Scarbrough Spaw, OR, A DESCRIPTION OF THE Nature and Virtues OF THE Spaw at
Scarbrough in Yorkshire.

Also a Treatise of the Nature and Use of Water in general, and the several
sorts thereof, as Sea, Rain, Snow, Pond, Lake, Spring, and River Water, with
their Original Causes and Qualities.

Where more largely the Controversy among Learned Writers about the Original
of Springs, is discussed.

To which is added, A short Discourse concerning Mineral Waters, especially
that of the SPAW.

By Robert Witty, Dr. in Physic.

London, Printed for, and are to be sold by Charles Tyus, at the three Bibles
on London Bridge, and by Richard Lambert in York, near the Minster, 1660.

Universis ac Singulis Medicinae Doctoribus, nec non coeteris Gener^sis ^am in
Urbe q^a nin Comitatu Eboracensi in Re Medica versantibus.
(...)
TRactatiunculam hanc de Aquis Scarburgensibus Vobis Doctissimi Colendissim^que
Viri, qui and virium Fontis hujus celeberrimi Testes estis ocul^ti, inter aquas
Spadanas Europaeas palmam facile merentis, apprima dico In directionibus ad
aquarum usum ad calcem libelli, medicaminum paradigmata omisi de industria, non
modo propter rations illic allegatas, sea quia nollem ut instruantur
Medic^stri isti Scioli, quos unusquisque fere Pagus tenet, qui morborum
Aegrorumque naturam and fontis vires ignorantos, meo forsam telo aliorum animas
transfigereni; vel saltem propositum meum non tenentes, uno eodemque omnes
calciarent calopodio. Nostis etenim quantam nobis Molestiam a praepostera
Medicimentorum exhibitione quotid^e a^ferunt, unde eodem telo quo Samson in
Sacra Historia ^hilasi^^^s, asinina Scilicet maxilla, Aegrorum m^ll^a miserrime
trucidare solent. Vestram (...) ^ruditionem sat scio Celeberrimi Viri, ^^a quos
^deo Aegros ablegando* censui, ut tam (...) p^cata freti Cynosura, recto cursu
per has ^quas procedant, ac tandem salutis portum fe^^cater appellant, and
optata arena potiantur^^nod ad reliquun de Aquis discursum, praecipue de
fontium origin ^iatribam attinet, sub judice (Lectore Scilire^) lis est, nec
me unicu^que placiturum, aut singulis J^ve ipso acceptiorem arbitror, de quo
Theognis suaviter cecinit.

(...)
(...).
Quem satis apposite vertit Erasmus in Chiliad,
Non etenim cunctis placeat vel Jupiter ipse,
Seu mitteus pluviam, scucohibens pluviam.
Doctis ut spero me voluisse sat est, etiamst adhuc in Origin N^^^au.
Demo^^^taeo puteo Veritas ipsa lateret. In^^uce rerum tam tenni homines
caligamus, in in sub^^r^arets nil mirum si Talpae sunius. Quicquia sii vobis
Ornatissimi Viri, in singularis am^^^^ae objervan^ traeque (...) porr^go, quea
si unan^ma approbetis ca^^ulo, and eoaem animo accepium ^^iquo datum
contigerit, manus mentisque precium habeo, neque erit quod Theo^^^ ^entis
rosionem metuam, i Valete.

Dat. Eboraci ex musaeo meo Maij 29. 1660. R. Witty.

Encomiasticon in Scriptorem doctum and Scriptum.
WIttodios olim Germanis nomine dictos
Ingenio celebres pristina Scripta docent.
Wittaeos nobis tam re, quam nomine habere
Contigerit si Anglis, ^am sumus ergo pares.
En tibi Lector h^bes specimen quod pagina doct^m
Exhibet, and pleni fontis ab ore fluens.
Scriptum fons lymphae, Scriptor sons artis, and altae
Naturae mystes, ambo perennis aquae.
Scarbu gi haurit aquas, cerebri and sua dulcin vina
Miscet, gust^to, sum librum ^t calicem.
Non opus huic hederam doctae applicuisse tabernae,
Tu vinum ac hederam, perlege, and invenies.
REader, who do peruse these Lines with thirst,
Start not to meet Aquarius at the first;
The Title speaks of Water, yet in fine
Though It promise water, it will sill thee Wine.
T. C. Mag. Art.

A Rapsodie on the learned work of my worthy and much honored friend, R.W. Dr.
in Physic.
Omne malum ab Aquilone
ALl ill from the North? nay, that is not so,
For here the wholesome waters slow.
(...) a saying ascribed to Demetrius a Greck Poet, Erasm. Adag.
No good by drinking waters? rare
Language for drunken Poets. Are
All of this mind? No Pindar says
(...) Piud. Olymp. Od. 1.
Water's best: Let him wear the bays,
Lacian. Demosth. Encom.
Demosthenes drank water, sure
Hence his Orations run so pure.
(...). Oppposed by Plato in Euthyd.
Naught precious but what is rare? how then
( said Plato chief of wisest men)
Can Water be the Commonest
Of other things, and yet the best?
You see that Fame's a liar, and they must
Run into vulgar Errors, who will trust
Before they trial make; For Water may
Be wholesome drink whatever people say.
This learned Author proves it, if you look
On the Witty waterworks within his Book.
Read, and you will call him Skillful Doctor; when
You have trial made, the honest Doctor then.
For here you will find a way to cure your ills,
Without profound Apothecaries bills.
Let Epsam, Tunbridge, Barnet, Knaresbrough be
In what request they will, Scarbrough for me.
P. W.

In sui nominis Viri Doctoris Witty de aquis Scarburgensibus claboratam
tractatiunculam, Carmen (...)
SObrius and sanns fieres? haec pagina docta
Edocet, est mentis corporis atq dosis.
Vinum, si sitias; agrotas? est med^^ amen
Sospita Scarburgi, fons saltentis aquae.
Vilius ut nihil est, hac nil pretiosius unda,
Hac purgat ventrem fistet alitqua sitim.
Nune Galene vale, catapotiae amara valete,
Utque magis valeam, Pharmacopaee vale.
Searburgensis aqua est medicina, sed ingeniosus
Sit Doctor Medicus, sit lib^r ingenium.
Your papers I have viewed, and think
Your waters are most pleasant drink.
Yet (my good Doctor) tell me why
That waters nourish you deny;
I read your papers, and do find
Your waters nourish corpse and mind.
Farewell wine, or Hull-ale rather,
Who reads your book will drink water.
This only fault I fear you made,
That you have spoyld the Vintners trade.
Your matters good, yet I can tell,
Your art the matter does excel.
Here labor, art, and learning sweet
Do all within your papers meet.
I think it fit those papers live,
That to so many health may give.
But what needs this? my labor wast,
Here Is Scarbrough -- warning, I Am in have.
Your Scrabrough Spaw I have drunk on,
But never drank of Helicon,
And it is no matter, for I think
Your Scrabrough Spaw far better drink.
Tuissimus (...), J.S. Mag. Art. C.C. Cantab.

In opus utilissinum R. Witty Med. Doctoris, de Spadacrene Scarburgensi.
CAsta Napaearum cum Phoebus Aquagia laetie
Lustrabat radiis; tum de temone cadentes
Stricturas gremio excepit Scarburgia Nympha:
Hac lege, ut nunquam (nisi de Jovis arbore malo
Gustato, imbueret tralucida purpura vultum)
Vivaces v^res rutilantis proderet Orbis.
Hinc longis seclis latuit vis enthea Nymphae:
Dum tandem coelo delapsa Hygiaea benigno
Secretum invenit, miseris quod tradidit aegris.
Ne Nymphaeque sacris praeclarus Mysta deesset,
Nom^is agnoscens omen, radiatus Apollo
Signavit lymphae encausto diploma disertum,
Quo jus augustum Tibi transtulit alme Sacerdos
Phaebi, tum vires, leges, mysteria and ortum
Naiadum conscribere, tum specialiter usus,
Quos Nymphae vestrae Phoebus concredidit olim.
Felices tribuis latices, panacea reclusa est:
Ingeniose, tui sit sostrum fama laboris.
L^^ul^ent Musae, ac jam tota Britannia plaudet;
S^ro persolvent laudum, nostrique Nepotes
Languid^li, vestris sua posthuma pensa favillis.
THough it be true, no Ivy need to tell
Where sprightfull Bacchus, or the Nymphs do dwell;
Yet some of the coyer stomachs must be wooed
With sugared words, and Court-ship to their food.
Tho some look pale, yet some may not think it strange
Hot liver'd Bacchus for a Nymph to change:
But it is for their own ends, because they think
It will empower them lustiler to drink.
None such are courted hither, for the intent
Is to invite for health not complement.
These draught restore lost health, and what is most sure,
Strange maladies find here their common Cure;
It Is the Summer Hospital, where Physick's given
To all that come, by a propitious Heaven.
Phoebus it first salutes, when is rest has caught
In Thetis lap, and takes his Morning draught;
Neptune his useful Physic fetches hence
For's feebler watery Subjects to dispense,
And in requital largely Tribute tells
Of Rubies, Agars, Diamonds and Shells.
Our Author the waters Universe does bring
In grand Procession to this healthful Spring.
Here Minerals, Mount ins, Regions, Cities, Plains
Are treated on with such Witty Remain,
As may invite the Readers curious stay,
In such Discoveries his thinks to pay.
An Ocean joins to the Spring, and it was fit
A cousin German Ocean of wit
Should mark its Hydrography: but now no more,
Each River Banks, and Ocean must have shore.
Nath. Johnson Med. Dr.
Pontesract June 3. 1160.
The Authors Contemplation upon his Waterworks.
SOme have been wont to entertain
Great Princes and their Royal Train
With Waterworks, and did inherit
Applause according to their merit.
If these of mine were so polite
That I might hope they would delight;
Each Letter should due homage bring
Upon its knees unto the King,
And solemnize with jollity
This day and year of Jubilee.
And so while each his present offers
In Service from his big-swoln Coffers,
I Would imitate that honest Clown,
That having nothing of his own
But's loyal heart, from the next Spring
Brought water in his hand to the King.
And of this little Book each Page
Should lackey him unto old Age
With loyalty. And when he dies,
O cruel word! from English eyes
'Twill floods of briny tears extract,
And raise up such a Cataract,
To make the waters here below
Unite with those above that flow:
And so another sort begin
Fie Subject for a better Pen.
York, May 29. 1660.
Scarbrough Spaw; OR, A description of the Nature and Virtues of the Spaw at
Scarbrough.
IN the South-East Corner of the north riding of Yorkshire, Sect. 1.
upon the Coast of the Germane Ocean is situate the ancient Corporation of
Scarbrough. It seems to have it is name from Scar, which signifies a cleft (as
learned Cambden thinks, and Burgh a Town, as if it were said, Britan:
a Town in the cleft, being environed both on the West, North, and East, with
mighty hills and rocks. It may be said of this place, as of most of our
Corporations in England, Caput inter nubila condit: We know not it is Original.
The Town is governed by 2 Bailiffs, 2 Ceronets, 4 Chamberlains, and 36
Burgesses, consisting of 3 Benches annually chosen, dignifyed with a right of
electing two Representatives in Parliament. It is fortifyed on the North-east
with an exceeding high and inaccessible Rock, which stretches it self at good
distance into the Sea, containing about 18 or 20 Acres of good Meadow on the top
of it: although Cambden out of William of Newburgh speaks of above 60 Acres;
whether the greater part of it be washed away with the Sea, or the difference
lies in the various measure of Acres, I will not dispute. The passage to the
Rock is by a narrow neck of Land, on which is a draw Bridge over an exceeding
deep trench; near which is the Castle, which has been accounted very strong,
although it is now become useless, one half of it having fallen from the other
through a battery of Guns in the siege, that was maintained against it by Sir
John Meldram, against Sir Hugh Cholmley in the late unhappy Wars. The top of
the Rock toward the Town, from the entrance into the gate to the Sea, is
further fortifyed and adorned with a very strong stone Wall, all the other
sides of the Rock are open to the Sea.

2 rarities.
There are two Rarities which I observe on the top of this huge Rock; the one is
an exceeding deep well made with Hewne stone, which seems to be dry at the
bottom, through which it is thought there is a secret passage into the Town, (I
had rather believe it then go to see.) The other is a spring of fresh Water,
within half a yard of the edge of the Rock toward the Sea, which in the most
droughty Summers never wanted water, and was of singular use to Sir Hugh
Ghomley and his Garrison in the siege, as also to the present Garrison.

Peers of Stone.
Another observable in this Town is, the mighty Peers of stone which have of old
been made, and are repaired by the Corporation, (to which some other maritine
Towns do contribute, knowing the benefit of the harbor, for their shipping on
occasion) consisting of mighty round stones, many of them of some tuns weight,
which are laid loose, and yet piled up together in such comely order,
stretching from the foot of the Castle Hill into the Sea, that they become a
sure defense against the raging waves of the Sea, and make a convenient harbor
for their Ships.

That which adds further to the fame of the place, being the main Subject of my
present discourse, The Spaw-well.
is the Spaw Well, which is a qui^k Spring about a quarter of a mi^e South from
the Town, at the foot of an exceeding high cliff, arising upright out of the
Earth like a boiling pot, near the level of the Spring tides, with which it is
often overflown.

It is of that sort of Springs which Aristot. calls (...), which in the most
droughty years are never dry, but run continually, affording above twenty four
gallons of water in an hour, the stones through which it flows being emptyed
every morning, containing more then twelve gallons will be full within half an
hour. It was found out by accident about thirty four years ago, and has by
degrees come into use and reputation, not only among the inhabitants of the
Eastriding and the ^own of Hull, among whom I lived and managed my profession
near eighteen years, observing very much the operation and effects of this
water, but also it has of late years been well known to the Citizens of York,
and the Gentry of the County, who do constantly frequent it; yea and to
several persons of quallity in the Nation, who upon the large commendations of
such as knew its opperration, have made trial of it, with whom it has gained
such credit, that they come above an hundred miles to drink of it, preferring
it before all other medicinal waters they had formerly frequented. Nay, I have
met with some that had been at the Germane Spaws, both at Sauvenir and Ponhout,
who prefer this for its speedy passage both by seige and urine before them.

I having had a large opportunity for twenty 2. years last past, to observe the
effects of this medicinal spring, not only in my self, but very many others,
whom I have known to drink of it in various cases; I shall for the further
benefit of my Country make out my experience, and will therefore first treat
concerning its parts, and of what Mineralls it does participate, with the
nature of them, and then descend to its virtues and effects.

Galen says, there are two things that do necessarily concur to the finding
out of Arts and Sciences, Lib. 2. de Simp. med. fac.
or any simple Medicine, vid. Experience and Reason; From whence did arise two
Sects of Physicians in his days, Empiricks and Methodists: The former observed
the operation of Medicines, not troubling themselves to pry into the nature of
them, to find out the reason of those operations, and were wont to use them
promiscuously whom therefore he frequently chides, and charges of folly. The
other though they had found out the virtue of a Medicine, yet were not
satisfied with the (...), but proceeded to the (...), diving into the nature of
it, that they might know from whence it had its virtue, and consequently the
reason of its working. These he calls the two legs of a Physician upon which
he ought to walk; and further adds, that he that would hope to attain to any
competent perfection in the Art of Physic, must take care to use them both. My
design shall be to follow his advice as well as I may, and so to let the
Reader know, that Experience has found out that this Medicinal Spring does
work exceeding well both by seige and urine, and that it is found to be
effectual in all diseases that require such evacuations.

But because I would not have the ingenious to Content himself with this
experime^cal notion, let him know that this water has it is virtue from it is
participation of Vitriol, Iron, allome, Its. Mineralls
Nitre and Salt: the natures of which Mineralls I shall enquire into anon.

It is very transparent to the sight, inclining somewhat to a Skey color, As
qualities
it has a pleasant acid taste from the Vitriol, and an inky smell.

If an equal quantity of boiling milk be put to it, it coagulates it, as do
the Germane Spaws, and makes a very clear Posset Drink.

If half a grain of the powder of Gal be put into a quart of this water does
immediately turn it into a Clarret color; or like unto sirrup of Violets mixed
with water, whereto some drops of spirit of Vitriol has been put; which if it
be suffered to stand some hours after it is so turned with the Gall, a red sand
will settle to the bottom, and the water will become clear and bright again.

I took 3. quarts of the Spaw water, and evaporated it all away upon the sire
in a clean Skellet, and there remained in the bottom a brown, saltish and
biterish sand, to the quantity of three drams or near upon; but because I
thought the sediment might proceed from the mixture of sand arising with the
water, (although I could not discern any with my eye) I therefore took three
quarts more, which I filtrated through a double thick woollen cloth, that I
might be sure to have no mixture of sand, and set it on the fire as before to
evaporate all the water, which when I had done there remained the same quantity
of brackish sediment as before, and of the same color, so as it plainly
appeared, it was not from any mixture of sand in the water.

Then I set on three quarts filtrated as before in a clean Skellet, which after
it had boiled a while, I discovered a reddish sand at the bottom, (the very
same that falls to the bottom, when it has been colored by the gall) so I
took it off the fire, and powered it into another vessel, the sand remaining
behind which I found to be about a dram, somewhat soft to the touch, not sharp
as sand, which I take to be no other then Rubric, or Matter ferri, or as Dr.
French calls it, Vitriol of Iron, separated by the heat, whose property it is
according to Philosophers congregare homogenea, and separare heterogenea, it
having a kind of S^iptick taste not saltish at all. Then I set on the same
water thus separated from the Rubric, to evaporate it as before, cleansing off
the scumme which arose, and at the ^ottome there remained a whitish Sediment,
somewhat bitter, and very sharp in taste, to the quantity of two Drams, which
cleaved to the bottom of the Skellet as if it were parched meat, not without
difficulty to be scraped off.

I observed when the water was almost all ev^porated and spent, it rose up in
Bullas, making a bubbling noise, like the boiling of Allome in the Mines at
Whitby within twelve miles of Scarbrough on the Sea c^st; of which Sir Thomas
Gower a very ingenious and learned Gentleman, much delighted in Chimicall
experiments, thinks this Spaw does eminently participate.

I think also it is from the Allome that it is so fixed, and cleaves to the
bottom, whereas otherwise the nitre would shoot in stir^as, and the Salt in
tesseras as Naturalists observe; and I take the greatest part of this sediment
to be Nitre, and Salt to be least predominant of all the rest of the Mineralls,
nor yet can they well be separated, concerning all which I shall speak more at
large in the twelfth Section.

There may perhaps be some other Mineralls in it, but they are not
discoverable, however these being most eminently conspicuous, I shall content
my self with them, and leave it to others to try experiments, and make what
new discoveries they can.

Now since Water is the Vetucle of the Virtues of all the aforesaid minerals,
Of water in general,
I think it proper for method sake, to speak somewhat concerning Water
ingeneral, together with its several sorts in particular, and the effects
thereof, being taken inwardly into the bodies of men.

And hereby the way, I intend nothing concerning distilled waters, which are
make out of green plants, nor to dispute whither they have in them the virtue
of the plant, out of which they are distilled, as Fernelius and Quercitanus
think, De abdit* rer. cause. l. 2. Pharm. restituta.
or whether they partake nothing of their virtue (especia^ly such as have
nothing of the sinell or taste of the plant) but are only the phlegmatic juice
of them, and of the same virtue with our common water, and to be used
indifferently in stead of it, as my learned and intimate friend Doctor
Primerose thought; it suffices that we have them always ready and at hand in
our Apothecarys Shops, to be a vehicle to others medicines which we have
occasion to use for present indications, when wholesome common water would many
times be far to seek.

Nor do I intend to trouble the Reader or my self, with a Phylosophicall
discourse concerning the Element of water, lib. 2. de genesis c. 8.
which is one of the four principles which Aristotle says, do necessarily
concur to the making up of every compound body, and into which it is to be
resolved in it is dissolution, whether it be animate or inanimate. Neither
indeed can that be found any where not being obvious to the external senses,
or capable of attaining its qualities of cold and moisture, without loosing its
form.

Instead of it we have our common water, whose proper place is the superficies
or unequal part of the earth, and is encompassed with the air, being also very
near of kin to the Elementary water, although not the same, 1* De Element and
de simpl. med. fac. l. 1. Parac. de Elem. ag.
as Galen and Paracelsus do assert, it being of the number of those bodies,
which Aristotle calls imperfect mixed bodies in his book of Meteors. It has
also the same qualities of cold and moisture, in which yet it is capable of
alteration (especially in the former) from external causes, without any formal
diminution.

This is called by Paracelsus the mother of all generations, Param. l. 3. and
de pest. tract. 1.
and the matrix of all the creatures: without this, there would be no
procreation of animalls or vegetables above the earth, or of mineralls within
the bowels of the earth; This perhaps made Empedocles be of the opinion that
all things were made of water.

But water is not only necessary by way of principle, and so an ingredient in
the constitution of our bodies, but also in Order to nourishment, for the
conservation of them in their being and growth; And therefore Plato called it
of all liquors the most precious, In Euthydemo.
although it may be had at a cheap rate. Lib. 2. Dypnos. c. 2.


I know Galen, Actuarius, and other learned men deny any nutritive quality to
be in water, although Athenaeus is of a contrary judgment, because some
creatures feed on nothing else, as Grasshoppers: and so we see Horseleaches,
that are put into water in our Apothecaryes-shops, will grow bigger. But as for
Grasshoppers, for ought I know they may feed as other insects do of green
plants, and it is probable they do; and as touching the growing of the
Horseleaches, I think the water while it is new and incorrupt pines them, and
makes them hungry, not affording them any nourishment till it putrefyes, which
it does the sooner by their being in it, and so they are nourished as well as
bred by putrefaction, which the water has contracted, and not by simple and
pure water it self.

Not n^urishing.
Now the reason why it adds nothing to the ^ourishment of our bodies, I conceive
to the this: That which is to nourish the body, is in proxima potentia to be
blood, and in remota a member, whereas water because of it is super-abundant
coldness, as also because it is a simple body, is not capable to become either
the one or the other, and therefore it cannot have any nourishing virtue.

Yet necessa^y unto nourishment.
Notwithstanding there is nothing more necessary unto nourishment, it being the
best vehicle of nourishment, without which those gross meats which we daily
eat, could not be assimilated, and turned into our substance: For how should
that chyle which the stomach makes, by concocting the solid meats which we
daily feed on, be able to pass into those small veins in the mesentery, and
from thence to the Liver, if it had not a moist watery humidity mixed with it
for it is vehicle, as says Galen. lib 4. de usu part. c. 5. Ob. Sol.


If any object that Wine or Beer will serve for this end, as well as water: I
answer, Wine and Beer do it by their watery and thin substance, which they have
from their abundant participation of water; besides water is more generally
used in the World both by men and beasts, then either Wine or Beer, and does
better serve for other inward common ends. And as for Wine, Beer or Ale, the
more they do recede from the nature of Water, the worse and more unwholsom are
they to be used for ordinary drink.

The use of wat^^.
By the help of Water, or what is made out of it, is our natural heat kept in a
mean, and our radical moisture repaired, so as the latter is not exhausted by
the excess of the former: Also with this nature is satisfied, and refreshed as
much when we are thirsty, as it is with meat when we are hungry, yet without
any addition, or increase of the substance of our bodies, as I said before.

The first common drink.
This was the common drink both of man and beast, during the first age of the
World, from the Creation till the Flood, for above 16. hundred years, when men's
lives were prolonged to almost a thousand years. Not that I think the drinking
of water was the cause of their so long living; but rather the good pleasure of
God for the more speedy propagating of mankind upon the earth was the cause,
and their temperance a great help, a virtue almost lost in this declining age
of the World: yet cert^inly it was the most proper drink which man could use,
in order to the lengthening of his days, and preserving his health, otherwise
God would have shown him a better.

And if circumstances be weighed, we shall see that after the invention and use
of wine, (which the Scripture attributes to Noah after the Flood) the age of
man began to be contracted to near a tenth part, Psalm. 90.10.
and yet still became shorter, so as in Moses his time, it was accounted but
threescore and ten.

Nay long after Wine came to be known, I find water was in ordinary use. The
ancient Romans used it.
Julius Frontinus says that the Romans were content with water as their only
drink, for the space of 440. years from the building of Rome. Yea, even to this
day not only the common sort of Citizens drink nothing else, but the wealthier
also delight in it exceedingly, keeping it in Earthen Vessels under the Earth,
and in their coolest Cellers, that they may have it always at hand.

Strabo says, l. 15. Geogr. c. ult.
that the Kings of Persia drank the water of the River Eulaeus constantly, with
whom it was in so high esteem, that it was forbidden any of his Subjects to
drink of the water of that River. Lib. 1.
Herodotus tells the same Story, but calls it Choaspes, which says he, flows
by the City Susa, where the Kings of Persia were wont to keep their Courts in
winter. And Agath^eles in Athenaeus further describes it, l. 12. Dypn. c. 3.
although he names not the River, it seems to have been a small one, whose
water was called by the Persians aqua aurea, So the Persian King^.
or the golden water, which was fed by 70. Spring-heads, of which it was
treason and punished with death, for any man to drink except the King, and his
eldest Son.

Water was accounted by the Ancients the fittest drink for all ages and Sexes,
However in this age of ours it is fallen under contempt. Hence those Laws which
Plato mentions, that young men should not so much as taste any Wine, till they
were 18. years of age, and women never: which was observed by the Roman
Matrones with very great devotion, as says Valerius Maximus, Lib. 1.
they usually drinking nothing but water, or sometimes a drink called passum,
which is made of Raisins boiled in water, when they are not well.

Athenaeus tells of a custom among the Roman women, l. 10. Dypn. c. 13.
that they were wont at the first meeting with any of their husbands kindred,
to salute the^ with a kiss, who not knowing how soon they must meet some of
them, did drink no Wine at all, least they should smell of it and so be
discovered, and have their names set up; that woman being accounted to want no
fault, that would drink Wine.

And thus also the Italian Women drink nothing but Water; Italians.
Ibid.
concerning which I find a pretty Story mentioned by Athenaeus out of Alcuinus
Siculus an old Italian Writer; He says, that Hereules as he was once
travailing on the way toward Croton, being thirsty, turned into an House near
the way side, desiring some Wine to drink, to quench his thirst; now it
happened that there was a Vessel of Wine in the House, which the good Wife had
broached for her own tooth, her husband not knowing of it. The Master of the
House hearing when Hercules called for Wine, bade his wife go and broach the
eask, and give him some, the good Wife not being willing her Husband should
know that it was already broached, pretending what a deal of trouble it would
be to them both, did churhshly bid him drink Water. Which Hercules (standing at
theh Door all the while) hearing, called the Husband to him, and commended him
for his good will, and showed him the woman's deceit, and the cask which now was
turned into a stone. This story is well known among the Italians, and the stone
is to be seen at this day says my Author, as a warning against the women's
drinking of Wine.

Likewise at this day in France, French.
it is accounted a foul crime for Virgins to drink any thing but water, only
their ancient women will mix a little wine with it, which is called by some,
although with too much liberty of speech, vinum baptizatum.

It were well if it were more in use in England, especially among the younger
sort, as that drink which nature first assigned, it would prevent drunkenness
which Athenaeus calls the metropolis of all mischiefs, lib. Dypn. c. 1. ^5. de
invent. rev l. 3. c. 3.
and Polydorus Virgilius the most filthy debauchment of the life of a man, and
the original of 600. other vices, (I suppose he intends a certain number for an
uncertain) and indeed is the shame of our Nation.

I know it is objected, Ob.
that the waters in England, in regard of the coldness of the climate, are more
crude, and not so pure and wholesome as those in Spain, France, and the hot
Countries.

I confess great care ought to be had concerning the goodness of water, Sol.
of which by and by. But certainly there is no cause for the objection, since
there is no Country but it affords wholesome water, The waters of England are
good.
even the most frozen Country of Greenland, as I have heard from our Seamen of
Hull, who yearly continue there m^^ months, and use it wiho^^ any the least
harm.

I know the Objection arises from this, that they think because of the coldness
of our climate, the water is not so well concocted with the heat of the Sun,
and so is hard of digestion.

1. But they must know, that the Sun by it is heat pierces no^ far into the
bowels of the earth in the hot Countries, where they suppose the best water to
be; the heat thereof piercing not above 10. foot deep into the earth, according
to the judgment of the best Philosophers, the Springs arising much deeper, as
we shall show anon.

2. Again the Sun and the Planets have an influence into the bowels of the
earth, where neither their heat nor their light can penetrate, to the
concocting of minerals, that are above 100. fathom deep, as I might manifest
at large, from the judgment of good Authors, and therefore we need not doubt
concerning water, which perhaps lies nearer the superfices, and requires less
concoction.

3. Moreover water (I mean Spring water which is in most ordinary use) has
it is concoction and preparation according to the temperature of heat and cold
that is in the earth. Now if we may believe Philosophy, which teaches that the
earth is warmer in Winter, in the low cavernes of it then in Summer, because of
the cold air and frosts, that shut the pores of it, which is also ratifyed by
our own experience, that the Springs are warmer in winter frosty weather, then
in an hot Summer; then it follows a pari, that in our cold climate, the Earth
must be warmer then in those hot climates, and consesequently the water rather
better concocted.

4. Besides it is a wrong to the God of nature, whose beams of Divine love are
equally extended in his common providence, for the preservation of mankind
throughout the whole universe, as if we in England or they in other more
Northern Countries, had not as good a provision of water, a thing so absolutely
and generally necessary, as they in the more Southern climates have. For my own
part I believe, that our waters are as wholesome for our bodies, as theirs are
for them in those hot climates, and much more then theirs would be for us; and
I think that fluxes and calentures, which happen to Englishmen that travail
into those hot climates, do proceed rather from the ungreeableness of the
waters to our bodies, then from any other one cause that can be assigned.

5. Again, these medicinal waters, with which England does abound more then any
Country, (such as this at Scarbrough) do certainly require more heat, and
concoction then any ordinary potable waters do, of which since England affords
so many, if not better then others do, it is without reason to question the
concoction of other waters.

6. And lastly, the waters of England do agree fully and exactly with that
description, and those tokens of good water, which I find laid down in the
writings, either of Philosophers or Physicians, Grecian, Arabian or Latin. If
any man require further satisfaction concerning this point, I refer him to my
ever honored and intimate friend, Dr. Primerose his Book of popular Errors.
lib. 3. c. 1.


The sum of what they all say accounts to this, Tokens of good water.
that there must be a concurrence of the Verdict of 3. Senses to prove the
Water to be good, viz. Sight, Taste and Smell; I will not trouble the Reader
nor my self with many quotations.

To the Sight, it must be exceeding transparent and clear, without any sediment
when it has stood long; and which being shaken has no shreds of any shape
whatsoever, or motes, or sand flying about.

To the Taste, it must be void of all qualities, neither sweet, nor sour, nor
salt, nor acide, nor must it have any other taste that can be discerned by the
tongue; the formality thereof consisting in cold and moisture.

To the Smell, it must have no smell at all, nor yield any quality that can be
discerned by the most accurate nose.

Paulus Zachias a learned Roman Physician, l. 5. Med. leg. qu. tit. 4.
will have the other two Senses to give verdict also; even the sense of
hearing, accounting that bad which being poured from one vessel to another
poures like oil with out noise, as being thick and unctuous, on which account
^accius discommends the Water of Tiber, lib. 1. de Tib. aq.
as also because it is thick and oily to the touch.

To the which I will add one trial more, that which being boiled yields no
scumme on the top, nor sediment at the bottom, but all evaporates into air;
there are other tokens which I shall reserve for their due place.

This says Montanus, is the common matter of all those things with which it is
mixed: And as the Astrologers say of Mercury among the Planets, so I may say of
water, it is good with the good, and bad with the bad, it heats with hot
things, and cools with the cold; yet it is to be observed, it ever dulls the
heat of hot things, and such as do attenuate.

Good in many cases.
Now cold simple water is not only the common drink, which the God of Nature
has provided for all his Creatures; for the sustentation of them in their
being, but also it is most healthful being taken inwardly, and is prescribed
by Physicians in many cases, both to prevent and cure diseases, and tends much
to preserve us in our well being; Concerning which one Hermannus vander Heyden,
a Dutchman of very good worth, has writ a peculiar Tractate, well worth the
reading.

It tempers our natural heat, Meth. med. c. 5.
which otherwise would scorch and dry up the humors of the body, as says
Fernelius, and does excellently correct that preternatural heat which is caused
by Fevers, as Galen and Avicen do affirm, and they both allow it to be drunk in
a large quantity, especially if there be signs of concoction in the veins,
which a learned Physician is able to judge of, and then it helps the critical
evacuations of nature by sweat, seige or vomit.

Aristotle says, that they that use to drink water do see the most clearly,
which is agreeable to reason, because it sends no hot fumes up into the brain,
but rather allayes them.

Eubulus commends it to help the invention, and says that such as drink water,
are the best inventers of new things, whereas all strong drinks do dull the
understanding, lib. 2. din. c. 2.
as Athenaeus cites him.

It is good against vomiting, when it proceeds from bilious humors; stays the
Hicket when it arises from choler, that corrodes and vellicates the Tunicles of
the stomach; and stays the flux; and being drunk warm it causes vomitting.

A glass of cold water being drunk after meat, is good for an hot stomach that
concocts too fast, and for such as Hippocrates calls (...); but it is not safe,
when a man has been toyling and is hot, as Cornelius Celsus says: lib. 1. c.
3.
nor can I approve of cold water for such as are old, and have very feeble
stomachs, least it overcome their natural heat, and they find the same fate
that Aristophanes relates of Tiresias, who drinking of the water of Tilphosa a
famous Spring in Baeotia, when he was very old, Ath. lib. 2. cap. 2.
dyed immediately, the coldness of the water overcoming his feeble natural heat.

Water furthers procreation of the Species, and therefore it is observable in
those Countries where they drink altogether water, they multiply more then else
where; and hence was the Law which I read of in Plato, Dialog. 2. de leg.
that those that were new married were to drink nothing but water: They indeed
that drink Wine are more salacious, yet they are less prolifick.

Crato in Scoltzius tells of one, Cons. med. 143.
that by drinking every night and morning cold water, found very much benefit
in freeing him from his usual violent tormenting pain of the stone, (in the
morning he swallowed some grains of Pepper in it unbruised, to correct it is
coldness) which may very well be, because it tempers the excessive heat of the
kidneys, and corrects the sharpness of urine.

Hermannus vander Heyden commends it highly against the Gout, as a most
sovereign remedy, in his Book before cited.

It tempers the heat of the Liver, but it hurts the Spleen, being taken in too
great a quantity, and fills it with serous humors; and therefore when we would
use it for the hot distemper of the Liver, we should have respect to the Spleen
to remove it is obstructions, as Capivaccius says well. In Sco^t. Cons. med.
156.
And let this suffice concerning water in general, to beget it a little more
credit among us, because of it is antiquity and usefulness.

Sect. 3.
I come now to speak concerning the several sorts of water in particular, as
they lie in the order of nature, and are or may be the causes of each other:
And first of Sea water, Of Sea water.
as that which was first in Nature, and very bri^fly, not being of use to be
taken inwardly, yet falling into our consideration in the subsequent discourse.

The Sea makes one Globe with the Earth, being yet not confused with it, but
divided from it, and gathered together into one place by it self, on the third
day of the Creation: Genesis 1.7.
The Earth is the center of the Globe, and contains the Sea water as in a
vessel, there being no water, which is not bottemed by the Earth, as
naturalists aver. The Water being a lighter Element, lib. 2. met. cap. 3.
it is proper place is to be above the Earth, so as the greater part by far of
the superfices of the Globe is covered with water; notwithstanding which the
higher places of the Earth stand out of the Water, 2 Pet. 3.5.
and appear above it, giving bounds to the Water which it cannot pass over, as
the Scripture says, Psalm. v. 9.
and so are become habitable for men and beasts.

It Is Nature.
Sea Water is Salt and hot in operation, binds and dryes the body, if it be
drunk, as do all salt waters according to the judgment of Hippocrates, De aere
aquis and locis.
which he says are (...), De remed. l. 2 c. 53.
indomicable and hard, it rather increases then quenches thirst, and has been
found deadly to such as have drunk of it being exceeding thirsty, as says
Paulus Aegineta.

I would not be so understood, as if I thought all salt waters were to be
r^j^cted from inward use, or as if no salt waters would purge the body; The
Sulphur Well at Knaresbrough, a gallon whereof being vaporated away yields two
ounces of salt, is daily used inwardly with very good success in many cases,
and purges the body, as I know by experience, and as Dr. Dean, and Dr. French
do both witness in their Books upon that Subject; This Spring does the same and
has some salt in it: Notwithstanding if salt waters do loose the body, it is
from other minerals of which they do participate, and not from the salt, on
which account they rather dry up the humors, and are singular good even in
hydropick constitutions; especially in the beginning, the truth whereof I have
proved by good experience in an Honorable Lady, to whom I commended the use of
the Sulphur Well before mentioned in the Dropsy with good success.

Hence it is that Hippocrates in the place before cited, blames them for their
ignorance, that upon any slight occasion use salt waters inwardly, expecting to
loose the body with them, they having from the salt no such virtue, but rather
stay the belly, and cause the body to break out in Scabs, and make the
fundament and lower parts troubled with checks, De simpl. c. 4.
as Rasis says:

The Sea water has indeed some sweet parts in it, which are thinner and
lighter then the substance of the water is, from whence it comes to pass, that
the flesh of those fishes that live in the Sea, is as fresh as those that are
taken in fresh waters.

If one distill Sea water in a cold Still it yields fresh water. And I have
read an experiment in Gamillus Flavius which is worthy a trial, Paraph. in Hip.
de aq. p. 43.
and may be of use to such as go on long voyages, and want sometimes fresh
water. He says, that if a bottle be made of Wax, and the mouth of it be close
stopped, so as no water can run into it, and it be cast into the Sea and made
to sink, in a few days it will be found to have fresh water in it, very
pleasant and wholesome to be drunk. I have inserted this for the Seamens sake,
to whom it may be beneficial.

Sect. 4.
In the next place I come to treat of Rain water, with it is original and
qualities; Of Rain.
the product or original is thus.

The Sun and the rest of the Heavenly bodies do by their heat exhale, Its cause
and draw forth out of the Sea, and other moist bodies that are on the Earth
the vapors, (which are the more rare and thin part of the water and bodies)
these by their heat they do so rarify, that through their levity they fly
upward toward the upper region of the air next to the Element of fire, the
proper place of such light bodies; where they continue till according to the
ordinary course of Providence, by the influence of the Moon, or some planetary
Aspect out of signs of the watery Triplicity, or some other cold and moist
constellation, they become more gross and moist, and so by their weight descend
into the middle region of the air, where by the excess of cold they are
condensed into waters, and now being become an heavy body, do fall down upon
the Earth in showers, making thereby a kind of circulation in Nature, through
the ascent of vapors and descent of showers.

This I say is according to the ordinary course of Providence, when
notwithstanding without any of those previous influences of the Celestial
bodies, Almighty God who is a most free Agent, and does what he will in the
Heavens and the Earth, does sometimes by a special Providence cause it to rain;
Exodus 9.18
and at other times also he does so suspend the aforesaid influences, Jam. 5.17.
that it rains not at all, Amos 4.7.
as in the use of Elijahs prayer. Thus as the Prophet observes, he makes it to
rain upon one City, and not upon another; and this he does that he may keep us
in a constant dependence upon himself, as upon the first and primary cause,
without whose concurrence secondary causes can produce no effects at all.

No this my judgment concerning the causes of rain, is agreeable to what is
writ upon that subject, by the best Philosophers and Physicians, the Scripture
also being clear in it. Amos 9.6. He calls for the Waters of the Sea, and
pours them out upon the face of the Earth: to which add that in Job 36.27,
28. He makes small the drops of water, they pour down rain according to the
vapor thereof, which the clouds do drop.

And that the rain does falls or is withheld from us in ordinary providence,
according to the influence of the celestial bodies, is deducible from another
place in Job, Chap. 38. v. 25. and so forward; where God, expostulating with
Job concerning his mighty works of providence, reads a Lecture to him
concerning the Meteors, of Rain, Lightening, Thunder, Dew, and Frost, with
their causes, and in the 31. Verse he has this question to him: Can thou
bind (or restrain) the influence of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?
with other expostulatory questions: The meaning thereof is this; Can thou
stay the rain, and hinder it from falling? or can thou loose the frost and
make it thaw? The Pleiades being a moist constellation in the shoulder of the
sign Taurus, which brings wet; and Orion a dry constellation in the last decade
of Gemini, arising in the evenings in the beginning of the Winter, causing
frosts. I might enlarge concerning Mazaroth, viz. the 12. signs, and Arcturus,
which are mentioned in the 32. verse. but I hasten. Nor is this my own private
interpretation, but it is agreeable to the judgment of the most learned
Interpreters upon the place, and particularly of those that were Members of the
late reverend Assembly of Divines, in that their excellent exposition upon the
Book of Job.

Now from the consideration of what bath been, said concerning the concurrent
cause of Rain, Its nature and quality
it will follow, that Rainwater is the most light of all others, clear and of
thin parts, and agreeable with the description of the best water before laid
down, being also most ethereal, and having the fewest terrestrial or earthly
parts of all waters whatsoever.

Hence is it that Hippocrates prefers Rainwater before any other, Lib. 6.
epid. and de aq.
especially that which falls in Summer out of white and thin clouds, and with
Thunder or Wind, which do help to purify it more; but he discommends that
which falls out of thick and black clouds, and in a storm; nevertheless he
would have it boiled before it be used, because of all other waters it is most
apt to putrefy and become corrupt.

It soon corrupts.
Nor let any startle at it, as that therefore it should be the more unwholesome,
because it is subject to corrupt so soon, this being rather a token of it is
goodness, in that it is so easily altered, according to the judgment of Paulus
Aegineta, Oribasius and others, although this also may be helped if it be kept
in a cool place, and in a pure stone Cistern.

Only let me give this caution that it be not long kept before it be used,
least being corrupted it causes hoursness and difficulty of breathing, and
breed Choleric humors in the stomach, and weaken it is retentive faculty.

Rasis says, it is ill for those that are subject to Fevers when it has been
long kept. And so Aetius is of the same mind, forbidding it also to be used in
Choleric constitutions, and in the jaundice, because it is easily turned into
choler, but commends it to be used in Eye waters to stop a flux of humors, or
to consolidate Ulcers of the eyes, as being more astringent then Spring Water;
which yet I cannot believe, because it is as I said before of thin and aerial
parts, and not so terrestrial as Spring Water is. And for this cause I think
it the best of all others to be used in a perient or pectoral Apozemes,
provided it be taken when it is new fallen, and strained through a thick cloth
or paper, the body also open.

Only to that of Aetius I Will add this, that of all other waters that are drunk
cold, Rain water is the worst for cachectick constitutions, which have an ill
habit of body, and for such as are Scorbutic, for though it be of thin parts,
yet because it is more subject to putrefy then other waters, and those bodies
not so pervious as sound bodies are, it is to be suspected, least it should
soon corrupt, before it can pass through the body, and so increase the maladyes.

This by it is admirable secundity refreshes the Earth, and makes it to bring
forth friut, filling it is lap with variety of vegetables, necessary for the
sustentation of man and beast, without which it could bring forth nothing at
all, and so would not be habitable. And what falls more then is necessary for
the production of vegetables, sinkes further into the earth for the supply of
Springs and subterreneall generations of mineralls and metalls, concerning
uwhich we shall have occasion to treat more anon.

Sect. 5.
Like unto Rain is Snow and Hail, especially in their original cause, for they
both proceed from the like vapors, which are exhaled (as I said before) by the
heavenly bodies, out of the Sea and the terrestrial bodies, and elevated into
the middle region of the air, whereby a greater and more intense degree of cold
then that which produces rain, they are condensed into Snow and hail; only the
hail is generated by a more remiss degree of cold then snow; and therefore
falls ordinarily in Summer, whereas Snow never falls but in winter, or very
cold weather.

I find that snow was much in use among the Ancients, who carefully preserved
it all the year, to mixed it with their wine, to allay its heat, and give it a
pleasant coolness to the palate.

Thus Chares Mytilinaeus in his History of Alexander the Great, tells how that
in his Siege against Petra a City of Indiae, he was exceedingly delighted with
Snow mixed in his Wine, and he relates his manner of preserving it; viz. he
caused many great and deep Trenches to be dug in the earth, which he covered
over with Oak boughs, in which the Snow was laid, being gathered when it was
new fallen, and preserved for the use aforesaid.

No less careful are they at this day in Spain and Italy, and other the hot
Countries of Europe in preserving Snow to mixed it with their Wine, to give it a
pleasant coolness, laying it up in their lowest and coolest Cellars, and
covering it as before said, and so they keep it till winter come again.

De simp^. cap. 6.
And thus the Arabians are wont also to put Snow into their Juleps for Acute
Fevers, in which case Rasis commends it very much. And Pisanellus an Italian
Writer tells that at Messana a City of Sicilie where the Climate is very hot,
De escud. and potul. fac. p. 162.
the Inhabitants were every year in Summer troubled with a pestilential Fever,
that swept away thousands, till they found out the use of Snow mixing it with
their drink, and then it left them: And hence it is become a custom among them,
that every man, even the poorest of all, besides other provision, which they
make for their Families, are sure to provide Snow.

Notwithstanding which, De Spir. anim. not. cap. 8.
that water which comes of Snow, or Hail, is accounted by all unwholsom to be
drunk alone, because of its exceeding coldness, as Actuarius observes, on
which account he esteems it the worst of all waters, as also because of it is
gross parts, for that which has once been conjealed into Snow or Ice, can
never return to it is pristine estate, for whatever thin, sweet or subtle parts
were in it, before it was conjealed by the cold are now lost and gone, and are
turned into a vapor, nothing remaining but the gross and earthy parts: and
this is easy to be discerned by a Vessel full of water, which if it has been
once turned into Ice, and thawed again, shall be found to have lost a good part
of it is measure. Now the thin parts being gone and evaporated away the gross
body or caput mortuum becomes obstructive, and so may produce many distempers,
besides the violence it offers the stomach and liver, by it is excessive
coldness; lih. de temper simpl.
and therefore Averrhoes forbids it especially to be drunk fasting while the
stomach is empty, with this expression; let no man presume to drink it
fasting, etc.

But they that mix it with Wine, do it safely and to very good purpose, the
Wine and the Snow correcting one another, and so making up a wholesome
composition.

Another Use of Snow, is, that while it lies upon the superfices of the earth,
unmelted, it preserves the earth, and the vegetables that grow thereon from the
nipping, piercing cold of the air, which it also putrifies; and when it melts
it moistens the ground as does rain, (although it fattens not so much) the
superfluity whereof is sucked up by the earth (except that which runs into
lakes and rivers) and is coverted to the same use as Rain; to wit, to the
supply of springs and subterreneall generations, being corrected and better
concocted by the moderate heat of the earth, which in Winter is warmer then in
Summer, as I said before.

Sect. 6.
The next in order to be spoken to, is Fenny pond or lake-maters, senne pond or
lake water.
which are made by a superfluity of Rain or melted Snow, settling in some low
places either above or else in some Caverns of the earth, which are to be
avoided from all inward use, as most unwholesome and many times deadly and
poisonous.

And first for Fens and Ponds, they being made up of melted Snow, are upon that
account bad enough, as I hinted before, nor are they amended by the mixtures of
rain water; unwholesome.
besides that in their passage they carry along with them slime and flith from
which they can never be purged. To this add, that they they are standing
waters, and lie open both to the heat of the Sun in Summer, which exhales all
their thin parts, and leaves them gross and fetid; and to the cold in winter,
which freezes them, and makes them still more gross and turbulent.

Rufus in Oribasius indeed tells us that the Fennes in Egypt, Col. Med. lib.
5. cap.
above all Other Fenns that ever he met withal, are wholesome being bred by
the overflowing of Nilus, which is not so apt to corrupt and putrefie as other
waters are, and will keep sweet the longest.

They that are forced to drink of Pond water are much to be pittyed, as I kow
(some Towns that have no other; and those Alewives that brew their Ale with
it, when they may have better water, (as I have heard for certain some do,
because it makes stronger drink then good water) are much to be blamed; these
sorts of water being condemned by Physicians both ancient and modern, Hip. de
ag. Valler. lib. 2 oom. loc. cap. 2.
as poisonous and pestelential, having in them horse-leeches and other filthy
vermin; and therefore of all sorts of waters these are most to be avoided in
times of common contagion, as Plagues and penitential Fevers.

These being drunk do cause obstructions in the liver, De aquis. Tetr. 1. Sermon.
3. De simpl. c. 4.
hardness of the spleen, corrupt the blood, and spoil the complexion: they
breed dropsies, dysenteries, the Stone of the Kidneys, shortness of breath,
and rotten and pestilentiall fevers, as Hyppocrates, Aetius, Rasis and others
say.

Besides they corrupt and infect the air, Corrupt the air.
with the noisome vapors which they send forth daily, to the breeding of very
many deseases: and therefore it is observable that most towns that are situate
near unto Fens or lakes are more subject to malignant diseases, which when
Physicians come to meddle with, lib. 2. loc. com. c. 2.
they find very rebellious scarcely admitting of a cure, as Valleriola had
experience of, at the City Arles in France. Notwithstanding if necessity
enforce to the use of this sort of water, it may be made much more wholesome,
if it be boiled before it be used.

2. As for lakes that are within the ground in the low cavern of the earth,
Lakes under ground poisonous.
they are also unwhole some and sometimes deadly, because they are standing
waters close, not open to the air and so have no enventilation, tainted by the
filthy damps and fogs that are in the earth, and are often found to have in
them poisonous vermin. I read of some that had fish in them which poisoned
those that did eat of them. Sen. Not. qu. l. 3 cig. Carp. l. 2. geog. c. 9.
In Caria near about the City Lorus there arose out of the earth suddenly by
reason of an Earthquake a great flood of Water, bringing out with it a great
number of Creatures and fishes, which had been fatted under the earth, of which
whosoever chanced to eat, dyed presently.

I am forced to mention these sorts of waters by the way, yet briefly, having
occasion to refer to them in the following discourse.

Sect. 7.
I now proceed to treat concerning Spring Water, Of Spring Water.
as that which comes closer to the main subject of discourse, to wit, the Spaw
at Scarbrough, which is a constant flowing Spring or fountain: For the better
understanding whereof in its virtues and operation, its needful that I say
something concerning the spring in general, together with the causes, nature
and variety of them, and that as briefly as the nature of the subject will
bear, because I would not weary my self, or the Reader, with a long and tedious
discourse.

It is a great controversy between the Stoics and Peripateticks concerning
the Original of springs, 3. Originals of springs.
also among several modern, learned Authors; and they pitch especially upon 3.
original causes, viz. the percolation of the Sea; the transumtation of air
within the bowels of the Earth; and the Rain and Snow.

The first is the most ancient being the opinion of Thales, and Plato with his
followers; Seas percolation. de sacr. Philoso. Not. Bath. c. 3.
as also of Valesias, and our learned Countrymen Mr. Lydiat, Mr. Carpenter, Dr.
Jordan, and Dr. French.

Yorkshire Spaw.
The reasons of their opinion are principally these; because first, there is
nothing but the vast Ocean that can afford such abundance of waters, as do
spring from the Earth, the Sea being a sufficient storehouse for all ends and
uses. Secondly, because the Sea is not increased by the multitude of Waters,
which flow into it daily, as it must of necessity be, if they had not by the
subteraneal channels a recourse to their Fountains. And to this opinion Solomon
seems to give ground, 1 Eccles. 7. where he says, All Rivers run into the Sea,
and yet the Sea is not full, unto the place from whence the Rivers come,
thither they return again.

But as for the place of Scripture, it proves not the point in hand, the
question being not about Rivers but Springs; Solomon speaks of the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea in great Rivers, into which the Tide runs, they being near
the Sea, and they would interpret it of Springs and Fountains, that are perhaps
many hundred miles of.

Not that I deny the Sea to contribute toward the making of Springs; the Sea
sends up vapors in abundance, which being converted into Rain and Snow in
their seasons, fall down upon the Earth, and afford matter for Springs, but I
cannot believe that there is any such percolation as they speak of, whereby the
water of the Sea is conveyed by occult cavities through the Earth to the
Springs, which are many hundred miles in some places of the World distant from
it, and many of them placed upon exceeding high Land, and Mountains much above
the Sea.

I know some of them for the making out of their opinion, will have the Sea to
be as high, Sea not higher then the earth.
if not higher them the highest Mountains, depressed only upon the shore, as
says Aristotle, lib. 1. de Meteor.
because terminated by the dry Land. This Doctrine of the Sea's elevation above
the Land being also defended by Tully (de not. deorum,) where he says that the
Sea being placed above the Earth; yet coveting the place of the Earth, is
congregated and collected, so as it cannot redouned or flow abroad; Scripture
urged.
as also by many learned Divines both ancient and modern, who reducing most
things to the supernatural and first cause, do many times neglect and overlook
second causes. And they seem to be warranted by some Scriptures, Psalm. 33.
verse. 7. He gathered the Waters thereof together as an heap. Ps. 33.7,
As also that place in Job, where God himself professes, that he has bounded
the Waters of the Sea, in these words Job 38.11. Hitherto shall thou go but no
further, Job. 38.11.
and there shall thy proud waves be stayed. And having thus resolved, they
fancy a natural motion of the water from the top of the Sea to the tops of the
Hills, although they are not all of this mind, as we shall examine by and by.

But we must know, de caelo l. 2. c. 4. De Geogr. p. 489
the Earth and the Sea (according to Aristotle, and a concurrence of Freigius
and all Geographers) make up but one body of a global figures, the Sea being a
moist fluid body keeps the figure exactly, its superficies being always
equidistant to the Center of the Earth, so as in what part of the Sea soever a
man can suppose himself to be, he must needs be in the highest part of the
Globe, whether he be in the middle of the Sea or near the Shore, and out of
this figure it cannot go without force. Whereas the Earth is not so exact in
the figure, that part of it which appears above the Water of the Sea being
extuberant, every Mountain and Valley still further breaking the figure; Now if
the water of the Sea should so pass from the Sea to the tops of the Springs, as
they affirm, it should arise beyond it is level, to wit, the Natural Sphericall
figure, which is absurd to be supposed without an extraneous force.

It is most certain, that Ships at Sea will at some leagues distance loose the
sight of one another, so as they that are upon the deck in the one, can make no
discovery of the other, but if they go up to the shrowds they may discern one
another, and still the higher they climb the better discovery they make The
reason of this is the Sphericall figure of the Sea, which terminates their
sight while they are upon the deck, until overtopping the bank by climbing
higher they have a clear view. And our Seamen observe no difference (supposing
the same distants) from what quarter soever the Ships lie from one another,
whither toward the Land or off at Sea. For exampel.

Suppose on the Eastern coast of England, which stretches North and South,
three Ships signed A. B. C. of equal size. A. lies under the shore; B. lies off
at Sea full East from A. toward the Coast of Holland: C. rides Southerly from
B. toward the Downs; and A. and C. at equal distance from B Our best
Navigators tell me, that f B. lose the sight of C. that she cannot be discerned
without climbing into the Shrowds; A. shall in like manner lose the sight of B.
which should not be so, Lib. 1. M^t. Not. Baths, p. 18.
if according as Aristotle and Dr. Jordan tells us, the Sea were depressed at
the shore, and elevated at distance, but rather B. should appear clearly unto
A. as if it were placed on a high Bank at full view. They say indeed, that B.
shall sooner lose the sight of A. because of the dark shore under which A. lies.

Now if it be thus, (as peritis in art sua credendum est) then is that conceit
of the Seas elevation above the highest Land but a fancy. Not. Baths c. 3. p.
18.
And that also of Dr. Jordans will hold no water, when he says as in
Siphunculis, the water being put in at one end will rise up in the other Pipe,
as high as the level of the water, so he will have it to be in the bowels of
the earth, between the superficies of the Sea and the heads of the Springs.

Nor is their reason for the depression of the Sea near the shore of any
validity; to wit, because it is terminated by the dry land; the Argument of
Demonstration which they use to illustrate the thing, being of sufficient
validity for confutation of the Position. Cap. 3. p. 19
For says Dr. Jordan, if a drop of water be put upon a dry Table, you shall
l^e it depressed on the sides, and elevated in the middle like an half G^obe,
but take away the termination by moistening the Table, and the drop sinks; and
he further ^dds, if this be evident in so sm^ll a proportion, we may imagine it
to be much more in the vast Ocean.

What! is not the sand of the Sea moistened by every wave as much as the Table
which makes the drop fall, and run out of its Global figure? why does not then
the Sea as well dilate it self, as the drop upon the Table, and consequently
leaving its Spherical Figure drown the world? We see the dry Land does not so
terminate the Sea, but it rises according to the Tides, still more and more,
till the Spring be at the height* and notwithstanding the moistening of the
Shore, it returns again to its lowest Ebb*

Nor do the Scriptures beforecited make out any thing for their purpose. Psa.
33.7. cleared.
As for that in Psalm. 33.7. He gathers the waters together as an heap. The
Prophet is speaking of the admirable power and wisdom of GOD in the Creation of
the world, as is evident in the 6. ver. By the word of the Lord were the
heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth: And then
follows, v. 7. He gathers, etc. The best way therefore to interpret this, is
to have recourse to the story of the Creation, and to see there what God did
with the waters, Genesis 1.7. and 9. After GOD had divided the waters that were
under the Firmament from those that were above; He said, ver. 9. Let the waters
under the heavens be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land
appear; So that it lows, the gathering of the waters together as an heap, is no
more then the putting them into one place, and the words that follow in that
7th. verse of the Psalm hint as much, which seem to be exegeticall and
interpretative to the former, to wit, He lays up the deep in storehouses.
Unless they will have the Prophet to hint also at the Spherical Figure of the
Sea, to which I can easily assent.

Besides the words themselves are worthy our considering, he does not say on an
heap, but as an heap, (...) congregans sicut acervum aquas maris; Whereas in
the story of the Israelites passing over Jordan, when the waters were divided
before them, and stood up in an heap, the same word in Hebrew for a heap is
used, to (...)* (...) not (...) Josh. 3 16. (...) steterunt acervo uno. The
Septuagint Translating that in the Psalm according to this sense, (...)
gathering as in a vessel the water of the Sea.

Job 38.11 cl^a^^d.
As touching that place in Job, I conceive it makes nothing for their opinion of
the Seas elevation above the earth. I deny not Gods miraculous and
extraordinary working in some things to manifest the glory of his wisdom and
power, yet I suppose the Sea to be confined by his providence within the
ordinary bounds of nature: for it were very strange to imagine that God in the
first institution of nature, should impose a perpetual violence upon nature
seeing we see the Creator in other things to use nature as his ordinary
servant, and to administer the regiments of matters by second causes. I
conceive no more is meant in that Scripture, but that Almighty God has set
certain limits and bounds which the waters should not pass these bounds and
limits I take not to be supernatural, as if the water restrained by a
miraculous word of command, should be forced to contain it self within its
circuit prescribed to it; but natural as cliffs and hills, within which the water
seems to be entrenched; for we may see there is no such force put upon it; but
if the natural bounds of the Sea, to wit, the cliffs be removed, the Sea
overruns the Land, and turns all into it self.

But the Authors of this opinion urge further,

I Answer, if we consider these Elements among themselves, Sol.
we must give the height to the water, for as much as the greatest part by far
of the Earth lies drowned, for that which is above, bears no sensible
proportion with that which lies under the water. But here we are not comparing
the two Elements entirely betwixt themselves, but the superficies of the water
with the parts of the earth that are uncovered, and are habitable, which
supersicies of the Earth notwithstanding this reason, may be higher then the
water.

But they object further, because Mariners coming from the main Ocean to the
Land,

This may easily be made out of Opticall principles, Sol.
that it must appear so, by reason that the Sphericall sigure and convexity of
the Sea, interposed betwixt our sight and the lower part of the Land, does hide
some parts from our sight, whence it must needs appear lower, being couched
almost under water; The like is discernable in another Ship at Sea, which seems
to be depressed underwater at some Leagues distance, so as nothing appears but
her top Sails. Besides at distance all things seem lower even upon a level at
Land, which when we draw nigh unto, do better discover their height.

I read that in Noah's Flood, God brake open the springs of the deep, and opened
the Cataracts of heaven, to pour down rain continually many days together upon
the Earth, of which there had been no necessity at all, had the Sea been heaped
up in such sort as they imagine; for the only withdrawing of his hand, and
letting loose the reins that the water might have run to an evenness, would
have been sufficient to have overwhelmed the whole earth.

Again, we find by experience, and our Mariners do all agree in it, that a like
gale of Wind will serve to carry a Ship out of the Port to the open Sea, as
from the Sea into the Port, which could not be, if the Sea were higher then the
Land, for they would need a great and stiff gale to carry them up the bank of
the Sea, and none at all to run into the Land.

And thus I conceive we are freed from that absurd consequence, which their
Doctrine of the Seas Elevation at distance, and depression on the shore, does
necessarily infer; to wit, that the water which runs out of Rivers in the ebb,
as soon as it reaches to the Sea, must run up the hill in its own natural
motion, which is against the nature of heavy bodies, whose motion is ever
downward to the Center of the Earth, as also Aristotle's own Doctrine else
where. Lib. c. de coelo. c. 4.


Besides, as Dr. French well observes, a man would think so many great Rivers
terminated in the Sea, might be a sufficient moisture for the taking away of
the termination made by the dryness of the Earth, and to make the Globus Sea
sink to an evenness.

Moreover tht manner of conveyance of the Sea water to the heads of Springs
fancied by Dr. Jordan, through the secret channells of the Earth, requires a
man of much credulity to believe him; to wit, that the water in those his
subterraneall crannyes should without any force upon it, leave its natural
figure, and correspond with its level, and yet the same water being exposed to
the open air near the shore, should both make and abide in a valley. It further
implies much easiness of pe^swasion in him that can believe, that those Springs
which are two or three hundred miles from the Sea, as some are in great
continents, must yet be supplied with water from the Sea, by Channells of that
length.

Besides if there were such Channells from the Sea to the Springs as he
fancyes, that are hollow like pipes, the water of the Springs would certainly
be brackish, according to the nature of the Sea water, which in such length of
time would have tainted the Channells through which it passes; Not. Hist. cent.
9. exp. 882.
as the Lord Bacon observes, that although pits dug near the Sea will be
found in time to have fresh water in them, yet afterward they will become
salt, the sand through which the water is transcolated co^tracting saltness, so
as new ones must be made, and so I think of Dr. Jordan's subterraneall
Channells.

As for Divines who are of the opinion of the Seas height above the Land, I
desire them to consider of that place in Psalm. 107. ver. 23. where it is called
going down to the Sea in Ships, the words being (...) descendentes ad mare,
Psalm. 107.23.
coming from the same root (...) descendit, with that word which is used, Micha
1.4. (...) which signifies locus declivis, or a steep place. Yet I deny not,
but there may be some Springs which at some small distance have a supply of
water from the Sea, but this makes nothing for their opinion concerning the
supply of Springs at great distance, and upon the high mountains. lib. 2. c. 56.
Pliny tells us of a Spring in the Gades which observes the Seas motion, in
ebbing and flowing: and I am credily informed there is another in the Peak in
Derbyshire, which ebbs and flows every twelve hours. So the Spring at
Giggleswick in Yorkshire ebbs and flows many times a day, even to the
admiration, whether that of Plinies may have any correspondence with the Sea or
no, I know not, Lib. ^. Not Q^^st.
I am sure the other two have not, and I had rather with Seneca, look on such
as these as wonders of God, then trouble my self curiously to enquire into
their causes, that are too hard for me.

Se^^^l concet^s.
But these that are of opinion of the Seas percolation to be the cause of
Springs, are not all for this way of conveyance, they say the water of the Se^
is conveyed by transcolation into huge Caverns in the body of the earth
indeed, but then they differ again in finding its passage to the Spring heads,
each propounding a way according to their fancy: Of agitation by subtterraneall
winds as Socrates in Plato. In Phoed.
Compulsion by a Spirit or breath that is in the water as Pliny and Valesius,
Pl.l. 2. c. 65.
of compression, De sac. phil. c. 1. and 63.
and that either through the weight of the Sea it self, Not. Qu. lib. 3.
a great part whereof he supposes to be out of its place in the air, as Seneca.
ib. 2. The at. not.
Or of the earth as Bodinus and Thales. Or rarefaction and condensation, as Dr.
Fludd and Mr. Carpenter. Geograph.
Or rarefaction and condensation, as Dr. Fludd and Mr. Carpenter. Or attraction
by the heat of the Sun and the heavenly bodies as Thomas Aquinas held. Or
Belmonts Sabutum, or Virgins earth; Ag in Sum. p. 1. q. 69.
all which as they seem at the very naiming to be nothing more then empty
conceits, besides the disagreement that is among themselves tenders it the more
questionable, so they are sufficiently confu^ed, some of them by Mr. Carpenter
in his Geography, Lib. 3. Not. Qu.
and the rest by Dr. French in his discourse upon the Spaw of Knaresbrough.

There is another account given by Empedocles an ancient Greek Philosopher,
Spaw p. 21. 22. etc.
as also Seneca for theebullition of Springs to which Gabriell Fallopius lib 1.
de aquis medicatis c. 3. Mr. Carpenter, Mr. Lydiat, and Dr. French adhere, the
last taking a great deal of pains to make it out, and that is by heat, wheareby
he will have the water which is conveyed from the Sea into the Caverns of the
Earth, to be elevated to the heads of Springs, after the same manner as from
the Sea to the middle region of the air, and that is by resolving the water
into vapors, Dr. French opinion.
nor matters he whether that heat be above or beneath the waters, if so be it
turns them into vapors, and makes them ascend as high as is requisite they
should: And this heat he will have maintained by subterraneall fires, that are
kindled and fed by Naphtha or some bituminous matter. And he makes two degrees
of heat, one more intense in the deep Caverns, to rarefie the waters in the
Caverns into vapors, the other more remiss nearer the superficies, which must
condense them again into waters; which he illustrates by the head of an
Alimbyck; and the cover of a boiling pot, whose more remiss degree of heat
turns the vapors into water.

Although Aristotle who also will have water to be generated in the Earth, L.
1. Meteor c. 11.
says it is condensed by cold, and the Philosopher seems as much to be
believed, especially since its more agreeable to their own parallel of the
middle region, where certainly the vapors are condensed by cold.

That there are bituminous fires our own reason (besides the testimony of good
Authors) does sufficiently evince, Sol.
they being the efficient cause of hot Springs, such as are those mentioned by
Plato and Pliny the one in Sicily, the other at Somosata; and our own at the
City Bath in Somersetshire, besides many others: from whence also are those
burning mountains Aetna and Vesuvius, besides others that we read of in Athours.

But first Dr. French supposes great Caverns of waters to be in the earth which
come from the Sea, page 16, 17. page 23.
the heat also to be of like proportion with the water; what a conflict this
would make in nature we may easily judge, when these two enemies fire and
water must be so immured together. I wonder the water being of like proportion
which the fire does not quench it, or that the fire consumes not the water, and
so in both cases we should want water in our Springs, and the world would be
destroyed: but it seems they do better agree and combine to bring about his
end, and he tells us how they both dwell together in the Caverns.

Secondly, L. 1. meteor c. 10.
this supposes the earth to be almost nothing but Caverns: for if that be true
that Aristotle says concerning Springs, that if all water that runs out of
them in one year could be kept in a vessel, it would almost equalize the
whole bulk of the earth; and Dr. French tells us, there is a like proportion of
fire and water in the Caverns; and reason tells us, that fire cannot be kept in
without a greater quantity of air, which it continually consumes, then what may
we judge concerning the Caverns.

Thirdly, this implies the Earth to be almost nothing but bitumen or Naphtha,
nor will his new generations be enough to maintain the expense.

Fourthly, this supposes all the Earth to be on fire, since almost in all
places there are Springs, and consequently contradicts the whole suffrage of
Philosophers, who call the Earth Elementum Frigidissimum.

Fifthly, the Earth would in time be consumed by so many fires, as says
Agricola, it being of a calcinable and combustible matter.

Sixthly, If it were so, then the water would have a bituminous taste or smell,
which we know it has not ordinarily, it not differing in quality from those
waters which are wont to break in the manner of Springs after great rains, of
which sort we have many break out yearly on the Wolds in Yorkshire, commonly
called by the name of Gypsies.

Lastly, its not probable that there are so many fires in the earth, because
those that dig in Mines in several Countries, do meet usually with water which
molest them, but no fires.

But to proceed, if the percolation of the Sea were the cause of Springs, then
we should usually have the most plentiful Springs near the Sea, by reason of
the nearness to their Fountain; when as to the contrary we find, that those
Towns which are situate near the Sea, are more destitute of water, then others
that are more remote. Again those Springs that are upon the Sea shore should
probably sympathize in their growth, or decrease with the Sea, and so at the
Spring-Tides should flow more plentifully, and at Neap-Tides more sparingly, as
those Springs I just now spoke of, the Gypsies, are more or less according to
the rain, whereas no such thing is observable in the other. Nor is this Spring
of which we treat, to wit, the Spaw, which is upon the level of the
Spring-tides, and sometimes overflow by them, in the least wise altered by
them, The Spaw not altered by the Tides.
as ever I could observe to flow more freely at the Spring-Tides, and slower at
the Neap-Tides, when the Sea is at somewhat a further distance; nor yet is its
taste altered in the least, or its efficacy in working, (notwithstanding which I
think it has some Salt in it from the Sea, and is thereby exalted in some
qualities.) Whereas it is very observable, notwithstanding it breaks out of the
ground, within three or four yards of the foot of the cliffe, which is near 40
yards high, and within a quarter of a mile there is another hill, that is more
then as high again above the Cliffe, and a descent all the way to the Cliffe,
so as the rain water cannot lie long upon the ground: I say nevertheless it is
observable that after a great rain the water is altered in its taste, But is
altered by rain.
and lessenened in its operation. Indeed a rainy day or two will not hurt it
all.

But to return to the ground of the opinion, which is built upon the Seas sole
sufficiency, to afford so great and constant a supply of waters to feed the
Springs: I easily grant it to be the best Storehouse, and do only dissent
about the manner of conveyance, of which I shall have occasion to speak by and
by.

And for the other ground, because the Sea is not increased by the multitude of
waters that flow into it daily, which it must of necessity be, if they had not
by their subterraneal Channels a recourse to their Foun^ains: Plato indeed has
a ready answer to it, telling of I know not what great Abyss, which he calls
Tartarus, and makes it the original Fountain of all waters, into which by
Caverns of the earth, he will have the Sea to empty it self of its superfluity.
If this Tartarus be Hell he is surely mistaken, for Dives found no water. De
Sac. Phil. c. 63.
Valesius indeed interprets it to be the same with Moses his Abyss, or else
some hidden part of the Sea. But this I pass over as one of the Philosophers
dreams, being also confuted by his Scholar Aristotle, who gives a full answer,
lib. 2. Met. c. 4.
which may satisfy any man, with whom agrees Freigius in his Hydrographie. An
immense quantity thereof, Hydrog. p. 442.
they say, is spent in vapors, which by the Sun, and the heavenly bodies are
drawn out of it daily, and converted into rain, snow, and hail, as also much is
dried up with the wind, to which Mr. Lydiat consents. Another large quantity is
sucked up by the earth, In praelect. Astron.
as is evidently seen near great Rivers, where the adjacent grounds are so much
moistened, that near them there is a more signal fertility, then in places more
remote. Ibid.
And then again, Aristotle says, that the Sea is not so much the end of the
waters to which they run, and wherein they are spent, as the beginning and
fountain of them, from which they flow; and so what was spent in exhalations is
but regained by the descent of showers of rain and snow, the Springs and Rivers
paying Tribute according to their receipt, and hence it comes to pass that the
Sea is neither fuller nor emptier. And besides, Valesius gives another answer,
viz. De Sac. Philos. c. 63.
The Sea is as much extenuated and dissipated under the Zodiac by the
exceeding heat, as it is augmented and increased under the Poles with rain and
snow. And this may suffice to be said, concerning the first opinion of the
Original of Springs, to wit, the percolation of the Sea.

Sect. 8.
The second opinion is, That Spring water is generated in the Earth, and that
either by transmutation of earth into water, or of air, The second Original.
Li^. 3 Not. quaest. c. 7.
as others. Of the former opinion was Seneca the Philosopher, who as he was the
Author of that fancy, so I think he is alone, for I find none of his judgment.

That the Elements may be transmuted one into another, especially those that
are placed nearest one another, agreeing together more in quality then the
rest, is the doctrine of Aristotle, Lib 2. de gener. c. 8.
and agreeable with reason, and very obvious to the senses. I can easily
believe, that the thinner parts of earth may be turned into water, as also the
grosser parts of water into earth; so the thinner and more subtle parts of
water into air, and the grosser parts of air into water, and therefore it may
be true that Seneca says, although it is rejected by Mr. Lydiat, de Origin,
font.
but that the earth which is a dry body, and accounted by Philosophers
Elementum Siccissimum, should by transmutation afford so much water, or the
hundred part of what flows out of Springs, is a thing so void of reason, as it
needs no arguments to disprove it, and is not likely to gain many followers.

I therefore pass on to the other of the transmutation of air into water,
performed in the Caverns of the earth, which by cold converts the air into
water; an opinion much more plausible then the other, having also the authority
of Aristotle to defend it, (...) M^^^ (...)
who will have it made in the earth, as it is in the middle region of the air,
when by condensation of vapors water is made, an^ he is followed by Dr. Fulk in
his book of Meteors and H. ab Heers.

But this opinion leads also into inextricable difficulties and absurdities.
Spadacr.
And first, he told us in the end of the tenth Chapter, that so much water runs
out of the earth in one year, as if it were kept in a vessel, it would
equalize the bulk of the whole earth, (notwithstanding he is sufficiently
scourged by Agricola, Cardane, Scaliger, and others for it) and reason tells
that more then ten parts of air will not serve for the making but of one part
of water, as Scaliger, In subt exere 46. de or font.
and M. Lydiat do both observe, (I think twenty would be too little) then it
would follow necessarily from these premises, that the earth should be almost
nothing but empty Caverns of air, when nevertheless those that dig mines in all
Countries, sometime two or three hundred fathom deep, do find no such thing,
but a solid body all along.

Secondly, this implies such an expense of air, as the whole Element of air
would not suffice to feed that gulf. Bodinus says it would not be sufficient
for one day, and therefore he laughs at the Philosopher. Lib. 2. The. at. not.
But certainly it had been long since extinct out of the mess of Elements, if
Aristotle had been in the right in this contrversie.

Thirdly, for a continual supply of so much air, as is requisite to be
converted into water, to supply all the Springs there should be found in
several parts of the earth, great and constant in draughts and sucktion of air
into the Caverns, with exceeding great celerity and violence, which no man ever
did find, nor any Geographer make mention of.

Fourthly, how comes it to pass that any winds break out of the earth, as
Aristotle teaches in his book de mundo, which he terms by the names of Apogei
and Encolpiae, de mund: c. 6.
and and that all the air is not rather turned into water, to supply his
constant generation of Spring water? And how can two such violent motions of
the air stand together, especially seeing he tells us elsewhere, that it is
contrary to the nature of the wind (which is nothing but Aer moius) to blow
contrary ways at once. L. 2. meteor c. 12.


I shall therefore pass over this Original also as not soundly principled,
and proceed to examine the last opinion.

Sect. 9.
The third and last opinion that I meet withal in the controversy about the
Original of Springs and Fountains, is that they are caused by Rain and Snow;
of which I find Albertus Magnus, (...)
and Georgius Agricola the most eminent Patrons The sum of what they say is
thus.

The Snow and rain falling from the clouds in great abundancy upon the earth,
Lib. 2. de ort. and cause. subter. c. 3.
do by moistning the superficies cause it to bring forth vegetables, whereas
otherwise it would be barren through dryness, The 3. Original.
and consequently not habitable: The remaining part (except what suddenly runs
into Rivers) sinks down by secret passages into the earth with which the
superficies does abound; (which are like unto small sibres of veins, not
discernable by the eye, Rain and Snow the true original of Springs.
terminating in the skin in all the parts of our bodies) and in rocky ground it
runsthrough the clefts, and by them is conveyed to the subterraneall
channells more or less deep in the earth, where it is concocted by the earth,
and moves as blood in the veins, receiving many times a tincture, according to
the nature of earth, and the Mineralls, or Metalls by which it passes, helping
forward also their generation.

What a Spring is?
This water at length in its passage through the veins of the earth finds vent
and runs forth, which place of eruption we call a Spring or Fountain.

Whence its ebullition
And this springing forth or eruption of the water. I conceive to be made not
by any forcible Agitation, compu^sion, or violence, that is put upon it ab
extra within the earth, or by suction from the Sun and the heavenly bodies, or
by heat which which may be in the earth, or by any spirits that are in the
water it self, but from its own natural inclination and tendency toward its
proper place assigned to it by the Creator, which as I said in the second
Section, is the unequal part of the earth, it not resting till it meets with its
natural correspondent the Air. And this I think to be the natural reason of
its ebullition out of the earth, and I find scaliger in his subtilities of the
same judgment, Exere 100.
it freeing nature from a violent force which the working fancies of men would
put upon it, who yet cannot agree among themselves.

Subterraneall lakes contribute nothing.
But as for subterraneal lakes that are found in the bottom of great Caverns of
the Earth, they are standing waters, oftentimes of poisonous quality, as I
hinted in the 6th Section, which having room enough and supplied with air above
them, I think they incline not to motion, and do contribute nothing to Springs,
nor can any subterraneal heat which Dr. French supposes to be in these Caverns,
extract a wholesome water out of them.

And this Rain or Snow water in the Channells, wherever it finds vent, it
continues to flow, so long as the Channells by which such a Spring is fed, have
any water to supply it, and that is more or less according to the wideness or
length of the Channells, or otherwise according to the number that meet
together, it not resting till it meets with the air; And therefore it is
observable in pipes that convey water from one vessel to another, the water
will flow till all its store be spent, whether the motion be upward or
transverse, till it meet with air, and then it ceases to flow, for if one bore
a hole in the pipe, and let in air, the motion is done.

These Channells also are furnished according to the quantity of Rain that
falls, and the advantages they have of receiving it, by the small and secret
passages that come from the superficies of the earth, which concenter in those
Channells.

Now this opinion of Rain and Snow water to be the Original of Springs,
Arguments to prove.
is illustrated with many arguments of demonstration by the Authors before
mentioned, and others of this judgment, the principal whereof are these.

First, Because it is found by experience, that fountains and consequently
rivers, are greater and do abound more with water in Winter, and moist weather
then in Summer.

Secondly, in those years when great Rain do falls in Summer, and great store
of Snow in Winter, we find Springs durable, whereas in droughty seasons when
there is but little or no Rain or snow, the Springs dry up. A sure proof
whereof we had in England in the years 1654, 55, and 56. when our climate was
dryer then ever any stories mention, so as we had very little Rain in Summer,
or Snow in Winter, most of our Springs were dried up, even such as in the
memory of the Eldest men living had never wanted water, but were of those sorts
Springs which we call fontes perennes, or at least were esteemed so; which if
they had received their supply of water from the Sea, or from the air in the
earth converted into water, they could not have failed of water.

A third reason which persuades to this Original is, because in those Climates
and Countries where little Rain falls, few or no Springs and Rivers are seen.
As in the deserts Aethiopia, and in most parts of Africa near the equinoctial
they have little water, and many times in two or three days journey can hardly
find enough to quench their thirst and their Camells, as Historians relate. and
so in Egypt where it rains very seldom, but they are supplied instead of it by
the overflowing of Nilus, there are no Springs at all. Whereas in Britain,
Germany, and France, and other Northern parts of Europe, there are great plenty
of Springs and Rivers, in regard they do abound in the moisture of the air, and
great falls of Rain and Snow.

To the first our Carpenter object, Georg. lib. 2. c. 9.
that the abounding of Rivers with water in Winter, is from the store of Rain
or Snow water, that runs into them from the higher grounds, and not from any
great quantity of water that falls into them out of Springs and Fountains.

I deny not but the Rivers are instantly heightened in Winter from Rain, Sol.
so as on the sudden they will often overflow their banks, but that water is
soon spent in the Sea; It is sufficient for defense of the point in hand, if
after that water in reason should be spent, they be yet maintained more
plentifully by the Springs, then usually they are in Summer; at which season of
the year, though they be filled with a sudden flood of Rain, yet wanting the
constant benevolence of the Springs, they suddenly fall as low as they were
before.

Another Objection I find started by Seneca, Lib. 3. Not. Quest. c. 7.
as also by M. Carpenter in the place before cited; to wit, that the greatest
Rain that can fall never sinks above ten foot into the ground; and Seneca cites
his own observation for it in the digging of Vineyards, and he gives this
reason for it, because when the earth is once satisfied with showers, it
opposes it self against the overplus by shutting its pores.

I own it thus far, Sol.
that into the solid earth the Rain sinks not above ten foot, although learned
Cardane allows it ten paces or fathomes, his words being non ultra december passus
descendere. De var rev c. 6.
But what becomes of that immense quantity of rain, which often continues for
many weeks together, nay often times some months, wherein we have scarce a fair
and dry day, besides the infinite quantity of wet and Snow that is falling all
Winter long, causing inundations of water over all the Country round about, not
only upon higher grounds near unto rivers, into which it may run per declive,
but in plains from whence it can have no current at all, can it be supposed
that ten foot of earth will drink up all this water, which who so shall dig
soon after the water is drunk up, shall not find it very moist or muddy, which
it would assuredly be if it had not some secret passage into the Caverns of the
earth, much deeper then they speak of? And therefore Cardane in the place
before cited, adds, that the earth is sadned with the Rain, so as it lies
above, unless by some empty crevice, or cleft, it sink deeper into the earth,
which is all I contend for, and which being granted will be sufficient to
quicken and continue the Springs.

And to Seneca's observation before mentioned let me oppose Albertus his
experience, Lib. 2 met. tract. de orig. slum.
who tells us that at the bottom of a solid rock, 120 fathom deep, he saw
drops of water distill from it in a rainy season.

Another Obj^ction that Seneca makes against the point in hand is this, ^ib 3.
Not. quest. c. 7.
on which he lays much stress; That the great mountains of Rock and Stone
which have little or no earth on them, and on that account not capable of
receiving much rain, do nevertheless yield great and lasting Springs, which are
never drawn dry.

This makes nothing against, but rather for the point in controversy. Solut.
There are no Rocks but they have their Commissure, joints or clefts: now the
Rain and Snow water can run more plentifully into those joints and clefts of
the Rocks, and and more speedily, then when it falls upon the solid earth; And
in that he faith they are not covered with much earth, they are the less robbed
of what falls from the clouds, and so are better supplied. To this I Will further
add, that Rocks have more large and spacious Caverns, that are fit receptacles
for the water, the solid earth has. Add to this that Rocks are usually many
together, covering much ground, ordinarily a whole Country is nothing but
Rocks, and so can receive much wet, and their store by their nakedness of earth
has a fresh supply from every shower that falls. And therefore on all these
accounts, as they have advantages of speedy reception of what falls without
diminution, and ca pacities for admission of greater quantities of wet then
other soyles have, so they may very well afford more plentiful and durable
fountains.

Besides it is observable, that in the solid clay soyles it is very rare to
find any eruption of water, because such are sad earth, and have few or no
Caverns or Channells in them, but our Springs break out ordinarily in Rocky,
gravelly ground, especially the best water, and most lasting Springs, such as
we call fontes perennes.

Another Objection that Seneca makes against it is this, or three hundred foot
deep, there is often found great plenty of water, which no man can suppose to
have come from the clouds, but he thinks it of that sort which is wont to be
called living water.

From whence then should it come, Solut.
from the Sea? perhaps the Sea is as many miles from that water as the
superficies of the earth is feet from it, and may much more be questioned. But
we may remember Seneca's judgment concerning the original of Springs is, that
they are generated by transumtation of earth into water; de Origin. font.
an assertion so ridiculous, as he is laughed at by M. Lydiat, and never had
any as yet to take his part. Perhaps it may come from the transmutation of air
into water, for such transmutation I cannot deny, we see Churches become wet
before rain falls from this cause: But its most probable to come from Rain,
which may possibly pierce by its crannyes much deeper then he speaks of, as I
have shown already. Our Miners will tell him that in Winter after great
inundations of Rain, they are much troubled with water in the bottom of their
Mines, finding it frequently distilling through the solid earth upon their
heads by the secret capillar veins, (as I may call them) that come from the
supersicies of the earth, whereas in Summer or dry seasons they find no
interruption at all. Touching the term living water which is used by Seneca, I
think no more is meant by it, then such as flows from everrunning fountains,
which therefore in English we commonly call quick Springs.

But to preceed, York Spaw. p. 4.
Dr. French Objects concerning the increasing of Springs in Winter, that its
not universally true, and he instances in St. Mugnus well, concerning which he
was informed by the woman that keeps it. Not. Hist.
that it begins to rise about May, and falls in October; as also that of Pliny
in Cydenia before Lesbon, that flows only at the Spring.

There is no rule so general but it may admit of an exception; Sol.
its enough if it be generally true though not universally so. He instances in
two only, although supposes others: I might without much ado instance two
hundred, and suppose very many more, and an induction of so many particulars is
accounted by Logicians an Argument of great force. Moreover as for that of St.
Mugnus well, he does not speak upon his own knowledge, if he had I would not
have questioned it, for I honor his memory and learning, he only cites the
woman for his Author whom he trusted too far. I have enquired of the Honorable
Knight and his Lady who own the ground, Sir. T. H.
and they never heard it observed by any, that the Well should rise in May or
the Summer months, and decrease toward Winter. M. R. W.
Likewise of another Gentleman that lives hard by the place, having good
advantages to know it, being brought up from his childhood within a mile of it,
and he assures me upon his own knowledge it is not so.

If any would know more concerning this Well, I refer him to Dr. Dean and Dr.
St. Mugnus well
French their Books upon the Spaw at Knaresbrough. It is a quick Spring that
runs plentifully over, within fourteen miles West of York, of great repute for
curing the rickets in children, whom they dip into it naked, and hold them in
it a little while; but they must observe to dip five, seven, or nine times,
more or less, according to custom, or some think it will not do, and this they
continue for several days together, when they take them out they put them into
a warm bed, where they sweat a while. Its also used for Cramps in the joints,
and lameness for elder people, who will sometimes stay in it half an hour or
more at a time, for a few days together, and many think it has done good in
both cases: Whether it partake of any Mineralls or no its doubted. Dr. Dean
thinks it does not, Dr. French thinks it does, only because of the effects of
it, for it seems not to have any preceptible quality different from our
ordinary and best sort of Springs, being exceeding cold in Summer when they use
to battle in it, and warm in Winter. But whether these effects proceed from a
superstitious conceit of this Sainted Well, which raises the imagination of
some, or some Mineral quality, or rather (which I most incline to) from the
excessive c^leness of the water, which repells the natural heat from the
joints to the inward parts, till coming out of the Well into the warmer air, or
a bed, it recoyles to the joints again with more force, and makes a new
fermentation in the humors which is furthered by sweat; I say from which of
these I will not determine. If any think fit to make trial in the likecases
with any other cold Spring they may perhaps find as much benefit, as some have
done in another Spring within half a mile of this City of York for the Rickets
in Children, from which they report they found some good for that disease.

As for the other of Plinies mentioning that flows only at the Spring, I
question not the truth of it. But this is to be observed, that in the southern
parts of Europe, as also elsewhere, they have but little rain in Summer, yet
having many exceeding high mountains, as the Alps and the Pirenaenas, which are
elevated near the middle region of the air, these are receptacles of great
quantities of Snow, which lies all Winter, and melts not because of the intense
coldness of the air, till the Sun come near to the Equinoctial point, which is
about the eleventh of March, and thence it may come to pass, that such Springs
as are supplied from that melted Snow, do begin only to flow at the Spring,
which having but scant and narrow receptacles, may soon be drawn and cease
flowing.

And here let me observe as I pass* that the greatest Rivers in Europe have
their beginning in those hills, and do begin to flow most violeatly at the
Spring when the Snow melts, to wit, Danubius otherwise called Ister the
greatest Rive^ in Germany, as Ausonicus in his E^^grams relates, which
Franciscus Ju^ius in his description of Germany seems to equalize with Nilus;
Lie. (...). c. (...).
and Rhodanus and Rhenus two Rivers of France, which stretch themselves from
the Alps, the one to the Mediterranean Sea, C^^ G^o^. M^nd. 12. pa^.
the other to the Germane Ocean, as Cassaneus mentions, and perhaps this Spring
of Plinies may come from some such cause.

But Dr. French Objects further, page 4.
that notwithstanding that which can be said, though the Springs which were
before dried up in Summer, do break out again after Rain, yet it does not
follow that Rain is the material cause of Springs, for (says he) their drying
up was not for want of Rain to supply them, but by reason of the dryness of the
earth toward its superficies, which attracts to it self the water of the
Springs to satisfy its drought, which it does again let go, when it has drunk
plentifully of the showers from heaven: And he instances in Rivers, which in
Summer will many times be dried up, although some fountains at the same time do
run plentifully.

Perhaps the Earth may drink up a great part of the water of Rivers as they
pass along, Solut.
and thence it comes to pass, that near Rivers the earth is more fertile, and
in Summer those meadows not so much parched with heat as elsewhere, and thence
it is that they flow low, having probably but a few Springs to supply them, in
comparison of what they had, many being dried up by reason of the heat of the
weather and want of Rain. And that the superficies of the earth near Springs
may drink up some of their moisture, we may well suppose, but that cannot be
much, nor the attraction of such force as to draw from far, so as to weaken the
current of a Spring considerably, much less to dry it up, for as much as the
water of the Spring is not diffused abroad as the water of Rivers is, but pent
up in a narrow Channel through which it passes.

Again, since it is true as naturalists tell us, that the heart of the Sun
peirces not above ten foot into the earth to dry it, the water that such a
little quantity of earth may need, or can draw, will not be in any proportion
toward the drying up a Spring, especially seeing it lies in a narrow channel,
and also perhaps rises upright out of the earth like a boiling pot.

And whereas he objects again, that the most part of the Rain that falls on
high places runs into plains, and from thence into Rivers, and where it cannot
so run, it remains upon the superficies till it be exhaled by the Sun.

I answer, we see a great quantity of water runs into Rivers after great Rains,
when they are nigh at hand; but what becomes of all that which falls in a whole
Country far from Rivers, and of the infinite quantity of Snow which covered the
surface of the ground, and sets all the Country in a flood when it melts, so as
a man would think it could not be dried up in many months, and this where there
is no current at all into Rivers? The moderate heat of the Sun in rainy
weather, especially in the Winter months, is such as it cannot be thought to
exhale the tenth part of it into vapors, and yet in a few days its all gone,
and no footsteps of it left save in the roads, whereby the continual beating of
the horses, it is so sadned that it cannot sink of a long time.

As for that place of Seneca which he urges, I have answered it already in this
Section; And for the digging of the Well, where sometimes no water can be got
two or three hundred foot deep, before we come at Springs: That may be, and yet
make nothing against the waters sinking much deeper, since though there be many
Channells of water in the earth, yet it is possible to miss them in such a
narrow compass as a Well, and yet there may be store of water near hand.

Nor can the dust or dirt, which he says, may be conveyed by the water into
the veins or crannyes, by which it should pass down into the earth, hinder it
any more, then the excrementitious humors that are in the bowels, do hinder the
chyle from passing into the Lactaea, or Mesentery veins, and so to the Liver;
both which may be thereby hindered in part; so as they cannot pass so speedily,
yet it is not so in all bodies, nor all over the ground, only in some places it
lies above the earth a while, before it can find passage down.

Another Objection which some make against this opinion of the Original of
Springs by Rain and Snow is this,

I would have such to consider what has been already said concerning the
immense quantity of wet that falls in Winter, besides the great Spouts of Rain,
that ordinarily every year at some time or other are falling in Summer, which
often sets the whole Country in a Flood, together with other frequent showers,
and whether there is not a reasonable proportion of wet for supply of the
Springs, especially while we consider the paucity of great Springs, and the
distance that is betwixt one Spring and another, sometimes two or three miles
of ground affording but a few Springs, and those perhaps of very small currents,
most Towns being supplied with Well water, of which very little is lost.

Again, it is very observable, that a great quantity of that water which runs
out of Springs that are placed on high ground near hill^, is in its passage
sucked up by the earth, as is also the waters of Rivers, and so is conveyed by
secret veins into the subterraneal channels, and serves to give being to nether
Springs that break out in lower grounds. Nor need this assertion seem strange
to any, seeing we read of great Rivers that hide their channels in the earth
for many miles together sometimes, and break out again, as the Rhine in
Germany, cited by Seneca; Lib. 3. Not. Quest.
Erasenus in Arg^lica; Padus in the Alps; but more remarkable, Grimston States
and Empires.
is that of the river Guadiana in Spain, which runs under the ground for the
space of thirteen leagues, and near to a Town called Villa Horta breaks up
again, which gives occasion to that brag of the Spaniards, concerning a bridge
in Spain, on which is daily fed ten thousand sheep. Nor does our own Country
want such presidents; the river Rye in Yorkshire runs under ground a quarter
of a mile together and breaks out again near Helmsley, and I am informed of the
like near Grantham in Lincolnshire. Yea and those great Seas in Asia are
thought to have subterraneal passages from one to another; the Caspian into the
black Sea, that into the Aegean, and this into the Mediterranean.

Sect. 10.
Having thus weighed and answered the most material exceptions, that are made
against this Original by learned men, I cannot but join in judgment with
Albertus and Agricola, yet not altogether excluding the other two, especially
that of the percolation of the Sea to Springs near adjoining; but how such as
break out on high Lands, and at great distance from the Sea, can be thought to
be supplied from thence, or otherwise then by the showers that fall from
heaven, I confess I see not, notwithstanding the Arguments they produce to make
it out. And therefore learned Dr. Jordan, notwithstanding he inclines strongly
to the Seas Original, page 19. not. Baths.
as we have heard already, yet is forced to grant at length, that if any
Springs be higher then the Sea, (and I have proved they art all so) they may
then proceed from Rain and Snow.

Nevertheless we must not forget from whence Rain and Snow do naturally
proceed, and that the Sea is the principal storehouse for the generation of
vapors, out of which they are made by condensation, the Earth and the moist
bodies thereon not affording any proportionable quantity to the wet that falls
from the clouds.

I shall now hasten to a period of this dispute, being only willing to
illustrate what has been said, by a quotation out of learned and laboborious
Dr. Heylin, Cosmog. p. 677.
in his Cosmography the second Edition p. 667. where treating of Cyprus an
Island in the Mediterranean Sea, in length two hundred miles, and sixty miles
broad, he tells that in the days of Constantine the great, there was an
exceeding long drought, so as for thirty six years they had no rain, in so much
as all the Springs and torrents or Rivers were dried up, so as the inhabitants
were forced to forsake the Island, and seek for new habitations for want of
fresh water. Now if the Sea had been the Original of the Springs, they could
not have wanted water, it being an Island and not very great; or if the
transmutation of air into water in the Caverns of the Earth, there could have
been no defect; since the Caverns were the same; so that its evident the
Springs proceeded from the Rain, which failing they were dried up.

Likewise whosoever shall compare the water which flows out of Springs, with
that which immediately falls from the clouds, shall find such a full and
perfect agreement betwixt them in all qualities perceptible to the senses, as
its hard to distinguish the one from the other. Besides that ex^er identity of
the water of ever flowing Springs and of the Gypsies I mentioned before, which
break out in the Wolds in Yorkshire, and else where, after a great inundation
of Rain, which if they proceeded from several causes, must probably differ in
their qualities and effects.

Lastly the two rarities I mentioned in the beginning, that are to be found
upon the Castle hill in Scarbrough; to wit, the deep Well that reaches to the
bottom of the Rock, which has no water, and the Spring Well which is within
half a yard of the edg of the Rock toward the Sea, which never wants water, do
somewhat illustrate the point in hand. For the deep Well being so near the Sea,
should probably have water in it, if there were any such percolation as is
spoken of; or if air were so plentifully transmuted in water, it should not be
dry; which yet it is, there being no Channells that empty themselves into it;
while the other which is upon the top of the Rock, not many yards deep, and
also upon the very edge of the cliffe is supplied, which doubtless is done by
secret Channells within the ground that convey the Rain and showers into it,
being placed on a dependant part of the Rock; near unto which there are also
Cellars under an old ruinated Chapel, which after a great rain are full of
water, but are dried up in a long drought.

I now proceed to confider of the nature of Spring water, The nature of Spring
water De simpl. med. fac. c. 4.
which doubtless is the best of all others for general use, eminently excelling
in the essential parts of water, viz. cold and moisture, as Galen says.
Nevertheless some Springs are better then others. Hyppocrates prefers such as
flow out of Rocksand Hills of gravel or stone, as more clear and white then
what coms out of other soyls; as also such Springs as are cold in summer and
warm in Winter, which is assuredly sound in them if their fountains be deep in
the Rock, and this is a sure token whereby we may distinguish of Well water
also. And to this of Hyppocrates I might join the whole suffrage of all
Philosophers and Physicians that may have writ upon this Subject. To sum up all
in a word, besides what was said in the second Section: The principal token of
good and wholesome water is, that it be simple or unmixed, and then it loads
not the stomach, and easily passes through the Hypechondres, being also soon
hot and soon cold.

I find some of the Ancients were wont to weigh their water, and accounted that
the best which was the lightest, and for this cause it seems it was, that the
Persian Kings would drink of no water but of the River Eulaeus an Attick saucer
whereof weighed less by a Dram then other waters, as Strabo says. Now Pliny
tells that an Attick saucer was a measure of fifteen drams; Lib 15. Geograph.
c. ult. Lib. 21. c. ult.
so then it was a fifteenth part lighter then the other waters of Persia. And
the Parthian Kings on the same account drank of the Rivers Choaspes and Eulaeus
as the same Pliny witnesses. And thus Athenaeus commends a Spring near Corinth,
Lib. 31. N. Hist. cap. 3.
which he calls Pirenes, for its levity above all the waters of Greece. Lib. 2.
dup. c. 2.
And there seems to be good reason for it, because its levity is a token of its
purity and simplicity, and that it bath no earthy parts, and consequently is
easier of concoction.

Now among the several sorts of fountains Hyppocrates commends most those that
open toward the East, Aph. 26. Sect 5.
as the lightest and fittest for all ages and constitutions; and next to them
such as run toward the West, but as for those that open toward the North, he
thinks them to be cold and hard of digestion, in that they want the heat of the
Sun; and he accounts those the worst that run southerly, because their thin
parts are exhaled by the heat, de aquis.
and so the water becomes gross. But we need not fear that in this our
Climate, where the Sun is not so hot, nor need those that are healthful, be
so scrupulous concerning their water, if it be Spring water espe^ially, nor
whether it runs East, West, North, or South, they being all indifferently good
and wholesome.

Now sometimes it happens that Springs break out where there was never any
before, The Reasons of the breaking forth of new springs.
as in great floods of Rain and Snow, which the subterraneall channells cannot
receive, but these are but of short continuance. Lib. 3. Not. qu. c. 11.
So after Earthquakes as Seneca mentions, and so Theophrastus, that in the
mountain Corycus after an Earthquake many Springs broke out. And thus after the
cutting down of Woods and Groves as Pliny tells us in his Not. Hist. Spadac. p.
1^.
And H. ab Heers cites a passage to this purpose out of Ambrosius Perez, who
writes that in the City Baja, a great Tree being torn up, to make room for the
building of a College for the Jesuits, there brake out a Spring of good and
wholesome water; a channel of water running under it, was it seems broken up.
So also the stopping of the mouth of a Spring in one place, may cause it to
break out in another, as we see by ordinary experience.

Of like nature with Springs, is Well water, only not so good, and among these
such as are open to the air are better then those that are shut, whose water is
fetched up by pumping, and the more they are drawn, the better and more
wholesome is the water.

Many ^ratities in Spring^.
There are also many rarities to be discovered in Springs, both in their
operations on those that drink them, as Dr. French has observed, and I might
multiply out of good Authors: as also in their motions in ebbing and flowing,
concerning all which its very hard to give a reason.

There is a fountain in Idumaea called Job, which is every three months of a
several color; to wit, duskie, red, green, and clear.

Another among the Troglodites, which is three times a day bitter and sweet
again.

The Fountain Silva that flows out of the foot of Mount Sion runs not
continually, but on certain days and hours. A like to which we have at
Giggleswick near a Market Town called Settle in Yorkshire, which I mentioned
before, that ebbs and flows many times a day; whether such as these proceed
from a spongious earth, which resists it a while, being but a slow Spring, till
it rally new force, and break through the obstruction; or it be from a Spirit
in the water, whose impulse puts it forward, but being a penurious Spring it
settles again, as Saxo Grammaticus thinks, In praefat. Da^iae suae.
I will not undertake to drtermine having not seen it, till when I will be
content to admire it as a secret.

I read also of a Fountain in Judaea, which flows six days and rests on the
Sabbath, and is therefore called fons S^bb^ticus.

Also of a Fountain in Epyrus, which will quench a lighted torch, and light one
whose flame is out.

So among the Garamantes there is a Spring which is so cold in the day time,
that one cannot drink of it, and in the night so hot, that it cannot be
touched.

Catal gl^r. mund. p. 12 In inst. rei pub. l. 7. tit. 9.
These and many more of like nat^te I meet withal in good Authors, especially
in Cassanaeus and Patricius, where the learned Reader may abundantly satisfy
his curiosity: like wise in D. Fulks book of Meteors, concerning which no
reason can be given, so as I think it better silently to admire the power and
wisdom of Almighty God in them, then too curiously to pry into the causes of
these deep mysteries in nature, which are wrought in the lower parts of the
earth; It being the Prophe: D^vids expression in his contemplation upon the
secret mystery of his forming in the womb, Psalm. 139.15.

Sect. 11. Of River Waters
The next sort of water which fal^under our consideration, is River water.
First therefore concerning the Original of Rivers, and then of the nature of
that sort of water.

In Original.
The Scripture tells us, that all Rivers come from the Sea, Eccles. 17. so as we
need not go further to search out their Original; nevertheless they consisting
of two sorts of water, to wit, salt and fresh, we may distinguish, and call the
Sea the original of the Salt water, and trace the fresh up to its Springs and
Fountains, and determine that the fresh water in Rivers comes from the Springs;
and in this we are not without a president in Scripture, Genesis 2.10. Where its
said a River went out of Eden, which divided it self into four streams; which
intimates that the Spring from whence those sour Rivers had their Original was
in Eden. Notwithstanding Rivers have also an additional supply from Rain and
Snow, which falling from higher places, do carry down with them the water that
is in Lakes, Ponds, and Ditches, and fills their Danks.

Hippocrates will have River water to be altogether unwholsom, Its natu^^.
being made up of so many several sorts of water, and most of them bad, as also
mixed with mud, dirt and slime, De aquis and locis.
breeding diseases of various kinds, according to the nature of the waters, and
therefore it is very observable, that those Cities and Towns, that are forced
to drink of the water of Rivers, are more pestered with Epidemical sickness
then others that have better water, which Valleriola observed at the City of
Arles in France, Lib 2. loc. com. c. 7.
which stands in a low and Fenny soil, having no Springs at all, but the
inhabitants are forced to drink the water of Rhone.

Notwithstanding I find some Rivers commended to have wholesome water, as
Eulaeus and Choaspes which I mentioned before, which the Kings of Persia and
Parthia preferred before any other sort whatsoever. But above all other the
water of Nilus is commended by Aetius, Tetrab. 1. c. 165.
as having all the properties of the best sort of water. And hence it was that
Philadelphus the second King of Egypt, having married his daughter Berenice to
Antiochus King of Assyria, caused the water of Nilus to be carried to her into
Assyria, that she might drink of no other water but that, Lib. 2. dypn. cap. 2.
as Athenaeus says out of Polybius.

Yea the water of Nilus seems to be equalized with wine, if not preferred
before it; for Scaliger relates out of Spartianus: that when the Egyptian Army
was ready to mutiny because they had no Wine, De subt. exerc. 48.
Pescenninae Niger their General appeased them with this answer, what do you
grumble for wine, and have the River Nilus at hand?

But I must not wade too far into this stream, least I lose my self and my
Subject, especially since River water contributes nothing to the Spaw at
Scarborough, there being none acer it. Nor have we the water of Nilus here; our
Rivers in England are compounded of several sorts of waters, and therefore not
so wholesome; and yet it is the best or only water that some Town have for their
ordinary use; the water of Owse being also most commonly used by this City of
York, for whose cause especially I will say something more concerning it.

River water is not so good as Rain or Spring Water, the Sun having exhaled the
thin parts it is become more gross, yet it will keep longer then either of the
other, and will make stronger Bear then either of them, it being more easily
impregnated with the strength of the Malt by reason of its gross parts; but it
is not so good for Medicines as the other. Now the reason why it will keep
longer then Rain or Spring water is, because it has passed already some
degrees of fermentation by the heat of the Sun, yet the water of some Rivers
will keep longer then other. Baccius says the water of Tiber will keep an
hundred years and not corrupt, Lib. 1. de ag teber. c. 2.
the reason is because it is gross and thick like Oil, on which account its
unwholesome to be drunk.

River water is not to be used after rain till it has purged it self, and
does become clear, and its the best when it is taken out of the middle of the
River, which if that cannot be done, then let it be taken out of some deep
place, and not where it is shallow, also above the Cities and Towns, before the
filth of the channels run into it. Great care likewise should be taken by the
Governors of Cities that no Carrion be cast into Rivers, both because it
corrupts the water, and destroys the fishes; likewise that no clothes be
washed, or boys bathe, or horses be watered above those places where the water
is taken up, especially in times of common contagion and pestilential diseases.
In which particulars the Ancient Lawmakers were exceeding careful, appointing
certain Officers for the preserving of their waters, whom they called
Hydrophylaces, which were persons of the best quality, and had great immunities
conferred on them, and were to see to the putting of the Laws in execution
concerning waters, Cat. glor. muud. par. 12. p. 259.
as Cassanaeus relates out of Franciscus de Ripa.

This water being taken up should be kept in large Stone Cesterns, (not leaden
which are apt to breed dysenterie fluxes) and those very clean, into which if
some gravel stones gathered out of a fresh River were put, it would preserve
it longer and cooler. Lib. 2. loc. com. c. 7.
Valleriola would have also some little fishes put in to keep in motion; and
when it is first put in the Cesterns, it should be poured through a thick
woollen cloth, that no sandy or slimy substance may pass through, River water
being very subject to have sediment more then other sorts.

Paulus Zachias a famous Roman Physician tells of a pretty device which was
used by Cardinal Francisco Maria de Monte, L. 5. quaest. med. leg. tit, 4. q.
2.
one much delighted in Chymicall experiments, whereby he puryfied the water of
Tyber, and made it wholesome to be drunk. He had two large Cesterns of an
Hollands sort of Stone, that was of a porous substance, which would hold
fifteen gallons a piece, these were so placed that the water that was put into
the one, might in some convenient space of time distill through the stone into
the other, under which he had a third, which received what dropped through the
second. Neither of the uppermost was perforated at all, but the water passed
through the pores of them, in the bottoms of both which there was ever found
such sediment; This water so transcolated was so pure and thin, that it would
easily pass through the Hypochondres, and the Cardinal told my Author, that
he found much benefit in it against the stone, and that it provoked urine
quickly.

I conceive this to be very rational and a neat way easy to be experimented,
and very proper for such as have weak bodies, and yet are forced to make use of
some of the grosser sorts of water, whereby they may so purify them, as they
may become much more wholesome for whose sakes I have thought fit to insert the
experiment.

Sect. 12.
Of Mineral waters
HAving thus as briefly as I could run through the several sorts of ordinary
waters, with their Original causes, natures, and eff^cts being taking
inwardly, which may serve as Polycletus his rule the better to judge of
Mineral waters, this being as Mathematicians say of linea recta index sui and
obliqui; I must again resume the subject, which is the principal occasion of
this discourse, viz. The Spaw at Scarbrough, which though it be a quick Spring
or Fountain, yet differs in quality and operation from our ordinary springs, in
regard it has imbibed the virtues of certain Mineralls through which it
passes, as I hinted in the first Section; to wit, Vitriol, Iron, Allome, Nitre,
and Salt; Concerning the nature of which Mineralls I shall say something, and
then proceed to the nature and vertures of the Spaw it self.

Agricola, De re metal. 2.
a learned Germane, and very judicious in the nature of Mineralls and Metalls,
reckons up six sorts of simple Mineral waters; to wit, Salt, Nitrous,
Aluminous, Atramentarious, Sulphurous, and Bituminous; this which we treat of
is mixed or compound, partaking of several of these together.

Water may imbibe the nature of Mineralls.
Now there are several ways whereby water may imbibe the nature and virtue of
a Mineral or Metal.

First, by receiving its vapor, and thus let water stand some while in a
brass skellet, (or some other Metal as Iron) and it will taste of brass or
Iron, and the sooner if it be warm, when yet the skellet has lost nothing of
its substance, and that water would all evaporate into Air.

Secondly, when some of their juice is dissolved in the water, and that is
while the Mineralls are but yet young and in fieri, or as Chemists speak in
solutis principiis, for at that time their concrete juyces are dissoluble in
water, In syntag. p. 221.
as Libavius says.

Thirdly, another way is by Corrosion of the substance of the Mineralls
mentioned by Galen, Lib. 1 de simpl. med. fac.
and this is performed by the help of the concrete juyces we now mentioned
dissolved in the water, which corrode and extract Mineral substances. And this
commonly is done by such waters as have imbibed Vitrioll at the first, for they
do thereby become hungry and corrosive, and so the fitter to take in to them
any other Mineral that lies in their way: an example whereof we see in aqua
fortis, which will corrode the substance of another Metal, and convert it into
its own nature, the difference only lies in a magis and minus. The like we see
in vegetable acide juyces, as vinegar, as juice of Lemmons, which will corrode
Iron, and cause a rustinses to grow upon it, which will soon wast its
substance, at least make it more easy to dissolve.

Fourthly and lastly, by confusion, changing the substance of the Mineral into
water; and this is when the Mineral is of such a nature, and that it is
capable of being converted into water, as Salt and Nitre will both so perfectly
turn into water (and Allom also although its not so fusible as the other) a
little being put to them, as if they were nothing else. And this they will do
the more quickly, if the water has imbibed a vitrioline juice, but then take
the water and evaporate it away, and the Mineralls will be found remaining in
the bottom. An example whereof we have in this our Spaw water, three quarts
whereof being evaporated over the fire, there will be found in the bottom
three Drams of a brown brackish sediment, which being separated as was said in
the first Section, two Drams will be found to be Allome, Nitre and Salt, the
rest the substance of an Iron Mineral.

But because I spoke now of Mineral juyces, while the Mineralls are but young
and in fieri, its requisite I say something concerning their production.

Some have imagined that Mineralls and Metalls were created perfect at the
first, Fallop. de met. c. 11.
seeing there appears not any seed of them manifestly, as there does of
animalls and vegetables, Lib^v. de not. met. c. 12
and because their substances are not so fluxible but firm and permanent. But
as they are subject to corruption in time, by reason of many impurities and
differing parts in them, besides other accidental decays, so they have need to
be repaired and preserved by generation, as learned Dr. Jordan observes. Not.
(...).


It appears in Genesis that plants were not created perfect at first, but only
in their seminaries: for in the 2. of Genesis 5. Moses gives a reason why plants
were not come forth of the earth; to wit, because (as Tremelius translates it)
there had as yet neither any rain fallen, nor any dew ascended from the earth,
whereby they might be produced: The like we may judge of Minerals, that they
were not at first created perfect, but in their Seminaries also for the same
reason, moisture being as necessary for the production of Mineralls within the
earth, as of vegetables above, as I said in the second Section, Deort. subt. 5.
c. 1. l. ib.
and to this do consent Agricola and Dr. Jordan.

And therefofe it has been always a received maxim among Philosophers, that
Mineralls are generated, and our own daily experience confirms it. Our Salt
Petermen, when they have extracted Salt Peter out of a floor of earth one year,
within three or four years after, do find more generated there, and do work it
over again. The like is observed of Allome and Copperas; And so of Iron,
Gaudentius Merula reports of Ilva an Island in the Adriatic Sea, where Iron
breeds as fast as they work it, which is confirmed by Agricola and Baccius, and
by Virgil who says of it.

Ilva inexh^ustis Chalybum generosa metallis. Lib. 10 A^^id.


The like we see confirmed in our own Mines both of Iron and Lead, yea, and
co^l too, at least in some places as I have heard the Miners affirm. Only the
difference is, the plants are increased by an extension of the parts generated
in all proportions, by the ingress of nourishment and the Mineralls are
augmented externally upon the superficies, as naturalists say juxta positionem,
by superaddition of new matter, concocted by the same virtue and spirits into
the same species.

If any demand of me, which of these ways this water comes to be impregnated
with the virtues of these Mineralls; How the Spaw has imbibed the Mineralls.
I answer, by them all, according to the nature and capacity of each Mineral.
Of Vitriol it partakes by the first way eminently; to wit, by receiving its
vapor, and so of Iron, yet so as it has also something of the concrete juyces
and substance of them both. From the vapors of Vitriol it has its inky smell
and acid taste, which after it has been heated by the fire are gone at least
in some degree, for it is not so strong as before. From the concrete juyces of
Vitriol, Iron and Allome, I think it has its color being something of a
bright azure or sky color. And that it wants not the substance of Iron is
apparent, in that after it has been boiled a while, there appears a reddish
sand, which is nothing else but matter ferri, or rubric, or as Dr. French calls
it, a Vitriol of Iron: which is also discoverable by putting a little powder of
Gall to i^, as I hinted in the first Section. Lastly Nitre and Salt being apt
to dissolv^ and turn to water, as also Allome, are mixed and confounded with
it, as has been already made out.

I now proceed to speak something concerning the nature of all these Mineralls
which I find in the water. Vitriol.


Vitriol is a name used by modern writers, De temp. simp. c. 376 Lib. 5. cap.
74.
whereas the Ancients called it Atramentum Sutorium* Serapio and Dioscorides
reckon two sorts of Vitriol which they call by an Arabic name Zeg; to wit,
Babylonian which being broken has white specks in it; And Cyprian which is of
the color of brass. But our later writers name three sorts; Toll. in Stock.
pr. c. 9.
to wit, Roman, Vitriol, or Copperas; Cyprian which is that of blew color
found in Mines in Germany, partaking of the nature of brass, which they call
Calcanthum; and another sort, which is found in Liguria, somewhat black, by
which Iron may be turned in Brass or copper, called Colcotar. Vadianus in his
Commentaries upon Pomponius Mela says, Lib. 3.
this sort was found in Poland, not far from Cracovia, in which he says if Iron
be infused, and so melted once and again, it turns it into Cyprian brass. Galen
found them all together in a Cave at Cyprus.

Vitriol is eminently hot, Lib. 4. de simpl. med. facult.
and of a biting and adustive quality, and yet is also Stiptick and astrictive,
and therefore dryes up superfluous humidity, and is used in diseases of the
eyes, being good in all moist diseases, it stays bleeding, provokes vomit,
kills all manner of worms and expells them, but when it is mixed with water it
is much more moderate in all its qualities. This is the account given by Galen,
Dioscorides, Serapio, Paulus, Oribasius, Aeetius, Actuarius, Fernelius, and
others, as I could cite at large out of their writings.

Iron called by Averrhoes Veffaf, Iron.
and Nadid by Serapio, is dry in the third degree: It is also Stiptick drying
up the superfluous humidities of the body, somewhat like to Vitriol; many
preparations being made of it against the moist distempers of several parts,
and particularly of the belly and womb, and strengthens the seminal vessels. It
is also opening, and good against the obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and
is commended against the hard swellings of them, and against the Dropsy, also
it strengthens a relaxed and debilitated stomach especially if it arise from
Choler: as Galen, Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius, Averrhoes, Ser. de temp. simpl. c
393.
and Serapio do witness, to whom especially, I refer the learned Reader.

Dioscorides will have it also to loose the belly, but especially he commends
the flower or filings of Brass to that purpose: Now Iron being joined with
Vitriol in this water, partakes of the nature of Brass, as I said before; and
is therefore the more purging and ope^ing, from which conjunction I think ^t is
that most of our vitrioline waters in England do loose the belly.

Allom is called by the Arabians Sceb. Allom.
Dioscorides ^eckons up many sorts of it, Galen but three, to wit, (...) and
(...), and says, they are all of gros^ parts and very Stiptick, abstersive,
heating, and something corrosive; i^ hinders the generation of ulcers in the
body, and stays women's fluxes, and is us^d in many sorts of Medicines to dry up
superfluous humidity, good against fretting Ulcers and Imposthumes of the Gums,
Matrix and testicles, as say, Galen, Oribasius Paulus, Aetius, Serapio,
Fernelius, and others.

Nitre or Baurach as the Arabians called it, Nitre.
is thought by some to be nothing more then efflorescentia terrae, or a certain
fatness in the earth, tending to the production of vegetables, Lib. 3.
observat. cap. 76.77. Lib. 3. N. H. c. x.
and that there are no Mines of it in the earth, of which opinion Bellonius
seems to have bin, as also Pliny. But Serapio and Dioscorides make out better
experiences, telling of Mines of Nitre in Armenia and Arcadia. I think
Bellonius and Pliny meant rather Aphronitrum, or the spume of Nitre, then Nitre
it self.

I also think this Spaw of ours proceeds from a Nitrous Mineral within the
earth, as else I see not how it should imbibe so great a quantity as it does,
three quarts affording above a dram of Nitre, when it is evaporated, the rest
being Allom and Salt.

Our best writers say there are two sorts of Nitre, Natural and Artificial; the
Natural tends to a reddish color as says Serapio: Galen says, there is also
a white sort; but all agree in this, that it is of a drying, digestive,
abstersive and resolving quality, cutting gross and clammy humors very
strongly, its taste is a mean betwixt salt and sour, inclining to bitter. It
is commended for such as have eaten poisonous Mushrums, and cures them
presently. Being mixed with water Dioscorides says, it corrects the sharpness
of Urine, and ulceration of the bladder caused by Cantharides.

It is wont also to be mixed in other Medicines when we would attenuate and
deterge; its added to Cerats and Plasters in distempers of the Nerves, as the
Palsy and Convulsion; and is good to be put into the Bread of such as are
troubled with the Palsy of the tongue. If any require further satisfaction
concerning the virtue of Nitre, let them consult Galen, Dioscorides, P.
Aegineta, Oribasius, Aetius, and Serapio.

Salt or Melch as the Arabians call it is of two sorts, ^alt.
viz. Fossile such as is dug out of Mines; and Marine such as is made of the
Seawater, or other brackish water, the former is of a more gross, earthy and
compact substance then the latter, yet they are both of one nature, of a
detersive, cleansing, resolving, purging quality, drying up superfluous
humors, and preserving from putrefaction, kills all manner of worms, and being
heated becomes bitter in taste.

Many other virtues are reckoned up by Galen, Serapio, Dioscorides, and others,
to be in Salt, to whom I will rather ^efer the learned Reader, then trouble him
with a large recital at present, because there is not much Salt in our Spring,
yet some there is, which I think it receives from the Sea, rather then from any
salt Mineral.

It suffices to have said somewhat concerning the nature of these Minerals
severally; doubtless there must some qualities arise from their mixture, and
that with water, which was not before in any one particular, I shall now
therefore hasten to Treat concerning the nature and effects of this most
excellent compound Mineral water, and then say something concerning preparation
to it, and right ordering of the body in drinking, and so conclude.

Sect. 13.
Of the Spaw.
THe Spaw water according to its manifest qualities is cold and moist, and being
drunk does immediately cool and moysten the body, and quench thirst, having
those qualities which simple water has, as I have reckoned up at large in the
second Section, and may indifferently be used for it. Although having imbibed
the aforesaid Minerals of Vitriol, Iron, Alom, Nitre, and Salt, it is
impregnated with the qualities and natures of the said Minerals, and
consequently is hot and dry in operation, being found by due and daily use
thereof, to correct cold and moist bodies, and cure such diseases as proceed
from the excess of cold and moisture.

Its nature.
Nor let any startle at this assertion, that I affirm this Spaw water to be cold
and moist, and also hot and dry, which are contrary qualities, since it is cold
and moist actually in the instantaneous use of it, but does heat and dry
virtually, and in process of time. Who knows not that wine, though it be cold
and moist actually, yet is potentially hot and dry, the ordinary use whereof
does heat and dry the body.

Now as all bodies incline to a preedominancy of these four qualities, and most
diseases consist in the excess of some one or more of them, each quality so
exceeding is tempered by its contrary in the water, so as nature, which is ever
sollicitous for its own preservation, closes with those qualities in the water
(as also in all other remedies) which correct its own excess, and arms it self
(unless it be very feeble) against those other qualities that might increase
its malady, and hence it is, as D. French well observes, that a distemper will
rather be altered by its contrary, then increased by its like.

But because these four first qualities are found in this water but in a remiss
degree, the heat and dryness being so corrected with cold and moisture, and the
contrary, that a forcible operation in respect of any of them cannot be
expected from it, I think sitter means may be found out for those intentions:
As if a man would only cool and moysten, it may be better done with simple
water, which has no potential heat or dryness in it, and may be found in every
village; or if he would only heat and dry up humors, it may better be performed
by other Medicines that are more eminently hot and dry, then by this cold and
moist water, so as no man need goto Scarbrough for these intentions. I
therefore pass on to the other qualities of this water, in which it does
eminently excel, through its participation of the aforesaid Minerals.

An operation.
It is of thin parts peircing into the most narrow and secret passages of the
body, and is excellent in opening obstructions, which are the causes of most
diseases. It does attenuate, cut, and dissolve viscous, lentous, and clammy
phlegm in the stomach, bowels, mesentery, reins and bladder, and is also
cleansing and deterging, casting them forth both by siege and urine, as it
finds them by their position most to incline: For such humors as are in
primis viis in the bowels, it purges out by siege, and such as lie in the
mesentery veins, or venae lacteae, porta, liver, reins, or bladder, it cleanses
by urine; and both ways so plentifully, as if all the humors went but one way,
for it purges so well, as if it would leave nothing to pass by urine, and yet
passes so plentifully by the bladder, as if it found no vent by stool;
performing these two operations the more plentifully, by reason of the quantity
that is to be drunk. And of such working it does very rarely fail, nor scarce
ever, unless in exceedingly constipated bodies, although it be taken without
any preparation, as very many do though not so safely, as shall be said in the
next Section: and this it does without any griping at all, casting forth
plentifully both it self and the excrementitious humors, which I have often
experimented both in my self and others.

An in^^ance.
I drank one morning, without taking any preparative at all, three quarts of the
water, facta prius retrogradatione matutina pro solito, having also weighed my
self before I drank, that I might discern what alteration it would make in my
weight. I drunk a pint every half hour, walking about betwixt one draught and
another, till I had taken all the three quarts. After I had taken three pints
it began to work, and so continued an evacuation both ways, viz. seven times by
siege liberally within eight hours. I also measured the quantity of Urine which
I had kept by it self, so as within the space of five hours, I had made a
pottle of Urine, within less then half a gill, as clear as the Spaw Water it
self, having neither smell nor taste like Urine. I took the Urine and evaporated
it all away, that I might try whether it had yet remaining in it any of the
substance of the Minerals, but it afforded nothing but a filthy slimy Sediment
of a sandy color.

Hence it may appear how diuretic this water is, when two third parts or near
hand, should in so short a space pass through those secret crannyes of nature
by Urine, and yet at the same time work by siege so freely, as I could not have
expected from Pil. Coch. dram one. Herein exceeding if I mistake not most of
the waters of Europe, (not excepting the German Spaws) some of which pass very
well and plentifully by siege, others of them by Urine, but scarce any so well
both ways, as I have from the testimony of diverse persons of quality that have
tried them.

Having thus observed the through operation of the water both ways for that one
day, I weighed my self again the next morning as before,

I had lost two pound and a half o^ my weight: now I think the humors being
rarefied by the water, some of them were evaporated by insensible
transpiration. And although I was in my ordinary state of health when I drank
this one dose, yet I found after it a better agility of body, and alacrity of
Spirit then before. I have caused others to make trial also as I did, and it
has in some fluid bodies wrought more plentifully both ways, then it did with
me.

Now this water does not only thus thoroughly cleanse the body by siege and
urine, in the parts through which it passes, but does also draw from distant
parts, as the head, joints, and breast, and helps to the preventing and curing
their distempers, moreover to this evacuating is also joined a corroberating or
strengthening quality, whe^^^^ it fortifies the parts, and so armse^^ture with
new strength to the preventing of relapses.

It is found to be good against diseases of the head, as the Apoplexy,
Epilepsie, Catalepsie, Vertigo, inveterate head ach, especially when they
proceed from Sympathy with the stomach or lower belly, as many times they do in
cacochymick constitutions.

It is good against the diseases of the Nerves, as the Convulsion, especially
when it proceeds from sharp and bilious humors, which do vellicate the
tunicles of the stomach or the beginning of the Nerves; or from worms, as is
ordinary in Children, and others of the younger sort: also against the Palsy,
especially if it proceed from the scurvy, which therefore is called Paralysis
Scorbutica, and is observed by our modern writers, occurring daily in our
practice, although not observed by the Princes in Physic, or the Ancient
writers. And of this particularly I have had good experience in serverall, Mr.
K.
especially of late in a Minister who found much benefit in the use of it
against the Palsy; although not without other specisicall remedies which I
added, to fortify the Nervs and the animal faculty.

It cleanses the stomach from tough and slimy phlegm, sometimes causing vomit,
if the stomach be prone thereto, otherwise not, unless one drink too fast
before it has time to go down. It furthers concoction of the meat, by
strengthening the digestive faculty; and provokes an appetite as large
experience shows, so as many that have come hither with feeble stomachs, either
in craving or concocting meat, have in a very few days found themselves with
hungry appetites to crave, and ability to concoct any meat that could be set
before them.

It opens the Lungs and cleanses them, being good in all diseases of the
breast, that need or can admit purgation. Its good against difficulty of
breathing, provided it be not accompanied with an Ulcer in the Lungs.

It cures the Asthma, if the patient labor not under the incurable disease of
old age, or an exceeding feeble and cold distemper of the bowels. Mr. H.D.
I know a Gentleman of Hull, that had been long and sore afflicted with the
Asthma, who was perfectly cured with drinking of it in a few days.

Mr is. B.
A Gentlewoman of York had been much troubled with Rhumes which had resisted all
remedies, found very much benefit by the use of this water, more then all other
methods that had been prescribed.

It cures the Palpitation of the heart, and helps such as are subject to
frequent fainting through Melancholic vapors that oppress the vitalls, and
such as are troubled with the Nightmare, or find an opressive load at their
breast.

It is good against indisposition of the body unto motion which we call
Spontanea lassitudo, which some that otherwise are healthful are troubled
withal, that they have no lift to stir, or not without short breathing; so as
I have observed some who at first coming, have not been able to walk a quarter
of a mile upon the plain ground without weariness, have after a few days
drinking, been able to walk up to the Castle hill without a rest.

It is singular good in opening even the old and inveterate obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, and consequently prevents a Dropsy or cures it, if it bd
taken in time or before the Liver be too much weakened. It prevents or cures a
Schirrus of these parts, if it be taken in the beginning before it be
confirmed, it corroberates the natural faculty of them exceedingly, and
strengthens the Liver in its work of sanguification and corrects its
intemperate heat.

It purifies the blood and cures the Scurvy, even such as have been tainted
with it in a high degree, a large trial whereof I had in the late wars, when
the Garrison that was kept by Sr Hugh Cholmley on the top of this Castle hill,
after a few weeks siege, whither from the air of the Sea, or a bad diet, or
want of exercise, were most of them ^allen into the Scurvy, especially the
Country Gentleman who had fled in thither, who were miserably troubled with it,
as many of them as drank and the Spaw Water were perfectly and speedily cured,
which some of them used without any other means.

It cures the Jaunders both yellow and black, the Leprosy in which case its
needful the patient should bathe in it, and cleanses the body from the
remainders of the French Pox, and consummates the cure*

I have known Inveterate Quartanes often cured by it, and other sorts of Agues
also, which have long resisted medicine, have been conquered by the use hereof
in a short time, but it must be drunk only upon their days of intermission. It
is very good to purge away the relics of the Small Pox, Agues, and other
diseases, and consequently to prevent relapses, which are wont to ensue through
a new fermentation of their matter.

It is a most Sovereign remedy against Hypo chondriack Melancholy and
Windiness, suppressing the vapors which fly up to the head, and cheering the
heart, as I might instance at large. I know a reverend Minister who for help in
this disease has traveled through all the Spaws in England, Mr. L.
till at length after trial made of this, he found so much benefit, that
leaving all the rest he comes yearly one hundr^d and fifty miles to drink of
it. Mr. B.
Likewise another Minister in York-Shrie, that was a long time both in his own
apprehension and others, in a languishing condition through a Melancholy
distemper, being full of fears and fancies, was perfectly cured with it, and is
become a very healthful and cheerful man.

It helps the Colic and Iliack passion, if it does not proceed from a cold
distemper of the bowels, but in this caseit should be drunk a little warm, and
the patient should also bathe in it.

It helps such as are subject to frequent Fluxes of the belly, and strengthens
the bowels, expells all sorts of worms and vermin out of the body, and the
matter of which they breed.

It is very good against diseases of the skin, cures the Itch and the Scab, and
helps such as are wont to break out into Botches.

It it peculiar against the Inflammation and Ulcer of the Reins, corrects the
heat and Sharpness of Urine, dissolveth the Stone in the Kidneys, expelling it
in gravel, and the mucous matter of which it is bred by Urine; and cleanses
all the passages of Urine; It furthers expulsion of the Stone in the Bladder
without pain, if it be not too big for the passage, and the tartarous matter of
which it is bred, which of times causes the same symptoms with the stone in
the bladder, when yet there is no stone at all; it helps the pissing of blood
and the Gonorrhaea, and strengthens the seminall vessels.

It is good against many disea* of the Womb, opening the obstructions thereof,
and cures the Green Sickness in Maids; it cures the overflowings thereof both
white and red, and helps those that are subject to abortions, and Fits of the
Mother; takes away some causes of barrenness, and strengthens the Womb;
amends the complexions of Women, making them look with a ruddy fresh color. In
some of these distempers it should be used by way of incession, or injection,
according to the nature of the malady, and the judgment and advice of some
learned and prudent Physician, and then all i^s qualities act more immediately
upon the parts, and so it better corrects hot and sharp humors, and is more
cleansing and healing.

It is good for such as are wont to Bleed often, and for the inflammations of
the eyes, an^ sudden flushings in the face, correcting the heat and acrimony of
the blood.

It is very beneficial to be used by such as through obstructions, or
abundance of viscous humors have incorrigible bodies that will not be moved by
anordinary Dose of Physic; as also for such as have been long detained in a
course of Physic, for the cure of some rebellious and Chronicall disease, to
consummate the cure.

In a word if any intentions be to be performed in a medicinal way, by
allaying or mitigating some hot distemper, opening obstructions, evacuating
morbifick humors by Urine or Seige, and strengthening the inward parts of the
body, it may be fully and completely effected by this water, wherein it
operates so safely, as I have very rarely observed any ill Symptoms to arise:
nor have I scarce named any distemper, of which I have not made particular
observation, and most of them many times over, or been certainly informed by
credible Authors.

Spaw at Malton.
Of like virtue with this is the Spaw at Malton within fourteen miles. North
East from York, but it is not so pleasant to the Palate, and also nauseous to
the stomach, by reason of a muddy taste it has, being a very flow Spring, not
affording water enough for many drinkers, although in operation it is as quick
and strong as this.

If it be demanded whether Children, old people, Spaw water or no.

To the first, I know H. ab Heers says he saw a sucking child drink of the
Germane Spaw with good success, Solut.
and Dr. French allows that at Knaresbrough to be given to children of a year
old; but I think it to no purpose to trouble them with it so young, Children.
since either they will not drink at al, or not above a spoonful or two, which
can make no operation at all, more then by cooling and moystning, which may be
done as well by other Spring water. But if a child be of four or five years, and
be troubled with the stone or gravel, or some such distemper, and will be
persuaded to drink of it, it may be very beneficial, as I know by experience
in several, that at four or five years old have been enticed to drink a quart
of it in a morning with good success, and so continued for several days.
Nevertheless if a younger child will drink of it, it will do no harm at all.

Old people.
2 As for old people, they are to be judged of according to the temper and
constitution of their bodies especially the stomach and bowels, for some are
more vigorous then others that are younger by much, and of such there needs no
scruple; but if any old people do labor under a very feeble stomach, and a
cold distemper of the bowels, and that upon trial made, they find their
stomach not able to receive it without a manifest dejection of appetite, or
some other ill Symptom, they shall do well to refrain: but for such as find no
inconvenience they may go on to drink, only in a less quantity and somewhat
warm. But as for those that labor under the incurable Symptoms of decrepit
old age, whose natural heat is small, let them not meddle with it, but content
themselves with a good diet, and a warm bed, and such cordialls or Kitchen
Physic, as may help to repair their feeble Nature.

Women with child
Touching women with child, difference is to be made according to the time they
are gone with child, as also according to the constitution of their bodies.
For the water being both purgative and diuretic, it seems not to be so safe
for them, yet it is well known that many have drunk of it without the least
detriment, some of whom have been young with child, and others many months
gone, even near the time of their delivery.

I intend not here to enter into the controversy, whither at all, or how far
women with child may be purged, Aph. 1. Sect. 4. and Aph. 29. Sect. 5.
, Hippocrates forbids it in the three first and three last months, but allows
it in the three middle months. And elsewhere he says, Aph. 34. Sect. 5
that if a great Lask happen to a woman with child, it puts her in danger of
miscarrying, which we find true in our daily experience. Now I conceive purging
must hurt them, because of the great agitation of the humors which is caused
thereby, and the expulsive faculty of Nature which is then irritated,
especially if it be caused by a Medicine that has an acrimonious or malignant
quality: and thus Hippocrates tells of one, that in her second month, having
taken a Pill of Elaterium, fell into a violent Flux and died. But this water
makes no such agitation of the humors, nor causes griping, nor has any
acrimonious or Malignant quality, to give any ground for such fears:
Nevertheless because in the first months of gravidity Natures cords are
tender, and so easily broken; and in the last months the motions of the child
are more strong, frequent and violent, and like fruit that is near ripe, which
soon f^lls if the Tree be but a little shaken; I conceive it safest in the
middle months; to wit, in the fourth, fifth, and sixth. And yet in these also
regard is to be had of the constitution of the body; for some are of such
tender slippery bodies, especially such as have been subject to frequent
abortions, that they can endure nothing; notwithstanding some causes of
abortion may be cured by the Spaw: Herein I advise them to consult some prudent
Physician before they drink of it. But certainly in ordinary bodies if there be
a redundancy of Gacochymick humors, it is a most proper and safe medicine, and
may serve either to cure or prevent distempers that proceed from thence, in any
month of their reckoning. And thus not only the Spaw water, but some other
purging remedies we find may safely be administered to them, in such a case if
need be in any month, Lib. 4. de morb. mul. c. de reggravid.
as also says Dr. Primrose, yet it must be done by a wise hand, although more
safely in the middle months for the reasons abovesaid.

Sect. 14.
IT now remains that I give some directions concerning the use of this Spaw
water, Drections for the use of the Spaw.
and that in reference to a preparation of the body for it, right management
during the time of drinking it, and what may be requisite to be done after it.

I know many go to Spaws not for necessity but pleasure, to withdraw themselves
a while from their serious employments, and solace with their friends; such are
but whets not lets to business, Such as ^^^in ^^^^th ^^^ed no ^^^paration.
and like the whetting of a tool, which sharpens it, and makes it cut the
better. If such do drink without any preparation, it matters not, only let
them not drink too much at the first, till it has found passage, which perhaps
it may do in an ordinary body within three or four hours, it being a sure
working water. I have often drunk my self not for need but company, and ^^^^r
took preparatory, and yet never failed of working the first day, both by seige
and urine, a touch whereof I have given in the foregoing Section.

It may do good even to those that find no need, in regard there may be some
latent obstructions in the body, or some lurking humors that may breed
distempers afterward, upon the access of some procatarctick or external
cause, which being taken away by this water may prevent a disease. And it is
very ordinary in corpulent bodies especially to have such humors and
obstructions, for whom this water is very proper, although they find no
sensible need at all, for as much as such as are near to a disease or sickness,
Sect. 1. Aph. 3.
as Hippocrates says, and do need purgation.

But as for such as find some decay of their health, by reason of some
distemper hanging on them, there may be need of preparation, and that with
reference to the nature of the malady, whether simple or complicated, the parts
principally affected, the age and constitution of the Patient, the time of the
disease whether in its growth, height, or declination, and the time of the
year, The fickly must take advice.
all which are considerable. My advice is that no man go to the Spaw in such a
case, but that he first know what be goes for, by a right understanding of his
condition, and a due comparing the disease and the remedy together, that he may
have some grounds to hope for good, and so drink cheerfully and not doubtingly,
for questionless it is not good for all things; some diseases, as also some
bodies not admitting of such evacuation, as they must expect that drink of this
water.

The best is therefore to advise with some learned Physician, who understanding
the nature of the malady and of the water, will be able thoroughly to instruct
him, whether it be a proper remedy or no for his condition. For though the
water will not probably hurt any man that is in perfect health, yet it may do
harm to such as are sickly, if it be not used aright. And its hard, nay almost
imp^ssible for me, to lay down rules that may suit every man's particular case,
there being as great variety and difference among them, almost as there are men.

Amongst these some perhaps will need no preparation at all, before they drink
of the Spaw; to wit, such whose bodies are fluid, or humors not many, the
malady lying perhaps in intemperie: Or at least some gentle eccoproticks may
serve the turn, being given the night before the Patient begin to drink. Others
whose obstructions are rebellious, and humors tenacious, or nature dull and
slow may need some course of Physic, or at the least some strong cattarticks
to make way for the water, for want of a right understanding whereof, some have
got more harm then good, and have bought repentance at too dear a rate;
especially such whose bodies have been weak, and tender for whom purging was
not ^a fit remedy.

Again, whereas I commend this water in several cases, as in diseases of the
head, breast, or lower belly, Other medicines needful.
I mean not as if it were to be used alone, and nothing else; It may be
requisite many times to furnish the Patient, with some specisick remedies, that
relate more peculiarly to the partaffected, with reference it may be to some
complication of maladies, which I cannot so perfectly discribe, without making
this swell into a voluminous bulk, which I intend not.

Let blood.
In some cases also it may be fit to let blood, either before or after some few
days drinking, especially in plethorical bodies, or hot distempers, without
which many times obstructions will not yield to remedies. All these cannot be
so well predetermined, but are best judged of by view and conference with the
party.

It will be sufficient to the wise, that I have said so much of the nature and
operation of this medicinal water, as that Physicians that never saw nor heard
of it before, may be able well to judge of it, and give good advice to such as
consult them with reference thereto.

The due manner of drinking.
These things being premised, let such as drink of the water, bergin with it in
the morning, by six of the Clock or seven at the furthest, taking two glasses
of half a pint a piece, intermitting a little space of time betwixt one and
the other; after which let the Patient walk about upon the sands half an hour,
by degrees
(or otherwise ride on horseback, or in a Coach) till he finds his stomach is a
little emptier, the water being passed down into the bowels, then let him
drink two glasses more and so walk again, which will help to warm the water in
the stomach, and further both its concoction and descent; or let him use some
gentle exercise, so as he do not provoke sweat, because that throws the water
into the habit of the body, and hinders its passage through the bowels. And
then after he finds his stomach capable of receiving more, let him drink other
two glasses as before, not exceeding a pottle or five pints the first day in
ordinary bodies, nor yet so much in weak bodies, unless they shall find it to
pass freely, as usually it begins to do within two or three hours, and then
such as have strong bodies, and capacious stomachs, may go a littlefurther.

Not good to take too fast.
I cannot approve of taking the waters too fast, least the coldness thereof
enfeeble the natural heat of the stomach, and provoke vomit, which otherwise
it is not apt to do, unless the stomach be prone thereto, or full of phlegmatic
humors; and then though one do vomit, it does no harm at all but good in
cleansing the stomach.

The next day the Patient may go higher to two or three pints more, he having
found a free passage the first day both by siege and urine, so as he finds no
distention in the hypochondres. Only it will be needful to have some
stomachicall Lozenges, or powder to correct the win^iness of the water, and
preserve the natural heat of the stomach, or at least some Caraway Comfirs,
which he may take some quantity of, betwixt every two glasses.

Have done by 9. or 10
I would also have every one to take his full dose of water, by nine or ten of
the Clock at furthest, that it may have time to pass down before dinner, least
if the meat mix with the water, it do float in the stomach, and be washed down
into the bowels unconcocted. Now its a token that the water has passed
through when the urine, which was pale and clear as the Spaw water it self,
begins to look with a higher color, which will usually be within 2 or 3 hours
at most after the last dose: at least it will have done its work in the
stomach, so as the whole company may go to dinner by twelve of the Clock: But
if any have such feeble stomachs that they cannot fast so long, they may take a
mess of warm broth which is ever ready in the Innes.

Feeble stomachs.
And if any have such feeble bodies that they cannot walk to the Spaw, being
about a quarter of a mile from the Town, such may drink it in their Chambers.
And those whose stomachs are not able to take it cold, may air it a little,
observing the directions already laid down.

It is good to eat somewhat sparingly at dinner, and not too freely at supper:
also let the meat be of easy gidestion, and not too many dishes, which are
apt to breed an heterogeneous juice, not so fit for nourishment, and also makes
nature toil too much to concoct them.

Salt meat not so good.
I cannot approve of salt meats either beef or fish, although I discommend not
that which is a little powdered, especially for such as have strong stomachs
and are healthful, who need not be critical. But as for such as are sickly
they must be more wary, especially such whose stomachs are feeble in the
concoctive faculty, since they are like here to fall into large temptation of
great varieties of Seafish new and very well dressed, Va^iety to be avoided.
as Tucbut, Codde, Conger, Soles, Plaice, Whiting, Skate, Herring, Macke^ill,
Lobster, Crab, etc. which are brought in by the Fisher men two or three times a
week, only let such drink a glass or two of Sack or Clarret to further
concoction, which I cannot but commend to all such as drink of these waters, to
preserve the natural heat of the Stomach; unless it be those that labor under
a hot distemper of the Liver, for whom dry medicines in form of an Electuary or
Lozenges are more proper, which do moderately warm the stomach, and not at all
inflame the Liver.

Sallets not good.
I altogether disallow of Sallets of cold herbs, in regard they are hard of
digestion, and are apt to float in the stomach with the water, and pass down
unconcocted, and breed many diseases. Rasis says, that a long use of water
after the eating of Sallets and pot herbs, Cap. 70. l. ult.
for such as are not accustomed to it, breeds the Scab, Itch, Morphew,
Erisipelas, and other diseases of the Skin.

Neither can I like of Su^me fruits to be eaten after dinner, as Cherries, Nor
summer fruit.
Plums, Rasberries, Apples, Pears, etc. they are best to be eaten after
complete concoction, or an hour or two before Supper, and yet the more
sparingly the better.

Not good to drink in the afternoon.
Nor do I approve of drinking at all of the Spaw in the afternoon, both because
it usually works sufficiently with what was drunk in the morning, moving the
body even all the day: as also because it does precipitate the meat out of the
stomach too soon, before complete concoction be made, and will not be cast off
the stomach before supper; as also disturb the Patient in the night, or fly
into the habit of the body, and breed the Gout or some other moist disease of
the joints: on which account I cannot allow it to be drunk at bed time; Page
104.
although Dr. French commends a glass of the Spaw at Knaresbrough to be taken
then to close the stomach, and suppress fumes; which I think are rather raised
by it, I would have the afternoon spent either in some pleasant discourse, or
walking about or riding, or some innocent recreation, and sleep to be avoided.
since through sleep it must of necessity lie the longer in the stomach, and
gathering heat send up vapors, which will oppress the brain.

If at any time it shall so happen, that the water does not find a free
passage, so as it causes distention and pain in the belly, d^fficulty of
breathing, or gidiness in the head, it may be helped by a carminative clyster
made of the Spaw water, in which may be decocted or infused some Hydragogue, or
some Species may be dissolved in it, which we use for purging of watery
humors, according as the greatness and urgency of the Symptom, or the
strength of the patient shall admit. Or if some Physician be present, he may
administer some Pills or other purging medicine, that may answer the
indication. How long it is fit to drink.


As for the time how long it may be convenient to drink, that must be suited
according to the greatness of the malady, and the strength of the Patient. Such
as have cacochymick bodies, which are full of bad humors; or melancholic, or
others whose obstructions are great, and humors tenacious, may stay longer
then others that have thin bodies, and which are easily moved. I have sometimes
drunk of it not for necessiry but company, or to make some little evacuation
from phlegmatic humors, being of an athletick constitution, when within three
days I found so great an agility and cheerfulness of body and mind more then I
had before, as I have wondered at it, that if I had stayed a fortnight, I could
not have expected more benefit.

I know the Germane Spaws are wont to be drunk for many weeks, yea months
together. Learned Dr. Heers in his Spadacrene, tells of one Ludovicus Hager^^,
Cap. 8. They stay long at the Germane Spaw.
who for the stone in the bladder drank of the Spaw every morning three hundred
and fifty ounces, which is more then three gallons for above ten weeks
together, and found much benefit in it, it carrying away the mucous matter with
which the stone was inveloped, and wasted the stone into gravel. Ibid.
Also of an old man of Antwerp, that had been long troubled with an ulcer in
his kidneys, for which he had frequented the Spaw three years, and drank
abundantly of it six months together each year, and found a Cure. And
Frambesarius, who was Physician to the French King, thinks the more any one
drinks of the Spaw the better, if it does but pass away freely: And in my own
observation, I have seen more inconve niences in drinking sparingly (for whom
it was fit) then in plentiful drinking.

The German work nor so well as this.
But I cannot approve of so long a stay at this water of Scarbrough for any one,
in regard I think it constantly passes through both by seige and urine more
freely then the German Spaws, which I perceive by Dr. Heers own confession, in
some bodies provokes not a stool once in eight days, even in those that before
were wont to retrograde once or twice a day ordinarily, without taking any
thing to stimulate nature: And therefore although I can agree with
Frambesarius, that a greater quantity may be drunk of it, because it passes so
freely, yet I think it not needful to stay so long, it perfecting its
operation in a less time. Besides the danger there may be in some bodies
especially, of cooling and moistening too much, and of causing a wan and pale
color over the whole body.

Good to intermit sometimes.
I think it much better if a disease be rebellious, that the Patient after a
continuance at the Spaw a month or five weeks, do leave off the waters a
while, and return to his ordinary Diet and state of living, and then after such
respite given to nature, apply himself to the waters again.

A few days may suffice some.
Nor can I here define, how long it may be needful for every particular person
to stay at the waters; four or five days may be sufficient for such as have
thin bodies, and whose humors do move easily, that have no great distemper, but
perhaps a spontaneous lassitude or weariness; whereas others who repair to them
for the cure of some malady already begun, or feared, or whose obstructions are
great, and humors rebellious, or such whose distempers lie not in the direct
passages of the water, but in some remote part must stay three or four weeks or
more.

When fit to leave of.
If any man finds, that after benefit once had by the waters, he begins to
decline again in his health, as that his appetite or concoction decay, or the
waters pass not so well as formerly, but cause distention either in the belly
or the veins, and so bring on a difficulty of breathing, or pain in the head,
or the like; it is then time to desist, and proceed no further, or at least to
take the advice of some Physician, who may remove the obstruction.

When the b^st season to drink.
As touching the season of the year, when it may be most commodious to drink of
the Spaw: The Summer months are the best, when the weather is warm and the
season dry, to wit, from the middle of May to the middle of September, it being
usually the dryest season, and that for several reasons.

Summer the fittest Season.
First, because in Summer the water is ordinarily more strong of the Minerals,
then at other Seasons, when plenty of wet falls, for in dry weather there is no
mixture of new moisture, but the Water comes immediatley from the Mineral
fully and strongly impregnated, whereas it is very observable that after a
great rain, the water is weaker, notwithstanding it lies so deep within the
earth.

The Spaw strongest in Winter.
I confess the water is strongest, of the Minerals in Winter after a long and
durable Frost, which having a long time together shut the pores of the earth,
so as no moisture could descend, and the heat thereby increased in the
subterraneal Channels, and consequently a better concoction wrought, must upon
that account be strouger both in taste and operation, And may be taken then.
of which I have had frequent experience. I advised it this last Winter in
January to a Lady of good quality, Lady M.
to cleanse her after a recovery of the small Pox, she having an incorrigible
body for Physic, so as a strong dose enough for any man would scarce move her
at all, and the water wrought effectually, she drinking about a gallon every
day. The like I experienced two years ago in a Gentlewoman of York for the
stone, Mr is B.
who had by my advice drunk of it in the Summer preceding, and still found it
at Christmas to work as well as it did in Summer, and with desired success.

The Germane Spaws are wont also to be drunk in Winter freque^tly, some
choosing that season rather then any other, because of the strength of the
water. And hence it was that the Duke of Mantua gave it in charge to Ryetitus
and H. ab Heers, two Germane Physicians that lived near the Spaw, to send him
every Christmas Eve two hundred flagons of Spaw water, taken out fresh after a
long frost, which they constantly did observe, finding the water at that time
stronger, then at any time in the hottest Summer. It was the last Winter also
during the frost, that I made the experiments I mentioned in the first Section,
when I found very near three Drams of Mineralls in three quarts, settling in
the bottom of the vessel, besides what spirits might be supposed to have
evaporated, the operations also being performed at my house at York, which is
thirty miles from the Fountain.

Another reason why I think it best to be drunk in Summer is, because at that
season the inward passages of our bodies are more open and pervious then in
Winter, so as water may pass more freely.

And lastly, because one may drink more liberally in Summer, our bodies being
more dry, and consequently we more thirsty then in Winter; besides it is more
pleasant traveling and residing at Scarbrongh in Summer then in Winter.

I know the grand Objection which we meet with too frequently in our other
practice also, Hippocrates, Aph. 5. Sect. 4.
(...), thereby forbidding purging of the body, as they say, so as neither the
preparatives nor the water it self can be safely taken.

This has been found a killing Objection to many in England, Solut. Of the
Dogdays.
who falling sick of accute Fevers, which at this season of the year, are more
frequent then at other times, are wont to defer the looking for help (a fault
too common at all seasons) because of the Dog days, till that which at the
beginning might easily have been cured, by delay does many times become
incurable. Sure I am Hippocrates never said or thought that the Dog days are
unfit time for Physic, Hippocrates explained.
nor did Galen in his Comment understand him in that sense; He only says,
purgation are difficult about that time of the year, that is, they cause ill
Symptoms, as Fevers, Gripings, dissolution of the Spirits, which are already
enfeebled by the excessive heat of the weather, imputing it not to the
influence of that Star, but to the heat that is wont to happen at that time,
the heat also not arising in the least respect from the nature of the Star, but
from the Sun it self, which is now again running over the same degrees of the
Ecliptic in Leo, that it had done before in Taurus, in July and August, which
it did in April and May.

It cannot be from an extraordinary malignant influence that is in the Dog Star
more then others, Dog star has no malignant influence.
it being agreed on all hands by those that are versed in Astrology, that there
are many other constellations, and parts of heaven, which are more full of
malignity then it is; as Corscorpionis, which arises with the Sun in the later
end of November, being also within a few degrees of the body of the Sun. So
Caput Medusae or Argol, near unto which the Sun pasles in the latter end of of
April. And the Dragons Tail and imaginary point of heaven full of enmity, by
which the Sun transits once a year, besides the monthly conjunction of the Moon
with them all: I say Hipocrates cannot be thought to intend the Malignant
influence of the Dog. Star to hinder the working of Physic, while he that knew
the rest as well as this, never mentions them at all, which if they were
observed would imply the unfitness of every season, and consequently very few
days in the year would be proper for Physic.

It was indeed the heat of the weather which he respected, which happens with
us about the Cosmicall rising of the Dog Star with the Sun, to wit, Phyfick may
be used in the Dog days.
toward the later end of July. But neither is the heat so intense in this our
climate, as that for it we should abstain from using remedies when there is
need, our July and August not being so hot as April and May are in the Island
of Coos, (which is called in Maps Laugo, and by its owners Turks Stancera, not
far from Rhodes) where Hippocrates lived. Now although nothing is more
necessary to be observed by Physicians then the disposition, rising and setting
of eminent Stars, the bodies and stomachs of men receiving mutation according
to their motions, to which respect is heedfully to be had in giving of Physic,
De aerc in principio.
as says Hippocrates else where; yet there is not so much regard to be had, as
that either this Star or the heat should make us wholly abstain, when a disease
requires it. Learned Physicians knowing well enough how to muzzle that Dog, and
temper the heat with medicines suitable, we having purging remedies as fit for
hot weather as for cold and temperate, such as if Hippocrates had known, I
verily think he had never mentioned that Aphorism; his purging medicines
being exceeding hot, violent, and of a malignant and coroding nature, which we
have very rarely any occasion to use (and then every better corrected) and do
wholly lay aside in the heat of Summer.

Neither is Hippocrates in that Aphorism laying down rules for giving of
Physic, but only reporting his observation concerning the manner of working of
medicines, which he says, is with some difficulty and bad Symptoms, and well
might it be so with his medicines in that Climate; but what is that to us, while
our own observations are, that ours do operate without any difficulty; And
whosoever shall observe the operations of medicines in the hand of any able
Physician at this time of the Withgood success.
year, shall acknowledge them as safe and successful, as that which he gives
at any other season. And more particularly this is found true in Mineral
waters, such as I am now treating of, which are (as I said) the best in hot
weather, both in regard of their more eminent participation of the strength of
the Minerals; as also because of our bodies, which are more open and free for
their passage; and we can also drink more plentifully in the Summer months,
which is necessarily to be done by such as go to the Spaws. It any require
further satisfaction concerning this point of the Dog-dayes, I refer him to
Dr Primerose his Book of Popular Errors: Lib. 4. c. 11
as also to Doctor Browns elaborate and learned Tractate concerning Vulgar
Errors, Lib. 4. e. 13
where he may be abundantly convinced.

Nevertheless, if any man's condition require his drinking in Winter, Directions
for such as drink in, winter.
let the water be a little ayred, that the extremity of the cold may be taken
off, and let a good fire be made to warm the Chamber, least it happen to him,
as Fallopius found in himself andothers, by drinking of the German Spaws in
winter excessively cold, who felt some paralytick and convulsive motions after
it.

It any enquire of me, whether this Spaw-water will endure to be carried into
the Country at distance,

I answer, Puriu ex ipso font bibuntur aquae. out any sensible decay of its
strength and operation, being constantly brought by the Fishermen in Caggs, It
has also been carried to London, and was found good
as far as York, and Hull, which is thirty miles, yea often many miles further.
It has also been carried to London, and was found good: I have drunk of it
after it had been ten days in the Cagge, and have always found it to work very
well; and I think if it were filled at the Fountain into Bottles, and well
stopped, it would keep its virtue and sweetness much longer, being set in Sand
or Earth in a cold Cellar, and might be carried perhaps as far as the German.

Nevertheless, I think it much better to drink it at Scarbrough, for those that
are able of body to travel thither, and in purse; especially for Students, who
being here withdrawn from their Books, and all occasions of Study (then which
nothing is more prejudicial to such as drink waters, or pursue any other course
of Physic) may enjoy the society of their acquaintance, and lead a more
cheerful and active life, which will help to refresh their spirits, and
promote the more speedy passage of the water. But as for such as through
feebleness of body or estate, are not able to travel, It may be carried abroad.
they may get it brought to them into the Country, having been encouraged to
the use of it by some able Physician, and they need not doubt its operation, it
being impregnated not only with the spirits of the Minerals, which being
carried far are subject to evaporation, but with the substance of them, or
concrete juice, which will continue as long as the Water it self remains sweet.

Compared with the Germane.
And this seems to be of like nature with the principal Spaw, in Germany, called
by the name of Powhont, which is wont to be carried into several Countries, and
was brought into England to Count Bellemont, when he was sent Ambassador from
France to King James, and was found as good as at the Fountain, which might
well be supposed to be done in less then ten days. And they both arise out of
the bottom of a great Rock, having imbibed almost the very same Minerals, only
I think this has no lead, and I suppose is not the worse for it, having also
more strength of the Minerals then the Powhont: For when Doctor Paddy our
Countrymen, and Doctor Heers distilled it, they found nothing but Rubrich,
Ocher and a little Vitriol, as Doctor Heers himself relates, whereas three
quarts of this affords, when the Rubric is separated from it, well nigh two
drams of other Minerals.

The other which they call Sauvenir partakes much of the spirits of the
Minerals, but has very little of their juice or substance, so as it is good at
the Fountain, but looses its spirits and virtue being carried abroad, in as
much as Frambesarius after two days journey found it like common water, whereas
that of Powhont was strong and quick.

There are two other Spaws in Germany not long since discovered, viz. Geronster
and Tonnelet, but they are short of the other in virtue: the former causing
vomit often, and dizzyness in the head, as if a man were drunk; and the other
muddy, and slimy, and nauseous to the Palate, yet they do each of them also
purge the belly. These do the inhabitants of the Towns near adjoining make use
of inwardly, both for the preparing of their meat and drink, as ordinary water,
especially the two first, and its observed by the German Writers, that in no
place of Germany are there to be found older, and more healthful people, then
thereabouts.

It is observable that the Stones by which this water passes at the Fountains
(as also in all other Spaws I read of) are of a reddish color; as also it
turns the execrements of such as drink of it into a sad green or blackish
color, both which Doctor Heers thinks to proceed from Rubric or matter ferri,
because all chalybeat Medicines after what manner soever they be taken inwardly
do the like. Cap. 8. p. 79.
But Doctor French, though he grants Iron may and does cause a black tincture,
yet he seems rather to impute it to the Vitrioll. For better satisfaction in
this scruple both to my self and others, I made a separation of the Rubric
from the test of the Minerals with gall, and drank the clear water, which
though I find it purges not a whit the less, yet the excretions were not
changed at all, which is an experiment observed by neither of them, so as it
plainly appears that change of color proceeds from the Rubric or Iron. And I
also think it is the color which receives the Tincture, which if it be
awanting the excrements are not tinged at all: as in those that have the
Jaunders, whose Choler by reason of obstructions does not pass into the guts,
they do find their excrements black, till after they have drunk a day or two,
the obstructions begin to open, and the choler is sent down into the bowels.
So also they that tarry long at the waters observe their excrements that before
were blackish, to become more pale, which arises from the greatest part of the
choler which has been purged away, except what is daily generated, which being
but little cannot give so deep a tincture.

Leave off by degrees
My advice to them that drink long of it is, that they leave by degrees as they
began, taking a less quantity every day then other for two or three days, and
to purge watery humors, as soon as they have done, either at Scarbrough, or
when they come at home,

It any after the use there of, find a watery moisture upon his stomach more
then ordinary, Wine and Water correct each other.
or some other moist distemper, which happens to those whose stomachs and
concective faculty are feeble, it may easily be corrected by drinking a glass
or two of Wine more then ordinary at meals, for some little while, Wine and
water fitly amending the distempers that proceed from a more then usual
drinking of each other, as Herilacus observes well, De vinor quoth effect 2.
so as he that is inflamed with Wine may be cooled with water, and all cold
distempers that come by the immoderate use of water, may be amended with Wine.

And whereas perhaps there may be some that think it an empiricall thing, and
to exceed belief, that this Spaw water should cure so many maladies, as I have
reckoned up, and several of them of contrary qualities, I refer such to the
writings of Fallowpius, Solenander, Geringus, Ryetius, Bezansonius, H. ab
Heers, who have treated of the Waters of Germany, and else where; as also to
several of our own Country men, as Dr. Dean, Mr. Stanhope, Dr. Fiend, and many
others, who have writ of several Spaws in England; moreover let them inform
themselves well, concernig the cures that have been done by the waters at
Epsam, Tunbridge, Barnet, Bristol, Knaresbrough, etc. This of ours coming not
short of (if not much exceeding) the best of them all either Germane or English.

Felix qui potuit boni
Fontem visere lucidum.
Boeth. de consolat.

Philos metr. 12. l. 4.
READER, Through the Authors great distance from the Press some gross Errors
have escabed the Printer, which do break the sense: He begs so much ingenuity,
that these following being some of the principal may be corrected by thy pen
before thou begin to read.
PAge 2. l. 12. read Coroners, p. 5. l. 10. r. having the, p. 11. l. 14. r.
sky, p. 12. l. 2. r. it does. p. 16. l. 21. in the marg. r. Sect. 2. p. 18. l.
8. r. other, p. 19. l. 5, r. altering, p. 34. l. 13.1. superfices, p. 38. l. 2.
c, amounts, p. 39. l. 14. r. Baccius, p. 48 l. 2. r. indomitable. p. 67. l. 3.
r. purifies, p. 67. l. 10. r. converted, p. 15. l. 4. r. meal, p. l. last r.
vehicle, p. p. 69. l. 14. r. know, p. 70. l. 9. r. pestileutiall, p. 72. l. 13.
r. up with it. p. 73. l. 4. r. of my discourse, l. 10. r. concerning Springs,
p. 74. l. 4. r. transmutation, p. 77. l. 15. r. redound, p. 78. l. ult, r.
figure, p. 90. l. ult r. distance, p. 106. l. dele the p. 108. l. ult, r.
renders, p, 112. l. 19. r, with the frre, p, 113. l. 12. r. all the water, p.
115. l. 7. r. break out, p. 117. l. 1. r. overflown, p. 123. l. 21. r. where,
p. 127. l. 3. r. abundance, l. ult. r. of the Earth. p. 128. l. 15. del.
which, p. 130. l. 3. r. suppply them, p. 131. l. 15. r. Rains do falls p. 132.
l. 5. r. sorts of Springs l. 16. r. of Athiopia, p. 133. l. 11. r. M.
Carpenter. p. 137. l. 7. r. Commissure. l. 18. r. thee solid.


