AN ANSWER TO Col: NATHANIEL FIENNES RELATION Concerning his surrender of the
City and Castle of Bristol.

PETRON. ARBITER. Universus mundus exercet Histrioniam.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year, M.DC.XLIII.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THough this Answer cost but few hours to compose it, yet was it a work of
some days to collect the materials thereof out of the several reports of
many principal Gentlemen and Commanders present in Bristol when it was
besieged; And when this Pamphlet was ready for the Press I found the Press
obstructed, whereby I was enforced to keep it in a month before I could be
delivered of this Birth, some malicious Juno sitting cross legged at the
labor. This is the reason it comes out so late after the Relation, that it
may seem to rub over an old sore, whose smart is almost past. But Truth is a
sluggard that uses to lie long in bed, after her base sister Falsehood is up and
stirring: Yet when Truth rises with her sober constant pace, she will soon
overtake Falsehood, and tread on her heels. Reader, it is in thy discretion
that Truth lose not her grace for want of noveltie. Although she come forth
with this further disadvantage, that almost all those Gentlemen and Commanders
that should wait upon her justification, are going out of town with Sir
William Waller, yet let Truth be welcome without attendants, without ornaments,
it being one of her most natural ornaments to be stark naked.

Thine, Cle. Walker.

An Answer to Col: Nathaniel Fiennes Relation concerning his Surrender of the
City and Castle of Bristol.
SInce the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and none can know the
issues thereof, we will not search over-curiously into the desires of the late
Governor of that unhappy City of BRISTOL, Colonel NATHANIEL FIENNES, whether
he affected the Government, or no? Yet seeing it is a point controverted by
himself, in his Relation, page 3. we will be bold to say,

FIrst, his undermining Col: Thomas Essex, whom he struck into the box, and
laid himself in his room: In this manner, Colonel Fiennes brought a letter to
Bristol, from my Lord General, authorizing him to seize on, and send up
prisoner Colonel Essex, then Governor of that City, and this was so underhand
carried, that the Deputy Lieutenants and Committee of Parliament, then resident
in Bristol, to assist Colonel Essex in the Government, were never consulted
with to know what cause of suspicion they found in him: This was an affront put
upon the Deputy Lieutenants in point of integrity, or discretion and industry.

Secondly, his putting Creatures of his own (neither soldiers, nor men known
in those parts) into Bristol Castle, to make the Government more entirely his
own, contrary to the desires both of the Town, and Country, which were to
have a Gentleman of honor and integrity, such as both the Town and Country
could confide in, placed there.

Thirdly, his many artifices, to lessen the Reputation and abridge the power of
the Committees and Gentlemen of the Country, (whereof more afterward.)

Fourthly, his underhand endeavors to draw a Territory of twenty miles
compass as annexed to that City, to be within his sole command, and to make it
independent upon the rest of the adjacent counties, thereby to exclude Sir W.
Waller and all others.

These considerations (we say) make us think he was as jealous of his
Government there, as any man is of his wife, and that he would brook no rival
therein; nor can his Letters sent to his Father oversway our belief; Father,
and son being Testes Domestici, in the nearest degree; But to take off this
conceit (in his fourth page) he tells us he made certain Propositions to the
Gentlemen of the adjacent Counties for the settling and maintaining a Garrison
there, to which most of the Gentlemen consented: It is answered, he made a
certain Proposition in general to that purpose, to the Gentlemen of Somerset
and Gloucester, and the Letter dated the 20. of March, 1642. (published in the
Governors Relation, page 13.) was sent to the Lord Say, and the like to his
Excellency the Lord General, to see how the said general Propositions would
take: But when the said Gentleman expected to be again advised withal for
reducing the said general into particular Propositions, he having got the
start of them, secretly sent up particulars of his own framing, (the same (it
may be) which he has published in his Relation, Page 17. entitled, A draught
of the Ordinance) whereby he endeavored to weaken the power of the
Deputy Lieutenants and Committees, and to make Bristol, and the Countries
adjacent for 20. miles compass his Territory, himself in all matters of
moment being of the Quorum: For example, in his said draught of the Ordinance,
he projected, that

First, the Garrison which should have consisted of 3. Foot Regiments (besides
Horse) (whereof one to be raised in the County of Somerset, under the command
of Colonel Alexander Popham, another in the County of Gloucester) should be
raised by the Governor only.

Secondly, the money raised in the Easterne-Division of Sommerset, in
Barkely-Division in Gloucester, and in the Cities of Bristoll and Bath, upon
the weekly Assessment, Twentieth part and Sequestration; nay and upon Excises
and new Imposts, should be assigned only for the use of that Garrison, with
further provision in the Ordinance, that if all this be not enough, it should
be made up out of the said Counties respectively: and the Committees appointed
to pay the charges of the said Garrison and fortifications being valued and
made known to them by the said Governor of Bristoll, whose Warrant and Receipt
should be a sufficient discharge.

Thirdly, The Treasurers of the said Divisions not to issue out any monyes
without the concurring warrant of Col: Fiennes Governor.

Fourthly, The Trained-Bands and Volunteers of the said Divisions not to be
drawn forth upon service, either into the City of Bristol or Country, but by
the like warrant.

See now what power was left to the said Committees or Deputy Leivtenents even
in their own Counties, and over their own men and monyes, upon which Collonell
Fiennes had not incroached in this his draught of an Ordinance; Again page 4.
he complains that Sir William Waller drew forth Collonell Essex Regiment, and
all the Troops of horse: we conceive Sir William Waller drew forth only Col:
Essex his Troop of Red Coats, being not above 30 or 40 and his foot Regiment
being incompleate, the one half whereof never marched out of Town, and were
entertained by the Governor still page 5. when Sir Ralph Hoptons Army drew
toward Somers^tshire: Collonell Alexander Popham moved by letters from my Lord
General, would have gone forth with his whole Regiment, to join with Wilts
and Dorset, and the Western forces of Somers^t, but was Countermanded by
Collonell Fiennes, who then first produced a letter from my Lord General
whereby Collonell Popham and his Regiment were reduced under his command, which
letter until then he had concealed, and would not suffer Col: Popham to march
with above six Companies: It is true that Col: Popham was routed through the
default of Major Langrish and his horse; but the foot Arms were not above
half lost; In answer to his 1200. men, lent Sir William Waller, It is
confessed, we all importuned him to enable Sir William Waller by an addition of
1200 foot, to take the field for preservation of the Country (which is no more
then Col: Fiennes in his propositions to my Lord General and Parliament
undertook, namely to defend the Country for 20 miles adioyneing) And Col:
Fiennes himself when he gave consent to this motion, did declare that if the
fortune of the Field went against Sir William Waller, yet with his forces
remaining in the Town; and the men which would be recollected and rallied out
of his defeated Companies, he made no doubt, but to make good the said City:
And Col: Fiennes after the defeat of Sir William Waller did declare that he
hoped to make good the Town with 2500. men, and that he hoped to to make up
that number, by arming those men, that fled from the defeat into the Town,
and by taking Arms from the Townsmen, and putting them into other hands,
page 6. Sir Arthar Haselrigg, Collonell Burghill, and diverse gentlemen after
Sir William Wallers defeat thought fit to withdraw themselves: these Gentlemen
did not leave the Town upon apprehension it was not Tenable, but out of a
desire to raise men elsewhere to supply it, and out of a consideration it was
not fit for them in time of war to stay under his command, who in time of peace
had plundered some of them for not paying such taxes as he put upon the City of
Bristoll, not withstanding they paid in the Country, and resided in Town only
to do public service, upon their own purses: and for lodging in the Castle it
is confidently affirmed, that no lodgings there were over offerred to any of
the Gentlemen, nor any former respects shewrd to them, could encourage them to
hope for any, and so many mean fellows of the Town were suffered to shelter
themselves and their goods there, that there was no room left for the
Gentlemen, insomuch that when Collonell Stephons with his wife and family
retreated into the Castle, they could not endure their bad entertainment, and
the Princes Trumpeter (then a prisoner) had better lodging then he and his
whole family, whereupon he returned into the Town again.

Page 6 he tells us he had but 700 men left in the Town, and never a penny of
money to pay them: Col: Fiennes had left in the Town half his own foot
Regiment, half Col: Pophams Regiment, the new begun, though not yet complete
Regiment of his brother John Fiennes, being about 300. or 400. men, besides 300
or 400. foot remaineing of Sir William Wallers, and 1000. or 1200. foot he
newly (by his own confession) raised and Armed in the Town, so that he had
near upon 2500. foot, besides his Regiment of horse and his Company of
dragoons, which is the number he undertook to keep the Town with as aforesaid,
and many more men he might have had, if he had not as aforesaid so much
lessened the Reputation of the Committees in the Country, that they, who by
their Warrant had called in near upon a thousand men in February last, when
Prince Rupert was before the Town, could not now call in a hundred, so much
was the Country distasted with taking free Quarter, Horses, disorderly
plundring even from the best affected, and all these abuses, with many more
were imputed by the Country people unto the Committee and Deputy Lieutenants
resident in Bristoll, because being in place they did not redress them,
although it were not in their power so to do, being over voted at the Council
of War, by Captains purposely chosen and new made by the Governor, that he
might have the sole power and countenance of that Council to serve his ends,
and being likewise overborne by the Governors access of power gotten from
time to time by Commissions and Letters under hand from the Lord General, or
the Parliament, which he kept sleeping by him, never showing his additionall
authority but upon special occasion, and then so cursorily and privately, as
did easily declare he meant not to have his authority so well understood, as to
draw it in danger to be examined and limited; Hereupon the Gentry forbore to
intermeddle with affairs, and the whole Town and Country were filled with
jealousies and indignations; and where he affirms he had not one penny of
money to pay his soldiers: This causes admiration in all men, who have
observed what strange and unheard of ways were used, and what number of
spunges and horseleeches were continually employed to suck both from the Town
and Country, some devices to raise moneys we will set down, all is impossible.



Bristol as stood in these Counties, yet this Relator concealeth, and in his
Letter the 17. of June, seems to deny that he had any special levy for his
work, both from the Town and Country.

a considerable sum, if an account had been kept thereof.

The plundring of S. Thomas Bridges, S. Maurice B^r^kl^y, Langrish or his
equals, and the Complainants just request choked with delays, as in Mistress
Millers case, and others.

The letting and setting, or the stocking with plundered Cattle,

The confiscated estates of the Conspirators in Bristol, page 25.) says he,
shall never make 3000.l. of the Conspirators estates: It may be he meant upon
compositions besides their plunder, which he could set no probable value upon.

Diverse loanes upon the public faith to a great value,

Diverse supplies from Parliament, page 23.) and we hear he has received to
the least 3000.l. or 4000.l. since, quaere whether he has received any money
from Sir Gilbert Gerrard?

Licenses to Trade with the Enemy (even contrary to his Excellencies Ordinances
of War) not granted for nothing.

Custom money 1700.l.

If we may believe common fame, them not being to be found, and the poor men
are put to compound with the enemy for getting them out, as formerly they did
with their friends to get them in; Besides, whereas his horse were to have 2.s.
6.d. a day pay, Colonel Fiennes, gave them free quarter in the Country, and
but 1.s. the day pay; quaere what became of the rest?

This we set down to show how good an Oecononist our Governor was, and how
able to raise money, having so rich a shop as the Town of Bristoll to work
in; certainly, it was very possible for such a thriving Governor to maintain
the Garrison out of so rich a Town, without the assistance of the adjacent
Counties, (contrary to his tenet, page 4.) and this we demonstrate by the
present practice of the Kings Forces, who make that Town, not only maintain
their whole Garrison, but man forth and maintain a good fleet of Ships, find
Gunpowder, and pay a great sine besides; And for the better understanding of
this money business, know that Colonel Pophams Regiment of foot, and
Colonel Coals Regiment of horse and Dragoones, resident in Town, were not
paid by the Governor, but by the Country; and the Governors whole charge
estimated by himself, (in a Letter to his Father dated June 17. 1643. and
printed with his Relation, page 23.) was between 21000.l. 1200.l. and 1300.l.
a week, reckoning as we conceive his weekly disbursment for fortifying,
which was none of his charge) And for the 15. Regiments of foot, and 12.
Regiments of horse, wherewith the Relator ( page 6.) says the enemy besieged
the Town; it is confidently affirmed they were not half Regiments, and that
many of their Colors were no other then such as the enemy had taken from Sir
William Waller, and were now set up like scar-Crowes, or penal statutes
against Recusants in terrorem only: But he relates ( page 7.) that there was
one place where the works were not perfect, the ditch not made on the outside,
nor the foote-banck on the inside, where was but a weak guard: this seems
strange to those that knew-how much money was raised to perfect the works, how
long time was spent in perfecting, and how suddenly so small a defect would
have been remedied, unless it had been purposely left as a posterne for the
enemy; and that there should be but a weak guard left in the weakest place,
and Major Langrish with his Troops of horse left there to second the Foot,
sounds not well; Had the several complaints formerly made to the Governor
against Langrish for his cowardice at Wells, Muncton Forly, Landsdowne, and the
Devises, or the present advice of Col: Stephens, Lieutenant Col: Clifton, and
many others been heard, he had not been set there to betray the trust reposed
in him now: wherefore we must set Langrishes faults upon Col: Fiennes score.
But it stood not with the Governors convenience to hear any complaints
against so profitable an instrument, he knew much, and could discover much,
Delicta fuere nexus amicite, (page 8.) the Relator continues his History of the
enemies entering the Line of communication which proved the loss of the Town.
To avoid interruption we will set down the counter-relation, according to the
information received from diverse Gentlemen of quality, commanding in that
service. When the enemies first viewed the Town, a great Officer of that Army
declared his opinion, that he thought it not fit to be attempted, alleging it
was no where assaltable, but in the hollow way, between Brandon hill Fort, and
Windmill hill Fort, (the only place where the enemy afterward found entrance
upon an assault given) the works being imperfect, and a weak guard kept there,
as abovesaid, by the Relators own confession, (page 7.) It was much the place
most obnoxious should be least regarded, yet so it happened, and upon the first
entrance for an hour together, there were not above 100. of the enemies within
the Line, the foe was so wary in seconding those that entered, that he gave them
for lost; and those that entered afterward as seconds, were but such scattered
soldiers as had been beaten off elsewhere, from the Works, between Windmill
hill Fort and Pegor hill Fort: How easily might any man but Langrish have done
good service there? as appears by the good service done by Captain Lieutenant
Nevill (whom for honors sake I name) see the Relation, page 8.) who had but
40. Horse, and yet if he had been seconded by some Musketeers, he had cut off
all that were then entered, and for about 2. hours more, there were not above
300. of the enemies entered, (so unapt they were to believe so unexpected a good
fortune) But the Governor presently upon the first entrance of the assaylants,
sent his Lieutenant Col: to call his soldiers off from the Line, who affirmed
that if our soldiers did not speedily retreat, they would be all cut off;
Lieutenant Col: Davison with other Officers earnestly advising that a fally
might be made out of the Town upon them and that the Soldiers yet remaining at
the line, might keep it, and fall upon the rear of them, which he could not
obtain until 3. hours after the assaylants had entered the line, when it was
too late, and the enemy had possessed himself of Essex fort, the Red lodge Sir
Fardinando Gorges house, and the College Tower, places of advantage in the
Suburbs, Major Jews (an old Soldier) was of the same mind with Davison, and
being at the Line, would not quit it in an hour and half, although he received
many commands to that purpose: At last his soldiers taking notice they were
commanded a way, and Jews receiving a command in writing under the Governors
own hand to retire into the Town under pain of hanging, he obeyed: After the
fally unseasonably made, and beaten back again, spoken of, (page 8.) the
assaylants possessed the Suburbs as far as Froome gate, yet was there no danger
of the enemies wading over at the Key, the depth of the mud and disadvantagious
landing places, would have made them liable to great execution, even by stones
and clubs, wherein the Townsmen would not have been backwards.

The Defendants both Townsmen and Soldiers were disheartened and displeased at
their retreat from the Line, into the Town, and to add more discouragement to
them, the Governor instead of making his last retreat into the Castle,
according to his first resolution, neglected to make so much as a show of
further defense, but presently resolved upon a Treaty with the enemy; whether
he called his own creatures, his officers to join with him in this
resolution, is uncertain; But the Committee and Gentlemen of the Country,
(who had most to lose there) viz. Sir John Hornor, Master Stephens, his son
the Colonel, and diverse other Officers do deny he ever put the question to
them, whether they would treat or no? But after he had sent a Drum to the enemy
for a Treaty, and gave Langrish and Captain Thomas Hippesly for Hostages, he
then called the Gentlemen to Counsel, to know what Articles he should propound
in their behalf. This Treaty slackned all men's courages, and made them lay by
all thought of saving themselves, by fight, but by Treaty only Now, and not
till now, (whatsoever the Relater says, page 8.) the Soldiers began to drop
from their Colors and Guards, and many of them ran to the Enemy, and
discovered the amazedness and disorders of the Defendants: Had the Governor
retreated to the Castle, and set a good face upon the matter, it would have
bettered his conditions, both for the good of his Soldiers and Townsmen, who
were so far from a design to fall upon the Garrison, that they had showed
great love in victualling the soldiers, and great courage in fighting for
them. We will not argue how tenable the Town and Castle, or the Castle, after
the Town lost, was, but certainly the Governor and all his Council (until
that very moment) thought it tenable: otherwise to what purpose served First
his great cost in fortifying, continued to that day? Secondly his victualling
the Castle? Thirdly his desire to Sir William Waller to withdraw with hi^
Horse, for fear of consuming his provisions, proved by the testimony of Col:
Cook, whom Col: Fiennes employed to carry a Message to that purpose, and by a
writing under Col: Fiennes hand herewith printed; And how could Sir Will:
Waller make such have to Exeter or to Gloucester, as to raise Forces to rescue
Col: Fiennes that was so hasty as to deliver up the Town and Castle in three
or four days to the enemy? Fourthly his former resolution at a council of
War was, if they were beaten from the Line, to fire the Suburbs and retreat
into the Town, and at last to fire the Town and retreat into the castle, to
which purpose Orders were given out; and yet when we consider how he had
pestered the castle with unnecessary people, and thereby disabled himself to
draw in his Soldiers to keep it, we cannot but conclude his resolution to
loose that and save himself was of an antienter date then his deeds and words
formerly made show of, but we are sorry to hear this Relator (page 9.) make it
so clear a point that if the place had been Tenable he could not have hoped for
any releife in 6. or 8. weeks: what a discouragement will this be to that stout
and faithful Commander Col: Massy, and other Governors of Towns, who have
not such a powerful solicitor with the Parliament as Col: Fiennes Father. We
have seen 3. of the Governors reasons why he could not keep the Castle.

The first was, he had too many men to keep the Castle, though too few to make
good the Town.

The second was, a doubt least the City should fall upon him in his retreat
thither.

Third was, the weakness of the Castle not fully fortified: And now newly
discovered by the enemies manner of storming, and the execution his pieces of
battery had lately done upon our Parapetts of earth; Together with the
provision he had made of close decked boats, and galleries; which provision is
gainsaid by all men: Let us now weigh the rest of his arguments (page 9 and 10)
upon that subject; first he wanted powder and match, he confesses he found 45.
barrells, when he first undertook the charge of the Town, that he received 30.
barrells from London, and 126. barrells from France, in all 201 barrells;
besides what powder was made in the Town, being about 6. or 7. barrells weekly
for 20. weeks together, and what was and might have been gotten out of ships,
shops and Merchants sellars, a large quantity surely, had they been well
searched; but to find Gunpowder had been to loose a good excuse; Quaere, how
many of these were double barrells, and what became of the overplus (granting
that Sir William Waller had 60. barrells out of this said sum) besides when
Captain Birth heard that the Castle would be rendered, he came to the chief
Gunner, desiring the Keys of him, for that he would defend the Castle
himself; the Gunner answered him, it was impossible, for that he had but 10.
barrels of powder left, and afterward in further talk the said Gunner
confessed he had about 60. barrels, but alleged that Colonel Fiennes bid him
say, that he had but 10. barrels left; And for Match, Colonel Fiennes might
have made enough there. Secondly, he says he should have lost all his Horse,
being 300. and all the Foot which would not be contained in the Castle;
wherefore it was concluded by the Council of War to treat and accept of
conditions which might preserve 300. horse and 1500 foot to the Parliament:
what Council of War this was appears not, The Committee and Gentlemen of the
Country and most Officers deny, they were called to any such Council of War,
or any such conclusion agreed on to their knowledge (as I have above said) And
he might have sent his horse away by night to Gloucester, and drawn all his foot
into the Castle, had he not so stuffed it with unserviceable people; But it
should seem by his actions subsequent to the conclusion of the Treaty, he took
little care to preserve the said body of men for service of the Parliament: for
presently upon the Articles agreed on; First he suffered his men to fall off
from their Colors, Guards and Watches, whereby the Common soldiers of the
Enemy entering the Town, before the time appointed came for the defendants to
march out, and mingling with our Soldiers, gave the enemy advantage in the
mixture, to plunder houses, strip and rifle our Soldiers, dismount our horse,
to allure, entice and enforce from the Parli: service many of them; and so to
break and dissolve almost all that body foot and horse; who thereupon
scattered and dispersed themselves about the Country into Harvest work for
their present releife; Nor could the Commanders on the Enemies part remedy this
evil which the Governors own folly had drawn upon him; and this is a better
justification of the two Armies, then that wherewith the Governor by way of
compliance tickleth them, (in his 11. page) Nor did the Governor beat his
Drum, or call his foot Soldiers again to the Colors when he went out of Town,
whereby they might march away with him in one entire body; and be kept
together for the service of their country; Secondly, presently upon the
Articles agreed upon, the Governor set all the prisoners in the Town and
Castle, at liberty, these forth with grew insolent and fell to plunder both
Town and Castle, before the enemy entered to take orderly possession of them;
these prisoners were many in number, and diverse of them men of good quality
taken by Sir William Waller; the Governor often complaining he was made Sir
William Wallers Jail keeper, and repining at the charge of keepeing them, he
was often advised to remove them to a place of more safety, where they might be
kept as pledges for our friends in captivity: London and the Lord Says Isle of
Lundy were propounded, but for the first, the voyage was too chargeable, and
for the last (it is since conceived) the Governor was unwilling to send any
company to that place, whereby the mysteries of that Island, might be
discovered; and observation made what was carried in and out there: and when
Sir William Waller moved Col: Fiennes to send a way the said prisoners by sea
before the enemy came before the Town, he answered he would not, for that he
would keep them to make his own conditions the better; his own Counsels were
always the best, I mean for his own ends; to make good which, the Council of
War was well furnished with suffragan Captains, purposely made to vote for him.
Much more might be said upon this Subject, especially for abuses done in
Churches etc. whereby the love of the Town and Country was much alienated. But
enough has been said of a bad matter, let us resort to God for mercy, and to
man for justice to be done in a fitting way, (that is openly and by man
uninteressed,) lest for want of due rewards and due punishments (the two Poles
upon which the frame of Government turns) the reformeing part of the
Commonwealth, become (...) corrupt as the part to be reformed, which God of
his mercy for^.

THere has lately come to my view a Letter written by Col. Nath: Fiennes to my
Lo: General, with no date to it, wherein (amongst other matters already
confuted in the answer to his relation) he tells you he armed 3000. foot and
300. horse, and paid constantly 2000 foot and a Regiment of h^rse for 4. or 5.
months together; This we deny, Col: Pophams Regiment of foot being armed and
paid by the Country, and where he will find 2000. foot, those excepted, we know
not, unles they lay hid in Prince Ruperts imaginary close decked boats: he
further says he was always ready to furnish Sir William Waller with arms,
money, etc. It is denied for both, especially for money, the money Sir William
Waller had from Bristol being taken up upon the private security of diverse
Gentlemen, Deputy Leivtenants, and Committees of Parliament and others, Col:
Fiennes always repining thereat, and complaining they would draw dry the
spring and starve the Garrison in the Town by those courses; this letter seems
to be attested under the hands of diverse men, some whereof deny they ever
subscribed it.

The true Copies of a Certificate under Col: Fienns own hand, dated July 17.
1643. As also of an Order of a Counsel of War held in Bristol the same (...)
expressing the true causes why Sir W. Waller lost the City of Bristol.

THE CERTIFICATE.
I do conceive that Sir W. Waller having only horse, they would be of little
use unto us for the defense of this City, and may be rather a burden unto us
in the consumption of our provisions, and therefore I do approve of Sir William
resolution to march out of the Town with them, and to dispose of them as he
s^^^ think most advantageous to the Cause.

Bristol. July 17. 1643. Nath: Fiennes.

The ORDER.
It was Ordered at a Council of War held in Bristol. July 17. 1643. That
(according to the importunity of the Governor and his Officers) Sir Will
Wallers depart are from Bristol, will be of far greater consequence for the
advancing of this present service, then his remaining there. And after debate,
it was concluded most convenient, That Sir Will. Waller speedily march
toward His Excellency the Earl of Essex, or to London.

Edward Hungerford. Alexander Popham. James Kerr. Francis Dowe^. Arthur
Haselrig. William Carr. Edward Cook. Jonas Van drusch.


FINIS.

