The Law of Laws: OR, THE EXCELLENCY OF THE CIVIL LAW, Above all other HUMANE
LAWS WHATSOEVER.

Showing of how great use and necessity the CIVIL LAW is to this Nation.

By TO: WISEMAN, Dr of the Civil Law.

Ea vere praestabilis est scientia, quae in foederibus, pactionibus,
conditionibus populorum, Regum, exterarumque Nationum, in omni denique belli
jure and pacis versatur.

Cicero. That is truly an excellent knowledge, which is conversant about
Leagues, agreements, the several constitutions of People, Kings, and foreign
Nations, and lastly, in the whole Law of War and Peace.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane. M.DC.LVII.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
IF this Book were set forth in any other Language, for Foreigners to read, I
were unavoidably driven to give them an account why I had put my self upon so
superfluous and so unnecessary an undertaking, as to extol and commend that,
whose worth and merit is owned by all the World, and which every where shines
so brightly, that it cannot be obscured by any, either Tongue, or Pen.

For it is very well known to them, that the Civil Law is the issue and product
of that great and mighty State, the Roman Empire, that led so many Nations and
people captive by their Wisdom, as much as by their Valor; that was once the
School of all Moral Honesty and goodness, and the stage, whereon the whole
variety of humane affairs was represented.

Neither need I tell them, that what through the prosperous success of that
State, for which it was ordained, and what through the natural Equity that is
to be read all along in it, and its being fitted for the general affairs of
Europe, the Laws of most of the Europaean Nations (who indeed all of them
anciently were subject to the Roman Government) are but as copies drawn from
that original, borrowing that luster of goodness they have, from it; and where
their particular Laws fail, thither their Judicatories resort to be supplied.

They cannot be ignorant, That though every particular Nation has some few Laws
of their own, proper for their occasions, government, and people; yet no where
beyond the Seas is there any profession or science of Law, but this; nor any
Law accounted the Law of Nations, but the Civil Law only: That time, practice,
argument, and applying it to the several affairs of so many Nations where it
has been used, has made it so perfect and so sufficient a body to decide all
cases by, that are between party and party, and do not concern the public
government, that they stand in need of very few Laws of their own making; and
without it no Laws they can make, would ever be able to serve their turn.

To those therefore that make such continual use of this Law in their Courts,
and who suffer none to sit as Judges, nor plead at their Bars, but such as have
been brought up in that faculty, and who strive to employ those only in all
transactions between themselves and other Nations: to them, I say, to praise
and applaud this Law, that is dignified by them so many several ways, is so
little needful, that it were almost impertinent.

But to make known to the people of this Nation to whom it is rendered now so
contemptible, how excellent it is in it self, how rational; what a general
approbation it has had with other Nations, and how very useful it may be to the
public welfare of this Nation diverse ways, it is a work so seasonable and
necessary, that it may be done without either Apology, Preface, or reason
premised; and is no more then the present state of things calls for.

For when it is considered, what an account it has been in amongst us for many
hundred years together; how many causes, Civil, Ecclesiastical, Maritime, and
Military, it dealt in how the jurisdiction thereof ran through the whole
Nation; how very little it was beneath the profession of the Common Law it
self, how many professors and practisers it maintained, and how much it did
enrich them; what a number of students it encouraged; what coercive power it
was entrusted withal, and the many Courts the employment thereof lay in: And
when we see, that now the causes thereof are cantonized, and like a spoil
divided; some carried to the Courts of Common Law, some to the Court of Equity,
others sent into the Country, some left without any rule or regulation at all,
and nothing left entire to the Civil Law; and when the solid reason of that Law
is crowded out by vulgar reason, the professors thereof scattered, the study
thereof discontinued, the very Law Books for want of use here, all transported
beyond sea to other Nations, and all coercion taken away; It is so much worth
the enquiring what the ground of this great change should be, that to be silent
thereat were great stupidity.

That the fall of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction might be a reason to suspend
the exercise of that profession in some causes for a time, till it were again
settled, I admit. But why it should not under this present form of Government
(if authority think fit) be restored again, as to a civil regulation of those
very matters under the Civil Magistrate, no satisfactory reason can be rendered.
I am sure, it can neither be rational, nor convenient, that they should be
carried from the Civil Law, which was the known, established, and practiced Law
in those matters, unto the conizance of those, that have neither Law, nor rule,
nor skill to try them; especially when the so doing does inevitably draw after
it the certain ruin of that whole profession.

It is therefore very-well worthy the most serious consideration of those that
sit at the Helm; That, since there must be a trial of those matters still,
and a gain attending thereupon to one or other, (which is the Game every body
hunts after:) Whether the Public is more concerned, that the profit of such
conisances should flow into the purses of others, no way apt or skilful, then
go to the maintaining and keeping up of such a learned profession, which this
Nation cannot be without.

And certainly, whenever we see that profession laid aside (which for the
public good, I trust, I never shall) we shall find this Commonwealth of ours
made very much inferior and unequal to other Nations, with whom (as it is an
Island, and now become an active one) it has and must have many ways to do. In
other things, as in strength, riches, and alliances, we contend for advantage
and superiority with them, why should we then suffer them to over-match us in
wit, dexterity, skill, knowledge, wisdom, policy, reason, or judgment, which
that learning above all other, and experience together gives them?

The dealings that we may have with them, as they are not a few, but
innumerable, even as many as there are things in the World to deal in: So some
of them are of highest moment and consequence also; As, Right to Kingdoms or
Provinces, by Donation, last Will, Succession, or by Marriage; community or
property of the Sea, and the rights of Fishing and trading there; freedom from
Customs and other immunities granted to foreign Merchants; Precedence,
amongst the Ambassadors of Princes and Republics; Promises of protection and
aid against enemies; Entertainment and harboring of Traitors or Rebels;
Interpretation of public Leagues or National Contracts; Not admitting of
Ambassadors, or detaining them, or using them in any uncivil manner; Making of
War, or contracting of Peace; Sending supplies to our enemies, or oppressing
our friends and confederates; Imbargo's, seizing upon our Merchants goods at
land, or stopping our ships or goods at Sea; The arbitrating of differences
between Nation and Nation, frequently referred to Princes or other States; Of
the force of National Contracts, and of their duration, whether they shall bind
successors, or die with the Princes that made them; Latitude of Territory and
jurisdiction, either upon Sea or Land. These and such like are the transactions
and matters, that may be frequently agitated and dealt in between us and other
Nations; wherein before we fall to an open War, we choose to reason and
expostulate the matter with them; sometimes we think it necessary to
remonstrate the right of our cause to other Nations; sometimes to declare the
state of the business to our own people: Neither of which can be done
effectually and with advantage, nor shall we be able to hold any such argument
convincingly, if we have not the perfect knowledge of the Law of Nations and the
learning of the Civil Law; which to be sure, is the only kind of Reason, that
other Nations (knowing no other Common Law or Rule besides it for such matters)
will encounter us withal.

And since we have such great need at this time of Armies by Land, and Navies
by Sea, to defend us from factions at home, and enemies abroad, I would put it
to those of the Military order, to consider, how not only useful, but
necessary that profession is for carrying on of Military business also, as well
by sea, as by land; and that all the military discipline, and good government
that they have in their Armies, and the right which they are enjoined to afford
to their very enemies, is directed by the rules and principles of that
profession: for it must be acknowledged, that the Municipal Law, as to the
carrying on of Martial affairs, is altogether impertinent, and of no use at
all; the same being a Law useful but in peace only.

But there are peculiar Laws, and a proper discipline for the state of War;
Sunt and belli sicut and pacis jura; and they are accommodated to the very
nature and exigencies of it: some of which are, That there be solemn denouncing
of the war intended, that all dissenters may withdraw in time, and to divert
other Nations from adhering; That it be prosecuted by just and honorable ways,
without treachery, corruption, breach of faith, poison, or secret
assassination, which the gallant Romans did disdain to act, though for never
so great a victory: That all articles and capitulations made be strictly kept
and observed, even toward Turks, Pagans, Jews, or Infidels; That they be
interpreted in the plainest and most equitable sense, without any art or
subtilty at all; That an enemy after he has yielded himself, be not killed, but
kept alive for exchange, or ransom; That what is gotten from the enemy, is
good and lawful purchase, though it was newly taken from some of our own people
or confederates, so that it were but once brought safe into the enemies
Quarters; That the enemies country, when it offers to yield, be not laid
waste, burnt, or destroyed; That when a Town is to be stormed, women, children,
aged, Ecclesiastical persons, so far as is possible, may be spared; That it be
free to friends or confederates to trade with the enemy, so they carry neither
victuals, money, arms, or ammunition; That the Country, through which the
Army passes, no offense being given, be not injured, but kept from spoil and
rapine; That Heralds or messengers sent from the enemy be received and
dismissed with safety; That strictness and severity of discipline, greater then
in peace, be maintained within the Camp; the valiant advanced to honors, and
admitted to partake in the spoil which he did help to get; the cowardly
disgraced, the disobedient rigorously chastised, the incorrigable cashiered,
and the aged and worn out soldier be dismissed to ease with reward and honor;
That a difference of degrees be observed, and a subordination made, as the
places of command differ; That for Military offenses, or contracts and promises
made between soldier and soldier, the conisance thereof be in the Court
Marshall, and to be tried by the Law of Arms only; That Hostages be taken and
kept, and may be put to death, if the enemy prove perfidious; That neither
friends goods coming in an enemies bottom, nor a friends ship, though carrying
enemies goods in her, be taken as prize; That when a victory is gotten, the
enemy subdued be used with all clemency and moderation; That Privileges be
granted to soldiers beyond other men; with an infinite number more, which are
no where to be found collected and laid together, but in the books and writings
of the Civil Law; which is the only proper learning to teach and instruct in
those matters.

For it has been the Civilians work, to draw together as it were into one body
and Systeme, all that the Civil Law it self does afford; and whatsoever else
can be gathered from the testimonies of the ancient Philosophers, Historians,
Poets, and Orators, in what they are all, as it were by the light of nature,
consenting in one and the same judgment; also what has been delivered by the
ancient Fathers and most approved Canons of the Church on that subject; and
especially to bring into argument, what has been constantly upon the same
occurrences in war, judged and practiced by the most Warlike and Heroic
Nations, that have been; as the Graecians, Assyrians, Medes, Persians,
Lacedaemonians, Carthaginians, but especially the Romans, with whom for
experience and discipline in War, and justice and bravery toward their
enemies; no Nation that ever acted on this great Theater of the World, is to be
compared: And so by these helps, the Laws of War in use at this day, have been
made and perfected, only through the Civilians pains and industry; neither are
they to be met with any where together, but in their books and writings.

And therefore since this profession is so useful and necessary for the
soldiers business also, that they cannot promise to themselves any good order,
wise conduct, or happy success with their Martial enterprises, but by that
light and direction which it affords, it is evident, that it could never be
worse spared or discountenanced; then now at this time. Which I humbly leave to
be further thought of by the wisdom of those that rule over us.

And so desiring thee to excuse me this once, for appearing thus in public,
being upon so pressing an occasion, as to revive (if by such weak endeavors it
were possible) a whole profession, almost quite expiring, I bid thee farewell,
and remain,

Thine in all possible respects whatsoever, To. Wiseman.

The Arguments of the Chapters of the First Book.
CHAP. I. THat a Law ought to be agreeable to true Reason. page 1 CHAP. II.
That what Reason teaches, should be made the subject of a Law, is no
superfluous, but a profitable thing. p. 22 CHAP. III. What is here meant and
intended by Reason. p. 24 CHAP. IV. That Reason is not so strictly required in
the Law that orders the affairs of State, as in that that settles the
differences that arise between man and man. p. 33 CHAP. V. That the customs of
a Nation ought in like manner to agree with reason. p. 36 CHAP. VI. Where Law
or custom is wanting, to judge by president or example, has no defense in
reason. p. 38 CHAP. VII. That they are great advantages, which a Nation has by
ruling by a such a Law as is rational. p. 46 CHAP. VIII. That Christian Nations
having entertained the Civil Law into their Territories, have thereby acquired
to themselves the most rational Law that has been ordained, as by the
constitutions thereof will appear. p. 51
The Arguments of the Chapters of the Second Book.
CHAP. I. THat the greatness and the splendor of the Roman Empire does
evidence the singular virtue of the Law it self, to which, as to its proper
cause, it may be ascribed. page 97 CHAP. II. The fundamentals of the Roman
Civil Law were fetched from other States, which did then excel others most in
Policy and Government. p. 103 CHAP. III. That time and intervenience of fatal
Accidents that has swept away so many States, together with all their Laws, and
has quite abolished the Roman State it self, has not yet been of force to
abolish the Roman Civil Law, but that it is extant still. p. 110 CHAP. IV. That
foreign Nations in doing of right between man and man, do mainly practice and
make use of the rules and dictates of the Civil Law. p. 128 CHAP. V. The
general admittance and use of the Civil Law in foreign parts, is acknowledged
by our selves here in England. p. 133 CHAP. VI. The Civilians themselves do not
enlarge the use and practice of the Civil Law in foreign parts, further then
Mr Seldom himself in his writings grants it to extend. p. 139 CHAP. VII. No
Municipal Law is sufficient to meet with the multitude and variety of cases and
questions that will happen at Land, at Sea, and in foreign parts: Which has
caused so many Nations to make use of the Civil Law, where it is proper and
pertinent to their affairs, to jayn with and help their own, rather then to be
without any Law at all, and to be subject to the mischiefs of arbitrariness,
folly, and violence. p. 144 CHAP. VIII. That the reasons are strong and
weighty, upon which so many foreign States do direct and order the business of
their Tribunals most by the prescript, reason, and equity of the Civil Law. p.
153 CHAP. IX. The admittance and sway of the Civil Law in foreign parts, is
yet further verified by the testimonies of Sr Tho. Smith, and Dr Hakewill, the
one a Statesman, the other a famous learned Divine of our own, and by some
other remarkable institutions within this Nation. p. 159 CHAP. X. The general
name of Jus Civil, The Civil Law, is signally for Honors sake peculiarly
ascribed to the Roman Civil Law, and to no other Law. p. 164 CHAP. XI. The Art
and knowledge of doing the purest right and most natural justice, is laid down
in the books of the Civil Law; and how it came by degrees to that perfection,
that now we see it in. p. 166 CHAP. XII. An Answer to the main Objections that
are now adays made against the continuance of the Civil Law within this
Nation. p. 173.
VVESENBEC. Parat. Dig. De Just. and jur. nu. 17. IN constituendo expoliendoque
jus Civil, Populus Romanus tantum reliquis Nationibus, velut and gloria belli
praestitit; ut si omnia omnium gentium instituta, mores, leges in unum
conferantur, nequaquam sint cum his Romanorum legibus and institutis,
prudentia, aequitate, pondere, ubertate, ullo modo comparanda. The people of
Rome did not only go beyond all Nations in the world besides in renown for
their warlike enterprises, but so much in establishing of Laws too; That if all
the Laws and customs of all other Nations were all laid together, they would
come far short of the Roman Laws, both for wisdom, equity, weight, fullness. LEX
LEGVM: OR, THE LAW OF LAWS, etc.
CHAP. I.
That a Law ought to be agreeable to true Reason.

The first Book.
THere is nothing under the Sun, that does more conduce to the Prosperity and
Peace of a Nation, then fitting and well-composed Laws.

In the framing whereof, those that have the Ordaining Power, must be heedfull
to observe many things, to make their Laws proportionable to so happy and so
blessed an end.

A Law must not enjoyne any wicked, ignominious, or unbeseeming things, these
being in intendment of the Civil Law impossible. Quae facta laedunt pietatem,
existimationem, verecundiam nostram, and (ut generaliter dixerim) contra bonos
mores fiunt, neo facere nos posse credendum est, says Papinian. L. 15. Co. de
condit. Inst.
Those actions which wound Piety, Reputation, Modesty, or in brief, are
generally disallowed by the practices of sober men, may be reckoned in the
number of those things which Nature admits not to be done.

It must be not obscure, but certain in the Intimation, just in the Precept,
profitable in the Execution, agreeing with the form of Government, customs,
places and time, where and when it is to be applied. It must be sufficient for
the defense of Propriety, for the encouragement of Labor, for the safeguard of
the Subjects persons, for determining Controversies, for reward of noble
Actions, and excellent Arts, and rare Inventions, for promoting Trade,
enriching the People, and must wholly advance the public good.

But above all things, the care of the Legislative Power ought to be solicitous
in nothing more, then to frame and fashion their Laws Plutarch saying, that
Kings ought to be governed by Laws, explains himself, that this Law must be a
word, not written in Books, and Tables, but dwelling in the mind; a living
rule, the interior guide of their manners, and monitors of their life.
by that great and exemplary pattern, the Law of Nature, and to enact or decree
nothing dissonant unto true inbred and Natural Reason; whereby a Man works
according to God, according to himself, Nature, the universal order and policy
of the world, quietly, sweetly, and as silently without nois^ a Ship that is
not driven but by the natural and ordinary co^^^^ of the Water: For when the
Wisdom and Power of God first bestowed upon Man Understanding and Reason, he
intended them as guides and directors in all the actions of his life, and
thereby to discern what was good and what was evil, by that very light that
shined within him. When therefore the commands of a Nation are irrational and
senseless, that light is as it were put out and extinguished, and Subjects are
made to obey rather like Beasts then Men.

And therefore Tully said, as he is quoted by Carbo, Tractat. de legib. lib. 6,
disp. 2.
Nos legem bonam a mala, nulla alia ratione nisi naturae norma dividere
possumus, We cannot discern a good Law from a bad, otherwise, then by comparing
it with the Law of Nature. And therefore he will have it to be justorum
injustorumque distinctio, ad illam antiquissimam and rerum omnium principem
naturam expressa: a rule discriminating that which is just, from that which is
unjust, delineated and drawn forth by the old. Original of Nature, and says
it is the highest or chief reason grafted in Nature, commanding those things
which are to be done, and forbidding the contrary.

And again: Lib. 2. De Inven.
Initium juris a natura profectum, deinde quaedam in consuetudinem ex utilitate
rationis venerunt, postea res a natura profectas and a consuetudine probatas
legum metus and religio sanxit: The beginning of all Law did proceed from
Nature it self, but afterward there were certain things which were by
evidence of Reason found necessary, and thereupon brought into common practice;
and at length, the fear and reverence of Laws did settle and enforce what had
been so taught by Nature, and Custom it self had allowed of. So that the Act
of the Law, is but to see that effectually observed and executed, which Nature
has ordained, and which the common Reason and Custom of men does declare to
be just, equal, and necessary.

And sometimes the same Lib. delegus. lib. 1.
Tully, styles Law the very force of Nature, the Understanding and Reason of a
wise Man, the rule of right and wrong. And Lib. 3. de rep.
defining Law as it ought to be, rather then what generally it is, he terms it
right reason, spread over all people, durable, everlasting; which, as fire
burns every where alike, is not one at Rome, and another at Athens, one now,
and another hereafter, but being the same and unalterable, serves for all
times, and runs through all people, which began not when it was first written,
but when it first sprung forth from Nature.

Plato In Min. de rep. and de legib.
will also have it a reasonable rule, leading and directing men to their due
end, for a public good, ordaining penalties for them that transgress, and
rewards for them that obey. And Isidore, who requires other properties in a
Law, requires this of Reason too; for in his Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Etymologies he says, Lex erit omne quod ratione constiterit, duntaxat quod
religioni congruat, quod disciplinae conveniat, quod saluti proficiat; A Law
shall be that, which may stand with Reason, agree with Religion, suit with the
education and dispositions of the people, and be beneficial to the public
welfare. With Prima secundae qu. 97. Ar. 1.
Aquinas also, Lex humana est quoddam dictamen rationis, quo diriguntur humani
actus; Humane Law is a dictate of Reason, by which humane acts are steered. And
again, Quest. 91. Art. 4.
Lex nihil aliud est, quane quaedam rationis ordinatio ad bonum communt, ab eo
qui curam communitatis habet, promulgata: A Law is nothing else but a
transferring or applying of Reason to the common good, manifested to all the
people, by him who has care of the Commonwealth. The Civil Law speaks the
same thing, Lib. 1. Dig de Legib.
Lex est commune praeceptum, virerum prudentum consultum, A Law is an
universal and generally known precept. Notitia aequi and boni a natura omnibus
indita, as Lib. 1.
Gothofred explains it, ingrafted in Man by Nature, and the result of sage and
understanding men.

All Minfinus Inst. de jur. Not. gent. and Civ. in princ.
Civilians without any contradiction do consent and agree, that the true Law
of a State is but Determinatio juris naturalis, a declaring or expounding in
such particular cases or accidents, as most frequently happen amongst men, what
the Law of Nature intends by its general precept; or it is a rational
distinguishing upon the Law of Nature, making it to be of force in some cases,
not of force in others, with such directions for observing the same, and kinds
of punishment to the offenders, as the wisdom of each state shall judge most
rational, and most convenient. Not to Steal, not to commit Adultery, not to
Kill, Nature it self taught in general: but who should be said to Steal; who
to commit Adultery; who to Kill; what proof should be sufficient to convict a
Man of these crimes; who might be the accusers, how and in what manner, and
before what Judges the offenders should be proceeded against; what pun shments
they should suffer, and after what time no accusation for them should be heard,
because the Natural Law did not teach in particular, therefore the Law of
every State does determine them; which as it is done in pursuance of the
primary precepts of Nature, so must it be done too with the soundest judgment
and reason, having an eye to the matter of the precepts, to the nature of the
people, and to the state of the Commonwealth it self. And these several
particulars being thus determined and put into a Law, they adopt to themselves
the name of a National Law. L. 6. Dig. de Just. and Jur.
Jus Civil, says Vlpian, est, quod neque in totum a naturali jure vel gentium
recedit, neque per omnia ei servit; Itaque cum aliquid addimus, vol, detrahimus
juri communi, jue proprium, id est, Civil intelligimus. The Law of a people is
that, which neither does wholly estrange it self from the Law of Nature, or of
Nations, nor does strictly follow them in all things neither: when therefore we
add or diminish ought from the Universal Law, we make it thereby a peculiar
Law, and give it the denomination of a Civil, or Municipal Law; so that the
Roman Law will have no other material difference to be between the Law of
Nature, and the Dictates of Reason, and the Law of a State, but that what was
before common and universal in notion, is now by distinguishing it into cases,
by fitting it with proper circumstances for more ready execution, and by
moulding it into a form, appropriated to peculiar use.

The Cansn Law that enumerates all the essential properties of a Law, does
exact also that it be honest, just, and agreeable to Nature: Car. 2. Did. 4.
Erit lex honesta, justa, possibilis, secundum naturam, secundum patriae
consuetudinem; loco temporique conveniens, necessaria, utilis, maenifesta
quoque, ne aliquid per obscuritatem in captionem contineat; nullo privato
commodo, sed pro communi civium utilitate conscripta: A Law shall be honest,
just, possible, according to Nature, suiting with the customs of the Country,
agreeing both with place and time, necessary, useful, and also plain, lest
through obscurity it may ensnare; nor made for private advantage, but for the
common good of all the people.

Thus by the judgment of all, Ratio est anima legis; Lex tune laudatur, quando
ratione probatur: Nature is the Fountain, and Reason does animate and make the
Law, and gets it the praise and acceptance. This indeed is a lightning and
raye of the Divinity; Ratio nihil aliud est, quam in corpus humanum pars divini
spiritus immersa, says Epist. 66.
Seneca: It is the stream and dependence of the eternal Law, which is God
himself and his will. Quid natura nisi Drus, and divina ratio toti mundo and
partibus ejus inserta? What is Nature but God, and Divine reason inserted into
the whole world, and immixed in all the parts thereof Lex nihil allud est, nifi
recta, and a numite Deorum tracta ratio, Cicer. Philip. 11.
? The Law of Moses in his Decalogue is an outward and public Copy, the Law of
the twelve Tables and the Roman Law, the moral instructions of Divines and
Philosophers, the advertisements and counsels of Lawyers, the edicts and
ordinances of the best Princes are no other but draughts and particular
Pourtrayes of it.

If therefore there be any Law, that varieth from this first and original
Mistress, commanding where she forbids, or forbidding where she commands or
allows, it is a monster, falsehood, and error. As for example, Adversus
periculum naturalis ratio permittit se defendere. Itaque si servum tuum
latronem insidiantem mihi occidere, securus ero, says Lib. 1. Dig. Ad l. Aquil.
Gaius. Natural Reason gives a man license to defend himself against any
danger, therefore I am in no danger of the Law, if I kill thy Servant that lies
in wait to mischief me. Again, Si quis percussorem ad se venientem gladio
repulerit, non ut homicida tenetur; quia defensor propriae salutis in nullo
peccasse videtur, says Gordian the Lib. 2. Co. Ad l. Co^nel, de Sicar.
Emperor: If a Man shall strike him dead that comes to destroy him, he shall
not be punished as a Manslayer, because the preserver of his own life offends
in nothing. That Law then surely is very unnatural, that inflicts forfeiture of
any part of his estate, though it requires not either the whole or his life,
upon any person, for slaying another in his own just and necessary defense;
when as if he had not done as he did, he must have been in peril of losing his
own life.

It is as prodigious to natural equity and good reason, that a man that is
unhappily peradventure doing of a lawful act, nor purposing the least mischief
to any person, but by mere chance author of another death, should be subject
to any punishment or loss whatsoever. Mera infortunia nec paenam mereutur, n^c
ad restitutionem damni obligant, says uDe Ju Bill. Lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 4.
Grotius. No man deserves to be punished, or is bound to make any reparation
for pure casualties. If an arrow being shot at a Beast or at Buts, lights upon
a Man and kills him; or a stone cast over an house, or an arm of a Tree being
cut, and falling, where seasonable warning is given to all that are near to
take heed, be the cause of another death, such casual Homicide is not in any
kind punishable. Lib. 5. Co. ad l. Corn^l de Sicar sect. 5. Inst. dc l Aquil.
A Law therefore that punishes a man for such adventure or misfortune, is not
a just or rational Law, being indeed repugnant to the Law of God, which
protected such persons, and appointed them a City of refuge to fly unto; Numb.
35.15.22. Josh. 20.3. Deuteronomy. 19.5.
for such an act happening in such sort, seems to be the work of God himself.

It is a cruelty also, which Nature and Reason abhors, that a King, who
ought to be as a Sheepherd and Guardian of his people, should have an
established liberty to endanger his Subjects lives and liberties, by a criminal
accusation brought against them; and yet they be denied the natural liberty and
freedom to defend themselves, by bringing that Evidence, and assistance of
Counsel, that may serve to clear them. Indeed all kind of awful submission and
reverence is due to the Prince from his Subject; but that is no way impeached
by a modest and fair defense. And therefore by the Civil Law, in any matter of
complaint that was brought by the public Exchequer, whether Criminal or Civil,
the defendant had his full defense most free. Defensionis facultas danda est
his quibus aliquam inquietudinem fiscus infert Lib 7. Co de Jur. fisc.
: Liberty of defense ought to be granted to those, whom the Exchequer brings
into any trouble. And whosoever is impeached as a Malefactor, that Law is so
indulgent to him, till he be convicted, that if he be in Prison, the Magistrate
is to make known by open Proclamation, what day he intends to hear him; Ne hi
qui defexdendi sunt, says Lib. 18 Sect. 9. Dig. de Quest.
Paulus, subitis accusatorum criminibus opprimantur; quamvis defensionem
quecunque tempore, post ulante reo, negari non oportet; adeo ut propterea and
differantur and proferantur cust^diae: Lest they which are to make their
defense, be too suddenly brought to trial by their Accusers, and thereby
destroyed: Howbeit the Court shall not deny to hear their defense at any time,
when themselves will ask it; for which cause, the Prisoners may have a certain
time set at first, and then if cause be, further day also may be given. And
though, when the person accused is not under restraint, if he shall not appear
to answer the accusation, some time within a year after Summons had, his estate
is irrecoverably lost, and forfeited to the Exchequer, and for that he shall
never be heard more Lib. 4. Dig. De requir. vel absent. damn.
: yet as to save him from personal punishment, neither the expiration of a
year, nor the efflux of any time shall bar him, but that he may still be
heard to defend himself l. 2. co. De Requirend. rei.
: For self preservation is so Hoc and ratio doctis, and mos gentibus and seris
natura ipsa. praeseripsis, ut omnem semper vim a corpore, a capite, a vitaesuae
propulsarent. Cic. pro Mil.
natural, that a Law that is set up to infringe it, may justly seem to fight
against nature.

These Laws therefore, and such like, as do thus cross and encounter common
sense, and natural Reason, are no fitter to be styled Laws, then the dead
Carcass of a Man, that is dest tute of the essentials of Life, Soul, and
Reason, can be called a Man. And therefore Tully did set down the truth, when
he taught, L. 1 de legib.
Eos qui perniciosa and injusta populis jussa descripserint, cum contra
fecerint quam polliciti professique sunt, quidvis potius tulisse quam leges.
They that did promulgate to the people pernicious and unjust Laws, since they
did clean contrary to that that they always promised and professed to do,
they might better be thought to enact any thing else then Laws.

And though it be never or very rarely seen, that any State does suffer any law
to pass them, which does directly cross the chief and fundamental Laws of
Nature, or which opposes the first and main principles of common Reason, as to
give direct license to Atheism, Theft, Adultery, Homicide, invading of the
rights or possession of others, Breach of Faith or Covenants, Rebellion against
Magistrates, Disobedience to Parents, abandoning of Children or such like, (for
this were too odious and detestable, and would presently dissolve all society
and government:) Yet the care of a Legislator does not determine here, but must
extend further also, if they will have their Laws to be of one complexion and
likeness, and all to agree with the Laws of Nature, and the Dictates of sound
Reason; for to each of those first and fundamental principles, there are diverse
inferior things and actions appertaining, which do mediately or immediately
depend upon, and refer unto them, standing some in a nearer, others in a
remoter distance from them; but all so knit and conjoined with the first and
main principle, to which they are subordinate, and do as it were wait upon,
that if any of them be settled by a Law, or practiced otherwise then they ought
to be, the first and great principle also by consequence is violated and
broken, or at least an occasion offered to violate and break it: and therefore
the Legislators care must be to settle these inferior and subordinate things
also in such wise, as that they may not encounter with any chief or fundamental
rule of Nature, to which they may have any reference or application. For
instance, That Parents should educate their Children, and supply them with
maintenance, is a Law proceeding from Nature. And though no humane Law was ever
found, that discharged Parents of such their duty, yet if a Law shall leave it
free to a Parent when he dies, to give away all from his own Children to a
stranger, or to dispose of all to one child, without making any provision for
the rest; is not that fundamental Law of Nature thereby consequentially
infringed and broken? By the Roman Law therefore which does strictly tie all
Parents to this Duty Go. de Alend. Liber.
, there is such a proportion due to Children out of their Parents estates, when
they dye, as the Parents, but upon certain causes just and true, cannot give
away from them, which was the third part, if there were four children or under;
or half of the whole substance, if there were more, amongst them all; the rest
they might freely give away to whom they pleased. And this the Law made so sure
to them, that though the Father for some offense did suffer Death, and his
Estate was confiscate, yet half the Estate should go to the Children
notwithstanding: Ne alieno admisso, graviorem poenam luerent quos nulla
contingeret culpa; Lib. 7. dig. dc Bon. damuat.
Lest the Fathers fault should prove a sharper punishment to them that offended
not, except the fault were Treason, in which case, for terror to others, they
lost all: Vt charitas liberorum amiciores parents reip. redderet Lib. 8. dig.
quod metus cause. sect. fin.
; That their very affection to their Children, knowing how greatly they were
like to suffer after them, might make them timorous how they so offended.

Likewise, if the Parent shall make no Will, nor make any disposition of his
Estate in his life time, dut dye intestate, if, when one of the Children has
entered upon his Fathers Estate, though by lawful Aathority, the Law of a State
shall adjudge the whole Inheritance unto him, and not admit any of the rest of
his Brethren and Sifters, how many soever they be, to divide or to have any
share with him, neither in real Estate, nor personal; surely this is a
contradiction to that Original Law of Nature, that binds Parents to provide
for all those that are of the same Flesh and Blood with them; for what
themselves cannot do being dead, their Estates ought to perform. The Civil
Law therefore, making no difference between Land and Goods, nor between Eidest
and Youngest, nor Male and Female, divides the whole Estate, real and
personal, equally amongst the Children. Ratio naturalis quasi lex quaedam
tacita, liberis parentum haereditatem addicit, velut ad debitam successienem
eosvocando, says D. l. 7. Dig. de Ben. damn. l. 7. Dig. si Tab. testam. null.
s. 1.
Paulus: There is as it were a secret Law made by Nature her self, that
settles the Parents Estate upon the Children, calling them to succeed as in
their proper right. And, Omnia quae nostra sunt; liberis nostris ex voto
paramus, says Lib. 50. Dig. de B^^^. libert. sect. 2.
Tryphoninus; All that we do possess, we professedly destine to our Children.
Neither does it give one child any advantage against the rest, that he has
first lawfully got into possession, for he has but thereby made himself subject
to be sued by the rest, to come to a Partition with them Tot. Tit. dig. and Co.
Famil. ercise.
; for Action to divide, being once brought, the Judge is told by Lib. 25. sect.
20. Dig. Eod.
Paulus, what he must do; Index familiae erciscundae nihil debet indivisum
relinquere; The Judge of a Partition ought to leave nothing undivided. A Law
then that forbids Parents to cast off the care of their Children, as nature
does, does not agree with Nature, nor with it self neither, if it does not as
the Civil Law does, make its other constitutions suitable, and put it out of
the power both of Parents and Children, by fraudulent ways to make their grand
Law of Nature, and Dictate of Reason fruitless and of no effect.

Likewise it is not sufficient, that the Law of a State has not declared any
thing against Honor, Reverence, and awful respect, which Nature it self has
enjoined Children to yield unto their Parents, except it does dispose and order
the actions and demeanor of Children answerable to that very duty; for if a
State shall give Children a freedom to bring like actions and accusations
against their Parents as against others, or to Marry without their consent, or
to give in evidence against them, or shall not punish them when they offer
violence to their Parents, or speak reproachfully against them; the reverential
respect so due by Nature to Parents, will soon be turned into contempt and
scorn. The Civil Law therefore has not only said, Filio semper honesta and
sancta persona patris videri debet Lib. 9. digo obseq. parent. and pairon. p
ae^land.
; The person of a Parent ought to be reputed by a Child as Venerable and
Religious: But in order to this, it also has forbidden Children to Marry
without their Fathers consent first obtained, which if they do, the Marriage
is made void Lib. 18. Dig. de vit. nupt. l. 7. Co de nupt. Inst. cod. in princ.
. Likewise, Si filius matrem aut patrem, quos venerari oportet, contumeliis
afficit, vel impias manus ei infert; praefectus urbis de lictum ad publicam
pietatem pertinens, pro modo ejus vindicat: If a child shall uttter approbrious
words of Father or Mother, whom he ought to have in veneration, or shall lay
wicked hands upon them, the Magistrate shall punish it as a public offense,
and as the quality thereof deserves Lib. 1. Dig. de obseq. sect. 2.
. It will not suffer Children to bring any criminal accusation or exception
against their Parents, whereby their credit may be empaired L. 2. dig. cod.
; nor commence any suit at all against them, except special leave from the
Judge be first gotten Lib. 2. and 13. Dig de injue voc.
. Nor put a parent to the Oath of calumny, Lib. 7 sect. 3. dig. de obsequ.
as may be done to all parties besides, that are in judgment, lest it should
thereby be suspected, that he does calumniate with his own Child. Nor shall a
Child be heard as evidence against his Parent, though he offers himself to be
a witness against him Lib. 6. Co. de Test.
. Again, the Laws of all States profess to abhor all fraud, deceit, and
circumvention in all contracts and dealings amongst men, as Nature it self and
the common voice of Nations has forbidden; for but upon confidence of honest,
upright and fair dealing, no trading, intercourse, or correspondence could be
secure. Yet if the Law of a State shall only admonish all that buy, barter, or
exechange, to be cautious and wary at their own peril, and when they be cheated
with any unsound and corrupted Merchandise, or in the price beyond all measure,
if it shall leave them helpless and without relief: Or if a State shall give
license or toleration to debtors to pass and convey away all their Estates,
thereby to deceive their Creditors, so it be done before action brought: or if
practices of collusion may be used, or feigned actions brought under
counterfeit and fictitious names, and in colorable and fallacious forms, on
purpose to defeat others of that right which was intended them, or to delude
the Law, by transferring a right thither, whither lawfully it ought not to go;
where then will honesty, truth and faithfulness, so requisite in all affairs
acted amongst men be? And therefore the Civil Law does not only say in the
general, In omnibus contractibus bonu fides requiritur; And, Naturalis suadst
aequitas, ut ex bona fide contrahatur: Schenidw. Inst. de action. s. estionum.
nu. 6.
All Contracts must be made with honesty; and natural Equity invites us to
honest dealing. But it comes to particulars also, and will allow of deceit no
where: for if a man be deceived in the price of a Commodity bought, supra
dimidium, above half the value of it (for so far as to half, inequality of
value is born with for avoiding endless challenges, Et nt omnis obligatio
emptionis and venditionis semper sit in incerto, that all uncertainty in buying
and selling may be removed l. 2. co. de rescind. vend.
) the seller at his election shall be enforced either to take his commodity
again, or restore to the buyer what he has taken above the true worth of it.
Immodicae laesio excedens dimidium justi pretii, gravior est quam ut toleretur:
an immeasurable prejudice, which exceeds half the just value, is more than can
be born withal. But if the fraud be not in the price, but does infect the
contract or act done in another kind, the Judge has commission either to
disannull the thing, or to take such order that the decriver may not gain by
his evil subtilty, l. ^. Dig. fiquis ^aut. l. 134. s. 1. di. de reg. jur. 2.
nor the other lose by his simplicity and weakness l. 155. Dig. de reg jur.
.

If a diseased or unmerchantable commodity be sold, and the defects thereof not
visible, the Civil Law will compel the seller to take it again, and give the
buyer his money back: Dig. De aedi^. edict.
Or if a seller shall tell the buyer, that the thing sold is thus and thus
qualified, by which, the buyer that cannot see whether it be so or no till some
good trial had, is induced to give the more, and afterward it is found clear
otherwise, the seller is to give so much back, as the thing is less worth by
those qualities which are wanting. Nam ea quae commendandi causa in
venditionibus dicuntur, venditorem obligant, nisi palam sint: Those qualities
or conditions, which any thing that is sold is commended for, must be made
good by the seller, except they be such as the buyer may be by his own view
certified, that they are not so good as they are spoken. l. 43. Dig. de
contrab, erupt.
Likewise if a man shall sell Land, House, or any thing else, to which he
cannot make a good title, but is recovered by another, though he never
undertakes to warrant it or make it good, yet emptorem indemnem servare debet,
he shall save the buyer harmless, because it does naturally arise without any
special covenant out of the bargain it self, that the buyer shall either
quietly enjoy the thing, or at least be indemnified by him that sold it. Lib.
11. Dig de act. empt. 1.6. co. de evict.
And if a man shall pass away his Estate to defraud his Creditors, leaving
nothing, or not enough in himself to satisfy his just debts that he had
contracted before; the Civil Law, without distinguishing whether it was done
before action brought, or after, revokes it out of the hands into which it was
put, and reinvests the debtor in it, and makes it as liable to his debts, as if
no such thing had been done. Dig. quae in fraud. cred.
Neither does it only disallow but punish also those that do prevaricate and
help the cause of their adversay, by waving their own just pleas, and wilfully
failing to prove what they may, and in show undertook to do. Di de praevaricat.
It will not suffer any such combination or practice of colluding to have any
effect to the taking away or prejudicing of the right of any person that is
concerned. For if the Executor of a Will shall combine with any of the next of
kin to make the deceased dye intestate, and thereupon does faintly defend it in
Court where it is in question, and subducts or conceales those proofs that
should uphold it, whereby for want of proof it comes to be overthrown; this
shall not prejudice the legataries; for they shall notwithstanding this
Judgment thus by fraud obtained, be heard to maintain and set up this will
again. Lib. 14. Dig. de appellas.
And as no man shall be prejudiced, so none shall reap any advantage by the
fraudulent practice of another neither, though he was no party nor actor in the
fraud himself; Alterius circumventio alii non praebet actionem. Lib. 49. Dig.
de reg. jur.
One man's fraud shall not create in another any right to sue.

The Civil Law can as little endure that the true sense and meaning of a Law
should be destroyed by a fraudulent interpretation that keeps the words, but
perverts the end for which it is made: In fraudem legis facit, qui salvis
verbis legis, sententiam ejus circumvenit; fraus legis fit, ubi quod fieri
noluit, fieri autem non vetuit, id fit. Lib. 29.30. Dig. de legib.
He deals deceitfully with the Law, that transgresses the true intent of it,
though he does not trespass against the formal and precise words. And therefore
when the Law forbids a man to settle any more upon his Bastard, than what will
barely keep him alive, it will not permit him to settle any superfluous estate
upon any other person for that Bestards use, or the Bastard to receive any such
estate from his Parent by another hand: Cum quid una via prohibetur alicui, ad
id alia via non debet admitti: That Reg. 8^. de reg. jur. in 6.
which cannot lawfully be done one way, or directly, must not be done
indirectly, or by another.

In like manner, as nothing is more precious among men than Life, Property,
good Name, Liberty, and the right of Contracts; in the which the whole civil
interest and welfare of all people may be rightly said to be comprised: So it
is not enough to provide in a general way for them neither; for it does not
suffice to declare by a Law, that neither the Life, Property, nor Liberty of
any Subject shall be taken away, but by course of Law, and a lawful trial first
had; nor to forbid calumnies and slanders; nor to command that the contracts
and agreements of men shall be mutually observed: but a special and most
vigilant care is to be had also, that all proceedings of justice, when a suit
is brought concerning any of them, be answerable to those great interests, and
that nothing be admitted which can any way, though obliquely or afar off,
infringe or overthrow any of them. Whereof the Civil Law is so tender, that by
bringing the Action, a man's right is rather improved than made worse: Neme in
persequendo deteriorem causam sed meliorem facit: Lib. ^7. Dig. de reg. jur.
To try a man's right is rather an advantage than any prejudice.

When therefore any of these rights be in question, if the Law of a State be so
short and defective, as that a mischief may be done, and yet no remedy be
found, or not a sufficient one; or if a prejudicial act may pass against me,
that may endanger my whole right in the end, and I not present thereat, nor
called unto it; or if I have not liberty to examine my adversary upon his oath,
to something which will clear the whole matter, and whereof I have no other
testimony but his own conscience; or if I may not be admitted to make out the
matter as well by violent and strong presumtions, as by clear and manifest
proofs; or if the testimony of one only witness be sufficient in any matter
whatsoever to cast and condemn me; or if where I cannot have my witness to the
Bar through sickness, or absence beyond the Seas, there be not some expedient
allowed to have his testimony upon his oath sent to the Court where my trial is
to be; or if such just exceptions as may take away, or at least extenuate the
credit of the evidence brought against me, will not be allowed; or if the
Justice of a nation be too quick and over hasty in concluding upon the rights
of men, before they can well prepare to defend them; or on the contrary, be too
slow and tedious, as not limit a time, when suits shall determine of
themselves, if they be not judged before; or if one sentence shall be so final,
that I may not appeal, nor bring my right to a trial any more: I say, where
these proceedings, or such like be allowed and and practiced, whatsoever is
most precious and of highest value amongst men, be it Life, Property, Good
name, Liberty, right of Contracts, or whatsoever else is flying to the
sanctuary of the Law, it is subject to be destroyed and taken away. For whether
the rights of a people be prejudiced by an irregular way of bringing them to
trial and judgment, or by the iniquity of those Laws that shall judge them
in the end, the mischief is all one. A State therefore that will sufficiently
provide, for defense of their peoples rights, must not only take care that the
Laws that must definitively overruled and determine them, be equal, just, and
rational, but the forms of trial must be the same also, that the same security
and just dealing, which is the end of both, may be obtained.

And herein the Roman Civil Law has been more exact and careful than some other
Laws of the world have been; for there is nothing, of what nature soever it
be, but the Civil Law has ordained a means to bring it to a discussion and
trial, either by giving a special Action in the case Tot. Tit. Inst. de action.
, or a general one Dig: de praescript. verb. and infact. action.
, relieving by ordinary remedies; or if those fail, by such as are
extraordinary Tot. tit. Dig. and lo. de in int^gr. res. titu.
, helping men jure actionis, or officio judicis, that is, by way of complaining
in their own name, or borrowing the name of the Magistrate Gl. in s. actic.
Inst de Action, verb. quam jus.
to make their complaints more effectual, so that one way or other a remedy may
be had, whatsoever the evil be; nor does it suffer any just complaint to go
away unremedied. And although it gives the highest authority to Orders and
Decrees of Court, yet it is so tender of, and has such a heedful respect
toward the Rights and Interests of men, that whether a man be concerned alone
in a cause, or whether others be concerned with him, it allows of no Act,
Order, Decree, or Judgment, but against those only, that were first called to
see it done. And therefore every judicial act done without warning given, is
accounted surreptitious, and declared void and null Marant spec. part 4.
Distinct. number. 10.
. The effect of which nullity is, that as to him that was absent and not heard,
the Cause is to begin again; Judicatum tantum inter praesentes tenet, says
Lib. 47 dig. de re Judic.
Paulus; Those that are in Court only, are bound by that which is decreed.

Neither shall a man lose his right for want of witnesses to prove it, for if
the matter was transacted between him and his adversary only, so that his
adversary being brought upon his Oath, must need confess the whole matter; the
Law will enjoin a man to answer, though against himself, and to his own
prejudice, rather then that the truth shall suffer, and wrong shall prevail. I
may take the same advantage also, if my witnesses live afar off, or that I
would avoid the trouble and charge of examining them, or that my adversary will
confess more to my benefit, then my witnesses will be able to prove. And he
that is cast by his own confession, is more powerfully condemned, then he can
be by any kind of evidence whatsoever; Confessio est probatro probata; Neque
ullae est probatio illa major. l. 1. Dig. De confess. Vulteii Ju isp. Roman.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
for that cannot be subject either to mistake or falsehood, as other testimony
may be.

But witnesses are then of use, if he denies what I charge upon him. Who if
they be far distant, or through Scknesse, Imprisonment, or other occasions be
not able to come, the Law has a ready way to relieve me, for I may have a
commission to examine them where they live. It were too great an oppression
that I must lose my right, because my witnesses cannot be brought to the Bar.
Insomuch as if they be travailed into foreign parts, I shall have Letters of
Request granted me to the Magistrates of the place where they remain, praying
them to examine them upon the matter in issue, and to transmit their testimony;
else regularly by the Civil Law, they are to be examined in open Court, that it
may be seen whether their countenance does not contradict what their tongues
declare Lib. 3. Sect. 3. dig. de Test. and Gothofred ibid.
.

Neither does the Civil Law require direct and positive proofs only, but it
will admit of strong and forcible presumptions also, that by arguments of
conjecture drawn from one thing to another, brings forth the certainty of the
thing in issue. Par est probationi praesumptio, quod quidem ad effectum
attinet, quiae pro probatione habetur, says P^rat. Dig. de prob. and
praesumpt. number. 14.
Wesenbeck; Presumptions are equivalent to proofs, and there is the same
effect in both. And if a presumptive proof were not as effectual to carry the
right, as any other kind of evidence; in vain did Menochius bestow his
pains, when he made that very long and most elaborate Treatise of that subject
only.

But yet no proof, whether it be presumptive only, or whether it be direct and
evident to the thing it self, is sufficient, except it be made out by the
testimony of two witnesses: for by that Law, Testimonium unius est testimonium
nullius; One witness and no witness at all is all alike. And so Constantine
the Emperor has very emphatically declared in these words: Manifest
sancimus, ut unius omnino testis responsio non audiatur, etiamsi praeclarae
curiae honor praefulgeat L. 9. Cold Test.
: We expressly require, that the testimony of one witness be not taken,
although he has the stamp of highest dignity upon him, for it were hard and
dangerous, that a man's whole right and interest of what value soever it be,
should depend upon the testimony of a single person only, who, if he be honest
and sincere, yet through want of good observation, or by a failing memory, may
report the matter of fact otherwise then indeed it was. Yet in matters of small
prejudice and value; the Civil Law does allow of the testimony of one witness,
if the Plaintiff himself can swear, the thing in demand is true; for in that
case, his averring upon Oath as much as his witness has sworn, does supply
the testimony of another winesse Mincing. cent. 1. observe. 68.
.

Howbeit the Civil Law has a further care yet, for before it will suffer any
man's right to be judged away from him, it will see not only a competent number
of witnesses, but they must swear of their knowledge too: L. Neque Natales Co.
de Prob.
and it does cast a very considerate eye upon their reputation and quality
also. It gives way therefore to the proving of any remarkable exceptions that
can be brought against them. Testium fides, says Callistratus, diligenter
examinanda est: Ideoque in persona eorum exploranda erunt inprimis conditio
cujusque; utrum quis decurio, an plebeius sit; and an honestae and inculpata
vitae, aen vero notatus quis and reprehensibilis; an locuples vel egens sit, ut
lucri causa quid facile admittat; vel an inimicus ei sit, adversus quem
testimonium fert, vel amicus ei sit pro quo testimonium dat. Nam si careat
suspicione testimonium, vel propter personam a quae fertur, quod honesta sit,
vel propter causam, quod neque lucri, neque gratiae, neque inim^citiae causa
sit, admittendus est. Lib 3. Dig. de Test.
The sincerity of witnesses is strictly to be enquired after. Therefore as to
their persons, the condition of every witness must be examined, whehe be a
Magistrate, or a common person, whether he be of good and unblameable life, or
whether he lie open to just reproof, or has been any way aspersed; whether he
be able or necessitous, so that he may be tempted to transgress for filthy
lucres sake; whether he be an enemy to him against whom he comes to testify,
or whether he be gracious with him whose witness he is to be, for if his
testimony be void of all suspicion, either in regard of his person, as that he
is honest, or in regard of the cause, as that there is neither gain, nor
affection, nor enmity to corrupt him, he is to be allowed.

Moreover, it leaves a Latitude to every Court of Judicature, to give such a
time both to Plaintiff and Defendant to prove, as the distance of place from
whence the proof is to be brought, does necessarily require. Neither does it
exact, that Plaintiff and Defendant should prove within one and the same time,
but the defendant begins to prove his Defeuce, after the Plaintiffs proof is
ended Speculat. de rest. sect. qualiser, number. 20.
. When both have done, the Judge is to conclude the cause, by which all further
proof is excluded, so that the next step is to judge and pronounce finally upon
the whole matter. And although the Roman Empire was the largest and most
extended that ever was, and the multitude of causes must be supposed to be
great too, yet no Civil cause whatsoever, was to last and continue longer then
by the space of three years, nor any criminal matter could be prosecuted
against any person, after two years time ended; so that all the proceedings
that should follow, and be made after such time ended, was absolutely null and
void Lib. 13. Go. de Judis.
.

Lastly, so careful it is to preserve and uphold the rights of men, that it
does not make any single judgment to be absolutely conclusive and final, if
he that is cast, be desirous to bring his cause to be tried again by another
Tribunal. So much more fitting is it, that the sentence of any Judge should be
impeached and overthrown, then that truth should suffer, or any man's right
should be injuriously taken away. Within ten days therefore after sentence
given, he that is condemned may by appealing to the next superior Judge,
complain thereof; and upon sufficient error assigned, or upon some further
proof made then was before, he may procure the first sentence to be quite
reversed, or at least reformed: for the end of an Appeal is, Vt aut
iniquitatem, aut imperitiam judicis corrigat Lib. 1. dig. de appellat.
; To rectify either injustice or error.

These few instances (for they are intended for no more, and thereby to take a
conjecture of the rest also) may suffice to show, that as the safety of the
peoples rights, is the general end and intention of the Civil Law, so it does
dispose and qualify all its constitutions, and particularly the forms of
trial and judicial proceedings to the self-same end and purpose, and it does
constantly hold and prosecute the same course in other matters. For if the
Civil Law be rightly understood, it will appear, that they grossly err, who
think, that though by the Civil Law, property is sufficiently enough
maintained against common men, yet that the Prince or Sovereign has a looser
power given him thereby, then other Laws will allow, to command or dispose
thereof at pleasure, because it is a rule in that Law, that Quod Principi
placuit legis habet rigorem Lib. 1. dig. de Constit. Princi. sect. 6. Inst. de
Jur. Not. Gent. and Civil.
; What pleases the Prince, has the force of a Law: and Princeps legibus solutus
est Lib. 31. Dig. de Legib. Novel. 105. c. 2.
; A Prince is not tied to Laws. Which being literally understood, and not
taken in that fair and moderate sense, which by the course of the whole Law,
and by the current of Interpreters it is expounded in, does import, as if
Property, Life, Liberty, and all, were subject, and did hold of the Princes
will.

But that this cannot be the meaning, is most evident, for that his mere Lust
or appetite, or every inordinate command that goes forth from him should be a
Law, is not so believed, that the Civil Law ever intended. But when the Roman
State was now changed from being a popular State, and was become an absolute
Empire, and that the people had conferred their whole power, that was in
themselves before, upon Augustus Caesar (in whose time it was that the Royal
Law was made) and his successors, it was meant by those words, that the
Legislative power should wholly rest in him, without the concurrence of any
other, and that thenceforward the Laws should come from him, and be as
obsequiously obeyed, as if they came from the whole people; but yet so, that
they should not be repugnant to the Laws of Nature, the common dictates of
Reason, or mischievous to the public welfare.

And therefore says Harprechtus, D. sect. 6. Inst. cod.
Verbum plicendi, aut Placiti, non volupt itis, non libidinis, non etiam
absolu'ae est voluntatis; sod justitiae, rationis, and consilii. The word
Pleases or Pleasure, does not denote Riot, Lust, or absolute Will; but Justice,
Reason, and good consideration: so that though the pleasure of a Sovereign,
whilst he publishes any thing for a Law, is binding and to be obeyed, because a
Law can come from none but him, where the nature of the government is such: Yet
it must be equal, just, honest, and profitable Ha^precht. Inst. de rer. d^v.
(...) p inc (...) 130.
. And what does a Sovereign more in this, then all other sorts of Governors
whatsoever, be they more then one, as in an optimacy; or be the government in
the whole people? or what more power is given in this by the Civil Law, to an
absolute Sovereign, which is not by other Laws given to the supreme and highest
rules of any Nation?

Again, all Laws in the world do allow those, that have the Supreme Power in
them, to take away Liberty by Imprisonment, where there is any public danger
by Freedom, or where it may be a just punishment for contempt and disobedience,
and to take away life too for capital offenses committed: and where public
defense calls for it, to command their very Subjects persons and estates to
such a proportion, as the present necessities require; for without this power
no community can long endure, nor any peace be preserved. And more then this,
nor in any other cases does the Civil Law grant a sovereign license to touch
either property, life, or liberty Harpretcht. loc. titat. nu. 95.
.

And where the Civil Law has declared, that a Prince is exempt from Laws, the
meaning is not, that he may violate and trample upon them as himself lifts,
as often as they stand in his way, for that is contradicted expressly by diverse
Texts of the Civil Law: L. 4 co. de legib. l. 23. de D^g. legate. 3.
but that he is not punishable, when he breaks them, because he has no humane
Superior to judge or question him, or to exact obedience from him; that in
some cases he may give license to his subjects not to observe some certain of
them, by way of dispensation; that be may grant pardons to some that have
transgressed them, where the nature of the fact will bear it; and that he may
also quite abolish them when they are grown useless or hurtful. Harprecht.
loc. citat. nu. 120.
And under what Law or Government is it, where all these things are not clear
without any dispute, and held lawful, and continually done?

And generally in all instances of the Civil Law, as well as in those whereof
mention is made before, it may be observed, that the imperial Law does not
only ratify and confirm the general Laws of Nature and of Nations, but takes
care also to reduce all its constitutions that might be any way instrumental to
the distribution of justice in particular cases, how remote soever they be from
the prime and chief principles, to a perfect conformity with them; and so ought
the Law of every State to do; for that is the true way to make it rational
throughout, and to keep it from being contradictory to it self. And that
particular Law that makes the least deflections from nature and the common
reason of man, and whose Acts and Edicts carry most of that evidence and
demonstration along with them (as doubtless some Laws carry more, and others
less, as the wisdom of those that made them was greater or lesser) that Law,
I say, must needs be the most rational, and thereby the best and perfectest Law
of all other.

CHAP. II.
That what Reason teaches should be made the subject of a Law, is no
superfluous, but a profitable thing.

IT is not any hard matter to give the reason, why the principles of Right and
Justice, and the duties of a civil life, that are already engraven by nature in
the heart of man, should notwithstanding be further declared and made known by
a Law. For,

First, though some principles of reason be in themselves so apparent, that
they need no illustration, yet there be others more secret, and more remote
from the understanding, than that they can be discerned by every man's present
conceit, without some deeper discourse and judgment. In which discourse,
because there is difficulty and possibility many ways to err, unless such
things were set down by Laws, many would be ignorant of their duties, which
now are not; and many that know what they should do, would nevertheless
dissemble it, and to excuse themselves pretend ignorance and simplicity, which
now they cannot. Tameise nulla perturbatione judices ab aequitate dimoverentur,
nihilominus tamen legibus opus est, quibus vel uti lucerna quadam, vel imperiti
in^ densissimis humanarum actionum tenebris dirigantur, vel scelerati metu
paenarum terreantur. Bodin. de rep. l. 6. c 6.


That a Ship and Goods cast away at Sea by tempest, if they be driven to Land,
shall accrue to the public Exchecquer, and the distressed owners shall not by
any claim recover them; some will not believe it to be barbarous and most
unnatural; for it is practiced by some nations, Sic vivitur, ut qui portus
habent, came ciudelitatem tum; in cives, tum in peregrinos exequantur. Jus
quaeris? Errorius facit. Bodin. de rep. l. 1. c 10.
and defended by diverse learned men. And yet a very Heathen by instinct of
nature, could cry out, Absit O Jupiter, ut lucrum captemus tale ex hominum
infortunio; Jove forbid that we should draw such lucre from man's distresses:
And therefore Constantine the Emperor did by a Law establish this dictate of
Nature and Reason, and restored them to the owners, and charged his
Exchecquer-men not to meddle with them. Quod enim, says he, Lib. 1. co. de
Naufrag.
jus habet fiseusin aliena calamitate, ut de re tam luctuosa compendium
sectetur? What right can another calamity bestow upon the public treasury,
that it should reap benefit from a sad disaster?

Secondly, Falsehood does so seck to cloth it self with the similitude and
appearance of truth, that none of the ordinary sort of men, and not all of the
best rank neither, can discover or distinguish true and solid reason from that
which is false and counterfeit. When therefore our own natural instinct and
inbred knowledge bears witness to any thing, and we have the warrant and
allowance of the Law for it besides, no false colors or semblances of reason
can deceive us: for what the wisdom and experience of a Nation has agreed and
declared to be just and convenient, and our hearts do own and allow to be so,
that unquestionably carries it in the greatest evidence and certainty of true
and pure reason, that mortal men can attain to in things of humane and civil
intercourse.

Thirdly, the Laws of Reason, which, Man retaining his original integrity, had
been sufficient to direct each particular person in all his affairs and
duties, are not of themselves sufficient, but do require the access of other
Law, now that Man and his offspring are grown thus corrupt and sinful. And
because the greatest part of men are such as prefer their own private good
before all things, even that good which is sensual, before whatsoever is most
Divine: and for that the labor or doing good, together with the pleasure
arising from the contrary, does make men for the most part slower to the one,
and proner to the other; therefore unto Laws it has seemed always needful to
add rewards, which more allure unto good then any hardness deterreth from it;
and punishments which may more deter from evil, than any sweetness thereto
allureth, wherein as the generality and substance is natural, Virtue
rewardable, and Vice punishable; so the particular determination of the reward
or punishment, and all other circumstances is the proper act of the Law.

Fourthly, when men are rebuked for acting contrary to the Law of Nature, and
the Light of Reason, what one amongst them commonly does not stomach at such
contradiction, storm at reproof, and hate such as would reform them.
Notwithstanding even they which brook it worst, that men should tell them of
their duties, when they are told the same by a Law, think very well and
reasonably of it. Because they presume that the Law does speak with all
indifferency; that the Law has no siderespect to their persons; that the Law
is as it were an Oracle proceeded from wisdom and understanding.

Thus we see, that what Reason it self prescribes, may in sundry
considerations be expedient to be ratified by a humane Law, and indeed that a
humane Law ought in substance to hold forth nothing which Reason allows not of.

CHAP. III.
What is here meant and intended by Reason?

BUt lest there should be any mistake touching the necessary quality of Reason,
which we so stictly require in a Law, it is but needful that we should explain
what we intend by Reason. For certainly there is not a more deceitful thing
than Reason; it being made use of frequently by false shows and colors to
beautify the foulest and most deformed things, and is grown to be the common
gloss that every evil does varnish and deck it self withal: also it is such a
faculty, that those that are partakers of it in the meanest measure, do
infinitely extol and admire what they apprehend to be reasonable, though to a
right judgment it be nothing so; and what they have not understanding enough
to conceive through their own natural weakness, they do as much disdain and
condemn, how judicious and solid soever it be. Although therefore the plainer a
Law is, and the more obvious to the understanding of those that are to be
guided by it, the better and the more commendable that Law must needs be; yet
we would not have it thought, that we allow no Law to be good, but what every
man that is bound by it, does immediately understand and approve of. For,

We cannot admit that the capacities of common men are sufficient to judge of
Laws, which may be rational enough, though the reason of them be not seen to
them: yet the main principles of reason are in themselves apparent, and
discernable by every eye, and it is not easy to find men ignorant of them;
and therefore a Law that is contrary to those common principles, is to be
abhorred. But besides those that are universally received and agreed on, there
are other principles which are not in themselves so evident, but are deduction
and inferences from the first; and which learned and very understanding men
only are capable by much discourse and reasoning to apprehend. And here
besides good natural faculties, and ripe nesse of years, there must be added
the right helps of true Art and Learning; since Education and Instruction are
the means, the one by use, the other by precept, to make our natural faculty of
Reason both the better and the sooner able to judge rightly between Truth and
Error, Good and Evil. Nay, it it not all kind of Learning neither, which will
give a man a fitness to discern, whether the Law of a Nation be conformable to
right Reason or not; but it must be either all Learning and Knowledge joined
together, or that proper legal knowledge, which is Ars aequi and boni, justi
atque injusti Scientia, the art of Equity and a good Conscience, the knowledge
of Right and Wrong. Further, the Judgment is not yet come to a full degree of
perfectness, nor competent enongh, except it be fortified with a practical
Knowledge too, and with a Wisdom arising from Experience and Observation; for
he that will undertake to judge whether a Law be agreeable to natural Equity
and good Reason, he must not take his estimate from the matter of the Law
only, but he must consider diverse other circumstances besides. For,

First. He must see into the Nature, Manners, and Inclinations of the People:
for the end of all Law being but to preserve the Public Peace, and to keep the
people in good order Salus populi suprema ltx est.
, that Law must needs be best and most rational, which does soonest produce
that end. And therefore considering that men, even by the very climate they
live under, are made to differ so mainly in every thing, Body, Soul, Religion,
and Manners, from the strange variety of Laws, which we see and read of
throughout the world, we cannot presently conclude any of them to be
unreasonable.

A Law Aristot. Polltic.
there is mentioned amongst the Graecians, whereof Pittacus is reported to have
been the Author; by which it was agreed, that he which being overcome with
drink, did then strike any man, should suffer punishment double as much as if
he had done the same being sober. No man could ever have thought this
reasonable, Ebrius si delictum commiserit, clement us est puniendus. Menoc. cas
326 l. 2. de Arbier. Judic. nu. 1.
that had intended thereby only to punish the injury committed, according to
the gravity of the fact; for who knows not that harm advisedly done, is
naturally less pardonable, and therefore worthy of sharper punishment? But
forasmuch as none did so usually offend this way as men in that case, which
they wittingly fell into, even because they would be so much the more freely
outrageous; it was for their public good where such disorder was grown, to
frame a positive Law or Remedy thereof accordingly. And therefore in that place
that was a most rational and a just Law.

A justification whereof we may find in the Roman Law it self; Nonnunquam
evenit, says Saturninus, L. 16. dig. de poen. perag. 10.
ut aliquorum malificiorum suppliciae exacerbentur, quoties nimium multis
personis grassantibus exemplo opus sit; It sometimes comes to pass, that some
certain offenses are the more sharply chastised, when offenders therein grow so
numerous, as that it is necessary to make them exemplary; for which severity
the Lawgivers are no way censurable, but the wicked inclinations of men are to
be taxed, which have enforced it from them. Our Savior himself did excuse
Moses, for suffering the Jews to put away their wives for lesser causes than
for Adultery, because of the hardness of their hearts, though from the
beginning it was not so Matthew. 19.
, that is, though it was not agreeable to nature, nor to the practice that had
always been. It being the lesser evil to dismiss them fairly, than to
prosecute them with continual hatred, out of which greater evils might ensue,
to which he knew the Jews (such was the malignity of their nature) might soon
be tempted. Likewise it is not void of reason neither, that the same faule
should be punished with greater severity in one State, where the opportunities
of committing it are greater, the inclinations of the people more prone to
offend therein, and the prejudice thence arising is more considerable than in
another where it is not so, Evenit, says the same Saturninus, D.l. 16. par. 9.
ut eadem scelera in quibusdam provin^iis gravius plectantur, ut in Africa
messium incensores; in Mysia vitium; ubi metalla sunt, adulteratores monetae:
It happens that the same foul actions are more heavily punished in certain
Provinces, as those that set fire on Corn in Africa, on Vines in Mysia; and
corrupters of current Money, where it is of Metal. Neither is it any injustice
or cruelty thus to vary: Non statim debet videri tyrannis, siquid gravius aut
remissius publicae necessitatis causa in Legibus statuitur; nam sine tali
injuria respublicae non possunt regi, says Conradus Lagus; Method. jur. civ.
part. 1. c. 4. nu. 7.
It ought not to be looked upon as tyranny, if at any time the hand of the Law
be sometimes heavier, and sometimes lighter, as public necessities shall
command; for without such inequality of measure, Common wealths cannot be
governed. And yet all this while here is no repugnancy to Nature neither; for
the general principle of nature and of Nations, which is to punish offenses
that are past, and to suppress them for the future, is still observed; only it
being accommodated to several nations which are various and differing, it
cannot possibly be executed by the same coertion or penalties, nor in one and
the same manner.

Secondly, the form and kind of Government must be respected also; for some Laws
may be judged very good and fitting for a Monarchy, which cannot be so
accounted of in a Government by a few, or by the whole people, or in such a one
as is mixed, and made up out of them all.

Thirdly, when a Justice of the Law is doubted, it must be examined, what
urgency of affairs there was at that time when the Law was made, and whether
some necessity and great reason of State did not enforce it. For those that
guide the stern do see those lets and difficulties in preserving the whole,
which others cannot discern; and therefore it is no marvel if such Laws be
enacted sometimes, for which no reason can be rendered. Non emnium quae a
majoribus constituta sunt, ratio redda potest; L. 20. dig. de legib.
A reason cannot be given for every thing that our Ancestors have established
for a Law.

Fourthly, A Law that may be mischievous to diverse particular persons, though
otherwise very innocent, must not therefore be presently condemned as
unreasonable, so that it be convenient and profitable for the public welfare.
Jura non in singulas personas, sed generaliter constituuntur, L. 8. Dig. de
legib.
Laws are ordained for the generalities sake, and not to provide for each
individual person, whose particular interest must suffer, rather than the whole
society be brought into jeopardy. Livius l. 4. de. bello Macedon. and l. 11.
dig de just. and jur.
A particular mis-chief is better than a general inconvenience. Nulla lex satis
commoda est omnibus; id tantum quaeritur, an pluribus, and in summa an prosit;
No Law is every way beneficial unto all; that only is enquired into, whether
it be generally profitable, and to the most.

Fifthly, A National Law that is generally and in most of its dictates and
principles very just and equitable, and universally so acknowledged by the
wisest and most judicious men and Nations, is not to be censured for some few
particular constitutions, which may seem hard and rigorous, or whereof the
Justice, Equity, or Reason, is not so evident; for this enterprise of making
Laws is the weightiest thing which any man can take upon him. And where a
multitude of Laws comes to be made by men (the best of whom are subject unto
errors) and for cases of infinite number and wonderful variety, some few
deviations, if any be, may be excused. It may well suffice that the Body is
fair, and the Specks but few.

Sixthly, we can by no means allow of their way of judging, who are ready to
measure the goodness of Laws by the corrupt and evil practices of those that
are instrumental to administer them. Neither are Laws to be judged such as
their execution is. Can a fountain be judged the worse, because it is so
unhappy as to run through a foul and slimy channel? or a chaste Matron
traduced, because violence has polluted her? so neither can the Law be justly
charged with the exorbitancies of men, which it self condemns, and was
purposely made to revenge and punish them; and would do so too, if violence,
power, and fraud did not obstruct its course.

Seventhly, we can as little esteem those competent and fitting Judges of a
Law, that are so forward to asperse and make it infamous, because by ancient
institution it was once ministerial, and attended upon a power and function
which they ever disesteemed, and have lately seen abolished.

Upon this ground and no other that can be imagined, have diverse uttered their
bitter and contumelious invectives against the Roman Civil Law, having been
helpful in the exercise of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of this Nation:
which because they see eradicated and quite taken away, they judge the other
quite useless, and therefore in their conceit ought not to be kept or
continued here any longer.

In which argument were there any strength of Reason, it might be more strongly
enforced against the Commmon Law it self; the intent and scope whereof, being
to set up and maintain an absolute successive Monarchy in this Nation, and to
keep the people in a subjection under it; that Government being now thrown
down, it may be inferred, that the Law also which did found and support it,
should never be made use of more, and that a Law of greater liberty and
freedom should be set up in place of it: and so in conclusion, the reason of
these disputants would allow us no Law at all.

But these must not be ignorant, that the Civil Law was originally made least
of all for Ecclesiastical matters, nor yet for so few cases, as in this Nation
it was permitted to deal in: but it was first ordained, to guide the mightiest
and vastest Empire that the world has yet known; and under it the same grew
and prospered, to the terror of its enemies, the joy and comfort of its friends
and confederates, and to the astonishment of the whole Earth. Indeed before the
first foundations of this Law were laid, the Romans did not disdain to fetch
their Laws from Athens, that City which was once the nurse of Reason, and
flourisht in eloquence and brave achievements more then all Greece, whence the
learned Fathers of the Church sucked literature; Basil his eloquence, Nazianzen
his strength, and others their flowing Oratory; that Athens, which who had not
seen, is by Lysippus accounted a very block. But since this beautiful fabric
of the Civil Law was reared up, and came to the perfection we now see it in, it
did not only order and compose all matters of public Justice, and of private
Right in that State, but is since, through the singular treasures of Wisdom
and purest Reason laid up there, propagated also to other Nations, who
constantly use it in their Courts, in conjunction with their own Laws. And in
conformity to other Nations did it come to pass, that the use of it was
admitted, and brought into the Ecclesiastical, and other Courts of this
Nation, where natural Equity and the best Reason came to be dispensed, in the
doing of right and justice; and especially for commerce with Nations abroad,
whereunto that knowledge is most requisite.

Therefore to say that the Civil Law is useless, because the Ecclesiastical
power is thrown out, is as much as if we said, we have no further need of
natural Equity, or right Reason, nor need to treat with foreign Nations any
longer, nor now be so wise as we have been, and as other Nations are.

Lastly, though the wisest of a people have upon mature deliberation agreed
upon a Law, and the Legislative power of the Nation has enacted it, yet that
does not presently conclude the same to be rational: for since the people of
other Nations are partakers of the same Nature, Reason, Learning, and
Experience with them, except it can appear rational to others also that are
taught and guided by the same principles, it is not to be deemed rational.

And from this single ground only was it, that the Roman Civil Law came to be
so universally embraced by other Nations, and to pass so generally for a most
rational and just Law, because more natural and common principles of Reason,
Justice and Equity were found therein, then in any other Law of Man's ordaining;
and because we meet with that reason there, that is universal and common to
all mankind.

And if there be any certainty of Reason in matters of humane discourse, (as we
must admit there is, else we shall put out one of the chiefest lights that God
has given to the world) it is to be discovered no where sooner, then from that,
which not only one whole Nation has agrred upon and established for a Law
amongst themselves, but which other Nations besides them, have allowed for true
reason, and practiced the same also within their several territories for many
hundreds of years together; for the most certain token of evident reason is, if
the general persuasion of all men do so account it, and when the judgments
of all men generally, or for the most part, run one and the same way. Non
potest error contingere, ubi omnes idem opinantur; and quicquid in omnibus
individuis unius speciei communiter inest, id causam communem habeat oportet,
quae est eorum individuorum species and natura. No error is to be feared in
such matters where all men are of the same opinion; and what is ingrafted in
every individual of the same species, must necessarily proceed from one common
cause, which is nothing but their very nature. The general and perpetual
voice of Men, is as the sentence of God himself; for that which all men have at
all times learned, Nature her self must needs have taught; and God being the
Author of Nature, her voice is but his instrument: By her from him we receive,
whatsoever in such sort we learn.

When therefore we say, that the Law of a Nation ought to be conformable to
Reason, we mean and intend such Reason, as other Nations and Men do generally
by the instinct of Nature, the means of good Literature, and their insight in
Civil affairs, understand and agree to be reason in such matters. Non enim
licet natural universaleque hominum judicium falsum vanumque existimare: It is
not fitting to question that which is generally allowed by all men. And that
Law that approches and comes nearest to such common and universal reason, is
the truest and perfectest Law of all other, and makes the people most happy and
quiet that live under it.

Howbeit, since this is a blessing that every Nation does not enjoy, froward
and perverse men must not take an occasion from hence, to despise and quarrel
with their own Laws, upon pretense that they are irrational. Cognitio de bone
and malo non pertinet ad singulos: omne judicium in civitate est illius qui
glaedium belli and gladium justitiae gerit. Regulae boni and mali, justi and
injusti, honesti and inhonesti, sunt leges civiles; ideoque quod Legislator
praeceperit, id pro bono, qnod vetuerit, id pro malo habendum est. To judge
what is good, and what is evil in a common society, belongs not to any, that
are under rule; but to him or them solely, in whom the Supreme Power rests:
The measures of good and evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest, are
singly the Laws of every State. Therefore what the Lawgiver does prescribe,
with subjects must pass for good; and what he forbids, they must look upon as
evil, till he thinks fitting to order and declare otherwise: Insomuch as
neither the Judges nor Magistrates themselves can dispute or Judge thereof. In
temporal bus legibus, quanquam de his homines judicent, cum cas instituunt;
tamen cum fuerint institutae and firmatae, non licebit judici de ipsis
judicare, sed secundum ipsas, says S. Augustine, as he is cited by the Canon
Law Cap. 3. Did. 4.
: In temporal Laws, though they may be debated by any man whilst they are in
making, yet when they are once agreed on, and fully passed, the Judge shall
judge by them, but of them he ought not to judge.

In pressing then that a Law ought to be agreeable to right reason, the
argument is directed to the Lawgiver, not to the Subject; and the scope of it
is to show, rather what a Law ought to be, then to quarrel with any particular
Law, because it is not so rational as it should be, and as other Laws are.
But withal, it professedly aims to discover the strange weakness of those,
that when other Nations hold fast the Roman Civil Law, as being the sum and
substance of all humane reason, they are willing to forgo it quite, when they
have had the conjunction and assistance thereof so long in this Nation, and may
with so much ease and advantage keep it still. To whom I shall give no 'other
caution, then what Vlpian, one of the grave sages of the Civil Law give; L. 2.
Dig. de constit print.
In rebus novis constituendis evidens esse utilitas debet, ut recedatur ab eo
jure quod diu aequum visum est: Amongst other alterations, says he, that is,
be it Government or what ever else, that comes to be altered in a state, yet it
ought to be some apparent advantage that should induce a Nation to part with
that Law that has by long use been found to be very equal.

CHAP. IV.
That Reason is not so strictly required in the Law that orders the affairs of
State, as in that that settles the differences that arise between Man and Man.

IF then we would know, when reason ought to manifest it self in a Law, and
when it is not so strictly required, but that some deviation may be permitted,
we must observe a wide difference between the public affairs of State, and
those of the Subjects own in their private dealings and controversies with one
another; for although all the affairs of a Nation both public and private,
must be under the provision and rule of the Law, yet is it not necessary, that
they should both be regulated in one and the same manner, nor by one and the
same reason; for there is a Reason of State, as well as a Reason of Nature.

In the Laws for public matters, because they respect the welfare and
preservation of the whole society merely, and so are not to be tied to the same
rules every where, a strict adherence to natural Equity and common Reason is
not required: Safety and convenience is Reason enough to justify them; so they
encourage Virtue, punish Vice, maintain Trade and Industry, and uphold
Religion. Yet it is the happiest, when there is the least aberration from
common Equity and known Reason, even in those things wherein the whole
Commonwealth is principally concerned.

But it is to be considered, that there are such multitudes of people, such
difference of degrees, qualities and conditions, and such perversity of Wills,
Humors, and Affections in every Commonwealth, that no humane Wit is able by
sweet equitable ways, to reduce them to that perfect temperature and harmony,
which is requisite for the conservation of civil unity. This may partly be
judged by the government of a Family, be it great or little, which is many
times turned upside down, and dissolved by the perverse humor of some one or
two, not corrigible by any wholesome Counsel, or moderate Chastisement of the
head of it. What marvel is it then, if in whole Kingdoms and Commonwealths,
amongst so many thousands of different persons, and of different humors, there
are many so exorbitant and turbulent, that no Wit nor power of Man can be able
fairly to tame or temper them?

The Laws therefore must be fitted to all such public accidents, providing
sharp remedies for Diseases that are acute and desperate: neither must they
tender the private right or safety of a few, if their detriment or mischief
may secure the whole. In these cases, Legum convenientiam and aptitudinem
semper expetimus, non semper aequitatem: The extremities of a Nation must be
provided for by fitting and convenient means, though the exactness of Right
and Justice seems to be infringed: for herein the Common wealth is like unto a
Ship in a storm at Sea, where the Master may cast over board what private man's
goods he will, to lighten the Ship, and to preserve the whole: So where an
enemy with an Hostile intent is coming against a great City, the City may
demolish or set on fire the Suburbs, rather then permit the enemy to harbor
there, thereby to annoy and endanger the whole City. The like must the
establishments of Law be, that are directed to a public end, they must aim to
procure the common welfare, without any respect to private right, or imaginary
reason.

But in such Laws as are purposely made to defend every man's private interest,
and to pacify contentions and quarrels arising thereupon, and where the
public is not concerned, it not only may but ought to be otherwise. They must
hold forth Nature, Equity, Reason and a sound judgment, so as to command every
judicious man's assent and approbation; and even they that are cast may not
complain, murmr, or dispute the same. And in the same manner has Wesenbeck in
his Paratitles upon the Digests, Tit. de Just. and Jur. nu. 14.
differenced these two sorts of Laws: Jus privatum, says he, quiae in reddendo
cuique quod suum est, versatur, eo ad normam aequalitatis and justitiae
congruat oportet: sed jus publicum, non totum ad normam aequitatis vel
aequalitatis, ut jura privatorum, sed ad id quod reip. est opportunum,
praecipue aptatur. The Law that is made for the use of each subject against
another, because the office of it is, to give to every one his own, it must
measure it out by the precise rule of equality and justice. But the Law that is
made to order the general welfare of the whole State, is not tied to any such
rule of equity, but is such as the advantages and exigencies of State require.

In all private affairs therefore that happen between party and party, wherein
there is no mixture of State-interest at all, and which come to be determined
by a Law, we require, that the rules by which such Controversies are appointed
to be decided, have not in circumstances (for they may be arbitrary, and
according to mere will) but in substance so sure a ground in Reason and common
Equity for the most part, as either to be consonant to the dictates of Nature,
or obvious to vulgar understandings, or at least discernable by the wisest and
most judicious of men, acquainted with the principles of Law, and the rules of
Right and Justice. Neither is it the bare reason of the wisest, if it be such
as is floating in the brain only, that will here suffice; but it must be
committed to writing, and have such an authority to own it, as is authentical
and current amongst the greatest and best disciplined Nations also, which kind
of reason thus authorized, especially in any ample measure, is to be looked for
and found only in the Civil Law Ratio naturalis secundum hominum captum
quandoque variat, and multi non tam ratione ill. quam phantasia aguntur. Leges
autem latae a sapientissimis viris, and judicie omnis scculi approbatae, certe
came rationem tenens. Alb. Gentil. de ju. bell. lib. 1. c. 1.
.

CHAP. V.
That the Customs of a Nation ought in like manner to agree with Reason.

ANd here I am not unmindfull, that besides written Laws and constitutions,
there are belonging to every Nation, Customs and usages unwritten, which have
as great an overruling power upon the persons and rights of the people, after
they have been generally allowed, and that their observation has been constant
and un-interrupted for a long time together: And therefore says Modestinus, L.
40 Dig. de Leg.b
Omne jus aut consensus fecit, aut necessitas constituit, aut firmavit
consuetudo: All Law proceeds either from consent, necessity, or custom.
Neither is it rare but common, to find in every Nation such usages as do
intermixe themselves with the acts of Justice, and the rights of the people,
and yet they have by long continuance so worn out their Original, that no
rational account can be given of them, nor no ground in reason rendered by
those that use them; and yet they will not stick to sacrifice their most
precious enjoyments to preserve them, nor will admit of a change of them, upon
any pretense of greater advantages whatsoever.

The reason hereof lies in the affection which the people are apt to bear
toward that, of which themselves are the Authors, Customs being first brought
in and consented to by them: but Laws are imposed on them by their Princes,
whether they will or no. Consuetudines, says Rer. Judic. l. 3. s. 1.
Anaeus Robertus, subditis neque graves sunt neque odiosae, sed leges istae
municipibus videri solent supra caetoras omnes acceptissimae, cum toler abilius
sit, consuetudinis vinculo quam legum necessitate astringi Quam dulce, quam
gratum est volun ariae subjicii necessitati, and illo juris vinculo astringi,
cujus cum authors simus, puderet iniquitatem aut severitatem accusare? At
regia edicta non ratio sed sola dominantis voluntas, justs sit an injusta,
sancit and moderatur: Customs are neither burdensome nor unpleasing to the
people, but above all other kinds of Law seem most acceptable, since it is
more tolerable to be tied to Custom, than to an imposed Law. How sweet and
pleasing is it to be subject to a necessity of ones own making, and to be bound
by such a Law, which when we have made our selves, we cannot for shame
complain, that it is either unjust or rigorous? But the Edicts of Princes flow
not from reason, but from mere will, without respect either to right or wrong.

Besides, though the reason of some Customs be not now discerned, yet it
cannot be supposed but when they were first admitted by the people, they tended
to their common good. For, Quoties de jure populi agitur apud populum, cui
mutare, cui abrogare, cui far quas velit leges, accipere quas velit
rogationes liceat, nunquam se ipse diminuet; They will never prejudice their
own rights by any Custom or Law which themselves establish, says Quintilian.
Detlam. 254.
Howbeit it is no more essential to a Law then it is to Custom, to be
reasonable when it is first ordained. L. 1. and 2. co. Quaesit longa consuet.
Rei non bonae consuetudo pessima est: Nemo consuetudinem rationi and veritati
praeponat; quia consuetudinem ratio and veritas semper excludit, says Saint
Augustine, Lib 3. de Baptismo contra Donatistas, cited in the Canon Law. Did.
8. c. 4.
Let no man prefer Custom before either Truth or Reason, because Truth and
Reason does drive contrary Custom quite away. So that both in a Law and a
Custom also, it is equally requisite that they should both be rational.

CHAP. VI.
Where Law or Custom is wanting, to judge by President or Example, has no
defense in Reason.

ANd since Right reason is so essential to that which comes to arbitrate and
judge of our Lives, Livelyhoods, and Interests, we must crave leave to disallow
of their opinion and practice, who when they have neither Law nor Custom of
their own country, to guide their judgments by in any case that comes before
them, do not resort to the Civil Law, as other Nations commonly do, but do
usually supply that defect by presidents, thinking that any case which the Law
has not provided in, may be judged by a Judgment had in the like case before;
which certainly cannot be defended by any right reason, or good judgment. Si
dixcrit aliquis, si vidi, sic audivt; en dccisiones; magis risum quam fidem
nostram excitat. Maestert. Dissertat. de Artific. disput. parag. 9.
For,

First, the conformity of one sentence to another, to rational and wise men
argues nothing as to right or equity, but concludes a concurrency in opinion
only, both which may be erroneous and mistaken.

Secondly, as in judged cases, taken merely as such, there is want of reason to
persuade, so there is want of authority also to oblige; for what force or power
can the judgments or sentences of any predecessors have to bind or limit those
that shall succeed them in the same Judicatory? Par in parem non habet
imperium, nec aliquis in seipsum; Judges of equal power cannot exercise any
rule over one another, nor indeed can any one tie up ones own self. L. 13.
parag. 4. Dig ad S. C. Tr^ble and Gothofr. ibid.
And therefore as it happens often, that de eadem resaepe alius aliud
decreverit aut judicaverit; upon the same fact one Judge judges one way, and
another another: So it is to be seen too, that illi alias aliud iisdem de rebus
and sentiunt and judicant, the very same men do determine the same fact at
diverse times diversely, says Erodius Rer. Judic. lib 1. Tit. 1. c. 18. etc. 26.
. For indeed the judgments of Men may wax perfecter by age, study, and
experience, than they were when they gave their first judgment: And those that
do succeed, may be by many degrees more eminent in wisdom, Reason, Knowledge,
and Eperience, than those that sat in the same Tribunals before them; for
there is in this world an undoubted wheeling in all things; Knowledge, Wit, and
Understanding does not shine and prosper so in some times, as in other
succeeding times they do; and time to posterity may discover that to be an
error, which our Ancestors thought a truth.

Thirdly, there must needs be little value and weight laid upon foregoing
Judgments, even of the highest and most exemplary tribunals of men; nor can
they be esteemed such fit patterns for our imitation, when it is considered
what uncertainties they lie under, what failings they are subject to, and what
artifices, subtilties, inventions, practices, and other undue means are too too
frequently used to corrupt and poison them. For,

Sometimes pars major vincit meliorem, the greater part weighs down the better.
Where many Judges are to pronounce Judgment, and some one or two of them be
eminently qualified above all the rest, that which the greater number concurs
in only, must prevail and take effect; but if the wisest be dissenters, numero
potius quam scientia judicatur, there is more of number than of weight or
knowledge in such a sentence.

Sometimes he, in whose favor sentence is given, carries it but by one vote
more than he against whom it passes.

Sometimes some one of the Judges being more renowned, or happily more eloquent
than his fellows, does either through his greatness, speech, dexterity, or
wit, draw all the rest into error by his too powerful interposing.

But the danger of passing wrong and erroneous judgment is greater, where the
office and power of judging rests in one single person only, since it is easier
to draw away and overcome one than many. And although it is his office to set
before his eyes Law, Religion, Equity, and Truth, and remove far from him
arbitrary and licentious Will, Love, Hatred, Envy, Fear, Indulgence,
Covetousness, and all inordinate Affections whatsoever; yet here too, says
Quintilian, Pecunia quoque persuadet, and gratia, and autoritas dicentis, and
dignitas, and postremo aspectus etiam ipse sine voce, quo vel recordatio
merltorum cujusque vel favies aliqua miserabilis, vel formae pulchritudo
sententiam dictat; Money does prevail, and favor, and the graciousness of the
suppliant, and greatness does draw away, and sometimes even the very presence
without any speaking, either through the remembrance of some eminent
deservings, or through the countenance being either mournful or sad, to pity or
to admiration beautiful, is a means to melt a Judge, and to corrupt and infect
the Sentence.

It is too common also, that the wrong cause is followed with exactest
diligence, strengthened with the patronage of the most and the best advocates,
and some of them happily too nearly related to the Judge himself, and assisted
with all other advantages, that can make Victory hopeful, when Right is
destitue of all assistances, and but weakly and faintly defended: the one side
too bold and pressing, the other too too modest and bashful, showing a kind of
guilt in blushes. It is not so rare neither as were to be wished, that the
Regal or other Supreme power does intermeddle in the very acts of Justice,
either directly, or by some remoter influence; especially when a Nation is
embroyled in troubles, and divided into diverse parties; for in such case
Justice is made subservient and ministerial to the strongest and most
prevailing faction.

These are the dissiculties and temptations which all Courts of Justice have to
contend withal, under which they may more easily fall, than withstand and
vanquish them. The Judgments therefore and Sentences which they deliver,
though we must acquiesce in and sit down by them, as to such cases which the
same are purposely given for to decide, and as to such persons that are
mentioned or concerned therein (for else there would be no end of
Controversies, nor no man's Right would be ever certain; and therefore the Civil
Law says, that Prator quoque jus reddere dicitur, etiam cum inique decernit,
L. 11. dig. de just. and jur.
and Res judicata pro veritate accipitur; L. 207. dig. de rap. jur.
a Judge is said to minister right, even when he decrees unjust things, and a
Sentence is taken, and stands for truth;) yet there is nothing either of Equity
or Reason to make them so authoritative and powerful, as that they should be
drawn into example for the future, and be made patterns to determine other,
though never so like cases, by; since the ways and means of obtaining them may
not be fair, and their integrity and foundnesse be questionable.

Fourthly, whereas similitude and likeness of cases is the only reason to
persuade the walking by the light of such Judgments as have been before
pronounced upon facts that are supposed to have had the same circumstances;
Quintilian Institut. l. 5. c. 2.
says very truly, Vix ulla est causa per omnia alteri similis, there is scarce
any cause that suits or agrees with another in all circumstances: and again
Lib. 7. iupraejat.
he says, Tot seculis nulla repertae est causa, quae est tota alteri similis,
In so many ages, and in such a multitude of cases that have occurred, there has
not been found one wholly like another; for indeed the dissimilitude and
difformity that is amongst our selves and the whole offspring of man, not in
outward form, visage, lineaments, or stature only, but even in our natures,
tempers, inclinations, and humors also, makes all the matters we deal in, and
the actions that flow from us, disagreeing too. Also in the other productions
of nature, and the accidents that are commonly ascribed to Chance and Fortune,
there is such a strange and wonderful variety, that nothing is acted, produced,
or happens like another, but that there is some circumstance or other that does
diversifie it and make it differ.

When therefore cases are eitherwholly diverse and differing, though in never so
small a circumstance, their determinations cannot be the same Re^per se ipse
valde pernicioa est, exemplis non legibus judicare, cum ex levissima
personarum, vel locorum, vel temporum varieta^e judicia mutentu^. Bodin. de
rep. l. 6. c 6.
for diversity of Fact must needs beget a diversity of Law too; and a very
small Circumstance will change and alter the state of any business, and require
clean another Judgment than can be had from Cases that do not exactly parallel
them in all things.

And this has made all Lawyers to agree, that, argumentum ductum a simili est
multum fragite and infirmum; nec procedit, quando datur dissimilitudo etiam
parva Fverard. Topi. loc a simili. nu 12.
; An Argument drawn from a like case is very weak and impotent, and falls to
the ground when the least dissimilitude is found.

Fifthly, since before former presidents can be made fitting rules to decide
and judge other cases by, it is absolutely necessary that the cases should
agree punctually in all such circumstances as were the prime efficient cause of
such final and definitive judgment; how shall this Concordance be made
evident and certain? for it must either depend upon the memory and truth of a
Reporter and the Judge together, or else upon the safe keeping of all that was
alleged and proved in the case in some Rgistry or Office, and the exact search
and perusal of all upon occasion; neither of which is authentical and sure
enough, whereby to judge and condemn another man: for either the report may be
very easily mistaken, or some leading circumstance may slip out of the Judges
remembrance, or some of the Records be lost or mislay'd, so that a part of the
Case whereupon the Judgment passed, may be wanting, and not rightly known.

Upon these and such like considerations is it, that the Civil Law does so
frequently express it self in disallowance of judging by president or example,
and directs Judges to reflect only upon that which Truth and the Law will
bear, and not upon any thing that has been done by others. Licet is qui
provinciae praeest, omnium Romae magistratuum vice and officio fungi debeat,
non tamen spectandum est quid Romae factu^ est, quam quid fieri debeat, says
Proculus L. 11. Dig. de offi^^ Praesid.
. Though the provincial and inferior Magistrate does exercise the same power
and office that the Magistrates do in Rome, yet he must not loook so much at
what they do in Rome, though the chief and head City, as what indeed and in
right they ought to do.

Justinian also did by an express constitution made in his time, command all
the Judges to pursue strictly Truth, Justice, and the Laws; and not in judging
to take their example from the most solemn sentences of the highest and most
eminent Judges in the whole Empire; no nor to follow such resolutions as
himself should make to emergent doubts propounded unto him, if he had otherwise
decided them then they ought to be: Non enim says he, si quid non been
dirimatur, hoc and in aliorum judicum vitium extendi oportet, cum non exemplis
sed legibus judicandum sit. L. 13. Go. de sent. and inter l. omn. jud.
for if a case has been once determined amiss, this should not spread to the
corrupting of other Judges, since we ought to Judge by the Laws and not by
example.

And therefore Gordian the Emperor makes it a strange and an unwonted thing in
Rome, that Judgments had between other parties, should either profit or
prejudice those who were neither present then in Court, nor ever called. Res
inter alios judicatae, says he, neque emolumentum aff^rre his qui judicio non
interfuerunt, neque praejudicium so^ent irrogare L. 2. Co. Quibue res judic.
non noc.
. Which holds not only in civil matters, but as to prejudice reaches to
criminal also: Juris manifestissimi, says Dioclesian and Maximinian
Emperors, L. 3. Co. Eod.
in accusationibus, his qui congressi in judicio non sunt, officere non posse,
siquid forte prejudicii videatur oblatum. There is nothing more manifest in
Law, then that in criminal prosecutions, a condemnation had can do no manner of
hurt or hinderance to him that was not accused.

I therefore say, as to prejudice, because when Life or Honor is in Jeopardy
by a criminous impeachment, the Law is so careful to preserve the same, that
the acquittall of one offender is an acquittall of the other also, the Law
being more prone to absolve, then to condemn, and so Vlpian answered in the
case of Adultery: L. 17. Parag. 6. dig ad l. Jul. de Adulter.
Expectabit mulier, says he, sententiam de adultero latam; Si absolutus
fuerit, mulier per eum vincet, noc ultra accusari potest: Let the Woman wait
the doom of the Man, if he be quitted, she is thereby free and can never be
accused; but if he be cast, that does not cast her, but she shall defend her
self notwithstanding. And the reason that is assigned is observeable. Quid
euim si adulter inimicitiis oppressus est, vel falsis argumentis testibusque
subornatis apud praesidem gravatus, qui aut noluit aut non petuit provocare?
Mulier vero judicem religiosum sortita, pudicitiam suam defendet? Possibly he
might be oppressed with Malice, or condemned by false Witnesses, or the Judge
might be carried away with smooth words, or mere outward shows: The Woman
coming under a better and more upright Judge, may vindicate her chastity, and
clear her innocence better. Neither will any likeness of one case to another,
involve an absent person in such accidents as have fallen upon other men; for,
nee in simili negoeio res inter alios actas absenti praejudicare, sape
constitutum est, says the Law L. 4. Co. Quib. res judis.
: It has been frequently overruled, that though the cases are never so much
the same, yet a third person that never was a party, shall sustain no
detriment by what has been done between those that were. For besides diverse
Laws that are set under other Titles, there is a whole Title to the same
effect. Co. Res inter alios judicas. aliis non nocere.
.

Neither does the Law look upon it as any incongruous or strange thing, that
the same business should be judged diversely, for it does instance where it
does frequently come to pass. Circa inofficiosi querelam, says Paulus,
evenire plerumque assolet, ut in una atqne eadom causa diversae sententiae
proferantur L. 24. dig. de inoffic. Testum.
. And the same says Papinian; Filius qui de inofficiosi action adversus duos
haeredes expertus, diversas sententias judicum tulit, and unum vicit, ab altero
superatus est; In an action that is brought against the Will made by a Father
to the disinheriting of his own children, it is usual to have contrary
sentences pronounced, the Son to vanquish one Executor, and to be overthrown
by another.

And therefore the practicants allow not any such plea in the Court, as to say,
that the case has been judged, except there be a concurrence of all these
three things together, to wit, that the cause and process be the same, the
right of action the same, and the persons the same too Gail. obs. lib. 1. obs.
70. nu. 17.
; so that though the causa agendi, the ground of suit were the same in all
things, yet if the same persons never had any such suit depending, but that
there is a new person in judgment which never appeared before, the proceeding
must now be made wholly upon a new stock, without considering how and in what
manner the right has been judged before between other persons. Neither is it
material, whether the Judge that is to give the present judgment, be the same
that judged the like case before, or whether they be diverse; for the Law is
still the same in both. Menochius resolves the one case, Consil. 59.
Diversae sententiae, says he, a diversis judicibus, inter diversas personas,
diversis temporibus, ex una eademque facti specie ferri possunt: Upon one and
the same fact, contrary sentences may be given by several Judges, between
other persons, at several times; and again, Consil. 180. Cum. 51.
Non aequissimi judicis est facere quod ab aliis fuit factum, sed quod fieri ab
illis (...) buit, sequi. It is not the part of a just Judge to judge as others
have done, but as they and all ought to do. As to the other, Christinaeus,
notwithstanding the great pains he has taken, to gather together as many
judgments and decisions of the great Council of Machlyn in the Empire, as
take up six volumes, yet he does not stick to say Vol. 1. Dicis. 2.
That Senatus non ligatur suis anterioribus sententiis, quin valeat postea
contrarium judicare. The Senate was not tied to former judgments, but that
they might judge the quite contrary afterward; for he accounts it
praiseworthy, to relinquish an error, and to embrace a truth at any time: nor
to be possible, but that the change of times should introduce change of
opinions and judgments also, and shows that Afflictis in his time saw that
judged one way, which Grammaticus afterward reports to have been judged the
contrary Ac proptereae curia Par si^^^ in sintentiis saepius haec ve^ba
subjecit; Neu julicatares ad consequentia t^ahatur. Bodin. de rep. l. 6. c. 6.
. Thus then, since we require that Reason and natural Equity should be strong
and vigorous both in Law and Custom, or at least no means repugnant to them,
when they come to judge us; and that we see all manner of Reason to stand
against judging by Presidents or foregoing judgments, besides the univerfall
Law and practice of Nations; we conclude that the way of judging by Presidents,
is as erroneous a guide to walk by, and as little satisfactory to the people,
as a Law or Custom that is void of all Equity and Reason, and therefore by no
means to be entertained or admitted.

And yet we must allow what Callistratus reports from the Emperor L. 38. dig.
de Legib.
Severus; That rerum perpetuo similiter judicatarum autoritas vim legis
obtinet: Cases constantly judged one way for a long tract of time together, do
set a rule to such as shall succeed: for as Cujacius likens it to Custom, L.
7. dig. de just and ju.
Consuetudo, says he, non valet nisi ex tempore longo, usuque frequenti. Ita
rerum judicatarum argumentum non valet, nisi ex tempore longo sive diuturn^
frequentique, judicioque simili: As custom is of no force, except it endures a
long time, and is frequently put in ure: So to argue from foregoing judgments,
is no weighty argument, except they have been many, and constantly the same for
a long time together. In like manner, it is most true, that Optima legum and
consuetudinis interpres est res perpetuo similiter judicata, The judging of the
same thing always in one and the same manner, is the best help to understand
both Law and Custom by: But then it must be, says Cujacius, Non quodlibet
judicium, sed quod numero and tempore valet; as if he had said, It must not be
once, twice, or thrice judged so, but the judgments must be many, as well as
alike; and it must hold on so for a long time together, before at can have the
force or effect of a Law, and after it has so long prevailed, it may be
esteemed not so much Law, as Reason; for certainly it could not have so long
endured, if the reason of it had not been evident to those, whose judgments
were so conformable as never to disagree therein.

CHAP. VII.
That they are great advantages which a Nation has by ruling by such a Law as
is rational.

THe governing and judging by that Law which Reason teaches us, cannot but be
effectual unto that Nations great good that observes the same; for we see the
whole world and each part thereof so compacted, that as long as each thing
performs only that work which is natural unto it, it thereby preserves
both other things, and also it self. Contrariwise, let any principal thing,
as the Sun, the Moon, any one of the Heavens or Elements, but once cease, or
fail, or swerve, and who does not easily conceive, that the sequel thereof
would be ruin both to it self, and whatsoever depends on it?

As therefore the obedience of other Creatures unto the Law of Nature is the
stay of the whole World, so nothing is more effectual to the upholding of any
communion amongst men, then to command the peoples obedience to nothing more,
then what Nature and Reason prompts them to, and to determine their Rights by
Rules, which themselves cannot gainsay; for when the judgments of a people are
satisfied in the Reason and Justice of that which is commanded, either by their
own understandings, or as they are taught by more knowing men; they sit down in
a quiet and contented submission, and looking upon their Governors with the
greatest Reverence and Honor, they obey without complaining, and thereby the
public peace is also secured.

But when the Laws of a Nation, that should be most clear and rational, are
wrapped up in a strange language, delivered in terms most intricate, and the
matter thereof not intelligible by any degree of true Reason or Learning; the
people are presently possessed with a jealousy, that their dearest rights and
most precious interests may miscarry under them, and their surest possessions
snatched from them, under pretense of a Law which they cannot discern any
Justice or Reason in; till at last they fall into open rage and distemper,
thereby disturbing the public peace, and oft-times shaking the very Government
it self in their fury Legum at Ma gistratuum con temptum sequun tue populi
sediti osae voces, and adve, sus priucipes ipsos conjurationes ac defectiones.
Bodin. de rep. l. 3. c. 1.
: for there is no bondage like to the slavery of the Judgment, and the
captivity of the Will; neither is there any greater occasion or ground of fear,
then when a man is constrained to tread such steps, where his understanding
cannot guide him. But especially for ones fortune or personal safety to be
exposed to danger in such unknown and undiscernable ways, it must needs draw
on a greater distemper in the mind, because of the great consequence thereon
depending. Moreover, when the dictates and proceedings of Law are rational, we
are much assisted by our Reason in a conformity and obedience to them, even
when we do not exactly know the Law it self and we do not so soon slip into
danger or mischief under it, when we have an inward guide to direct us in the
way we are to walk in: but when we are to walk in a path we know not in any
kind, and to observe rules which we cannot understand, it is then that we
wander out of one Labyrinth into another, till mischiese and the penalty of the
Law surprizeth us unawares.

Besides, Laws that carry in them honest, rational, and clear principles, are
as so many lessons for the people to fashion their lives and actions by, whose
nature and manners will be much tempered by the discipline of the Law they live
under; for since it is the only guard and security that they have for their
lives and fortunes, they will be studious in it, inquisitive after it, and
attentive to it; and so whilst they study and learn the Law, to keep
themselves and their estates in safety, at the same time they also learn all
the duties of a Moral life, and suck in the truest principles of practical
integrity, and civil conversation. And this amongst many others, has been one
very powerful inducement to Christian Nations, to receive and cherish the use
of the Civil Law to much as they do, because no humane Law or Learning does so
well teach men to be just virtuous, and innocent in all the actions of this
life, as that Law does. Iustitiam colimus, and boni and aequi notitiam
profitemur; aequum de iniquo separantes licitum ab illicito discernentes;
bononon solu^ metu poenaru^ verum etia^ proemioru^ quoque exhortatione efficere
cupientes; veram, nist fallor, philosophiam, non simulatam affectantes, saves
Vlpian L. 1. dig. de Just. and jur.
, in the name of all the Lawyers. We adore Justice, and the knowledge of Right
and Equity is our profession; dividing Equity from what is unequal; discerning
lawful things from unlawful; aiming to make men virtuous, as well by
rewarding them where they do well, as punishing them when they do ill;
teaching such wisdom, if I mistake not, says he, as is not for show and
ostentation, but is true, solid, and substantial: For Cujacius explaining the
last words of that Law, makes it the proper office of a Lawyer, to teach men to
bridle their Lusts and Appetites, to study the common good, to defend their
own, to keep their desires, hands and eyes from the goods of others; which are
but the lessons of a true Philosopher.

Likewise the sum and substance of all that a man owes morally either to
himself or others, is comprised in the three general precepts of the Civil
Law: Honest vivere, alterum non laedere, suum cuique tribuere L 10 dig. de
Just. and Jur. Parag. 1.
; To live soberly, not to hurt another, to give every one his own. The first
duty concerns our own selves, and is the fruit of Modesty, forbidding us to
do any thing whereby we may seem lewd or vicious; nor to show any kind of
dissoluteness either in our speech, habit or manners, and to refrain from any
act, quod vel nos commaculet solos, says D. l. 10.
Cujacius, that is, which may stain our persons, though none be privy to it but
our selves The other two are the proper effects of Temperance and Justice, and
owing to others, whom we are to live, converse and deal with; teaching us to
abstain from theft, violence, rapine and injury; to render back to all men what
we have of theirs, or do owe them; reward to virtuous actions, and to evil
punishment; and to make full satisfaction for damage or detriment done to
others through our means. Again, though Laws very rarely continue, when the
stare of Government comes to be quite changed; as it fell out in the Roman
state at first, long before the time of the Civil Law: where L. 2. Dig. de
Orig. Jur.
Pomponius writes, that Exactis Regibus, omnes leget Regiae ex-leverunt,
iterumque caepit Populus Romanus incerto magis jure and consuetudine aliqua
uti, quam perlata lege, iaque prope vig nti annis p ssus est: Kings being
driven out of the Empire, their Laws presently ceased, and the people of Rome
did again begin to be governed, partly by arbitrary discretion, and partly by
custom, rather then by any written Law, and so continued for twenty years
together: And so it comes to pass, that new Laws are always prepared to suit
with a new Government. Yet upon no change whatsoever, are mere rational Laws
repealed, or grow out of use.

The reason hereof is, because men can never lose their Nature, forgo their
Understanding, or quit their Reason. Neither can a supposition be admitted,
that such Laws as these can be unsuitable to any Government; for what kind of
Government has been hitherto devised by Man, or established in any Nation,
with the which, natural Equity, or the dictates of right Reason has not
suited? Nay, it should be rather concluded, there may be a Tyranny, but there
can be no government without them.

Hereupon it has been, that no change that ever happened in the Roman state, no
nor the overthrow of the State it self, could take away the force or use of the
Roman Civil Law, but that other Nations have assumed it into their territories,
and have made it serviceable to their occasions and ways of governing, how
various and differing soever those occasions and kinds of government have been.

Furthermore, though Laws with all other worldly things besides, have their
times to wax old, and as it were decrepite in, according to that of Claudian.

Firmatur senium juris, priscamque resumunt
Caniciem leges, emendanturque vetustae,
Acceduntque novae. --
Yet those Laws that are inspired by Nature, Reason, and pure Equity, can
never in any time, in all places at once lose their esteem or use. These are
the Laws that carry a clause of perpetuity with them, they were first born
with Man, and can never dye before him. It might well be reckoned amongst the
wonders of the World, that the Civil Law made so many hundred years agone, and
which has seen the spoil and overthrow of Rome it self, and many other States
and Empires besides, should still flourish in the Europaean Nations, as if it
were but new sprung up; but that surely the eminent wisdom and known reason
that is in it, has given that Law a life as lasting as the World it self.

It has been observed of all Arts and Sciences, that there is a kind of
circular progress in them: they have their birth, their growth, their
flourishing, their failing, their fading, and within a while after, their
resurrection and reflourishing again. And Aristotle 1. Decaele. ^. Mottor.
himself, who held the Arts Eternal, as he did the World, yet tells us, there
was always a rising and a falling of them as of the Stars, so as sometimes
they flourished in one place and age, and sometimes in another, as the Stars
sometimes shine in our Hemisphere, sometimes in the other. And so it may fare
with that Noble and useful Science of the Civil Law in like manner; it may be
obscured and under a dark thick cloud for a while in one place or other, but it
can never be irrecoverably lost every where, but it will still find some place
to prosper in, till at last it be even courted to return thither from whence it
was before expelled.

Lastly, to shaw the benefit of clear and rational Justice yet further: As it
is of highest advantage and benefit to a Nation, to purchase the acquaintance
and correspondence of other Nations abroad, as well for traffic sake by
exchanging their Commodities together, as also to be confoederated by a league
with them to be made the stronger, and likewise for doing all good reciprocal
offices each to other; so nothing can more strongly invite foreigners
frequently to resort unto, to trade, deal, and communicate with a Nation, then
an assurance that in all their dealings, if difference happen to arise, they
shall receive plain and clear justice, fetched as it were from the very bowels
of Heaven and Earth, and grounded upon the very fame reason they bring into the
Nation with them. But if in stead of this fair and civil entertainment, they
shall be led into labyrinths of something called Law, where they can discover
no light of that reason whereof they partake as men, nor yet any of those
principles, which in the acts of Justice are current amongst all other civil
Nations: they will conclude, it is not safe nor honorable to converse any
longer with such a Nation, but will forsake and abandon it as barbarous.

CHAP. VIII.
That Christian Nations having entertained the Civil Law into their
Territories, have thereby acquired to themselves the most rational Law that
has been ordained, as by the constitutions thereof will appear.

THus have I laid down the most excellent fruits that a Nation reaps, by
framing for it self such Laws, as are agreeable to the old and ancient
grounds of Reason in Nature, the Grandmother of all Law, justly so styled. Of
the which, the Nations of Christendom for these many hundreds of years, have
therefore very plentifully partaken, because they have admitted into their
Schools and Academies the Study, and into their Tribunalls the use and practice
of the Roman Civil Law: for although all public business, and the general
affairs of State wherein the interest of the common welfare lies, are carried
on by Laws of each Countries own making, fitted to time, place, persons,
occasion, and accidents that do happen, which the Civil Law cannot be made to
serve nor suit withal; so vatious each Nations exigencies and occasions are:
Yet they borrow their greatest, if not all their light and direction from the
Civil Law, in settling the contentious bufinesse Omnia judicia aut
distrabendarum controversiarum, aut puniendorum malesiciorum causa reperta
sunt. Cie. pro Caecin.
of the Subject, and the matters that arise in difference betwixt party and
party; their perfectest Municipall Laws, having contributed so little toward
their determination, that in comparison of what they have made no provision at
all in, that which they have seemed to provide for, is to be accounted nothing.

Most States employ their consideration most upon the public welfare, and upon
such interests as have an universal effect upon the whole body, as easiest to
be seen, and requiring but one and the same remedy for all. But in a numerous
multitude, and where their transactions and dealings with one another are so
various, and indeed by different circumstances become infinite; to suit each
persons case and business with a proper and fitting rule to decide it, is a
work so void of end or bottom, and past finishing, that no State will set upon
the enterprise to begin it; especially when the Art and Science of the Civil
Law has done it to their hands so excellently well, and with so much wisdom,
pure reason, and true natural equity already.

The Romans (who through the largeness of their Empire, and the long
continuance of it, had dealings with the greatest part of the World then
inhabited and found out, and so had beyond other Nations, the greatest
opportunity to see the wonderful variety of questions and controversies, that
fall out between Man and Man in their mutual transactions, when such a
numberless number of them came before their own Judicatories) they chiefly
minded the regulation of such matters; the Laws that are now extant, being
almost wholly taken up in them, and handling the public very sparingly; for of
the fifty books of the Digests, nine and forty do almost wholly consist of
these private controversiall things. They have taken up likewise all the Code,
saving a little of the first book of it, and the three last Books of all. The
Institutes are altogether spent herein, excepting that one Title De public is
Judiciis, which is the last of all.

Hereof Cujacius and Duarenus render this reason: Ideo neglectum est jus
publicum, say they, quod parum videretur ejus cognitie singulis esse
necessaria, quod de rebus privatis frequentiores essent lites, quodque raro de
jure publico interrogaretur: Therefore by the Roman Laws so little was declared
concerning the public, because the knowledge of such matters was so little
necessary for private men, and for that most suits were brought for differences
betwixt one subject and another, as also because little advice was asked upon
that which concerned the general welfare.

There is nothing therefore upon which a Controversy may be raised in our
dealings with one another in this life, but to cast the right where it ought to
go, there may be found out in the study of the Civil Law, that, which though it
was a Law to the Romans only, yet has it the force of profound, pure, solid
reason to all other men; so perfect, absolute, and so rational a Systeme is it
of all humane affairs and dealings whatsoever. Neither are we able to prize or
esteem the singular benefit that has grown unto the world by the Roman Civil
Law, being still extant, as the value thereof deserves.

For the precepts of Nature, and the rules of Natural Reason, whereof it
abounds, are either such as we of our selves could not easily have found out,
and then the benefit is not small to have them readily set down to our hands;
or if they be so clear and manifest, that no man endued with reason can easily
be ignorant of them, yet the Law as it were borrowing them from the school of
Nature, to prove other things less manifest, and to induce a necessary
consequence of something which were in it self more hard and dark, unless it
should in such sort be cleared, the very applying of them unto cases
particular, is not without most singular use and profit many ways for men's
instruction.

Besides, be they plain of themselves or obscure, the evidence of so renowned a
Law added unto the natural assent of reason concerning the certainty of them,
does not a little authorize and confirm the same. Wherefore in as much as our
actions are conversant about things beset with many circumstances, which cause
men of sundry wits to be also of sundry judgments concerning that which ought
to be done, beneficial it cannot but seem, that the rule of Civil Law has
herein helped our infirmity, whereby we do so well understand what is right and
just, and what otherwise.

Though the first principles of the Law of Nature are easy, and discerned
generally by all men, yet concerning the duty which Natures law does require at
the hands of men in a number of things particular, so far has the natural
understanding even of sundry whole Nations been darkened, that they have not
discerned, no not gross injustice and injury to be so. Whereby it appears
how much we are bound to admire the profound wisdom, and even honor the
memory of the Roman Lawgivers, who have delivered such a Law to the world; a
Law wherein so many things are laid open, clear, and manifest as a light which
otherwise might have been buried in darkness, not without the hazard, or
rather not with the hazard, but with the certain loss of the rights of many
men and nations.

For albert there is in the Civil Law, as there is and must be in all Laws
whatsoever, a very great intermixture of such things as are established by the
voluntary determination, and proceed from the mere will and pleasure of those
that have ordained them, who might limit Times, Places, Forms, Actions,
Rewards, punishments; and difference Persons, and might order and dispose of
all Circumstances in what way and manner they pleased, as the Nature, Manners,
Government, and Occasions of the Roman people most required, without any
respect to common and universal Reason, and are therefore neither obligatory
nor useful to any other State or Nation, as they were to the Roman: yet there
is in it a rational and natural part also, which belongs unto men as men, or to
men as they live in politic society, consisting of such common and natural
notions, and so abstracted from such circumstances which should change and
alter it, that it is always permanent, alike known to all men, or at least to
the wiser sort of men, obligatory, and useful every where. And never was there
any Humane Law that abounded so much with this, as the Civil Law does, it being
to be found every where about the whole Law, though intermixed with that which
is merely positive, proper and useful for that State and none else, or at
least not fitting to be made a Rule for all people.

By Natural and Rational I understand that which our own natural understanding
allows as good, or disallowes as evil, though there were no Law to forbid the
one, or to prescribe the other. And this was the same, which St. Paul Romans 2.14.
expresses to be the guide of the Gentiles, that is, of all men naturally. The
Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law;
which shows the work of the Law written in their hearts. Also that which is
commonly received and practiced by all men: In re consensio omnium gentium lex
naturae putanda est; Cicer. Tuse. l. 1.
what all Nations agree on is to be esteemed natural. Quod mundus probat, non
audeo improbare, says Baldus, Consil. l. 4. Consil. 496.
I dare not question that which is generally allowed of.

Likewise I account that natural and rational which is necessary and
behoofefull for those that lead their lives in any wellordered state of
government, and without which we take away all possibility of a sociable life
in the world.

Further, that justice may well be esteemed natural and rational, which is
squired by and accommodated to the nature of the thing in question, as it is
defined, and as it generally passes in the account of all, or at least the most
knowing men.

Neither do I account that only to be natural and rational which was so when
the first foundations of the world were laid, and man became inhabitant
thereof; for then all things were common, and men were not gathered into civil
societies; neither was there any distinction of Nations, nor any Co^tracts, no
waging War, nor leading Captive, nor servitudes, nor conjunction of Dwellings,
nor any limits set to the property of each Man and Nation, as we see at this
day. Therefore that must be looked upon as natural and rational, which suits
with the present state of affairs, as they now stand in the world at this time:
for though the Natural Law be alwaes the same, yet some parts of it are primely
necessary, others by supposition and accident, and both are of the same
necessity, that is, equally necessary in the several cases. Thus, to obey a
King is as necessary and naturally reasonable as to obey a Father, though the
first Governor of all; that is, supposing there be a King, as it is certain
naturally a man cannot be, but a Father must be supposed. If it be made
necessary that I promise, it is also necessary that I perform it; for else I
shall return to that inconvenience which I sought to avoid, when I made the
promise: And though the instance be very fat removed from the first necessities
and accidents of our prime being and production; yet the reason still pursues
us, and natural reason reaches out to the very last minutes, and orders the
most remote particulars of our well being.

Moreover, besides the natural and rational part before spoken of, which either
simply concerns men as men, or which belongs unto them as they are men
linked with others in some form of politic society; there is another sort
thereof, which serves to order and direct all such several bodies politic, so
far forth as one of them has public co^merce with another: for although civil
society does more content the nature of man than any private kind of solitary
living, because in society this good of mutual participation is so much larger
than otherwise: yet we are not satisfied herewith, but we covet (if it might
be) to have a kind of society and fellowship with all mankind. And therefore
Themistius speaking to Valens the Roman Emperor, he told him, Grot. Proleg.
lib. de ja. bell. and pac.
that Kings if they would act by the rule of true wisdom, they must, non unius
sibi creditae gentis habere ratione^, sed totius humani generis, and esse non
(...) tantum, aut (...), sed (...), not take care of their own people only,
but bear a tender regard toward all societies and companies of men whatsoever,
and be lovers of men generally, not of the Macedonians or Romans only. And
surely God in his wise disposal of all things here below, would therefore not
suffer any one part of the earth to be enriched with all his worldly benefits
and blessings, but chose rather to sprinkle them up and down, making one nation
to abound with one thing, another with another, but none to possess all things;
that thereby the several societies of men standing in need of one another,
might be driven to seek and preserve one another friendship and
correspondence, if it were but to purchase these outward temporal things, and
to gain those great advantages which are to be had only in a combined
multitude, and for which a single Nation is too weak and impotent. Nulla est
tam valida civitas, says Grotius, In Proltgom.
quae non aliquando aliarum extra se open indigere possit, vel ad commercia, vel
etiam ad arcendas multarum externarum gentium junctas in se vires; unde etiam a
potentissimis populis and regibus soedera appeti videmus. There is no country
so strongly fortified within it self, but that it may at one time or other be
put to implore the aid of other Nations, either in the way of trade, to put off
their own commodities in exchange for others, or else to secure themselves
against a collected force that is about to invade them. Hence we often see,
even mighty Princes and people so strongly solicit to be in league with other
States.

This natural inclination that is in the men of the World, to have the
knowledge of, and acquaintance and friendship each with other, how far
distant soever they be, did appear so much in Socrates, that he professed
himself a Citizen, not of this or that Commonwealth, but of the World. And an
effect of that very natural desire in us (a manifest token that we wish after
a sort an universal fellowship with all men) shows it self by the wonderful
delight men have, some to visit foreign Countries, some to discover Nations
not heard of in former ages; we all, to know the affairs and dealings of other
people, yea to be in league of amity with them, and this not only for
traffic sake, or to the end that when many are Confoederated, each may make
the other more strong; but for such cause also as moved the Queen of Sheba to
visit Solomon; and in a word, because Nature does presume, that how many men
there are in the World, so many Gods as it were there are, or at leastwise such
they should be toward Men. Further, this conversing with foreign States gets
us an opportunity to discern their inclinations, know their strength and
riches, or find their weakness, and sometimes to discover their secret
machinations against our selves.

Thus whilst we travail and send out into other Nations, in pursuit of our
several ends and interests, we fall at length to contract, exchange,
transport, and so by degrees establish a fixed trade for return of commodities
each to other. This draws on firm leagues of amity and friendship,
capitulations to fight against our common enemies, and mutually to defend our
selves. And this cannot be transacted without the help of Embassies, and the
mediation of Ministers, by whom the minds of both are made known, and our
agreements sealed and confirmed. Sometimes injury is done by our neighbor
Nations, or their subjects, either in staying our Ships, seizing our goods,
restraining our persons, or protecting the public and declared enemies of the
Nation, which causes us to demand redress and reparation. Which if it be
denied or delayed us, if the offense comes from particular men, we right our
selves upon some subjects only by way of reprizall; if from the State it
self, or the most considerable part thereof, then follows the denouncing of
open War, and all the concomitants thereof. Besides, when disturbances at
home are outrageous, and over-violent, we are sometimes driven to call in
forrreign fores to appease them.

Moreover, if there be any Nation that grows so great in dominion, strength,
and riches, as to strike terror and amazement into all the neighbor Nations
round about it, so as they may justly fear they shall become a prey to their
luxuriant power and greatness, to proclaim open War against such a Nation,
or to kindle the fire of dissension and civil discord within her own bowels,
or to set other Nations upon her back to bring her lower, and to make her
incapable of offending her weak neighbors, is by many deemed a politic,
Principum at civitatum imperia stabiliora sunt, and ab injuria finitimorum
tutiora, cum societates ac faedera sic contrabuntur, ut aequabilis quaedam cx
omnibus potentia existat. Bodin. de rep. l. 5. c. 6.
and by some a lawful way of Anticipation Sunt qui neutrarum partium se esse
verbo detlavant, re tamen faces utrisque ad bellum inflemmandum elam
suppeditant: ferendum illud quidem quodammodo, si suae saluti aliter consulere
non possint. Bodin. de rep. lib. 5. cap. 6.
. Which whether it be or no, it is not proper here to determine. But sure I am,
to be regardlesse of such an over-spreading Neighbor, were a token of great
improvidence and stupidity. And it were but needful for the lesser States to
confoederate and combine together, and to make joint preparations to oppose
her, in case she shall offer to molest any one of them; for so active is Man by
nature, that where a sufficient power to hurt is present, it is seldom seen
that Will is wanting Una est tenuium adversus potentiores securiatis cautio, ut
scilicct potentes, si necert velint, non possint; cum nocendi voluntas
ambitiosis bominibus and imperandi cupidis nunquam sit defusure. Bodin. de.
rep. lib. 5. cap. 6.
.

Also, since it is neither honorable nor advantageous for any young Prince to
intermarry even with the Noblest or Richest of his own Subjects, he must of
necessity fit himself out of the Royal Families of other Princes; here
therefore they must be seen, known, and dealt with also. Besides a free and
open recourse to foreign parts, is so absolutely necessary to the very being
of a Nation, that we see oft-times the restraint and shutting up thereof in
point of trading, does so exasperate and incense a people, that the whole frame
is ready to be dissolved, and the Subjects ready to rend one another in pieces,
not sparing to discharge their anger even upon the very Prince himself.

These and such like instances do demonstrate, how, not only advantageous, but
unavoidable it is, for several and divided Kingdoms to correspond, act, and
negotiate each with other: which it is not possible for them to do, but that
controversies both various and difficult, and which mainly concern their
several interests, even to no less value sometimes then whole Kingdoms, will
fall in, that must be debated, and must have some determination. And when every
thing else has a Law to guide it, and a rule to examine and try it by, insomuch
as no one society, or petty Commonwealth can stand without some Law; the like
necessity must there needs be of a Law to maintain and order the communion of
Nations corresponding and acting together. Si nulla est communit as quae sine
jure conservari possit, quod memorabili latronum exemplo probabat Aristoteles;
certe and illa quae genus humanum aut populos complures inter se colligat, jure
indiget, says In Prolegom.
Grotius: If there be no association which can be held up without some Law, as
Aristotle hoth proved by an argument drawn from that close partnership which is
usually amongst Thieves and Highway-men; then surely is there want of a Law to
direct that grand fellowship, which linkes all mankind, or diverse States
together. And again, Grot. ibid.
Sicut cujusque civitatis jura utilitatem suae civitatis recipient, ita inter
civitates aut omnes aut plerasque ex consensu jura quaedam nasci potuerunt, and
nata apparet, quae utilitatem respiciciunt non coetuum singulorum, sed magnae
universitatis; As the Laws of every particular Commonwealth are made for the
benefit thereof, so some certain Laws might be and were certainly agreed upon
by all or most of the Nations of the world, which should conduce to the
welfare, not of any one people, but of the great communion of all men.

Now the Law that guides those transactions which are usually observed to
arise between grand Societies, is the Law of Nations: which is most natural
and rational in its kind too, being grounded at first upon a common necessity
that lay upon all Nations, to have reciprocal dealings and negociations with
one another, and which the very Nature of those several dealings, and Reason it
self dictates as necessary to be observed, so that without it such communion
could not long endure.

Under the regulation hereof comes Embassies, courteous entertainment of
foreigners and strangers, Laws of Arms, freedom of Traffic, right of
Contracts, free passage through each others Borders, Reprizalls, the preserving
and redemption of Captives, Leagues, Truces, Articles, and such like. The
strength and virtue of which Law is such, that a people can with as little
safety violate it by any act, how advantageous soever it may seem to be to the
whole Body Qui civium rationem habendam dicunt, exterorum negant, hi
communionem and socictatem humani generis dirimunt. Cicer.
, as a private man can, in hope to benefit himself, infringe the Law of his
Country. Sicut civis qui jus civil perrumpit utilitatis praesentis causa, id
convellit quo ipsius posteritatisque suae perpetuae utilitates continentur; sic
and populus jura naturae gentiumque violans, suae quoque tranquillitatis in
posterum rescindit munimenta Grot. in Prolegom.
: As a Subject trespassing against the Law for a present advantage, brings the
future happiness of himself and posterity into hazard, so a people that shall
trample upon the Law of Nature and of Nations, strips it self of the only
preservative of their peace and safety. It is not only lawful but honorable
for any people, either to right or revenge the breach of the Law of Nations.
And as in the state of one Country, any man may accuse upon a public crime,
so in the state of the World, any people may prosecute a common offense: for as
there is a civil bond among all the people of one Nation, so is there a
natural knot among all men in the world, which should it be once dissolved, it
must needs endanger the whole frame of that communion. Nay, of such power and
praeeminence is the Law of Nations, that no particular Nation can lawfully
prejudice the same by any their several Laws and Ordinances, Si Princeps velit
vel jus gentium primarium vel secundarium intra sui imperii limits abrogare,
potestate sue abuti censendus est. Bar. bos. Collect. in c. 9. did. 1. nn. 6.
more then a Man by his private resolutions, the Law of the whole Common wealth
or State wherein he lives: for as a Civil Law, being the act of a whole body
politic, does therefore overruled each several part of the same body, so
there is no reason that any one Commonwealth of it self, should to the
prejudice of another, annihilate that whereupon the whole world has agreed:
for which cause, the Lacedaemonians forbidding all access of strangers into
their Coasts, are in that respect both by Lib 2. Cont. Appion
Josephus and Lib. 9. de sanand. Graec. affect.
Theodoret deservedly blamed, as being enemies to that hospitality, which for
common humanities sake all the Nations on earth should embrace.

And the Roman Civil Law is of singular use to teach and instruct in this Law
too. Grotius the Ornament of his Age and Nation for learning and wisdom,
undertaking in his most singular Book De juri belli and Pacis, to set down the
several heads of that Law which serves to direct those great transactions of
Peace and War between Nation and Nation, and to reconcile their differences,
professes to have borrowed toward the perfecting of that admirable work, much
from the Books of the Civil Law, because, says he, In Prolegom.
Rations saepe optimas suppeditant ad demonstrandum id quod juris est naturae;
and eidem juri, neque minus gentium juri testimonium saepe praebent; They often
make very clear discoveries of what is the Law of Nature, and do give frequent
instances both of that, and of the Law of Nations also.

And indeed the Law of Nations is no more then that natural Reason which
Nations do owe, and are bound to render each to other, whilst they correspond
and act together, be it in Peace or War; and but the very same which private
men ought to practice amongst themselves in their private dealings. Which moved
Mt. Hobbs Lib. de Civ. cap. 14. art. 4.
, when for illustration sake he divided the Natural Law, in naturalem hominum,
and naturalem civitatum, into that of private Men and that of Nations, to add,
that praeoepta utriusque eadem sunt; sed quia civitates semel institutae
induunt proprietates hominum personales L 76. Dig. de Judic. l. 56. dig. de
Usufrust. Popule respectu tetius generis humant privatorum locum obtinent.
G^ot. Mare lib. c. ^.
, lex quam, loquentes de hominum singulorum officio, naturalem dieimus,
applicata totis civitalibus, nationibus five gentibus, vocatur jus Gentium: The
precepts of both are but one and the same; but says he, because several
Commonwealths once settled are but as so many private men; the same Law which
in reference to single men we term Natural, being applied to whole States,
Nations and people, is called the Law of Nations, their duties being indeed
both alike: for what one man ought to render to another, the same ought one
Nation to render to another also.

So that although what ever we read of in the Text of the Civil Law, was not
intended by the Roman Legislators, to reach or direct beyong the bounds of the
Roman Empire, neither could they prescribe any Law to other Nations which were
in no subjection to them, and even those Laws that do treat of Military
matters, Prisoners of War, Embassies, and such like, do but direct what
Order and Discipline shall be kept among their own Soldiers, and how if any of
them be taken by the Enemy, they forfeit the right of Citizens for the time of
their captivity, but shall upon return be restored; and how free from being
Sued or molested, Ambassadors that come from their own Provinces, not from
foreign States to Rome, should be; and so all those constitutions and such
like, have still looked homewards, and no further, as Lib 1. de jur. Bill. cap.
1.
Albericus Gentilis has truly observed: Yet since there is such a strong stream
of Natural Reason continually flowing in the Channel of the Roman Laws, and
that there is no affair or business known to any part of the World now, which
the Roman Empire dealt not in before, and their Justice still provided A
Romany ad omnes populos Juris faecialis totiusque justitiae fontes purissimi
manarunt. Bodin. de rep. lib. 5. cap 6.
for; what should hinder, but that the nature of affairs being the same, the
same general rule of Justice and dictates of Reason may be as fitly
accommodated to foreigners dealing with one another, (as it is clear they have
been by the Civilians of all ages) as to those of one and the same Nation, when
one common Reason is a guide and a light to them both? for it is not the
Persons, but the Case, and the Reason therein that is considerable altogether.
How came the old Law given to the Jews to be in some measure obligatory to the
Christians coming so long after, and to be of force still, and will be as long
as the World endures, but because, besides the ceremonial and judicial part
thereof, (which was observable by the Jews only, and is now abrogated, in as
much as it had but a temporary cause of Gods ordaining it) there was also a
Natural and a Moral part incorporated in it, which all Nations and Men are
bound to fulfill and keep, and can never cease? Haec pars legis vivit, says De
Legib lib: 9. cap. 11. nu. 22.
Suarez, non tamen quia legis Moysis pars, sed quia naturae lex est, and novae
legis pars, vivetque in sempiternum: This part of the Law remains in force, but
not because it was a part of Moses his Law, but because it was given first by
Nature, and the new Law has since confirmed it, and the authority thereof shall
remain for ever.

So and in like manner, there is in the Roman Civil Law a circumstantiall and a
positive part, which was a Law to the Romans, and by them to be obeyed, but
neither of force or use to others, being made for that people, climate, and
government only. But there is in it too a Law whereunto by the light of Reason
men find themselves bound in that they are Men; a Law by composition, for
multitudes and politic societies of Men to be guided by; a Law that may be
applied to the communion and fellowship of all Mankind, or diverse Nations
linked in amity and friendship together; and this part of the Law is natural,
perpetual, belonging not to the Romans only, but to all Nations and Men;
neither can it have any cause of change, when that which gave it its first
institution remains for ever one and the same.

Yet as the Civil Law is Roman, it is of no validity, but as it is natural
only: for as it was Roman, it extended not beyond the bounds of the Roman
Empire, nor did it take care for any other People or Nation but the Roman
only, nor could the commanding power thereof endure longer then the Empire it
self lasted. But when it treats and discusses such matters as are common to
all mankind, and not only the Roman Nation did, but all Nations and People do
still deal in; as of contracts of all kinds, both at Land and at Sea,
dispositions testamentary, succssions in deceaseds Estates where no Will is
made, good offices done at another charge or detriment; of the relations
between Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Master and Servant, Governors and
Governed, Magistrates supreme and subordinate; of matters of property and
possession, injuries done to the persons, or scandalls to the credit, or
damages done to the goods of Men; of servitudes due from Houses or Lands to
other Houses, Lands or Persons, Crimes and Offenses of all sorts, and the
punishments greater or lesser that attend them; explanation of Laws or
Statutes, or of any obscure clause in any Contract, Speech or Writing
whatsoever; of Customs and other public duties payable to the Exchequer,
Authorities, Powers or Commissions granted to others: Deeds of free gift,
Writings obligatory, Instruments, Pattents, Charters, privileges in Writing or
by prescription; Customs and prescriptions to take away or diminish the right
and property of others: of reparations upon fraud, nonage, absence, or other
impediments unavoidable and necessary; Nusances done in public places or
Highways, or from one House to another, obstructions in Rivers or
Watercourse, Mortgages in Law as well as Fact: of goods lost in Ships,
Taverns, Inns, or delivered to Carriers to convey to other places, or left with
other Men to keep; services due to the Commonwealth; patrimoniall, personal,
and mixed, Soldiers, and the exemptions and discipline belonging to them: Of
judicial Trials in all these cases and many more, where the quality of the
Judge, his kind of Jurisdiction, the manner of Trial, the Officers assisting,
the kind of Evidence, the Judgment, the Execution thereof, or remedy by way of
Appeal come to be considered: I say, when the consideration of these several
matters is as incident to all other Nations and times that live under Order and
Government, as it was to the Roman, and that there be delivered and laid down
in the Roman Civil Law such rules and dictates as are most natural,
essential, and necessary to be observed in each of them; it must needs be,
that the use of the Roman Civil Law in these particulars, as to the matter of
it, can neither be local nor temporary, neither be limited to that Empire, nor
determine with it, but must be of use every where and for so long time as the
business to which those rules are applied, comes to be acted and dealt in,
which will be as long as the World it self endures, and until men leave to
traffic and converse with one another.

Now as in the matters before specified, the difference that arises may be
sometimes between the public and some private person, sometimes between one
private man and another within the same Nation; so it may be also between a
subject and a stranger, or, between strangers only, or between Nation and
Nation; and yet the same measure of justice will hold and serve for all. For
look what justice may be rightly afforded between one man and another upon the
general rule of natural equity and right reason, the same may as warrantably
be dispensed between one Nation and another, as often as any variance happens
between them.

And hence it is that all those Writers that handle and treat of those
controversiall things, which frequently come to be disputed between one Nation
and another, as they are all Civilians, so though they do make use of other
authorities besides, yet the strongest and most convincing arguments that they
bring to resolve them by, are fetched from the general rules of Equity and
right Reason set down in the Civil Law. And were it not for them, we had no
certainty to rest upon, nor any peaceable determination could be made of such
controversies, but the sharpest Sword must be drawn out to cut the knot
asunder: For what can Histories and the examples drawn from them do toward a
composure? Errant, qui quod exemplo fit id etiam jure fieri putant, says De
ju. and offic. Bellic. lib. 1. ca. 2
Ayala out of Cicero; It is an error in any to think, that what has once been
done, may therefore be lawfully done again. The force of example is weak and
insufficient, Sana ratio exemplis anteponitur, says De ju. Bell. lib. 2. ca.
18.
Albericus Gentilis; Sound reason is far above examples. Besides, the integrity
and truth of Histories is questionable, Saepe tempori, saepe affectibus
serviunt; and they too too often afford examples contrary each to other.

And moreover, by as it were a general consent of Nations, there is an
appealing to, and a resting in the voice and judgment of the Civil Law, in
these cases between Nation and Nation. The reason whereof is, because any thing
that is irrational. unnatural, absurd, partial, injust, immodest, ignoble,
treacherous or unfaithful, that Law abhors; and for that it is the most
perfect image and representation of Nature, and of the Equity and Reason Nature
prescribes to humane actions, that was ever yet presented or set forth to the
World in a Law. And therefore whosoever will observe the style of the Imperial
Law, he shall find it least of all to run in this strain; Sancimus, Mandamus,
praecipimus, jubemus, imperamus, volumus; We decree, command, will, enjoin,
enact, or in the like imperious and commanding way, but most in a gentle, soft,
rational, and a convincing way, thus; Non est aequum. Nulla juris ratio, aut
aequitaetis benignitas patitur. Bona fides non patitur. Divine admodum. Non est
dubium. Nimis grave est. Non sine ratione. Nihil tam natural. Naturalem habet
intellectum. Dolo facit. Absurdum est. Contra bonos mores est. Cum satis
inhumanum est. Cum nulla ratio sit. Humanitatis ac religionis Ratio.
Humanitatis intuitu. Humanum esse probamus. Ita nobis cordi pudor est. Indignum
est. Iniquissimum est. Cum ratio naturalis. A plerisque prudentum generaliter
definitum est. Improbum quidem and criminosum. Periniquum est. Aequissimum
visum est. Aequissimum putavit Praetor. Boni viri arbitratu. Juxta arbitrium
boni viri. Hic titulus aequitatem habet naturalem. Hoc edictum summam habet
aequitatem, and sine cujusquam indignatione justa. Vt moderatae rationis
temperamenta defiderant. Nec verecundiae nec dignitati convenit. Nemo est qui
nesciat, and the like, as if nothing were offered for a Law, but what is
evident in it self, and all men must own, and presently apprehend to be just
and equal.

There was never any Law more agreeable to the Divine, and to the rules of
Conscience and exact righteousness, then that Law. Tertullian in his
Apologetick against the Romans did acknowledge, Eorum leges ad innocentiam
pergere, and de divina lege ut antiquiore, ferme mutuatas; that their Laws did
walk in the way to innocence, and were almost the same with the Divine Law.
Philip Melancthon another Divine and a Protestant, says that and more: Ad
normam effictam in mentibus humanis, and Decalogi voce declaratam atque
illustratam congruunt humanae leges, quae citra controversiam post Mosaicas
caeteris ut antiquitate, sic dignitate; ut auctoritate sic veritatis
certitudine; ut rationum and demonstrationum evidentia, sic ordinis praestantia
antecellunt: The Roman Laws, says he, are made after the likeness of the
Decalogue, and do not differ from those notions and principles of Reason which
Nature has implanted in all men. And it is out of all question, that setting
aside Gods Law, they are as more ancient, so more renowned; as of higher
authority, so truer and clearer in determination; as of a more evident
demonstration and reason, so of a more excellent rank then other Laws that yet
have been.

Which conformity and likeness of the Civil Law to the Divine and Eternal,
has been the only cause, that the Casuists and Divines that have treated upon
cases of Conscience, and have labored to teach men what rules they must walk
by, to do justice, and to execute righteousness in their dealings and
communications with one another, they do every where about their books and
writings, propose and set down the very rules and maxims of the Civil Law, as
the best lessons of morality and justice, citing the very Laws themselves, and
the authorities of that profession; which were incongruous and vain for them to
do, were not their justice, equity, and soundness unquestionable, and their
authority beyond all dispute, even in those things for which their authority is
brought by them. Neither is it they alone that set this high estimate upon the
authority of the Civil Law, since the Learned in other faculties do the same:
with whom there is nothing more frequent, then when the duties of men one
toward another in their several relations come to be set forth, as between
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Husband and Wife, Sovereign and
Subject, Magistrates and private Men, Captain and Soldiers, one Citizen with
another; or when the best rules and advantages are to be laid down for the
first founding of a Commonwealth, or the keeping of it in safety and
splendor; or when the justice and convenience of a Law is in question; or the
actions of Men, even of Princes themselves, be to be approved or condemned: In
all these cases and the like, nothing I say is more usual with Writers of
highest renown for Learning and wisdom, then to fort fie their resolutions and
dictates one way or other, with the practice and discipline of the Roman State;
and to make the Civil Law their Touchstone to try all things by, and the best
and most approved balance to weigh them in; judging the authority thereof to
be beyond denial in any thing that it does either defend or disallow, and for
such as it is presented, does it pass current with all men.

The Civil Law requires that an act should be worthy and laudable as well as
lawful, that it should be fair, equitable, ingenuous, and candid, as well as
strictly just. Subtilties and niceties of words, and those apices juris,
finesses of Law, and fine-spun webs of Wit, which are opposite to integrity and
honest dealing, and which through a precise form of words and strict propriety
of speech, would frustrate what was purely at first intended, it will not allow
of or endure. Bonae fidei non congruit de apicibus juris disputare, says
Vlpian. l. 29. Paragt 4. Dig Mandat:
It suits not with sincerity, to contend about curiosities: Sensum non vana
nominum vocabula amplecti oportet, l. 2. Co: De constipecun:
The true intended sense and not the bare litteral signification is to be
pursued. Scriptum sequi calumniatoris est, boni vero judicis, voluntatem
scriptoris autoritatemque defendere, says Gail. Lib: 2. obs: 132. out of Cicer:
pro Caetinu:
It is the part of a Caviller to keep close to words, but of an upright Judge,
to uphold the intent and meaning of him that spoke them; Qui pertinaciter a
scripto recedere non vult, perniciose errat, says Peckius; Ga: 88. De reg. ju:
in 6. in in prine:
He shall offend perniciously, that will grant but what the very words will
bear, and will be got to yield no further.

And therefore the Civil Law which we have now, had it been in being in the
third Punick War, when the City of Carthage by a crafty exposition of words was
quite demolished by order of the Roman Senate, after they had first given their
faith to the Carthaginians, in these expressions; Civitatem Carthaginis salvam
fore, jura, privilegia, immunitates easdem habituros quibus antea semper usi
fuissent, The City of Carthage should be saved, and the same rights,
immunities, and privileges should be continued unto them which they always
had; would have condemned the whole Senate for such their breach of faith and
treachery, though there was not the life of any person touched. For who could
doubt, but that the Carthaginians articling for the safety of the City, did aim
and intend to have the place preserved as well as the persons? And it was a
shameful defense to say, as the Romans did, that when the people of the City
were all preserved and kept alive, the true City was saved, which was as much
as they promised, though the walls and buildings themselves were destroyed;
Civitatem maenibus urbis minime contineri, The word City does import the Men,
and not the Structure or Edifices thereof.

For although in strict propriety of speech there is that nice difference inter
urbam and civitatem, quod urbs aedificia, Civitas incolae sint; yet legulciorum
est, syllabas and apices aucupari, non militaris simplicitatis, says Albericus
Gentilis; De jur: Bell: lib: 2. ca. 4.
It is for Lawyers to catch at words, and not for Soldiers, whose plain
meaning admits not of such nice distinctions. In fide, quid senseris non quid
dixeris cogitandum est, says Grotius; De ju. B^ll: lib: 2. ca: 16. nu: 1 out of
Tully.
Where faith is given, what was meant is to be regarded rather then what was
spoken. The Plataeans were as false and unworthy, when after they had promised
to send home the Prisoners taken, slew them first, and so sent them home dead,
quasi cadavera essent captivi, and mortuus homo esset homo, says Albericus
Gentilis; d. ca: 4.
as if it were to be believed, that the Carkases were the Prisoners themselves,
or a man dead could be thought a man. And as deceitful were the Baeotians too,
who having engaged to restore the City, did deliver it up, not standing, but
rased and pulled down. So was it an act most treacherous and false in
Alexander, who first gave a besieged Town an Assurance that they should go
forth of the Town safely, and then after they were quite gone forth, and set
forward some part of their way, put them all to the sword, Grotius d ca: 16.
out of Tully.
says truly, ejusmodi fraudibus astringi non dissolvi perjurium, by such
fraudulent evasisions perjury is rather augmented then wiped away.

In Contracts between Princes or several States, exuberantior fides requiritur,
a greater measure of sincereness is required, and subtle interpretations ought
to be avoided, and such a meaning ought to be given to their compacts, as not
Critics, but vulgar and plain-dealing men may like of, and which was most
probably intended by him for whose sake and benefit they were originally made.
And in such fense Divines do agree all Oaths ought to be taken; Quacunque art
verborum quis juret, Deus tamen qui conscientiae testis est, ita hoc accipit
sicut ille cui juratur intelligit, says Isidore, cited in the Canon Law. c.
quacunque cause: 22. quaest:
Let the words by which we swear be never so artificially laid, yet God to whom
our most secret thoughts are manifest, takes every oath in such a sense, as it
is understood by him to whom such Oath is made. For which cause St Austin
Epist: 224,
has pronounced them perjured, qui servatis verbis, expectationem eorum quibus
juratum est, deceperunt; who having fulfilled the bare words, have frustrated
the true expectation of those to whom they swear. Even as the Civil and Canon
Law both, deems them not fulfillers but fraudulent transgressors of a Law,
that perform the words, but act against the true intent and meaning of it.
Certum est, quod is committit in legem, qui verba legis complectens, contra
legis nititur veluntatem: l. 5. Cod. De legi. reg. 88. De reg. ju. in 6.
Whosoever keeping strictly to the words of a Law, perverts the intent, does
clearly offend against it. For Lex non in verbis sed in sensu, non in
superficie and foliis verborum, sed in medulla consistit, says Peckius. D. reg.
88. nu. 7.
The Law lies not in the outward bark of the words, but in the pith and marrow,
which is the sense.

Likewise in last Wills and Testaments, it will have the mind and meaning of
the Testator, if known, to be pursued, whatsoever the proper signification of
the words be. Non enim in causa testamentorum, says Marcellus, l. 69. Parag. 1.
Di de leg. 3.
ad definitionem utique descendendum est, cum plerunque abusive loquantur, nec
propriis nominibus ac vecabulis semper utantur: In questions about Wills, we
must not fly to that sense that the words will in extremity bear, since most
do speak improperly, and they are but few that can deliver themselves in proper
and apt expressions. And therefore says Mantica, De conject. ult. vol. lib. 3.
Tit. 3. nu. 1.
Cavendum est, ne dum nimia subtilitate verborum utimur, vera judicia
defunctorum subvertantur; We must take heed, that we do not so precisely
observe the words, as to disappoint the true intentions of him that uttered
them. From which sentences and sayings of the Civil Law it is clear, that no
words, forms, niceties, or propriety of language is of any regard in the Civil
Law, in comparison of truth, faithfulness and integrity. For verba monti, non
men's verbis servire debet; Words were made as instruments to serve and express
the mind, and not to command or control it.

Further, it takes care to suppress not only those things which are manifestly
evil, but some things also which are no otherwise bad, then as they are
illaudable and undecent. Non omne quod licet honestum est; l. 144 Dig. De reg.
jur.
Every thing that is lawful, the Civil Law does not esteem to be honest. If a
Divorced wife Marry again, and by that marriage has a daughter, though she be
not daughter in law to the first husband, nor any way of kin or allied unto
him, since the first marriage was quite dissolved, yet he cannot marry her:
Parag. 9. Inst. de Nupt.
Neither will it allow the father to marry his bastard daughter; nor the father
to marry the sons spouse, nor the son to marry the fathers; the reason is,
quoniam in contrahendis matrimoniis natural jus and pudor inspiciendus est; l.
14. Parag. 2. Di. De rit. nupt.
in matrimonial copulations it ought to be considered, what nature and sobriety
does allow of; and where it be doubtful, whether a marriage may be lawfully had
or not, this rule is ever prescribed; In re dubia certius and modestius est
hujusmodi nuptiis abstinere; D. l. 14. Par. 3.
in an uncertainty it is safest and most modest not to contract such marriages.
So that in some things, Quod non vetat lex, hoc vetat fieri pudor; and as
Bartol l. 8. Dig. De Aliment. leg.
has expressed it, Non modo obligatio, verum etiam verecundia nos obligat;
There be some things, which for very shame we must forbear to do, though
otherwise the Law will permit us to do them.

The Civil Law tells the very Emperor himself, that for him to demand a Legacy
by a Will that was void, inverecundum est, it was undecent. Decet enim tantam
majestatem eas servre leges quibus ipse solutus esse videtur; l. 23. Dig. de
legate. 3.
It is most beseeming his Highness for to keep those Laws whereof he may seem
to be free. And again, Digna vox est majestate regnantis, legibus alligatum se
profiteri; l. 4. co. De legib.
It is language worthy of a Prince, to acknowledge himself bound to Laws. What
did Seneca in his grave Philosophical precepts say more, when he cried out;
Quam angusta innocentia est, ad legem bonum esse? quanto latius officiorum
patet quam juris regula? multa pietas, humanitas, liberalitas, justitia, fides
exigunt, quae omnia extra publicas tabulas sunt. How poor is that innocence, to
be but as good as the Law requires? How much further does the officious
respects which men owe to one another go, then the letter and rule of Law? How
many things be there, which Piety, Humanity, Nobleness, Equity, and Uprightness
do exact, which are out of the provision of the Law altogether?

When any thing in Wills, Contracts, Laws, Statutes, or Testimonies, is rendered
so doubtful, that it is capable of tetrick and severe as well as a mild and
temperate, of an odious as well as a favorable meaning; it does so much affect
clemency, gentleness, and moderation, Nihil nobis tam gratum est quam
humanitas, says Justinian lib 57. co. De Episcopal. audient.
that the gentlest and the softest interpretation shall be chosen, and it shall
be taken in the mildest and best sense. What is odious and punishing, it
restrains and keeps in to the utmost, and admits of nothing more in that case,
then the strict propriety of words will enforce. But what is favorable,
gracious, and pleasing, it enlarges and widens, by stretching them even to an
improper sense and signification. These rules therefore and such like are to be
frequently met withal. Semper in dubiis benigniora praeferenda sunt. l. 56.
Dig. De reg. ju.
Rapienda occasio est quae praebet benignius responsum l. 168. Dig. eod.
. In re dubia benigniorem interpretationem sequi, non minus justius est quam
tutius. l. 119. Dig. eod.
In poenalibus causis benignius est interpretandum. l. 155. Parag. fin. Dig.
eod. ca. 49. ext. eod.
Satius est impunitum manner facinus nocentis, quam innocentem condemnare. l.
5. Dig. De poen.
Semper in obscuris, quod minimum est sequimur. l 9. Dig. De reg jur.
Odia restringi, and favores convenit ampliari; Ca. 15. ext. eod.
and the like to an infinite number. Not any thing short of the same Seneca,
Epist. 81.
when he says; Reus sententiis paribus absolvitur, and semper quicquid dubium
est, humanitas inclinat in melius; Where the suffrages of a Court are equal,
the defendant stands acquitted; and where any thing happens to be doubtful,
clemency will always pitch upon the gentlest resolution.

Neither does it derogate from the clemency of the Civil Law, that it seems to
deal so sharply with those (against whom there are grounds enough to suspect
them of some enormous crimes whereof they are accused, but not evidence full
enough to condemn them) as to allow such persons to be Dig. and Co. de
Quaestion.
set upon the Rack, thereby to manifest their innocence by an obstinate denial,
or to discover their guilt by a plain confession. For the only ground of this
austere proceeding was a great tenderness not to take away the lives of any,
but upon most manifest and undeniable proof; and yet with a care
notwithstanding, that for want of such full and clear proof (which offenders
through their secret workings would always labor to prevent) offenses should
not go unpunished, to the endangering of the public peace and welfare of other
men.

When a man is criminally accused, there are but two ways to convict him,
either by his confession, or by proof. As to confession; where is it seen that
he that dares to offend highly, when he comes to be examined, does not deny it
as boldly? and who is there that does not excuse him for seeking thus to
preserve himself? Ignoscendum est ei qui sanguinem suum qualiter qualiter
redemptum voluit, says the l. 1. Dig. De honis little qui ante.
Civil Law it self; that is, He is to be pardoned, meaning as to punishment,
that labors by any means to avoid the shedding of his own blood. As to proof,
the Romans were so tender of the lives and personal safety of their people,
that to convict a man by proof it was no easy thing, but very difficult; for
they would neither inflict any corporal punishment, nor condemn any man to
death, as some Christian States do at this day, upon the testimony of one
single witness, though present when the act was done. Gomez. var. resel. Tom.
3. ca. 12. De Probat. delict.
And in this it did exactly follow the best pattern of all other, the Law of
God; Deuteronomy. 19.15.17 6. Numb. 35.30.
One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin,
in any sin that he sins: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of
three witnesses shall the matter be established.

By the Roman Law therefore, before death or other personal punishment could be
inflicted, there were to be two witnesses; they must be free from all
exception, and especially they must be none of the accuseds accomplices, who l.
Final. co. de accusat.
could not be evidence against one another; they must not by remote
circumstances, or by any light l. absentem parag. 1. Dig. De poen.
presumptions, but clearly and concludently depose the thing; and their
testimony must be agreeing also not only as to the act done, but as to place,
time, person, and other material circumstances, wherein if they did vary or
disagree, the proof was insufficient. Three of the Roman Emperors, Gratian,
Valentinian, and Theodosius, did all agree in giving to all public accusers
this advertisement: l. 25. co. De Probat.
Sciant cuncti accusatores eam se rem defer in publicam notionem debere, quae
munita sit idoneis testibus, vel instructa apertissimis documentis, vel
indiciis ad probationem indubitatis and luce clarioribus expedita; Let all
accusers take notice, that they must offer that to public Trial which is
furnished with legal witnesses, or attended with most luculent proof, or may be
made out by arguments of unquestionable conviction, and clearer then the light
it self.

The case therefore thus standing, that the wickedness of Men was grown
luxuriant and abounding, that it acted in secret altogether, that it would
never betray it self, and witnesses sufficient enough to condemn them could
hardly be found; It was but necessary Bonum innocentis bono nocentis, bonum.
commune privato ante habendum est ordinatae di ectionis lege; ex dilectione
autem innocentium capitalia judicia nata sunt. Grot. de jur. bell. lib. 1. ca.
2. sect 8.
for the public peace, and the safety of innocent and quiet men, to make them
by a vigorous course of trial either fear to offend, or be instrumental to
condemn themselves, rather then they should be encouraged to offend freely, out
of a presumption that their evil actings should never be brought to light. For
if there were but one positive witness that saw the thing done, as it was mercy
and clemency in the Law not to condemn the accused presently upon so short a
proof; yet were it safe, were it not Sicut est aliquando misericordia puniens,
ita est crudelitas parcens. Augustine.
cruelty to all the people, were it not of ill example to absolve him quite
without a further trial, merely because there was no better proof; which their
ill-minded subtilty, making an ill use of the favor of the Law, was a cause of
too? So that to bring men to the rack in such cases for trials sake, is not to
be censured for cruelty; Non ex saevitia, sed ex bonitate talia faciunt
homines, says l. ad Corin. 3.12. de paenis humanis agens.
St Chrysostom; Such things are done by men, not out of cruelty but goodness.
And I must say with De justit. Roman. leg. lib. 2. dubit. 64. arg. l. 51.
parag. ult. Dig. ad l. Aquil.
Maestertius, who stiffly maintains this proceeding in the Roman Law: sane hic
juris rigor (si aliquis sit) utilitate publica compensatur; This rigor of the
Law (if it be any) is recompensed with advantage to the whole Commonwealth;
for by the terror hereof it is free from the machinations of wicked and lewd
men. And though there have been some, as Ludovicus Vives writing upon St Austin
De civit. Dei lib. 19. ca. 6.
, and Sir ca. 22.
John Fortescue in his praises of the Laws of England, who have with very much
acrimony defended the contrary; yet I must say to them as the l. 3. Co.
Theodosian. De defensor. civitat.
three Emperors, Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius once said; Removeantur
patrocinia, quae favorem reis, and auxilium facinorosis impertiendo, maturari
scelera fecerunt; Away with those Apologies, that by assisting persons that are
accused, and pleading on the behalf of wicked men, are an occasion for
wickedness to spring up and fructify; for surely it must needs grow most, and
wax most vigorous there, where it is most gently dealt withal: though as to
the first, (unquestionably a most learned man) whosoever reads him in that
place, he may see that he there condemns this trial by torture, looking upon it
in the general only, and as used arbitrarily and without any rule or measure
at all, and not as it was practiced under the rules and cautions of the Roman
Law. As for the other, though he is zealous to prefer the Law of this Nation
before the Civil Law, and all other Laws of the World besides, yet he could not
have been so bitter in censuring the Civil Law in this particular, if he had
remembered with what measure of severity those that are arraigned for capital
crimes, are handled by that Law that he does so much commend; which, because
others of that profession have lately taken such free notice of, themselves
need not mention.

And yet was not this practiced amongst the Romans only, nor More majorum
introductum esse inquit Cicero, ut per tormenta veritas exquiraratur. in
Partit. Orator.
they the first authors of it; for they took it from the Graecians, and from
the people of Rhodes, whom they followed in most things. And Parat. Dig. de
Quaestion. nu 3.
Wesenbeck says of it, that it was mos antiquissimus, omnium fere been
institutorum populorum communis; ut non immerito pro lege ac jure quodam
gentium habeatur; It was an ancient observation, common almost to all well
ordered Commonwealths, that it may very justly be accounted of as it were a
Law of Nations. And if we look into our own Historians, and Cowels Interp.
verb. Ordei.
Books of Law, we shall find that there has been a kind of trial very anciently
in use amongst our selves here in England, very near to this of the Romans, and
in severity no whit inferior: For there were certain Ordeal Laws which were
used in such doubtful cases, whereby when clear and manifest proofs were
wanting, they did try and find out whether the accused were guilty or
guiltless. And this they were wont to execute one of these three ways, either
by fire, or by water, or by combat. For sometimes men were enforced to decide
matters in controversy not only criminal but civil, by the death of one
another in a Duel. Sometimes they were adjudged to take red-hot Irons into
their bare hands; and sometimes to Which was practiced upon Queen Emma the
Mother of King Edward the Confessor, to clear her self of Adultery with Allwin
Bishop of Winchester, or as some write, upon Allwin himself. Hackwill. Apolog.
of Gods Provid. lib. 4. ca 2 sect. 5. Isaacksons Chronolog. Anno 10^0.
walk barefoot over red-hot plough-shares blindfold. Their judgment by water
was either by appointing the party accused to thrust his arms up to his elbows
in seething hot water, or by having a cord tied about him under his arms, to
be cast into some river.

In these cases, if the accused parties go over seven ploughshares laid a
little distance one from another, and either tread besides them, or treading
upon them with their bare feet, or taking the hot irons in their bare hands,
did receive no harm: and so if the parties putting their arms into the hot
water, were not scalded; or they that were cast into a river, did sink down
into the bottom thereof until they were drawn up; they were pronounced innocent
and not guilty: but if they were burnt by the hot irons, or scalded by the hot
water, or could not sink to the bottom of the river, or were slain or
vanquished in the combat, in such cases they were pronounced guilty.

But further, this great but most wholesome severity of the Romans, was tempered
with a very great allay of tenderness and care toward the accused offender; as
may be seen by the many and most prudent cautions that were observed in it. For

First, the offense in which such trial was allowed, was to be enormous, and
not so little Gomez. var. Resol. Tom. 3. ca. 13. nu. 2.
as was to be punished by banishment or pecuniary satisfaction, but either
death or corporal punishment was to follow it.

Secondly, it never could be had where there could be gotten a full and a
sufficient proof to condemn without it. For this was to be the last means to
bring forth the truth, when l 12. co. de. Quaestion.
all other means did fail.

Thirdly, Before a man could be brought to the rack, the offense was to be made
out Multis indiciis oneratus, and argumentis pene convictus reus esse debet.
Wesenb. parat. dig. eod. nu. 7.
with such an evidence, as in some other States would be sufficient to take
away life it self, it the crime were capital: for either it must be proved by
one witness who saw it done, or if it could no otherwise be made out then by
circumstances, they must be very pregnant and convincing, and such
circumstances must be Gomez. dict. ca. 13. nu. 18.
proved at least by two witnesses.

Fourthly, the accused person had all free license given him to disable the
accusers proof, to disparage his witnesses, or to offer any Si quaedam indicia
pro reo sacient, quae elident contraria, ita ut amplius ea semiplenam
probationem non impleant, ad torturam perveniri non debet. Wesemb. parat. Dig.
De quaest. nu. 7.11.
evidence to the contrary; and if the Judge did at last condemn him to be
brought to the rack, he L. 2. Dig. De appellat. recipiend.
might yet appeal.

Fifthly, it must be executed with a respect had to the strength or weakness of
the body that is to suffer, and no further then may serve to draw out the
truth, ut moderatae rationis temperamenta desiderant, says l. 10. parag. 3.
Dig De quaest.
Arcadius; and, ut homo salvus sit vel innocentiae vel supplicio; as may stand
with all fitting and reasonable moderation; and that he may be preserved either
to innocence or to punishment.

Sixthly, The Law notwithstanding gave so little credit to any confession made
under such bitter sufferings, because it might be extored by force, and out of
a hope to be rid of the present pain, rather then that they were the words of
truth, that it would never condemn upon any such confession, except the party
accused being redeemed from his pain, and in his full liberty, did again
confess the very same thing; nor then neither, if that which was confessed were
more probable to be false then true.

Lastly, the Judge that examined him in such extremities, was directed to bear
himself so cautiously, l. 1. parag. 21. Dig. eod.
ut non suggerere interrogato, sed ab eo potius veritatem requirere videatur;
that the truth should rather come freely from himself, then any thing should be
suggested to him. He was also diligently to mind with what voice he spoke, high
or low, how freely such confession fell from him, or whether it came with
reluctance; and to enquire what his credit and condition of life had been in
the place where he lived. Plurimum in excutienda veritate, says l. 10. parag.
5. De eod.
Arcadius, etiam vox ipsa, and cognitionis subtilis diligentia affert. Nam and
ex sermon, and ex eo, qua quis constantia, qua trepidatione quid diceret; vel
cujus existimationis quisque in civitate sua est, quaedam ad illuminandam
veritatem in lucem emergunt.

These were the cautions which the Roman State did prescribe to be used in this
sharp, but as their policy stood (who did not love upon a slender proof to take
away the lives of their people) very necessary course of trial by torture;
which peaceable and just men could not be offended with, because it was to
Quippe cum ne se quidem inter tot cruces and supplicia sontium satis tuta fit
innocen. tia, says Grotius de jur. Beil. lib. 2. ca. 20. nu. 12.
defend and secure them from the rage and the rapine of vile men: And if evil
men did groan under that severity, they had their desert, and might Damnum quod
quis sua culpa sextit, fiot debit non al^is imputate. Reg. 86. De reg jur. in 6.
thank themselves. And though it might possibly, howbeit very rarely happen,
that some innocent man might wrongfully suffer sometimes under that trial; yet
what so perfect or exact a trial can there be devised or thought of, under
which that rare accident may not also be? for when we have done all that we
can, yet we can still but judge as Men.

In defense whereof I have therefore taken the liberty to insist the longer,
because once at a public solemn meeting, where the keeping up of this
Profession came to be considered of, I took notice that this small part of the
Civil Law was enforced by a worthy Gentleman, quem honoris causa non nomino, as
a main objection, upon which he would have that whole Law to be quite laid
aside; by which rule I know not what Law there is, or ever was, that would
stand: and for this reason also, to show how wise and rational that Law is,
even in that which those that do not fully understand it, would so much condemn
it for; and how easily in all other matters it may be defended, if so well
maintained in this. To go on therefore in pursuit of my first design.

The Civil Law will have rigor always give place to equity. Placuit in
omnibus rebus praecipuam esse justitiae aequitatisque, quam stricti juris
rationem, l. 8. Co. de Judic.
says the Law; It is enacted that in all things there ought to be a greater
consideration of right and equity then of strict and exact rule. For if every
case, when circumstances be clean different, should be measured by one and the
same rule, sub authoritate juris scientiae perniciose aliquando erraretur,
says Paulus l. si servum. dig. de verb. chlig. parag. 3.
; Under pretense of observing Law, we may at one time or other fall into
dangerous error. If a man leaves goods in my hands to keep for him, the Law
does strictly enjoin me to restore them when they are demanded l. Tot. Tit.
dig. Depos.
: But if afterward this man's goods shall be confiscate, as being condemned for
some capital crime; or if it appears that these goods were stolen, and that
the true owner comes to claim them, I should err injuriously to keep my self
to the strict rule of restoring the goods precisely from whence I had them, and
not to deliver them up to the State, or to return them to the true and just
owner. Haec est bona fides, says Tryphoninus, l. 31. dig. Depos parag. 1.
ut commissam rem recipiat is, qui dedit. Sed si totius rei aequitatem, quae ex
omnibus personis quae negecio isto continguntur, impletur, mihi reddenda sunt,
a quo, facto scelestissimo adempta sunt. Et probo hanc esse justitiam, quae
suum cuique ita tribuit, ut non distrahatur ab ullius justiore repetitione; It
is honesty to return the goods to him that left them with me. But if the equity
of the whole case be considered, and the persons that are concerned in it, they
are better returned to him from whom they were unjustly taken. I allow that
justice, says he, which does so render back to every one his own, as that
thereby no injury is done to another who has a better right therein.

And from this equity is it that several ways and means are ordained, of
restoring men to their first state and condition, from whence in strictness of
Law they are fallen: For if a man through threats, or any crafty practice of
another, or by his want of full age, or by his being not present, or through
some slip or error which a wiser then he might have committed, be fallen into
some great mischief, equity in such cases will relieve him against the Law.
Tot. Tit. Dig. de in integ. rest.
Hence is it that the Law appoints the Judge, aequitatem semper ante oculos
habere, l. 4. parag 1. Dig de eo quod cert. loc.
to have equity before his eyes; and that upon the entrance into his office he
shall take an oath, quod in judicando velit aequitatem sequi, Nevell. 8.
that he will judge according to equity; and that all bargains are to be
interpreted by equity. l. 81. Dig. Prosocio.
Also sometimes we may depart from the very nature of the contract, and the
very words of the will, to follow equity. Brouch. l. 90. Dig de reg. jur.
Also solemnities and forms of Law, though they ought to be most carefully
observed, because they are ordained as rules for all cases; yet upon the ground
of manifest equity there may be a deviation from them too. Et si nihil facile
mutandum est ex solennibus, tamen ubi aequitas evidens poseit, subveniendum
est. l. 7. Dig. de in integr. rest.


And yet will not the Law allow of the relief of equity in any case, which is
specially even with all its circumstances settled by Law, how rigorous soever
the determination of the Law be: for written rigor shall be preferred before
unwritten equity. l. 12. parag 1: Dig. Qui and a quib man. Vetantis legit major
est potestas, quam aequitatis, tujus speciem obtendere suae cupiditaticuique
liceret. Bodin de rep^ lib. 1. ca. 8.
Glementiores lege judices esse non oportet; Judges ought not to be merciful
above that that the Law it self is But it lets in equity where the Law is
general, and the case in fact is accompanied with such special circumstances,
that in all likelihood the Law never took it into consideration; which if it
had, it would and must have made an exception in that case; For as Aristotle
says, aequitas nihil aliud est quam supplementum ejus quod lex praetermisit;
equity is no more then a providing specially for that which the Law is silent
in. Neither does it allow of a wandering, imaginary, or unrestrained equity,
but what is either written and authentic from the Law it self, or what is
manifest and evident to wise, rational, and the best discerning men (I mean
those that are skilled and well studied in the Civil Law, and not your vulgar
rational men) by deductions and reasonings from the Law given in the like
cases. Non possunt omnes articuli sigillatim aut legibus aut senatusconsultis
comprehendi; sed cum in aliqua causa sententia eorum manifesta est, is qui
jurisdictioni praeest, ad similia procedere, atque ita jus dicere debet; Laws
and decrees cannot hit every circumstance; but when their determination is
certain in any one case, by that the Judge may do right in other cases that are
like it l. 12. Dig. De Legib.
.

As it treats the living with all gentleness and equity, so it extends its
humanity and tender consideration to the dead too, and is indulgent to those
that lie in their very graves. And therefore it will have the heirs and
executors of a deceased person to be so free to bury the dead, and to pay all
such funeral respects as are due, that it will not suffer any action to be
brought, or any demand to be made of any thing that was owing by him that is
dead, by the space of nine days. Novell. 115. ca. 5.
Nor can any legal process be served upon those that are accompanying the corpse
to burial. l. 2. and 3. Dig. De in jus vocand.
And so far is it from conniving at the barbarous inhumanity of those, that for
money owing by the deceased will arrest and stay the body from burial till
payment made, or full security given, that it inflicts a sharp punishment upon
such transgressors; for they do not only quite lose that which they labor to
recover by so foul an action, but also forfeit as much in value to the
deceaseds heirs; and a third part of their estate is confiscate, and they make
themselves infamous Ut defunct. seu funer. cor. non injur. ca. 5.
.

And if there be such a custom which I have heard is pretended to by some
parishes within this Nation, and practiced also, that when a dead corpse is
carried through toward some further place of burial, it may be stayed upon the
way, and not suffered to proceed till some fee or toll be paid; it is such a
custom which the Civil Law is against. For that Law expressly provides, ne
corpora aut essa mortuorum detinerentur aut vexarentur; neve prohiberentur, quo
minus via publica transferrentur, aut quo minus sepelirentur; that the bodies
and bones of the dead be not stayed or troubled, nor that any restraint be to
hinder their passage along the highway to and fro, or to obstruct their
burial. l. 38. Dig. de Mortu Infer.
And generally without exception either of place or person, says directly,
that no such fee or toll shall be paid. Graec. Cod. de relig. and sumpt. fun l.
15.
In nullo quopiam loco vectigal ab aliqua perfona pro corporibus ex uno loco in
alium translatis praestetur; No fee shall be paid by any person in any place
for the removing of a corpse from one place to another.

And surely if the first ground from whence that custom came were known, we
should be willing for Religion sake to lay it down. For our superstitious
ancestors believing that the prayers of the living were useful to the souls of
the dead, were wont as often as they carried forth any dead body to be buried,
to stay in every convenient Town through which they went, to receive the
prayers of the devout people for the soul of their deceased Brother; In
recompense whereof it is probable, that something was in charity bestowed for
the poor of that place, or to some other end. Which at first proceeding from
bounty, we have no cause to turn it into a duty, especially to pass an
indignity upon the dead, and when we bestow not the prayers as they did, nor
indeed can think them profitable as they applied them.

Neither is the Law so careful to conduct the dead quietly to their graves, as
it is severe in punishing those that shall disturb their bodies there, or shall
demolish or deface their sepulchers. The place where the dead body lies is
esteemed Religious, and the injury done to the body it self, or to the monument
thereof, is accounted no less then sacrilege. l Co. De sepulch. viol.


If it be done riotously and with Arms, the crime is capital; if without, it
is to be considered whether the body be pulled out of the grave, and then it is
capital to those of the meaner sort, but others of better rank are banished, or
condemned to work in the Mines. But if the sepulcher be only demolished or
defaced, a penalty is paid to the Exchequer, and good reparation given to the
next heirs, and diverse other punishments besides inflicted Tot. Tit. Dig. and
Cod. de fepulch. viol.
.

Nay, though the body be interred in another man's private ground, though it
does not allow of the act, but will order the body to be removed, or the value
thereof to be paid to the owner of the soil, yet it will not suffer the owner
of the ground, of his own head to unbury or take away the body, propter
reverentiam manium, and quia corpus sepultum non est inquietandum; for the
honor due to the Ghosts of the dead, and because dead men once interred ought
not to be disturbed; but either the Prince or the chief Priest must give
authority or warrant for the same. l. 8.39. Dig. de relig. and sumpt. fun.
Finally, the debt contracted by the deceased in the time of his sickness or
about his burial, shall be paid before all other debts whatsoever. l. pen. Dig.
de relig. and sumpt. fun. l, 3. Co. eod.


In all its constitutions it opposes and sets it self against the
oppression of great ones, and hates that wrong that comes from the potency or
greatness of any person. If a person of honor shall forcibly carry away a
Virgin, or invade the possession of another, he shall be tried by the ordinary
Judge of the place where he offends, and not be allowed any higher or more
noble Judge, which else he may claim to have: for omnem hujusmodi honorem
reatus excludit, says the Text of the Law; l. Co. Ubi senato. vel clariss.
His guilt renders him incapable of any such Honorable Privilege. Neque honos
ei servatur qui se in tantum scelus deduxit; l. 47. Dig. de ritu nupt.
Honor is no protection for him that has stained it with such an odious crime.

It will not allow persons of great power or high place to interest themselves
in the controversies or litigious estates of others, neither by soliciting
them in Court, nor having their names used to countenance them; ne tenuiores
importunis potentium intercessionibus opprimantur, says the Text; l. 1. Co. Ne
lieiat potent. patrocin.
that is, lest might should bear down and be too hard for right. Nay, it will
not admit either the public Exchequer or the Commonwealth, upon any pretense
of debt, gift, or assignment to them made, to lend their name or patronage for
the asserting of others rights. Tot. Tit. Co. Ne fiscus vel resp. procuration.
Ne inde injuriarum nascatur occasio, unde jura nascuntur; l. 6. Co. unde vi.
that is, lest they that should do most right, should be the occasion of doing
the greatest wrong.

And it is remarkable, how disdaining the expressions of the Law are in that
particular, and yet but such as upon the like occasion are frequent and common
in the Law every where. Petition being made to Gordian the Emperor, that he
would suffer it, his answer was, Contra juris rationem desideras; l. 1. Co. Ne
fiscus vel resp.
The request was opposite to right reason. The same Emperor being asked again
the same thing, said, Hoc temporum meorum disciplina non patitur. Vnde jus
tuum, si quod tibi competit, citra invidiam fisci mei tueri solenniter cura; l.
2. Co. eod.
that is, it agrees not with my fashion or government so to do. If therefore
you have a right, prosecute it in your own name, without drawing into odium my
Exchequer. The Emperors Dioclesian and Maximilian to the same thing
peremptorily say, Abhorret a seculo nostro; l. 3. Co. eod.
It was a thing that he and all of his time abhorred: And again, l. 4. Co. eod.
that it was contra seculi sui tranquillitatem; It would be an inlet to a
general distemper to permit it.

It will not endure any fraudulent, fallacious, or deceitful dealing. Tot. Tit.
Dig. and Co. de Dol. mal.
If a man does wilfully alien to defraud his adversary, his act is vain; for in
the eye of the Law he is taken to be in possession still. Qui dolo desierit
possidere, pro pessidente damnatur; quia pro pessessione dolus est. l. 131.
Dig. de reg. jur.
Especially it hates deceit most in those, whom it is most forward to relieve
when they are deceived. The Civil Law allows not a woman a capacity to be
surety or to be bound for others, though she might contract for her self,
propter inbecillitatem sexus, being prone to be drawn in and to be wrought
upon; Tot. Tit. Dig. ad S. C. Velleian.
Which restraint did bind her from being bound for her own husband. l. 2. Dig.
eod.
But if when she knows her privilege, and will cunningly dissemble it, and
offer to be bound notwithstanding, and the creditor is such a one as may be
justly ignorant of the Law in that particular; or if she presents herself in
man's apparel, the Law will not relieve her, but she remains subject to action:
For, ita demum mulieribus subvenitur, si non callide sint versatae: Infirmitas
foeminarum, non calliditas, auxilium meruit; d. l. 2. parag. 3.
It is their ignorance and weakness that the Law favors, and not their craft
and subtilty. So no act is binding to him that is under age. Tot. Tit. Dig. de
minor.
But if he shall fallaci majoris aetatis mendacio aliquem decipere, say and
pretend to him that deals with him that he is of full age when he is not, in
that case he stands obliged and is remediless. Nam errantibus, non fallentibus,
publica jura subveniunt; l. 2. Co. si min. se major. dixer.
It is error and imprudence, and not fraud, that the Law will succor.

Ingratitude is so odious in the Civil Law, that if a slave that has been
manumised shall bear himself unthankful toward his Master, or if a son shall
recompense the benefit of being quit of his fathers power and command, with
some injurious act or office against his father, they may both for their
ingratitude be brought into their former yoke again. Wesenb. Parat. Dig de
obsequ parent. and patron. praestand.
And generally, if I have out of my free bounty bestowed any thing upon
another, if he shall attempt to betray my life or estate to mischief, or pass
upon me any weighty injury, I need not suffer my bounty to remain with so
unworthy a person, but may recall it again from him; l. 10. Co. De revocand.
Donat.
Cum magis in eos collata liberalitas ad obsequium eos inclinare deberet, quam
ad insolentiam erigere; l. 1. Co. eod.
Since bounty ought to invite men to be rather obsequious then insolent.
Howbeit my heir, if I die, shall not sue to recovet it: Etenim si ipse qui hoc
passus est, tacuerit, silentium ejus maneat semper, says the Law: d. l. 10.
If I against whom the ingratitude was committed did not complain, let it be
buried in silence for ever.

The elegance wherewith it has expressed its detestation and severity against
the odious and unnatural sin of men carnally mixing with one another, is very
remarkable: Cum vir nubit in foeminam viris porrecturam, quid cupiatur, ubi
sexus perdidit locum? ubi scelus est id, quod non proficit, scire? Vbi Venus
mutatur in alteram formam? Vbi amor quaeritur, nec videtur? Jubemus insurgere
leges, armari jura gladio ultore, ut exquisitis poenis subdantur infames, qui
sunt vel futuri sunt rei. l. 31. Co. ad l. Jul. de Adult.
The state and quality of the matter requires me not to translate the words,
though most elegant.

The order that the Civil Law has settled for the sharing of a man's estate who
dies intestate, is very natural, just, and rational. It sets no difference
between land and goods, nor between eldest and youngest, nor male and female,
but divides the whole equally amongst them; yet it has a respect to distance
and propinquity of degrees, and considers the whole blood and the half after a
different manner. It calls first children; if they fail, then parents; if they
fail too, then the next collateral kindred. Novel. 118. de haered. ab intest
venient. inprinc.
And when I say that children shall succeed in the first place, I do thereby
exclude and bar Grandchildren, so long as their parents are alive: for
proximior in gradu semper remotiorem excludit; Parag. si plures Inst. de legit.
agnat. succes.
the nearer in degree shuts out those that are further off. Yet if there were
diverse children at first, and one of them is dead, who has left children, such
Children and Grandchildren shall succeed together, but they shall not all
share alike: for as the children amongst themselves shall partake equally; so
the children of him that is dead, if there be never so many of them, yet all
representing their father and coming under his right, they shall all have but
that portion which he should have had if he had lived. Parag. rum filius. Inst.
De haered. quae ab intest. defer.
And this the Law calls a succession in stirpes, there being no consideration
had of their number, but of their stocks only. And though all the children of
the first degree should die, each of them leaving their several children, be
the number equal or unequal; yet still the children of each child shall have
but the fathers or mothers part; Parag. fin. Inst. cod.
for still they succeed in right of their ancestour, and not in any right of
their own. Wesent. Parat. dig. Unde cogra.


When children and all of the descendent line do fail, the Law does not only
admit the father and mother in the next place to succeed equally; but if they
fail, the next in degree above them in the ascendent line, as Grandfather and
Grandmother, shall come in to inherit. And if there be both Grand father and
Grandmother by the fathers side, and Grandfather and Grandmother by the
mothers side, the estate shall be divided into two equal parts; the Grand
father and Grandmother by the fathers side to have one, and the Grandfather
and Grandmother by the mothers side to have the other; and though there be but
one of one side, and two of the other, yet the division must be the same. Ca.
1. dict. Novel. 118.


But if the person that is dead intestate, left Parents in the ascendent line;
and near kindred in the collateral line, as brothers and sisters; the one shall
not exclude the other, but they shall all be admitted together, to divide the
estate equally, every person carrying away an equal share; d cap 2.
and if there be children of a brother that is dead, they shall come in too,
but no further, then to carry away their fathers part. Schneidw. Inst. de
haered: quae ab int. Tit. de secund. ordin. succe. l. nu. 29.
Howbeit, they must be brothers or sisters of the whole blood to him that is
dead, who would come in with the parents: for brothers or sisters of the half
blood shall not concur with them. schneidw. loc. cit ^t. nu. 30.


Where the descendent and ascendent line do both fail, if there be brothers
alone, they have all alike; but if there be children of a brother that is dead
concurring with them, they must yield to the children their fathers part. But
if there be brothers and sisters children only, the brothers and sisters being
all dead, though there be never so many of one brother, and but one of another,
and two of one sister and but one of another, yet all these brothers and
sisters children standing alone, how unequal soever they be in number, yet they
shall all share equally; not each stock having what their fathers should have
had, but every person having his equal part in the whole: schneidw. loc. eit.
Tit. de Tertio ord. succed nu. 29.
And this the Law calls sucessio in capita, a succession by the poll. The
reason why they succeed thus differently when they are alone, from that which
they do when they concur with brothers and sisters to the deceased, is, because
here they derive no right from their ancestour, but succeed by a right of their
own, being now the deceaseds next of kin: whereas in the other case they
succeed by way of representation, and in the right of their parent only.

But if brothers and sisters and their children do both fail, it is a certain
and uncontrouled rule, That whosoever is next in degree to him that is dead,
after these in the collateral line, bars and shuts out all of any degree that
is further off. Auth. post. fratres. Go. de legitim. haered.
For the right of representation reaches no further, nor to any other then to
brothers children in the collateral line. Ca. 3. diot. Novel, 118.
Wherefore if a man dies leaving Uncles and Aunts both by father and mother,
they are all admitted to have equal shares; but no children of any Uncle or
Aunt that is dead, shall be admitted to come in with them. And so much the
Civil Law prefers the whole blood before the half, that if a man dies, leaving
Brothers of the whole blood, and Brothers of the half, the whole blood only
are admitted, the half being quite excluded. Auth. Cessante co. De legitim.
haered.
Nay further, a Brothers son of the whole blood shall carry away the estate
from the Brother of the half. But if there be no Brothers or Brothers children
of the whole blood, then the Brothers and Sisters of the half and their
children are let in, to exclude remoter kindred. d. Auth. post fratres autem.
Howbeit though the being of the half blood be a bar to succession in Brothers
and Brothers children, yet does it bar no other further off then they. If
therefore a man dies leaving two Uncles, the one Brother of the whole blood to
his father, the other Brother of the half, the whole blood here shall not
exclude the half, but they shall both succeed alike. For in the collateral
line, after Brothers and Brothers children, solum consideratur proximitas and
paritas graduum, non duplex vinculum conjunctionis; the nearness in degree is
only to be respected, and not the blood. Wherefore they being both in an equal
degree, they are to be dealt withal in this point of succession equally.
schneidw loci citat: Tit: De tertio erd: succed: nu: 34.


As for the wife, because under the Roman state she might have a threefold
patrimony of her own; First her dower, secondly, the goods that she brought in
marriage to her husband over and above, called bona Paraphernalia, or bona
extra dotem; and thirdly goods or estate that she kept in her own hands, which
never came to the hands of her husband: Paul de castr: in l. maritus. 21. co:
de procurat:
And because by the course of the Civil Law, both her dower and the goods that
she brought besides over and above, her husband being dead, came back to her
again, the husband having but the use of them during life; l. 4. co. solut:
matrimon:
therefore where there was either children or kindred, it did not admit the
wife to have any part or portion in the husbands estate, but did leave her to
enjoy her own.

But if the case were such, that she had no portion to bring in marriage, or
had but a slender one, and that she has nothing or not enough of her own to
subsist with, nor otherwise be provided for by her husband, the Law does then
allow her a fourth part out of her husbands estate, if there be three children
or under; but if there be more, she shall then have an equal share with them
for her life. But if there be kindred only, and no children, or if the
children that be, be not her children, but children of another marriage, she
shall have the property thereof for ever. Auth: praeterea. co. Unde vir and
Uxor: schneidw: loc: citat: Tit De sucees: inter v. r: and ux: tu: 14. sl. 20.
Co. De Transact,


But there is nothing that the Civil Law is more strict and sollicitous in,
then to keep men fast to such promises, covenants, and free gifts that they
have made to others, though made never so liberally and freely, and without any
consideration at all. Nihilita fldei congruit humanae, quam ea quae placuerant,
custadiri; l. 20 Co. De Transaot.
Nothing suits better with common honesty, then that those things which have
been once assented unto should be observed. Which it will have binding and
obligatory, though any right or property that a man has, be thereby passed and
conveyed away. Nihil tam conveniens est naturali aequitati, quam voluntatem
domini volentis rem suam in alium transferri, ratam haberi; Parag. 1. Inst. De
v. rb. ohligat.
Nothing does nearer approach unto natural equity, then that the mind of any
man who once puts over any thing that he has to another, should stand of force.
And the Law is the same, when a man without any asking does of himself freely
give any thing to another, though he does not presently part with the
possession. l. 35. parag. ult Co. de Donat.
The reason that is given by the Law is, Cum in arbitrio cujuscunque sit hoc
facere quod instituit; oportot eum vel minime ad hoc prosilire, vel cum venire
ad hoc proper averit, non quibusdam excogitatis artibus suum propositum
defraudare, tantamque indevetionem quibusdam quasi legitimis velamentis
protegere; When it is in every man's free power to do as he purposes at first,
he ought either not to offer it at all, or when he has gone so far as to pass
his word, he should not seek by any devised artifices to slip from his first
intention, or to prop up so much unworthiness with any fair or colorable
pretenses. Only a free giver has this favor showed him, that he shall not be
urged to make good his word any further, then in quantum facer^ potest, habita
ratione ne egeat, so far as he is able to perform, and not want himself. l. 28.
Dig. de reg jur.
Nor shall he be so severely dealt with, as one that has debts to pay, Pinguius
donatori succurrere debemus, quam ei qui verum debitum persolvere compellitur;
ne liberali. tate sua inops fieri periclitetur, says the Law; l. 49, 50. Dig.
De re judic.
We must lend a more favorable hand to a free benefactor, then to one that is
to pay a just debt; lest a man's freeness should expose him to the danger of
extreme want and penury. And albeit it be a rule in the Civil Law, that a bare
promise or compact, called Nudum Pactum, is not obligatory, nor shall give any
cause of action: l 45. Dig. de pact.
Yet when there is discerned a seriousness and an advised purpose in the
promiser, so that he does not do it suddenly, and ad captandam benevolentiam,
to get favor only; or if it be manifest, that he does it out of pure
liberality, the want of recompense or consideration will not make it Nudum
Pactum, but that an action shall arise upon it, and he shall be bound to
perform it. Or if such promise or compact be put into writing, which may argue
it to be serious and deliberate; the defect of a valuable consideration will
not make it to be a Nudum Pactum, but that it shall bind; and he that made it
shall be enjoined to perform it also, though he received nothing at all in
recompense for it. Maestert. de just. Roman. Leg. lib. 1. ca. 31, 33.


When the Civil Law gives way to two that are indebted each to other, that when
either sues, the other may plead in bar the debt which the complainant ows him;
which if it be equal, it strikes it off wholly, or lessens it if it be under,
and so by discounting, a mutual discharge arises without any money paid; or not
so much as is demanded; who sees not that this part of the Civil Law is
established upon so much natural equity and reason, that it had been a Law of
it self, if the Romans had not made it so, and ought to be of force every where
throughout the World, it is so full of pure justice and reason? Interest enim
nostra potius non solvere quam solutum repetere; l. 3. Dig. de compensat.
It is an advantage rather not to pay at all, then to pay once, and be put to
demand the same again. And, dolo facit qui petit id quod mox redditurus est. l.
in condemnatione. parag. 3. Dig. de reg. jur.
His intent must needs be fraudulent, that will exact that which he must render
again to him from whom he receives it. Besides, he that will rightly ask his
due, must yield to another what is due to him. And albeit it may be said, that
he may also sue to recover that which is owing unto him; yet, frustra fit per
plura quod fieri potest per pauciora; l. 10. Co. De Judic.
A second action is a needless trouble and charge, which may be brought to an
end by one. Stoppage therefore is unquestionably the most natural, equal, and
easy way of payment; provided, that the debt that is set against the debt
demanded, be of the same kind, and clear without dispute; which if it be, it
may be pleaded even after judgment, to hinder execution. Sichard. in Rubr. Co.
de compensat.
Yet it will not suffer me to plead a debt against him that has put into my
hands a sum of money in trust to keep for him, because my faithfulness and
truth was here relied upon; nor against the Exchequer that demands tribnte or
custom, for that the safety of the people is therein concerned. Parag. 30.
Inst. de act. l 3. Co. de compensas.


The Romans did so thoroughly see the necessity that lay upon men to perform
mutual offices and kindnesses each to other, that to encourage men the more to
pay these reciprocal duties, so necessary to each others common being, the
scope of their Laws tended to secure all men from sustaining any prejudice by
being officious or active for the benefit of other men. If therefore in my
friends absence I expend money, or contract a debt upon my self to accommedate
and improve his business, though I did it without his privity or knowledge, the
Givil Law will see all that I have laid out shall be restored me, and will
compel him to save me harmless, where either I have or can possibly suffer
detriment for his sake. For, sicut aequum est, says Gaius, negociorum gestorem
actus sui rationem reddere, and eo nomine condemnari, quicquid vel non ut
oportuit gessit, vel ex his negociis retinet: ita ex diverso justum est, si
utiliter gessit, praestari ei, quicquid eo nomine vel abest ei, vel abfuturum
est; l. 2. Dig. de nego. gest.
As it is but fitting, when I undertake to act in another man's business, I
should give an account for what I do, and answer for any thing I have done
amiss therein, and render unto him such profits as his affairs and goods have
yielded: So on the otherside it is but just, where I have served him with
success and advantage, that there he should reimburse me all that I have
usefully expended, and free me of all present and future prejudice whatsoever.
Hence is it, that if I pay another man's debt with my own money; or free from
captivity another son or such near kinsman, whom nature would oblige him to
redeem, or if being a Physician I attend and prosecute the cure and recovery of
another servant that is sick or wounded: in none of these cases will the Law
suffer me to be a loser in any measure; for what cost I have been at, or
whatsoever I have disbursed shall be allowed me: Iniquum est, says Gaius,
officium suum alicui esse damnosum; l. 7 Dig. Testam. quemadm. aper.
It is unreasonable, that a man for his courtesy and goodness should reap a
prejudice. Upon the equity hereof is that proceeding in the Admiralty Court
clearly justified, whereby, if a Ship being set upon by Pirates or by enenemies,
shall be rescued by another Ship seasonably coming in to her rescue; it
charges the Ship that is thus redeemed with salvage money to the other that did
so endanger herself, to preserve her; that recompense being but in lien of all
damages thereby sustained, and for future encouragement to others to fight in
the defense of those that they see assailed hereafter. Upon the same equity is
it, that when a Ship is in danger to be cast away through a raging tempest, if
to lighten the Ship, some of the heaviest goods belonging to others be thrown
overboard, and thereby the Ship and the rest of the goods comes safe home, the
loss is made common and reparable by the whole. Aequissimum enim est, says
Paulus, commune detrimentum fieri eorum, qui propter amissas res aliorum
consecuti sunt ut merces suas salvas haberent; l 2. Dig Ad leg. Rbod.
It is most equitable, that their wares should join to make up that loss, which
was the only means whereby they were preserved.

In like manner, though goods taken at Sea by Pirates from the true owners, may
be challenged and regained from any hands, where ever they shall be found and
met with (though it is otherwise in goods taken by an enemy in a just and open
war) yet if a man shall expend his own money to redeem them out of the Pirates
hands, not for his own use, or to make a good bargain for himself, but with an
intent to bring them home to their true owner; in this case, if the owner will
have them, he must first lay dawn the purchase money. l. 6. Dig. de Captiv. and
postlim. revers l. 2. parag. 3. Dig. ad. leg. Rhod.
Nay, sometimes the Law will enjoin a man to pay for that which he had got
before. For if three be taken prisoners in war, and one be permitted to go home
to procure money to pay for the ransoming of them all, and a condition added,
that if he that is let go returns not, the two that are left behind shall stand
engaged for his ranfome as well as for their own; in this case what money
soever they lay down for him, he is bound to repay them, though he had gotten
his liberty before. l. 21. Dig. de. Negoc. gest.
For the Law will not suffer a man to be damnified by any act which is done
usefully in contemplation of another.

And herein the Law does not so much look upon the success or sequel, as the
good will and probable undertaking. And therefore if I should fence or cast a
wall about another man's Island to keep it from overflowing, and it is overflown
notwithstanding; or if I bestow pains and cost to cure another man's child or
servant, and he dies, yet the Law will see me satisfied. Nam sufficit, si
utiliter gessi, et si effectum non habuit negocium, says Vlpian; l. 10 Dig.
de. negoc. gest.
It is sufficient that I did what was to be done, though the intended effect
did not ensue.

But here some caution and wariness must be used. For he that thus acts for
another, must be sure that he does no more then he that he acts for would
have done for himself, neither must he expend any more then is profitable and
necessary, and he can bear. l. 10. parag. 1. Dig eod.
Also he must not act after any countermand be once sent him, or that he be
once bidden to desist. l ult. Co. eod.
For in neither of these cases will the Law help him.

Further, if he be a father, or other of most near relation, that deals for the
benefit and in the concernments of such an one, as the Law may possibly presume
he does it rather to testify his natural affection toward him, then to demand
any thing of him for the same; I say, if there be any such proximity or
nearness, and yet an eye to to future satisfaction, he must declare and make
protestation, that it is done with that intent, and not donandi animo, not out
of any mind to bestow it freely, but to be allowed for the same; else the Law
will strike it out upon the score of affection and natural obligation. And so
did Alexander Severus declare to Mother Herennia, who when she had fed and
maintained at her Table her children, and laid out money besides for their
other uses; when they came of age, she demanded satisfaction of all from them,
but being denied it, she complained to the Emperor, who made her this answer,
Alimenta quidem quae filiis tuis praestitisti, tibi reddi non justa ratione
postulas; cum id exigente materna pietate feceris. Si quid autem in rebus eorum
utiliter and probabili more impendisti, si non and hoc materna liberalitate sed
recipiendi animo secisse te ostenderis, negociorum gestorum action id consequi
potes; l. 11. Co. eod.
Thou have no just reason to demand payment for that alimony and sustenance
which thou did afford thy children, for very natural piety did require it of
thee. But if thou have usefully and in a probable hope to advantage them,
expended also money about their business; if thou can make it good that thou
did it not out of a free mind, nor merely as a Mother, but with an
expectation to be reimbursed thereof by thy children, the Law will enforce them
to pay it thee back again.

Lastly, he that will voluntarily and of himself, being not commissioned, act
in another business, if he intends to ground any demand upon it, he must be
sure, not only to think and intend a benefit or advantage to him whom he is
about to serve, but it must be really so. For let him think it never so
beneficial, and wish it never so much, yet if it be not so indeed the loss will
be his; and he can challenge no satisfaction for what he does or expendeth. Vt
enim eventum non spectemus, says U^pian, negocium debet utiliter esse coeptum;
l 10. parag. 1. Dig. eod.
Though we value not the success, yet it is requisite that it should be
evidently useful or necessary when it is first undertaken.

Lastly, (not to sail any longer in an Ocean so vast and infinite, having given
instances enough to measure the rest of the Law by, tanquam ex pede Herculem)
though it is the proper work of every Law that is made, to declare to the
people what things they ought to do, and from what they must abstain, and
wherein they may take their full freedom; I egis vi^us est in perare, veta^t,
permi^tere, puntre. l. 7. Dig. de legth.
yet no Law has ever done it so fully and perfectly as this has done. For
Princes, Rulers, Councillors of State, Judges, subordinate Magistrates,
Advocates and Clients, Proctors, Registers and Notaries, Masters of families,
Husbands and Wives, Children and Servants, Masters and Scholars, Tutours and
Pupils, Merchants, Factours, Buyers and Sellers, Letters and Hirers, Borrowers
and Lenders, Officers and Soldiers, open Enemies as well as allies and
Confederates, Ambassadors and Nuntios, Conquerours and Conquered, Owners,
Masters, and Captains of Ships, Pilots, Mariners and Passengers, Aliens and
Natives, Fiduciaries, Mediators, Substitutes; and lastly, all sorts of people
of what age, degree, or condition soever they be, may read their truest duties
in this Learning, and be directed how to order and demean themselves aright in
their several offices and functions. So that when the learning of this Law is
thus universal, running through the several negociations and matters of
intercourse between Man and Man, Nation and Nation, and having a resolution
ready for all such questions as arise upon them; and is so rational withal,
that its decisions are rather the strong enforcements of reason, then any
commands of will; it ought to be no matter of wonder to us, that it has found
so much credit and authority with Christian Nations, as to make it the rule to
end their greatest Controversies.

The End of the First Book.
LEX LEGVM: OR, THE EXCELLENCY Of the Roman CIVIL LAW, Above all other HUMANE
LAWS WHATSOEVER.

The Second Part.

London, Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane. 1656.

LEX LEGUM: OR, THE EXCELLENCY Of the Roman CIVIL LAW, Above all other HUMANE
LAWS WHATSOEVER.
CHAP. I.
That the greatness and splendor of the Roman Empire does evidence the
singular virtue of the Law it self, to which, as to its proper cause, it may be
ascribed.

ALbeit it be praise sufficient for the Roman Civil Law, that it has more of
natural equity and pure reason in it then any other Law of Man; and that more
need not be said, to divert a Nation or people from throwing it out of their
Territories, or disesteeming it, then that they may thereby seem to abandon
their own reason, and stifle the very dictates of nature, and even stop up that
fountain from whence all their own particular Laws were at first derived (for,
lex Romanorum legum omnium Matter nuncupatur, Addit. ad Capitul. Lud. Imper. ca.
a. tn God. leg. Antiqu.
the Roman Law is called the Mother of all Laws that have since been made:) Yet
because there are many other grounds upon which it may be yet further extolled
and set up above other Laws, I think I cannot spend time and pains better then
to set them down, especially when I see every thing is laid hold on to cry that
profession down.

And surely if the dispensation of right justice be a principal means to make a
State glorious and flourishing, this Law must needs surpass in excellency all
other Laws, by how much the Roman State, whch was all along carried on by that
Law, did in greatness exceed, and in splendour outshine all other States and
Empires that have yet been. Touching which the Roman story every where gives us
to undestand, that the Roman State in process of time grew so large in Dominion
and Power, that it spread it self almost over the whole World, there being few
Nations which were not brought under its rule and government; and indeed was
esteemed the common country of all men, and the Center of the whole earth.
Tantae erant Romanorum vires, ut Asia, Africa, and maxima Europae part
subactis, iisdem serme quibus Solis cursus metis, imperium suum finirent, says
Loccenius; Pe^iod. Imper. lib. 4. ca. 5.
The potency of the Romans was grown to be such, that Asia, Africa, and the
greatest part of Europe being Conquered, the Sun and the Empire did almost run
the same race.

It maintained intercourse of Trade, and held correspondence with all other
Nations, of what sort constitution, and language soever: It was the common
Nihil principe diguius, nihil magis optandum, quam dissidiorum ac bellorum
inter popules arbitrum ^ieri; ut olim S^natus Populufque Romanus propter summam
virtutis quam de se ipse concitarat ^pinionem. Bodin. de rep. lib: 5. ca. 6.
Judge and Umpire to arbitrate the differences of other Princes and people: It
was the seat of Learning, and receptacle of all learned men: It continued
flourishing many hundreds of years; during all which time it dealt in affairs
of the greatest consequence and variety, and did increase in great plenty and
abundance of all things; and whatsoever was in any kind rare, curious, or
exquisite in any part of the earth besides, it was brought thither. And
therefore Athenaeus has not doubted to call Rome in express terms, (...), the
Abridgment and Summary of the whole World; as if Rome wanted nothing which all
the other parts of the earth afforded; or as if we ought to esteem it Orbem in
urbs, the wide World confined in that one City:

In congruity therefore of reason must it be concluded, that a Nation in all
other things so much superior unto others, must also have Laws and rules of
conduct proportionable; else could they never have brought to pass so great and
glorious things as they did: For by the benefit of wholesome Laws and prudent
order is it, that great achievements are accomplished in a Commonwealth, and
such mighty works effected. Hereupon Tully contemplating the Laws of Rome as
well as their riches, does deelare, tautam sapientiam majoribus suis in jure
constituendo fuisse, quanta fuit in his tantis opibus imperii comparandia; they
showed as great wisdom in framing their Laws, as they did in getting the
infinite wealth which their State then had.

And well it is observed and delivered by many later writers, that in the
Roman Empire, the greatness thereof is rather to be imputed and ascribed to
the wisdom of their Laws and Government, then to their arms and valor. And
although in Vegetius his opinion, Disciplina militaris acriter retenta
principatam terrarum Romano imperio peperit, Their strict holding to the rules
of Martial discipline made the Romans Masters of the world; yet Sulpitius the
Poet will not give it to that only, for in his judgment, Duo sunt quibus
extulit ingens.
Roma caput, virtus belli, and sapientia Pacis.
it was their wise government in peace, as well as their success in war that
did so highly advance their City; for what their arms did get, their Laws did
keep, according to the saying of Florus, Viribus parantur provinciae, jure
retinentur. Thomas Aquinas Lib. 3. de Re. gim. Prineip. ca. 5.
says, that though they got the Empire first by injustice, rapine, and
bloodshed, yet they did deserve to hold it and to have it established upon
them, for the good Laws they had ordained.

Saint Austin Lib. 5. De civit. Dei ca: 12.
designing to set down how it came to pass that God did so exalt and enlarge
the Roman Empire, and what actions were the cause thereof, imputes it to their
virtues, and to their heroic and gallant minds; to their prudence and
honesty, rather then to their strength and power. For he brings in Cato
speaking to the Romans of his own time, that had much degenerated from their
Ancestors: Think not, says he, that our Ancestry brought the City into this
height by arms; if it were so, we should make it far more admirable then ever,
for we have greater plenty and abundance of men, more confederates, a greater
store also of arms and horses then they had. But they had other means which we
want, industry at home, equity abroad, freedom in consultation, and purity of
minds in all men, free from lust and enormity: For these we have gotten riot
and avarice, public beggary and private wealth: riches we praise, and sloth we
follow: good and bad are now undistinguished, ambition devouring all the
rewards due to virtue. Nor wonder at it, when each one patcheth up a private
estate; when you serve your lusts at home, and your profit and partiality here
in the Senate. This is it that lays the State open to all incursion of others.
Again, in the same place he says of them, That they were greedy of praise, and
bountiful of their purses; they loved glory and wealth honestly gotten; Honor
they dearly affected, but through virtue, offering willingly both their lives
and their estates for renown. The zealous desire of this one thing made them
set aside all other inordinate affections whatsoever; and hence they desired to
keep their Country first in freedom, and then in Sovereignty; because they saw
how baseness went with servitude, and glory with dominion. Amorc primitus
libertatis, post etiam demin ^tionis, and cupidit. te laudis and glo i.e multa
magna seterunt.


And then concludes; Wherefore, says he, whereas the Monarchies of the East
had been a long time glorious, God resolved to erect one now in the West also,
which although it were after them in time, yet should be before them in
greatness and dignity. And this he left in the hands of such men, (which he
supposes were not the generality of the people but some few only, but those
very good and gallant men) to punish the loud and crying guilt of other
Nations. And those men were such, as for honor and dominations sake would have
an absolute care of their Country, whence they received this honor; and would
not stick to lay down their own lives for their fellows, suppressing
covetousness and all other vices only with the desire of honor. Pro islouno
vitio, id est, amore laudis, pecuniae cupiditatem, and mult^ alit vitia corrum
pentes;


And then in the fifteenth Chapter of the same Book, speaking still of the
Romans, and the course they took in the prudent conduct of their affairs, he
closes thus most excellently, His emnibus artibus tanquam vera via nisi sunt
ad honores, imperium, gloriam: honor ati sunt in omnibus fere gentibus: imperii
sui leges imposuerunt multis gentibus: hodieque liter is and historia gloriosi
sunt pene in omnibus gentibus. Non est quod de summi and very Dei justitia
conquerantur; perceperunt mercedem suam; By these Arts as by sure steps they
climbed to honor, rule, glory: their name was magnified almost in all Nations;
they sent out their Laws to many Nations, and they were obeyed: there is almost
no Nation, but their Histories and writings mention them. No reason have they
to murmur at the justice of the true and high God; they have had their reward.
Terrenam gloriam excellentissimi imperii Deus ^orcessit, ut redderctur merces
bonis artibus little, id est, virtutibus, quibus ad tan. tam gloriam pervenire
nitebantur.


Although therefore the Romans in their gallant and heroic minds they bore,
did propose to themselves no other end but their temporal honor and earthly
greatness, not once thinking of doing honor to the great God, nor looking
toward any heavenly felicity that might follow after this life ended, having
not yet been taught or heard of any such thing: yet it must be acknowledged
that the effects which have flowed from their desire of glory and rule, have
been singular and admirable; amongst which their just, rational, and honest
Laws do deserve to make their memory still famous amongst men, because so much
use has been made thereof ever since, in the governing of so many States,
Empires, and people. And well did some of the ancient Fathers of the Church, as
also some of our later Divines observe, that without doubt God did therefore
indue the Romans with such admirable skill in government and Law making, that
after Nations might have a good example to follow. It is St Austins judgment,
Lib. 5. De civitat. Dei. ca. 6.
That the Roman Empire had that glorious increase, not only to be a fit
guerdon to the virtues of such as bore rule there, but also that the Citizens
of heaven in their pilgrimages upon earth, might seriously and attentively fix
their eyes upon those examples. And before him Tully, as Lnd. Vives has cited
him, Lib. de cause. corrupt. art.
being to draw a Model of a Commonwealth, and Laws to govern it withal, sets
before his eyes no other pattern but that of the Romans, to which in his
judgment all people should in prudence shape and conform themselves.

And that our Savior Christ himself (God Almighty from all eternity so
disposing it) should be born under the government of the Roman Empire, and
submit to it too; may it not more then probably be inferred, that it was Gods
secret intent and purpose, if not to bring all Christians under subjection to
those very Laws under which their head was born and lived; yet at least by that
signal act of his to recommend that policy and government to their imitation,
which might be a means to propagate the Gospel of Christ, and to send it forth
to the whole world, which that Empire seemed wholly to command? St Austin Lib.
18. de civit. Dei ca. 22.
makes the Universal rule of the Romans a special design of God for the good of
mankind. Per populum Romanum placuit Deo terrarum orbem debellare, ut in unam
societatem reipublicae legumque perductum long lateque pacaret; It was
therefore, says he, Gods pleasure that the Romans should conquer and command
the whole earth, that being brought under one communion of government and form
of Laws, it might the better enjoy peace both far and wide. Videtur Dominus
Monarchiall Romanorum conservasse and prop^gasse, ut simul propagaretur honesta
eorum Politia, and reprimeretur incondita barbaries aliarum gentium, says
Baldwine; In his Prolegom.
Therefore was the Roman Empire by Gods permission so far extended, that their
good government might spread the more, and the conversation of barbarous and
wild Nations be made civil.

And indeed the continuance of it in such diversity of governments, as Kings,
Consuls, Tribunes, Dictators, Emperors, cannot but show a Divine power, and a
most prudent managery of affairs there in all vicissitudes: For otherwise so
many changes might in all likelihood have bred confusion, and so consequently
suppressed their rising to so great an Empire; which as the last, so it may be
truly styled the greatest that yet the world ever knew or heard of.

Thus therefore the Roman Empire having climbed up to such an height of
Sovereignty, as to be a spectacle and an astonishment to all other Nations;
Romani trium pulcherr ^imarum virtutum, justitiae inquam, fortitudin^s, ac
prudentiae laudibus, imperatoriisque artibus cumulaeti, populos omnes in sui
admirationem converteru^s. Bodinde rep. lib. 5. ca. 6.
and their government being generally proposed and looked upon as a pattern,
and by some judgments designed as an example by God himself for other States to
follow and be directed by: What does it witness less, then that the Laws of
such a Nation and government must needs be singular and incomparable?

CHAP. II.
The fundamentals of the Roman Civil Law were fetched from other States, which
did then excel others most in Policy and Government.

THe first grounds and foundations of the Civil Law were not of the Romans own
composing, but were fetched from other Nations, and those the best governed
that were in being: for when they had cast off Kingly government, and put
themselves into the form of a Commonwealth, they would no longer endure the
Laws that their Kings had made, partly because they would not suffer any memory
of their power to remain, and partly because the setting up of a new
government would require necessarily the making also of new Laws, which might
correspond therewith, Therefore since a present supply of Laws was necessary
(arbitrary rule being intolerable) and that to frame a body of Laws themselves
in a short time, was impossible, and not by a newborn State to be effected;
they appointed three eminent men to go to Athens, and other Grecian Cities
which had been famous for rule and administration of justice above others, to
fetch from thence the choicest Laws they could find.

At the return of those three men, the Consuls that had bore the sway were
deposed, and both their Authority and Ensigns given unto ten men newly elected
for the government of the State, and were thence called Decemviri, whose office
it was to select the best of these Laws, and by them precisely to rule and do
justice to all the people. The Laws that they chose and best approved of, were
written at first in ten Tables of Brass, to which two Tables more being added
afterward, they were all set up together in the open Marketplace to be seen
and read by the people, which ever after were distinguished by the name of
Leges 12 Tabularum, The Laws of the 12 Tables.

To the direction of these Laws the Roman people were subject, and conformed
themselves for a long time, and they were the only Law they had: Of the which
Tully Lib. 1. De Orat.
gives this high testimony, that this one book of these Laws, both for
usefulness and wisdom, did transcend all the books that all the Philosophers
of the world had written.

And although their engravement in brass could not preserve them from the
injury of time, nor rescue them from that universal change that altered all
things in the Roman Empire; whereby it came to pass, that some relics only
of them are now extant, to the lamentation of all the learned: Yet the
Historians without any disagreeing tell us, that the rise and beginning of all
the Civil Law that we have in the books of Justinian, came from those Laws;
Thus Livie, Tacitus, Sigonius, and Rosinus. And no less is delivered by
Pomponius himself in his large Narrative of the beginning and progress of the
Civil Law; l. 2. Dig. De orig. jur.
and as much by Justinian himself. Parag. 10. Inst. de ju. not. gent. and civ.


And hence it is that every where throughout the Body of the Civil Law frequent
and common mention is made of the Laws of the 12 Tables, and several of them
entirely recited; and some of them confirmed and enlarged; others quite taken
away; some of them diminished only, as to some circumstances; others
interpreted, as being very obscure and doubtful; some declared in what cases
they shall be of force, and in what not: and others stretched to other cases
not provided for in express words, but in presumption thereby intended, because
so much alike to them that were expressed.

It was a Law of the 12 Tables, Vt si quis hostem concitasset, civemve hosti
tradidisset, capite poenas lueret; Part. 2. ca. ^.
that is, if any shall stir up an enemy, or betray to the enemy any subject, he
shall be punished with death. The same Law is cited in l. 3. Dig. Ad l. Jul.
Majest. where and in other Laws of that Title it is declared, it shall be high
treason for any man to contrive any mischief against the State, either in
raising tumults or levying war against the supreme power of it, or even against
the enemies of it without commission; or in holding correspondence with the
enemy, or sending any manner of aid unto them, or in helping to bring them into
the Territories of the Commonwealth, or to betray the army or any part
thereof, or any place of strength into the enemies hand, or indeed to surrender
it cowardly without fighting when it may be kept, or to plot how public
hostages may escape, or for a General to leave the army without leave obtained,
or not to give up his charge to him that by public appointment is to succeed
him, after the State has once discharged him: The punishment whereof is not
only capital, but the memory and name of the offender is to be remembered no
more, his goods are confiscated, and not to go to his own children. Li 5. Co.
ad l. Iul. Majest. parag. 1.


Again, by the Law of the 12 Tables it was provided, first, that the custody of
such as were mad, and the managing of their estate should be in the hands of
the next heir male: Also if any one come to be a prodigal or spend-thrift, the
Magistrate first examining the matter, should forbid him the ordering of his
own estate, and the administration thereof should be in the next heir male.
Part. 3. ca. 5, 6.
The last of which laws may be found single in l. 1. Dig. De curator. furios.
and both of them joined together Inst. De curator. parag. 3. Where the care of
the Law in providing governors for those that are not able to help themselves,
nor follow their affairs, is extended to Idiots, to persons that are deaf and
dumb, and to such as labor under such an incurable disease as is never like to
leave them, and renders them unfit to attend their business, as well as to mad
men and prodigals; declaring him to be a prodigal, Qui neque tempus neque finem
expensarum habet, sed bona sua dilacerando and dissipando profundit, who wastes
without regard either of time or measure; a mad man, qui rabie quadam animi
agitur, who is in a violeut fury; an idiot, qui sine tumultu ac clamoribus
desipit, who is void of understanding, but never rages. And further, the Law
proceeds in avoiding and disanulling all contracts, negotiations and
dealings, which such persons shall have made for themselves, after Guardians
are once assigned them; yet with this difference, that a Prodigal, or such as
have common reason, though otherwise very impotent and needing a curator, may
contract to advantage themselves, though not to their loss and hinderance: But
such as want capacity and understanding, can do no good for themselves. L. 6.
Dig. De verb. oblig. l. 5. Dig-dereg. jur.


And although the Law of the 12 Tables seems to bestow upon the Guardian of
such disabled persons absolute power over their estates, yet the Civil Law will
have that understood to reach no further then to the husbanding of their
estates for their use and benefit; for it will not permit them to sell, aliene,
or mortgage any thing that does belong unto them, except that upon examination
of the Magistrate it be found advantageable and fit to be done, and that the
Magistrate does expressly make his decree to that purpose. Insomuch as if money
be taken up by the Guardian for the need and to the use of any such person, and
his land mortgaged for payment of it, yet if it be not done by the license of
the Magistrate, the serving of that impotent man's necessity how extreme soever,
will not make that mortgage the more forcible; such care has the Law to
preserve the patrimony of such from being passed away. Yet since the money lent
was so well employed, the Law that suffers no man to be enriched with another
detriment, gives the lender a personal action whereby to recover what he lent.
L. 2. Co. de curat. furios.


Lastly, does the Civil Law afford more plentiful provision on any subject then
that of last Wills and Testaments? Yet the first rise and foundation of all
that is written therein, came first from that Law of the 12 Tables; Vti quisque
rei sui legasset, ita jus esto, Part. 3. ca. 11.
that is, As a man shall order by his will in any thing that is his own, so let
it be. The very words of which Law are repeated, Inst. De leg. Falcid. in
princ. and l. 120. Dig. De verb. signific. But the questions falling under this
head, do not only take up whole titles in the Law, and those very large ones
too, but also many of them lie dispersed up and down in all places and parts of
the Law.

So that generally it may be observed, what Laws soever are written almost on
any subject, are but as so many explanations or enlargements, made by the old
primitive Lawyers, such as Gaius, Scaevola, Papinian, Vlpian, Paulus, Affrican,
and the rest of those Worthies, and are as it were their Comments on the Law of
Nature and of Nations, and upon this Law of the 12 Tables; at first a foreign
Law, but brought into the Roman Commonwealth by a common consent of all the
people, from such Nations as for rule and government might justly be an example
to all their neighbors.

In like manner the Sea Laws that were admitted into the Roman State, and
incorporated amongst their Laws, were fetched from another people, namely the
people of Rhodes, Islanders in the Carpathian Sea, bordering upon Caria in
Asia, who in respect of the mighty concourse of seafaring-men thither, and
their continual trade and potency by Sea, grew so expert in the regulation of
all matters and differences thereto appertaining, and their determinations
therein were esteemed so just and equitable, that their Laws in such affairs
have been held oracles ever since. And therefore Antoninus the Emperor to a
complaint that was made unto him by Eudaemon, whose goods had been seized by
some public officers upon a shipwreck, gave him this answer, Ego quidem Mundi
Dominus, lex autem Maris: Lege id Rhodia, quae de rebus nauticis praescripta
est, judicetur, quatenus ei nulla nostrarum legum adversatur; L. 9. Dig. De
lege Rhod.
That is, I am the Lord of the world, but the Law is the Empress of the Sea.
Let the Rhodian Law which has the regulating of Sea matters decide it, so that
none of our own Laws be opposite thereunto.

And generally it was their custom and usage, that whenever they conquered
any Nation, they did not only give them Laws, as conquerours use to do to
those whom they subdue, but I may say, they received Laws from them too: For
what Laws, practices, or ways of government they found there or any where else
where they came, that were laudable and useful in their State, they carried
them home, and there put them in practice; observing them rather with humility,
then rejecting them with disdain. Majoribus nostris, says Salust, as Baldwine
quotes him in his Prolegomena, speaking of the Romans; superbia non obstabat,
quo minus aliena instituta, si modo proba erant, imitarentur. Imitari quam
invidere bonis malebant, and quod utique apud socios vel hosts idoneum
videbatur, cum summo studio domi exequebantur; Our Ancestors were not so high
minded, as not to imitate such rules and customs of other Nations as they
found to be good, choosing rather to tread in the steps of virtuous and well
disposed people then to envy them. Therefore what either their allies or
enemies afforded that was useful and fitting, they greedily embraced and
practiced it in their own State.

And if Salust may be thought partial, because a Roman writer, let Polybius
speak, that was a Grecian: They were always so wise, says he, as, (...), to
take and apply the best customs of other Nations, to their own use. Athenaeus
says the same, and declares it at large, how from the beginning and first
founding of the Commonwealth, they took from others the best points of policy
and government.

And so in these Laws of ours we have what all the wisest and noblest men in
that Commonwealth (which was the most flourishing and potent that ever was in
the world) could of themselves by their wisdom and reason devise, or could
learn from other States in about a thousand years; for about so many years it
was from the time of the Decemvirate unto Justinians death. Tantae molis erat
Romanas condere leges.

From this example of the Romans, who admitted so freely other Laws besides
their own, and would rather send about to borrow Laws from others, then want
such as were necessary and convenient for themselves, we may learn to esteem it
neither shameful nor inconvenient for the people of this Nation, to give such
an admittance to the Roman Civil Law here, as the Romans did in their State to
the Laws of other Nations: For it must needs draw after it much benefit, and no
prejudice, if it be done with these cautions.

First, that it be a free and a voluntary act of our own, and not imposed upon
us by a foreign power.

Secondly, that it be admitted merely to supply the defects of our own Laws,
and to have a resolving power in such cases only, where our own Laws have made
no determination at all.

Thirdly, so little to be made use of in opposition to our own municipal Law,
as not so much as to be compared with it.

Fourthly, that it be of greatest force in all cases where there is greatest
need of equity and a good conscience, whereof there is more to be found in that
Law then in any other Law of Man.

Fifthly, that it may order and determine all matters transacted and arising
upon the Sea, or contracted and done in foreign parts, to which the Laws of
the Land are most incongruous, and less satisfactory to those whom they
concern, being chiefly strangers and of another Nation.

Lastly, that if at any time the use and exercise thereof should be stretched
beyond the bounds that are allowed it, it should be penal; but be checked by
such equal and indifferent Umpires, as are parties in neither of both
professions: For where an incrochment is pretended to be made by either Law
upon the other, neither seems to be competent enough to judge the difference,
or to condemn the other.

Under these cautions, to admit the use of the Civil Law into this Nation, that
in the doing of justice, where our own Laws fail, we may be sure to be supplied
by another, is no more then what the Romans themselves, a renowned and wise
people, did by the Laws of other Nations, and what other Nations do at this day
by the Civil Law it self, which they do practice and use as frequently as they
do their own.

CHAP. III.
That time and intervenience of fatal Accidents, that has swept away so many
States together with all their Laws, and has quite abolished the Roman State it
self, has not yet been of force to abolish the Roman Civil Law, but that it is
extant still.

BEsides that this Law was at first derived from such Nations as in their time
were renowned for Policy and Wisdom, and was a chief means to convey the
Romans to their greatness; this also may be said thereof that can be said of no
other humane Law besides, That though it has been never seen that any Law has
lasted longer then the State it self for whch it was first ordained, but both
have been buried in the same sepulcher together; yet this Law is in being to
this very day, after the Roman State it self has so long lain intombed in its
own ashes. Jus Justiniani praescriptum libris, non Civitatis tantum est, sed
and Gentium and naturae; and aptatum sic est ad naturam universam, ut imperio
extincto, ipsum jus-diu sepultum surrexerit tamen, and in omnes se effuderit
gentes humanas. Ergo and Principibus stat, etsi est privatis conditum a
Justiniano, says Albericus Gentilis; Lib. 1. De ju. Bell. ca. 3.
The Law that is set down in the books of Justinian, is not the Law of one City
only, but is the Law of Nature and Nations; and is so throughout fitted to
very Nature it self, that when the Roman Empire was quite extinct, yet the Law
of the Empire, after it had lain long as it were buried, sprung up again, and
spread it self into all Nations. Therefore now it is become a standing Law to
Princes, although made at first by Justinian for the use of private men.

We know for certain, that at the first erecting of Commonweals, when some
certain kind of regiment was once approved, nothing was then further thought
upon for the manner of governing, but all permitted unto their wisdom and
discretion, which were to rule; the Princes word, beck, and rule, serving
instead of all Laws; who both in time of peace and war, sent out their edicts
from time to time, as the present occasion required, all depending upon their
full and absolute power, being themselves not bound to any Laws or Customs at
all. And that is it, for which Pomponius L. 2. Dig. De Orig. jur. in princ.
writes, the Roman Commonweal to have been at the first governed by Regal
power, without use of any Law.

Justin Lib. 2.
says of Athens, that there was a time, when Nullae civitati leges erant, quia
libido Regum pro legibus habebatur, that the City was without Law, because the
wills of Kings were Laws. And Josephus the Historiographer in his second Book
against Appian, desirous to show the most honorable Antiquity of the Hebrews,
and of their Laws, says, that Moses of all others was the first that ever writ
Laws; and that in five hundred years after, the word Law was never heard of;
alleging in proof thereof, that Homer in so many books as were by him written,
never uses this word, (...), Law. Bodin de rep. lib. 6. ca. 6.
It may therefore well be told us, that we have no cause to marvail, if we have
no Laws at all transmitted unto us from those first times, there being then no
certain standing Law any where.

Yet I am sure, afterward, when all people saw that to live by one man's will
became the cause of all men's misery; this did necessitate succeeding ages to
come unto Laws established, wherein all men might see their duties beforehand,
and know the penalties of transgressing them, Ut bonestorum ac turpium lex
aeterna in mentibus unjuscujus. que nostrum ab immortali Deo fit inscripta,
poenae tamen quibus improbi ab injuriosa facinorosaque vita avocentur, in
animis inscripta a Deo nullae fuerunt. Bodin. de rep. lib. 6. ca. 6.
and be more secure against the irregular passions of their Rulers, whom they
found by woeful experience to be too apt to degenerate into Tyranny. And yet
they have not rested here neither, but have committed the same to writing, that
their subjects might have them continually before their eyes; and to transmit
them to posterity also, lest they that should come after, should vary from
those foundations on which the State was first laid, and so hasten the downfall
of the whole society.

Hence it has come to pass, that the Laws of some certain people have been more
famous then the Laws of others, and the Authors mentioned with high praise and
commendation. Solon, who made Laws for the Athenians, and was accounted one of
the seven Sages in Greece, is highly commended for his great wisdom in making
Laws both by Aristotle and Plato, who proposes him and Lycurgus the
Lacedaemonian Lawgiver, as patterns for all such as shall institute
Commonwealths, and devise Laws for them. Plato also prayseth the Cretensian
Laws, and Isocrates the Laws of Lacedaemon. Zaleucus is upon record too for
being a great Lawgiver amongst the Locrians: and Charondas has got himself a
name for the Laws the Thurians had from him; And so has Zamolxis, Pythagoras
his scholar, for the Laws he gave the Getae.

And yet of all these Laws so much extolled and spoken of amongst the Learned,
there is not one extant to this day in any entire body; I say, in an entire
body, because of the Attick Law some fragments may be found, which the industry
of Petitus has collected out of several Greek Authors, as Athenaeus, Plato,
Plutarch, Demosthenes, and others, where they lay dispersed; which though they
may busy Critics and those that contemplate upon Antiquity, yet are of no use
to govern a State by, nor to decide differences that arise in common
intercourse. As it is no small wonder then, so does it add much to the Honor
of the Roman Civil Law, that it has not been swept away by that common fate
under which these and all other ancient Laws have perished, but is the sole
surviving Law at this time. The preservation whereof is the more to be admired,
if it be considered, how by the storms and persecutions of several ages, near
it has been to be annihilated and quite suppressed, as all other Laws besides it
have been. For as the affairs of State have succeeded, and as the Emperors
themselves have been virtuously or vitiously inclined, so has it fared with
this study and the professors of it, and indeed after the same manner with all
other kind of learning.

Julius Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, Claudius, Vespasian, Trajan, Adrian,
Antonius Pius, and Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher, Alexander Severus,
Constantine, Theodosius, and Justinian, that were Emperors vigilant and
industrious for the prosperity and weal of the Empire, and designed nothing
within themselves but actions of virtue and honor; and well knowing that their
true interest lay in the maintaining of the Laws and government, without which
all things must needs run hastily into disorder and confusion; they had the
Lawyers of their times in highest esteem, preferring them to the public
offices of State, both of honor and justice; and admitting them into their
secretest and most important counsels, and seldom was any Law made, to which
they were not called to give their counsel and advise: Insomuch as it is
written of Alexander Severus, one of the before named Emperors, that he never
established any Law without the presence and assistance of twenty of the most
renowned Lawyers, and fifty other most judicious and acute men. Baldwin
Prolegom ju. Civil. Forster bist. ju. civ. lib. 2. ca. 77.


But there were others that sat in the Empire of a far different nature and
disposition, who disdaining that their will, how vicious and lewd soever,
should be circumscribed within the bounds of any Law; and esteeming it a
dishonor, that Lawyers, who were but private men, should undertake to advise
Princes; or that any thing should be done in State, but what themselves
absolutely commanded; some of them despised the whole Law, and slighted those
that taught it; others proceeded so far in cruelty, as to banish some, and to
put other Lawyers to death; for so did Nero, Commodus, Caracalla, Heliogabalus,
Septimius Severus.

But to persecute and take away their persons did not satisfy the fury of some
implacable Emperors, since others did succeed still in their room. Therefore
it was thought necessary by some, that the Law it self should be so dispatched,
as it might be sure it should never renew or rise again. Annae. Robert. rer.
judic. lib. 2. ca. 1.
Caligula therefore put on a more hardy but a most barbarous resolution, to
burn all the books of the Law that were then extant; pretending that equity
would run clearer, and justice be quicker, where the niceties and perplexities
of the Law were gone. Sed non fuit tam diuturnum ejus imperium, ut efficere
potuerit quae meditabatur; nec passus est Deus rata esse hujus tyranni impia
and reipublicae perniciosa consilia; But his reign did not endure so long as to
execute what he did intend; neither would God suffer the design of this tyrant,
that was so detestable in it self, and so destructive to the Commonwealth, to
be brought to pass, says Baldwine in his Prolegomena. Notwithstanding how
odious soever this intendment was, and though it proved ineffectual in
Caligula, yet did Licinius the Emperor attempt to do the very same thing; but
God would not suffer such a barbarous act to be done by him neither, says the
same Baldwine.

So that as often as it is called to mind, what extremities fell upon the
Lawyers in the sufferances of their persons, and how near the whole body of the
Law it self was to be swallowed up and at once devoured, and that from no
forreign-enemy, but from the Roman Emperors themselves, who should have
protected both; it must also be remembered, that those Emperors were such,
whose actions are hated and abhorred by all that read them, and themselves
stigmatized for cruel and unnatural tyrants, and esteemed rather Monsters then
Men. Let it be considered also, that they did it to make way for their
unbridled and tyrannical wills, which they thought might be more licentious,
when there was neither person nor Law left to awe them. And let it withal be
spoken to the eternal honor of that Law, that it stood flourishing
notwithstanding, after so many Emperors had vainly attempted to throw it down.

But never was it so near to utter extirpation, as when a combined strength of
barbarous people overran the Western part of the Empire: For we read, that in
less time then the compass of eighty years, Italy though anciently the strength
and seat of that Empire) was seven times brought almost unto desolation by the
fire and sword of the Barbarians, viz. First, by Alarick King of the Goths,
who sacked Rome, Naples, and other places. Secondly, By Attila King of the
Huns, who razed Florence, wasted Lombardy, and not without much difficulty was
diverted from the spoil of Rome, by the intercession of Pope Leo. Thirdly, by
Genserious King of the Vandals, who also had the sackage of Rome it self.
Fourthly, by Biorgus King of the Alani, in the time of the Emperor Majoranus.
Fifthly, by Odoacer King of the Heruli, who drove Augustulus the last Western
Emperor out of his estate, and twice in thirteen years laid the Country
desolate. Sixthly, by Theodorick King of the Goths, called in by Zeno Emperor
of Constantinople, to expel Odoacer and the Heruli. And seventhly, by Gundebald
King of the Burgundians, who having ransacked all Lombardy, returned home
again, leaving possession to the Goths.

And when the Goths had reigned in Italy under eight of their Kings for the
space of seventy two years, they were at last subdued by Belisarius and Narses,
and Italy united once more to the Empire in the time of Justinian. But Narses
having governed Italy about seventeen years, and being after such good service
most despitefully used by Sophia the wife of the Emperor Justinus, in revenge
opened the passages of the Country to Alboinus King of the Lombards, then
possessed of Pannonia, who coming into Italy with their Wives and Children,
possessed themselves of all that Country which anciently was inhabited by the
Cisalpine Galls, calling it by their own names Longobardia, now corruptly
Lombardy. And afterward in process of time they grew so mighty and spreading
there, that there are reckoned no less then twenty three Kings of that line
succeeding one another in Italy, and their Kingdom endured no less then 206
years.

Italy therefore being thus rent from the Roman Empire, and the Imperial seat
being quite carried out of the West, and fixed in the East at Constantinople,
the power thereof came to be less feared, and other of the Roman provinces were
likewise assaulted: For France, after it had been long harrassed by the
incursions, first of the Burgundians, and then of the Goths, was afterward
invaded and quite possessed by the Franks; who having long hovered on the banks
of the Rhene, at last took advantage of the distractions of the Empire, and
ventured over the River under the conduct of their first King Pharamond, and
quite expelled the Romans, and laid such a strong foundation of government
there, that they have in a constant and uninterrupted succession continued
there ever since.

Spain did not long remain in subjection to the Romans neither, out of which
they were driven by the Goths also, who kept the quiet possession thereof very
near three hundred years, till the Moors and Sarracens dispossessed them; who
there reigned full seven hundred years.

As for Germany, it was never wholly subdued by the Romans, but what they had
gained thereof, the French, Burgundians, Almans, and other Dutch Nations took
from them: till in the end the French prevailing over the rest, extended their
Empire over all the modern Germany; chiefly performed by the valor of Charles
the Great, King of France, created Emperor of the West by the people of Rome,
and Crowned with the Imperial Crown by Pope Leo the fourth, with whom and his
successors it remained above an hundred years; till at last by alienating
whole countries from it (some titulary acknowledgment only excepted) and by
dismembring it into many Principalities and inferior States, and those made
absolute and independent, that great Empire came to be nothing in effect, but
magni nominis umbra, the shadow of a mighty body, a mere empty Title; having no
resemblance of the Roman Empire, from the which in the person of Charles the
Great it was quite divided.

England also, that was made a perfect member of the Roman Empire, being
invaded by the Scots and Picts, and the Romans being enforced to recall their
Legions they had here, for the defense of Italy it self, then wasted and
destroyed by the Barbarous Nations, was relinquished and given up, as a
province that was to be held by the Romans no longer; Honorius being at that
time the Roman Emperor, and Victorinus the last governor for the Empire in
the Isle of Britain; the Romans having been in it full five hundred years, and
their Laws also.

Thus the Roman Empire being rent in sunder, it is easy to imagine, that the
Roman Laws which constantly attended the Romans wherever they went, were also
dissipated in the same tempest; Laws and Government being like Hippocrates
twins, they laugh and cry, live and die together: For Conquerours never think
their Conquests perfect, till they have overthrown the ancient Government,
Laws, and Customs, and have put all into a new mould after their own way.
Neither is a people thoroughly brought under subjection to their new masters,
till they have utterly renounced all that was prescribed them by their former
Rulers: Nor is the danger of their revolting quite over, till they have quite
forgotten their first condition, and till a total change is made of Laws,
Customs, Habit, and Language. And who knows not, that it is in the power of
the Sword, being well fortified, to impose what Laws and Rules it self will
upon a people, who after a tedious and a destructive war will rather embrace an
ill conditioned peace, then run the hazard of a new war, where they are sure to
be swallowed up in spoil and rapine?

In this declining therefore of the Roman Empire, many Provinces thereof being
possessed by several invaders, it is certain that the conquering people gave
their own Laws to the conquered, but ruled most Iuxta illud Silii; Vis colitur,
jurisque locum sibi vendicat. ensis.
by power and arbitrary will. In iis seculis, says Dr Duck, Lib. 1. de Author.
ju. civ. ca. 7.
speaking of the declension of the Roman greatness, non erat aliud parendi
dominandive jus quam armorum potentia, crassa literarum omnium ignorantia,
leges omnes barbaricae, Gothicae, Francicae, Lombardicaeve, sepultis jam
legibus Romany, rerum omnium morumque confusio: In those times there was no
other rule, but what the sword did give, a gross ignorance of all literature,
the Laws all barbarous, had from the Goths, Francks, Lombards, the Roman Laws
lying now in the grave, and indeed a plain confusion of civility, and all
things whatsoever. Ludovicus Vives Lib. 1. de cause. corrupt. Art.
mentioning the utter downfall that was of all learning at that time, tells us
also the politic reason that animated that savage people to deal so tragically
with it: Irrisae sunt ab eis linguae ac studia omnia, says he; Nec solum eis
detractum est pretium, sed contumelia addita; seu quod nollent quenque in
victis plus sapere quam victorem, and ut quisque esset doctissimus, ita crassis
illis hominibus inprimis erat suspectus, tanquam vafer and ad frauds ac dolos
maxim appositus; sen quod emolliri per haec veram virtutem opinarentur, ac
minus bello idoneos reddi, cui omnia illi tum tribuebant, laudem, gloriam,
decus; ex bello uno verum germanumque, etiam sempiternum oriri rati: They
laughed at the variety of tongues, and at all literature; Neither did they
only distesteem them, but they cast reproaches upon them also; either because
they were not willing, that any that they had now brought under subjection
should be wiser then themselves, who being blockish, did cast a jealous eye
upon those that were most knowing men as they that were subtle, and fitted for
all politic and wily practices: or because they had a conceit, that learning
did too much soften and enervate valor, and render men unfit for war, in the
which they thought all praise, glory, and renown did lie; and that no where
true and immortal honor was to be won, but in war only.

Which torrent of ruin then happening, was the more unfortunate and fatal, in
regard through Italy and the Europaean Nations being thus infested, that which
is the Roman Civil Law now, and was collected and put together by Justinian
himself, and does bear his name (though selected out of a great confused mass,
consisting of near two thousand Volumes, that had been 1400 years a laying
together by several Lawyers) could not have any place then in Italy, nor could
ever get entrance into those parts for 500 years together after the death of
Justinian: Because this body of the Law that is now extant, was compiled and
put together at Constantinople, after the Roman Emperors had removed
themselves thither, and kept out of Italy and the Western part of the Empire
for all that time that those Barbarians were possessed of the same.

Howbeit it is no less certain, that the ancient Civil Law that was in being
long before Justinians time, and that very frame and model thereof which was
drawn together and raised out of those ancient foundations by Justinian
himself, was the sovereign and ruling Law at Constantinople and all over the
East, where the Roman Empire then was, and was translated into the Greek tongue
for the use of the people, and there continued flourishing at that time when
the West would not admit it. So that it is to be noted, that when it was driven
or kept out, it was by a barbarous people that followed all with fire and
sword; and that it did not suffer alone, but all civility and learning was
banished with it too: and that it was never so extirpated from off the earth,
but it had a being and continuance somewhere.

And yet there was a part of Italy also, namely the Exarchate of Ravenna,
consisting of ten Cities with the territories belonging to them, which the
barbarous people could not subdue, nor make them change their governors,
government, or Laws; who being still ruled by the Viceroys and Lieutenants of
the Constantinopolitan Emperors, were totally governed by the Roman Laws also
as they were before. And after the collection of Laws made by Justinian was
perfected and published, and was now to be the only Law for the whole Empire,
it was sent to and embraced by the Exarchate of Ravenna, and there practiced,
though no where else throughout Italy for 500 years together.

Notwithstanding, it cannot be truly affirmed neither, that even those parts of
Italy which the Romans had quite lost, and were made subject to this barbarous
people, were totally guided by another Law, and had none of the Roman Law to
guide them.

For, although the Goths ruled much by Laws of their own prescribing, yet
Cassiodore writes, that in the time of Theodorick, and some of his successors,
the Roman Law that had been in use there before, was also used still, though
but in a way of Subserviency to their own.

And Ataulphus fully purposing Romana omnia adeo in Gothicum nomen moresque
mutare, ut Romanum plane obliteraretur, so to change all that was Roman into
the way and fashion of the Gothic Nation, that nothing that was Roman should
remain any longer; Mr. Seldom out of Orosius Lib. 7. ca. 43.
says, upon better consideration had, he changed his resolution quite, and did
by all means strive, ut Romanae restitutionis author haberetur, postquam esse
non poterat immutator, to be the chief setter up of the Roman policy, which
he saw he should not be able to throw down.

For the time therefore that the Goths and Lombards were possessed of Italy,
the Code of Theodosius, and some things taken out of the Gregorian and
Hermogenian Codes, and Gajus his Institutions, Vlpians fragments, and the Notes
and sentences of Paulus, all parts of the Civil Law, and antienter then that
body of Laws whereof Justinian was the compiler, were taken in and admitted
into use together with their own Laws. Those Provinces of France that are
nearest unto Italy, when the Goths came to invade them, were also permitted to
enjoy the Roman Laws upon the same terms; and especially when Honorius and
Arcadius surrendered Aquitaine, one of the conditions was, ut lex testamentorum
iis salva esset, that their Laws for ordaining or expounding their last wills
should not be infringed.

And Alarick the second, one of the Gothish Kings, was so affected toward the
Roman Laws, that in the year 506, he employed his own Chancellor Anianus to
make a Collection out of the several parts of the Roman Laws, whereof the
Theodosian Code was the chief, and to write Notes and Expositions upon it;
which after he had done, it was published and set forth to be observed as Law
in France. And Mr Seldom writes, Dissert. ad Flet. ca. 5. parag. 4.
that the same King did the like in Spain too as well as in France.

So that albeit ruin, devastation, and violence had buried all that was Roman
besides; and for the better and more sure keeping of what was gotten, clean
another government and another Law was also settled; yet the Roman Law, either
out of necessity, because they saw the hearts of that people so set upon that
Law, that they would never have remained quiet or peaceable without it, or out
of some good esteem that such a wild and barbarous people bore to it
themselves, finding it to be so wise, solid, and rational, was still retained
in some use in Italy, France, Spain, and in Germany too, as the same Mr Seldom
affirms, amidst its very enemies; though much diminished, corrected, and
controuled by their own supereminent and overruling Law. So good a piece of
policy, and such a special mark of wisdom was it then accounted, to have two
Laws in the same Territory; the one of the Romans for private matters between
man and man, for which it was so sufficient, full, and equal; the other of
their own, to direct and steer the public upon all accidents, which they meant
should superintend and reign in chief over and above the other.

But further, not only the use, practice, and observation of the Roman Law has
been in danger to be quite lost and wholly set aside, but the very books and
writings of the Law have run very hard fates also; ut mirum sit vel has
qualescunque juris Romani reliquias superesse, says Baldwine in his
Prolegomena; that it may be admired we have such parcels thereof extant at this
day. It was a most unhappy fate, and very worthily lamented by all learned men,
that after Justinians composition of the Law was perfected and set forth, with
a command, that that only should be the Law of the Empire, omnibusque
antiquioribus quieseentibus, nemoque audeat vel comparare eas prioribus, as
Justinians own words are; L. 2. God. De Veter. jur. cuuclcand.
all the old Laws being quite put to silence, nor that any should dare to make
comparisons between them; the very Law Books themselves being 2000 Volumes, as
we said before (whereof Justinians new work was but a choice Collection, raised
out of a confused and an indigested heap, and thence put into order) did
thereby lie neglected so long, that in process of time, they perished quite,
and were never seen more.

Questionless had they been preserved, and transmitted unto posterity entire,
they would have acquainted us with much more of the Roman Antiquities then we
now know; the Civil Law that we have, would have been much better understood,
when we might have gone to the Original from whence it came; and the
contradictions now contended about so much, would have been easily reconciled.

The sense of this loss did cast Sabinus Floridus, who charges it upon
Justinian, into such an ecstasy of indignation, that he says, Justinian died
mad with the consciousness and horror of suppressing these books, and judges
him not worthy ever to have been born. But Franciscus Philelphus goes a strain
higher, plainly imprecating in this manner: O ntiuam superi, si quid mortalibus
usquam
Justitiae reliquum, te, Justiniane, sub imis
Manibus ardenti plectant Phlegetonte jacentem;
Post quam tanta Italis millena volumina legum
Principe te clades, te principe pestis ademit.
Now though I fee not any ground to justify so much bitterness, nor indeed
deservedly to make that renowned Emperor author of such a crime, being
especially thought by the most not guilty; yet since those books of Law that
are left us, which are but an extract from the other, are of such high price
and value, surely when the other perished, there was lost a very great treasure.

Again, as there were three Cities famous above all others, for the nourishing
and maintaining of the study and learning of the Civil Law, to wit, Rome,
Berytus, and Constantinople; In which three Cities only by an express
constitution of Justinian, Digest. Proaem. parag. 7.
it was to be read and taught to others, and no where else throughout the Roman
Empire; so it was not possible but the books and writings thereof must be lost
and destroyed, as indeed they were, in the direful events of those Cities: For
Rome was often spoiled, sacked, and laid waste, by rude and savage people, who
would not spare books or learning, that they knew would detest, condemn, and
censure them, and their barbarous actions. Berytus was so utterly swallowed up
in an Earthquake, that nothing of the whole City was left above ground.
Constantinople in Zeno the Emperors time, in the year 478 was almost wholly
destroyed by fire; in which perished, amongst othings, an hundred and twenty
thousand books; and is since fallen into the power and hands of the Turks,
professed enemies to civility and learning, the same being taken by Mahomet the
Great, in the time of Constantine Palaeogolus the last of the Grecian
Emperors, in the year 1452.

Thus has it fared with the very books and writings of the Civil Law; but such
has been the providence of the Almighty in preserving this necessary piece of
learning, that neither any nor all of these disasters have been powerful enough
to extinguish it. For although it seemed sometimes to be buried, and no where
visible, yet at last by one means or other it was restored and brought to light.

But to none more is the honor of this restitution given, then to the Emperor
Lotharius the second, who undertaking a war against Roger King of Sicily and
Naples, after he had taken by storm the City of Amalphis in Apulia, he there
found the chiefest and most authentic part of the Civil Law, the Digests;
which was from thence conveyed to Pisa, and afterward to Florence, where they
have been kept with the greatest care, and had in much veneration and esteem;
Mr Seldom says it is there kept in the Dukes Palace, and is never brought
forth but with Torch-light and other reverence. Notes upon Fortescue ad cap.
17. in tin.
and this was in or about the year, 1137. The other parts of Justinians, frame
and Collection were found at Ravenna about the same time.

These books were no sooner pulled as it were out of the dust, but by the same
Emperors command, they were every where divulged, taught in Schools and
Universities up and down the Empire, the barbarous Laws as it were silenced,
and these in practice made the rule for all Tribunals.

And indeed the fame and reputation of them so spread, all kind of learning
reviving with it at the same time, that in a little space of time it got
footing also with the other sciences in France, Spain, and Italy, and in all
the Western part of Europe, where it has been in greatest use and highest
account, as well in studies as in Judicatories, ever since to this very age of
ours. Nay, the Civil Law after it was once restored and taken notice of, having
long lain hid and concealed, drew the hearts and studies of men after it in
such wonderful manner, and grew to that mighty eminence and power, that the
most were intent upon the study of it, and but few in comparison looked after
any other learning.

Giraldus of Oxford charges it as a fault upon the students of his time, and
tells that one Martin a Clergyman, did sharply reprove the University of
Oxford at a public congregation, for devoting themselves wholly to that study,
neglecting all other learning; saying, quod leges Imperiales reliqua scientias
omnes suffecaverant, the Imperial Laws had swallowed up all the other Sciences.

Also Daniel Morlaes in the same Century, being in Henry the seconds time,
writes, that the Law was so much studied in Oxford, quod pro Titio and Seio
Aristoteles and Plato penitus oblivioni traderentur; that Titius and Seius were
minded altogether, and Aristotle and Plato were quite forgotten. And Roger
Bacon, that had made himself eminent in all the sciences, did upbraid the
Bishops of the same age, for minding Divinity so little; adding, quod
cavillationes juris defaedarent Philophiam, the sophistry of the Law would
corrupt the true Philosophy.

Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury took up the same complaint in Henry
the thirds time, against the Monks of his time, qui relicto agro very Booz,
nempe sacra Scriptura, ad alium agrum, id est, scientiam secularem, pro
cupiditate terrena transirent; who through greediness of filthy lucre, which
was then to be gotten chiefest from the Law, did forsake the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and hunt after secular knowledge.

The like lamentation was made by Robert Holcot of the order of the Praedicants
in Northamptonshire, in Edward the thirds time; leges and canones, says he,
istis temporibus innumerabiliter sunt foecundae; concipiunt divitias and
pariunt dignitates; ad illas confluunt quasi tota multitudo scholarum his
diebus: The Laws and Canons are immeasurably profitable in these times; riches
and honors spring from thence; almost the whole number of Scholars resort
thither; for indeed the greatest professors in Theology, that were, did so
little content themselves with that one way of advancement, that they did
frequently assume degrees in Law, to fit and qualify them for other
preferments also.

But sure it is, these complaints and objurgations of private men could so
little keep this luxuriant growth of the Law from spreading, that the very
Edicts and Decrees of Princes could not bring it down.

Matthew Paris in his History upon the year 1254, and in the Additions, page
883. Edit. Noviss. makes mention of a constitution made and published by Pope
Innocent the fourth, by which it was ordained, that no professor of the Laws
should be promoted to any Ecclesiastical dignity in France, England, Scotland,
Spain, and Hungary; and that from thenceforward the Imperial Laws should not
be read in those dominions, if the Kings and Princes so thought fit. Pope
Honorius the third forbad the reading or teaching of the Civil Law in Paris, in
the year 1220. Ca super specuta. ext. de privileg.


Those Popes thought that the restraint of the Imperial Law, would be a ready
means to bring into request the Canon Law, which was as it were but new set up.
Upon design therefore to bring into credit their own Ecclesiastical Law, rather
then out of any dislike of the Civil, were those prohibitorie Decrees made;
however they very much failed of that effect that was intended them: for we may
have observed to this very time, that all those Christian States that do
acknowledge the Popes authority and power, have so equally divided their
respect between both those Laws, that they have appointed to each their proper
function; designing the one to be serviceable to Civil matters, the other to
Ecclesiastical; and so by such moderation have done very equal right to both.
At the same time that the Civil Law was publicly read at Bononia by the means
of Lotharius the second, it was brought into England by Theobald the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and being publicly read in Oxford by Vacarius, it
grew so general a study, and other learning was so much neglected upon it, that
King Stephen incensed thereat, sent forth a peremptory command, that it should
be read in England no more, that Vacarius should forbear to teach it any
further, nor that it should be lawful for any to keep any books of the Roman
Laws by them: Sed parum valuit Stephani prohibitio; nam eo magis invaluit
virtus legis, Deo favente, quo came amplius nitebatur impietas subvertere, says
Mr Seldom; Dissertat. ad Flet. cap. 7. parag. 6.
But King Stephens prohibition did prevail but little; for the power of the
Law, God prospering the same, waxed the more vigorous, when malice did most
strive to destroy it.

Charles the ninth, and Henry the third of France, did also by sending forth
their Edicts forbid the Civil Law to be taught in Paris, or that any Degrees
should be taken in that faculty. Philip the fair, and the Parliament of Paris
anciently, did straightly charge, that no man should dare in any pleading to urge
or cite the Roman Law against a special Law of the Nation. In Spain it has
been made no less then a capital crime, to offer or allege the Roman Law, as
compulsive or binding.

And surely it is a high indignity to any Prince, to have any sorreigne Law set
up against, and to beat down his own. And therefore in the erection of
Universities in France, the Kings have always declared, that their purpose was
to have the Civil and Canon Laws in them publicly professed and taught, to
make use thereof at their discretion, but not that the subjects should be any
way bound thereunto, lest they should seem to derogate from the Laws of their
own country, by advancing the Laws of strangers. Bodin. de rep. lib. 1. ca. 8.


These and such like edicts and declarations of Princes, have been always of
full force and power, as most justly they ought to be, to limit the vast and
universal power of the Civil Law, and to keep it from getting above and
prevailing over the Laws and Customs of their own Territories; for that were
no less then to worship two Suns in one and the same firmament, and to call in
the Roman Sovereignty, which was long ago cast off. But that the Civil Law
should not be studied, publicly taught, no degrees taken in it, nor cited in
their Judicatories in a ministerial and subordinate way to their own municipal
Laws and Customs, or that it should not be admitted to teach us true equity
and sound reason, their restraining Edicts never have so far prevailed so
totally to suppress it, from the time of Lotharius the second, the first
restorer and reestablisher of it, to this present, which is now full 500 years.
Plurimum distat lex a jure, says the same Bodine; Jus enim sine jussu ad id
quod aequum bonumque est; lex autem a^ imperantis majestatem pertinet: There is
much difference betwixt Right and Law; for Right without any command
insinuating it self into the soul of a just man, recommendeth to that which is
good and equal; but Law imports a command of some Sovereigne, which may force
and hurry the will to such an action, which in equity or right reason may not
be good or laudable. As a Law to bind by its own proper power and virtue, or by
any authority of those that made it, the Imperial Law is not admitted in any
Nation. Yet no Christian Nation with all the express decrees that that they
have at any time made against it, has been able to exclude it, as it contains
veram naturalem rationem, optimum inter omnes leges humanas exemplum,
aequitatis normam, authoritatem prudentum, veram justitiae rationem, artem and
scientiam juris, and ut bonos mores complectitur; they all admit it, as it does
propound and hold forth true natural reason, and as it is the most imitable
pattern amongst all the Laws of men, the rule of equity, the voice of Sage men,
the true method of justice, the art and knowledge of doing right, and as it
comprehends instructions for a moral life: For thus to shut the door against
it, were to renounce reason, equity, justice; and to defy all moral goodness.

Thus much may very well suffice to show how the Roman Civil Law has had the
singular honor and prerogative which no other Law has had, to be rescued from
that universal deluge of abolition, which has swept away all other ancient
Laws besides it; and not only to outlive Rome it self, but to out-stand many
dangerous assaults and casualties, and diverse sharp penal Edicts that have
been made against it, and to continue to this very time a large and
accomplished body. This surely next to the providence of God who has so
disposed it, must needs be ascribed, and the cause must needs be conceived to
be, some especial excellency and rare wisdom that is in the Law it self; For
else why has not other Laws continued as long, as that has done?

CHAP. IV.
That Foreign Nations in doing of Right between Man and Man, do mainly
practice and make use of the Rules and dictates of the Civil Law.

THat the Roman Civil Law, framed so many hundred years ago, and devised for
the use of one Nation only, is still extant and in being at this day, the
state it self being quite extinct; possibly it may not seem commendation and
praise sufficient, except the use, practice, and observation of it up and down
diverse great Nations of the World be also showed. The next thing therefore that
we have to say in further praise thereof is, that the greatest and best ordered
Nations, though they manage their public occasions and affairs of State by
rules and directions of their own ordaining, having an eye to the nature of
their people, way of government, and present exigencies only; yet in the
dispensation of private justice, and in pacifying the debates and differences
that do arise between their subjects, where mere right and equity only is
considerable, they use and practice the rules and principles of the Civil Law
chiefly.

Peculiar Statutes, Ordinances, Customs, and municipal Laws every State has of
its own making, which in the regulation of its proper affairs it does prefer
before any other Laws or constitutions whatsoever, though in reason and
convenience they may seem much better. Yet humane occurences are so many in
number, and in circumstances so greatly differing one from the other, that no
Nation is perfectly supplied with Laws of their own to answer them, but that
there is still need of some subsidiary Law, more universal and comprehensive
then its own.

And from this ground is it, that most States have entertained the Imperial
Law, to supply and assist where their own is defective; making their study and
science of Law to consist in that, but the use and exercise thereof to be
restrained and bounded by their own proper Laws, which every Nation requires to
have first known, and chiefly to be observed. Wherefore if you travel into
their States, and shall ascend up into their Courts and places of Judicature,
both Judges and Advocates will be every where found to be all Civilians and
Graduates in that faculty; and the proceedings in causes there, to be most
after the form and manner of the Civil Law. And when any case comes to be
resolved by final sentence, if there be any proper or peculiar Law of their own
Country to determine it, judgment passes, as that special Law directs; but
if that be wanting, as commonly it is, presently recourse is had to the Civil
Law, and by that is it both pleaded and judged.

Which because it shows the transcendent excellency of this Law, being incident
to no other Law besides, and being not thoroughly enquired into, may seem
incredible to many men, it is therefore a point worthy of a strict examination,
and fit to be fully cleared and perfectly understood.

For peradventure it may not pass without a wonder, that a Prince or
Commonwealth should not be able to manage their rule and government by Laws of
their own devising; or that any differences should arise amongst their people,
which they knew not how to decide of themselves, but must consult with the
oracles of other Nations.

It eclipses, some may think, the Majesty of a State, to have rules prescribed
to it by others. And since the time that a divivision of Kingdoms was first
made, and each had their bounds set them, no Potentate, no not the Emperor
himself has pretended to a power to give Law to any, but to such as have been
his subjects by birth, habitation, or conquest. Neither can Laws be made to
regulate the whole World, or to bind all people, says Suarez. Lib. 3. de
legib. ca. 4. nu. 7. and ea 7. nu. 9.
Besides, quae leges Romany congruebant, non omnibus jam congruunt: mutata est
ratio vivendi, status rerum mutatus, says Ludovicus Vives; De cause. corrupt.
art. lib. 7.
The Laws that were proper for the Romans, suit not so well with others; the
manner of living is not now as it then was, the state of affairs is clean
changed, climates differ, and the tempers of people differ too; new and strange
accidents do frequently arise, which will require new constitutions to settle
them; the form of governing is diverse in several times and places, the Laws
therefore cannot possibly be the same; Monarchical Laws are of no use to a
Popular government; and Popular Laws do not fit a Monarchical State: Severe
edicts will not suit with a mild and gentle people; and contrariwise,
barbarous or untractable natures must not be dealt withal by gentleness or
clemency. It may therefore be questioned, how the Civil Law that was made so
many hundred years ago, and for one single Nation, can be accomodated to other
Nations, coming in so long a tract of time after them, and differing from them
in habit, language, situation, manners, and form of govermnent.

Besides, to hear of the general use of the Civil Law in foreign parts, is so
odious and offensive a thing to some humorous Anticivilians, that although they
be so learned, that they must needs know it to be true, and having travailed
abroad must needs have seen it; yet to take away all belief thereof from the
people of this Nation, lest they should look too favorably upon it, they do
too frequently suggest in their writings, That in France it has been forbidden
under a penalty to read the Civil Law to any public audience, and those that
should hear the same read, were also to undergo the same punishment; And that
in Spain to cite the authority of the Civil Law in Court, has been made an
offense no less then capital. But they do not add withal (which they know they
may as truly) that these sharp edicts lasted not long, but grew out of use very
long ago; and that the Civil Law does flourish no where so much as in those two
great Monarchies, and so has done for a long time together; and have both sent
forth men as famous and renowned in that profession as in any other; of whom
mention shall be made hereafter. For both the study and practice of the Civil
Law has been found of such absolute use and necessity, that those States that
have been brought upon some pretense of convenience to suppress it, have been
glad after some little want thereof to reestablish it and set it up again.

Baldwine in his Prolegomena takes in all Christendom in this particular;
Religio Christiana, says he, probavit retinuitque politicas Romanorum leges,
quas aequitate summa subnixas and naturalium notionum honestati proximas esse
videbat; easque reverita est tanquam Dei dona and beneficia: Christian Religion
has allowed of and kept the Roman Laws, which it saw were grounded upon pure
equity, and came nearest to natural integrity it self, and has ever since
reverenced them as the gifts of God and blessings bestowed on Man. Jus Civil
Romanorum, says Wesenbeck, Parat. Dig. De legib. nu. 9.
propter summam aequitatem and prudentiam, jus quasi gentium, and omnium
populorum been institutorum commune est: The Civil Law of the Romans, for its
special equity and wisdom, is come to be as it were the Law of Nations and of
all well ordered people. Jus Romanum tam aequum est and rationi consentaneum,
says Molinaeus, Ad consuetud. Paris. Tit. Des fiefs. nu. 110.
ut omnium fere Christianarum gentium usu and approbatione commune sit
effectum: The Roman Law is so equal and so coming up to reason it self, that by
the usage and acceptance of almost all Christian Nations, it is turned into a
general and common Law. Hoc jus commune, says Peckius, Ca. 28. De Reg. jur.
in 6. in princip.
quod tantis vigiliis excogitatum and inventum est, adeo bonum and aequum
semper visum fuit omnibus, ut hi quos Romani imperii leges non tenent, hoc
ipsum jus tanquam aequitati naturali maxim consentaneum, libenter sequantur
and ubique probent, suasque leges per hoc interpretentur; This common Law,
meaning the Roman, invented and wrought out by so hard and so long labor, has
always seemed unto all States so good and conscionable, as even those Nations
whom the Law of the Roman Empire does not oblige at all, do notwithstanding
freely follow and approve thereof, as most agreeable to natural equity, and do
interpret their own peculiar Laws by them. Particularly for France, Equinarius
Baro Inst. De ju. not. gent. and Civil.
says, that, si more statutore regionis aut lege Regia controversiae dirimi
non possint, ad jus Caesareum velut ad (...) Judices regii caeterique laici
confugiunt; If there be no custom or constitution to determine the
controversy, both Judges and people go to the imperial Law as the best that
ever was. And a little after, Jus Romanum, says he, commune jus Franci
appellant, and interdum absolute jus, vel jus civil, quod eo jure communiter
omnes regiones utantur, ubi pactum, mos, lex regia desideratur; We Frenchmen
call the Roman Law the common Law, and sometimes simply the Law, or the Civil
Law, because that Law all Nations do commonly use, where agreement, custom,
and particular Law is wanting. Annaeus Robertus, Rer. Judic. lib. 2. ca. 1.
another French Lawyer says, that some Provinces in France, either by special
privilege, or by grant from their Kings heretofore made do use the Roman Laws;
as the Territory of Tholose, and that of Daulphine, and some others, and these
are called Provinciae juris scripti, the provinces of the written Law: some
others, says he, and indeed the most and best Provinces are governed by
unwritten customs; but in the end he adds for the whole Kingdom thus, Civil
Romanorum jus in senatu and tribunalibus Franciae citare licet, non quod
Romany legibus parere necesse habeamus, sed ut aequitatis ratio ex tot
clarissimorum and prudentissimorum Jurisconsultorum responsis attendi and
inspici queat; The Civil Law of the Romans is alleged in the judicatories of
France, not that we think our selves bound to them, but that out of the
resolutions of so many most famous and most prudent Lawyers, the rule of equity
might be extracted. For Spain, Fernandus Vasquius, De succes. creat. lib. 3.
parag. 26. limitat. 31. nu. 71.
one of their own Lawyers, shall give testimony, how the Imperial Law and the
Law of their own Nation goes hand in hand conjoined and linked together: Jus
Civil Hispanorum, says he, hospitio voluntari recepit jus civil Romanorum:
jamque nostrum jus civil Hispanicum and jus civil Romanorum simul pariterque
coeunt, licet ex vi jurisdictionis illud recipere nos Hispani non teneremur:
The Law of Spain has given a free admittance to the Roman Law, and now they
are as it were united together, albeit there lies no tie of command upon us in
Spain to enforce a submission to it.

CHAP. V.
The general admittance and use of the Civil Law in foreign parts, is
acknowledged by our selves here in England.

I Shall not travail any further to cite any more foreign testimony, to prove
that this Law is generally received and practiced by other Nations; and the
rather, because Dr Duck in his book, has by variety of proof so sufficiently
made it good already. But yet it is worth the setting down, what some of our
own Contrymen have in their writings acknowledged to the very same purpose;
and those especially amongst the rest, whose interest and high valuation which
they pass upon the Laws of their own Country, will not permit them to ascribe
more to the Civil Law, then the just truth will bear.

And it is most observable, what King James himself, the learnedest of all
modern Princes, said here in a Speech made to no less solemn assembly, then his
Lords and Commons of Parliament, 21. Martii 1609.
which we have extant amongst his printed works. As a King, says he, I have
least cause of any man to dislike the Common Law; for no Law can be more
favorable and advantageous for a King, and extends further his Prerogative,
then it does. And for a King of England to despise the the Common Law, it is to
neglect his own Crown. Yet, says he, I do greatly esteem the Civil Law, the
profession thereof serving more for general learning, and being most necessary
for matters of Treaty with all foreign Nations. And I think, that if it should
be taken away, it would make an entry to Barbarism in this Kingdom, and would
blemish the honor of England; for it is in a manner lex Gentium, and
maintains intercourse with all foreign Nations. But I only allow it to have
course here, according to those limits of jurisdiction, which the Common Law it
self does allow it. And therefore though it be not fit for the general
government of the people here, it does not follow it should be extinct; no
more, then because the Latin tongue is not the mother or radical Language of
any Nation in the World at this time, that therefore the English tongue should
only now be learned in this Kingdom, which were to bring in barbarism.

And in another speech in Star Chamber, 20 Iun. 1616.
printed also; God forbid, says he, the Law of Nations (intending thereby
chiefly the Civil Law) should be barred in this Kingdom, and that for two
causes; one, because it is a Law to satisfy strangers, which will not hold
themselves so well satisfied with other municipal Laws; another, to satisfy
our own subjects in matters of Piracy, Marriage, Wills, and things of like
nature.

And again, when he was so mightily pressing to have had an union of England
and Scotland under the same policy of Laws, as they had but one and the same
King; in a speech made upon that subject, Ult. Mart. 1607.
extant in his printed works, he told his two Houses of Parliament, that in
point of conjunction of Nations, the Civil Law ought to bear a great sway, it
being the Law of Nations. These are the expressions of a King, the interest of
whose Crown and Scepter, and the prerogatives thereunto belonging did depend
upon the favor of another Law; and yet he positively and in downright terms
in the face of all his people, avows the Civil Law to be the Law of Nations;
and that all transactions of Treaty and of Trade with foreign Nations were
dispatched by the rule and reason thereof; and that the authority thereof was
so great in the esteem of strangers, that they would rest satisfied therewith,
when no municipal Law could satisfy them. But in that he avers also, that when
the people of England shall exterminate that Law, (which must needs be when the
practice thereof is quite taken away or thrust into a poor narrow compass)
their honor will be obscured, and they will be in danger to be overrun with
barbarism; it was never so well worth the observing, as at this present time.
And it clearly shows, that wise and learned King did perfectly understand the
true use of the Civil Law; for as the language thereof must needs be a means to
maintain learning, which does civilize and soften the minds of men; so there is
no sort of learning with the which the matter of it does not correspond and
participate; but above all it does afford more and better rules for civil
living and orderly conversation amongst men, and for righteous dealing each
with other, then any other study or learning whatsoever.

But this practice and usage of the Civil Law in foreign parts is yet better
confirmed by the authority of those, who studying and professing the Law of
England, have been always jealous of the rising and growth of the Civil Law in
this Nation. For though they have desired to keep it low here (for what reason
I need not mention) yet some of them have freely enough owned, how much it is
in use and practice in other Countries.

Sir Francis Bacon in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Queen, set before his
Maxims of Law, after he had told the Queen, that Justinian the Emperor did
gloriously, and yet aptly call the Body of the Roman Laws, proprium and
sanctissimum templum justitiae consecratum, a true and a most sacred temple
consecrated unto justice; he says, that it is a work of great excellency
indeed, as may well appear, in that France, Italy, and Spain, who have long
since shaken off the yoke of the Roman Empire, do yet nevertheless continue to
use the policy of that Law.

My Lord Ellesmere Chancellor of England, as Sir Francis Bacon was, in his
speech of the Postnati, does expressly deliver, that the Civil Law is taken to
be the most universal and general Law in the World.

Sir John Fortescue himself, Lord chief Justice of England, and afterward
Lord Chancellor in King Henry the sixth's days, in his book, wherein he does
so highly magnify and commend the Laws England above the Civil Law, yet he
could say, De Laud. legum Angliae. ca. 9.
That Civiles supra humanas cunctas leges alias fama per orbem extollit
gloriosa; The Civil Laws throughout the whole World, are advanced in glory and
renown above all other man's Laws.

Fulbeck also, another of the same profession, and of great learning, does
agree with the former in these words; In his parallel part. 1. Epistle to the
Reader.
The Roman Laws; says he, in the times of Arcadius, Theodosius, and Justinian,
recovered their strength; and shining to all the Commonwealths of Europe, as
the Sun to all the climates of the Earth, have for their worthiness, and
necessary use and employment, received entertainment, countenance, and great
reward of Emperors, Kings and Princes.

Likewise Mr Seldom, a Graduate in the Common Law, but a great Student in all
learning, and one that seems to have searched narrowly into the state of the
Civil Law, as it has stood in use and request in other Countries as well as in
England, in all times, in his additional discourse upon Fleta, wholly spent
upon that subject, owns the entertainment and use of the Civil Law in the
Western Countries of Europe, that had left to acknowledge the Roman Empire long
before. For in that discourse Ca. 6. parag 4.
he has these words:

Ita jam, id est sub annum 1145, receptus fuit Juris Justinianaei usus, ut
quoties interpretandi jura sive vetera sive nova sive ratio sive analogia
desideraretur, aut mos aut lex expressior non reperiretur, ad jus illud
Justinianaeum tum veluti rationis juridicae promptuarium optimum ac ditissimum,
tum ut quod legem in nondum definitis ex ratione seu analogia commode
suppleret, esset recurrendum. Certe ita ferme Rhodiam recepere veteres Romani
legem in rebus nauticis, ut etiam apud nos and gentes vicinas leges recipiuntur
Oleronianae; cum interim nec hae nec illae ex authoritate sui, qua primo
conditae sunt, vim sic obtinuerint. Atque ut Academiae demum non paucae aliae
per Europam Occidentalem hac in re, quoad studiorum institutionem, Bononiensem;
Ita etiam Regna alia and Respublicae imperium Caesarianum quoad usum juris
ejusdem aliquem imitatae sunt, retentis semper ac ubique moribus alias avitis
legibusque sibi, pro varia regiminis cujusque formula, ante conditis, novasque
condendi tum liberate tum usu. Neque ullibi pro simplici juris norma in
Occidente inde usurpatum est jus illud Caesareum, sed cum temperamentis quae
jam diximus: That is, About the year One thousand one hundred forty five,
Justinians Law came to be used in the Western part of Europe, in such cases,
as either the State had made no special provision at all in them, or that there
was no custom to resolve them by; or where in default of both the case that
fell out was to be settled by right and sound reason, or by some other cases
that in all circumstances did resemble the matter in question; or lastly, where
the local statutes themselves were not so clear, but that they stood in need of
interpretation, and were so doubtfully penned, that solid reason and a deep
judgment was to be made use of to explain them. In all which cases recourse was
had to the Law of Justinian, as to the best and richest Treasury of legal
reason and equitable knowledge; and which could best supply the want of a
peculiar Law either with concludent reason, or with parallelling the case in
question with other express cases of the Law, as did exactly suit therewith.
Much after the same sort were the Rhodian Laws embraced by the ancient Romans
to regulate such matters as fell out at Sea, as the Laws of Oleron have been in
England and elsewhere; when as notwithstanding neither the one nor the other
have had such a binding power in them, as they had when and where they were
first ordained. And as many Universities at last were guided by that of Bononia
(where learning, after it had layen a long time neglected, was first revived)
in setting up the teaching and reading of all kind of literature; so did also
other Kingdoms and Commonwealths in some measure make use of the Civil Law,
as the Empire did, reserving to themselves such old Laws and Customs, as they
had proper to their several forms and ways of government, and the freedom of
making new, which they practiced as often as they had occasion. Neither, says
he, has that Imperial Law been at any time since observed in the Western
Countries for a positive commanding Law, but ever under the rules and limits
before spoken of.

The same Mr Seldom also in his Mare Clausum, Lib. 1. ca. 24.
although he will have the Europaean Nations to practice diverse things very
opposite to the Civil Law, as that there are no Slaves now, or right of
personal Postliminiage, as were by the Civil Law; and that goods cast away at
sea, do by the customs and ordinances of many Countries accrue to the Princes
themselves, which by the course of the Civil Law were restored back to the
owners, or if they claimed not went to the first occupant; yet he commends the
Princes of Europe for establishing the use of the Civil Law in their Academies
and in their Tribunals so far, as their own peculiar statutes were not contrary
thereunto.

I cannot also omit what Mr Seldom writes in his Review upon his History of
Tithes; Ca. 7.
Where though he vehemently declaimes against the gross ignorance of those,
that do not stick to publish here in England commonly, that all other States
are governed only by the Civil Law; and would have such to understand the
difference betwixt the use of Laws in study or argument, and the governing
authority of them: yet he acknowledges, that in the Empire and a good part of
Itaely, through the power of Emperors and Popes, the authority of the Civil
Law does still continue; and that in Poriugal the Roman Civil Law is authorized
by an Ordinance of State, in cases which are not literally comprehended in the
customs or constitutions of the Kingdom. And as for other Christian States,
which acknowledge no superior, or any subjection to the Empire, as France,
Spain, Denmark, Poland, the City of Venice, and what also in Germany has made
it self free from the Empire, though as it is Law, he will not have it to bind
or rule with them; yet he says, in all of them, the reason of it brought into
method, is used and applied commonly to argument, when any of their customs or
statutes come in question; because the practisers studied it in the
Universities, and had thence their degrees given them. And so the old Imperial
Civil Law valet pro ratione, non pro inducto jure; and pro ratione, only
quantum Reges, Dynastae, and Respublicae intra potestatis suae fines valere
patiuntur; that is, it is of force as Reason, not as an introduced Law; and no
farther as reason, then as Kings, Rulers, and Commonwealths will have it to
prevail within their several Territories.

And yet the same Mr Seldom also says within very few lines after, that
doubtless custom has made some parts of the Imperials to be received for Law
in all places, where they have been studied. And albeit he be very vehement in
asserting, that justice is administered in every State by its own peculiar Laws,
yet he admits also, that the interpretation of those Laws in most places, save
England and Ireland, has of late time been much directed by the reason of the
Imperials, and only by the reason of them, and not by their authority; and
that also in case where they are not opposite at all to the special Law of the
place, but seem to agree with the Law of Nations or common reason. And he
grants moreover, that ever since Frederick Barbarossa's time (which is near 500
years ago) the Civil Law has grown into a common profession in this Western
World.

CHAP. VI.
The Civilians themselves do not enlarge the use and practice of the Civil Law
in foreign parts, further then Mr Seldom himself in his writings grants it to
extend.

FRom what has been cited out of Mr Seldom, it does appear, that there is as
much granted by Mr Seldom to the Civil Law, as ever was challenged by any
Civilian, or ever ascribed to it by any, or that any can wish to be granted to
that profession in any Nation.

He in effect acknowledges, that when the use thereof came to be renewed in
Europe with other learning, it was found to be so rich a Treasury of reason,
judgment, and true natural equity; and so useful for all matters that respected
Civil society and government, that by the knowledge and direction of the Civil
Law, and the rules and principles thereof they knew how to supply with
resolution such cases, as their National Laws had not made any provision at all
in; or if they had, but were dark or intricate, this would help to explain and
illustrate them; which neither common reason nor any other humane learning
would enable them to do. The Universities have therefore since made it their
common study, and commonly given degrees in it, and have sent forth the
professors thereof into all Tribunals to be the minsters of right and justice
there, till now at last it is grown to be a common profession throughout
Europe. And though the original authority which it had in the Roman State, is
quite worn out, no State being now subject to the Roman Sovereignty; yet Mr
Seldom does admit it to be entertained for a binding Law by ordinance in some
places, that stamp that authority upon it which of it self it has not; in
others usually observed as a Law by custom and practice; but where it passes
not for Law neither way, there the reason and wisdom thereof prevails, and
every man suffers himself to be convinced thereby, non vi necessitatis sed vi
rationis, not forcing the will, as a Law does, but as by reason powerfully
working upon, and at last controuling the understanding.

Thus far goes Mr Seldom himself; and by no Civilian has a greater latitude
then this been ever given to the Civil Law. For what King James spoke to his
Parliament in the year 1609, touching this matter; That there was no Kingdom
in the World, not only Scotland, but not France, nor Spain, nor any other
Kingdom governed merely by the Civil Law, but every one of them has their own
Municipal Laws agreeable to their customs, as this Kingdom has the
Common Law; we all unanimously own to be true.

And what he told them of Scotland in particular, in the year 1607. may be as
well and as truly spoken of all the States in Europe. If a man, says he, plead
there, that the Law of the Nation is otherwise, it is a bar to the Civil; and a
good Chancellor or President will oftentimes repel and put to silence an
argument that the Lawyers bring out of the Civil Law, where they have a clear
solution in their own Law. So as, says he, the Civil Law in Scotland is
admitted in no other cases, but to supply such cases, wherein the Municipal Law
is defective. This is generally reported by others, never questioned by our
selves: For we are of opinion, there is no people in the World governed singly
by any one kind of Law whatsoever, nor indeed can be; much less can any State
be totally governed by the Roman Law, but that there must needs be a superadded
and a peculiar Law, especially as to government, suiting with the climate it
self, the nature and manners of the people, the fashion and form of public
actions, diverse accidents of the time, and sundry other occurrences. Nay, we
often see it fall out, that some certain Laws that are specially made for a
people, and at their first ordaining are found to be most excellent and very
wholesome Laws; yet in process of time through alteration of things, and the
very persons themselves for which they were originally made, it is as great
wisdom and as necessary to change them and quite take them away, as it was at
first to devise them. It is no wonder therefore, that diverse parts of the Civil
Law, that were accommodated to the nature of the Roman people only, and the
usages then in being, should prove incongruous to the men and to the affairs
of this present world, which is of a clean different face and nature. For
instance:

A Roman subject was not such a supreme moderator amongst his Children, nor
such a free disposer of his own estate, as that he could make his Will thereof,
as he pleased, preferring one child, and excluding another, or parting it too
unequally amongst them, or gratifying some stranger without remembering any of
them.

If therefore a child were quite left out of his fathers Will, or were
especially disinherited, but without any cause mentioned, or upon such a cause
as the Law did not allow of, or if upon a legal cause, yet not such as was true
in fact, the Will was void and null. Wesemb. parat. Dig. De liber. and posthum.
The just portion or share that every child might expect from his father, if he
made a Will, and which he could not give from him without lawful cause, was, if
there were but four children in all, or under, an equal share in the third part
of his whole substance both Land and goods; (for at Civil Law they both came
under one reckoning, and went one and the same way without any difference) but
if there were more then four children, then a full half of the whole estate was
equally shared amongst them all. Novell. De trient. and semiss parag. haec nos.


If less was given to any child then this just proportion, or if it were
clogged with any condition, or time of payment, whereby it could not come
presently and freely to him, the Will was not absolutely void, L. omni modo.
Co. de inoffic. testam.
but a complaint might be brought to restore him to his just and equal share,
and to have it presently and absolutely without condition, encumbrance, or day
for payment given. L. Quoniam in prioribus. Co. De inoffic. testam.


But in those Nations and Countries where the subjects are such free and
absolute propietaries of all the estate they have, that they can dispose of the
same how they will, even from their own children, and to them in what
inequality they will, these tender and indulgent dictates of the Civil Law are
useless and unsuitable. Those Titles then and constitutions of the Civil Law,
that treat on that subject, Dig. and Co. De lib. and postum. haered. inst. vel
exhaered. De exhaered. Lib. De Inoffic. testam. are not capable to receive any
practical use or application in those Territories.

Again, the greatest punishment that the Romans inflicted upon simple theft,
was to pay fourfold, where the thief was taken in the act it self, or at least
seen and cried out upon before he got out of sight, Culac lib. 11. obs. 58.
or if otherwise the theft was not so manifest, to pay double the value of that
which he stole, and the reparation was made only to the party damnified. And
if there were diverse persons taken or discovered to be actors of one and the
same theft, they all underwent but one and the same penalty amongst them, yet
either of them might be sued for the whole. L. 21. parag. 9. Dig. de furt.


But by the Civil Law it is not only theft, privily to take and carry away
something that is another with an intent to defraud him of it; but it is a
theft also, when one that has lent money upon a Pawn does employ the pawn to
any private use of his own; or when one that is entrusted with the safe keeping
of any thing for me, does use or wear it himself; or when one has borrowed a
thing of me for a certain use, and he does otherwise employ it, or for a
certain time, and he detains it longer, or carries it whither he should not,
and further then he promised to do. L. Si pignore. 54. Dig. De furt. parag.
furtum autem. Just. De oblig. quae ex delict.


Howbeit, though Justinian will not have any theft punished with the loss of
life or member, Novell. 134. ca. fin. verse. pro furto autem.
yet he leaves High-way-men, and breakers into houses, and pirates at sea, to
be chastised by death; Ca. Ult. No. 134. l. Dig. ad l. Cornel. de sicar.
for such acts as these are accounted more then theft by the Civil Law. And for
want of ability to make pecuniary reparation, he will have all thieves punished
at the Judges discretion, L. ult. Dig. de furt. l. 1. parag. generaliter. Dig.
de paen.
corporally not capitally. Surely then in a case of simple theft it were very
improper to bring into argument, or to cite any Text of the Civil Law De
furtis, in any State or Country, when theft is looked upon rather as a public
crime, then as a private injury, and is punished with death it self, without
any satisfaction made to the party.

Likewise Slavery, as it was under the Romans, not well suiting with Christian
Religion (which looks upon all men alike, proceeding from one common parent,
and created for one and the same end) is in all Christian Nations worn out and
abolished. Because it seems to be against Christian charity and that brotherly
communion which we stand obliged by to one another, to exercise such an
absolute dominion over any, that nature and religion has made our equals.

Those hard and severe Laws of servitude therefore, which were in use amongst
the Romans, whereby slaves were excluded from the participation of any civil
right whatsoever, L. 32. Dig. de reg. ju.
and could not so much as marry, nor have any estate of their own, nor bring
any action or complaint in their own name, but as to civil communion were
accounted as plainly dead; L. 209. Dig. de reg. jur.
wanting in a Christian Commonwealth that subject matter for which they were
first ordained, they must needs fail also of their use and vigor, and be
esteemed incongruous and improper there.

These and such like instances do show, that the Law of a Nation must
necessarily be fitted to the government of it, and to the disposition of the
people, and such affairs as they use to deal in; and that it is not possible,
that the Civil Law alone without the help of a peculiar Law proper to each
Nation, should be sufficient to steer and carry on all the affairs of every
Nation, so differing from, and as I may say, directly opposite to the Roman.
But what are a few instances of Laws abrogated, or out of use, and that
sometimes but in part neither, and which chiefly refer to public Government,
to a whole Body of justice, both distributive, and commutative, which that Law
comprehends, and takes in?

CHAP. VII.
No Municipal Law is sufficient to meet with the multitude and variety of cases
and questions that will happen at Land, at Sea, and in foreign parts: Which
has caused so many Nations to make use of the Civil Law, where it is proper and
pertinent to their affairs, to join with and help their own; rather then to be
without any Law at all, and to be subject to the mischiefs of arbitrariness,
folly, and violence.

IT is the practice of the whole world to adhere and stand to the dictates of
their own Laws, and in no case to admit of any other Rule, either of Civil Law,
or acutest reason against that which their own National Laws have declared and
directed to be done. Nee judicibus contra leges judicare, nec de legibus in
republica probatis ac susceptis disputare fas est. Bodin. de rep. lib. 1. ca.
10. in fin:
But then it is visible to every discerning eye, that the Laws that are made,
are often times drawn so short, and put into such obscure and ambiguous terms,
that it is but requisite some other Law or rule should be found out to supply,
clear, and explain them. And every where the body of the Municipal
constitutions appears so narrow and slender, and comprehends so little, that
the number of cases that are expressly resolved by Law, is not by many degrees
comparable to the number of those, that do frequently and almost daily happen,
wherein the Law of the Nation has not made any decision at all.

Sir John Davis in his Preface to the Irish Reports, does not stick to
acknowledge this to be most true in the Municipal Law of England, though in his
praises of it he sets it above all the Laws of the World besides. For, says
he, if the Rules and Maxims of the Law were a thousand times as many as they
be indeed, yet would they carry no proportion with the infinite diversity of
men's actions, and of other accidents, which make the cases that are to be
decided by the Law. How great need is there therefore to keep the Civil Law in
England still, that out of its store and plenty it may be instrumental to
resolve those doubts and questions of right, which as yet have no special Law
of the Nation made for them?

Indeed as the humors and inclinations of men do differ, and their occasions
are diverse, and the ends they pursue, various, and the way and course they take
to obtain them, not the same; so is it impossible, that the actions that
proceed from them, should be like and uniform, but must needs, as their causes
are, be various and disagreeing: From whence it happens, that every day
produces such accidents, as though they be not wholly new, yet they come
accompanied with one circumstance or other, that makes them differ from all
that went before them. Besides, Nature it self brings forth some variety of
contingents without any act of man.

All which being of several natures, and differently circumstantiated from what
is past or could be thought of, though they do too frequently happen and
intermix with the affairs of men, yet to supply them with a direct peculiar
Law, or any other express and determinate rule to settle them, is an enterprise
that was never undertaken by the wisest Lawgivers that have been; Legislator
non potest omnia declarare, quia res in quibus versatur, sunt propemodum
infinitae; and quia in hac vita mortali nihil est perfectum; and propter
ingenii imbecillitatem non possumus cunctae rimari. Mantie. de tacit. and ambig
convent. lib. 1. Tit. 15. nu. 19.
nor can possibly be effected by any society of men whatsoever. For it cannot
be understood, how such things can be the subject of any established Law or
rule, that cannot be foreseen, neither what, nor when, nor how they will come
to pass. Hae varietates infinitae nullis legibus, nullis tabulis, nullis
Pandectis, nulla librorum quantumvis immensa mole ac multitudine capiuntur,
says Bodinus; De rep. lib. 6. ca. 6.
These infinite varieties can in no Laws, no Tables, no Pandects, no Books, be
they never so many or so voluminous, be all of them contained or comprehended.
And again, Ibidem.
Non magis legibus singula contineri possunt, quam infinitum quiddam and
immensum ab eo quod finibus exiguis, ac veluti cancellis angustissimis
conclusum est, says the same Bodinus; No easier is it to collect all the
several cases into one book of Laws, then to comprehend that which is in
greatness infinite, in that which lies in a most narrow compass, and is as it
were in straitest bounds shut up. And yet since there is a necessity of settling
such various and so unlike contingencies, some rational way or rule must be
found out whereby to compose and settle them, lest they should be made subject
to mere will and pleasure, or in default of better means, men interested
therein should be left to right themselves by forcible and violent ways.

It is no less evident and manifest, that whilst we have to deal with foreign
States, as ordinarily we do in the way of trade and commerce, and too
frequently in the way of War too, questions and controversies without number do
arise, some whereof do concern and reflect upon the States themselves, as being
of public concernment; others be of a more private nature, and do concern the
interest of some subjects only. But when such controversies of either kind do
happen, is there any Municipal Law capable to decide them? should we not as
much disdain to be judged by the Law of France, or Spain, when we have to do
with them, as they would to be overruled by ours, when they have to do with
us? Nay, should we not abandon the society of such a Nation, that should tie us
to their own Laws, in matters that are transacted and done out of their proper
Territory, as happily upon the open Sea, or in the Territory of another Prince
and people? Of what force or power can a Law be to those who are not subject to
the authority of those that make it Ubi cessat jurisdictio statuemium, statuti
dispositio non obtinet. l. fin. Dig. de jutisd. omn. Iudic. l. 1. Co. De susp.
fut.
? And yet when we fall into their hands, and controversies are moved against us
in their Tribunals, we must inevitably stand to and abide their justice, and
the like they owe to ours: But then right must be done by such rules and
principles, as both sides may be fully satisfied in the equity of them.

Here therefore does appear the true use of the Civil Law, and the ground
whereupon all Nations have admitted it into their Courts and acts of justice:
For although it cannot be said, that there is no case which is not contained in
the Roman Law: Neque leges neque senatusconsulta ita scribi possunt, ut omnes
casus qui quandoque inciderint, comprehendantur; sed sufficit, and ea quae
plerunque accidunt, contineri, says the Civil Law it self: L. 10. Dig. De
legib.
Neither Laws nor results of Council can be so sufficiently framed, as to
provide for all cases that shall happen hereafter; but it may suffice, if such
cases be provided for, as in contingency are most familiar and common: yet such
is the copiousness of that Law, beyond any that has yet been; and such a
wonderful enlargement has been made thereof by the professors of it in all
ages ever since, as cases and accidents of all sorts and natures, and in all
Countries, have happened from time to time, from study, argument, and the
several resolutions of foreign Courts applied thereunto, and all upon the
reason and equity of that Law which was written by the Romans; that now it may
be justly thought, no case can fall out or accident arise, which the learning
of that profession thus polished and perfected, either in express terms, or by
parity of reason, will not determine. Wherefore it is upon just reason, and
likewise upon necessity too, that so many Nations have recourse to the wisdom
and fullness of that Law thus amplified, as often as their own particular
constitutions fail them.

And although there are a sort of men in the world (who indeed have some good
natural abilities in them, as a ready apprehension, a quick wit, a holding
memory, and a smooth elocution, but were never brought up either in Law or any
learning) yet they do much presume upon that ordinary and common understanding
which they have, that they think, or at least they would have the World believe
so, whereby they may be thought worthy of the best places of Judicature, that
they can by the strength of their poor illiterate reason resolve all questions
and doubts of Law whatsoever, whether they arise at Land or at Sea; be they of
public concernment or of private; entrenching upon our own Law, or touching
upon the Law of Nations; be the case between Prince and people; subject and
stranger; one State and another; clear in Law or ambiguous; settled by express
constitution, or left undecided; yet their capacity, as they would have it
conceived, without any such help as the Civil Law, does suffice for all.

And yet when these presumptuous and high conceited men do sit to judge and
administer right on such matters, they quickly find what they would not before
believe, or at least not have believed by others, that their understanding is
too narrow to comprehend such difficult things, and their insufficiency to be
too great to determine them: and are therefore driven to consult with the
learned of that profession, to whose skill it does belong, not without some
shame to themselves. And it were to be wished, that the only effect of such
men's ambition and confidence might rest there, and that it did no greater
mischief. But it commonly falls out to be fatal to the interest of many, which
is taken away or prejudiced by their error and ignorance: and sometime States
also are embroyled in war and hostility each against other by their unskilful
managery; Ignorantia judicis plerunque est calamit as innocentis, says St
Austin; De Civit. Dei. lib. 19. ca. 6.
the ignorance of the Judge is frequently the woe of those that are innocent.

And indeed though it be nothing else but reason, that does render a man
capable and fitting to discuss and pronounce upon such questions, yet it is not
the vulgar and common reason that nature does bestow upon every man; but it is
that reason which is gotten by art and study of the Law and of the rules and
principles of justice, and which is improved and enlightened by a continual use,
and a long experience, and which in truth is to be found no where but in
students, practisers and Judges of the Civil Law only.

And yet there has been a strong conceit, taken up but lately, but yet very
hotly pursued, to have the same take effect, by folliciting the state to make a
Law to that purpose; that a certain number of old experienced Merchants are
much fitter and better enabled to sit upon the trial and examination of matters
of foreign trade and negotiation, and of business arising upon or beyond the
Sea, then any students, graduats, or practisers in the Civil Law whatsoever;
supposing, that if the Court of Admiralty were turned into a Court of
Merchants, both subjects and strangers would be better satisfied, and trade go
on and thrive much better.

Which project some Merchants have been the more emboldened to set on foot,
because they once prevailed so far, as to get an Act of Parliament to be made
in the forty third year of Queen Elizabeth, whereby all controversies that
should from thenceforth arise upon any assurances made of any goods,
merchandises, ships, and things adventured, are committed to the hearing and
trial of so many Judges, whereof the Civilians are fewest, and the Merchants
make the greatest number. They would have it conceived, that none has
understanding or skill enough to judge of the my sterie of their employment but
themselves only; and that it is equity and a good conscience, in a most
summary and a compendious way, and not the intricate and long Maeanders of the
Law, that is the fittest to arbitrate and decide their differences; crying out
for a quick dispatch, that their voyages to Sea may not be obstructed. They are
jealous withal, that the profession of the Law is but a design to enrich a
company of men with the vexations and spoils of others; grudging, that there
should be a distinct profession made of the Law, which secures themselves and
all they have, when every Trade and Handicraft has the like.

In which suggestions if there could be imagined to be any either truth or
soundness, yet since the same may be made by other trades and professions as
well as by the Merchants; it would argue, that there were by the State too
great care had of them, and too little had of others, to assign the Merchants
only Judges out of their own order, and not to grant the same privilege to
other Tradesmen also. And yet to make a peculiar provision general, and to
erect so many Tribunals as there are Trades and callings, was never as yet
accustomed or put in practice by any Nation.

The Romans would not admit any Barterers or Traffiquers into the Camp, or to
any place of honor in the Civil Government L. 12. Co. De Cobortat. 1. vi^^.
Co. Negeciat. ne Militent.
Paulus L. 44. Dig. De aedilit. edict.
gives the reason; Id genus hominum. says he, ad lucrum potius vel turpiter
faciendum pronius est; That sort of men are disposed to gain, and unrighteous
dealing. Saint Chrysostom says no less, as Gratian cites him, ca. ejiciens.
Distinct. 88. Mercator sine mendacio and perjurio esse non potest; No Merchant
can subsist without lying and perjury: And Demosthenes Orat: pro Phormione.
makes it a miracle, si idem mercator industrius videatur and probus; if that
man that is sedulous and intent upon Merchandising, can be an honest man. And
therefore the Thebans would not suffer any man to bear any honorable office in
their Commonwealth, that had not quite given over Merchandising for the space
of ten years. Arist. Polit. lib. 3. ca. 3. in fin.
Surely their fear was, that when those kind of men studied and endeavored
nothing else but amassing of wealth and getting of riches, the Tribunal, if
they sat there, might become a Mart, and justice be exposed to sale.

Besides, it is most frequent and ordinary for a number of Merchants to join in
copartnership together, and to employ one common and joint stock beyond the
Seas, and yet few of the copartners known or taken notice of; so that it may
happen, that a Merchant, that sits on the judgment seat, may be deeply
concerned in the case in question, and be judge in his own case, and yet his
interest not seen or discerned.

Again, there is such a spirit of opposition reigns between the Merchant and
the Mariner, who is as useful and serviceable at sea as the Merchant can
possibly pretend to be, that if the Merchant should sit to judge the Mariner,
in time, the company of poor Mariners might be so severely dealt with, and kept
with such short wages by the Merchant, at whose pleasure and command he is,
that he will not care to serve, and so navigation may be quite lost.

Nay further, the controversies in the Admiralty are not between our own
Merchants only, but many times between our own and other Merchants of foreign
Nations. Whereby, if ours were Judges, there would be given into their hands a
great advantage to help and gratify those of their own Country and rank, and
to oppress strangers.

Moreover, what affinity is there between buying and selling, (which is the
only skill of the Merchant) and judging of the nature and right of contracts,
injuries, debts, agreements, offenses, and other accidents and emergencies
happening upon the Sea or in foreign parts, which they so covet to gain unto
themselves? Which knowledge and faculty is not to be found in the depth of the
Ocean, nor to be obtained by Travail, but is gotten by serious contemplation
and a long study, and perfected by the practice of a man's whole life.

I write not this to debase the true worth nor to lessen the repute of
Merchants. They are a people that enrich the Nation as well as themselves; and
for the dangers they run through, both personal and real, they deserve to have
the highest immunities conferred on them. But let them keep within their own
sphere, and not aspire to such a function, which neither their breeding,
capacity, or parts does enable them unto, nor their employment gives them
leisure to discharge. Robert Rer. judicat. lib. 2. ca. 16.
And therefore upon a solemn debate, whether Merchants should be joined to
Civilians to try such matters, it was denied, and judged against in France, in
the year 1584.

Besides, that it should be thought that men (whose knowledge of the Law and
skill to do right and justice is no greater, then bare nature and their
illiterate education has affoorded them) should be able to do it quicker, and
at less charge to those that seek it, then those that have made it their whole
study and employment, is to me an imagination strange and beyond belief; for
unquestionably the skilful and expert Judge, that by his study and practice is
accustomed to such business, as he does best understand it, so he must needs
soonest dispatch it also. Because custom and knowledge has made all things of
that nature obvious and easy to him; and such a judge will not allow any thing
to be spoken impertinently and beside the matter in question; and so a
multitude of business goes off quickest under him, and both delay and much
charge is avoided. But when they come to judge thereof, who never meditated or
dealt in such things, it must needs be, that they must run into many
impertinent questions, and that they must toil and perplex themselves to
understand the true point in issue; meeting every where with knots and
difficulties, and scarce any thing that is easy and clear to them; whereby they
cannot without long and frequent debates and much time spent resolve any ease
in question. And though it be rightly decided in the end, which it is twenty to
one if it be, and is an act of chance rather then judgment; yet in a multitude
of other business, before any comes to be judged, the attendance, I am sure, is
most tedious, and the charge intolerable: so that to put the Maritime and
foreign affairs to be judged by Merchants, is to augment delay and charge,
rather then to lessen either.

In like manner, those that study and profess only the Law of their own
Country, (which as I said before, is commonly but of narrow extent, and serves
but for a few particular occasions only) may be as justly deemed incapable to
judge and sit upon trial of such matters (though they do concern the
dispensing of Law and justice too) wherein the Municipal Law is silent, and has
made no provision at all; or peradventure is not capable to make any
determination in them; as when they fall out upon the main and open Sea, or in
a foreign State, or are controversies arising between two several Nations, or
their subjects, to which no Municipal Law can be applied. In brief, where the
Laws stand distinct, and the professions thereof distinct also, the exercise of
them ought not to be confounded by the ones thrusting into the others function
and calling. And therefore much less reason have they to prohibit the
Civilians, who have the knowledge, the trial of those cases; and assume it to
themselves who have it not.

Hereupon therefore we say it is, that though every Nation has Laws and
Statutes of their own, proper for their affairs and people, and those within
their several confines, so far as they do prescribe, have the preeminence above
any other Law or reason in the world, as has been said before: Yet there is no
foreign Nation in the World, that has a distinct study and profession of the
Municipal Law of the Nation, apart and divided from the Roman Civil Law:
neither are there any where else students and professors of any Municipal Law
distinctly so called and dignified, as there are in England. But the study and
profession of Law that is to be found in the other parts of the World, and is
serviceable for the government of the Civil State, is the study and profession
of the Roman Civil Law only.

All which, and whatsoever else we shall say hereafter to the same purpose, we
would have understood as humble proposals only, to be considered of in order
to a future settlement which we hope and long for. But if the Authority of this
Nation (who best can judge what is fittest for the people, and what suits best
with the present Government) shall in the end commit and dispose of those
Trials which formerly did belong to the profession of the Civil Law, into the
hands of others, that do not partake of that excellent knowledge; it does
behove all persons to sit down satisfied therewith, and to submit unto it,
without any murmuring or disputing; for I do greatly approve of that golden
saying of the Civil Law. L^ 3. Co. De grim. sacrileg.
Disputare de principali judicio non oportet. Sacrilegii enim instar est,
dubitare an is dignus sit quem Imperator elegerit; No man ought to question
that which the supreme Magistrate has once decided. For it is a kind of
sacriledg, to doubt of that persons merit, whom the highest magistrate by his
immediate election has thought fit to dignifie.

CHAP. VIII.
The reasons are strong and weighty, upon which so many foreign States do
direct and order the business of their Tribunals most by the praescript,
reason, and equity of the Civil Law.

IT is from the Roman Civil Law that the students in foreign Nations do derive
their first principles of Law and justice, and in this are all public Lectures
read and degrees taken, and not in any Municipal Law.

Yet it is true, that before they practice or sit in places of Judicature, they
read and thoroughly inform themselves in the Laws of their own Country; by
which, where there is positive and express constitution in the point, their
pleadings and judgments must be directed wholly. But in cases where there is
none, as the cases be but few where there is, in comparison of those where
there is not; or where that which is, is either in sense ambiguous, or in words
obscure, and must be interpreted; or where no Municipal Law can be of any force
or use at all, as in the cases above specified, there they generally make the
Civil Law, or the reason thereof, their only rule and guide, to administer
right and justice by both to their own people, and to foreigners also.

To this they are led by diverse necessary and most important reasons.

First, for them to do so, is but answerable to their education, as they are
all Civilians, and to those principles which their learning has ingrafted in
them: For since they have been bred and disciplined under it, it is no wonder
if their judgments and results be steered by it: it being natural, that waters
should have the true relish of the fountain from whence they flow. And
therefore when the learned of that profession sat in diverse Judicatories of
England, distribution of justice was ever after the same rules in such cases,
wherein no special Law was, or could be made to guide them.

Secondly, it cannot be devised, how such cases as neither the Law nor the
custom of the place has specially provided in, can be well understood, and
receive a true and right judgment, without the help of that profession. All
other learning besides that is taken up in the consideration of things that are
clean of another nature; and does not consider what dealings there are between
man and man, subjects and foreigners; and what justice and equity does require
in each of them, as that exactly does.

As for vulgar and common reason, it is of use in matters that are obvious to
sense, and to the first apprehension, and which are ministerial to the
maintaining of life and livelihood. But where the discursive faculty must be
employed, and great reasoning and a long experience is required, as in the
things we now speak of, ordinary reason, if we presume upon it, will sooner
lead us into error, then be any advantage toward a solid and right judgment.
Nay, so unable are the common capacities to discern and judge of them, that it
is usual for the Judges of the Law themselves to be at a stand, and to spend
some time in study and counsel, ere they can resolve some questions that do
arise; so intricate and perplexed are they.

Thirdly, it is the nature and practice of all States and people, besides their
own proper Laws, to use such as are common to all other Nations and men, and so
no strange thing to cherish two Laws in one Commonwealth, as some do too
vainly imagine. Omnes populi, qui legibus and moribus reguntur, partim suo
proprio, partim communi omnium hominum jure utuntur, says Gaius; L. 9. Dig. De
just. and jur.
and Justinian: Parag. 1. Inst. Deju. not. gent. and civ.
All people that are guided by any Law or custom at all, are guided by a Law
common to others, as well as by that that is peculiar to themselves; for if the
Law of a Nation be not universal enough (as indeed none is) but that in the
ministration of justice there will every day arise such questions, which the
particular Law has not touched upon; if there be not some other Law to fly to,
there must necessarily ensue either a failer of justice as to those cases,
which would draw on a self-revenge; or else the settling them must be arbitrary
and at will, which a people will not long endure.

Besides, there is no Nation in the World, that abounds with all things. There
is no people so well fortified, but that they may stand in need of the
assistance of others, either in matter of commerce, or to join in opposing a
common enemy, who watches to destroy them both. When as therefore the imploring
of this foreign help, or the transportation of our native commodities to those
that can supply us with theirs, which we have not, drives us to a necessity of
dealing with other people; it is substantially needful also to order such
dealings by, to have some Law or rules generally known, and unquestionably just
to both.

There being therefore a necessity of another Law, besides the particular Law
of each Country, the Civil Law has been chosen by most foreign States,
because it has from the time of the Romans run through all Nations, and has
been so generally applauded and allowed of by all, that now at last it has
purchased to it self the honor to be styled, Jus Gentium, the Law of Nations,
or jus commune, the common Law of all Europe, because it has more in it of the
Law of Nature, that is common to all mankind, then any other Law of Man.

Fourthly, the Civil Law is of such large extent, and so vast a comprehension,
that nothing can fall out, wherein the ministration of Law, equity, or any part
of justice may be necessary, which either the words of that Law, or the reason
thereof will not decide: For indeed the Romans, through the Universal power
they had over a great part of the World, and their conversing several ways
with the rest, were brought acquainted with the nature and state of all Humane
affairs of what kind soever.

Fifthly, it provides not for the welfare and interest of one Nation only, as
a particular Law does, but contemplates and takes care for the general affairs
of all people: For it treats of all manner of differences arising between one
State and another, of the Laws of war and articles of peace, of leagues,
truces, reprizals, rights and privileges of Ambassadors, and redemption of
prisoners; of precedencies due to Princes; of the freedom of trade to
forreiguers, and of the restraint thereof upon just and weighty reasons; of the
free and common use of the Sea, and how it may be interdicted or limited; of
all contracts in and about shipping or transportation; of damages or injuries
done at Sea; of Customs, Wrecks, Pyracies, Salvage, or contribution; of
assurances made upon ships or goods; of the carrying of Arms, Money, or Men,
to furnish or strengthen our enemies; of the conditions given for the
surrendering besieged places, by whom they may be effectually made, and how far
they may be extended; whether change of governor and government can dissolve
amity, friendship and respect between us and other States. These and such like
are matters of concernment to other States as well as to our selves, and are
not meddled with by Municipal Laws, but fall under the learning of the Civil Law
only; whereby it must needs be accounted a most noble and useful science, the
profit thereof being not confined to one Territory, but communicable to the
whole society of Men.

Sixthly, the precepts and rules of this Law are but the dictates of natural
reason, and which command the assent and approbation of the most judicious,
when first propounded. And so satisfactory and convincing is the justice
thereof both to subjects and strangers of other Nations, that it silenceth the
complaints of those, who are thereby condemned, their own reason and
consciousness concurring in that condemnation.

Seventhly, it is the use of the Civil Law that holds up the intercourse and
correspondence of nations each with other; for where the rules of judging
controversies, as often as they do arise, are certainly known and allowed of,
there any Prince or people will be strongly invited to Trade, make Leagues,
intermarry, send their Ambassadors, and communicate all other offices of love
and friendship whatsoever: because they know what dealing they shall have from
them, and what justice to expect at their hands. But where illud justum est
quod est utile, that is, where advantage does rather set the rule for justice
then right reason; or where it must be administered by prescriptions of their
own devising, which none can discern any equity or reason in, nor understand
but themselves, such a Nation must make much of themselves, and be contented to
subsist of what they have of their own; for no other Prince or people will
adventure to deal or correspond with them.

Eighthly, those that are the composers of this Law, in the ordaining thereof
had not, as is usual in the making of other Laws, the advantages of State in
their eye, nor the honor and greatness of those that had the government, nor
any merely politic considerations whatsoever; much less did they look at the
particular benefit of any private men. But as in public matters salus populi
was suprema lex, so in private, quod aequum bonumque fuit, was that which made
up the Law with them; the dispensation of true right and pure equity was
thought the most effectual means to preserve the whole. And hence it is, that
the sincere equity of the Roman Civil Law has been owned, and the wisdom of it
greatly admired by those, to whom the exigencies of the Roman State, and the
interest of the Rulers of it could not be known.

Ninthly, this Law is so well tempered, and so indifferently composed, that it
may be accommodated to any kind or form of government; so that be the Supreme
power in one, or be it in few, or be it in the whole people, it is equally
useful for them all: for Rome came under all these several forms of
government, and some part of the Civil Law was made under each of them.

Lastly, Trial, that is the true Touchstone of Laws as of all things else
whatsoever, has exalted it above all other Laws of Man. First, in the general
use of it every where about the World. Secondly, in the continuance of it to
this present time, after the State and Government of Rome has long ago ceased
to be, and against all storms and tempests that have come. Thirdly, in that
all States and Commonwealths have exceedingly flourished, that have made use
thereof.

And yet we are not such vain exalters of our own profession, as to think, or
boast, that the Civil Law has the force or property of a Law within it, so as
to prescribe to or bind foreign Nations. Leges non allegantur in curi^s
Principum aut regum pro authoritate, sed proration^ sui. Jas. in l. 19. co. de
Collat. nu. 10. Non quia sunt leges Imperatorum; sed quia sum natu^^les and
bonae; non quia lex h^^ dicat, sed quia Retio sic vult. Ba^d. in l. 13. co.
Desent. and interloc. on^^ judic.
But we rather say, by any authority of its own, it commands and necessitates
no where, and yet (as reason must always prevail with men that are rational)
it informs, illuminates, and persuades every where. We say this further, that
though in matters of public government the Municipal Law bears sway, and is
practiced altogether in every Nation: for those must be managed by such prudent
ways and means, as the supreme Governors from time to time shall think most
necessary; without being tied up to any certain rules even of their own, much
less to any of the Roman Empire: yet in private controversial things, arising
between man and man, some special matters of more public and general
concernment excepted, the Civil Law is much more practiced and more frequently
used, then the Municipal. Because in respect of the great variety and multitude
of such cases, the Municipal Law can declare but little that is certain in
them: So that though we cannot say, that foreign States are governed by the
Civil Law, yet the suits and differences their subjects have one with another,
are for the most part judged and ended by it. But the admittance of the Civil
Law in these cases, how general soever they be, is voluntary and free, without
either necessity or constraint.

And we do so little think, that the want of a compulsive and binding power
does in any part obscure the luster of it, as in our judgments that very
consideration does commend it much more, and makes the merit of it much more
conspicuous and splendid; for to be awed by an imposed Law, argues the
superiority of the power that imposes it, and the servility and subjection of
the people that are under it, but no worth and excellency in the Law it self:
for peradventure if they were left to their full freedom, they would choose to
live under some more natural and more reasonable Law. But when a Prince and
people shall of their own accord without direction or command from any other,
freely embrace a Law, and desire to be tried and judged thereby (as foreign
States do by the Civil Law) it is an evident token, that this free assuming of
such a Law, proceeds from some known singular virtue and rare goodness that is
in it; for else they would not, being at liberty, be so unanimously guided and
directed by the same.

CHAP. IX.
The admittance and sway of the Civil Law in foreign parts, is yet further
verified by the testimonies of Sir Tho. Smith, and Dr Hakewill, the one a
Statesman, the other a famous learned Divine of our own, and by some other
remarkable institutions within this Nation.

I Have before told you, what a great and renowned King of this Nation, and
five great Sages of the National Law have said concerning the fame and practice
of the Civil Law in foreign Nations. I connot pass by what Sir Tho. Smith, a
most famous Scholar and Statesman of this Nation, and one who in Queen
Elizabeth's time went Ambassador to the King of France, and so had the
opportunity to know more of this matter then those that sit at home, has
written obiter to the very same purpose, in his book De Republica Anglorum.
Wherein after he has delineated and set forth the true state of the policy and
form of government within this Commonwealth, and wherein the Laws thereof do
greatly differ from that, which other States do observe and follow, in his
third book, ca. 11. he closes in this manner. Administrationis and Politiae
Anglicanae formam quasi in tabula breviter vobis ad intuendum proposui; Quid
suum habeat, quidque ab aliis rebuspublicis, Gallorum, Italorum, Hispanorum,
Germanorum, diversum, quae civilibus legibus Romanorum in Pandectas and Codicem
a Justiniano redactis reguntur, enarravi. The form of Policy and government of
England, says he, I have as it were in a Map briefly set down before you to be
seen, what it has proper to it self, and what differing from other
Commonwealths, to wit, of France, Italy, Spain, Germany, which, says he, are
swayed by those Civil Laws of the Romans, that Justinian did put into the
Digests and the Code, I have likewise showed you.

The testimony also of Dr Hakewill, a great Divine of this Country also, is as
full to the same matter; for in his learnned Apology of the power and
providence of God, Lib. 3. ca. 7. sect. 3.
he does not only rank the Civil Law next to the Law of God, but also avows
the professors thereof in some foreign parts to be generally better scholars
then their Divines; and the Lawyers of this last age to be much more able in
their learning and skill, then the Lawyers of former ages have been. Of the
which he will have the reason to be, the great sway, interest and employment,
which they have had in the Judicial Courts of Christendom, that has given them
such encouragement. Next Gods Laws, says he, those of the Empire seem to
challenge their place; howbeit with us, having neither that reward nor
employment as they deserve, they have lost both their rank and dignity: but in
foreign parts, where they are cherished and honored, they marvellously
flourish; insomuch as in some transmarine Kingdoms their Lawyers are held, and
for the most part are undoubtedly more sufficient Scholars then their Divines;
and within this last Centenary, much more sufficient then the writers and
professors of the same faculty in many precedent ages, as well in that part
which is professed in Schools, as the practick expressed in judgments and
pleadings. Now for the latter part, which is the practick, says he, it may
easily be evidenced to any who will be pleased to look into it, that by the
observations, experience, pains, and learning of the Lawyers of those latter
ages, it is grown to much more exactness and perfection then former ages had.
Which appears by the judgments, decisions, arrests, and pleadings of the
highest Courts of the greatest part of the Christian Nations, which are extant
in great numbers; as the Decisions of the several Rotes of Italy, at Rome, at
Naples, at Florence, at Genoa, at Bononia, at Mantua, and Perusium, and the
rest: the judgments of the Imperial Chamber at Spire, which is the last resort
of the German Nation; and the arrests of the several Courts of Parliament in
France, as Paris, Aiz, Bordeaux, Grenoble, and the rest. To which may be added
the pleadings of Monsieur Servine, the French Kings Advocate, and others of
that nature, which are all published and extant, partly in Latin, and partly in
their own Languages, with that variety and learning, as much exceeds the former
ages.

But to pass from what is observed by our own Contrymen in this particular,
is not there an ancient institution of England, that does clearly demonstrate
the same thing? for if we were not sure that the Civil Law did pass for
current, and were generally embraced in foreign parts, why should we always
to this very day observe to try and decide all differences, that arise between
our own Contrymen and Strangers either upon or beyond the Sea, in the Court
of Admiralty; where the proceedings are only after the form of the Civil Law?
And were it not to please foreigners in the Law they like and allow of, we
might when we had them here, strictly hold them to our own Laws. But since we
must trade and traffic with them, it were no indifferency to call them from
the trial of that Law which they in some part know, and is the Law of their
Country, as themselves make it, to the trial of a Law which they know in no
part, and is mere foreign unto them.

Likewise, if the Treaties that we have had with foreign Princes were
surveyed, it would be found, that they run in the language, and are transacted
by the skill and knowledge of the same Law. It is evident therefore, that it is
used and accepted of every where upon and beyond the seas; since that where we
deal with strangers most, and have most variance with them, there it is most
used even amongst our selves:

And to the same ground and reason does Mr Seldom in his discourse upon Fleta
Ca. 8. parag. ^.
impute it, that the practice of the Civil Law has been continued always in
the Marshals Court here in England, where diverse causes might arise, that might
concern strangers; as also in the Judicial Courts in both Universities, where
strangers for study sake do frequently come to settle: though for my part I
cannot think, that the Universities use it for any other reason, then for the
pure natural equity and sound reason that is in it above all the Laws in the
World besides; nor for any other end, then that young men trained up and made
expert in that profession, when they come abroad, might be more ready in all
matters of negotiation and commerce, that the Prince or State should in their
dealing with foreign Nations have occasion to use them in, when ever they were
called to any such employment; to which the Laws of this Land serve nothing at
all.

It is needless in so clear a matter to offer any further proof to convince our
Contrymen, that all their neighbors beyond the Seas (that are nevertheless
wise, rich, and potent) do suffer themselves to be judged and directed by the
Civil Law and the professors of it. I shall therefore as touching this
particular add but two things, which in my judgment are very well worth the
observation.

The first is, that Justinians Code (which is a collection of the Emperors
Laws only, from the days of Adrian unto the age of Justinian himself) is in
use even amongst the Turks. Stephan. Pro^^m. in Novel. ^u, 64.
In order to which it was, as Mr Seldom says in his discourse upon Fleta; Ca.
5 parag. 5.
that Mahomet the second, but the first Emperor of the Turks so called, when
he had won Constantinople from the Christians, he commanded Maximus the
Patriarch with other books to translate also into Arabic (...), that is, the
Imperial Codes, which was done; in futurum, ut videtur, Mahumedici imperii
usum, says Mr Seldom; that is, to be useful for the Turkish Empire.

The second is, that even in the territory of the Church, where the patrimony
and the jurisdiction of the Popes lies, this Law has in some cases an interest
of guidance in the Tribunals there too. And yet if the precious worth that is
in it, did not captivate them, there are not forcible and weighty reasons
wanting to make them abhor and decline the same: For,

First, some of the Christian Roman Emperors, as Constantine, Theodosius,
Martian, and Justinian, did ordain diverse Laws for the ordering of
Church Matters and Churchmen, which since the Popes looked upon as an
usurpation, and an incroachment upon their spiritual jurisdiction, Temporal
Princes being the disposers of temporal things only, as they suppose, and not
to meddle with spiritual; it might well beget in them an animosity and dislike
against the Law it self.

Secondly, the Church has a large Law of their own, the Canon Law; and so
large, that it may be thought sufficient to set a rule to all that Churches
affairs whatsoever, and need not borrow help from any other Law.

Thirdly, there has always been as it were an emulous contention, which of
these two Laws should be the most potent, and spread furthest in the Christian
World.

Fourthly, the Popes in these latter ages have not stuck to make open
protestation, that the Pontificial dignity was rather to give Laws to the
Emperors, then receive any from them.

And are not these, if there were no other, grounds enough to make them tender
how they admitted the Civil Law into their Territories? yet such has been the
power and sorce of that Law, that it has got footing even in that Spiritual
Monarchy; for where sin against God comes not to be restrained, or punished,
nor the soul and conscience disciplined in order to its spiritual welfare
(which was the main end of ordaining the Canon Law) but that the case is merely
temporal and worldly, and not decided by the Canon Law, there the Civil Law
gives the rule even in the Popes dominions; non vi sua, says Suarez, De legib.
lib. 3. ca. 8. nu. 3.
sed quia Pontifices ita voluerunt, not that it has any authoritative power
there inherent in it self, but as the Popes have freely entertained the same.
Nay, Maranta in his Speculum, Part. 3. nu. 76.
adds further, and he cites Feline, a great Canonist for it; That if the Canon
Law has declared it self in the case, but is too strict and rigid, and the
Civil Law be more fair and equitable, the Civil Law shall be rather followed in
that case, even in the Churches territory, then the Canon Law it self.

And indeed setting aside some few special differences between the Civil Law
and the Canon as to some particulars, the Canon Law is nothing else but the
Civil Law applied to the use of the Church and Church matters. And such a
conformity there is between them, that Rebuffus De Nominat. quaest. 5. nu. 14.
says, the Canon Law is but Medulla legum and practica juris civilis; the
marrow and substance of the Civil Law, and the practical application of it to
cases in fact arising. And Cuiacius plainly averreth, Ca. 15. De sent. and re
judic.
that the Canon Law fere omnia sumpsit ex jure Civili, and omnino quicquid
praeclarum est in hoc jure, ex jure Civili est, nec hujus interpres idoneus
quisquam, nisi sit juris Civilis peritissimus; it is almost wholly taken out of
the Civil, but undoubtedly whatsoever is excellent in it, it has borrowed from
the Civil Law, neither can any one thoroughly understand the Canon Law, that is
not first perfectly skilled in the Civil.

This is not so truly averred of the Canon Law, but the same may be as justly
affirmed of the particular Law of every Nation that is any thing famous either
for Laws or Government. For undoubtedly, the best governed Nations have wrote
their Laws by the copy of the Roman, and the Civil Law has been the Womb that
has born and brought forth all of them; neither can they judiciously clear the
obscure meaning and doubtful sense of their own Laws, without they make use of
the learning of the Civil Law, from whence they sprang originally, for a help
to interpret them. And therefore which of them soever does cast out of their
Territories the Civil Law, they do plainly put out the light of their own Laws,
and do abandon and exile that Mother, of which their own Laws, for so much as
is good in them, are but the offspring; since by the testimony of Claudian De
leudib. Stilicon. lib. 3.
Rome was, Armorum legumque parens, quae fundit in omnes
Imperium, primique dedit cunabula Juris.


CHAP. X.
The general name of Jus Civil, The Civil Law, is signally for Honors sake
peculiarly ascribed to the Roman Civil Law, and to no other Law.

AMongst other notes and characters of Honor, that Nations have bestowed upon
the Roman Law, this is not the least; That it bears to this very day that name
and style, which not only distinguishes it from the Laws of other Nations, but
in a way of eminenty extols and sets it above them all: for although from that
which every City, Country, or Nation does observe for their binding Law, is
derived that particular appellation of the Civil Law of that particular place;
as the Municipal Law of England, France, or Spain, may be called The Civil Law
of England, France, or Spain: yet he that is to mention the Municipal Law of
any one Country or Nation, besides the Roman, if he would express it by the
name of the Civil Law, he will not be understood, except he adds the proper
name of that Country too, whereof he intends to speak.

But the common use of speaking still to this very day observed by the best and
greatest Nations, is clean otherwise, as often as mention is to be made of the
Law of the Roman State; for albeit you may call it, The Civil Law of the
Romans, yet does it pass currently under the simple denomination of The Civil
Law; and you are intended to speak of that peculiar Law, though you do not
subjoyn the proper name of that state or people. Justinian the Roman Emperor
did first enact it as a Law and as a binding direction to the Roman people;
Quoties non addimus nomen, cujus sit civitatis, nostrum ju^ significamus;
Parag. (...). Inst. De ju. not. gent. and ^iv.
As often as we say, The Civil Law, and do not add the name of any City to
which it does belong, we mean our own Law. But now it is become the voluntary
and free language of such people as are not subject to the Imperial Law.

And it is a sure token of a superlative excellency, when a general appellation
that is common to all things of the same rank and quality, is specially and by
common consent bestowed upon one peculiar thing of the same kind. What was the
reason that Rome was called, The City, when there was such a multitude of
Cities besides it, but because none came near it in power, greatness, riches,
or magnificence? Or that Aristotle, when there were so many known Philosophers
besides, should be signally named, The Philosopher, but because the rest knew
not the true essence of things so well as he, nor had dived so deeply into the
secrets of nature as he had done? Or that Virgil should be styled the Poet
amongst the Latins, and Homer amongst the Greeks, amidst so many other Poets
contemporary with and a great many others since succeeding them, but because
they two far exceeded them all? Or that Solomon should be termed, The Wise man,
and St Paul, The Apostle, when certainly wisdom was to be found in others, and
in a great proportion too, as well as in Solomon; and Saint Paul was but one of
twelve Apostles; but because the Wisdom of Solomon did surpass the wisdom of
all men under the Sun, and Saint Paul was thought to be more inspired, and to
have greater gifts and endowments given him, then other Apostles had? In like
manner and upon the same ground is it, that although every Nation that is
brought under rule and government, and is not barbarous, has a certain peculiar
Civil Law, under which it lives and is governed; yet out of a general belief,
that no other humane Law whatsoever is to be compared with the Roman Law, does
it still, as anciently it did, carry away the name and title of, The Civil Law,
from them all, as being the exactest and perfectest of all other Laws in the
World besides.

CHAP. XI.
The Art and knowledge of doing the purest right and most natural justice, is
laid down in the books of the Civil Law; and how it came by degrees to that
perfection, that now we see it in.

THe Roman Civil Law has not the praeeminence of other Laws in title and
denomination only, but it is thought also, that in the books thereof there are
laid up such treasures of humane Wisdom, Policy, Justice, Equity, and natural
Reason, that the art of doing equal justice, and the doctrine of true and
uncorrupted right is taught by them only. Jus, said Celsus, Lib. 1 Dig. Dt
just. and ju.
est ars aequi and boni; Law is an art informing what is just and good: And
Jurisprudentia, said the Emperor, Parag. 1. Inst. cod.
est rerum divinarum atque humanarum notitia, justi atque injusti scientia; The
science of the Law teaches what is the right both in Holy and Worldly things,
and what is just and unjust; both speaking of the Roman Law: so was it
accounted then, and no otherwise is it accounted now too. For,

Whereas the learned of the world do reckon upon three supreme Arts and
Sciences, Divinity, Law, and Physic, which do so mainly support and hold up
the whole frame of Man, that without them this goodly link of things here
below must needs dissolve and fall away to nothing; by the Art of Law, it is
far from their meaning to comprehend the Municipal Law of any Nation, which is
fitted for the climate of one people only, and serves for the exigencies and
occasions of the State, and varies as times and occasions, and the dispositions
of the men do vary; which commands rather then teaches; which has an eye more
to what is profitable to the public, then what is just and equitable; and
which deals more in the great advantages of State, then in settling private
interests, or composing differences between man and man: (for this is the true
state of the local constitutions of the several and respective Nations and
Kingdoms of the World; each of them being far short of deciding those many
doubts and questions, that must needs happen in great variety between their
subjects, whilst they trade and deal together.) But they understand some more
Universal Law, that is commonly embraced and allowed of by the best and most
potent Nations; that is full of pure equity and true reason, and being grounded
upon dictates of nature and common reason, is unchangeable; whose method is to
teach and instruct by certain rules and principles orderly and handsomely
digested, as well as to command and order; and which amongst the frequent and
various dealings of men, does leave few cases that can happen undecided.

And it is evident, that by this Art of Law, they intend no other but the Roman
Civil Law: for although the Laws have been a making almost ever since Rome was
first built, and were ordained as questions did arise from time to time, and
under several forms of government; Rome being sometimes under the rule of one,
sometimes of more, and sometimes of the whole people; and grew at last to an
infinite multitude, and lay in a confused and indigested heap, void of all
order or method: Yet at last Justinian, when he came to the Empire, did set
upon that opus desperatum, as he calls it in his Proaeme to the Institutes,
that desperate enterprise of disposing them into that admirable order that now
we see them in; and indeed was the first that laid the foundation for the
building up of the Art and Science of Law.

By his means it was, that after the best and most useful Laws were selected
and chosen out of a vast and tumultuous heap, they were distributed into
Titles, and the Titles into Books, every Title contains those Laws that are
proper and pertinent to that principal subject whereof that Title treats;
sometimes by definition opening the true state and nature of it; sometimes if
it be various, dividing it into its several kinds and branches: also subjoyning
a resolution of the several cases and questions that come under it, rather by
the still voice of right reason, and as all men by their natural instinct, and
practical experience would agree to determine them, then by sovereign command
or imperial will.

After this method is that principal part of the Law the Digests, otherwise
called the Pandects composed; which Duarenus calls the Magazine and Storehouse
of all equity, justice, and learning, and the artificial framing thereof
Cuiacius Parat. Dig. Mandat.
does so much admire, that he judges them to be fools and illiterate, and not
to understand, neither what Art is, nor what the principles of Law are, nor how
well the Pandects are made, that should require any other Art then what is to
be found in them. Tully, says Alciat, had long and sollicitous thoughts, de
jure Civili in artem redigendo, of making an Art of the Civil Law; but
Justinian in the Digests has done that work.

But to make this science of the Law yet perfecter, Justinian has also added
his book of Institutions, for no other end, but, as himself testifies, ut sint
totius legitimae scientiae prima elementa, the introduction to the whole Law,
they being indeed the sum and substance of it: and he directs it, cupidae
legum juventuti, to those that shall desire to enter upon that study; intending
it as a help to the younger students only, whereby they might be enabled after
the reading thereof, the better to undertake the more difficult and voluminous
books of the Law: for he considering, that the other volumes of the Law would
prove too hard and tedious for young beginners, and so it might come to pass,
that the whole study of the Law might be quite laid aside, and utterly perish
for want of some to study the same, he commanded this little book of
Institutions to be made, whereby young men might be invited partly with the
briefness, and partly with the easiness thereof, to the study and profession of
it. Here then is a great body of Law orderly and methodically disposed, and a
book of praeliminary Institutions also, to make the entrance into it easier and
more beneficial.

But there are two Volumes more of this Law also, the one collected by
Justinian as the Digests were, and that is the Code; the other ordained by him,
as the Institutions were, and that is the Authenticks, otherwise called the
Novell Constitutions: for the first is but a bare collection of such decisions,
as the Emperors that had sat in the Roman Empire even to Justinians time had
made to the questions that had been propounded to them, sometimes by Judges,
and sometimes by private persons, as in contingency they fell; and are ranked
in the same order and method as the Digests are. In the Authenticks there is
not that order observed in the disposition of Laws as is either in the Digests,
or the Code, but as occasion was offered of any doubt, wherein the Princes
resolution was necessary to every thing, so it is set down without any other
method or form. And they were called the Novels, because they were new Laws,
compared to the Laws of the Digests, Institutions, or the Code; and sometimes
they alter and correct the Laws of the other three.

Thus far went Justinian himself in his design of a general survey and
disposure of the Roman Laws; sometimes ordaining Laws of his own, and sometimes
gathering together the Laws of others, till he had made an exact and absolute
composition. Which enterprise that renowned scholar and Statesman of our
Country Sir Francis Bacon does so much commend and admire, in his Epistle to
Queen Elizabeth, set before his book of Maxims of Law, that when he understood,
that she had the like purpose in her breast, to enter into a general amendment
of the state of her Laws, and to reduce them to more brevity and certainty; he
says, it struck him with great admiration, when he heard it; and acknowledges
it to be one of the most chosen works, and of highest merit and beneficence
toward the subject, that ever entered into the mind of any King; but adds,
that there be rare presidents of it in government, as it comes to pass in
things so excellent, there being no president full in view but that of
Justinian, as he confesses. Whose work is the more to be admired, because the
use thereof is not local, nor restrained to the state and policy of one Nation
only, as hers would have been, but may serve for the use and benefit of any
state or people whatsoever, and is subservient to all accidents and occasions
that can happen in common intercourse, and inded has for its object such
things, as commonly arise every where throughout the World, and have no
Municipal or customary Law to determine them.

But if Justinian should be thought to have failed in any thing of bringing
this Art to a full perfection, yet what the learned of Christendom from his
time downward to this present, has done toward the perfecting thereof, will
make it up: for the infinite number of writers of all sorts, of all Nations,
and in all ages, that have wrote hereupon, are prodigious to behold, and
wonderful to consider.

What Glosses, Notes, Lectures, Repetitions, Commentaries, Paratitles,
Analyzes, Intellects, are there upon the very Laws themselves? There is hardly
any Text of Law that is not copiously written on, either in stating the true
reading of it, or in clearing it from obscurity, or in enlarging upon the
matter of it. Then as to the general subjects of the Law, and the particular
cases and questions that fall under them, both speculative and practical, the
Tractats, Discourses, Counsels, Questions, Reports, common Opinions,
Controversies, Resolutions, Practices, Observations, and Singulars, are without
number.

Even this latter age of ours, besides all that which foregoing antiquity has
produced, has brought forth every where in all Countries of renown so many
famous writers in this kind, that every Nation has seemed to be at an emulous
contention each with other, which should most excel in such men.

For France, are reckoned Cuiacius, Brissonius, Molinaus, Antonie Faber, Peter
Faber, Rebuffus, Bodinus, Tholosanus, Gothofred, Choppinus, Bellonus, Papo,
Charondas, Hottoman, all of high account in that faculty.

For Spain, there are famous to this day, Covarruvias, Gemezius, Vasquius,
Alvarez, Gregory Lopez, Bernardus Diaz, Villagut, Pinellus, Franciscus Salgado
de Somoza, Sarmientus, Rodericus Suarez, Johannes Lupus.

For Italy, Gabriel Romanus, Stiaticus, Asinius, Cephalus, Gigas, Gratus,
Palaeotus, Peregrinus, Bossius, Balbus, Puteus, Farinacius, Mascard, Zunt,
Surdus, Vincentius de Franchis, Mozzius, Sfortia Oddos.

From Germany came forth not without much estimation and honor, Gail,
Wesenbeck, Minsinger, Schneidwine, Peckius, Hopperus, Raevardus, Vulteius,
Thomingius, Althusius, Sichardus, Freigius, Pacius, Forsterus, Melchier Kling.

Every one of these has left such writings behind him in the Civil Law, as will
makes their memories immortal. Neither can it be any wonder, that the Civil Law
it self, and the books thereof are grown so voluminous and almost infinite.
Because indeed that Science does comprehend that vast and great variety of
affairs and worldly business, that the large Nation of the Romans dealt in
during the long continuance of that great and large Empire. And since have been
added unto it, and squared as it were by the rule thereof, and applied unto it,
the affairs of many Nations, which must in all changes and accidents, and in
each Nation be many, various, and several from the time of that Empire down to
this present. Which being severally writ upon, by several fancies, and in
several ways and methods, must needs produce throughout the World large and
copious writings in this faculty, as it has in all other Arts and Sciences
besides. But the benefit that the world reaps thereby, lies in this, that there
neither is or can be any contract made, or any human affair transacted, either
Domestic, Civil, or Military, either between governors and governed, or
between the people themselves one with another, or between Nation and Nation,
either upon sea or upon land, but by the help of that study and the writings
thereof, there may be found most rational rules and directions; sometimes to
discern the true nature of the thing it self; sometimes to discern its kinds;
sometimes to resolve the doubts and questions that fall under it; sometimes to
justify it as wholly good and lawful; and sometimes to condemn it as
altogether unjust and evil. And if the action be not uniform, but various, and
may be in some cases good and in others evil, it will distinguish upon the
several cases; that dealers may walk securely and safely, if they will guide
their actions by the prescript of that Law, where the Laws and customs of
their own Country do not direct them otherwise.

No part of this pains has been taken or honor done by the learned of foreign
States to the Municipal Law of any Nation, besides the Roman; for although
every State may wonderfully affect and be delighted with their own Laws, and so
it may come to pass, that they may be greatly extolled and set up, and
sometimes with much industry and great benefit to the subjects interpreted,
explained, and writ upon by the writings of their own Contrymen; yet are
they of so little esteem and account with foreigners, that they almost disdain
to read them. But where any have employed their pens in writing upon a Law of
another Nation, no one example can be given, but in the Civil Law only; which
has busied and set on work the learned of the whole World.

Therefore, what high applause soever may be given to the local constitutions
of any people (as questionless they are all useful within their proper
territories) yet it is a truth unquestionable, that in the account of other
Nations, whatsoever the case or question be; be it between their own subjects,
so that their own National Laws and customs do not specially order it; or be
it between them and other Princes, or their subjects, the Civil Law is the
straitest rule and the best guide to decide it by; and the art and skill to
dispense equal right and exact justice to all men, is to be learnt from the
study of no other Law of man's creation but that Law only. Nihil aliud est jus
Civil, quam sententiae quaedam a veteribus Jurisconsult is pronunciatae, quae
in certum redactae ordinem, dijudicandi rationem nostr is Jurisperit is
ostendunt, says Machiavell himself in his Prooem to his books de republica. The
Civil Law is nothing more then certain dictates or principles declared by the
ancient lawyers (undoubtedly meaning Papinian, Vlpian, Scaevola, Africanus,
Pomponius, Neratins, Celsus, Marcianus, and the rest, whose names are prefixed
before their several Laws in the Digest) which being put into good order, do
instruct others in the ways of administering right and justice. And hence is
it, that in all the Universities throughout the World, I will not except
England, the Law that is studied, the Law that is publicly read and taught in
their Schools, the Law wherein degrees are taken, is the Civil Law.

CHAP. XII.
An Answer to the main Objections that are now adays made against the
continuance of the Civil Law within this Nation.

THese things that have been thus truly delivered to the praise and
commendation of the Civil Law, being clear and evident, our Adversaries the
Anticivilians will not so vainly contend, as to oppose them, or to detract from
the worth of that learning, which has been so generally owned by all the World,
nor was ever brought into any question, since it was first propagated and made
known to other Nations besides the Roman. They will, as they must, admit and
acknowledge, that the Civil Law does more abound with natural reason and
equity, then any other Law of man's establishing; that it has spread further
into the World, then any Law ever did; and has been more studied and adorned
with the writings of the learned of all Nations and languages, then any Law
that yet has been; that the profession thereof is of so large a compass, that
it takes in and treats of all the affairs, contracts, and dealings of the
World; that Princes freely entertain it into their Judicatories, and minister
right and justice only by the learned and Graduates of that profession; that
the principles of solid wisdom and best Moral Honesty are taught thereby; that
it has described and set down the duties of all people of what relation soever,
more amply, and more to the pattern of nature and right reason then any other
Law has done. Yet this free and ample acknowledgment notwithstanding, they will
not admit the use and practice thereof in the ministration of justice within
this nation to be co^venient or necessary, suggesting to themselves certain
reasons strong and important, as they pretend, why that profession how learned
and wise soever in it self, yet since it is become useless, as to the people of
this Nation, it cannot conveniently, as our affairs are now changed, be
continued here any longer, as they imagine. Which opinion how well it is
grounded, it is meet and requisite we should in the next place examine; for
except it may be maintained that it is also useful and very necessary for the
Commonwealth under which we now live, and no way, or at least, in comparison
of the great benefits thereof, not considerably inconvenient, all the other
excellencies and rare qualities that can be spoken thereof, will turn but into
a speculative and ayrie discourse, and will move nothing toward the begetting
of a public settlement thereof within the Nation: for, they will say, all
rules and instructions that are useful to inform the understanding, and fashion
the manners and actions of private men or of Princes, as they are men only,
may not presently be fitting or necessary to regulate and direct a State in the
carrying on of public business.

Let it therefore be added for a further commendation of the Imperial Law;
first, that as it contains the dictates of nature, the conclusions of right
reason, and as it sets forth the natural and essential properties of such
humane things, contracts and dealings of men, whereof it treats, (of all which
without comparison the greatest plenty lies recorded in the writings of the
Civil Law) I say, as it contains all these, it is so essentially necessary to
the well ordering of all States and the common affairs of men, that it cannot
be a bolished through any change of Law or government whatsoever, but at the
same instant the peace and well being of that State and people must needs
vanish and dissolve also: For can the Sun fall from the firmament, and the
world not be at an end? or the soul expire, and the body not be void of life
or motion? No more can the splendor of that people endure any longer, where
the sun of natural equity and justice has left to shine amongst them; nor can
the body of a Commonwealth grow prosperous or flourishing, that is fallen from
the soundness of right reason, which is the very soul and spirit of all Law and
government: for in this it is no otherwise with a whole society of men, then it
is with one individual person.

If a man shall be unnatural, and cares not to observe true right and just
reason in his dealings with other men, he presently renders himself odious and
detestable to all men, and it is looked upon as dangerous to have any dealings
or to be familiar with such a person. So if a State, which is a collective body
of men, when they are appealed to for common right, either by their own people,
or by other Nations, shall administer that for right, which crosses natural
justice, and the notions of right reason, it exposes it self to scorn and
obloquie, it gauls and exasperates their own subjects, and makes their
neighbors stand at a distance with them: and the condition of that State must
needs be dangerous and unsure, having lost their reputation both at home and
abroad. Only here is the difference, and it is a sad one; The danger of
particular injustice determines in some detriment of a few; but national
injustice draws after it ofttimes the ruin and confusion of many Nations.

Besides, the impressions of nature and reason are so strong in man and so
great a part of his essence, that they cannot be quite expunged or deleted in
him; neither can they be so long discontinued, but they will at length have
their return -- Naturam expellas furcalicet, usque recurret -- and inclinations
and affections thereunto will appear, even when the contrary is performed. So
true is that of the Civil Law, Jura naturalia sunt immutabilia; Parag. 11.
Inst. De jur. not. geut. and Civil.
The Laws of nature and the common reason of nations are unchangeable, and are
not capable to be repealed.

For if it were once admitted, that these Laws were alterable, what strange
contradictions and senseless incongruities would follow? And how would man be
ravished as it were from himself, his reason one chief part of his essence
being taken away? Besides, how would sins and trespasses against nature
multiply? How common would natural injustice be? and what loud complaints
thereof would arise? whereby not only great confusion would break in, and the
peace of the Commonwealth be disturbed, but the common society of Nations
would in time also cease. The Civil Law then, as it is natural, essential, or
rational, cannot be repealed.

Secondly, let it be spoken to its praise also, that the Civil Law is so far
from being made useless to a Nation, where the whole state of Government has
been subverted, as that it is thereby become more useful and necessary.

It is certain, that the Roman people themselves thought it so, when they
dispatched certain chosen men on purpose to fetch it from Athens for their use
and service, after they had driven out their Kings, suppressed their Laws, and
erected a popular government in place of the Regal. The like opinion possesses
now adays the Princes and potentates of the greatest part of Europe, as is
clearly demonstrated by their admitting the learning and profession thereof
into their several Territories, that it may be at hand to decide and resolve
such cases and questions of right, that happen amongst their people, wherein a
Law of their own is wanting.

Nay, if any such difference or controversy arises between the Princes
themselves, or between Nation and Nation, which is most frequent and common;
because there never was nor can be by any authority a positive Law made to bind
them, they debate and argue such differences by arguments fetched from the Civil
Law, and allow of the reason thereof as a most competent and equal rule to
decide them by.

And if this supply of justice by the learning and knowledge of the Civil Law
were taken away too, what ignorance, uncertainty, arbitrariness, injustice, and
oppression would the people of the world lie under? and what hazards of
detriment or ruin would their rights, fortunes, and estates be exposed unto?
for where all manner of Law is wanting in a Common weal, to do the acts of
justice and ministration of right by, it must be granted, that the light of
natural reason must of necessity be the Law; since that was the only means
which was given to man at first to judge and discern by of humane things,
before any Law was given. But if that should depend upon the wandering fancies
and imaginations of men only, and not be illuminated by some right knowledge
and learning, under how many several shapes and forms must it needs appear,
when the apprehensions and conceptions of men through the variety of natural
gifts, education, age, knowledge, and experience, are as differing, as their
visages and persons be?

And where would the certainty, constancy, and unity of justice be, when the
Judges of the same Tribunal furnished with bare natural endowments only, would
differ from and oppose one another? when one Tribunal shall judge directly
opposite to another upon one and the same fact, or (which is a levity shameful
and unbeseeming) when the Judges of the same Court in cases of like nature,
shall judge and order diversely from that which they had done before? Apud
Romanos prius quam sententiam ferrent, praeco clara vice judioes ho^tabatur, Ne
se paterentur sui dissimiles esse. Bodin. de rep. lib. 6. ca. 6.
Under which uncertainty and discordance how shall people know what to expect,
when their rights come into question? What can any Counsel advise? Or what
caution or advisedness can be used by men, to put themselves or their affairs
out of jeopardy, when they are never certain of that justice to which they
should conform themselves, and be secure?

By the conversion and change of State therefore, though the Municipal Law goes
to wrack (as commonly such great frames are seldom meddled withal, but all
falls a pieces) the Civil Law is not the less, but rather the more necessary to
be retained still; First, because it has no coherence or conglutination with
the particular customs or government, either Regal or Episcopal, as the
Municipal Law has, and so the one may fall, and yet the other stand. Secondly,
because the Civil Law is the proper Art and Science of that right natural
reason, which for want of other rules in the doing of justice, we have said
must necessarily be the common standard to try all things by. The principles of
which Art and Science are not weak or superficial, but strong and solid; not
various or repugnant, but certain and agreeing; not harsh and rigorous, but
tender, compassionate, and equitable; not partial to any, but alike just to
all; not obscure and perplexed, but clear and perspicuous in the eyes of
judicious and right discerning men, though above the reach of the vulgar.
Thirdly, because in carries the weight of undeniable authority along with it,
the decisions thereof being not the sudden fancies and raw conceits of a few
men, nor do they rest upon the bare Reports of any, how learned in the Law
soever, but they are the clear evidence of Reason, and the prudent advisements
and mature deliberations of a whole State, excelling in wisdom, mighty in
greatness, and famous in renown.

And howsoever it was at first ordained to be a Law for a particular Nation to
be ruled by, yet has it since been made universal in use throughout Europe; and
by the general consent of all the learned sprung up to an Art or Science, to
teach natural justice and equity to all mankind. Fourthly, because the reason
of the Civil Law does not only rightly inform and teach the understanding what
is just and right, but the certainty thereof does keep the judgment steady, and
unexposed to those fits of variation and instability, which those that are
directed by no certain principles, are subject to; for it is not easy for them
to vary, who have any fixed rules to guide them: So that if this Law were duly
applied by those only that are learned in it (since it is not possible to be
done by any other sort of men) neither ignorance, nor error, nor
arbitrariness, nor uncertainty of justice, nor the consequences thereof, wrong,
injustice, or oppression would be found, at least they would not be so frequent
and common, as where the guidance and light of such a Law is wanting.

But besides these foregoing reasons, there are yet further and much stronger
reasons to be added, why those matters and causes, which before the present
change of government did belong to the trial and determination of the Civil
Law, should be kept within the same cognizance still, these alterations
notwithstanding. First, because for many hundreds of years, that and no other
his been the standing, approved, and practiced Law in those matters, and
therefore in that regard to be preferred before any new Law, though better, if
such a one could possibly be found. Secondly, because if it should be laid
aside, it would be so impossible to find a better, that we should find no Law
or rule at all, to put in the room thereof, that would be able to decide them
with any tolerable discretion or knowledge. The professors of the Municipal
Law must acknowledge, that their Book cases (the only learning of their Law)
must needs here fail them, when not any of those matters were ever judged or
tried before them. Where then would the Law or rule be found? And surely from
that we have before said, it were very inconvenient to commit the trial of
them to such as have neither Law or knowledge proper for the determination of
them. Thirdly, because thereby so eminent and so useful a profession might be
kept up; which else to the great dishonor and damage of this Nation must
irrecoverably fall, and be quite extinct. Fourthly, because if these things
were suffered to go on in their accustomed way, it would make this great change
of State to be the less, which in all alterations is to be wished and sought
after. Fifthly, because there was nothing in the nature of those causes to tie
them to the former government only; but that they may be tried under the name
and authority of the present government, and yet as much according to the
course of the Civil Law, as they were before; for indeed the Civil Law is
fitted to act under any government. It can serve the Church, as well as the
State; the Popular government, as well as the Regal; and the Aristocratical,
as well as either; as we shall clearly find if we look into the States abroad,
as France, Spain, the Empire, the Territories of the Church of Rome, the States
of the Low Countries, the States of Italy, the State of Venice, whose differing
in point of government does not hinder, but that the Civil Law is used and
practiced in them all.

The reason whereof is, because it meddles not with matters of government at
all, but was originally made to order the private affairs of the people, and to
judge the matter of right between party and party only; as may appear by the
very state and purport of the Laws themselves, which are as answers made to
questions only concerning matters of private right and interest, as they did
arise from time to time, during the long continuance of the Roman Empire.
Besides, the Romans themselves after they had expulsed their Kings, saw several
kinds of government, and yet the Civil Law served under them all. And if it
did not stand indifferent in this point of government, so many Princes and
States herein very much disagreeing, would not so freely admit it into their
Territories, as they do; for can we think, that they would consent to the
admittance of any thing that might endanger their government? So that it is
clear, the change of government that has been amongst us, does not at all
hinder, but that as long as the same causes as well Maritime as others, do
remain, and must necessarily have a Trial, the Civil Law, that tried them
before, is the fittest Law to try them still.

It is of as little force and moment, and ought to hinder no more, which is
objected, That the Civil Law is a foreign Law, not ordained by the Legislative
power and authority of this Nation; and therefore very inconvenient it may
seem, that matters arising here should be ordered by any other Law, then which
is of our own making, or that we should be made to submit to any other.
Besides, to have two Laws tolerated in one State, may cause great distraction
and uncertainty amongst the people, who may under several pretenses be troubled
and convented under both for one and the same thing. Further, the entertaining
of the Civil Law, may in time be a means to supplant and undermine the
Municipal Law and customs of this Nation.

For as to its being a foreign Law, what is it more in that, then the Laws of
the Saxons, Danes, and Normans; of the which our English Antiquaries, Cambden,
Britann. fo. 153.
Spelman, Glossar. verb. lex Anglorum.
Cowell, Interpr. verb. Law.
and Seldom, Notes upon Fortescue. ca. 17. in princ.
all take notice, that the Laws of this Nation are but a mixture and
composition? And yet it is not such a stranger amongst us neither, as may be
conceived; for not only Antiquity will tell us, that when the Romans were
possessed of this Nation, and during the continuance of their government and
power here (which was no less then 500 years) all the affairs of this Nation
were ordered and carried on by the Roman Civil Law; and had no Law to assist,
much less to check it in all that time. Cambdens Britan. fo. 63. Seldens
Dissertat. ad Flet. ca. 4.
But also if we look no further back then twenty years ago, we shall remember
the Civil Law did so far spread it self up and down this Nation, that there was
not any one County, which had not some part of the government thereof managed
and exercised by one or more of that profession, besides the great employment
and practice it had in the Courts in London. So that it being thus
incorporated, and as I may say, naturalized by our selves into this
Commonwealth, it ought not to be reputed or looked upon by us a stranger any
longer.

Besides, right reason from what hand soever it comes presented, ought to be
embraced by us; Rationabile dictum debet ita movere judicem ed judicandum,
sicut ipsa lex. Quia lex est omne quod ratione consistit. Itaque sufficit
allegare naturalem rationem, licet quis legem non alleget. Jas. in l. 19. Co.
De collat. nu. 10.
and is authority enough to it self, to carry the understanding, judgment,
will, and affections of all men, though it be not put into a Law. Imberillitas
est humani intellectus in quacunque causa legem quaerere, ubi rationem
naturalem inveneris. Bald. in l. scire oporiet. parag. sufficit. Dig. De excus,
Tut.
But when besides its own commanding power and virtue, it comes withal
recommended by such a wise State as the Roman was, and framed into a Law by
them, and has since been allowed of by other Nations also, as conforming with
the general reason of Man; surely it ought not to be looked upon as strange and
foreign unto us or to our affairs, carrying about as the same reason, and
dealing in the same matters that they did, merely because we did not promulgate
and enact the same.

Moreover, if we will deal in foreign affairs, and lanch forth into the wide
Ocean, and converse with foreign people, and have to do with shipping,
negotiation, and traffic, without which (so populous are we grown) we are not
able so much as to subsist or live; or if we would be enabled to stand upon our
own defense against a Nation that shall assault us by a war; or revenge
unsufferable injuries done us by making war upon them; we must not then stand
upon our own Legislative authority, to which other Princes and people will not
be obliged; Consuetudines vel statuta sunt localia, and fie non obligant nisi
subditos. Gail. obs. lib 2. obs. 124. nu. 5.
but we must be contented to stand and submit our selves to such a Law how
foreign soever, as is proper for those very matters, and to which other
Nations do refer themselves; which is the Civil Law, that Nature has breathed
out it self in, and Nations have consented unto.

And if it be so necessary for the carrying on of foreign affairs, that they
cannot be transacted without it, this shows a necessity of admitting of it also
in the agitation of certain matters and causes at home and amongst our selves,
for the more ample reward and encouragement of that profession; which can never
be maintained or upheld by the transaction of foreign affairs only; which is
not desired neither in any greater latitude or measure, then has been always
allowed it heretofore, and where the Common Law has never known to intermeddle:
and in which if the Civil Law should not be used, questions and differences
would arise, and there would be no Law or Rule found to settle them, which
would be a very pernicious thing: So that be the authority of the Civil Law
foreign, which it cannot be, except it were imposed upon us by some other
Nation or people; or be it that it were of no authority at all, but what the
necessary assent of our own natural reason, and the consent of Nations gives
it; yet it were strange that we should rather choose to have no Law at all in
those matters, then to receive or entertain the same for a help to direct our
judgments in them.

It being then so necessary a Law, that but by the knowledge and conduct thereof
foreign affairs cannot possibly be carried on, and there would be a manifest
failer of justice in other matters at home without it; the supposed
inconvenience of having two Laws in one and the same Nation, so much urged
against it, will appear to be a very slender and inconsiderable thing; for how
can that inconvenience hurt us more, then it does other Nations, that have
Municipal Laws of their own, and yet do keep the Civil Law too? Besides, it is
so far from being an inconvenience, that it is both a benefit and an honor to
a people to abound in justice, and to have it rather supplied by two Laws, then
to fail in the doing thereof by having but one.

And though where there be two Laws, and two distinct professions of them in
one State, if the matters and causes whereof they are severally allowed the
cognizance, be not certainly assigned to each, that the one may not enterfire
with the other, there may arise a confusion of jurisdictions, and the subject
will be uncertain whither to go for justice, and may be in danger to be
molested by both Courts for one and the same thing, which were an intolerable
mischief: Gravius privatorum damno peccatur, eum inter summos magistratus,
curiasve majores de imperio certatur. Bodin. de rep. lib. 3. ca. 6.
Yet the Courts of the Civil Law have always had their limits particularly
prescribed them, and the causes within their cognizance punctually set down;
and if they hold plea of any thing else, there is a known remedy to be had to
stop them, by bringing prohibitions from the Common Law, which are never so
soon asked, as granted. But if the Common Law Courts shall draw to their
examination such matters as do properly belong to the Civil, (as they have done
too often) or do prohibit the Civil from proceeding, where they know they can
do no right nor give any relief themselves, as in the business of allotting
portions amongst the deceaseds kindred, which they never did nor can do, nor
will suffer the Civil Law Courts to do it neither, this an heavy vexation, but
the blame must lie upon them. But to be sure, whilst there is such a
correcting hand over the Courts of the Civil Law, there is little ground of
fear that they can trouble or molest the people further then their just power
does authorize them. Which may be sufficient also to remove the jealousies of
those that fear, if the Civil should be admitted, it may in time supplant and
undermine the Municipal Law of this Nation: For it were a vain attempt for
subordinate Courts to go about to shake the standing of that Law, to whose
check and control they lie continually subject.

And if in foreign Nations (that have their Municipal Laws all of them, but no
profession, nor Lawyers, nor Judges, but of the Civil Law only) there is not
any found so bold and presumptuous, that dares at any time to set up the Civil
Law above the particular Law or Custom of the place, though opportunities to
do it are not wanting, but that the particular Law or Custom, if any be in the
case, does prevail, and has the praeeminence always; surely then the Municipal
Law and customs of England are much more secure from being invaded and
incroched upon, when not only the Law is distinct, but there is a distinct
profession thereof also from the Civil Law, that bears a watchful eye toward
its own greatness, and which is more, that has a controuling power, and as it
were a sovereignty over the other. Besides, the very principles of the Civil
Law do run clean counter to any such design, it being an express Maxim in that
Law, That the Municipal Law and custom of any State for what concerns those
that are subject to it, ought to be preferred before any more Universal Law
that is to the contrary. Lex Municipalis sive consuetudo juri communi derogat;
Gail. obs. lib. 2. obs. 124. nu. 2.
Lex cujusque loci inspicienda est, sive scripta sit, sive non. Gl. in l. 5.
parag. 1. Dig. De jur. immunit verb. legem. Tam in decidendis litigantium
controversiis, is qui jurisdictioni praeest, consuetudines loci, in quo
contractum est, observare debet, quam in delictorum punitione, ejus loci
consuetudinem, in quo peccatum est, sequi tenetur. l. si sundus. Dig. de evict.
Doct. in l. cunctos. Co. De sum. Trinit.
And as I have said before often, so I must inculcate it here still; The Civil
Law, where ever it is admitted, it comes without the least prejudice to any,
either Law, custom, or government, nor alters any thing; but is an auxiliary
supplement or a knowledge assisting in the administration of right and justice
both to subjects, and between Nation and Nation, where there is no Municipal
Law in the case, or where it is imperfect and obscure, or where a local Law is
of no authority at all. In the one it supplies, in the other it interprets, in
the last it moderates, as a most indifferent Umpire.

So that of these two Laws the proper office and function is, without drawing
several ways, and clashing one against another, or questioning each others
power, sweetly to join both in that most excellent and divine work of justice,
which may render the people of this Nation most quiet within themselves, and
honorably esteemed by others.

But lastly, there is a strange conceit that has got into the heads of some
men. That the Civil and Canon Law are one and the same, that they cannot be
severed, that if the one be admitted, the other will have access also, and the
letting in of the Canon Law, which was ordained by the Popes and the Church of
Rome, will open a wide gap to introduce all their superstition, erroneous
doctrine, and prelatical discipline; and so in time we shall become wholly
Romish and Antichristian And truly I must confess, that such a cause, that
might produce so dangerous an effect, is not to be neglected, but is to be very
carefully looked after. But as in the one the supposition is greatly mistaken,
so there is no such cause of fear in the other, not any such danger as is
surmised: for that these two Laws are the same, or that they are inseparable,
is more then a small mistake. They were made at several times, long distant
each from other, by several authors, and for several ends and purposes.

The Civil Law, after it had been growing by degrees in a very long process of
time, as well under the people, when Rome was a free State, as under the
Emperors; being become voluminous and indigested, the choycest thereof was
picked out and laid together by Justinian; and that Collection was perfected in
the year 533, and made the Law of the Empire, whereof Rome was now no part or
member, but become the land of the Church, the place for the Popes and Bishops
of Rome to sit in. Who though they made canons for the rule of the Church and
Churchmen long before, yet the Canon Law, that is now so styled, came not
forth into the world till above 500 years after; the first part thereof, which
is Gratians decree, being not published till the year 1151.

The intent and purpose of the Civil Law was, to order and direct all the Civil
affairs of the great and spacious Roman Empire: And the business of the Canon
Law was to guide and govern the spiritual and ecclesiastical matters of the Sea
of Rome; the one was ordained to rule a State, the other to discipline a
Church. These considerations then dividing and setting apart these two Laws
each from other, do manifestly show, that they are neither the same, nor for
the same end made, nor yet inseparable; for if that mighty State of the Romans
could manage and carry on so much business as they dealt in, by the Civil Law
only, what need has any lesser Nation now to make use of the Canon Law at all?
Besides, there has been always such a contention between these two Laws for
superiority, and which should have most esteem with the Nations of Europe, that
they have been rather ready to fight as foes, then unite and agree as friends.
Nay, Mr Seldom Dissert ad Flet. ca. 6. nu. 5.
writes, that when Pope Innocent the second did solicit the Europaean Princes
and people to give admittance to the Canon Law within their Territories,
thinking thereby to enlarge his own jurisdiction and greatness, they did the
more freely receive and entertain the Civil Law, that they might the better
keep off both the Pope and his Law too. So that it should rather seem they are
so far from being inseparable, that to entertain the one, is the only means to
shut out the other.

And indeed the Canon Law is unnecessary where the Civil is in use; for it is
well known, that the latter Roman Emperors did Bilson a Bishop of our Church
does defend Justinian and the other Emperors, and all Princes in so doing.
Christian subject part. 2. circa princip.
as they might justly do, make diverse and sundry Laws from time to time for the
ordering and regulating of eccesiastical matters and ecclesiastical men, as is
evident by diverse Titles in the Code, De summa Trinitate and fide catholica; De
sacrosanctis ecclesiis; De episcopis and clericis; De haereticis; Ne sanctum
baptisma iteretur; De Apostatis; De Judaeis and Coelicolis; De bis qui ad
ecclesias confugiunt, and the like. And it is as certain, that As may be seen
in the History of the Council of Trent. Lib. 4. fol 332, 333. and lib. 7. fo.
790.
there is a multitude of things, which the Popes and the Church of Rome have
taken upon them to order and make Canons in, in ordine ad spiritualia, in order
to the spiritual welfare of men's souls, as they pretend, which are Temporal,
and matters of civil intercourse between man and man; as may be seen in these
Titles, De pactis. De precario. De commodate. De Deposito. De emptione and
venditione. De locato and conducto. De rerum Permutatione. De pignoribus. De
Donationibus. De Testamentis. De Trenga and Pace. De transactionibus. De
Decimis, primitiis and oblationibus. De jure Paetronatus. De sponsalibus and
matrimoniis. De successionibus ab intestato. De Homicidio voluntario vel
casuali. De Raptoribus. De furtis. And diverse others.

And all these things in their true nature are but temporal, and mere matters
of Negotiation or actings between man and man, though some of them, as Tithes,
presentations to Benefices, Marriages, Testaments, successions to Dead men's
goods that have died intestate, and other such like, are by the Church of Rome
accounted spiritual, and through indulgence of diverse Princes for the Honor of
the Church, the jurisdiction in them has been granted unto spiritual men. But
that has proceeded rather from the favor of Princes, then from the Bishop
Bilson says, That the Popes decrees, judgments, and executions in these cases,
if claimed from Christ as things spiritual, and not granted by Caesar, are but
open invasions of Princes rights, calling those things spiritual, which indeed
be civil and temporal. Christian subject. part. 2. circa med.
nature of the things themselves.

And whosoever does take a survey of the Canon Law in the Titles above
mentioned, and in diverse others, he shall find it most taken out, and speak
the very language of the Civil Law: and so much is noted and observed all along
by the very Gloss and Canonists themselves. So that hereby the Canon Law
appears to be of little use, when for the ordering of those matters, we may be
supplied from the fountain it self, from whence the Canon Law has got it. But
suppose there were such a necessary concomitancy between these two Laws, and
that the use and practice of the one would be a sure inlet to the other, as
some do too fondly imagine; does it therefore follow, that the errors and
superstitions of the Church of Rome must needs creep in too? No more surely,
then it follows, that because the old Law, that is full of Jewish rights and
ceremonies, is joined to the Gospel, and that we read both together, we must
therefore presently all become Jews.

And thus having satisfied all scruples, that are usually made against the
continuing the Civil Law within this Nation; I shall but shut up all in this
conclusion: That seeing the Roman State, out of their wonderful wisdom and
great experience in government and the several affairs of the World, did devise
a Law not only proper for themselves, but so mainly useful to other Nations
also; and that the industry of the learned working upon that foundation, has by
method, order, Rules, expositions, illustrations, and treatises of all kinds,
reduced it to a perfect and complete Art and Science of Law, whereby the right
skill and way of doing the purest and most natural justice, whatsoever the case
be, may be taught and known; And when it has from thence been ingrafted into
our own and the other Universities of Europe, and made one of the three chief
Sciences there, to which the rest of the Arts serve as it were as handmaids and
servants; and all for the directing of men and Nations, how they should deal
honestly and uprightly with one another; seeing also that our very Martial
affairs cannot proceed well, nor be rightly regulated without it; and that those
Nations whom we have most dealings and intercourse withal, and to whom we
should despise to be any whit inferior, do not only keep it, but also have no
other profession of Law besides it, and do think their own private Laws to be
very insufficient and lame without it; and that diverse matters and causes
amongst our selves will remain without any Law at all, except the Civil Law be
kept to order them, as it did before; Lastly, when the Civil Law comes to help
and assist, and not to infringe or take away from the Municipal Law at all: If
we shall now abandon it, and cast it out of our coasts, or which is all one, if
we shall reward and encourage it so slenderly, that no man will either think it
worth his pains to study, or his cost to take any degree in it (to which pass
it is most visibly come already) I say, if we shall still thus neglect or
despise it either way; we shall not only set light by the Policy and Wisdom
of the Romans, which all other people are studious to imitate and come as near
as possibly they can; but we shall also deprive our selves of one excellent
means to improve our knowledge and reason by; our justice without it, being
guided by illiterate and irrational principles, will be less satisfactory to
the people; our skill in the discipline of War, and in the Laws of Arms will
be very defective; the very harmony of learning, that has so long flourished
amongst us, will be dissolved, when so considerable a part as the Civil Law is
broken off from it; other Nations will grow too wise and subtle for us, and
will turn and wind us as they lift; and our justice at home will be lamed, not
being competent enough for the matters we deal in. The consequence of all which
will be, mischief at home, and dishonor abroad, which all good Patriots and
lovers of their Country will lament to see.

An Index of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A
ARts and Sciences have their beginning, growing, falling, and rising again.
fol. 50 Argument drawn from like case is unsufficient. fol. 41 Admiralty Court
proper to be managed by Civilians only. fol. 148 Athens was the place from
whence the Civil Law first came. fol. 29, 103
B
Business of other men, if I expend any money or care upon, though without
their privity, the Civil Law will see me satisfied. fol. 90 Books of the Roman
Laws when and where found, after that learning had lain neglected a long time.
fol. 122 Barbarism will be let in, where the Civil Law is expelled. fol. 134
Books of the Roman Laws that were before Justinians Collection, after that came
forth, were quite lost. fol. 121
C
Children, if no disposition at all were made by the father, did equally divide
the whole estate between them, by the Civil Law. fol. 15. Enjoined so to
reverence their parents, that they could not sue them without leave, nor be
witnesses against them, nor marry without their consent, nor charge them with
any criminal act. fol. 11 Collusion odious by the Civil Law, and makes the act
void. fol. 13 The Civil Law agreeable not only to the first principles of
nature, but also to others never so much remote. fol. 21. made to rule the
mightiest Empire that ever was, and since propagated to other Nations. 29. and
how it came so. 30. it teaches men to be virtuous and innocent. 48. though
sometimes in obscurity, yet never to be quite lost. 50. it handles public
matters very sparingly. 52. custom must agree with reason. 36. customs are
more acceptable to the people, then Laws are. ibid. Cases commonly all differ
from one another. fol. 41 The Civil Law contains the whole reason of man, both
private, politic, and that of Nations. 53, 63. it runs more in a convincing
then commanding style. 65. most conformable to the Divine and eternal Law. 66.
grown to be the common authority to justify or condemn humane actions. 67. it
avoids niceties, and follows the true intent only. 67. it will not allow of
some things, because they are not worthy nor honorable, though otherwise
lawful. 70. it is full of elemency and mildness. 71. it prefers equity before
rigor. 78. all persons of what condition soever may read their duties in it.
93. The fundamentals thereof fetched from other states, the best governed that
then were. fol. 103. 29 Civil Law how it may be admitted into England without
any inconvenience. fol. 108 Civil Law almost distroyed, when the Roman Empire
was invaded by barbarous people, 114. 116. the first books thereof being lost,
did much hurt and injury to those that we have now, being but an extract of
them 121 many of the books thereof to an infinite number perished and were lost
by the sad fates that befell Rome, Berytus, and Constantinople. 122. yet under
Lotharius the Emperor it was again restored. ib. and afterward grew so great,
that other learning was neglected, and all did study that only. 123. The
Edicts of Princes how severe soever, were not able to suppress it. 124. no
where so much in use as in Spain and France, though they have both made sharp
decrees against it. 130. How it came into that form, order, and method which
now we see it in. 167. what a multitude of writers there are in to is Law. fol.
170 Civil Law is not proper to govern every State by. fol. 140. 51 Cities three
above all others most famous for the study of the Civil Law, Rome, Berytus and
Constantinope. fol. 122 Civil Law has not of it self any authoritative force to
bind as a Law in any Nation, but is and must be of force every where, as it
contains true and solid reason, to which all men are to submit. fol. 126. 138.
157 Cases that do happen are to be all settled by some rule or other. fol. 145
Civil Law perfected as it is at this day, very sufficient to resolve all cases
that can happen. 15. 53. 147. 155: 171. and is the true Art and Science of Law.
fol. 166 Canon Law and Civil Law have been at variance, which should spread
most. 163. 185. yet both of them have been admitted by Princes for several
uses. 125. 185. that they are not inseparable, as some do imagine. 184. Canon
Law is but the Civil Law applied to the use of the Church and church matters,
and is in most things the same with the Civil. 163. 186 orders diverse things
merely temporal, under pretense of being spiritual. fol. 186 Causes that were
tried by the Civil Law before the government changed, why they should be tried
by the same Law still. 178. and in the Epistle.
D
Defense legal ought not even in capital matters be denied a subject against
his King. fol. 7 Dead bodies not to be arrested, nor touched in their graves.
fol. 80
E
Exarchate of Ravenna, after Constantinople was the seat of the Empire, was
still governed by the Civil Law. fol. 118 England had the Civil Law read
publicly in it, as soon as it was restered in Italy by Lotharius. fol. 125
Ecclesiastical men and Ecclesiastical matters have been and may be regulated by
temporal Princes. fol. 186. 162 Ecclesiastical men have through favor of
Princes, rather then of right, been suffered to order some causes which are
merely temporal. fol. 186
F
Fraud so detested by the Civil Law, that sometimes it did dissolve the whole
bargain, sometimes it did enjoin the whole true value to be paid, where one was
deceived in more then half the worth. 12. never suffered to bring any advantage
to the deceiver, or to any one else. 13. most detestable in those, that the Law
does most privilege, when deceived. fol. 13 Foreign States not to be judged
by Municipal Laws. fol. 146 Foreign States, why they do judge so much by the
rules of the Civil Law. fol. 153
G
Great men are not suffered to assume or protect the controversies or litigious
suits of others. fol. 62 Guardians may husband, but not sell the estates of
their pupils. fol. 106 Government was at first without any Law at all. fol. 110
Government being changed, the Laws seldom remain the same. fol. 116 Government
howsoever changed, yet the Civil Law is of use. fol. 157. 176
I
Ingratitude does make a free gift revocable from him that is ungrateful. fol.
84 Italy was seven times brought almost to utter desolation in less then eighty
years. fol. 114 Justinians body of the Law was compiled at Constantinople, and
kept out of Italy 500 years together. 118. but prevailed altogether in the
East. ibid. Italy when it was possessed by the Goths and Lombards, some parts
of the Civil Law were in use there still. fol. 119 Justinian is by somes made
instrumental in suppressing the old books of the Roman Laws, after his
collection was finished, but without just ground. fol. 121
K
Killing in ones own defense ought to receive no punishment. 6. nor killing by
chance. ibid. A King by the Civil Law is no more absolved from the observation
of the Law, nor has any looser power over the lives, liberties, or goods of his
subjects, then by other Laws. fol. 19 Kings being driven out of Rome, their
Laws were never in use more. fol. 103
L
Law, what properties it ought to have, and that chiefly it ought to agree with
reason. 1.2. and seq. 46. it is but a determination of the Law of Nature. 4. it
must not only not cross the first and chief principles of nature, but not such
neither, as are any way, though remotely, depending on them. 8. to be fairly
and heartily interpreted, and without any fraud. 13. may profitably contain
the very maxims of Reason. 21. common capacities no good judges of Laws. 25.
and who are, and what must be considered to judge rightly of them. ibid. the
severity of them to be imputed to the demerits of men. 26. though not so
rational as others, subjects must acquitss in them, till they be altered. fol.
31 Law of Nations is that which orders all affairs between Nation and Nation.
59. to be known out of the Civil Law. fol. 61 Laws of the twelve Tables the
groundwork and foundation of the Civil Law. fol. 104 Laws of all other Nations
are gone and extinct with the States themselves, excepting the Roman. fol. 110
Laws of some people more famous then others. fol. 111 Lotharius the Emperor
was the restorer of the Civil Law, when it was as it were extinct in Europe.
fol. 122 Law foreign not to be preferred before the proper Law of the
Country. fol. 125. 140. 144 Law of no Nation so sufficient, but that another
Law is needful. fol. 128. 144. 154 Law of government proper for the state it
self, is necessary in every Nation. fol. 129. 140 Laws of all Nations too
imperfect for the multitude of cases that do happen. fol. 52. 144. 145 Laws not
to be measured by their abuse, or execution. fol. 28 Legal matters are to be
judged by Lawyers only. fol. 25. 151 Lawyers, none in foreign parts, but
Civilians. fol. 152 Lawyers of the latter age more learned then those before
them. fol. 160 Two Laws in one state not inconvenient. fol. 120. 154. 182
M
Municipal Laws must be in every Nation. 129. 140. and they to be preferred
before any other Law or reason. fol. 103. 125. 140. 143. 144 Municipal Laws are
too short and scanty, to take in all cases that do arise. fol. 144 Merchants,
no fitting judges to try and decide Sea causes. fol. 148 Men how much they
differ in their tempers, and so in their actions. fol. 25. 41. 53. 145 Monarchy
is no looser government then any other. fol. 19 Military questions to be
regulated by the Civil Law. In the Epistle. Municipal Laws have no degrees
taken, nor Lectures read in them, any where but in England. 152. 153. all that
is good in them is taken out of the Civil Law. fol. 98. 164.
N
Nations not so abounding in all things, but that they do or may stand in need
one of another. fol. 155 Nations abroad do mainly practice the Civil Law in
matters between man and man. fol. 128. 133. 159 Nations abroad are best
satisfied by justice done according to the rules of the Civil Law. fol. 134
Nations in their dealing with one another must have some common Law to guide
them. fol. 59. 146. 155 National differences not to be debated but by the Law
of Nations, and the reason of the Civil Law. In the Epist. and fol. 65. Natural
Laws cannot be repealed. fol. 49. 174
O
Offenses, though the same, may be punished with more severity in one State
then in another. fol. 26
P
Parents could not give away nor forfeit their whole estate from their children
by the Civil Law, except in case of Treason. fol. 9 Proceedings legal how
rationally ordered by the Civil Law. fol. 15 President or example no rule to
judge by. fol. 38. 65 Promises, if serious, though without consideration, are
to be performed, by Civil Law. fol. 87 Pope of Rome did make edicts against the
Civil Law, thereby to advance the Canon Law the better. 124. yet he does make
use of the Civil Law. fol. 163 Parents were bound to leave a certain part of
their estate to their children. fol. 9. 141 Penalties added to Laws, argue the
power, but not the justness of them. fol. 158 Punishments for the same offense,
may justly be greater in one place then in anothes. fol. 26
R
Reason was given to be man's guide in all his actions. 2. it is a beam of the
divine light. 5. the principles thereof, all of them, not to be discerned by
all. 21. is sometimes covered with falsehood, and is much darkened by other
natural corruptions. 23. not a more deceitful thing then it. 24. then most
evident, when generally allowed by all. 30. not so requisite in public Laws as
in private. 33. private, politic, and that of Nations to be gathered out of
the Civil Law. fol. 53 Romes greatness and flourishing does demonstrate the
excellency of the Laws wherewith it was governed. fol. 98 Rome was as it were
the City of the whole World. fol. 98 Romes greatness to be imputed rather to
their Laws then Arms. fol. 99 Romans very greedy of honor, in pursuit whereof
they did many gallant acts, and especially made such good Laws as they did.
fol. 100 Romes universal rule a special design of God for the good of man;
which was the cause that Christ was born under that government. fol. 102 Romans
when they conquered a nation, did not disdain to take such Laws from them, as
they found to be very honest and rational. fol. 107 Roman Emperors some
favorable to the Civil Law, others bitter enemies against it, and the
professors of it. fol. 112 Robbery in the Highway, or at Sea, or with
Burglary, punished by death at Civil Law. fol. 142 Roman antiquities would have
been better known, if the old books of the Roman Laws had been preserved. fol.
121 Reason vulgar and ordinary not suffient to judge of legal matters. fol.
147. 154 Romans through their universal sovereignty, dealt in greater variety
of business, then any Nation. fol. 52. 155 Rome came under several forms of
government, and ye some part of the Civil Law was under all of them. fol. 157
Ransom paid for another, though without his directions, is recoverable from
him. fol. 91 Roman Laws do only carry away the name of The Civil Law. fol. 166
S
Society Civil what the benefits thereof be. fol. 56 Succession to intestates
goods, how regulated by the Civil Law. fol. 84 Stoppage is an allowed way of
payment at Civil Law. fol. 89 Ship or goods when saved by the pains or loss of
another, the Law will allow salvage or other recompense for it. fol. 90 Slavery
and servitude out of use amongst Christians. fol. 143 Sea matters to be judged
and tried by Civilians only. fol. 148
T
Torture, as it is allowed by Civil Law, justified. fol. 72 These by Civil Law
punished by pecuniary satisfaction. fol. 142
V
Universities of England, why they practice the Civil Law. fol. 161
Universities of the World teach no other, nor give degrees in any other Law but
the Civil Law. fol. 152. 153. 172.
W
Wrecks by the Civil Law restored to the owners, and go not to the King. fol.
21.
ERRATA
The Reader is first desired to take notice, that the Printer, by the absence
of the Author, and being not acquainted with the quotations of Civil Law, has
from fol. 4, to fol. 23. in diverse places in the Margent, erroneously set down
the book, for the Law, printing lib. instead of l. which stands for lege. When
therefore the Law is quoted out of the Digests or Code within that compass,
instead of lib. read l. as in fol. 4. in the Margent litt. l. for lib. 1. r. l.
1.

Fol. 4. in the marg. litt. n. for, Minfinus r. Minsing. fol. 19. lin. 24.
rigorem r. vigorem. l. 33. for, is not so, r. is not to be. fol. 20. l. 22. for
rules, r. rulers. fol. 71. in the mangent litt. r. for lib. 57. r. l. 57. fol.
75. l. 10. for need not, r. l need not. fol. 158. l. 20. for they, r. it. fol.
175. l. 33. for natural, r. unnatwal. fol. 181. l. 16. for as, r. us.

The End.

