A DECLARATION OF MAJOR George Wither, Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON With his
Desires to Sir John Robinson, His Majesty's Lieutenant: Writ on three fair
Trenchers, with a Piece of Char-Coal. Worthy of the Readers serious Perusal.

depiction of George Wither

London, Printed for S. Jones. 1662.

A DECLARATION Of Major George Withers, Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON;
Concerning the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Presbyterian Party, and all
public and private Congregations whatsoever, etc.
Whereas the Rebels of King David constrained him to flight, and God was
pleased to bring him home again, it is apparent, that those who at first had
been very forward to drive Him out, at last, made haste to join with those who
had been Instrumental to bring Him in: And He, with God in Mercy so complyd
that Indemnity was granted, and not a man for that Rebellion suffered Death,
it being Absalom that had contrived the Treason, deceiving the well-meaning
People.

And although that Rebellion cost a Traittous Child's Life; yet it cannot be
denied, but by our unnatural War, a Royal Fathers Life was lost: And through
Providence and Justice, after many Years, the Heavens cried aloud for this
Royal Martyr, and some bloodshed that produced Traitors having their just
Rewards. Yet by all true Subjects and Humane Reason His Gracious Majesty may
be justly excused; Whom Natural Affection moved to shed, the Blood of such
Barbarous Wretches, by whom His Royal Father received Martyrdom.

And since it pleased the Most High, to indue His Princely Heart from above
with Mercies most infinite so I wish that every one in his respective place and
station may not only have a high esteem, but forever prize so great and signal
a Mercy, as the happy Restoration of His Sacred Majesty: for indeed, no Iem
so beautifies a Royal Diadem, as Mercy, when it is enamelled with Justice, and
reveted with Prudence.

And as to this His Majesty's happy Restoration, same questionless, out of true
Loyalty, and just Allegiance, contributed to His Majesty's Accommodation; and
some again no doubt, only to work their own Salvation out.

But this is a most assured Truth, that many who formerly contained against
Majesty it self, are now so truly convinced of their former Errors and the
excellency of His Majesty's abundant Worth and Princely Endowments, that His
Royal Person in them is safe: for in such who have received His Majesty's
Gractous Pardon, and unparalleld Clemency, there will Love and Loyalty much
increase and abound.

And as for my own particular, I must ingenuously Declare, That I who
compulsively obeyed the late preceding Powers, does now most willingly submit
to His Majesty's; promising all due Allegiance to His Sacred Majesty

Further Declaring, That when I saw God on His Side appear, I was reclaimed not
by Fear, but Conscience. Yea not only foreseeing, but also foretelling the
Downfall and Ruin of the Usurpers then in Power.

And that His Majesty's Happiness and Prosperity may survive and flourish from
my Soul I humbly unplore and desire, That His Majesty may such means assay,
not giving Ear to those who would withstand the Good and Prosperity of His
Majesty, the Peace of the Church the Welfare of these his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions, and the Work which God has now in hand.

And whatever does befall I shall discharge my Conscience, hoping that will not
wholly be despised, which here in all Loyalty and Faithfulness. I humbly
supplicate. That Justice may be His Majesty's Scepter, and Mercy His Crown: And
that it may long flourish on His Princely Head, and the rest of the Royal
Progeny, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure.

And the only Peace (...) my Soul (...). That Hi^ Majesty may take all
Opportunities to render Him a Blessed Instrument, not only to reign gloriously
here, but also to Eternity hereafter: And that His Earthly Throne may appear
more glorious, then the Throne of any Prince whatsoever since the Conquest.

And that His Name may be a Terror to all His Enemies, and shame and confusion
to befall those who shall dare to disturb the true Peace and Tranquillity of
these Nations.

And for my own particular, I shall patiently submit to the Divine Will and
Pleasure of the King of all Kings, and what His Vicegerent on Earth shall be
pleased to do, not asking (whatsoere I seem to want,) ought more then His
Majesty shall graciously be pleased to grant: Not doubting, but what is
wanting here on Earth, will be supplied to me in Heaven.

Many such like Papers did he write, during his Confinement in the Press-yard
at Newgate, some whereof being of very dangerous Consequence, and not fitting
to be published. And since his being removed from thence to the Tower, Sir John
Robinson His Majesty's Lieutenant had Orders to detain him Close Prisoner, and
to keep him from Pen Ink and Paper; Which accordingly was done, but with as
much Civility, as possible could be expected for any one in his Condition.

Yet notwithstanding this somewhat began to exasperate his troubled Spirits,
and after some contemplation, was moved to write to the Lieutenant with a piece
of Charcoal, on three fair Trenchers, Desiring what favor possibly could might
be allowed him; and that as he was ancient, some Liberty might be extended
toward him, etc.

FINIS.

