AMYGDALA BRITANNICA, Almonds for Parrets.

A Dish of STONE-FRUIT, partly shel'd and partly unshel'd; WHICH (Jf cracked,
picked, and well digested) May be wholesome against those Epidemick Distempers
of the Brain, now predominant; and prevent some Malignant Diseases, likely to
ensue.

Composed, heretofore, by a well-knowne Modern Author; and, now published
according to a Copy, found written with his own Hand.

Qui been latuit, been vixit. MATTHEW. XIII. XIII, XIV, XV. Therefore speak I to
them in parables: because they seeing, see not: and hearing, they hear not,
neither do they understand.

And in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Esaias which says, By hearing ye
shall hear, and shall not understand: and seeing ye shall see, and shall not
perceive.

For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing,
and their eyes they have closed, left at any time they should see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and healed.

Anno M.D.C.XLVII.

AMYGDALA BRITANNICA, Almonds for Parrets.
When Wisemen found plain-dealing did offend,
In Hieroglyphics they their Musings penned;
And, to the meek, conveyed in a cloud,
The light, which was disdained by the proud;
That, so, the scorner, hearing, might not hear,
Nor seeing, see, what plainly does appear:
For, just it is, that they should lose their sight,
Who would not see their safety, when they might.
It Is much observed, that this Generation
Has taken up the Parrets inclination,
Who loves, on shells, to exercise his beak,
And, words not understood, delights to speak:
We, therefore, (since the labor may be spared)
For private entertainment, have prepared
This dish of Stone-fruits; whereof, there are some,
That yield a kernel, better then the plumb;
And, such, that, if they well digested be,
Will clear their eyes, who have a mind to see.
Here, till affairs are wholly mis-transpos'd,
You shall perceive, in Parables, disclosed,
Upon what actions, and contingencies,
The Fortune of this British Empire lies;
And, by what symptoms, you may truly know,
Which way the Public Fate will ebb, or flow.
Thus he conceives, who seriously has weighed
Those things; and in these words his thoughts arai'd.
ALL things terrestrial have their dates,
Kings, Kingdoms, and the greatest States;
And, warnings do appear, to, some,
Of all such changes, ere they come;
Whereby, were timely means assaid,
Plagues might be escaped, or allaid:
And, peradventure, to that use,
This, which ensues, may conduce.
The time draws near, and hastes on,
In which strange works will be begun;
And, prosecutions, whereon shall
Depend much future bliss or bale.
If, to the left hand, you decline,
Assured destruction they divine;
But if the right hand course ye take,
This Island it will happy make.
A time draws near, in which you may,
As you shall please, the Chesse-men play:
Remove, confine, check, leave, or take,
Dispose; depose, undo, or make,
Pawn, Rook, Knight, Bishop, Queen, or King,
And, act your wills in every thing:
But, if that time let slip you shall,
For yesterday, in vain you call.
A time draws near, in which the Sun
Will give more light, then he has done:
Then, also, you shall see the Moon
Shine brighter then the Sun at noon:
And, many Stars, now seeming dull,
Give shadows, like the Moon at full.
Yet, then, shall some, who think they see,
Wrapped in Egyptian darkness be.
A time draws near, when, with your blood,
You shall preserve the Vipers brood,
And starve your own; yet, fancy, than,
That, you have played the Pelican:
But, when you think, the frozen Snakes
Have changed their natures, for your sakes,
They, in requital, will contrive
Your mischief, who did them revive.
A time will come, when, they that wake,
Shall dream; and sleepers undertake
The grand-Affaires: yet, few men know,
Which are the Dreamers of these two;
And, fewer care, by which of these
They guided be, so they have ease:
But, an Alarm shall advance
Your drowzie spirits, from that trance.
A time shall come, ere long, in which
Mere Beggars shall grow soonest rich;
The rich with wants be pinched more,
Then such as go from door to door;
The honorable by the base
Shall be despighted, to their face;
The truth defamed be with lies;
The fool preferred before the wise;
And he that fighteh to be free,
By conquering, enslaved shall be.
A Time shall come, when they that would
Discredit truths, which were foretold,
Of every news will stand in fear,
And, credit every lie they hear;
Till they, by penance done, have paid
For every truth they have gainsaid.
Then, they who have expected Fish,
Shall find a Scorpion in their dish:
The children shall have stones for bread,
And, starved be, whilst dogs are fed:
Then also shall each work you do,
Ere it be finished, make you two;
And, render all, when much is done,
Far worse, then when the Plague begun.
A time draws near, in which your peace
Shall make your quarrels more increase:
Then shall you by false-brethren lose
More, then by all your open-foes:
Then one-mans hate shall rob of more
Then five times twenty can restore:
Three men shall act more mischiefs here,
Then three great Kingdoms well can bear:
And then shall they be better prized,
Whose counsels have been long despised.
The time is drawing near, when we
Our own Antipodes shall be:
When our most dangerous disease
Shall be the Scribes and Pharisees:
When Seamen shall usurp the whip;
Plowmen presume to guide the ship;
The children frequently begin,
To teach their grandams how to spin:
And, then shall that, which was a crime,
Be deemed the virtue of the time;
And, that, impiety be thought,
Which has, for sanctity, been taught.
A time will come, in which the Flocks,
Shall see their Shepherd play the Fox,
And range and ramble up and down,
Till he into a wolf be grown;
Then, they that hounds and sleugh-dogs keep,
Shall hunt him, till he grows a Sheep;
And, then, if what he seems, he be
He shall be safe; and, so, shall we.
A time will come, when see you shall
Toads fly aloft, and Eagles crawle;
Wolves walk abroad in humane shapes;
Men, turn to asses, hogs, and apes:
But, when that cursed time is come,
Well's he that is both deaf, and dumb;
That nothing speaks, nothing hears,
And, neither hopes, desires, nor fears.
The time will come when you shall see
A Headlesse-body active be,
And, many actions full of dread,
Performed by a Trunklesse-head;
Which Head, and Body, being brought
To knit together, as they ought,
Might prove to be, in time to come,
The joy, and awe, of Chiristendome.
But, e're such happy days be seen,
There will some changes intervene
Our hopes and them, to make or mar
the sequel, as they managed are;
And, therefore, that discern you may
When these approach; and, which are they;
And, what to do, when they are known,
Here, they in easy types are shown;
Or, by those tokens, which fore-hint,
What you should labor to prevent.
When, you see many things effected,
Which were nor feared nor suspected;
The Mountains sink, the Valleys clime;
Stars rise, and set, before their time;
Gross Meteors from the mud exhald,
To highest Spheres, and Planets called;
And, utter darkness termed light;
Then, bid your happy days, goodnight.
When, you embrewed, in their blood,
Behold three Lions of one brood;
If, then, a fourth shall interpose,
It will but more increase their woes;
Till but one head, possess they shall,
And, but one heart, among them all.
Which, whosoever to pass can bring.
Shall be the darling of a King.
His prickles, when the Thistle shows,
Whithin the borders of the Rose,
If, with the Flower-de-Luce it close,
Designing what the Orange does,
The style of blessed it shall lose;
Yea, cursed be, where e're it grows;
And, by such faithlesnesse, expose
If self, and others, to their Foes.
But, being, only, for a time,
(To cure the Fevers or that Clyme)
Transplanted Southward; if it spread,
And root, no further then the bed,
Where, by the Gardner, it was set,
To cure us of our Ague-fit;
It, of our Garden, shall be free,
And, called the blessed-Thistle be.
When Charles his waine, begins to reel,
And, retrograde shall seem to wheel;
If, rambling forth, the Driver be.
Without his Orb, but one degree;
What hope soever he has of help,
From Lioness, or Lions-whelp,
'Twill be a hundred unto one
If he return, when he is gone.
When from one hand, let slip, you view.
Two Dogs, one Leopard to pursue;
Though every passage you beset
And ride, and run until you sweat,
The Game will at the last get free,
If Patch, one of your Gray-hounds be;
Or, if you think, to take the beast,
By Huntsmen, who are such professed.
When Britains Gerion you shall see,
With Single head, on bodies three,
Put forth his face, in a disguize,
(Undecently betwixt his thighs)
Be wary then, and take great heed,
In your affairs, how ye proceed;
Least, you be laid in little ease,
Betwixt the French and Kings disease.
When frequently, observe you shall,
S. Peter robbed, to pay S. Paul;
When Butterflies, Silk-wormes out-brave;
When Maggots waste, what Ants did save,
And, wasps, and drones, and hornets drive
Your Bees, to seek a Forraign-hive;
Then, fly to providence-divine,
And, do, as that shall you incline.
When, you see breaking Stones, and glasses,
For zeal in true Religion passes:
As Well the Clergy, as the Lay,
Learn, how at fast, and loose, to play:
Hermaphrodites begot with child;
Herod, and Pilate, reconciled:
The Moralist, his light abuse;
And, Chritstians turning Semi-Jewes;
You may, where e're you go, or ride,
Have Ignis fatuus, for your guide.
When, in this Isle observe you shall
The tenth part of great Babel fall,
And, Reformation, fully made
Of them, and their mysterious trade,
Who merchandise most holy things;
Then GOD to speedy vengeance brings,
With Gog, with Magog, and the Whore,
The Beast, which Nations, yet, adore.
When you perceive the Common-Creed,
Renounced; and, whimseyes in it steed;
The words, which our chief Rabbi taught,
Despised, or out of practice brought;
And, some abuse the Godhead, more
Then all the Gentiles heretofore;
They, who his nature do mistake,
Shall then grow like the God they make;
And, think it, when they do oppress,
But sanctity, and righteousness.
When, they, that are of Babel shie,
Shall further into Babell fly;
When, they, who Superstition shun,
To greater Superstitions run,
And, to escape profaneness, shall
Into mere Atheism fall;
Then, will, at full, those plagues appear,
Which, now, are but beginning, here;
And, they, who live those days to know,
Will think of him, who told you so.
When, in this Isle, the people sees
A confused heptarchie of Pees,
Their peace, disturbing, by distraction;
Their power, become a three-square faction
Of equal sides, and, each inclined
To what, it fancy has designed;
And, few regarding Common-good:
Then, shall the Moon be turned to blood,
Unless, you can by Chymistrie,
The Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury
So temper; that produce it shall
The true Elixar from them all.
When, loud the British waters roar,
And, flow up to the Senate door,
If, then, the wind shall also blow,
To make their swellings higher grow:
Then whether you to them give way,
Or, seek to stop them, by a bay,
In vain, to curb them, strive you shall,
Without the Balsome-box, and scale;
Though you diversions make (in hope
To do it) and, cast Mountains up.
When, you observe the Civil-sword,
Usurp the power of the word;
And, (where declining Babel stood)
Men, laying Sions walls, in blood;
Then, some, who for the Lamb profess,
The Dragons Kingdom will increase,
Until, they shall be better taught
How, living Temples should be wrought.
When, you have pulled the great Popes down,
And, set up one in every Town;
When, in each house, a Church shall be,
And, in one house, a part of three;
When, one shall tell you Christ, is here;
Another say, lo, he is ^ere;
More comfort they shall then receive,
Who love; then they, who these believe.
When, only, numbered out, you see.
What, weighed, and measured, too, should be;
When all, that you shall save, or lose,
Depends on their yea's, and no's,
Who, peradventure, may intend,
Self-will, selfe-profit, or selfe-end;
Then, self-denial must proceed
From words, into a real deed;
And, more regardfully you must
Consider, whom you ought to trust;
Least, e're this tragedy be played,
You, and your Freedoms be betrayed.
When, clothed like lambs, the wolves appear,
When, Foxes preach, and Goslings hear,
When, Hawks to guard the Doves are chose,
When, wounds must cured be with blows,
And, when your frogs and mice renew
Their foolish war; Then, will ensue
What has by wisemen been foretold,
In tales and parables, of old;
Unless, your keepers eye affrights
The Romish Eagles, and the Kites.
When, you perceive the Harper play
His Harpstrings, and his Harp away;
The Miter, hazzarding the Crown;
The sword, instructing of the Gown;
The members, that in darkness be,
Informing, how the Eyes should see;
And, hands, and feet, aspiring to
That, which the Head, and Heart should do;
Then, you, a while, their lots must share,
Who, in their guts, their brains do bear.
When, you shall see Death richly clad,
With what, the living should have had;
And, then, behold a Church bespread
With rags, and relics of the dead,
Exposing that to open scorn,
Which was in public triumph born:
If, then, with seriousness you heed
The simple doer, and the deed,
It shall occasion shame to some,
Who thought, much honored, to become:
And, let a just occasion in
To rake up, what might hid have bin.
When Blocks, and Stones, offense shall take,]
And riots in your Cities make;
Beware: for, if heed be not took,
A spark shall casually be struck,
From some rough flint, which will devour
Your wealth, your glory, and your power;
That future times may not despise
The wrath, and spleen, of Ants and Flies.
When you see Gallants take their vies,
As if they would ore-skip the skies,
Or, give the Sun, and Moon, a Law,
Yet, then, scarce over-leap a straw;
Or, when conceptions-mountainous
Shall bring forth nothing, but a mouse,
(After great throes, 'twixt hopes, and fears,
Sustained, by you, many years)
Then, your declining state deplore,
And, take a dos of Hellebore.
When, here, you shall re-act the sin
Of Pharaoh, and of Benjamin;
Keep Jezabels, and Ahabs Fast;
In Jehu's mold Reformers cast;
Give honor unto Golden Calves,
And Idols, setting up themselves;
You shall but bring, to quench your flame,
That oil, which will increase the same:
And, GOD, your Offerings will despise;
Till Justice be your sacrifice.
When Out-lawes shall themselves propose
For your Lawgivers to be chose;
Felons, grow makers of your Laws;
Effects, producers of their Cause;
The accused, his own Judge become;
The thief, pronounce the true-mans doom;
Your greatest foes, turn seeming-friends;
And, greatest wrongs get least amends:
Then, to no earthly hopes aspire;
But, unto GOD, alone, retire.
When, most the Charmers-voice shall hear,
And, like deaf Adders, stop their ear;
When, they who sit in Judgment, be
Inexorable, more then He
Who did both GOD, and Man, despise;
(And, slight even Importunities,
Continued without intermission)
Then, fear, O Britain! thy condition.
When, most that hear, and pray, and fast,
No sweetness, in those duties taste;
But, formally, in them go on,
Depending upon what is done;
And, others, so believing grow,
As, that, they no good works will do:
Or, when small difference shall appear
'Twixt persons, times, or places, here;
And, those Ideas, men embrace,
Which have nor body, form, nor face;
And, run vagaries without bound,
As if, no medium's could be found,
'Twixt two extremes: Even then, shall they
Who love the light, enjoy the day;
And, then, shall looked for be, or some,
A Kingdom, that will never come.
When, in your City-paramount,
This Realm is called to Account,
(And, they, who do receive and pay,
Forsake the old Exchequer way)
If those may then their trial shun,
By whom, the greatest wrongs are done,
Your hypocrites will soon appear
So many, and so powerful, here,
That, GOD himself the Accounts will take,
Which they unwilling are to make.
When folly, avarice, and pride,
Upon the publike-Asse shall ride,
And, labor to subject the State
Unto that base Triumvirate;
Such justice, piety, and knowledge,
Will, then, proceed from Gotham-Colledge,
That, blinde-men, plainly shall perceive,
What, they, who see, will not believe.
Then, they who now delight in lies,
(Which their own malice did devise)
And, those predictions do deride,
Which they see daily verified;
Shall view with shame, and feel with fear,
Those truths, of which they would not hear;
And, they who, their despights have borne,
Shall laugh their pride, and hate, to scorn.
When, you hear thousands make their mones,
And prayers, unto Blocks and Stones;
Poor Suitors, prosecuting Causes
In circles, labyrinths, and mazes,
Till scarce a neighbor, friend, or brother,
Believes, or loves one the other;
Or, till they have nor house, nor bread,
Who, for the Kingdomes-cause, have bled;
Then, you fulfilled shall behold
So much, that, more needs not be told.
When, you shall hear your Pipers play
Till none will either dance, or pay;
Or, till among you does begin
A second bloody matachin;
Then, will clean hands, and honest hearts,
Besteed you more, then Irish darts;
Secure you better from your foes,
Then guards of guns, of bills or bows;
And, then, will they, whom Pride does scorn,
More happy be, then Princes-borne.
When, you most slight what Tel-troth says;
When, you have proved the Punick-faith;
When, you see those, who have misdone,
In spite of Council, still, go on,
To prosecute their wild designs;
Then take you heed of those Divines,
Who, to effect their carnal end,
For GOD and CHRIST, will much pretend:
And, that, you no way do abuse
The Flat-caps, or the Clouted-shooes.
When, they who greatest Traitors are,
With Patriots, reward shall share,
And, be with large allowance fed,
Whilst, your best servants, scarce have bread:
When doing justice, shall be thought
Ill manners; and, they men untaught,
Who are so daring, to afford
A poor man, right against a Lord;
Then, shall men purchase land, and fee,
For little price; which dear will be,
To every purchaser, unless
By piety, and righteousness,
The sale be sanctified; and you
Give both to GOD, and men, their due.
When your Reformers, shall begin
To out-doe those men in their sin,
Whom to reform they did pretend;
And, like sour ale in summer, mend:
When, they the Rule shall misapply;
And give by deeds, their words the lie;
Till, that, be mentioned with scorn,
Which is your praise, and saving-horne,
Then, Jehu's temper will undo you,
Unless you can invite unto you
Eliah's spirit duplifi'd
On some Elisha, to provide
A speedy cure, for that disease,
Which on your Vitall-parts will seize.
When, men and women blushlesse grow
In filthiness; and act it so,
As if, a Stallion to be known,
A Princely quality were grown;
Or, when your Ladies do appear
(As if old heathenish Rome were here)
By Coachfulls, with a brazen face,
To see men run a naked-race:
And, when sin to a rankness springs,
Beyond the reach of libellings;
And, libellings so common be,
That none shall from their dirt be free,
Though never so innocent (but those
Whom no man hates, envies, or knows)
Then, look for that which will ensue
Such impudence; if God be true.
When, men shall gen'rally confess
Their folly, and their wickedness;
Yet, act, as if there neither were
Among them, conscience, wit, or fear:
When, they shall talk as if they had
Some brains; yet, do, as they were mad;
And, nor by reason, nor by noise,
By humane, or by heav'nly-voice,
By being praised, or reproved,
By judgments, or by mercies moved:
Then, look for so much sword, and fire,
As such a temper does require.
When, in this Isle, you shall behold,
What Is termed, the Devils ring of gold,
To be in use; and, then, shall see,
Both, pawned, and, forfeited, to be,
The richest-Jewell of the State;
Take order, therefore, ere too late,
To save your credits: For, you know,
That, London is not Mexico.
Or, if it were, we plainly view,
By Genoa, what may ensue.
When, your Betrayers shall divide,
And, seem of a contrary side,
That they the better may contrive
Their own Designments; or, perceive,
What is endeavored, to prevent
Those mischiefs, whereto they are bent.
Then, look about you; or, be sure,
Your safety you shall not secure:
But, when you hear it often said,
By whom, you should have been betrayed,
In what, they, false, with you have played;
And, how they gave your spoilers aid,
With such like falsehoods; and then, see,
Such common Fames, neglected be:
The accused countenanced; and, those
Traduced, and, punished, as foes,
Who, out of conscience, and, of zeal,
To save this drooping Commonweal,
Their knowledge, and, their fear declare;
Then, of a sudden blow, beware.
When, they, who, but the other day,
As low, as in the channel, lay;
And; had nor presence, wealth, not wit,
(And, scarce the meanest of them, yet)
Your most pragmatick-men become,
And, places of chief trust assume:
Your Mastives, then, shall Spaniels grow;
Your Hens, and Capons, learn to crow,
Disarme, and silence, all your Cocks;
And, men, wear petticoats, and smocks.
When you, who, at the first, begun
With honesty (and, thereby, won
Advantages) shall act, or plot
Ill means, to keep what you have got;
As, if the GOD, you seemed to serve,
Could not, as well, to you preserve,
By real virtue, what was gained,
As, give it, by a virtue feigned:
Then, you shall thrive, as did that King,
Who was or'ecome, by conquering;
Because he served false gods, whose lands
The true GOD gave into his hands:
And, you shall then, the difference know,
'Twixt being just, and seeming so.
When, Justice cuts of Hydra's heads,
And, sees arising, in their steads,
More, and more monstrous ones, then they
Whom Reformation pared away:
When Tyranny beginns to vary
The form and shape, of Arbitrarie
And willfull-rule; when, she inslaves
By mean, and despicable knaves;
When, they who 'scape the Lions-pawes,
The teeth of Wolves, and Harpies-clawes;
Shall look for safety, and for ease,
And, then, be eat by Lice and Fleas;
Or, be in pieces, rent and torn
By vermin, once, below their scorn;
Then; then, shall you begin to see
Your masked Foes; and who they be
That sought your weal: and, then, in vain
Shall wish for, what you now disdain.
Then, some, shall much persuade you to
What, none but such as they would do,
Who whet their knives, and cut their throats,
To cure a chollick, in their guts:
For, then shall they, who seek your harm,
Seek how to cut off your right-arm,
That, of your chiefest guard bereft
There may be no hand but the left
To save your heads: And, then, perchance,
You will perceive your ignorance.
For, then, new troubles will begin,
Whereby, they who have blamed bin,
Shall suffer much: But, they shall bear
Most burdens, who most guilty were;
And, many, then, who now despise
These Lines, will think them Prophecies.
Then, shall they seek, and crouch, and bow,
Who are most proud, and surely, now;
Petition long, without regard;
Make prayers, which will not be heard;
And, find as little mercy, then,
As they have shown to other men.
They, from the sword shall thither 'flie,
Where they for want of bread shall die;
Or, hoping Famine to avoid,
Be, by the Pestilence, destroyed;
Or, (that they may one sorrow shun)
Into a hundred mischieves run,
And, find no rest, till they repent
Their pride, or, meet due punishment.
Then, shall the principles that lurk
Within men's hearts begin to work,
Upon their humors; and, purge out
Much poison, now dispersed about
Through eve'ry Member: yet, at first,
That, shall seem best, which would be worst,
And, few men be so wise to know,
What they were best resolve to do.
For, you shall in a Medium stand,
'Twixt Aegyt, and the Holy Land,
As in suspense, whether to make
A progress thither, or turn back
To your old servitude, or worse:
And, that will seem the safest course,
Unless the Masters of your School
Shall take the counsel of a Fool;
And be directed and advised
To act the thing they have despised.
Which if they do; your foes shall be
Your friends; and both be safe and free
From what is feared; and, live together
A mutual strength to one another;
Whose factions, if they long endure,
Will prove a plague, without a cure.
But, mark (oh City!) mark this well;
(Thou, who do all this Realm excel,
In sin, and virtue) That, when thou
Shall see thy Trustees partial grow
In doing Justice; with respect
Of persons; and, with high neglect
Of truth and judgment: Then, unless
The mercy and the righteousness
Which thou pretendest, shall increase
To fortify thee in that peace
Thou yet enjoy'st; and, teach thine eyes.
To see, wherein thy safety lies:
Thou, wilt but treasure up thy store,
To make thee miserably poor;
Grow, by a new-Militia strong,
To ruin thine own strength, e're long;
Draw, day by day, occasions hither,
Of discords, and of plagues together;
Till all the plagues, through Britain spread,
In thee, be gathered to a head;
And, break upon thee, in conclusion,
To thy dishonor, and confusion.
E're long the welfare, of this Land,
Upon a ticklish point will stand;
And, at that time, if you perceive
The Body representative,
Act by two Factions; and, admit
Their Grandees, to invassall it
To their designs; and captivate
Their equals: you, shall after that
Find little comfort, till you see
Extracted a third Party be
From out of those, to search into
Their actions, and with courage do
As they find cause: But, then, you shall
Perceive a turn will joy you all.
And to draw nearer to the But,
At which, all these our shafts are shot,
When, those two Diamonds of this Land,
Which are the basis, whereon stand
The publike-welfare, polish shall
Each other; and, quite rub off all
The rotten pieces, rags, and flawes,
Which disesteem upon them draws;
And, perfect make, in every thing,
Our ancient threefold Gimell-ring,
That Is lately broke; Then, you shall see
A change, that worth your praise will be:
And, he that gives you stones to crack,
(Which cause, perhaps, your hearts to ache)
Will, when that blessed season comes,
Give you a dish of sugar-plumbs.
But, know, that while this Emperie
Neglects her Triple-Trinitie;
To wit, three Realms, beneath one Throne;
Within each Realm, three States in one.
And, GODHEAD one, in Persons three,
You shall not without troubles be:
Or, possibly attain to that
Which your well-willer aims at,
Till, you shall, purely, God adore;
And to the common use, restore
At least the Essentials of that power
Which makes your Earthly-saving-Tower.
Which much the stronger, might be made
And fairer too, if you could add
To strengthen and adorn the same,
Some parts of the Venetian Frame.
And, know; that, when a Declaration,
As public, as a Proclamation,
Shall offer to consideration,
The many failings of this Nation;
If, then, you seek not preservation,
By prayer, and humiliation,
And, by a serious Recantation;
GOD, threatens sudden desolation.
Now, much good do it you; And, yet, stay:
Before I send you quite away,
Take these blanched Almonds without shells,
(Whereto are added nothing else
But, some few kernells in there stones)
For, though they seem but bitter ones,
Yet, if you taste them, we believe
They Will prove a good preservative.
First, chaw on this; that, you in vain,
Seek, here a blessed peace to gain,
Till justice, and till mercy, more
Advanced be, then heretofore;
And, till you shall have more regard
To punishment, and to reward.
Next, know, as vainly yoy presume
Informed, rightly, to become
In things of faith, whilst you depart
From what is written in the heart;
And, act contrary to the natures,
And Laws, of reasonable creatures:
For, how shall they who cannot learn
Things moral, things divine discern?
Next, be informed; even you, who had
The righteoust cause; that, you have made.
Defaults enough, to let all see
The best had need forgiven be:
And, let that make your hearts inclined.
To pardon all, in whom you find.
That penitence which does intend
Crimes past, sincerely to amend:
Yea, if ye mean, in peace, to live,
Let all strive, who shall most forgive;
That by so doing, all may move
Each other, to a mutuall-love;
Which grace, they only are denied,
Who could be true to neither side.
And, lastly, let no more despights
Unto your Fundamentall-rights,
And, Constitutions, now, be done:
For, if the Ground-works, be overthrown,
What, can the wise, or just man do?
What to sustain it, add thereto?
Or, what will council be, but wind,
To them, whose ruin is designed?
Some, little hope is left: And, yet,
Lest no effect, our words beget,
That, then, the times to come, may know
A Messenger was sent to show
What would befall this age, before
It came to pass. This one pearl more,
Is cast before you, (without fear
Of such, as would in pieces tear)
Observe it well, O Generation,
Regardlesse of thy visitation.
When, you have had hard work to do,
And, added five, to forty two;
You shall perceive a good Play spoiled,
And, by unworthy Actors, foiled;
The Scoenes transposed, the Acts confused;
The Poet shamefully abused:
The first intention of the Plot,
By those confusions, quite forgot:
Yea, them, to Tragick-Acts designed,
Who entered with a Comick-mind;
And, then, what now our eye fore-sees,
(Like him, who saw men walk, like trees)
Shall be discovered, by that light,
Which, never does deceive the sight.
Then, they who mark it, shall perceive
Your Politicians, will contrive
Their own indemnity, whilst they
Pretend for yours; that, so, they may
Secure themselves, from answering that,
Whereby, they have abused the State:
And, then (unless you can prevent
The fraudfulnesse of that intent)
They, who did most their wealth increase,
By cheating you, will buy their peace;
And, sell your Freedoms, unto those,
With whom, they do design to close.
Then, will such Juggling-tricks be played,
That, publike-debts will nere be paid,
As long, as either fool, or knave,
Shall have the power to give, or crave;
Or, they enjoy a Trustees place,
Who have put on a Janus-face.
Then, most men, plainly shall behold,
What, few believed, though foretold.
The noblest parts, worst played shall be,
Till, men their errors come to fee;
Good-action, shall be much mistook;
Ill-meanings, will be fairly spoke;
Some, for ill-doing, shall have meeds;
Some, shall have blame for lawful deeds.
Some, personating double parts,
With double tongues, and double hearts,
Shall, from one side, to to'ther run,
Till they are scorned of every one.
Fools, Clownes, and very dunghill things,
Shall act the parts, of Lords, and Kings,
Till, few know what to do or say;
How to command, or to obey.
Your Fountain shall be turned to puddle;
Yea, all reduced to such a huddle;
That, your Ill-willers will be glad;
Your much abused Spectators mad;
And, in their furiousness go near
The Players rags, from them to tear;
Or, pull the Stage, and Playhouse down;
Unless a medicine, yet, unknown,
Be soon applied: Or, on the Stage,
(To stop the peoples rising rage)
Some quick-devise, and pleasing-straine,
Be brought, to charm them down again.
With which Catastrophe, we pray,
The Tragedy, conclude you may,
And, see the Scoenes, and Acts, to come,
Less bloody, and less troublesome;
For, if Conjectures fail him not,
Who has considered well the plot,
(And, whose fore-warnings, none believes,
Till it is too late), he plain perceives
A Storm will in the South be bred
Whilst you a Northern-Tempest dread,
And conjured hither, by some Friends,
Who, seem to have much better ends
Then they pursue: And, then, unless
JUDAH, and ISRAEL shall confess
Their sins, and, reconcile, betimes;
Manasses pray, repent his crimes
Unfainedly (as David did,
When, from Jerusalem he fled)
And, with full resolution, do
What, prudence would advise him to:
The Babylonians will conspire
With Amaiek; your neighbor Tire
Shall (as a sly spectator) stand,
To take advantage underhand:
And, by those means (when peace seems near)
The troubles, which did first appear
In thirty nine, prolonged will be,
Till fifty two, and fifty three.
And, what new courses will be took,
When those years wheel about, Go look:
For, here, already, we fore-show
More, then you can deserve to know;
Till, you more lovingly shall deal
With such, as labor, for your weal;
And, their estates, and time, have spent,
Your likely ruin to prevent.
Ere, GOD, his wrath on Balaam wreaks,
First, by his Ass to him he speaks;
Then, shows him, in an Angels hand,
A sword, his courses to withstand;
But, seeing, still, he forward went,
Quite through his heart, a sword he sent;
And, GOD, will thus, if thus they do,
Still deal with Kings, and Subjects, too:
That, where his grace despised is grown,
He, by his judgments, may be known.
Fiat Voluntas Dei.

GoD eXpeCreth Our repentanCe, gIVing Express Warnings InVItIng there Unto;
haVe Early respeCt therefore, Unto sVCh Warnings, and repent not Slightly
Your offensIVe VanItIes.


