Vox Pacifica: A VOICE TENDING TO The Pacification of GOD' s wrath; and
offering those Propositions, or Conditions, by the acceptance, and performance
whereof, in some good measure, a firm and continuing Peace may be obtained. It
is directed to the KING, PARLIAMENTS, and PEOPLE of these Islands:

BY GEO. WITHER Esquire, (a Commander in this War) heretofore their unneeded
REMEBERANCER of Plagues and Deliverances past; and their timely Forewarner of
the Judgments now come. He has disposed it into six BOOKS, or CANTO's, whereof
four only are contained in this VOLUMNE; and the other deferred to be
hereafter published, as there shall be Cause.

To day, if you will hear this VOICE, harden not your hearts, etc. LONDON
Printed by Robert Austin, in the Old Bailey M DC XLV.

The meaning of the Frontispice.
A Trumpet sounds a parlee to this Isle,
And, over it, a Hand displayes, the while,
A Flag of Peace; that, this new Sign at door,
May draw you in, to view a little more.
We hung it forth, that these besotted Nations
May heed the season of their Visitations;
And, grow more careful to conform their ways
To what this VOICE, and their known Duty, says:
Though, yet, the most, our words no more have marked,
Then if a Cat had meaw'd, or Dog had barked.
You see the building; you have seen the Sign;
And, if it pleases you, may taste our Wine.
You view the Type, and Title, of the Play,
Our Argument, and where the Scoene we lay;
And, that, for which the Maker dearer paid,
May, when you please, for little be survai'd;
Even for as little as you think it worth,
When he, at that low rate, can set it forth:
And, that we offer no unwholesome Wares,
Our License, and our Privilege, declares.
Neglect not courtesies, when few are done;
Nor Opportunities, till they are gone:
Nor doubt your usage, though abroad you hear,
Our Author, in reproving, is austere:
For, they who bring a well-composed mind,
In his most harshreproofs, will mildness find:
And, none have been his Adversaries, yet,
But, they, who wanted honesty, or wit.
When his own failings have to him appeared,
Himself no more then others he has spared;
And, did, what, he supposes, him became.
Let every Reader strive to do the same,
And shortly, here, in substance will be seen,
What, in this Emblem, has but shadowed been
map of the British Isles VOX PACIFICA
PAX VOBIS



TO THE KING, PARLIAMENTS, AND PEOPLE, OF These BRITISH ISLES.
NOt to petition King, or Parliament,
Or Court the People, suits with his intent
Who sends you this: Nor, is it come to crave
Your Favors, or, your Patronage to have.
It is almost too late; and 'twas too soon:
At this time, therefore, he expects that boon
From One who better knows him; and from whom
This VOICE, does to your sight, and hearing come.
And, had he always done so, he had lost
Less labor; and escaped with less cost.
He has no mind to flatter: if he had,
To flatter at this time, were to be mad;
And, perad venture, also, he has, now,
As little cause, as mind, to flatter you:
For, Courtship on that LADY, who bestows,
That poor, despised, deformed and aged grows,
Who slighted him, and left him to despair
When she was wealthy, lovely, young, and fair.
Yet, that those old affections may appear,
With which, by him, you always served were;
And, that he may not give a just offense
(By seeming careless of the reverence
Belonging to your Greatness) he professes,
That, merely, for the sake of these Expresses,
The freedom of bold-language he assumes;
And, that he nothing, for himself, presumes:
Nor, means to honor, love, or serve you, less,
For your unkindnesses, or your distress.
The News he brings, accepted if it be,
Will warrantize the Speaker to be free:
And, if it be despised, he conceives,
Some will grow bold, ere long, without your leaves;
And, make you hear, with ruder complements,
A blunter Language, and to worse intents:
For, dreadful things are murmured; and unless
Men more conform, to that which they profess,
You Will find, ere long, he dares, without fear,
To speak more truth, then many dare to hear.
What ever He, what e're his Language seems;
Your Persons, none more values, or esteems.
None loves your Honors, or your safeties, more
Then he yet does, and has done heretofore.
None, oft'ner his own blame has ventured on,
That others might not wholly be undone;
Or, is more free from aims, at that which tends
To personal respects, or private ends.
And, thus professes he, that you might grow
More honorable, by believing so.
He, that has done GOD'S errand, was, ere now,
Reputed a 2 King, 9.11.
Mad-fellow: Some, of you,
Have so been pleased, perhaps, of him to say,
Because he has appeared in such a way,
As, never, since the Christian-paths, were trod,
Was traced, by a Messenger from GOD.
But, times have been; and, this is such a time,
In which the People, much regard not them
Who speak in Ordinary: And, then must
Some Ploughman, or some Herdman, forth be thrust
To help awake them; and, He, perad venture,
With Riddles, Signs, or Parables, must enter;
Or, else, by some unusual strains proceed,
To make his Hearers give the better heed;
And, know, the Spirit stoupeth from on high,
Sometime, even with a vulgar 2 King. 3.15.
Minstralfie.
Be pleased, therefore, not to under-prize
Him, or his Present; lest (when his disguise
Is taken off) you find him somewhat else
Then you have thought, or his appearance tells.
Permit you not the crafty Politicians
In either Faction, to beget suspicions,
That, he, who wrote this VOICE, has some Intents,
For compassing whereof, he, now, invents
A Fancy, and pretends the publike-Peace,
When, really, he aims at nothing less.
For, that his purposes, no other were
Then he professes, plainly shall appear
To men of ingenuity, or wit,
Who weigh things past, with what he, now, has writ.
For, whosoever has observation took,
With what impartiall-freedome he has spoke
To either side, (nor sparing Friend, nor Foe;
Nor caring, who displeased, or pleased shall grow)
Can never draw that false conclusion thence,
Without much folly, or much impudence.
Yea, since it is apparent, that his Pen
Has spared himself, no more then other men;
Since he has, now, nigh five and thirty years,
This Freedom used; and naught, yet, appears
To be, thereby, acquired, but sad events,
Disgraces, losses, close imprisonments,
Despights and mischiefs; how can you suppose
His folly such, that, now, the world worse grows,
He thinks, this course will him advantage more,
Or, bring him fewer mischiefs, then before?
He knows, there is the selfsame basen^sse, yet,
The same corruption, the same little wit,
And malice, which in former times was here;
Though, now, in other habits they appear,
And act another way. He knows, what then
Best pleased; and, what will, now: yet, takes again
The selfsame Course: Because, he knows from whom
His messages, and warranties do come:
And, that it shall be more his reputation,
To be undone, by such a Generation,
For doing of his Duty; then, thereby,
To be advanced for furth'ring vanity,
Till he and they into perdition fall,
Like Sheep, or Bullocks, slaught'red in their stall.
This, has so steeled him, that he can abide
To hear a foolish-Gallant him deride,
And (taking up his Poem) grin, and say;
Come, let us hear what novelties we may
Collect from this New-Prophet? and behold,
What future things, are here, by him, foretold?
This, makes him bold, and resolute, for you;
Who, for himself, does bashfully pursue
The meanest favor, while you seem to see
Another, who thereof may worthier be.
And, therefore, now, this one time him regard,
For your own sakes, though never afterward.
Be wary, that this VOICE you truly heed,
Before to any censure, you proceed,
Condemning it, or him, by whom it came;
Lest your, your selves, incur the greatest blame:
And, thereupon, this also, may ensue;
That, thousands for that censure, censure you,
When they perceive, that you a course have run,
Whereby, you are dishonored, and undone.
And, to this end; of those, who cause have bin
Of all your present Plagues, and of that sin,
Which brought them on you (that two-horned-Beast)
Beware of: yea, be wary that no Priest,
Of either side, make void what this VOICE tells,
By their prejudicating it: Or else,
By shows of Learning, or feigned Holiness,
Make you believe, that this way to express
Divine concernments: Or, for Saints, to use
The Muses language, some way does abuse
Their Sanctity: Or, that this way of Preaching,
Is Heathenish, and a Pagan-straine of teaching.
For, though most Poets were, long time ago,
(And yet are) Priests of Lust, and Drunkenness,
They, from their first beginning, were not so;
But, men inspired divinely, to express
The will of GOD; and, by their holy Songs,
To rouse up that affection in the heart,
Which to the Love of Piety belongs;
And, to incline it to the better-part.
At this our Author aims; and, to restore
That Gift, to what it has been heretofore,
His Muses consecrates: and, shows the way,
That, others (if it please them) follow may.
Permit not then, the rigidnesse of those,
Who think Divinity confined to prose;
And, Verse ordained, at first, for nothing else
But, carnal fancies, foolish charms, and spells:
Oh! suffer none of those (who have beside
Their ignorance, much envy, and much pride)
Your judgments to pervert, divert your eyes,
Or, fill your ears, with vanities and lies,
To keep off your attention, from this VOICE,
By juggling with Formalities, and noise;
Both to the prolongation of your woe,
And, loss of good effects which thence may flow.
For, if this VOICE be welcome to your ear,
The blessed way of Peace, it shall prepare:
And by the Charmings of this new-tun'd Song
The rage of War, shall be allaid e're long.
That wicked Spirit shall be charmed down,
By whom, the seeds of discords, have been sown:
The Hags and Furies, that have danced here,
No longer, to affright you, shall appear:
But, all the sacred virtues, and the graces,
Shall beautify your Desolated-places.
If you contemn this VOICE, what e're you deem,
Of that it speaks, (or, what e're he seem,
Who now proclaims it) GOD shall spread the same,
In spite of all detractions, to your shame,
And to the honor of that Instrument,
By whom it comes: yea, as a Monument,
Even you, (and yours, who slight it) shall preserve it
From being lost; your closets shall reserve it,
To bear a Testimonial of your crimes,
And your impenitence, to future times:
Or, for a warning, to some age to come;
Or, to exalt GODS Justice in your doom:
The least of which, will yield a rich return
For all his pains, though you his labor scorn.
Should you despise these counsels, it will show
So plainly, those events which must ensue,
That, he shall neither value those respects
The world affords, nor care for her neglects:
But (your sad doomes bewailing) shall desire,
That, he and his, may speedily retire
To that safe resting place, wherein are found
Sure shelters, from those plagues, that will abound:
And, where he never more shall feel, or hear
The scorns of pride, the rage of malice fear:
Or, labor, as he has done, heretofore,
To make a White-man of a Blackamoore.
But, yet he hopes; and yet, a while expects
Some other, and more suitable effects,
To his desires: which (if they should succeed
Accordingly, will bring him, or, his seed,
To see (forth of these Fires) that Phanix rise,
Which, is the chief desire, of all their eyes,
Who love Jerusalem. And, with this hope,
His heart, he comforting, here, makes a stop;
And signifies, that, He, who does prefer
This VOICE, is your despised REMEMBRANCER.
GEO. WITHER.

A Postscript.
BE pleased to know, that, though our Author gives,
In these four Canto's, fretting Corosives,
He takes no contentment in your smart;
But, studies to perform that Leaches part,
Who, rather, seeks his patients life to save,
Then, how to flatter him into his grave.
If you (with patience) let this Plaster lie,
The next that he intends to apply,
Shall be a Balsome, which will cure and ease;
And (if you be not very hard to please)
Give proof (what ever, knaves and fools pretend)
Why, every honest man, should be his friend.
The Contents of the several Canto's contained in this Volumne
The Contents of the first Canto.

First, here is to your view preferred
When, where, and how this VOICE was heard:
What kind of Muzings, were the ground:
What worlds, and wonders, may be found
Within our selves: what safe-Retreats
From those oppressions, frands, and baits
Which are without: how little fear
Of Terrors, which affright us here:
How plainly, there, a man may see
The villainies, that acted be
For private ends, with public shows.
How general the mischief grows:
Why, to acquaint you with this VOICE,
GOD, by so mean a man, makes choice:
Then, shows how our grand-hopes deceive us,
And, prays his aid, that must relieve us.
The Contents of the second Canto.

This Canto's Preface being done,
The VOICE, to these effects, goes on;
Tells, how unworthy we are, yet,
For Peace desired, how unfit:
How vain, how harmfull Treaties be,
Till both Sides, in one Third agree;
And (laying by ignoble ends)
Use likely means of being Friends.
Shows, that the Peace which most pursue,
Will be nor permanent, nor true.
Then, that some Cures may be applied,
Declares, which Parts are putrifi'd;
Which, must be purged, without delay;
Or, cauteriz'd, or cut away,
If we will, e're it be too late,
Recure this weak, this dying State.
The Contents of the third Canto.

Here, whether you be pleased, or no,
This Author, makes bold to show
That Portion of his private wrongs,
Whose knowledge, and redress, belongs
To Public Justice; that, her eye
May through his wounds, her own epsy.
The VOCE, then speaks again, and schools,
In Him, all other froward-Fooles,
Who, with impati^ncie do vent
Their private wrongs, or discontent:
As if their Trifles could be heard,
When Kingdoms cannot ^^nd^ regard.
It shewe^, our Senate blamplesse are,
Of those Distractions, raging here;
And, where the Fault, and Fountatine lies,
From whence, our present plagues arise.
The Contents of the fourth Canto.

While here, our Author does recite
His Muzings after Naesby fight,
The VOICE returns; and, does begin
To show us, what must usher in
Exiled Peace. Then, told are we,
How kept our Vows, and Covenants be:
How we reform, and fast, and pray:
What Thankfulness we do repay:
What, must in general be done;
What, by each Individuall-One:
What course both King and State must take,
E're they their Peace with GOD shall make:
What he expects, from every Nation,
From every Town, and Corporation,
And every House, in some degree,
Before our Peace renewed will be.
These faults are discovered in the printing, which the Reader is desired to
mend with his pen, and to pardon such other as are over-seene.

Page 3. line 30. read rectify. page 15. lin. 9. read tezed. p. 18. l. 8. read
ye. p. 41. l. 4. read in. p. 50. l. 16. read clean. p. 52. l. 1. r. Treatings.
p. 57. l. 23. r. ye. p. 105. l. 36. r. this war. p. 123. l. 36. r. fore-show.
p. 128. l. 24. r. you. l. 25. r. your sorrow. p. 130. l. 28. r. inward. p. 142.
l. 29. r. winning. p. 144. l. 12. r. Our losses by the Sword werepossesse. p.
145. l. 27. r. invokes. p. 155. l. 3. r. oppressions. p. 159. l. 19. r. though.
ibid. l. 28. r. Christian-libertie.

VOX PACIFICA: OR, A VOICE preparing the way of PEACE:
AND, To that end, dedicated to the KING, Parliaments and People of these
British Isles.
The Contents, of the first Canto.

First, here is to your view preferred
When, where, and how this VOICE was heard:
What kind of Muzings were the ground:
What worlds, and wonders, may be found
Within our selves: what safe-Retreats
From those oppressions, frauds, and baits.
Which are without: how little fear
Of Terrors, which affright us here:
How plainly, there, a man may see
The villainies, that acted be
For private ends, with public shows:
How general the mischief grows:
Why, to acquaint you with this VOICE,
GOD by so mean a man makes choice:
Then, shows how our grand-hopes deceive us,
And, prays his aid, that must relieve us.
I Who (before my Harp was tuned or strung)
Began to play a descant on the Times.
And was among the first of those that sung
The scorn and shame of VICE, in English Rymes.
(...), that have, now, just half the Age of Man,
Been slashing at those Hydro's heads of sin,
Which are, yet, more then when I first began;
And more deformed grown, then they have bin.
I, that have spoke of Truth, till few believe it;
Of taking heed, till Folly has her doom;
Of Good-advice, till no man will receive it;
And, of Deserved-Plagues, till they are come:
Once more appear, with an intent, to say
A needful Word in season, if I may.
The Sun has run his course through all the Signs,
And, thirteen times the Moon renewed her light,
Since last I limbed my thoughts in measured lines,
Or, felt my heart for Numbers tuned aright;
For, ever since my Musings in the Pield,
The close whereof, a Voice of PEACE fore-tells,
With such disord'red thoughts I have been filled
As use to thrive where sad distemper dwells:
And, we have, All, so broken that Condition,
On which our wished Comforts founded are,
That, of accomplishing our hopes fruition,
Not many certain symptoms, yet, appear;
Though, therefore, I have silent been till now,
My slownesse blame not, neither murmr you.
The Muses are not still at my command,
Whereby those Informations are acquired,
Which many have expected at my hand;
(And somewhat out of season too, desired.)
The VOICE, there mentioned, was but a Sound,
Not then, articulated into words;
The perfect Form thereof I had not found,
Nor what interpretation it affords.
If I had spoken, e're I had mine Arrant,
Beyond my wit, my forward tongue had went;
If I had run, before I had my Warrant,
Well might I, for my labor, have been shent.
There is, for all things an appointed hour;
And, Times, and Seasons, are not in my power.
My Vessel stirs not, till that Wind blows
Which never blows but when, and where it list:
Dry is my Cisterne, till that Fountain flows,
Whose flowings-forth, I cannot then resist.
Sometimes, in me, so low the Waters lie,
That every Child and Beast is trampling on me;
Sometime again, they rise, they swell so high,
That Princes cannot make a Bridge upon me.
Had King, and Parliament, the other day,
Commanded from me that which now I write,
To save my life, I knew not what to say
Of that, which was inspired yesternight:
And, being, now, as full as I can hold,
Though none they please, my Musings must be told.
Mistake not tho, as if it should be thought,
That by Enthusiasme, now, I write;
Or, that the matter which to me is brought,
By GODS immediate dictates, I indite.
Far is that Arrogancy from my Pen:
The Objects of my Contemplation, be
The same which GOD affords to other men,
The Muses challenge a peculiar phrase
And freedoms, not so well becoming those,
Who are confined to observe the laws
Of common speech, and tell their minds in prose:
For, whereas these have but one work to do,
I have, in my Intentions, often two.
To reason out a Truth, is their perfection;
That, so, men's judgments terrify they might:
Thereat, I aim: But, how to move Affection,
And set the motions of the Will aright,
Is my chief work: And; to that end, I catch
At all advantages of Place and Time,
Of Actions, or Expressions; and, I watch
For every means of well improving them.
By which endeavors (and, for ought I know,
By some aid, more then ordinary too)
Mixed with mine own Conjectures, I fore-show
Some things, which GOD requires, or means to do.
And, when I apprehend such things as these,
They neither are conceall'd, nor told with ease.
As when a portion of new spritly-wine,
Is in a close, and crazie Vessel pent,
Which neither can sufficiently confine
The working Liquour, nor well give it vent;
Even so I fared: For, (though I felt my breast
With matter fully stored) seven days I strove
My swelling Thoughts, in Words, to have expressed,
Yet neither could desist, nor forward move.
But, on that night in which our Monethly-Fast
Had swallowed up our greatest Festival,
My Muse broke loose: And, now the stop is past,
Will run her Course, what ever may befall;
And (since to speak her mind she has begun)
Resolves, She will be heard, e're She has done.
Once more therefore, ye BRITAINS lend an ear;
KING, PRIEST, and PEOPLE mark what now I say,
And, if you shall be pleased this VOICE to hear,
Take heed, you harden not your hearts to day.
For, if your pride, and folly, shall despise
The gentle VOICE, that now salutes your ear,
Ere long, there shall another VOICE arise,
Which will not such a peaceful note prefer.
It shall not move with so becalmed a Breath,
Nor be dilated through so mild an air,
But, from the womb of Hell, and Jaws of Death,
Be thund'red forth, with horrors and despair:
And, few shall hear that VOICES dreadful sound,
Without a smarting, and a curelesse wound.
Though you my former Warnings did abuse,
It brooks excuse: Because, I so foretold
Ensuing things, as yet, no Moderne-Muse
Has done the like; and few in times of old:
But, now, by seeing those Predictions true,
You, as it were, an Earnest have received,
And an assurance, tendered unto you,
That, what is here declared, may be believed.
By virtue, therefore, of that Seal, and Sign,
I challenge that belief, and that respect,
Which appertains to this VOICE of mine,
Till, thence, I seek to draw some ill effect;
By making that, which has fulfilled bin,
An Argument to warrantize a sin.
If an advantage I shall take from thence,
To tempt, from any duty to be done;
To act, what gives the Deity offense,
Or any unbeseeming Course to run;
Let me be censured as Impostors ought,
That woo the world, by seeking Heaven in show:
Or as a man that is by delusion taught,
To take more pains for Hell, then others do.
But, if this VOICE, by Truth shall stand approved,
And by your Consciences allowed be;
Resist not that, whereto you shall be moved,
Nor of my Hopes, at this time, hinder me:
For, in their prosecution, I Will proceed,
How e're you practice, or how ere I speed.
The twentieth year, tenth month, and sixteenth day,
With careful thoughts, and thoughtfull heart oppressed,
Near to the fruitful Banks of Them I lay,
With waking eyes, whilst others were at rest,
It was that day, on which they mournd apart,
By whom this Realm has represented bin;
(Thereby, instructing every Single-heart,
Which way, the Peace desired, must begin)
With private griefs, I had enough to do,
To rob my body, and my mind of rest:
Yet, I had many public sorrows, too,
By which, my other sufferings were increast:
And, who was ever unafflicted known,
That bears others burdens with his own?
Were I but only robbed of my estate,
And, thereby brought in danger to be poor;
Or of such other mischiefs, as of late
These wars have brought on me, and many more:
Could I no other miseries conceive,
Then those, which make our carcasses to smart,
Our children cry, our tender women grieve,
Or try the stoutnesse of a manly heart:
Were but the outward glories of this Realm,
Or of this Church, endangered, and no more;
Our wounds had needed but a common balm,
A sigh or two had blown my sorrows ore:
Because, for shells, but little care I take,
Save only for the precious kernel sake.
But, though the happiness of Realms and Men,
Does not, alone, in outward things consist;
(Nay, rather gains perfection, now and then,
By having some external blessing mist)
Yet, he to his experience little owes,
Who sees not, that defect of needful things,
Breeds incivility; and overthrowes
That industry, from whence well-being springs.
And, he to our condition is a stranger,
Who knows not, that, by these distractions here,
Reformed-Churches are (this day) in danger
To suffer, in our sufferings, every where:
And, that, if our confusions we pursue,
Mere Barbarifme will (ere long) ensue.
Who, can behold the spirit of contention
Still active; and, all overtures of Peace
Retarded still; or, poisoned with dissension,
Yet not bewail our miseries increase?
Or, who laments not? that may fear he carries
Within his loins, the seed of Generations,
That may be bred for Romish-Janisaries:
And, nursed up in their abominations?
For, though GOD may prevent what we may dread,
(And will perhaps) yet none should senseless grow
Of that wherewith our Land is overspread;
Nor of those Plagues, which these may bring us to:
But, rather, labor for, by sighs, and tears
A public Freedom from our private Fears.
For, who now dreads not, that upon this Age,
Worse Plagnes are coming, then as yet, we view?
And, that the things we suffer, do presage
Far greater mischieves, will on those ensue?
Lo, that great Festival, which by this Nation,
Was every year observed, upon this week,
With such magnificent solemnization,
That through the world, there has not been the like:
That Festival, which memoriz'd the birth
Of our great Pastor, and (for no small while)
Did fill each Temple, and each house with mirth,
Through every Shire, and Village, of this Isle:
That Feast into a Fast, our sins now turn;
And, where we have triumphed, we now mourn.
The Feast of Ashuerus, was to this
A petty banquet (if considered
In every circumstance) though great was his,
And many people for a long time fed.
The Jewish Passover, which did surpass
The most for some respects; in all of them,
By out great Festival, exceeded was,
As well in Plenties, as in Place, and Time.
For, therein, all Provisions did abound:
It was throughout all places, too, extended;
With some, it ent'rance in November, found;
And not till February, fully ended;
But, universally, twelve days, at least,
Throughout the Land, it was a yearly Feast,
That Festival, (which till it was polluted
With Bacchanalian Rites, and Superstition,
A pious Observation was reputed)
Is now exploded, as a vain Tradition.
Our Triumph-day, by Providence, is come
To be the day of our humiliations.
The Glory, now, is quite departed from
This Kingdom, for our great abominations.
The pleasant things, in which we were delighted,
Are took away. The costly trimmings, which
To Superstition, Ignorance invited,
And which began to cozen, and bewitch,
Are broken down; Our brave rich-Robes are gone,
And, all of us, have Mourning-Garments on.
For our abuse of them, GOD, takes away
The chief of our Melodious-Instruments;
And, they who heretofore did sing and play,
Now, sadly sigh; or, howl forth discontents.
Our Lutes and Violls, (which were wont to sound
Eare-charming strains) are broke and thrown aside:
Or, by the noise of Drums and Cannons drowned,
In whose loud thundrings, terror does reside.
The Peace, which we supposed everlasting,
Is fled away: Our Jubilees are ended:
Our Horn of plenty, every day is wasting,
Our Foes are strong, and we are ill befriended:
Our fruitless hopes, have utterly undone us;
The things we feared, are now come upon us.
Our many great and unrepented crimes,
The Plagues that Sin has multiplied here;
The wilfulness and madness of the times,
So represented to my fancy were,
That, through this Island, I (me thought) could see
No Work secured from being overthrown;
No act, or counsel, from confusion free;
No place, that was not metamorphos'd grown:
No man, almost, that had not changed his mind;
No principle, that was not called in doubt;
No course, in which we might a safety find;
No virtue, in all trials, holding out;
Nor any hope of being freed from
Our present evils, for the time to come.
That Cloud of Plagues, which filled in Embleme-Wise,
The Title Page, of my REMEMBRANCER,
(To set before this heedlesse Nations eyes,
A glimpse of Judgments, then, approaching near)
That horrid-cloud, through all these Isles dispersed,
Me-thought I viewed; and showring on these Lands,
The black effects, which I long since rehearst;
And, all the Plagues attending GODS commands.
Not only Famine, Pestilence, and Sword,
With such, as bring on outward Desolations;
But, Plagues appeared also, more abhord
By those, who cherish noblest expectations:
For, though these harmfull are, more hurt they do,
Which murder us in Soul, and Body too.
I saw so great, so many our Distractions,
Such Discords, rising up between the Nations;
In every Shire, in every Town such Factions;
In every Person, such dissimulations:
Among the Wise, I found so little Reason;
So little goodness, left among the Best;
In fairest shows of Trust, such real Treason;
And so much Fraud, where Truth was most professed;
That, neither want, nor wealth; nor wit, nor Folly;
Nor Vice, nor Virtue; Love, nor Hatred, neither,
Nor sanctified things, nor things unholy
Distinguished were; but, shuffled so together,
That, all things in this world, appeared, me-thought,
Into a Soul-confounding Chaos, brought.
Which melancholy Apprehensions reared
Such crotchets, and such whimsies in my brains;
That, many sights, and sounds, I saw and heard,
Like those which Fear begets, or Fancy faines:
Before me, as a shadow seemed to pass,
Things present, past, and coming; till I saw
Quite out of sight, all that which IS, or WAS,
And, to an end things Future, also, draw.
Strange sounds and noyses, heard I round about me,
Or, in me rather; such as did begin
From those which rumbled every day without me,
Before a troubled Fancy let them in:
Which, though to be uncertain Sounds, we grant,
A Mystery, not one of them does want.
One while, me thought, Wolves, Foxes, Dogs, and Swine,
A greedy, crafty, currish, nastie rabble,
Did howl, bark, snarle and grunt; and sometime join
In consort: Music most abominable!
Sometime, as when an Angry Lion roares,
Or, as when Thunder breaks out of a cloud,
Or, as when raging Billows tear the shoares,
I Voices heard; so shrill, so deep, so loud.
I heard, me thought, the Voice of Desperation,
The crying Voice of Sin, the Voice of Blood,
The Voice of Death, and utter Desolation;
The Voice of Judgment, from an angry GOD,
And every Voice, and every Cry and Sound,
In which amazement, dread, and death is found.
Which, had it sounded to an Outward-eare,
(As, by my Understanding it was heard)
The noise, had made both dead and living, hear:
The Spheres to shake, and Earth, and Hell afeard:
The terror of it, made my Soul to fly
Beyond the limits of corporeal things:
Sometimes descending, sometimes mounting high,
To shun the din, which doubt and horror brings.
But, whatsoever way her course she stear'd,
Confused noise did every where abound;
Confused actions every where appeared;
Which caused my strong distempers to abound:
And, almost curelesse, made I my disease,
By asking of my heart, such things a these.
Why is this World (a Scene of sin and pain)
Filled full of shadows, which no substance have?
A place of time and labor spent in vain?
And where we lose our selves, a Toy to save?
From thence, where we nor smart, nor grief did feel,
We through the womb come crawling weakly hither;
Then getting strength, we scratch and fight a while;
And, through the grave, pass on, we know not whither.
If we pursue what nat'rally delights us,
And walk that course, which gives the flesh content;
Our Conscience, or some Powre-divine affrights us,
With inward fears, and threats of punishment:
And, if our selves we virtuously dispose,
The World, and all without us, are our Foes.
Disgraceful slanders, every where attend us,
Though none can, justly, any where accuse us:
They, who are most obliged to befriend us,
When we expect best usage, most abuse us,
They, who to all enormities are prone,
And make no conscience, of the foulest crimes,
(If they suspect us guilty but of One)
Mis-judge us, as off-scourings of the Times.
While for their peace, our studies we employ,
And spend our selves, to propagate their good;
They, labor our Well-doing, to destroy,
And stain their murderous weapons, with our blood,
As if those portions they regarded not,
Which were not torn, out of a brothers throat.
Since Kings, and Princes, were at first promoted,
Nor for their own, but for the Peoples sake,
Why, on their trappings, have all Ages doted?
How, did our Creatures, slaves of us, first make?
How grew mankind so mad, to flatter them
Up to that needless height, of pomp, and power,
Which makes their Arrogancies to contemn
Our Freedoms? and our Birthrights to devour?
How, are they still so fooled, as not to know
(By that which they have heard, and read, and see)
That, Tyrants always have an overthrow,
When great'st their Hopes, and their Oppressions be?
And, justly, lose their Honors, Crowns, and Lives,
By struggling for unjust Prerogatives?
Since GOD, for MAN, at first, this world did frame,
(And made it principally for the sake
Of those who serve him and adore his Name)
Why, does his Foe, possession thereof take?
How comes it, that the Serpent, and his breed,
Lords Paramount through all Earths Kingdoms are?
And, that the promised and the blessed Seed,
Enjoyes of this vast Globe, so small a share?
Yea, since the Earth is GODS, and they are His,
To whom, by free donation, it was given:
Why, is their due infringed, as it is?
And, why are they from their possessions driven,
Scorned, injured, and abused, as abject things,
Where they should honored be, as Lords and Kings?
Why is the chosen flock of Christ so few,
And, they so numerous, who them despite?
(The Pagan, the Mahumetan, the Jew,
The Papist, and the Bosome-Hypocrite.)
Since GOD made Man, for good, and not for ill,
(To be in him, and with him, ever blessed)
How did his Foe first captivate his Will?
How, of his Creature, is GOD dispossessed?
How, is he glorified, while those Fiends
Do persecute, insult, and domineere
In mischieves? and in ruining his Friends,
Who said, Their Lives and Deaths, to him are dear?
Since GOD is good, why, so prevails evil?
Since he is Almighty, how, so thrives the Devil?
Whilst these Expostulations I pursued,
A BOOK to me appeared, fairly writ;
In which, I satisfying answers viewed
To all the Questionings of Carnall-wit.
Wherewith, my Soul remained satisfide,
And drew her self from these wild Contemplations.
(Which, else perhaps, had carried her aside
From better, and from safer meditations.)
Then, from all outward Noyses, to be free,
Into my Self, I further did retire;
Even to that Closet, which is called in me,
The INNER-MAN, to seek out my Desire:
And, being there, enough I heard and saw,
To teach, to comfort, and to keep in awe.
For, then, my Heart, (which did before appear
A little, narrow, lonely, darksome Room)
Was filled with a Light, that shined so clear,
And made the same so visible become;
That (looking inwardly) I saw distensions
So boundless, in their Width, their Depth, and Height,
That, weighing well a fleshly Hearts dimensions,
It might be thought an admirable sight.
For, were you on that mountain, or high cliffe,
Whence you might farthest round about you see,
(Suppose it were the famous Tenariffe)
The Prospects, there, to those that In-ward be,
To me, no more to be compared, appears
Than that within a Nut-shell, to the Sheares.
It shows a Place (if Place we call it may)
Within the Concave of whose wondrous Orb,
The Eye of Contemplation may survay
Sights, which no Bounds, or Shadows, do disturb.
There, may be seen the means which does disclose,
Though not the Essence of Eternall-things,
So much at least, as every notion shows,
From whence, belief of their true Being springs.
There, may the Soul that hideous Downfall see,
Which leads to the brinck of Desperation:
There, may that Entrance plainly viewed be,
Which guides to a blessed Exaltation:
And, there, the Spirit, to our knowledge, brings
The Good and Ill, of all created things.
For, hitherto, I never heard of ought
In Heaven, or Earth, but I perceived it there:
Yea, many Novelties from thence are brought,
Which have no Being, any other where.
It is indeed, another WORLD within
The World without me; and I thither go,
When I to loath external things begin,
And, doubtful am, what in this World, to do.
I sometime there have entertainments had,
Like those which may in Paradise be found:
Sometime again, it is like a Chaos made,
Wherein deluding Fancies do abound.
Sometime, the Light of Heaven there seems to dwell,
And, other while, it is as dark as Hell.
Within our selves (as GOD vouchsafes his grace)
That Bliss, and that true happiness is found,
Which men seek after in that Time and Place,
Which have not much relation to this ROVND:
I being thither guided (by that Light
Which fails none) there, found out an abode
Quite out of hearing, and beyond the sight
Of those distractions, which I saw abroad.
There, found I out, a Resting place to hide me
From scorn of Fools, and from the Strife of tongues:
From their despite, who slander and deride me;
From private mischiefs, and from public wrongs;
From all the menaces, my ears have heard;
From all the perils, which my heart h^th feared.
There, I with sportive sleightings, did peruse
That, which their malice, who these times do flatter,
Have spewed forth against my blameless Muse,
In lumps of scurrill, base, and witless matter:
And, am content to let the OURS alone,
Though loud they snarle and bawle; because I find
Those Beasts are by their Masters seized on;
And, do but bark* according to their kind.
Though not their wit, their malice might, perhaps,
Deserve a Rating; and, I could have flung them
A Bone, that would have broke, or gagged their chaps;
(Or, thrown the Wild-fires of my Brain among them)
But, they in vain shall bark; in vain they rail:
To scratch the Scabs, I scorn to foul my nail.
For, I, in that Retirement, seemed no more
By such decrepit- Malice, to be hurt,
Than is a well compacted Rockie-shore,
On which, the Billows cast up Foame, and dirt.
There, shown I was, the high prerogatives,
(The privileges) of my Second-birth;
And, from what noble Root, my Soul derives
Her Pedigree, though she be clothed with earth.
And, could I still (when I from Contemplation
Return to Act) retain in me that height
Of Spirit; and the real estimation
Of that, wherein at those times, I delight*
I never more, an earthly hope should cherish,
Or, prize the honors, of the Beasts that perish.
There, on a Throne, above the world I sat,
Beholding, with disdain, Terrestrial things;
The fruitless love of Mortals, and their hate,
The Tyrannies of Subjects, and of Kings.
There, I beheld (without those perturbations,
Which vexed me abroad) how Pride and Folly
Support each other, by their combinations,
In wicked projects, and in works unholy.
There, spied I, by what secret Links and Ties,
The cursed-Counsell which deludes the King,
And, that false-pack which in our bosom lies,
Their dark Designs together closely bring:
And why so many months in vain are spent,
Their treacheries and treasons, to prevent.
There, can I sit obscured, and spy what ends
Are closely followed by the Politician;
Who, seemingly, the common-Cause befriends,
That he may ruin it, without suspicion.
There, I descrie, what avarice, what frauds,
What spite, and what hypocrisy does lurk
In many, whom the publike-Voice applauds,
As faithful men, in carrying on the Work.
Without distemper, there, I think upon
Their pride and envy, who had rather see
Three Kingdoms universally undone,
Then, wained from their wilfulness to be:
Because, I know, GODS Work will be effected,
In spite of what their madness has projected.
There, without breach of Patience, I can heed,
How impudently some have sought to seem
Of eminent desert; who are indeed
More worthy of contempt, then of esteem:
How quaintly other-some can mischief do;
And then, by policy, and frauds contrive
To purchase thanks, and pay, and favor too,
For that, which, rather, should a halter have.
Yea, there, without offense, I notice take
How zealously Malignants are befriended;
How slight account of their deserts we make,
Who have, with life, and goods, the State defended:
And, with what confidence, we still confide
On those, that will be true to neither side.
There, likewise, without wrath, I view, and hear
How senseless many, who are counted wise,
Both of advantages, and dangers are,
Which every day appear before our eyes.
How needless good Advice, by some, is thought
Till it is too late; how, to prevent a Wound
They lose a life; and, (to be thriftie thought)
How, they to save a groat, mispend a pound.
How desp'rately they sometime take a Fall,
To escape a Slip; how, other while, to save
Some Rotten-Members* they adventure all
Which we by Grace* or Natures Charters have.
All this, in my Retirements, I can see,
Yet, nothing vexes, or aff^igheth me.
For, therewithal, such means appear to show
That both the good Endeavors of our Friends,
And all the Counterminings of the Foe,
Shall work out that, at last, which GOD intends:
And, that, if we contented can become
To bear our Burdens, but a little longer,
His Grace, will render them, less troublesome,
Or make us, to sustain them, daily stronger.
Wherewith well pleased, I totally resigned
My Will to his; And, by that Resignation,
Delightful Calmes within my heart did find,
So freeing me, from former perturbation,
That, all within, and all without me, kept
Such silence, as if all the world had slept.
As at high Midnight in a Desert Vale,
Or'e-hung and bordred by a Double-Hill.
On which there blows not any whistling-gale,
Down which, there flows not any murmuring Rill,
Near which, nor Bird does sing, nor Beast does play,
Through which, no Travailer does ever pass;
By which, there grows no rusling leaf or spray,
In which, no noise of Creature ever was;
Such seemed that Calm, which, then, I did possess,
(Or deeper, if it might a deeper be)
And, that the Silence, which I now express,
May not prove empty both to You, and Me,
In this Retreat, from every other noise,
As from a far, to me there came a VOICE.
A VOICE there came; From whence, I will not say:
Judge yet, to whom I shall report the same;
For, if you mark the sense, conceive you may
As Well as I, from whom and whence it came.
So still a VOICE it was, that with mine Ear,
I heard it not; nor made it such a noise
As that, which our corporeal sense does hear;
Nor was it an articulated VOICE:
But, such a VOICE as when the Spirit brings
A Message down from GOD; and, to the heart
Does whisper those intelligible-things,
Which words do but imperfectly impart;
Or, such a VOICE, as from GODS written Word,
The Genuine sense well heeded, may afford.
And yet it spoke so plainly, and did show
Those Informations which I gained thereby,
In every Circumstance, to be so true,
That of no branch thereof, misdoubt have I.
Thus, it began. Thou Offspring of the earth,
Whom Providence designed, in this Nation
To have thy temp'rall Being; and thy Birth
In this D^gree, and in this Generation:
Suppose not, that, in any worth of thine
There could a merit, or a motive be,
Which might Eternall-Providence incline,
To cast so gracious an aspect on thee,
As to descend so low, as to thy heart,
The knowledge of his pleasure, to impart*
For, from thy Childhood, he thy thoughts has seen,
Heard all thy words, observed all thy ways;
Can tell how vain thy youthful years have been,
And, how thou have defiled thy elder-daies.
He knows thy seeming virtues imperfections;
He saw what evil secretly thou did;
And* made thee likewise feel by due corrections,
That, he beheld what from the world thou hidst.
The Folly, Fraud, and falsehood of thy heart;
The vices, and the vainness of thy tongue;
How false to others and thy self thou art,
How slow to good, how swift in doing wrong,
He truly knows; and, finds thee apt to do
No duty, but what he compells thee to.
And, he observed (though thy guilt he smothers)
That, thou to whom he better things has taught,
Art in those Crimes as deeply di'd as others,
Who on this Isle, these present Plagues have brought.
Observed he has, how fondly thou have striven
With Wordlings, in their lusts, to have a share;
Although, to thee, experiments were given,
What empty, and pernicious things they are.
Yea, with some indignation he discerned
That, madly, thou did many times partake
In provocations, whereof thou had warned
This Land (even those thou vowedst to forsake)
And, that, with greediness thou have pursud'd,
Those vanities that ought to be eschew'd.
Although thy heart informed thee, long agoo
(By an indubitable information)
That, all the services thou could bestow
Upon the Minions of this Generation,
Should nothing profit thee: Thou, nerethelesse,
(Forgetting what was counseled, and resolved)
Did fawn on some of them, in thy distress;
And had, no doubt, thereby thy self involved
Within those Nets, which at their Boords are spread;
But, that, GOD did permit them to contemn
Thy honest Muses: who a plot had laid,
Into those virtues, to have flattered them,
Which they regard not: otherwise that Course
Which nothing bettered them, had made thee worse.
When thou had, in thy Poems, vice reproved,
He searched thy heart; and saw it was not, then,
Mere love to virtue, whereby thou were moved;
Or, that thou had less guilt then other men.
Sometime, that fickle bubble, Reputation,
Sometime that hope which thy vain Fancy gives thee;
Sometime, applauses, sometimes, indignation,
Into a just reproof of sinners drives thee.
Some other by-respects, often wrought upon
Thy heart, to rouse up in thee an endeavor
In things, that seemed worthy to be done:
But, thy performances proceeded never
From that true love, and that sincere affection
Which thou did owe to Him, and his perfection.
And, for these things, their mouths wide opened be,
Who seek to turn thy glory to thy shame:
Those witless Railers are let loose on thee,
Whom, in thy Measures, thou did scorn to name.
For this, thou suffer by the sharp despights
Of open-sinners: and much more, by far,
Through those malicious, and proud Hypocrites,
Who kindled first, and still foment this war.
For this, thou (who for others could epsy
Concealed events) have often so blinded been
In matters of thine own, that what thine eye
Seemed fixed on, thy wit has over-seen;
Till, to thy mind, they through those means were brought,
By which each Fool, and every child is taught.
For this, were thou deservedly deprived
Of blessings, which thou else might have enjoyed:
And, for that cause, have worthily survived,
To see thy hopes, with other men's, destroyed.
For this, thou (with the first) have plundered bin;
For this, thou both by Friends and Foes art torn;
For this, where thou had hopes, respects to win,
Instead of honor, thou reproach have born:
For this, thy best endeavors have been crossed,
By them, whose power could else no spite have done thee;
For this, those pains, and those designs are lost,
Which otherwise had great advantage won thee;
And, but that whom GOD loves, he leaves never,
For this, rejected thou had been for ever.
Yet such is his compassion, that his love
Still seeks to reingage thee by his graces;
Beholding thee with favor from above,
In wants, in sufferings, in all times and places.
According to thy trust in him reposed,
(When thy Remembrances did first appear)
As with a wall of brass he thee enclosed,
From those who at thy Muse enraged were.
The Prelates and the Nobles, who conspired
To ruin thee, and thereto did comply,
Obtained no power to act what they desired,
Though open to their fury thou did lie;
Although some suffered, then, (for milder lines)
By Stygmatizings, Banishment, and Fines.
When thou were grasped in that Dragons paws,
Who sought thy spoil; GOD, strangely charmed his rage:
He from devouring thee restrained his Jaws,
Even while he raved, and stormed at thy presage,
Yea, whereas thou did imprecate on those,
Who should maliciously thy lines defame,
(And without penitence their Truth oppose)
A Public Mark, to brand them for the same;
Even so it came to pass: For, scarcely one
Of those Oppressers are at this day free
From having those just Censures undergone
By which, the publike-Foes, now marked be;
And, to the chief of them, this mark GOD gave,
That, He with shame, went headless to his grave.
In all the changes of this toylsome life,
He kept thee with an honest Reputation.
He, was thy comfort still, in times of grief,
In dangers, he has been thy preservation.
He saved thee from the furioust Pestilence
That ever in this Clymate did appear;
And, hitherto, has by his Providence,
Secured thee from the Sword, yet raging here.
Now, when they lack, who surfeted of late;
When Bread, with men more worthy, grows scant,
(Yea, though the Foe has spoiled thy estate)
He keeps thy family, from pinching want;
And makes thee hopeful, whatsoere betide,
That, he for thee and thine will still provide.
Moreover, when thy patience was nigh tired;
When thy estate, the world did most despise;
GOD gave thee that which most thy heart desired,
(And, of all things terrestrial, most has prized)
He, likewise, has preserved thee to behold
Those things, in thine own lifetime verifide,
Which seemed as dreams, when first by thee foretold;
Which fools did slight, and wiser men deride.
And, not thus only, was he pleased to do;
But, now, has also called thee, to prepare
The Way of Peace, and, to reveal unto
These British Isles, what those Conditions are,
Whereon, it is his pleasure to return
That Blessing to them, for which, yet they mourn.
It is not for thy sake, that, now, his eyes
He fixes, not on persons eminent;
Or, has not chosen one more learned and wise,
By whom, this weighty Message might be sent:
But, rather, to abase and vex their pride
Who carnal Pomp, and outward shows adore,
(Vouchsafing scarce to turn their eye aside,
To heed the suits, or counsels of the poor)
And, that (to humble them) they may be feign
Perforce, to hear, and to accept from him,
(Whose gifts and person, most of them disdain)
The Way of Peace, which he shall offer them;
Or else, through pride, grow hardened in that sin,
Which brings Desolation faster in.
This is the Course, which Providence has took
When self-conceit, and sin, befooleth Nations;
And Carnal policy, does overlook
The lowly means, of timely preservations.
Thus, that the Jewish-pride he down might bring,
When they the pomp of heathenish-Kings affected,
He made, one Seeking-Asses, their first King;
And, them unto a Shepherd, next, subjected.
When their proud Pharisees, and Priests, believed,
That He, who came the Kingdom to restore,
Should from their power and wisdom have received
Chief aid thereto; he raised it by the poor.
From their formalities, his eyes he turned,
And chose the meek-ones, whom their pride had scorned.
And, GOD thus deals still, when he intends
To purge a People, and refine a State;
Making one motion, move to several ends,
As it to sundry Objects may relate.
Who should have thought, that saw a while ago
The Prelacie in pomp (advancing through
This potent Isle) it should be baffled so
In height of all it pride, at Edenborough?
Who could have then supposed, that a Stool,
Flung by a silly woman, in her zeal,
(When policy did labor to befoole
Your brethren, and the Dragons wound to heal)
Should have, in thousands, kindled such a flame
Of zeal, as from that mean occasion came?
Who would have thought the late despised Scot,
(A Nation, whom your elders dis-esteem'd,
A Nation, whom your Fathers loved not,
And, of whose friendship, careless you have seemed)
Should first have roused, a passage to have broke
Through that Attempt; which, will (if unrepented
And wilful sins obstruct not) break that yoke
Which Heresy and Tyranny invented?
Who would have been persuaded, but erewhile,
The Scot should faithfully for you have kept
Your nigh-lost footing in the Irish I Will?
And, while the Flame into their borders crept,
Should, brother-like, contribute their chief powers,
To quench the Burnings, which your Towns devours?
Or, who would have believed (having heard
The scandals, and malignant jealousies,
Wherewith some do their love, yet, mis-reward)
That Scotland should for Englands aid arise,
And in their marches through your fruitful lands,
More conscience make, than you your selves have shown,
Of laying violent, and griping hands,
On them, whose wounds and losses are your own?
But, GOD is pleased these things should come to pass,
To humble and abase that high conceit,
Which falsely of your selves admitted was;
And, that both you and they might have a sight
Of his great Providence, in so proceeding;
And, Good, and Bad, confess it merits heeding.
For, by this course, he does effect his will
Within them, by them, and upon them too.
Both Friends and Foes, all actions good or ill,
Promote the work which he intends to do.
They, who, long time, have wilfully persisted
In crooked paths, from which they called have bin,
And, in those Calls, the Spirits Voice resisted,
(Or carelessly proceeded in their sin)
Shall (blind with malice, and obdur'd with pride)
Slight all the counsels, tendered now by thee:
The Tenor of this VOICE, they shall deride,
And, madly, stubborn in their Courses be,
Till on their heads, those judgments down shall come,
Which are an unrepentant Sinners doom.
And, when with plagues deserved they are stung,
(In stead of Penitence, or filial awe)
As does a Dog at whom a stone is flung,
So they shall snarle, and so the weapon gnaw.
Or, rather, as it was foretold of those,
For whom, GOD, his fifth Violl should prepare,
The greater, still, their fear or torment grows,
The less to be reformed will those men care.
They (to the Throne and Kingdom of the BEAST
True Vassals being) will GODS name blaspheme;
Or, else be stupefied, at the least,
When GOD with stripes, or counsels visits them.
To these, this VOICE, will no good Omen sing;
To these, no Peace, no Comfort, will it bring.
But, they who by their chastisements for sin,
Are humbled so, so schooled, and made so meek,
As to admit that true repentance in,
Which makes them gladly, Truth, and Mercy seek,
Even they shall from this VOICE, receive content;
And not disdain the Wine of consolation,
Though in an earthen Vessel it be sent;
But, take it with a thankful acceptance.
And, if of these, that number found shall be,
For which, three wicked Kingdoms may be spared,
You shall from Rulne, once again be free;
To show the World, that, what few now regard,
Prevents more mischief, and more safety brings,
Than potent Armies, Parlaments, and Kings.
For, Kings, and Parlaments, and Armies, too,
When crying sins in any Realm abound,
Advantage not, so much as they undo;
As, by a late experience, you have found.
A King you had, who was, at first, conceived,
To pity, and to piety inclined;
(Such, he was really of thee believed)
Yet, of those Virtues, now, small signs you find.
The Cup and Fornications of the WHORE,
Do seem to have bewitched his royal breast:
With bloody sins, his Realms are flowed over,
(Defiled with crimes, that cannot be expressed)
And, more in danger to be quite undone,
Than, ever since, a King first filled this Throne.
He takes a Course, which if pursued, will do him
More damages than all his foreign foes:
And all their malice could have brought unto him.
Yea, so improvident a path he goes,
As if by his Forefathers, or by Him,
Some sin had been committed, which has shaken
His very Throne, defaced his Diadem,
And, for which, Vengeance must ere long be taken.
For, though he knows the peoples griefs and fears,
Though sprawling in their blood he sees them lying;
Though he beholds the flames about their ears,
And, in their deaths, his honor daily dying?
Yet, seems he nothing to hear, know, or see,
Which for your safety, or his own may be.
The Royal Power, that should the Realm have guarded,
Is to the ruin thereof, mis-imploy'd;
The Perquisites, allowed to have rewarded
Deserving-men, by Ruffians are enjoyed.
The Dignities, ordained to have been placed
On them, whose deeds their nobleness declared;
To Slaves are prostituted; and disgraced,
By being on Buffoones and Clownes conferred.
His Councell-Table was become a snare,
His Court, a Sanctuary for Transgressors;
The Iudgement-Seats, were engines to prepare
Advantages, for Bribers and Oppressors:
The Sovereign, from the Subject is estranged;
And Kingship into Tyranny, is changed.
But, though the King be partner in these crimes,
It Is you, who have your selves, and him undone:
For, as Idolaters in former times,
First, made carved Images, of Wood and Stone,
(Perhaps, but merely for Commemoration
Of some deceased Worthy) and, at last,
Improved it into sottish adoration;
So, Those, on whom the Government was placed,
(By prudent Counsel) Base men, by degrees
So idolized, and with flatteries
So long, in servile manner, bowed their knees
To their Self-will; that, first, to tyrannize
The peoples blockishnesse, and baseness brought them:
Yea, how to be Oppressors, they first taught them.
And, when Kings saw, the peoples foolishness
Did make themselves believe, that their own Creature
Had therein, an inherent awfulnesse,
Advancing it above the humane nature;
They, quickly from that folly, and that fear,
Advantages assumed to improve
Their powers: It made them greater to appear;
And in a more Majestic Orb to move.
The slavish gestures, and the servile phrase
Long used in Court, did thereto so much add,
That, he who like a man, declares his cause,
Is judged unmannerly, or somewhat mad:
Nay, to that height the, Royal claim is brought,
That none, but Slaves, are now true Subjects thought.
A Parliament you have, which you obtained,
When you were most desirous to have had it;
You, thereunto a privilege have gained,
Which, now, more fixed than formerly, has made it.
The House of Peers is of a party cleared,
Whom, leaning to your, Common-Foe you doubted;
Whose power you felt, whose policy you feared,
And, whom, long since, some gladly would have outed.
Yet had Corruption over-fill'd it so
With honored Titles, worn without deserts;
And, with so many, raised from below,
To sit on Princely Seats, with Slavish-hearts,
That, when your troubles well-nigh cured you thought,
Far greater mischieves, were upon you brought.
Your House of Commons, (though when first convented,
It filled you with a hopeful expectation)
Has every way so truly represented,
The Common Constitution of this Nation;
That, little hitherto has been effected
To mitigate your Fears, or settle Peace,
According to the issue you expected;
But, every day your sorrows more increase.
So great an inundation of confusion
Is broken in upon you; that, in vain
You hope or labor for a good conclusion,
Till GOD himself make up the Breach again;
And, you (with more sincerity) confess
Your Guilt, your Weakness, and your Foolishness.
Betwixt You, and your King, there is of late
A cursed Fire broke forth, whose raging flame
Each others ruin threatens, like to that
Which from Abimelech, and Shechem, came.
So damnable a Spirit of Contention
Is conjured up, that, his designs are brought
Past all those remedies, and that prevention
Which by the wit of mortals can be wrought.
So madly, you each other do oppose,
That every one consults and acts in vain:
What one reares up, another overthrowes;
What one destroys, another builds again:
And nothing is the vulgar expectation
But ruin, if not utter Desolation.
For, crying-sins do gen'rally prevail,
The Rules of Order, quite aside are laid:
The prudence of the Counselor does fail;
The honestest-Designes, are most gainsaid;
The Grossest Falsehood, soonest is believed;
His cause best speedes, who aims at basest-ends,
The worst-Transgressour, shall be soon'st reprieved;
The veriest Knave shall find the Lordliest friends:
And, when Foundations thus are overthrown,
What can the Righteous do? what likely hope
Have Husbandmen, when all is over-growne
With Briars and Thorns, to reap a thriftie crop?
Or, what can by a Parliament be done,
Where all are with Corruption overgrown?
With Warlike Forces, too, now strongly armed
You do appear; and Martial men abound,
As though each Township, Bee-hive-like had swarmed,
And Horse, and Arms, sprung daily from the ground.
But, what have these availed, in regard
Of expectation? Nay, how multiplide
Are these afflictions, rather, (which you feared)
By their dissensions, insolence, or pride?
Your Treasures, Stocks, and Fields, they have nigh wasted,
Their avaritions fury to allay;
Yet, as if they had Pharoah's kine out-fasted,
So greedy, and so hungry, still are they,
That, all the plenties of your peaceful years,
Will hardly quench that vast desire of theirs.
Want of sincerenesse in your chief Commanders,
Too much ambition, much respect of friends:
(Most men that hear this, know these are no slanders)
Fraud, Envy, Cowardice, or private-ends;
And, gen'rally defect of Discipline:
Or, (to be plain) want of that honesty,
Which these Forth-breakings of the Wrath-divine
Has, now, required in your Soulderie,
Have set licentiousness so much at large,
And made most Officers, presume upon
Such loosnesse; and so slackly to discharge
Their duties; that, you likely are to run,
By your own Forces (as the matter goes)
Not much less hazard, than by open Foes.
Your Common men, (this will disparage none
Among you Martialists, that blameless are)
Have not in misdemeanors, been out-gone
By many, who the States opposers were.
They cheat, rob, lie, curse, swear, blaspheme and rore,
They equally oppress both Friend, and Foe;
They plunder, scoff, insult, game, drink and whore,
And every day corrupt each other so;
That, if this plague continue but a while,
You and your King, so many Rogues will arm,
That, throughout every Township of this I Will,
This curse brood of Lice will crawle and swarm,
Till they have quite devoured those that fed them;
And, pine in that starved Body, which first bred them.
For, though the highest honors temporary,
On Soldiers are conferred, whose true worth,
Whose virtues in employments military,
With an illustrious candor shines forth:
Though they, who to defend their Countries cause,
Themselves to death and dangers do expose,
(Observing duly, GODS and Natures Laws,
Not only to their friends, but to their foes)
Though these, deserve all honors; no expression
Is full enough to make an illustration
Of their ignoble, and their base condition,
Who triumph in their Countries desolation:
And, as the rascal sort of Tinkers do,
Pretend to mend one hole, and then make two.
For, these four years of Discord, have so changed,
The gentleness, already, of this Nation;
And, men and women are fo far estranged,
From civil, to a barbarous inclination:
They are so prone to mutinous disorders,
So forward in all mischievous projections,
So little moved with robberies or murders,
And, so insensible of good Affections;
That, they whom you have armed for your defense,
Will shortly ruin you, unless preventions
Be interposed by that Providence,
Which frustates diabolical intentions:
And therefore, now, Conditions are propounded,
On which, a Restoration may be grounded.
Yea, now, when Medicines (that most sovereign were
At other times) have multiplied diseases:
When all your Policies quite routed are;
To intervene, a Timely-Mercie pleases.
Now, that your Armies, King, and Parliaments,
Which were your hopefulst means of preservation,
Are made, by Sin, imperfect Instruments,
And, leave these Isles almost in desperation:
Thou, shall once more, to dis-respective men,
A Herald-extraordinarie be;
And, carry them conditions, once again,
Whereby they from these troubles may be free;
And, that those Angels which now smite these Lands,
From Desolation, may withold their hands.
Now, then, for Overtures of Peace provide;
Silence thy Trumpets, let thy Drums be still;
Furle up thy Colors, lay Commands aside,
Sheath up thy Sword, resume again thy Quill;
And, make thou such an entry on Record,
Of what thou intellectually do hear,
That, to these present Times, it may afford
A legible Express, of what they are:
That, thereby, meek men may have information,
What humble service, and what sacrifice
May best promove that reconciliation,
Which will conclude these bloody Tragedies;
And, that it may, by working upon some,
A Blessing, unto all these Isles, become.
To that intent, once more, thy self prepare,
To hear enraged Tyrants madly rave;
The envious to detract, the proud to jeer,
And Fools to show how little wit they have.
Prepare thy self, to suffer what disgrace
The spite of secret malice has begun;
And, all those injuries, which, to thy face,
May, by an open enemy, be done.
And saulter not: but, plainly publish thou,
What is, and shall be spoken to thy heart;
That, if these will not, time to come may know,
By what good Spirit thou inspired art:
And, that men may, unto GOD's praise, confess,
That, He, in Justice, is not merciless.
And be not swayed by any by-respect
To King, or People, Persons, or Estates,
From uttering (to thy power) the full effect
Of whatsoever, now, this VOICE relates.
Nor be thou so presumptuous, as to add
One syllable (beyond what shall be true)
Through fear; or, that some profit may be had;
Lest thy vain fears, and thy false hopes thou rue.
But, speak what truth shall whisper forth to thee,
In so impartial, and so bold a strain,
That, to their souls, it may a terror be,
Who still, in their impenitence remain:
And, therewithal, those consolations bring,
Which make the meek, and brokenhearted sing.
Fear neither Peers, nor Commons, Friends, nor Foes,
So long as thou thy duty shall perform*
Nor fear the threatenings or the frowns of those,
Who, at thy publishing this VOICE may storm,
For, of whatever they shall thee deprive,
Who, therewithal, are spitefully offended,
Thou for the same shall seventie fold receive,
In life and death, by all good men befriended.
And, if by thy Detractors ought be spoke,
Which this thy warrantable duty wrongs,
Their malice shall quite vanish into smoke,
And for the same, ten hundred thousand tongues
Shall censure them, who now mis-censure thee,
Even while they are, and when they shall not be.
The VOICE, here made a pause: For, though I had
Myself, into myself retired, as far,
As a Retreat could possibly be made,
From things, that Bars to Contemplation are;
Yet, thither carried I so much about me,
Relating to the Flesh, which I have on me;
(And also to the World that is without me)
That she, with violence, broke in upon me;
And came so overjoyed with fruitless news
Of an approaching Treaty, and with hope
Of Peace thereby; that she disturbed my Muse,
And brought those Revelations to a stop,
Of which, this I Will shall never hear again,
Till she has proved all other means in vain.
Your wits, ye Politicians therefore try,
Ye Mighty, thereunto your Forces join,
And you, that with a Formall-pietie,
Or morall-facings, your projections line.
Pursue your ways of Peace, till you are gone
So far, that you no forwarder can get;
And find, that when your wilful course is done,
You, like wild-Bulls, lie tumbling in a net:
For, then, perhaps (though but a Moufe it were,
That gnawed the snare) your pride would be content,
The means of your deliverance to hear,
By whomesoere the Message shall be sent.
When that hour coms, the VOICE that spoke before,
Will speak again; and, then I Will tell you more.
Meane-while, I purpose to return unto
Those other under-takings, wherewithal
I am entrusted; or, those works to do,
For which, the Common-danger, first may call.
And since I ought not wholly to neglect,
Their private wants, who on my care depend,
I will be bold, a little, to respect
My own Affairs, which few men, yet, befriend;
Lest, e're I finish what I have begun,
I may incur some sudden detriment;
Or, else, by my Oppressors, be undone.
For, he that makes no conscience to prevent
His private ruin, shall be seldom heard
In any public matter, with regard.
LORD, by thy power (for, by thy power, alone,
Such Plagues are cured) recure us e're too late,
And, once again, in mercy, look upon
This heart-sick, languishing, and dying State.
Once more be reconciled: (Once more at least)
To these distracted, these divided Lands,
Let that Preserving-Mercie be expressed,
On which, the safety of a Kingdom stands.
Abate those Earthquakes, which have made unsteady
The Pillars of this Church and Commonwealth;
Disperse those Vapors, which imve made us giddie;
Purge out those Humors, which impair our health:
Support the Limbs, which must prevent our fall,
Cut off, those Members, which may ruin all.
And, give me Courage, Wisdom, Grace, and Power,
So, to discern thy Will; so, to express
What is inspired; and in so good an hour,
As, that it may prepare the Way of Peace.
THOU, that, by Babes, and Sucklings, do restore
Decayed Strength; and, by despised things,
Advance thy Kingdom, and thy Glory, more
Then by the Counsels, and the Powers of Kings:
So, make this VOICE to speak; so, make men hear;
That, both Times present, and the Times to come,
May love thy Mercies, and thy Judgments, fear,
Throughout these Islands, till the day of doom:
And, let this VOICE'S good effects be shown
Most clear in Him, by whom, thou make it known.
The second Canto.
The Contents.

This Canto's Preface being done,
The VOICE, to these effects, goes on;
Tells, how unworthy we are yet,
For Peace desired, how unfit:
How vain, how harmfull Treaties be,
Till both Sides, in one Third agree;
And (laying by ignoble ends,)
Use likely means of being Friends.
Shows, that the Peace, which most pursue*
Will be nor permanent, nor true.
Then, that some Cures may heappli'd,
Declares which Parts are putrifi'd;
Which must be purged, without delay;
Or, cauteriz'd, or cut away,
If we will, e're it be too late,
Recure this weak, this dying State.
THe VOICE and Muzings, hitherto expressed,
In me, so sad, so serious Thoughts had left,
And, stamped them so deep into my breast,
That, of it health, my Body they bereft:
And, e're my former strength could be renewed
(Or those Affairs dispensed with, which deny
To be, at will, delayed or pursued)
Three months of Relaxation passed by:
And, in that space, was opened such a Sluice
To Interruptions, discomposing so
My meditations; that, them to reduce
To their late temper, I had much ado.
Oh GOD! from me, how fast good motions fly!
How long are they unborn! how soon they die!
My heart, that is corrupt enough to know
What any wicked man can think or say,
Before my feet, began harsh rubs to throw,
And, cast great stumbling blocks orethwart my way.
When I had some removed, Lo, (with a jeere)
A thought within me said; If nothing else
But Virtue guides thy Pen, what needed here,
All that, which of thy Self, this Poem tells?
Why mention'st thou (as if thou were afraid
Thy Readers knew not, or forgot the same)
What thou fore-toldst? what thou have thought or said?
And what events on thy Predictions came?
And, in a Magisteriall-straine have spoke,
As if thou for a Prophet would be took?
Indeed, my Vanities, I find to be
More then enough, my Musings to expose
To mis-constructions; and, to bring on me
The sharp result of such like thoughts as those:
For, never could I fix my mind upon
GOD'S Work so closely, but, Charrs great or small,
Have still been there with brought me to be done,
By those old Haglers, whom I live withal.
Even in this Task, (though GOD stands over me
With Fire, and Sword) such failings will appear,
And, so imperfect my endeavors be,
(...), much I grieve, to think how vain they are;
And feared, they had been but effects of pride,
Till thus, for me, another Thought replide.
GOD, pleased seems, to make thy Vices do
Those duties, which thy Virtues leave undone.
And what though this may add (if it prove so)
Dishonor to thy self, so GOD have none?
If thou thy Thoughts, have clothed in such words,
And, them in such a dressing, forth shall send,
As best advantage to thy Self affords,
Why should it any other man offend?
Or, if thou addest ought for thine own praise,
Why should an envious Reader grudge the same,
Since Malice, and Dispight, have many ways,
To turn such empty Glories, to thy shame?
Or, why should thou forbear, if cause thou find,
To make thy words help fortify thy mind?
Thine own expressions, are sometime the Charms
Which waken thy Resolves that were asleep:
Thy Heart, the repetition of them warmes;
Thy Spirit from dejection they do keep.
The mentioning what GOD has for thee done,
Or, what he has enabled thee to do,
May to his glory be insisted on;
And, otherwhile, to thy advantage too.
Why then, through Fear of witless Censurers,
(Or, of an ayrie scoff, should thou omit
Thy self to mention, or thine own affairs,
When thou (on good occasion) think it fit?
Since, if thy Muses would be so confined,
They to themselves were traitors, or unkind.
And, to make void what shall well purposed be,
There intervene so many casualties,
By mis-conceiving, or mis-knowing thee,
Sometime, such Inconveniences arise,
As that, it may essentially advance
Thy Work in hand, if some few lines be spent,
To add, or to enlarge a circumstance,
Which captious men may think impertinent;
For, when the Matter moves not that respect,
Which is desired, perhaps, the Manner may:
And, if thou honestly thy hopes effect,
What though Fools think, that thou the Fool did play?
Although harsh doomes, this age to thee affords,
The Times to come, will give thee better words.
Thus spoke my Thoughts; But, little do I care
How I am judged, save only for their sake,
On whom those Verities, which I declare,
May thereby, more or less impression make.
The care I took, was how to hear again
The VOICE, which I conceived had much to say,
That to this Islands peace does appertain;
If, what is councelled, men would obey.
For, well I saw, although unseen it was
By many, (and too well perceived by some)
That such a Time, was well nigh come to pass,
As my preceding Canto, said should come,
Before, the VOICE I heard, the rest would say,
Of that, which was begun the other day.
Yea, I discovered them, on either side,
To be distracted and confounded, so,
By that which falsehood, policy, and pride,
Self-will, and Avarice, has brought them to;
That, I began to feel my self afraid,
Destruction might or'e-whelme this Generation,
Before there would be means to hear, that said,
Which may, perhaps, prevent out desolation.
As Soon therefore, as GOD to me restored
Decayed strength, and my infirmities,
Did Opportunities, and time afford,
I recompos'd my scatt'red faculties;
And, being then retired, and noise alaid,
The VOICE that spoke before, thus, further said.
Come Weakling, fit thy soul, prepare thine care,
Gird up thy loins, and set thy self apart,
That thou, the more intentively, may hear
What, shall be further spoken to thy heart.
That TREATY, now, is at a fruitless end
Which interrupted what I had to say:
That Hope, whereon so many did depend,
Is, like a fair bright Morning, past away
And, leaves you in a Cloud, that seems to threat
A terrible tempestuous Afternoon;
Which, you with many Fears, will round beset,
Before the Day of Trial, shall be done:
And, therefore, that which will be now declared,
May, peradventure, find the more regard.
You look for Peace, (and he who well can sing
That Song, deserves highly to be prized)
But, who can thither such a blessing bring,
Where all Conditions of it are despised?
Or, what, as yet, have they to do with peace,
Whom these Corrections, move not to repent?
Whose Wickedness, does rather more increase,
Then seem abated, by their chastisement?
Who can expect, the fretting Corosives
Should be removed from your Fest'ring sore
Until the skillfull Surgeon first perceives,
It may, with healing salves be plaistred over,
Unless, he rather has a mind to see
The patient ruined, then cured to be?
How few have thou observed, whose former course
Is bettered by those Plagues, which now are on them?
How many, rather, do appear the worse?
And, to be more corrupt then thou have known them?
In what perpetual broiles are they involved,
Who, for the public welfare, most endeavor?
How friendlesse are they, who are best resolved?
And, in good resolutions, dare persever?
How many, into Parties quickly band
A questioned Malignant to protect?
How few men, for that Innocent, will stand,
Whom Malice does accuse, or but suspect?
And who now lives, and loves the Common-Right,
Who suffers not some insolent despite?
Though most men see distractions hanging over
Their giddie heads; their Tragedy begun;
And, round about them, nothing can discover,
But universal Ruin drawing on;
Ambition, Malice, Avarice, and Pride,
Self-will, Self-love, Hypocrisy, and Guile,
As arrogantly still on horseback ride,
As if no Plague had seized on this Isle.
This man for Place; that, striveth for Command;
Pretends the Publike-weale, but, seeks his Own;
And cares not, so he profit by the hand,
Though Law and Gospel too, be overthrown:
And, He that in defense of them does come,
Finds furious Foes abroad, and worse at home.
In every Shire, in every Town and City,
The Kingdoms discords are epitomized:
In every Corporation, and Committee,
Some Engine for Division is deviz'd.
Occasions daily spring, each man engaging,
To side with, or stand leaning, to some Faction,
And, by new quarrels, more and more enraging
Their Fury, to the heightning of Distraction.
An Emblem of which madness, he might draw,
Who saw, within an old thatched Barn on fire,
Poor beggars quarrelling for lousie straw,
(Or dunghill rags, new raked from the mire)
Who will nor heed their harms, nor leave to brawl,
Until the Flames consume Rogues, Rags, and All.
How can calm Peace be timely wooed thither,
Where men so brutish are in their dissentions,
And, where the means of knitting them together,
Are still occasions made of new contentions?
How can these Isles have Peace that are so vicious?
And, who have Factious Spirits raised on them,
As wilfully disposed, as those Seditious,
Who brought destruction on Jerusalem?
How can they look for Peace, while they contrive
Designs, enlarging, still, their discontent?
While Policy, does wedges daily drive,
Twixt every joint, to make a curelesse rent?
And, while to mend the breaches of this Land
There Is nothing brought, but pebble-stones and sand?
Who can unite again a Broken-bone,
Whose parted ends, are set the from ward way?
How long will oil and water mix in One?
Or, things quite Opposite together stay?
There are betwixt you such Antipathies,
And such abhominatings of each other,
That, in no ordinary Power it lies,
To knit you in a perfect League together:
And it is not possible, your fest'ring sores,
Should ever heal, while in them there is found
That putrified flesh, and rotten cores,
Which keep from closing, and from growing sound?
And which will suddenly break forth again,
Augmenting more your hazard, and your pain?
How can these miserable Isles have Peace,
While Justice, nor Compassion find regard?
While they who should protect, do most oppress?
Where sin scapes blame, and Virtue wants reward?
How can he hope for Peace, that would enjoy
His wish on any terms? And, for the Shade,
The Substance of that mercy quite destroy,
Which might by patient Industry be had?
Or, how can he be worthy of that Blessing,
Who (knowing how much, lately it has cost,
In blood and Treasure) would the repossessing
Of that dear purchase, for a toy, have lost?
And, everlastingly, himself undo,
To satisfy his Lust, a year or two?
Who knows not, that much more dread you have,
Lest of Estate, or Person, you should lose
The loved Freedoms; then to be a Slave
To him, whose Tyranny, the Soul undoes?
For, to that end you Give, you Lend, you Pay;
To that intent, strict Covenants you make;
To that intent, you sometimes Fast and Pray;
To that intent, much Pains and Care you take.
Yea, many goodly things to that intent
You daily do, and many more, intend:
But, your Peace-offrings, all in vaineare spent,
Till you direct them to their proper end;
And, till the Peace, for which your Suits you make,
Shall be desired for Truths, and Mercies sake.
Who sees not, that a Peace you now desire
For naught, but that you might again enjoy
Your lusts; and, to those Vanities retire,
Wherein you did your former days employ?
Who sees not, that, like to those Israelites,
Whom from the Egyptian Bondage GOD redeemed,
You have the pleasing of your Appetites,
Much more than your Deliverer esteemed?
Their Garlic, and their Fleshpots left behind,
They thought on more, than on that Servitude,
From which they came; and, more than they did mind,
Those Wonders, and that Mercy, which GOD showed:
And, you have acted, as in imitation
Of that perverse, and foolish generation.
You have forgot, already, to what height
Of Tyranny and Pride, the Court was reared;
What Projects for Oppression, were in sight;
What Injuries you felt, and what you feared.
You seem to have forgot, to what degree
Of Insolence the Prelacie was come:
How, generally, you began to be
Bewitched, by the Sorceries of Rome.
You, have not so observed, as you ought,
How near, unto a helpless overthrow,
You (by your Foes confederacies) were brought,
Before their purpose did apparent grow;
Nay, you yet heed not, what will soon betide,
If, now, from good-beginnings back you slide.
But, as aforesaid, like the sottish Jews,
(Who, of the Humane-nature, and of You,
Are perfect Types) GODS favors you abuse;
And, so, your own Inventions, you pursue.
Though like their Fierie-pillar, and their Cloud,
A special Providence has been your Guard;
An unbeleeving heart, your deeds have showed;
And, you of every Bug-beare are afeard.
Like them (even while the Law to you is giving,
And all this Island, like Mount Sinai smokes)
New Worships, and new GODS you are contriving;
Like them, you slight his Benefits, and strokes;
And, in your Provocations, are as daring,
While he is Rest and Peace, for you preparing.
So, you forget, how great your Bondage was,
And whereunto you feared it might increase;
So, those great Marvailes you still over-passe,
Which GOD has wrought, to perfect your release:
So, when by some new Straight, your Faith he tries,
You wish that in your Bondage, you had staid:
So, your Deliverers, you scandalize;
As if by them, your Freedoms were betrayed:
So, murmr you, when any thing you lack;
So, you, despair, when carnal props decay;
So, every difficulty turns you back,
And stands like Seas, and Giants in your way:
And, so, through mis-beleefe, your selves deprive
Of Blessings, which your Children shall receive.
And, thus it comes to pass, because, like them
You are a stupid and a foolish Nation,
Who your Deliverances do contemn;
And, are like them, without consideration.
Else, grudge you would not, for that, you are more
Imbroyl'd by seeking to preserve your due,
And put to greater charges, than before
Your Vindication you did first pursue:
For, Prudent men, will while they are at ease,
Be willingly made sick; and bear the cost
Of Physic, for the cure of that disease,
Through which, ere long, their lives might else be lost:
Yea, every rustic Seed-man, sowes in hope,
(Advent'ring much) e're he receives a crop.
You justly might suppose, that Patients wit
Much crazed, that when good physic works upon him,
Straight wishes, he had never taken it;
Cries out, that his Physicians have undone him;
Because, they made him sick, e're he was so:
Drinks, eats, and acts, both what and when he will;
Yea, thereby makes himself more sick to grow,
And causes that which would have cured, to kill.
Yet, this is your condition: and, if, now,
In this distempered, and unto ward plight,
Your kind Physician had deserted you,
(As for your peevishness, he justly might)
Your labors past, and those you shall bestow,
Will prove like Arrows, from a warped Bow.
You mark not, what great wonders GOD has wrought,
To move your hardened Pharaohs to relent;
And that from slaveries, you might be brought,
Nor heed you, what your Foes, for you invent.
A thousand things, unthought on, you let go,
Of consequence, which wrought for you have bin,
Since your Deliverer began to show
An Outlet, from the Bondage you were in.
As, in what dreadful manner, in one place,
He seized by an unseen-messenger,
A bold Transgressor (who so daring was,
As to provoke the Devil to appear)
And, smoth'red him in loathsome smoke and stink,
Whilst he presumed blasphemous healths to drink.
You do not mark, how oftentimes the Plot,
Against you laid, has crossed been by Him,
When, else, you had no knowledge thereof got;
Nor, to prevent it, either Power, or Time.
You have not memorized, as you ought,
How, GOD himself, when your own strength did fail,
For you, against your Enemies has fought;
And made you conquer, when they did prevail.
How wondrously, a Remnant, for a Seed,
In Ireland, he preserves: how often from spoil,
Your Garrisons and Armies, he has freed,
When they have been in hazard of a foil:
Nor do you mind, how often, him thank you may,
For saving, what, you would have fooled away.
You ponder not, how often he has saved,
Where no Salvation was; how near at hand,
He still was found, when you protection craved;
And, when destruction over-hung the Land.
You have not heeded, how the Saplesse-brest
Of withered Age, (when raging cruelty
The child of murth'red Parents had distressed)
Did wonderfully, thereto milk supply:
Nor, for how many thousand Families,
He food provides, whom War has quite undone:
Nor, how his Grace restraines their Poverties,
From Outrage, whereinto they else had run;
And which, ere long, attempted you will see,
Unless more Just, and Merciful you be.
You, hardly yet believe, that, in conclusion
The mischiefs, by your Adversaries done,
Must be the Groundwork of their own confusion;
Or, that your Peace is by this War begun.
You mark not, that when first the sottish Dane,
Preparing was, your causlesse Foes to aid,
GOD, then, to call him to account began,
For all that blood whereon his Throne was laid:
Nor how, even then, GOD fastened in his nose
The Swedish-hooke, and found him work at home,
To show, that He of Princes does dispose;
And, what of wilfull-Tyrants will become,
Though, by permission, for a while, they may
The Fools, or Madmen, on their stages play.
You mark not, with such thankful observations,
As would become you, that, GOD's providence,
(Though you are threatened by some other Nations)
Has (by engagements) kept them yet, from hence.
And many other things unheeded are,
Which must consid'red be, ere you aright
Your hearts, and your affections can prepare,
For such a Peace, as will be worth your sight.
Yea, many things must be repented too,
And much amended, ere you may expect,
That either swords, or words this work will do;
Or Blows, or Treaties, bring your wished effect.
The Peace of GOD you never can possess,
But, by atonement, with the GOD of Peace.
You, by a Treaty, had a hope to see
A Peace concluded on. But how alas!
How possibly may that accomplished be!
Till means is found to bring it well to pass?
The Mediums to that work, are wanting, yet,
By which, the Parties who at variance are,
Should reconcile; and they themselves have set
Too far asunder, to be brought so near.
There wants a Third, by whom they should unite:
For, most who are imploid as Instruments,
To join them, in Divisions take delight:
And, private-interests, that work prevents;
Because, when these, the way to Peace shall take,
Themselves obnoxious to the Laws they make.
The chiefest outward-Instruments, whereby
To join a King and Subjects disunited,
Was wont to be that Christian Charity,
By which the neighboring Princes were invited
To mediate, and labor to compose
Their diff'rences. As first, by friendly Words,
And prudent Arguments, persuading those
Who seemed unjustly to have drawn their swords.
By threatenings, next: And, if nor argument,
Nor intercession, nor sharp menaces
Prevailed; they then, to help the innocent,
As they enabled were, would sometimes please;
Lest, an unbounded, and usurped power
Should all oppress, and all at last devour.
But you have no such hope; For, all the States,
And all the Kings and Princes, near, or far,
Which were your Friends, and your Confederates,
Neglecters of this pious duty are.
The Swedes, the Germans, and those other Nations,
Who really compassionate your grief,
Are so engaged, for their own preservations,
That, thence you neither can expect relief,
Nor means of an Atonement. From the Dane,
(Your old Oppressor) you long since, had found
What he resolved; unless, the Swede had taken
Occasion to employ him in the Sound:
And, should the French, or Spaniard intercede,
Against their own Designments, they might plead.
Th'Vnited Netherlands, who to pursue
This duty, are obliged, beyond them all,
And, who (unless they prove both false to you,
And to themselves) themselves remember shall:
Even they have hitherto but only sent
Jobs comforters unto you: or, perchance
To practice here, some piece of complement,
Which they have newly learned from Spain, or France:
Ot, else, to see a pattern of that Plague,
Which must, from hence, translated thither be,
When they have quite forgotten their old league
With you, who spent your blood, to set them free;
When they, in danger were to be enslaved,
As you are now, and, for assistance craved,
Now, whether these are blinded by some sin
That calls for Vengeance; or, by some poor hope,
New works on this Isles ruins, to begin;
Or, whether Providence has made that stop,
To frustrate such like means, that, you might fly
To him alone; it does not yet appear:
But, will ere long. Meanewhile, the certainty
Of this, becomes manifestly clear;
That, GOD suspendeth every help to Peace,
Which foreign Aid, or foreign intercession
Are like to add; and, suffers an increase
Of jars at home, which threaten your perdition:
For, every thing essential to that blessing,
Are, well-nigh, taken out of your possession.
Most Circumstances, thereunto pertaining,
Are missing too. For, on the one side, at least,
There Is not so much as willingness remaining,
To further what they have in word, professed.
The Spheres in which they move, divert them from
A true Coujunction; and, from all Aspects,
From whence good Influences use to come,
Or, any lasting peaceable-effects.
It is destructive to their maine Defigne,
And to their Principles, to make true Peace;
Or, with a faithful purpose, to incline
To seek this Islands real happiness.
Nor should you think such purposes they had,
Till, in their course, you see them retrograde.
As soon shall he that Westward always goes,
Meet him, that still an Eastward point does steer,
As your two Factions firm together close,
Till they, in their chiefe-aimes, approach more near:
For, the one is bent, the other to inslave;
That other, is resolved to be free:
The Last, would keep what GOD and Nature gave;
The First, would seize, what ought not theirs to be.
And, these, from reconcilement are so far,
That, all their kindness is but to betray:
When most they talk of Peace, they purpose War;
When they embrace, they mean to stab and slay:
And, when they make you think the War is done,
The greatest mischief will be but begun.
Beside, as yet, nor the one, nor the other side,
Nor King, nor People, Commoners, nor Peers,
Nor Flocks, nor Shepherds, have the course yet tried,
By which you can be saved from your fears.
A TREATY may complete it: But, before
You venture that, you must be fit to Treat.
For, then, the work were halfway done, and more:
And, till that be, no step you forward get.
In heat of quarrels, nothing done or spoke,
Can reconcile: a friends words move them not:
The more they talk, the more the peace is broke,
Till they their lost consid'ring-caps have got;
Till their hot blood is cooled, till rage is gone;
And, Reason does examine them alone.
Then, peradventure, they with shame will view
Their oversights, their furiousness repent,
Distinguish Truths, from things that are untrue;
And, by that quarrel, future jarres prevent.
Thus likewise, when GOD, thereto says Amen,
Your Disagreements here, shall have an end:
Your Discords will be then allaid again,
And, he that is now a Foe, shall be a Friend.
But, you must find, before this can be done,
A Preparation, and a Groundwork laid,
(With such an alteration wrought upon
Your Hearrs) that Reason may be more obeyed:
GOD, make this Preparation; For, by none
But by himself, this work may now be done.
When you may hope a Treaty will prevail,
Good Symptoms, you to usher it shall see;
Inducing you to hope it shall not fail:
And, for a taft, they such as these will be.
Both sides will to some Course themselves apply
That shall declare their hearts are growing-lean;
Themselves they will endeavor to deny;
Their tongues will nothing speak, but what they mean.
You shall perceive more Justice, to be shown;
More Charity among you will appear;
They will be meek, who to be proud were known;
Contentions will be fewer then they were;
And, they who on the Publike-Trust attend,
Will less abuse it, for their private end.
A Change, thus wrought; these Virtues, in a while,
Will every where, beget themselves esteem:
By their esteem the Firebrarnds of this Jsle,
Will daily more abominable seem:
That loathing of those Monsters will increase
The number of true Converts: By that number,
The growing of Malignancie will cease,
And Newters be awakened from their slumber:
By their awakening, such will be afraid
Who have not gone maliciously astray:
That Fear will quickly make them well apaid
To leave their standing, in the sinners way,
And, when these from that Station shall be gone,
It will bring scorn upon the Scorners Throne.
Thus, as at first, Malignancie was bred
By ill example, and mis-informations;
So, Good affections, will revive and spread,
And strengthen by their changed Conversations.
Then, will arise a longing to be free
From your Imbroylments; with so true a sight
Of present mischiefs, and of what may be,
That, in the means of Peace, you will delight.
And, then, both Parties will be pleased to meet
On one set day, to fall with humbleness,
For their foul bloody sins, before GODS feet,
Whose Mercy, far exceeder their wickedness;
And he, perhaps, will make that complement,
An earnest of your general assent.
When such like inclinations do appear,
(Both parties moving on, in some such way,
As here is pointed at) they who draw near
At first in generals, will every day,
Assent in some particular or other,
Till they who now so much divided be,
Shall lovingly unite again together,
And in one Discipline and Faith agree.
But, doubtless, not till they themselves deny,
And more forbear, when they negotiate,
From seeking in their public Agencie,
To serve and save themselves, before the State;
Whose weal, to all men should be dearer, far,
Then their estates, their lives, and honors are.
Nay, till both Parties do, at least, agree
In all those common principles, whereby
Humane Society, preserved may be,
With Nations Rights, and Christian Liberty;
All Treaties will be mischeevous, or vain,
To men adhering to the better Course:
For, by such Threatenings, Politicians gain
Advantages, to make your being worse.
Yea, by that means, these find occasions may
To gain, or give intelligence; to make
New plots, and friends; to hasten or delay,
As cause requires; and, other ways to take
For their avail, which else they had not got:
And which true honesty allows not.
Nor can, in any cause, a Treaty bring
More mischief then in your; till on each side
The Parties treating, are in every thing
(Thereto pertaining) rightly qualified:
Because, when Forraigners alone are Foes,
It Is hard corrupting more then one or two;
Whereas, here want not multitudes of those,
That, willingly, their Country would undo.
Nay, some among you are so void of reason,
To buy their Traytorships; and other some,
By conscience, seem obliged to the treason:
And, these will to a Treaty never come,
To make true reconcilement; but, to gather
Advantages, for some new mischief, rather.
You are this way, and many other ways,
Corrupted so, so false, and so unfit
For Peace desired; and for those assayes,
Whereby you may acquire that blessing, yet,
That you must cleansed be from that pollution
Which brought this curse upon you; and whereby
Those means are vainly put in execution,
Which might procure a blessed Unity.
There is so little honesty among you,
And your discretion is become so small,
That they who most apparently do wrong you,
(And seek your Souls and Bodies to inthrall)
Have more encouragements, to help undo you,
Then they, who offer means of safety to you.
Instead of being linked fast, in one,
Against the common-Foe, you have permitted
That band of amity to be und one,
Whose preservation had these times befitted.
You, that in Fundamentalls do agree,
Are so divided about Circumstances,
(Which might, at better leisure, settled be)
That your Destroyers projects it advances:
And, if with speed you cement not the breaches,
That which (ere long) must thereupon ensue,
Experience (which the veriest idiots teaches;)
Will, to your greater sorrow, daily show;
Till you of all, are by those foes despoiled,
Whom you by good atonement might have foiled.
You are a fickle, and inconstant Nation,
Your serious promises deserve no trust;
Your words are full of base dissimulation,
Your thoughts are vanity, your deeds unjust.
Your virtues are but few, your vices many;
Great is your Folly, and your Wisdom small;
Your Principles are such (if you have any)
That, from your best resolves you quickly fall.
With jealousies, each other you pursue;
You misbelieve, and find, as you believed:
You, nor to GOD, nor men continue true:
And, therefore, of much comfort are bereaved,
Which by their friendship might have been possessed,
Who keep to you, that Faith which they professed.
Betwixt you, and your Brethren of the North,
The seeds of Discord secretly are sown:
Much pain some take to make them tillow forth,
Dissentions coals in every place are thrown;
And these by Folly, and by Malice, too,
So wilfully are blown by either side,
So scattered, and tossed to and fro,
And so much fuel is to them applied;
That, if the patience of the Stottish-Nation
Exceed not Common-measure: If more true
They prove not to their Vows, their Protestations,
And Christian-principles, than some of You,
A worse Division will betwixt you spring,
Than this, between the People and the King.
For, this will in another Age abate,
But, that, unless GODS grace prevent it shall,
Will grow into an everlasting hate,
Or, bring a speedy ruin on you all.
Now therefore, in both Nations, let those few
Who faithful are, firm in their Faith abide.
Now, let them to their Principles be true;
Now, let the Patience of the Saints be tried.
His last great Batt'rie, ANTICHRIST now reares,
His deepest Mines, against you sinking be,
His powerful Army, mustred now appears,
His chiefest Cunning, now, employeth he.
Oh! let him not by Force your Strength dis-joyne,
Nor, by his fraud, your Counsels undermine.
But, let your Faith and Courage so prevail,
That you may better Fixed-Stars appear,
Than they, who daily by the Dragons-Taile,
Are smitten, or affrighted from their Sphere;
That, you may those Elected-Ones be sound,
Who cannot by Deceivers, be deceived;
That, with those Conquerours you may be crowned,
Who shall not of their Garlands be bereaved:
That, of the Kingdom, seizure you may take,
Which GOD, on Perseverers does bestow;
And, not be shut from thence, by looking back,
When you have set your hands unto the plough.
In this Backsliding, some already are:
Some, nearer to it, than they are aware.
For, so imprudent are Men discontent,
That, to avenge their personal neglects,
Complaints for private injuries, they vent
As Nationall-affronts, and dis-respects;
Whereas, it is apparent every day,
That, many members of each several Nation,
Do suffer, by their own, as much as they,
In Person, in Estate, and Reputation:
And, that both Nations, mutually have shown,
(Unless, perhaps, among the baser sort)
As loving a respect as to their own,
And, therefore, let not Prudent-men retort
Mistaken wrongs; or quarrels be begun
'Twixt them, for that, which Fools and Knaves have done.
Let not those jealousies, which were perchance
Devised by them, who in your spoils delight,
Make you, imprudently, their ends advance,
And you, to their Advantage, dis-unite.
If some of them, discourtesies have shown,
To some of yours; or, injuries have done;
It is no more than you, unto your own
Have offered often, since first this War begun.
An Army cannot possibly be free
From all Injustice; and, yet, oftentimes
Ill Will, and men who dis-contented be,
Will make complaints, much larger than the crimes.
But cursed be their malice, and their tongues,
Who Nations would divide for private wrongs.
Your Fathers felt, and some of you have heard,
The Deadly-Fewds, between you heretofore;
Which, if your own well-being you regard,
Would make you glad it might be so no more:
And entertain, and cherish with all dearnesse,
The brotherly Affection, which that Nation
Has late expressed; and with a true sincerenesse,
Be careful of your mutual preservation.
Yea, if the sons of Belial, and of Blindness,
On either Party, rightly understood,
How greatly, to perpetuate this kindness
Between the Nations, it concerns their good,
(Even in those outward things which they respect)
They would not your disunion, so project.
Believe it, this is not the way to Peace,
But rather, to an never-ending war;
And likelier new troubles to increase
Then set a period unto those that are.
And, they who willingly shall tind such flames,
Or, wilfully foment them, merit well
To be esteemed (to their perpetual shames)
The Plagues of earth, and Fierbrands of hell.
For, of your Scottish-Brethren, wherefore, now,
Ye English-Britaines, are ye jealous grown,
Who have expressed more faithfulness to you,
Then you your selves, unto your selves have shown?
Or, wherein have they seemingly abused
Your trust, whereof, they may not be excused?
They would appear to be confided in
With less distrust, if ever you had heard
On what conditions, they allured have bin
To be dishonorable, for reward.
For, when the Prelates-War had them constrained
To arm themselves against the superstitions
Intruded on them; when they had regained
Their Peace with honor, and on good conditions;
And, when your Army could have been content
Vonat'rally (on promise of reward)
To turn their Swords upon this Parliament,
(And so had surely done, had they not feared
The Scots, then, on their Rear) they were the men
who kept you from the mischeef purposed then.
Had they been trustlesse; or, had aimed at ends,
As base as many of your own have had;
Your Foe, e're this, had done what he intends:
And you and yours, perhaps, had slaves been made.
For, to allure them, four brave Northern Shires
Should have annexed been to Scottish-ground:
To bear expenses (and to pay Arreares)
A paune to be three hundred thousand pound
In Jewels, was designed. York, should have had
The Soveraigne-Seat of royall-Residence;
The Scottish General, should have been made
The chief of both your Armies; and, the Prince
In Scotland, should have had his education;
All which, together, seemed a strong temptation.
Yet, more was offered: For, to each Commander
Revenue, Office, yea, and Honor too
Was promised; and th'unvaluable plunder
Of London, to both Armies: What to do?
To force the Parliament, to make the King
A Monarch absolute; and you, and your,
Into perpetual slavery to bring,
By an ill-gotten Arbitrary power.
But, these temptations, their brave minds abhorred:
Of which their nobleness, this VOICE shall be
An everlasting Trophee, and Record;
Wherein, these times, and times to come, shall see
How, we to sale were offered; and, how these
Disdained to thrive, by base advantages.
If they be faithless, and you shall be true,
GOD, will with shame and vengeance send them home.
If, you unfaithfully your Vows pursue,
Possessors of your Land they shall become.
In spite of all your policies and power,
Here, they shall settle; whither they were set,
To do the work of GOD (as well as your)
Who will requite the kindness you forget.
But, if without hypocrisy and guiles,
You, Brethren-like, shall strengthen one another,
In setting up his Throne, within these Isles,
By, and in whom, you seem, now, kn^t together;
Both, shall thereby, that happiness enjoy,
Which all the powers on Earth, shall not destroy.
Look therefore, well about you, and persever
In your vowed union: For, the maine design
Is to divide you; and, to that endeavor
Your Foes, withal their Faculties combine.
Yea, and of such like projects, there are other,
Through levitie, or malice so promoted,
As if to ruin these three Realms together,
It were almost unanimously voted.
No Chronicle has shown; no age has seen
An Empire so divided, and yet stand;
Or that a Nation so corrupt has been,
Whose desolation was not near at hand.
And, if you shall escape it; be it known
To all now living, and that shall be borne,
A greater Mercy never was bestowne
On any Kingdom since a Crown was worn:
And that no Nations, who so much profess
In outward show, did ere deserve it less.
Although by vows, and duty you are tide,
Yet, you are careless in pursuing either;
And play at fast, and loose on every side,
Fair seeming friends to both, but, true to neither.
He, that is within your Covenants, and conceives
Himself engaged; by those Obligations,
To bring to trial those whom he believes
Injurious to the safety of these Nations;
Often into greater danger thereby falls,
Of secret mischiefs, of reproofs, or troubles,
Then they whom justly to account he calls:
And, by this means, your Foe his power doubles,
Takes courage, and accomplisheth his ends,
By making you to ruin your own friends.
*It Is, often, more safe, to let the Commonweal
Be ruined, or betrayed, then to oppose
A Traitor; or with freedom to reveal
That, which your vows oblige you to disclose.
Your personal immunities, of late,
Are so insisted on, that many fear
The Publike-Priviledge to vindicate;
Least they Infringers of the first appear.
And, if there be not some provisions made,
Whereby freemen their minds may freely say,
When probable suspicions they have had,
That some entrusted, do their trust betray,
Your Privileged Persons, will advance
Their freedoms to the Public hinderance.
Through some obstructions, your most noble Court
Which is the Sanctuary, whereunto
Oppressed men, by multitudes resort,
Yields less relief, then it had wont to do.
For, public Greevances are so increast,
That, time and leisure, hardly can be gained,
To hear how men are privately oppressed,
Till they are quite undone who have complained:
Beside (which in Committees often is done)
By making friends, to come, or keep away,
Unwarranted advantages are won,
To wrong the Truth, or Justice, to delay,
Thus, when the Peers or Commons are but few,
A mischief unexpected may ensue.
For, when Reports or Motions should be made,
If they who make them will deceitful prove,
Occasions doubtless, may be watched, and had,
Injurously both to report and move;
Since they who shall report (if to their choice
The times be left) may their designs propose,
And get it passed by a Major-Voice,
E're their appearing, who the same oppose.
Yea, it is nor hard nor strange to watch and wait,
A we^k or two, for such advantages,
And gain a Vote for that by this deceit,
Which in a Full-Assembly would displease.
Thus, by man's wickedness, a mischief springs,
From justest Courts, and from the noblest things.
And, if you soon return not from your height,
Of Falsehood and Injustice, that which was
Your Idol (and the Glory of your might)
Your hope of bringing mighty things to pass;
Even, that shall also fail you, in the end:
That, shall augment your manifold vexations:
That, shall become unable to defend,
Or save it self, among your desperations.
Nay, that, shall by degrees it self corrupt
To such a Monster, as will fright you more,
More grieve, and more your quiet interrupt,
Than all oppressing Tyrants heretofore.
For, when in sinning, men presumptuous grow,
GOD makes their strength to be their overthrow.
It was not merely in the Government
By Kingship, that you were oppressed of late:
It was not that, which brought the Detriment
Dilacerating so, both Church and State.
The Princes errors, and the Peoples crimes,
(Increasing by their aiding of each other
In wickedness) have made them, in these times,
A mutual scourge; and both now smart together.
By godless counsels you misled your King:
Then kept him, standing in the sinners way:
And to the scorners throne him now you bring;
Whereon if once he settle (as he may,
If God prevent not) you, as yet, but see
Beginnings of those plagues that felt must be.
Unless by penitence you break off sin,
Your Parliamentall Members (when long sitting,
And fewness of the number, shall bring in
Both means, and opportunity, begetting
Such knowledge of each other, as is now
In some Committees) shall much represent
The Lands Corruptions; and make perfect show
By whom, and from what body they were sent.
For, then on Privileges to insist
Meer-personall, more then on Publike-Right:
To say their pleasures; and do what they list,
In Laws contempt, and Equities despite;
Shall grow in use, till you and they shall run
Another Course to be, yet, more undone.
You, then, shall see (though under other notions)
Your old Oppressions to return again:
As much false-play for profit and promotions,
As when you to your King, did first complain:
Then, you shall see your monstrous- High Commission,
Your Councell-Table, your Star Chamber too,
New-shapes assuming to their old Condition,
Revive, and act as they had wont to do*
That Insolence, that Pride Prelaticall,
Those corporal and ghostly Tyrannies,
Which in your Clergy lately had a fall,
Shall rise again, clothed with a new disguise,
And act, what they who played before did mean.
Although they change their Habits, and the Scoene*
For, then some Priestlings, who as guilty are
Of your Divisions, as the Prelates-traine,
(First kindling, and fomenting, still, this war,
As much as they) will make their meanings plain.
Yea, by divisions, and by subdividing,
According as their maine design requires,
Opposing some, and with some other siding,
(As best may serve to compass their desires)
Shall Schisms, Sects, and Fancies multiply.
Beyond compute; and from the truth shall steal
So many hearts by fained sanctity,
By counterfeited honesty and zeal,
That, all your other Foes shall not disease
Your private, and the public Rest, like these.
For, (though enacted- Law, does now of late
From Secular-employments them exclude)
To intermeddle with Affairs of State,
They will, by many means, themselves intrude.
By gathering Parties, they will plots contrive,
To make those greatest, who will them obey;
To make them rich, by whom they hope to thrive,
And to such ends will study, preach, and pray;
Join hands, solicit, covenant, petition;
(The Publike-good, still their chief aim pretending)
And, whatsoever stands in opposition
To their Design, shall want no such commending,
As flows from implacable despite,
Or, from the malice of an Hypocrite.
And, if e're long, there be not some endeavor,
To keep them to their Calling, (and to bound
Their meddling with Lay-matters) you shall never
Be free from Faction, while the Spheres go round.
Like Salamanders, these can never live,
But in a Flame; nor, long themselves conform
To any Reformation: For, they thrive
In Changes best, and swim best in a Storm.
And, many diffring Sects of these there are;
Some to an Independancie incline,
Some to a Presbyterian-way adhere;
Yet, really, themselves to neither join:
But, rather, take advantage to make use
Of that, which to their ends, may best conduce.
To limit these to some Parochial Charge,
Were to imprison them: For, they well know
From Congregations gathered up at large,
What Profits, and Advantages do flow.
A Parish Income, though they largely grant
Both Tithes and Pensions, is but very small,
Compared to what that Priest itinerant,
Can gather up, who has no bounds at all.
A Parish is too narrow for his Pride,
Or Avarice: And, in one place, perchance,
Should he be long compelled to reside,
He could not so conceal his ignorance,
Or cover failings in his Conversation,
As, by an Vnconfined-Congregation.
Had these been regulated, and reduced,
To that Conformity, which Reason would,
The Simple had not then been so seduced:
Nor, had the Common People so been fooled.
Had these, and their Antagonists been charmed
By prudent Discipline, and made agree,
Your King and Parliament had not been armed
Against each other, as this day they be.
Had these been conjured down; that Piety,
That Prudent-meeknesse, and sweet Moderation,
By which a Part of that Fraternity
Does wrestle for a blessing on this Nation,
Should more be honored; and, ere long, prevail,
For curing of those Plagues which they bewail.
For, these, often suffer the deserved blame
Of Demas and Diotrophes; and share,
(By being of their Calling) in their shame,
When of their Faults they no way guilty are.
And, these, are they, whose Prayers and Examples,
Whose good advice, and whose well-tempered Zeal
Shall keep your State, your Cities, and your Temples
From desolation, and your Plague Sore heal.
If therefore, Wit profane, or Scurrile tongue
Shall any of our censurings apply,
To do their worth or innocence wrong,
Let it redound to their own infamy:
Let every check, from which they shall be free,
An augmentation to their honor be.
And, let it not discourage them, a whit,
That, now, those temp'rall Dignities are gone,
Which, often, in their possessors, pride beget,
And, really, are honor unto none;
Since, by their lives, and doctrines, they may more
Their Persons and their Callings dignifie,
Then Wealth and Titles have done, heretofore,
And, reach true honors highest pitch thereby:
For, who, when Prelacie did highest seem,
Were honored by the People, or the Peers,
With more unfain'd affection and esteem,
Then they are now, whom real worth endeers?
Oh! let this honor still on them attend;
And, let their counsels move you to amend.
For, every one has erred in his ways;
King, Priest and People have alike misgone;
As does the Flock, even so the Shepherd strayes;
And, there is no man perfect, no not one.
It is not in the power of words to tell,
How far below esteem your virtues are:
Or, how in wickedness you would excel,
If wholly left, to your own selves, you were.
Could you but look into your hearts, and view
How many villainies those cavernes hide,
Beside all those, which words and deeds do show,
Or, may by circumstances, be descride;
You could not but unfainedly confess,
That you are, yet, incapable of peace.
Could you permit your blinded eyes to heed,
How, while you smart, you multiply offense;
How, that, which awful penitence should breed,
Has changed error, into impudence:
Could you perceive, before it were too late,
How fast you fell away, since you began
To fail in your professions to the State;
And, to be faithless, both to GOD, and Man;
You would abhor your selves, and be afraid
Your souls, by transmigration, would ere long,
Pass into sottish Beasts: For, you have straid
Beyond that blockishnesse which is among
The noblest Brutes; and, hardly do escape
With so much of true manhood, as the shape.
There is no pity of the Fatherless,
Or, of the poor afflicted Widows tears;
No charitable heed of their distress,
Whose misery, most evident appears.
They, who have gladly, lent, and spent, and given
Goods, Blood, and best-assistance, to defend
The Common-safety, (till they have been driven
To want of Bread) have hardly found a friend:
Some other, who often hazzarded their lives,
For your protection (and have quite undone
Their dearest Children, and beloved Wives,
To do you service) have been looked upon
Without regard; and worse, by far, have sped
Then they, who nothing have contributed.
Nay (would it were but so) their, and your Foes,
By your injustice, or your heedlesnesse,
Find means to spatter, and to ruin those,
Whom, to defend, you did (with vows) profess.
And (though their deeds have through this Isle proclaimed
Their faithfulness) you gladly suffer them
By cunning whisperers, to be defamed;
And, Falsehoods words, Truths actions, to condemn
Before due trialls, you (through Avarice,
Or, Envy) with contentedness, can hear
Desert traduced; and, with such prejudice,
Receive Detractions, as if glad you were,
Of such false Quittances, to make a show
Of having paid that debt which, yet, you owe*
It is, indeed, the Politicians way,
Thus, to requite: And, therefore, he that bring^
Obligements, greater then discharge they may,
On thanklesse Nations, or on fathlesse Kings,
Instead of due reward, shall be repaid
With causlesse jealousies, and with suspect,
Of having either failed, or betrayed
Their Trust, by fa^shood; or, by some neglect.
And, then, it must a Mercy be believed,
If He, for all the service he has done,
(In lieu of wh^^ he thought to have received)
With life and loss of honor, may be gone:
And, this, will, now, the portions be of some
Whom better usage, better will become.
And, how can GOD have peace with such a Nation,
In which this b^senesse, and this falsehood lurks,
Which is rejected with much detestation
Among the brutish Salvages and Turks?
Or, how can you to other men be true,
Who to your selves are false, as may appear
By many practices, which you pursue,
Through wilfulness, through folly, or through fear?
For, whosoever tyranny defends,
And sets himself that Party to oppose
Which for the Public Liberty contends,
Betrayeth his own person to his Foes:
Or (if perchance, his person free he saves)
Himself, in his Posterity inslaves.
Nay, you, who seem the better part to take,
Even y^u, are to your selves, as false as they:
The Price of blood, a thing of naught you make,
And complement Advantages away.
Your Passes, and Protections, you bestow,
Nor, as though to your safety they pertain'd;
But rather, your Authority to show,
Who gave them; Or, that profit might be gained
To Clarks, and Secretaries. And, your care
Is not, at all times, how you may supply
A place of Trust, with such as fathfull are;
Or, fittest for the States necessity:
But, soonest they, those favors do obtain,
Who sell the Public for their private gain.
Nor Ableness their duty to discharge,
Nor loss, nor sufferings, for the common Cause,
Nor of Integrity, good proofs at large,
Respect to such a man's preferment draws:
Nay, he that by a general assent
Was nominated, (and petitioned for)
Without his seeking, in the Parliament,
To services of Trust; and, which is more,
Had these employments, also, recommended
By Order thence; has, now, a year unheard
For answer, from those Referrees attended,
Without so much as hope of their regard:
Because, though to the Publike-weale it tends,
It Is found it will disprofit private friends.
Your Indiscreet Indulgence, suffers those
Who loose their Blood, and Liberties for you,
To lie in worse condition, then your Foes,
To whom an equal usage seems due.
Yea, while in loathsome dungeons, they remain,
Who captivated in your service were,
Sweet Lodgings and respect their Foes obtain,
When in your Quarters they imprisoned are.
By which unequallnesse, (till their side please
To show more mercy) much discouragement,
Your Party finds; and, disadvantages
Which moderate severenesse might prevent:
And, you more Cruelty, then Mercy show,
When Mercy you on Cruell-men bestow.
He that to ruin you no spite has spared,
If he submit, although but to deceive you,
Shall find more courtesy, and more regard,
Then he, who never left, nor means to leave you.
He, that with Outrage has your towns embroiled,
He, that has in your blond, his hands imbrew'd,
Your friends of their chief livelihood despoiled,
And, to his utmost power, that course pursued:
He, if for favor (though constrained) he come,
Shall not alone find means to set him free,
With his Possessions, for a trivial sum:
But also quickly countenanced be
With Friends, and Favors, him inabling, too,
Your faithful'st friends, and servants to undo.
False to your selves you are, in not assaying
To execute the fullness of your power,
In these Extremities; and, in delaying
To take those Freedoms which are justly your.
The Members of your Body wasted are;
And, such as are of that consumption glad,
(Unless prevented) will the cure defer,
Until it cannot possibly be had.
By raising fears of some supposed-thing,
Which neither is, nor was, nor shall be done,
Upon your selves, you many mischiefs bring,
Which by a prudent-Stoutnesse you may shun:
For, when you make an unexpected pawse,
You weaken your Assistants, and your Cause.
You act not out your parts, as if you thought,
A Tragedy in earnest, now, were played;
Or, that upon the Combat to be fought,
The Trial of your whole estates were laid:
For, to advance a frivolous design,
To please a knave, that is a friend in show,
To feed some lust, whereto they do incline,
Or, shun the fury of a feared Foe;
Advantages you daily fool away.
Which by no humane power can be recal'd;
Eternity, you venture for a day,
And, when you might with brass be double wal'd,
You seek to fortify the Kingdoms Cause
With paper-works, with rotten sticks, and strawes.
Those Places and Employments, whence arise
The greatest profit, rarely are conferred,
With conscionable care of their supplies,
By faithful men: but, thither are preferred
Those, rather, whose chief aims are how to make
Their private Fortunes; and, to that effect
Know how to move; and how to give or take,
To gain themselves advantage, and respect.
Yea, though there be suspicions, and perchance,
Good evidences too, that some of these
The Cause of your opposers, will advance
(When they an opportunity may seize)
To Offices of Trust, you these commend,
Before your suffering and deserving Friend.
Who their estates have now increased most,
But, they who for the public ventured least?
Whose paiments and preferment^ more are crossed,
Then their, who (to their power) have served you best?
In what Committees now, or in what Shires,
Are not, this day, a multitude of those,
Whose faithfulness undoubtedly appears,
Disabled, and discouraged, by their Foes?
How gen'rally do you in every place,
Begin, well-known Malignants, now, to trust
With your Affairs? And, suffer, with disgrace.
True Patriots from employment to be thrust?
And, by this madness, how are you betrayed?
How open to destruction are you laid?
They, who were first in Arms, for your defense;
Who, first, their Free-will-Offerings to you brought;
And have continued faithful, ever since,
Even they are now, unserviceable thought.
Contrariwise, they, who at first refused
To lend you aid, in Person, or in Pay,
They, who in word and deed, your cause abused
(And are unfaithful to you to this day)
Even they have now insinuated so
By help of their Protectors: And, of these
So over-confident you daily grow,
That your best friends, you ruin, and displease;
And, on your selves a greater hazard bring,
Then all the armed Forces of the King.
For, those accursed Vipers, are with you,
So intermingled in your consultations,
(Nay, rather, so incorporated now,
In private, and in State negotiations)
That, by a miracle it must be done,
If any good Design to pass be brought,
Or, for the publike-safetie be begun,
Which will not, e're performed, come to naught:
And, if you are not pleased to have it so
Why did you? and why do you still, permit,
Those men whom faultring (if not false) you know,
In Counsel, every day, with you to to fit?
And, why for those, do you your Friends neglect,
Unless your own perdition you affect?
Why else when Forts, or Forces to command,
On which the Publike-safety much depends,
Do you commit them rather to their hand,
Whom neither proof, nor likelihood, commends,
To such a Trust? Why not unto their care
And keeping rather, who have courage shown?
Of whose fidelity, good proofs appear?
And whose experience has been well made known?
This could not be, but that you do prefer
Your sons, your nephews, and your friends, before
The Publike-weale, or else persuaded are
That, your Destruction will afflict the more,
Unless, your own devises help undo you;
Or, some who are both near, and dear unto you.
How can there be among you those foundations,
Whereon, your Peace or Safety, may erect,
While most men, for their own accommodations
Designments to the Public loss project?
And, while to compass their desired ends,
They do not only mischief, and delude
Themselves, their kindred, neighborhood, and friends,
Or mis-inform the brainlesse multitude;
But, by their cunning, also do contrive
Those Engines, which good Discipline deface;
The State into unstable postures drive,
Raise jarres, and jealousies in every place;
And spread abroad the Devils Axioms too,
The unity of Doctrine to undo.
These Engineers, your power infeeble more,
And weaken more your hands, then all yet done,
By other adversaries heretofore,
Since this unhappie Warfare first begun.
These, while to build among you they pretended,
As partners in the work of Reformation,
Have secretly their private Aims befriended,
With hindrance to your wished Restoration.
Sanballats, and Tobiahs, you have had,
Who, by dissembling with you, to unite
Have rent you from your selves; and, thereby made
Both Parties feel the common Foes despite;
To be each others whip, and make the Truth
A theme of scorn, in every drunkards mouth.
There are so many failings in the best,
Such needless, and such wilful breach of Laws;
So careless are you, of your Faith professed,
To those, who have been faithful in your Cause;
So has your Falsehood, and your folly blended
Both right and wrong, both good and ill together,
That, both must be opposed or defended;
Or, else you must declare your selves for neither.
And (whether with the one, or the other side
You shall partake, or for a Newter, stand)
No humane wisdom, can for you provide,
A being, with true safety, in this Land:
So little wit, has ordered this Place,
So little honesty, so little grace.
And, these great mischeifs rose, from giving way
For every man, at pleasure, to deface
Those Outworks, which (though faulty) were a stay
Not useless, till some better came in place.
For, he that would prevent an inundation
(By false-built Sea-banks) lets not every one
Tear down the Piles, and break the old Foundation,
Lest that which he would make, might be undone:
Nor for a Cobbler, or a Fiddler, sends;
But, men experienced in such works, does call;
And, with such wariness the fault amends,
That, no disaster may, meanwhile, befall:
And, that the Old-worke, and the New-worke, may
Begin, and end together, in one day.
You thus proceeded not, but (with more heat
Then prudence, hurrying on) in have, you tore
The wharfage down; even while the floods did threat
To drown the fields, and Billows rent the shore.
The furious Soldier was, with commendation,
Permitted to reform, as he thought fit;
(Forbidding or affording toleration,
According to the model of his wit)
And, he that was not mad enough to run
Their wildgoose-chase, and set the world on fire,
To suffer by suspicion, straight, begun;
And, forced was, from employment to retire,
As not right principled, or drawn aside,
By Balaams wages; or, unsanctifi'd.
And, these Reformers, not enough content,
To carve out Discipline, as they shall please,
(And Doctrine too) will on the Government,
Unless it be prevented, shortly seize.
For, having no Foundation, like a feather,
Which from the body of a Foul is torn.
They to and fro, are turned with every weather;
Else, up and down, still wrestlesly are borne.
And, by these foolish Fires, even as you see
By shining-vapours, rising in the night,
Misled from safe highways, poor people be,
To fall in Pits, and Ponds, by their false light;
So these, and other, have by their delusions,
Brought on these Nations, mischieves, and confusions.
And these confusions, not alone befall
The Civil State; but, have disord'red so
Your Discipline Ecclesiastical,
That Church affairs, are out of order too.
Each one sets up their private Idol, there.
That man, contends for this; this man, for that.
Some, would have new things; some, for old things are,
Some, would have something, but they know not what.
Some, care not what they have: and some there be,
That would have nothing, which might them confine,
In doing, or believing; but, live free
In every thing, a perfect Libertine.
And, most, in such a posture do appear,
As if the Tower of Babell raising were.
Some, to no Congregation, will repair,
In which their duties are extemporarie;
As if (because some call vain bablings, prayer)
No man possessed that gift in ordinary.
Some, do abhor Set-Formes; as if they thought
The Spirit, whereby they were first indighted,
Dispis'd the words, which by it self were taught,
If more then once, though with true zeal recited.
Some, care not how GODS Fields are overgrown
With Briars, and Thorns; some others, are so strict.
That, for his Vineyards, they no place will own,
But those, from whence all weeds, and stones, are picked;
As if they, for a Church, allowed not,
What has a scarre, a wrinkle, or a spot.
A Militarie-Church, was well expressed,
In ancient Hieroglyphicke, by the Moon;
To show, that when her light was at the best,
(And when her brightest glory she puts on)
Some shadows, or some Waynings, will declare,
That, in this world, she has not her perfection:
And, that the Sun, from whom her beauties are,
Conveigheth light unto her, by reflection.
Sometime, that Sun, does hide his face away,
Lest men ascribe to Her, what is His due:
Sometime, her proper motions, her convey
Too high, or else, too far, beyond the view
Of private-spirits: And, sometime, from sight
Earths Globe, and sometime Clouds, obscure her light.
Which, many, not consid'ring, are offended
Without a cause; and indiscreetly mar
That Beauty, which to polish they pretended;
And 'twixt her Members, raise intestine war.
Some Weeds, and Corn, are in the blade so like,
That many Weeders have deceived bin;
And, oftentimes, good corn away do pick,
And make the crop, at harvest, very thin.
A spotless Church, or perfect Disciplines
Go seek at Nonesuch: For, they are not found
In any place, between the Tropick-Lines,
Or any where, upon this earthly Round;
Though some have shaped modells, in their brain,
Of that, whereto, they never shall attain.
On speculations, these have doted so,
(Which their own Fancies form) that, they have lost
The Body of Religion; and let go
That Form thereof, which must enshrine the Ghost.
And, he (who being in the flesh) believes
The soul of Worship can retained be,
Or known, without a Form, himself deceives;
Yea others, with himself, deceives he:
And, wanders (restless) in perpetual motion,
In quest of empty-shades; and to pursue
Each flitting dream, and every changing Notion,
Which comes within his intellectual view:
Till Pride, upon his Fantasy, begets
High thoughts of his own light, and in his breast
Stirs up, and kindles those distempered heats,
That keep the mind and body without rest;
And, then perchance, he to a meteor grows,
Which Fools, to be a Star, a while, suppose.
But, if you mark such well, their new-borne-blaze
Is quickly out; and you shall see, ere long,
Some Evils follow, whereof they were Cause
As well as Signs. And take you this, among
Your Notes; that, when your Marches furious be,
Like Jehu's, in Religions reformation;
(And so pursued, as if you said, Come see
Our zeal for GOD) that, but for ostentation,
Or, for your own advancements, you become
So zealous: and, that (when you execute
GOD's mandates, Jehu-like) you, for the same
Shall taste, of his false zeal, the bitter-fruit;
That, other men may learn, his will to do,
For his own sake; and, with due meekness too.
No few disosters had prevented bin,
If in the Work now doing, you had learned
With whether part, 'twas fittest to begin:
Which might in GOD's own works have been descern'd:
For, though this World, in worth inferior be
To Man; and, though the Body be below
The soul, in value; yet, created He
The meanest of these first: And, that may show
How men should work. For, had Man been created
Before the World; or, had the Soul been made
Before the Body, where had they been seated,
To exercise the Faculties they had?
Though noblest works should first be thought upon,
Sometime, a meaner work should first be done.
A Commonwealths, blessed being, does depend
Upon the Church: the Churches Reformation,
You, therefore, principally should intend:
And yet, your zeal may merit commendation,
Though to reform the Civill-government
You first begin, and waive a while the other;
If there shall happen some such accident,
As hinders the reforming both together.
Else, peradventure, while you are contriving,
Your Form of Discipline, there may begin
A mischief, not alone of Peace depriving,
But, of a Country to profess it in:
And, so, with you it has almost succeeded;
Because, this freedom was not timely heeded.
For, had you timed, and ordered aright
The Civill-Part; and, therewith brought along
The Church-Affaires (as by degrees you might)
The Work had proved less grievous, and more strong.
Or, had true Prudencie directed Zeal
First, to reform some things pertaining to
The safe well-being of the Commonweal;
Both, had not been, at once, distracted so.
And, yet, in this, the wisdom of the State
Deserves no check; but, rather, that Defection
Throughout the Land, which does irregulate
The Works in hand, and keep them from perfection,
By multiplied Obstructions; and, sometime,
By streightning, and necessitating them.
For, such is your corruption and your folly,
So false and hypocritical you are;
So brutishly profane, and so unholy,
(Though you Religious-Nations would appear)
That, had your temp'rall grievances been eased,
And all those Privileges been secured,
For which, to be at cost, you yet are pleased,
(And many Deaths and dangers have endured)
Most would have hazarded nor life, nor limb,
Nor Goods nor pains, the Church to vindicate
From her enthralments; but, to sink or swim,
Had left her in a deplorable state:
And, therefore, GOD permitted the pursuit
Of Counsels, which have brought forth bitter fruit.
Even as a Worldling, who has spent his days
In carnal Pleasures; and has partner bin
With lewd Companions, in their wicked ways,
(And in the practice of each crying sin)
When he does feel the stroke of some disease
Portending Death; and that the self-same hour
Those horrors on his conscience also seize,
Which threaten Soul and Body to devour;
Desire of Life, and fearfulness to die
Distracts him so, that heat once for aid,
Both from Physicians, and Divines does cry;
And, having both, becomes so dismayed,
That he receives benefit from neither:
But, hazards Soul and Body both together.
So, while you labored at once to heal
The desperate Diseases, which of late
Endangered both Church and Commonweal;
Such longings, then, your double-zeale begat,
To cure them both together; and so strove
Your Zelots, that, from both at once, they might
The Cause of their distemperatures remove,
That, great Confusions upon both, are brought:
Yea, both of them, are now exposed more
To scandals, losses, errors, perturbations,
And hazards of destruction, than before:
That, whether now you seek their preservations
Together or apart, you shall not, yet,
Obtain that blessing, which you hope to get.
For, you must first be cleared of the sin,
Which hinders from enjoying your desire:
And, that which lately might have cleansed bin
With water, must be purged now with fire.
Yea, since your follies and your sins have brought
Those great Confusions both on Church and State,
For which the means, that might their cure have wrought,
Are now too feeble, and will come too late;
Since, into such a Chaos all is changed,
That, all endeavors useful heretofore,
Have, daily, you from Concord, more estranged,
And made your mischiefs, and your sorrows more,
No ordinary-course, can set you free
From those distractions, wherein, now, you be.
This, being known (and in what great distress
You plunged are) to you it appertains
With penitencie, humbly to address
Your suits to him, in whom your help remains.
And ere you make approaches to his Throne,
There must be (as was told you) some purgation,
From those omissions, and those deeds mis-done,
Which make your prayers an abomination.
The Zimri's and the Cosbi's of the time,
Of whose uncleanness and whose impudence,
You talk of, yet, but as a Venial crime,
Or, laugh at, as a trivial offense,
Must with more zeal (more speed) receive their due;
Or, else, their sins, GOD shall avenge on you.
For, these are so impure, that, in their Sin,
They are unsatisfi'd, unless the same
H^th with some circumstances acted bin,
Which proves them double-guiltie, without shame.
They are not pleased in Simple-Fornication,
Unless thereto, Adulteries they add:
Nor seems that, now, sufficient violation
Of Chastity, unless, the Crime be made,
Yet more abominable, by beguiling
Some Innocent; or else by (offering force)
The Bed of Honor, with bold vaunts defiling:
Nay, there is found among you (if not worse)
Uncleanness more unmanly, and more strange;
Adult'ries by consent, and by exchange.
But, these are the defilements of your Peace,
Where yet they have not felt the rage of War;
Where, yet, the Course of Justice does not cease,
And where great shows of Piety yet are.
And, if such impudence may there be found;
If there, you so corrupt already grow,
Oh I how do those Uncleannesses abound,
Where cruel Outrage her grim face does show?
Sure words are insufficient to express
The Rapes, the Ravishments, and loathsome sins,
Where War gives way to all Unruliness,
And Tyranny and Lust the conquest wins:
When sin and impudence is acted there,
Where Justice on her seats does yet appear.
Behold, this day, even whilst with Desolation,
The Land is threatened, you have now let in,
A crying witkednesse, which to this Nation,
Was ever thought so hateful to have bin;
That, though among the Jews, a Law they had,
Inflicting Death upon it, you have none;
Because, a Law is very rarely made,
Concerning things unlikely to be done.
Who would have thought, there being neither Bear,
Nor Wolf, nor Lion on your English ground,
To seize upon your little Children there,
That many Beasts and Monsters should be found,
In humane shape, to steal and bear away
Your Infants, whilst before your doors they play?
Who would have thought, that for so small a price,
So many, could so quickly have been got,
To join in perpetrating of a Vice,
So horrible, and yet abhor it not?
That, their hard hearts could hear poor Children cry
Upon their fathers, or their mothers name,
Till, peradventure, in an agony
Of extreme passion, livelesse they became.
Or (which is worse) preserved them, to be sent
To Bondage, whilst their Parents (almost wild)
Were left in everlasting discontent,
By musing, on their lost-beloved-child?
This Cruelty has in your streets been seen;
Thus high, have your corruptions heightened been.
In these sad times, while GODS afflicting hand
Lies heavy on you, and with sword and fire,
Pursues, through every Corner of the Land;
And, real Penitencie does require.
In stead thereof, the People now begins
To grow more daring, and to practice crimes
(Beside the old, or Epidemick sins)
Which were unheard of here, in former times.
Blasphemous Heresy among you grows,
Like Sprouts at Springtide, from a new lopt tree:
And, so detestable, are some of those,
That, pious men afraid to name them be:
Lest they, who love the sinfulness of Sin,
Should, thereby, let such mischiefs further in.
Death, was the punishment, which for this crime
Was judged by the Law of Moses due;
And, well it would become you at this time,
That Law, among these Nations to renew.
And if you should observe, how little sense
Of Perjurie, men seem to have of late;
And what bold use is made of that Offense,
To serve the will of Malice, and of hate;
Or, with what ease, Oppressors, thereby may,
(And sometimes do) not only ruinate
And honest Fame, but also take away,
As well their precious lives, as an estate
From Innocents; Death, would not seem a Law
Too strict, to keep those Wicked ones, in awe.
The Land, through Oaths and Curses, also, mournes:
For, some have learned new oaths, and imprecations,
Not heard of heretofore; and, GOD returns
On their own heads, their wished-for Damnations.
In Cursings they delighted; and they soke
Like Oil into their bones. They took a pride
In wishing Plagues; and, lo, as with a cloak
Therewith, now, wrapped they are on every side.
You loved not Blessings: but, when you enjoyed
Peace, plenty, health, and safety, you despised
Those Mercies; and behold, they are destroyed,
That they, hereafter, may be better prized.
You, long have partners been in every sin,
And, now, each others Hang-men, you have bin.
When every neighboring house is in a flame,
You store your own, as if no danger were.
In Honestie's, and in Religion's name,
You credit get; and public Robbers are.
To lie, and to be perjured for the Cause
Of GOD, your King, or Country, is a gin
To catch Opixion; whereby, most, he draws,
That is most bold, and impudent therein.
By some pretense, to benefit the State,
Religion to promote, or aid the King,
You color your oppressions; slander, cheat,
And, put in practice almost any thing:
You, by a show, the General to preserve,
Particulars, unmercifully starve.
You wrong the meaning of your Parliament
When their estates you seize who are their Foes;
To their undoing, who are innocent,
And blameless, though the Creditors, of those.
And, were it our Designment to accuse
Particulars (as to inform and warn,
In general terms; that, they, who yet abuse
Their power, more humanity might learn)
We could have instanced in many things,
Discov'ring, that, their number is not few,
Whose Cruelty, Reproach, and Curses, brings
On those Proceedings, which they did pursue
With Prudence, and with Mercy, should relieve
The Public, more; and, private men, less grieve.
One part of you, contributes to the King;
The other Party, to the Parliament:
To these, you personal assistance bring;
To these, you liberally your goods have lent:
Yet, most of you, who thus engaged are,
Are both to King, and Parliament untrue:
For, many signs your faithlesnesse declare,
And many things your giddiness does show.
You are most firm to that, which you conceive
Your private weal, or safety, best promotes:
While that is doubtful, you, Demurs can weave;
When that is plain, you quickly turn your Coats;
And, to that end, you craftily provide
Quaint shifts, to serve your turns, on either side.
Some, by Intelligence, themselves indear;
Or, by some service acted underhand.
By secret Favors, Friends you can prepare,
Who in the Gap, for you, at need shall stand.
Some, have a Son, a Father or a Brother,
Who Ledger with your Adverse-party, lies;
To make good Terms of Peace, for one another,
According as Occasions may arise.
And (to advance this Project) they, who spend
Their Blood, and Fortunes, with a single heart,
(Endeavoring truly for the noblest end)
Engaged are, to act a desperate part;
Which, into present mischiefs, them does cast,
And, into fears of greater, at the last.
You, have not Faith enough, in GOD, to trust;
(Though, wonder-working Faith, you do pretend)
And, that, has tempted you to things unjust:
That, makes you on your arm of flesh depend.
That, makes you bold, when you should rather fear;
And, fearful grow, when you should bolder be:
That, makes your Foe so vigilant appear;
And, you, so many things, to over-see.
That, makes you, for your Aid, poor tricks devise,
And take that Course which Scandal on you draws:
That, makes you think, that false Reports, and Lies,
Are meritorious in an Honest-Cause:
And, by these fallings, you your peace delay;
And justify your foes, in their lewd way.
They, who abhor Pluralities in other,
And in your Clergy hate non-residence;
Can, Office unto Office join together,
And, in themselves, suppose it no offense.
Some, can heap up Command, upon Command;
Share, or take all the honor, and the pay,
(When but for ciphers, nay for less they stand)
And other men's true value take away.
Some, when the Public was in great distress,
(Though they Commanded few, had pay for many)
Yea, some of you (who better minds profess)
Were paid for soldiers, when you had not any:
And, some have took, (who yet for payment call)
In Plunder and Free Quarter, more then all.
Of Orphans cries, and of the Widows tears,
Whose Fathers and whose Husbands for your sake,
Have spent their lives, and fortunes in these wars,
More heed, more care, more pity, you must take.
When at your doors, and at your feet they lie,
To crave a part of that which is their own,
To feed them in their great necessity,
More Bowels of Compassion, must be shown.
And, they who, to contribute, have not spared
Pains, Counsels, Prayers, Persons, nor Estates
In public duties, must find more regard,
Before the fury of this Plague abates:
For, who can hope the GOD of Righteousness,
Will show forth mercy, to the merciless?
They, who in Peace, the blood of War have shed
As Ioab did; or, have exposed their friends,
And faithful soldiers, to be murdered
To hide their Plots, or to effect their Ends,
Must not be winked at: nor they, who dare
So partial in their judgments to become,
As to inflict on those that equals are
In their transgressions, an unequall-doome:
For, of this partial dealing there is found,
A murmur in your streets: and, Common-fame
Reports, injustice so much to abound;
That, he speedes best, who merits greatest blame:
And, that, for sin, when Accessaries bleed,
The Principalls find favor, and are freed.
Your Beasts of prey, who live upon the spoil,
And, by the public ruins, fat are grown,
Must either quite be chased from this Isle,
Or, from their dens, be roused, and hunted down.
Your Ambodexters, who are neither true,
To GOD, nor Man, to King, nor Parliament,
Must learn a better temp'rature to show,
And of their fraud, and fickleness repent.
Those Rotten-Members, those false Officers,
And those Committee Men, who have deceived
The Kingdoms Trust, must for that guilt of theirs,
Pass other doomes, then yet they have received,
Before those wrongs, and practices, do cease,
Which keep away your much desired Peace.
They who have almost perfected the times
For desolation, by habituating
Themselves in Sodom's, and Gomorrah's crimes;
And, by an impudently imitating
Of their impenitence: even they, that had
The pride of life, sacietie of bread,
And lived in idleness; must, now, be made
To taft their sufferings, who are hunger-fed:
To feel the pains of their laborious life,
Who, sweat in good employments; and the scorn,
Which humble-men have long without relief,
By their oppression, and ambition, borne.
These must be humbled, and perhaps destroyed,
Before your expectations are enjoyed.
Your counterfeit and rash Reformers, too,
Must change their hearts, and regulate their zeal,
Ere you shall compass what you hope to do,
In matters of the Church, or Commonweal.
Your Scribes and Pharisees, who by long prayer,
Devour poor Widows houses; and by shows
Of honesty (and by pretending fair
To piety) good meaning souls abuse:
They, who in tithing mint, and annise, are
More strict, then in the weighty points of Law;
And, burdens great, for other men prepare,
When they themselves will hardly lift a straw:
These, must, e're perfect Peace you here shall see,
Be more unvizarded, then yet they be.
Your pettie-Tyrants, must be likewise fewer,
Then now they are; e're GOD will condescend,
To ease your burdens, or your griefs to care;
Or, bring your dis-agreements to an end.
For, how, in equity, can you expect
Your GOD should free you, from those injuries,
That Sov'raignty-abused may inflict?
Whilst you, on one another, tyrannize?
Or, how can, possibly, true Peace be there,
Where well nigh all are Tyrants to their power?
And, as they get advantage domineer,
Insult, oppress, impov'rish, and devour?
For, this oppression you may plainly see
In some of every Calling, and Degree,
Nigh every one the King exemplifies,
In usurpation of Prorogatives,
Above his due: Nay, that which he denies
Unto his Prince; injuriously, he strives
To take unto himself. The Peer, upon
The Commoner usurps: The Husband, so
Upon the Wife: The Father, on the Son;
And, on their Servants, thus, the Master, do.
In every Corporation, thus presume
The Governors; yea, thus the Magistrate
Of lowest rank, does on himself assume
What, in his Chief, he will not tolerate:
And, they who their own Freedoms, fain would save,
Are always willing, others to inslave.
These, and such Scabs, and Tetters, must be seared
E're they will heal; And, you must cut away
Those Members, whereon Gangrieves have appeared:
Which, else, this Kingdoms body will destroy.
For, multitudes of those, among you, hide
Their Addle-heads: yea, many such as these
(Corrupting, both the one, and other side)
Do keep incurable this Lands disease.
And, to your safety, it would most redound,
(And your desired Peace, the more assure)
If, by each party, their own faults were found;
And, they themselves, endeavored their own cure:
Which, shall perhaps, begin, when on one day,
Both Parties, for this Grace, shall Fast, and Pray.
But, why should thou be kept attending, here,
What further (to this purpose) may be said,
And be the while (when thou no harm do fear)
Injuriously rewarded, and betrayed?
Lo; they that hate thee, while thou art imploid
To seek their Peace; have now prevailed so,
That, if their plot thou quickly make not void,
They, whom thou honour'st most, shall thee undo.
That mischief to prevent, make therefore speed;
And, mark, when thy endeavor thou have done,
What justice or injustice shall succeed:
For, guess thou may, by what befalls thereon,
How safely thou have ventured thy estate
Upon the publike-Faith, or publique-Fate.
The VOICE here paws'd again; and, forth I went
To see, how I requited was by them,
In whose defense, my fortunes, I have spent;
My life adventured, and consumed my time.
If they deceive my hope, my greatest grief
Will be for them; because, I plainly see
Their failing me, of promised relief,
Will more dishonor them, then hinder me.
For, nor on Peers nor Commons, I depend:
But, on his power, and on his love alone,
Who, ere I had my being, was my Friend;
And, shall be, when my Foes are all undone.
By Him, in all oppressions, I am eased;
With whatsoere he pleases, I am pleased.
The third Canto.
The Contents.

Here, whether you be plea'd, or no,
This Author, makes bold to show
Those Portions of his Private wrongs,
Whose knowledge, and redress, belongs
To Public Justice; that, her eye
May through his wounds, her own epsy.
The VOICE, then speaks again, and schools,
In Him, all other froward Fools,
Who, with impatiencie, do vent
Their private wrongs, or discontent:
As if their Trifles could be heard,
When Kingdoms cannot find regard.
It shows, our Senate blameless are,
Of those Distractions, raging here;
And, where the Fault, and Fountain lies,
From whence, our present plagues arise.
EXcuse me, if your longings be delai'd,
Mine own Affairs, a little, to review;
And, if, here somewhat of my self be said,
Before my former Subject I pursue.
For, though I know not many, much encli'nd,
To hear, or speak, of what may profit me,
And see most pleased, when I am as unkind,
Or failing to my self, as others be:
Ye^, though sometime I have appeared such,
Yet, now, my meaning to my self is better;
And, therefore, whosoever thinks it much,
My self, I finding, to my self a Debtor,
Will here presume (because I justly may)
To do my self an Errand, by the way.
I know it will not relish well with some,
When, of my self, they this Digression find;
But (seeing Charity begins at home)
When others do not, I, my self will mind.
My wrongs do not alone extend to me;
But, on the Public Rights take, likewise, hold:
And, for my sake, since heard they cannot be,
They, for the Common-Safetie, shall be told.
Most famous Prophets, and renowned Saints,
And many other of approved wit,
When they oppressed were did make complaints,
And in their Volumes of themselves have writ.
If therefore, any of my Readers grutch,
The time of reading, some few leaves, to spare,
Concerning me, who have not thought it much,
All this, for his Advantage, to prepare;
I leave him to his pleasure, and his case,
And bold will make, to do as I shall please.
The VOICE dismissing me, as in the Close
Of my preceding Canto, you have heard,
From Postures of Retirement, I arose,
To see, in what Designs, my Foes appeared.
And, saw indeed my self so ill befriended,
That (whilst I mused with a serious thought,
What to the Common Peace and Safety tended)
My Ruin had maliciously been sought.
And, that it has been followed, ever since
My first engagement in these fatal wars;
By reason of an evil Influence,
To me directed from malignant Stars,
Who shining, openly, with fair Aspects,
Produce, in secret, mischievous Effects.
Which, if I should endeavor to express,
The pains, a small Advantage would return;
Since, they who might my Grievances redress,
Might grudge to hear so much as I have borne.
For, by Oppressions, manifold and great,
Remonstrances are often made so long,
That, when Redresses we suppose to get,
Our just Complaints, unheard, away are flung:
And, Malice can with so much impudence
Invent, and vent untruths, (in hope thereby
To disadvantage truest Innocence)
That, Patience is our cheapest remedy:
And, he who seeks for other Cures, often doubles
His Grievance by Expense, Affronts, or Troubles.
There are so many Passages awry,
In every Action; and, in every Cause,
So many Tricks, to put a Hearing by;
To blind the Judges, and pervert the Laws:
So many Fees and Charges, to be paid
To Witnesses, to Clerks, and Counselors,
Which quite are lost, when Hearings are delai'd;
(Ten times, perchance, before an end appears:)
Nay, often, Partiality and Pride,
(In stead of Justice) gives that provocation,
Which no free Spirit, always, can abide,
Without some shows of our ward Indignation;
Whereby, he peradventure, does augment
That mischief, which he labors to prevent.
At first, I hoped better, and I strove
In humble Supplications, to declare
My suffcings; and, their burden to remove.
Where likel'est means of such achievement were.
But, there I saw such throngings with Petitions;
So small assistance, and so much ado:
There, saw I, in all private Expeditions,
And, in the public, such Obstructions too:
Such waiting, such soliciting by friends;
Such mis-informings, makings, and unmakings;
Such partiality, for private ends,
Such thwartings, such Opposings, and mistakings:
And, had so difficult a Course to run,
That, e're I could be heard I was undone.
A place of Profit, or of Reputation,
I never, hitherto, from any sought,
Until my self thereto by invitation
(From those whom it concerned) I called thought.
And, when I have a matter to be heard,
I can enforce my self to little more,
Than (after I my suit have once ^eterr'd)
To wait for hearing, at the Counsel door.
Perhaps, when long unheeded I attend,
I give remembrances that I am there;
Or, for dispatch, a word or two can spend:
And, if I speed not, much I do not care.
By which blunt course, I past, with little fruit,
Through many an honest Cause, and hopeful Suit.
When long Attendance, no dispatch affords,
My Passions, peradventure, overflow;
And, boil up into those impatient words,
Which more Corruption, than Discretion, show.
And, then, they who, before, to do me right,
Could find no leisure, straight at leisure be,
To hear enough to do me a despite;
And, to my temper, that reduces me.
For, though they, with a mischief, send me home;
Yet, many good effects, thereout arise:
Of them, and of my self, I, there, become
A Censurer: and, study to despise
Those Things, and those Affairs pertaining to me,
Wherein, a Fool or Villain, may undo me.
I cannot, though my life it were to save,
Solicit, as I see most Suitors can;
And, rather than repulses I would have,
Use every means, almost, to every man.
When I bring in a matter to be tried,
I hope, that all my Judges will be just:
And, (though, this way, much failing I have spide)
Till he deceives me, no man I distrust.
To press mere strangers, I, too modest am;
Wise men, regard not much solicitation;
To urge my Friends, their friendship seems to blame;
To Court a Fool, is my abomination:
And, favors to implore from persons evil,
To me appears, a praying to the Devil.
This Inclination, ar it keeps me poor,
So, it preserves me out of many Snares:
It makes my inward quiet much the more,
When outwardly, my rest disturbed appears.
And, therefore, when away I have been sent,
With less then naught, when more then all was due,
One puff blew off, my greatest discontent;
And, e're I slept, I pleased, and merry grew.
But, I of late, before I was aware,
That Object of my Contemplation lost,
Which teaches how affliction I should bear:
And, being with a sudden storm, then tossed,
Oppressed with wants, and with unkindnesse too,
It made me vex my self, as others do.
And, much ado I had to keep my tongue
From speaking out the murm'rings of my heart;
And wonder not, that, others, having wrong,
Do sometime act an unbeseeming part:
No marvel, though a wiser man then I,
Was causlesly a madman termed of late,
By reason he had with impatiencie,
Opposed some gross abusings of the State:
And, that, the wisdom of the Holy Ghost,
Has said, Oppression makes a wise man mad:
For, though true wisdom never can be lost,
A fit of madness may be thereby had;
And, so I think had I: and, so may you,
Who read me, being used as I am now.
For, when I came abroad and saw the spite
Which had been done me: And, when done it was
How much contentment, and how much delight
The Doers took in what they brought to pass;
Although I slighted them, as foolish men,
(Who had no sense, how I avenged might be,
Nor worth, to move my anger, or my pen)
Unkindness, in others, troubled me.
And, though my service merit not so much
As an Acknowledgement (much less reward)
I thought, my love unto my Country such,
As might, at least, have purchased regard,
And friends enough, for me to have enjoyed
More grace then he, that would have her destroyed,
Which finding otherwise; as one amazed,
I sat a while; not well discerning whether
Grief, Shame, or Anger, that demurrer caused
(Or all those passions mustred up together.)
But, when I called to mind how many years
The Brunts of opposition, and of scorn,
Endured I have, for what, to me, appears
To be the chiefest work, for which I Am borne:
And, when I minded, that, nor Peace, nor War,
Prelaticall, nor Presbyterian dries,
Nor youth, nor age, to me propitious are;
That King nor People, favored my essays:
And, that nor Friends, nor Foes, nor Wrong, nor Right
Befriended me; it broke my patience quite.
And being much distempered, thus my thoughts
Began to grumble, (having drawn together
A crew, of Riotous distrusts and doubts,
Which, in such cases, call forth one another)
Art thou (said they to me) for all thy pains,
Thy losses, and adventures, thus rewarded?
Is this, the well-affected Parties gains?
Are thus, our Vows and Covenants rewarded?
Have we the tricks of Hocus Pocus learned
At our Committees? And, can some convay
A mischievous Design, so undiscerned,
That, Honesty nor Wit, discover may
How impudently they abuse the State,
For private profit, or through private hate?
Was I, the first of those, who, where I dwelt,
To guard our Liberties, and save our Laws,
An uncompelled Contribution dealt?
And, who first there was armed for this Cause?
Was I, among the first, who did withstand
The secret plottings of Malignants, there?
And, Horse, and Foot, and Castle did command,
When fewer Friends, than Foes, about me were?
Was I, among the first, of whose estate
The furious Adversary made a prey?
Did I expose my self unto their hate,
Who offered me, a fairer-seeming way;
Wherein appeared, what chance soever came,
A likely means, to get a saving-game?
Have I, my life adventured often too,
Through much discouragement, and without pay?
Done every thing my strength or with could do,
To keep the Weak, from falling quite away?
To help confirm the Strong? To bring them home,
Who by Seducers have been led aside?
To make our Newters, Zelots to become?
And mark-out Foes, that, here, as friends abide?
Have I, with patience viewed my self bereft,
In Taxes and Free-quarterings, by our own,
Of what to me, the plundring Foe had left?
And, suffered other Injuries unknown
In public? and (it may be) now concealed,
That, they more seasonably may be revealed?
Have I, upon the Publike-Faith reli'd,
And on the Commons Order, fairly granted,
Until my Children might for bread have cried,
If I my self, had private credit wanted?
Have I, to serve my Country, so engaged
My Fortunes and my self, that, Open Foes
Against me are implacably enraged,
And, Secret-Ones, as virulent as those?
Have I, adventured, likewise, therewithal
Hopes present, and in expectation too,
Resolving, with this Cause, to stand and fall,
And (though abused) my Duty still to do?
Yea, thus have I resolved? thus done? thus borne?
To be repaid with injuries and scorn?
Behold, Malignancie is grown so strong
Within our Quarters; and, has so made void
The Public Faith, that, I am lately flung
Quite out of that, which I, thereby, enjoyed:
And, it has acted with such insolence,
By color of Authority abused,
That, it proceeds to warlike violence;
And like a Foe, the Kingdoms-friend, has used.
Before I knew, that, any man appeared
Against me there, where I was overthrown;
Before that I was called to be heard,
Before my claim or answer, could be known;
I was expelled unjustly, from my right,
With all the circumstances, of despite.
For, He that has been armed to bereave me,
Of what by public Order I possessed,
And, where with (if good hopes do not deceive me)
That, Order shall, ere long, me re-invest;
Seemed not enough content that he so sped,
Unless by boasting of his Conquests too,
The Well-affected he discouraged;
And, showed Malignants, what his Friends could do:
Nor was it without much discouragement,
To all the Faithfull-Partie thereabout;
For, when they saw my hopes had that event,
It made them partly fear, and partly doubt;
Lest he, who for the Public most has done,
May live, till he shall least be thought upon.
For, nothing was considerable showed,
In him, to whom I did perforce resign;
But, that his hands were in their blood imbrew'd,
For whose defense, I have adventured mine.
I, put on Arms, to serve the Commonweal;
And, for her safety offered all I had:
He, raised Forces, but to rob and steal;
And, to his power, a spoil thereof he made.
Nor, came he hither, as has been surmiz'd,
With such Repentance, as he ought to bring;
But, to pursue a Stratagem, devised,
To have betrayed my person to the King:
Which not succeeding, and, he finding friends
Among my Foes, pursued other ends.
For, Friends he found (as most Malignants do)
So forward our Ill-willers to protect,
So powerful, and, withal, so cunning too,
Their ends, by fair pretenses, to effect;
That, though I were their neighbor, and their friend;
Though my endeavors had been truly done,
To further that, whereto they love pretend;
And, though before this War, I knew not one,
Whose malice, in those parts, suspect I might;
Nor any person, who suspected me
To them injuricus, in word, deed, or thought:
Yea, though, by Covenant, obliged they be
On my behalf; They, naythelesse, did grow
Confed'rates with this Stranger, my known Foe.
Else, when they heard how first the Plot was laid
For my surprisall; where, it was begun;
To whom, he meant I should have been betrayed;
By whom, and how, and when it should be done,
Averred on oath, me thinks, in such a case
He should not, then, so suddenly, have found
So many favoring him, to my disgrace,
If all of them had at the heart been sound.
Nor, would you think, if every circumstance
Were fully told, that Charity first drew
So many to afford him countenance,
Who was their Foe, if they to us were true;
And, who may thank the spite they bore to me,
That, they, to him, so kind and friendly be.
And, on some likely Grounds, conceive I may
Those friends of his were they, who first convay'd
Those notions to him, which first showed the way,
How to my Foes I should have been betrayed.
For, from our Quarters, he so far, then, lived,
That, else, our Posture, and Affections, here.
He had not so well known, to have contrived
A plot, which did so feizable appear.
And, when he came (as if his coming thither,
A blessing to the Country had been thought)
To further his Designs, they joined together;
They strengthened him, against me, what they might:
And published of me, to my disgrace,
What neither done, nor spoke, nor purposed was.
And, that they with their Grandees might comply,
My Neighbors turned about, I also find;
They whom, in Peace, I always lived by,
And, unto whom I never was unkind;
Even they, who true respect from me have had,
And, till this War, the like to me did show,
Are of my losses and disgraces glad,
And, to my causlesse wrong, befriend my Foe.
They mention me, when they together sit,
As if it hardly could allowed be,
That, of Religion, Souldieries or Wit,
There appertained any share to me;
And speak for truths, what they themselves do know
They may with safety swear, is nothing so.
My greatest wrongs, and sufferings, now, be there
Where best I have deserved: My greatest scorn
And dis-respect, is in those places, where
My dwelling was; and there where I was borne.
They who are most obliged to befriend me,
Have most abused my patience, and desert;
They, who have made a Covenant to defend me,
Have with my chiefest haters taken part.
Yea, now, when my affronts are to the wrong
Of Publike-Justice; and, when my defense
Unto the Publike-safety does belong,
They have exposed my well-known innocence,
To his despite, against whom, erewhile, I thought
I needed not, protections to have sought.
In some respects, their cruelties are more
Then theirs, by whom my dwelling wast was laid;
For, (though they robbed my house, and left me poor)
To bar relief, no spightfull part they played.
But, these trod on me, when they saw me down;
And, lest I should find pity in distress,
A false report by them abroad was blown,
As if my well known losses had been less
Then I can prove them; For, I offer here
That if my hindrances (well weighed) be found
One mite below what I affirmed they were;
For every shilling I will give a pound,
If they will my true damages defray
When I have proved that true which they gainsay.
Yet, some, to that intent, did late suborne
The most defamed Varlets of the Shire
To swear against me, and to be forsworn,
By crossing what they formerly did swear:
To that intent, while our Committee sat,
The Kingdoms Foe, had leave in person, there,
To manage witnesses, as for the State,
And, them by leading questions to prepare,
For proof of what they falsely did suggest,
To my dishonor: But, they could not bring
Their witnesses, against me, to attest,
One culpable, or one material thing;
Nor was it worth regarding if they had,
Consid'ring, of what persons, choice they made:
For, one of those, unto that village came
Where now he lives; due punishment to shun,
Or, to escape a just deserving shame,
For what he in another place had done.
He, now, in part by labor, part by prowling,
(With other courses to his neighbors known,
As lawless fishings, and unlawful fowling)
And taking somewhat more then is his own,
Makes shift to live. Another of this Pack,
Was he, that should have been the Instrument
Of my betraying, who like course does take;
And, lately, to avoid the punishiment
Deserved long, is married to a whore;
With whom he lived like a knave before.
The third, a Labourer of evil fame,
Whom I five years together had employed
(To keep his brats from starving, him from shame,
And, that, he other mischieves might avoid)
This Beast, when I was plundered by our Foes
Of what they found, made offer (for a sum,
By him desired) that he would disclose
A parcel of my goods, then hidden from
Those Vultures eyes; who, readily agreed
To promise much: But, when the work was done,
And, this false Traitor came to ask his meed,
Some blows they gave, but, money gave him none;
And, told him, hanging was the fittest pay
For him, that such a master would betray.
The fourth of these, had been my servant too,
Whom (though he had deserved public shame
For doing more then honesty should do)
I put away, without an open blame:
And, at that time his faultiness concealed,
Because he seemed religiously inclined;
But, shortly after, other men beheld
Apparent proof of his dis-honest mind.
For, in the night felloniously he broke
A Colonels Field Wagon of our side
Then quartering at his Masters; and thence took
Some things of worth; for which, he did abide
Correction in the Bilboes, for a day,
And after, by connivance, ran away.
These were the witnesses, which forth were sought
By some who for the Parliament pretend,
In hope their power, should more effects have wrought
On those choice Instruments to work their end.
These (whom I Will prove charactred thus to be
Without the least addition of a lie)
Are they, whom now my foes, to scandal me,
Have raked out of the ditch of infamy.
These, are encouraged to devise and say
Of me their pleasures: and to bring and carry
What ever to my wrong convert they may,
Or to the profit of my adversary;
Whom, to the States dishonor, they protect,
And merely, in dispight of me, respect.
When informations, were against him laid,
And his reply required thereunto;
From just restraint, his person they convaid,
Before cause shown, or order so to do.
On his behalf they have subscribed hands,
Thereby deluding, wilfully, the State:
He had our soulderie at his commands,
To execute his pleasure, and their hate.
And, has so far prevailed, that unless
The mercy of the State vouchsafe with speed
The sufferings of her servant to redress,
And him, and his oppressors better heed;
For ought he sees, his Country he may serve
With faithfulness; and yet his household starve.
Why should my person from that place be driven,
In which I best know how to serve the State?
Of what to me, by public grace was given,
Why should I be deprived, by private hate?
What knew they in him, whom they more befriended,
But that he was this Realms professed foe?
Or why to do me wrong have they contended,
Except because I never will be so?
They who were wont to gloze and fawn upon me,
When I was armed among them; and while they
To their Designs were hopeful to have won me,
Now snuff, and turn their nose another way.
And think, that they themselves now quite have freed,
From him, who marked and hindered their proceed.
For, that Confed'racie within those parts,
Where then I lived (and maugre whose intent
I there commanded) having rotten hearts
Unfaithful, always to the Parliament,
Perceiving me unlikelie to be made
Their Instrument; and, that my presence, there,
(With such repute, and power as I then had)
Might mar their works, which they contriving were*
They so prevailed, that from my Garrison
I was removed, if thence not betrayed:
(For many things suceeded thereupon,
Which made me think, that so it may be said)
And all our neigh'bring Country, ever since,
Has dearly paid, for my removing thence.
When I was gone, a part of those arose
(Encouraged by some other underhand)
And my estate, (as chiefest of their foes)
First seized; and then, the place of my Command.
In which forth-breaking, some went on so far,
That, ever since, they open foes have been:
Some went as far as fools, and cowards dare;
And then slunck back, in hope they were not seen.
But, some of them so cunningly did act,
That, though they are as guilty as the rest,
By circumstances; yet, by open fact
Their falsehood is not perfectly expressed:
And, these by cunning, such effects have wrought,
That knaves and fools, our faithful men are thought.
These, have a way invented how to arm
The dangeroust Malignants of the Shire,
And, make men hope their Foes will do no harm,
Till sheathed in their Chest their swords appear.
These, have a trick to make their neighbors dream,
A double Tax increases not their cost,
And, that though their designs have beggered them,
Their wit, alone, saved all from being lost.
These, have so laid their Scoene, and acted so,
That, though we daily hear, and plainly see,
What course they bend, and what they mean to do,
(When all things to their purpose rip'ned be)
We strive in vain their projects to prevent;
And, gain but mischieves, for our good intent.
Nay, this new Junto, does so strong become,
By their conferring Offices and Places,
By adding-to, and by removing-from,
By secret-commendations, and disgraces;
And by deluding of a simple crew,
(Who, by these Politicians, may be brought
Their own perdition fiercely to pursue)
That, they have almost compast what they sought;
And, they will gain the rest, if not prevented;
For, by their diligence, they have removed,
Undone, discouraged, or discontendted
Most men, whose faithfulness was most approved:
And, they, whose power, these cannot yet destroy,
Do act with small success, and little joy.
Had I conceived, that, now it would have been,
As needful as I find it, to collect
Such proofs of that which I have heard and seen
To prove their faithlesnesse whom I suspect,
Or know unfaithful: that, I might have made
Such proofs to others, as I have whereby
To prove it to my self; I should have had
Enough to make me able to unty
That knot of Vipers, which now to unknit
Is not so easy. But, my aim has bin
To mend particulars, and bend my wit,
In generals, alone, to strike at sin:
And, that has rendered, now, my power the less,
The mischiefs of this Faction to suppress.
These, having long, and many several ways,
To root me from among them, tried their wit;
And failed heretofore in their assayes,
At last, thus happened to accomplish it.
Within that Village, where my Spoilers made
A prey of that estate which I possessed,
A Captain of the Kings a Chattle had,
With which, the Parliament did me invest.
He, is that person who protected was,
As I have here expressed: had they a thought,
By countenancing him, to bring to pass
Their purpose; and have gained what they sought,
For, I, who served my Country, thence am chased;
And he that spoild it, in my room, is placed.
I grudge not mercy when it should be shown,
Nor is my heart so churlishly inclined,
As not to spare, a portion of mine own,
Where, Objects fit for mercy, I shall find.
But, when I see my self ungently used,
Those favored, who my life would have betrayed,
Authority deluded and abused,
And plots to ruin, and disgrace me, laid,
I cannot think it Patience to be mute,
In such a case; or, that with charity,
Or with a manly prudence it can suit,
To pass, at all times, such abuses by:
Or, that we may not, justly, on our foes
Repair what in this lawful war we lose.
Why should it grudged be, that by the Sword,
We, by the Sword, our losses repossesse?
Why should our Party to their friends afford
Less favor, then to those that merit less?
So well deserving, wherefore should he seem
Who put the State to hazard, and to cost
That all his great estate he should redeem
For less, then at one skirmish I have lost?
Of those reliefes, why should I be defeated,
Which do, by right and grace, to me belong?
Thereof, why should I be dispoil'd and cheated,
Both to the States dishonor, and my wrong?
And, wherefore should I not expect, and have
A confirmation, of what once they gave?
For, who will in our Senators confide,
Or prize their Orders which are made by them,
If they permit them to be vilifi'd?
And, their Ioynt-Votes, loose Members to contemn?
To say, they heeded not what things they granted,
So prudent an Assembly, mis-became;
To say, they power to make it good, have wanted,
Would wrong their power, and bring us all to shame:
And, to affirm that they regardlesse are
To vindicate their grant, for his relief,
Who to advantage them, his life could spare,
Were to aver, what merits no belief.
How comes it then, that, I dispights have born?
And that their favors, now from me, are torn?
Why has it openly, by some, been spoke
Ere question put, or any vote made known,
That, there is an intention to revoke
What by the Commons, was on me bestown?
How dared he (who rather should uphold
The Commons lawful Right in what he may)
How dared he (as soon as it was told
By whom I claimed) in sleighting wise to say,
It Was but the Commons Order? as if that
Were not an Act sufficient to confer,
For my Recruit, the personal estate
Of any traitorous Rebell-Commoner;
Until a time return, in which, men may
Have Justice done them, in a legal way.
Why are false rumors raised and entertained,
As if I many thousand pounds had got;
Whereas, of hind'rances by me sustained,
To me, the tenth as yet returns not?
How comes it, that attendance, nigh two year
Procures me (although my wants be great)
No penny of two thousand pounds arreare?
Nor an imploiment, that affords me meat?
Why speed I thus? And wherefore, notwithstanding
The remnant of my ruins forth I laid,
Thereby to keep my soldiers from disbanding,
Is nothing, in requital, yet, repaid,
But sleights, and slanders? yea, though use I pay
For many hundreds of it, to this day?
Indeed, my house GOD has refurnished;
And, of his Love, to give me outward shows,
Has clothed my Body, and my Table spread,
As well in spite, as presence of my Foes.
Yet, when I shall account how I have lived;
Of what I have been hindered, since these wars;
How, much was lost; how little is received;
How, my successive-wants supplied are:
How, my engagements every day increase,
How destitute, my Wife and Children be,
Of outward Portions; and, how merciless
This world, has all my life time, been to me:
They, who their favors, have on me bestowed,
Shall find no cause to grudge the Mercy showed.
And though (as some conceive) I have obtained
A full repair, and therewith somewhat more
Than my bare losses? what, had I then gained,
Respecting all my damage heretofore?
Against those Traitors to the Common-Good,
Who, now, apparent Enemies are found,
Nigh thirty years, a Combat I have stood:
So long ago, I to these Isles did sound
A warning Trumpet. So long have I borne
The frowns and fury of the wanton Court,
The Prelates malice, the despitefull scorn
Of wealthy Fools, and of the vulgar sort.
Yea, though I know a path applauded more,
I took the course, I knew, would keep me poor.
And, why should any man be discontent,
That for my damages, and service then,
My charges, pains, and close imprisonment,
I, now have bread, and clothes, like other men?
Why is a trifle thought too much for me?
When, one slight Officer can in a year,
Cheat up a Sum, that shall sufficient be,
To pay my damages, and my Arreare?
Why, grievous does it seem, that, out of that,
Which was by him possessed, who compli'd
With those, who robbed me of my estate,
A part of my great loss should be supplied?
He having spoiled my Friends of ten times more,
Than, ten times that small part, he should restore.
Since, we for Traitors, and for Cutthroats, here,
(And for their wives, and their malignant brood)
Provisions make, when Converts they appear;
Why should there not, of raiment, and of food,
For us, our Wives, and Children, some supplies
Be likewise made? yea, since they were the Cause,
That, on our backs, the work so heavy lies,
Of holding up our Liberties, and Laws?
Why are we poorly clothed, while they are brave,
By whose unfaithfulness we are undone?
While we want bread, why should they fullness have,
By whom, these wars and troubles were begun?
And, till a Restoration may be had,
Of what we lost, why should they rich be made?
Since by our Adverse party, our estate
Is given and possessed: Since we are
Assured of their everlasting hate,
So long as we have either peace, or war,
Or Being in this life: yea, since our Cause
Is known unto us, to be just, and right;
Since for our Conscience, Liberties, and Laws,
Against oppressing Tyrants we do sight:
Since to avenge the Saints, we do oppose,
Not merely Cananites, whom for their sin,
The Land would vomit forth; but, also those,
Who without cause, this war did first begin:
Why should we not out of their Barnes be fed,
By whom we have been robbed of our bread?
Nay, since our Charity does portions give,
To feed their wives and children, while among
Our Adversaries, in that course, they live,
Which this unhappie Warfare does prolong,
Why should not we and ours, as well as they,
Be cared for? since with a willing heart,
We bore the heat, and burden of the day,
And, from our duties, mean not to depart?
Why is our equity, and our discretion
So small, that till our losses be repai'd,
We suffer for a trifling composition,
Their whole estates, by them to be enjoyed?
And, their full freedom, who, for ought we know,
Are here, but Spies, or Agents for the Foe?
He, whom, that true Repentance brings home,
Which makes a real Convert to the State,
Not for his Lands, but Conscience sake does come;
And, such an one, if we redintegrate,
When, of his penitence good proofs appear;
Of Charity, both to our selves and them,
An honorable Evidence it were,
Which no man should repine at, or condemn.
But, when we unadvisedly shall part
With large Possessions, for a Person, which
Brings to us, neither wit, nor honest heart,
Nor Power, nor any thing to make us rich,
But poorer; and, it may be weaker too,
How reasonlesse, is then the thing we do?
When we receive to Mercy, those who seek
No more, but how they their estates may save;
To compass by that match, what are we like,
But an estate to lose, and find a knave?
They, strength receiving, from our false-ones, here,
Restrengthen them; and are so knit together,
That, we who to this Cause most faithful were,
Are much disabled by their coming hither.
And, what advantage had we lost, I pray,
If of those few, who reconciled seem,
None had returned? what lost we, if you weigh,
How useless to that party they did seem,
From whom they came (while they continued there?)
And, what they are to us now they are here?
Who shall at last our private loss repay,
If this course hold? who shall the charge sustain
Of all our future detriments, but they,
Who of the cost already do complain?
Why should a perjured Commoner, or Lord,
(Who, peradventure, did but stay behind,
That some advantages it might afford,
To those departed) suffered be to blind
The Public Eye, in favor of our Foes?
Defraud the State? And in our competitions
Slight, and affront us, for the sake of those,
Who wilfully endeavored our perditions?
And, only, come (for ought yet known unto us)
That, at our cost, they safely may undo us?
When of my goods, the Foe had me dispoil'd,
(For doing faithful service) and when I,
To seek an habitation was compelled,
And had provided for my Family,
By public Order; why neglected so
Was I, and mine? That (knowing not else where
My wife with her big belly to bestow)
I was displaced, and forced to harbor there,
Where desolation dwelt? And, in that place,
Why was the wife of him that plund'red me
There settled? why, to my disgrace,
Must I the second time removed be,
And made a Shuttle-cock, or Tennis-ball,
For every Fool and Knave to play withal?
As I have hope to live, and see an end
Of these Distractions; and, as ere I die,
I hope to see our greatest Foe our Friend,
(Which are my Hopes, though yet I know not why)
Unless the Civil Justice shall ere long,
Restore my Right; If all the brains I have,
Can in a martial Posture make me strong,
My Tamenesse, shall no longer me inslave.
But, what the Commons pleased to afford
(My losses in their Service, to repay)
I Will repossesse, and settle by the Sword,
Or, in that place, my bones I mean to lay.
No runaway Commander of the Kings,
Shall baffle me, although unto his aid,
A Troop of those Committee Men he brings,
By whom the best affected are betrayed;
But, I will make it known, if urged thereto,
I dare do that, none think I dare to do.
My heart thus murmured: And, I know not well,
To what it would have stirred me; for, my blood
Began to boil, my veins began to swell,
And, in mine eyes, a flaming fury stood.
But, ere this great distemper, to it height
Was raised up; I felt into my breast
Another Spirit entering, which made sleight Of all, which in this rapture was expressed.
With many secret checks my heart it struck,
(Which no man but my self do much concern)
Out of my soul repining thoughts it shook,
It taught me my great failings to discern;
And, then, the VOICE late heard, did thus begin,
To speak again unto me, from within.
Impatient, foolish, and forgetful man,
If, now, thou had been left to thy career,
To what conclusions had thy folly ran?
And, what would thou have made thy self appear?
These are, indeed, such musings as the times
Are busied in. This, is the common note;
Thus go the City, and the Country chimes;
And, this, without book, now, most men have got.
Your private wrongs, and injuries are minded,
With such a partial, and self-seeking heart;
That, in all public matters, most are blinded,
And, act a careless, or a faithless part.
Yea, so much after private ends men run,
That little public service can be done.
In such a blustering tone, thou here had showed
Thy private wrongs, as if thy passion meant,
By fury, some short passage to have hewed,
Through all Opposers, to thine own content.
This will not be the Way, to break asunder
The Lincks of Tyranny. Among you, be
So many storms of lightning, and of thunder,
Already raised, that no Coast is free.
The calmest tempers, and the sobrest wit,
The self-denying, and the suffering hearts;
The Work, the Time, the Place, now best befit:
And, if by these, you play not forth your parts,
The Tragedies, now acting on your stage,
Prolonged will be, with an increasing rage.
In every Public Work (as here thou do)
Each one, some way or other, still contrives
How, thereinto he that Design may thrust,
Whereby, his private Trade he forward drives.
Yet, these your failings, Providence Divine
Employeth, often, to further his intent,
And, shall by this Digression now of thine,
Make better use, than thy corruption meant.
For, thereby both to others, and to thee,
Occasion will be offered, to discover
Some Observations, which will helpful be,
Your Wits, your Peace, and patience to recover.
Oh! how can praises due to him be sung,
Who, thus, extracts you gold out of your dung!
By this thy giddie Rage, and blunt relating
A branch of thy oppressions, wise men may
Perceive on what their hearts are ruminating,
Who twice as much have borne, yet less can say.
And, thence, perhaps, their wisdom will collect,
What may succeed, unless their care prevents
The likely consequence, and ill effect
Of Foes prevailings, and Friends discontents;
From thence, it may be, they some hints will take,
To mark proceedings better than they did;
And, for the public safety, notice take
Of Snakes, which underneath fair flowers lie hid.
Thus, otherwhile, the failings of a Fool,
By Providence, may set the Wise to school.
But, why were thou enraged? what want thou,
That, with impatiencie, thou do repine?
What Peer, or Prince, in all these Islands now,
Enjoyes a Fortune that surpasses thine?
Have thou not bread, and clothes enough, and more
Than for the present day may well suffice?
And, by that Friend, who kept thee heretofore,
Assurance (for the future) of supplies?
Have thou not had a Promise of Protection,
In all thy ways; assuring thee, that neither
The Rage of War, of Famine, or Infection,
Nor, all those joined in one Plague together,
Shall do thee harm, if thou in him confide,
Whose aid to no Believer is denied.
Why should thou fear, though thy estate is gone,
(And Mercy fled) that thou, or thine, may want?
Who know, man lives not by bread alone,
And, where, for asking, all things may be had?
What need'st thou care, though they at last deceive thee,
On whom thou did repose an ample trust;
Who have an able Friend, that will not leave thee,
Though all hopes else were buried in the dust?
Why should thou vex, to see Oppressors flourish,
That have beheld so many, in thy days,
Arise from nothing, and to nothing perish?
And that the Part which every Tyrant plays,
How gloriously soever he ascends,
In certain shame, and sudden ruin ends?
Would thou be rich? what riches can thou find
Of greater worth, than truly to enjoy,
At such a time as this, a settled mind,
And such a state, as no man can destroy?
Some thousands, who but few weeks past could say,
That their Revenues, and their Incomes, were
Enough to furnish them, for every day,
With more than thine affords for a year;
Have nothing left them now. Why striv'st thou then*
To seek a certainty, where can be none?
To catch at that which flies from other men?
To save thy self, when all is overthrown?
And (knowing what thou know) to desire
To take a house, where all the Towne's on fire?
Would thou be honorable? where is he,
That by the Bodily, or Ghostly Line,
Derives his Being by a Pedigree,
That ancienter, or nobler is, than thine?
What more heroical can be achieved,
Than, what no King can give, or take away?
And by the King of Kings to be received
Into that Order, whose true Badge, none may
So much as know, but he that wears the same,
And was twice borne? What honor is so great,
As his, whom Poverty, Reproach, and Blame,
Still more ennobles? And, who does beget
His honors out of those, who most contemn
His Reputation; and, in spite of them?
Thou have been taught; and, thou do seem to know
This Path to Honor; and yet taken art,
With such vain Bubbles, as from fancy flow:
And, whereon, every worldling sets his heart.
Cannot thy contemplations thee enable,
To let the simple people dote upon
Their Hobbyhorse, their Fools Cap, and their Babble,
Because thy Fortune will afford thee none?
Can thou not pass, except a stone thou throw
At every Cur that bawles? Nor, yet, forbear
Impatient, for those vanities, to grow,
Whose emptiness to thee discovered are?
For shame, let more conformity be shown,
In practice, unto that which thou have known.
Who can exp^ct (when they shall see or hear,
With what distemper thou have here expressed
Thy private wrongs) that other men should bear
Their sufferings well, when they are so oppressed?
If thou who know, what comforts do attend
A calm, and patient bearing of the Cross,
What blessing crowns the Meek man's latter end,
And with what riches GOD repaies his loss;
Art so enraged; no marvel, if nigh mad
Some others grow, who are as greatly pained,
And want th'experiments which thou have had,
Whereby the wrongs may better be sustained.
Is this the power? is this the strength of him,
Who, sometimes, thinks he could the world contemn?
Is this a time for thee, who have made show
Of better hopes, to scramble, with the Boys,
For Nuts and Apples? will thou struggle now,
With Fools and Slaves, for bables and for toys?
Contend thou not with Children, in their play;
Nor strive thou their vain longings to possess:
From Micah take thou not his Gods away,
Lest they may bring thee to unhappiness.
Endeavor what is comely to be done,
To reap the profit, which to thee belongs.
Use prudent means Oppressors paws to shun;
Or, to remove, or mitigate thy wrongs:
And, to that purpose, having done thy best,
Be patient, and to God commit the rest.
And, to preserve this temper, wary be
(Above all other times) when their despite
And envy shall be exercised on thee,
Who think, the Publike-Trust belongs, of right,
To so much by the year: These, have so long
Enslaved the people; that themselves disgraced
They do conceive, if, to do right or wrong,
Inferiors, in Authority be placed:
And, these have lately censured it unfit,
That, with so reverend a thing, as Wealth,
Such strangers, now, as Honesty, and Wit,
Should called be, to serve the Commonwealth,
Or lend a helping hand, to save, what they
Have took a course to ruin, many a day.
These, value men, according to the Rent
Their Fathers left them: and, these cannot brook
Without vexation, and much discontent,
That, notice should of other worth be took.
And, therefore, if it must be as these will;
If your besotted people have a mind
To be oppressed, to be fooled, still,
And, to be kept, perpetually blind;
Strain not thy self, to help unlade an Ass
That loves his burden; nor, his drivers trouble;
But, let them, and their silly creature pass,
Till they have made their scorns and mischiefs double.
For, he that meddles with them, nothing gains,
But kicks, and evil language, for his pains.
Cast quite behind thee, what of their despite,
Or injuries, to thee, has been reported:
Their open hate, with secret love requite;
For evil, let not evil be retorted.
Fret not thy self, although thou see them jeer,
And Thee, and thy Authority deride:
For, most, to whom their envy shall appear,
Will laugh to scorn, their folly, and their pride.
And, as thou soughtst it not, nor do, yet, know*
By whom, that seeming-honour was conferred;
So, whether thou continued be, or no,
In thy employments, give it no regard:
For, thou shall sit ere long, above their hate,
And, their Commissions shall be out of date.
While thou remain'st amongst them, do thy best
To side with innocence; and do not there
Of wicked prophanations make a jest;
Curse those that curse; or swear at those that swear.
Abuse not thy Authority or Place
To favor knaves, or put good men to sorrow:
Plead not for law, this day in one man's case,
What, for another, shall be none to morrow.
Use not thy power, thy neighbors to enslave,
As many do who bettet things pretend,
And, when thou chargest others, care to have
That they against their Oaths do not offend,
Take heed, thou make more conscience of thine own
Then others of their oaths, have lately shown.
For, some of those, who fluently can preach
Upon the Bench, as tho (if need had bin)
They could the Parson of the Parish teach
To do his duty in reproving sin:
Even some of those, at that time countenance
Known Malefactors, there, indicted for
Crimes then in charge: and, shamelesly advance
In practice, what in words, they do abhor.
When there, they have inveighed at abuses,
Occasioned by permitting an excess
Of licensed and unlicen'd tipling-houses,
(And their suppression, urged with earnestness;
(Instead of what they would appear to do)
They seem to put down one, and set up two.
These are not pleased, that an observing-eye
Is placed among them. And, perhaps, to prove
Thy patience, these, their power ere long will try:
But, Thee to no distemper let it move.
This, is a time of suffering: and, though men
Are instruments each other to correct*
Yet, GOD, himself employes them. Suffer, then,
Without repining, what he shall inflict.
Although thy foes oppress, and friends forsake thee,
Let no ill tidings make thy heart afraid,
From thy first principles, let nothing shake thee,
What ere against thee, shall be done or said:
But, further what to Publike-peace belongs,
And leave thou unto GOD, thy private wrongs.
For, though it may be granted, that, if here
Thou should illustrate all things which concern
Thy usages (but only in that Shire
Where thou have lived) thy Readers might discern
In what condition many others are
Who truly, serve the Public: yet, take heed
Lest following thine own sufferings over-far
May tediousness, or sleighting of them breed.
Be watchful too; lest by much musing on
Thy personal affronts, a selfe-respect
May cause mis-censures to be cast upon
The Public Justice, to her dis-respect.
For men oppressed, and grieved in an extreme,
Look, not alone with sullenness, upon
Those Parties that are thought to injure them,
And on their own oppressions, as if none
Had borne the like; but, also, as if clear
They from all blame, in all their sufferings, were.
And, in a public Grievance, scarce a man
Among a thousand, searches out those things
Which mis-befall, so far as they began,
To find the Fountains, whence the mischief springs.
Most men (and thou among the rest for one)
Can spy out many others, much to blame,
But, few men heed what they themselves have done,
Whereby the Plague so general became.
And, whence soev'r it comes, the Malcontent
Though in the Persons he the cause may find,
Fomes out his venom on the Government,
And, to a change is presently inclined.
Whereas, the mischief, still, the same will be
Until there be a change in such as He.
Even some of you, (and many is that some)
Who to the skies, this Parliament have raised,
With whom, it was almost a GOD become,
And such, as never could enough be praised.
This Parliament, in whose defense you stand
Till all your pretions things, are well nigh wasted,
Till war, has marched quite through all the land,
Till bitterness, in all your sweets is tasted;
Till into pleces, Families are torn,
Until with blood, your ways, and streets do run,
Till Towns, and Towers, and Temples down are borne,
Till Prince and Peasant, are almost undone;
Till Famine, too, begins to appear,
Which in long Warfares, brings up the rear.
This Parliament, for which you suffer so,
And for whose preservation bear you would
Ten times as much, might you beforehand know,
What, (if it prosper'd not) ensue there should;
Even to this Parliament, so highly prized,
You in your former love are growing slack.
This your Diana, is by some despised:
Of your Distractions, her the cause you make.
On her, you laid the burden and the blame,
(As if due care she wanted, or foresight)
When disadvantage, or dishonor came
By ill success in counsel, or in fight;
And murmured, as if your hearts had said,
That, by your Parliament, you were betrayed.
Such is your folly, (madness I might say)
That, some among you, so your selves express
As if you thought it much advantage may
The Public Cause, to bring her faithfulness,
Or prudence into question: For, you hear,
Collect, report, and have dispersed, so,
All scandalls, and dis-trusts, which malice rear;
And, daily give such credence thereunto,
That, you (who seem to be unfeigned Friends
Unto this Parliament) have, thereby, done
Those mischieves to it, which the Foe intends;
And will destroy it, if this course you run:
Yea, this your folly, will more weaken it
Then all your cunning Adversaries wit.
For, this imprudencie will by degrees
Your bones unsinnew, and your joints untie:
By this, you both their hands and hearts will leese,
Who, in your Quarrel, vowed to live and die.
What Devil then has tempted you, in this,
To sin against your souls? and, blinds you so
That, you observe not whose design it is
Which you now further, and whose work you do?
The honor of that Senate, is the power,
And life thereof; and, on the life of that,
Depends every Privilege of your,
Belonging to your temporal estate;
And, peradventure, some way does extend,
That being, to concern, which has no end.
It is your duty, therefore to discern
And labor the defense of that which may
Your being, and well-being so concern:
And, to that purpose, there is much to say,
For, though it be your strongest Creature-guard
Against Oppressors; yet, you can expect
No safer Tutelage to be conferred
Thereby, then what a Creature may effect.
It labors your protection; but, alas!
The work is great, and through much opposition,
And many difficulties, they must pass,
To bring this Land, into a safe condition.
For to restore you to your peace again,
It Is now, a work for GOD, and not for men.
You heed their failings; but, you heed not yet
(Nor fully can conceive) how hard a work
They have to do, nor how they are beset
With enemies; nor what obstructions lurk
In these proceedings, which make show to be
Without a rub, to them who stand a aloof,
And have not opportunity to see
What stops may rise, before they come to proof.
Their own infirmities, as they are men
(And which you ought to wink at) may perchance
In this great enterprise, be now, and then,
Occasions of no little hinderance:
For, who but GOD, alone, can perfect be?
Or, who is fit for such a work, but he?
The heinous sins, and many obdurations,
Of that great Body, whom they represent,
And of those froward, and divided Nations,
Which are concerned in their Government,
Give being unto many several things,
And actions, whence, oft-times, an accident
Unlooked for; or some hid mischief springs,
Which humane policy cannot prevent.
When Israel sins, Benjamin that has
A wicked cause, their Brethren down shall smite,
To expiate the just avengers wrath,
Before the cause prevails, that is upright:
Whilst in the camp an Achan does remain,
These Counsel, and your Soldiers fight, in vain.
Though Moses governed you, though Josuah were
Called up to be your Armies General;
And David's Worthies now revived, here,
To be your Colonells, events would fall
Below your hopes, whilst unrepented sin
Is, wilfully, connived at: For, that, made
Your Parliaments unprosprous; that, has been
Chief cause of all their failings they have had.
And, then, beside this hindrance, and this bar
To their success, they have a powerful foe
Opposing them as well by force of war,
As by what fraud and tyranny can do:
And, that their Faith and stoutnesse may appear,
A muster of their foes I give you here.
Their General in chief is ANTICHRIST,
And, he the main Battalia, now, commands:
Which, of those armed Locusts does consist
On whose Activitie his Empire stands.
Lievtenant-Generall, is he that strives
A conquest of your Liberties to make;
And counts it one of his Prerogatives,
As he shall please, your goods, to give and take.
He leads the Van; in which, with him appears
Those Princes, and those Nobles, who still are,
And were at first, the wicked Councellers,
Who did encourage him unto this war;
And he of broken Courtiers, up has made
(And of some beggared Lords) all this Brigade.
The Major-Generall, (who brings on,
The right wing of this Army) is the Prince
Of broken fortunes; who still falls upon
The Carriages, and Baggage, that from thence
He may recruit. His ragged Regiments
(Beside those lousie, and those tattered fellows
Late pressed for him, out of Beggars Rents,
And freed from the prisons, and the gallows)
Were patched up, out of Bankrupts, cast-Commanders,
Cashiered Bandettees, Fellows of the pot,
Debauched Players, Tapsters, Gamesters, Panders,
With such, as in a drunken fit were got
To bear them company. And, these are they
Who first made plunder seem a lawful prey.
The left wing, by Pope would be, ordered is;
A stately Prelate, and one, for whose sake,
(Though he the Triple-crown is like to miss)
The war, now raised, did first beginning take.
He, heads a Party of as desperate mates,
As e're drew sword: and, many of them be
Both disciplined to make Assasinates,
And ready for it, when their time they see.
Among these, march some prudent-seeming men,
Some, that, more honesty then wealth do want:
Some witty fellows; but, not one for ten
Of those, that are extremely ignorant;
The openly profane, the closely vicious,
The Papists, Atheists, and the Superstitious.
The Rear is brought up by a Libertine,
That is for any Doctrine or opinion:
For any Government or Discipline,
For Protestant, for Brownist, for Arminian,
Or, any thing he pleases. And, he gives
This liberty (so far as they are able
To make it good) to all, whom he receives
Into his Troops; which are innumerable:
For, all that would their wicked lusts fulfill,
All they, who Law, and Order do contemn;
All they, that are ambitious of their will,
Even all of these, unite themselves to him:
And, in his quarters, many women too
Are found, who, not a little mischief do.
These Forces, both asunder and united,
Have so obstructed, and so many ways,
This Parliament opposed, and dispighted,
In all their consultations, and assaies;
They have by sleight of wit, by strength of hand,
By Treacheries, by Treaties, and by Spies
Abroad, and here at home; by Sea, and Land,
By Protestations, Promises, and Lies,
And, by a thousand other tricks, beside,
Pursued such means and courses to distract,
Affright, discourage, weaken, or divide,
And, frustrate what they shall advise oract;
That, it is no wonder you have sped no better,
But, rather, that the mischieves are no greater.
For, if beside the disadvantages
Which have occurred to this Parliament,
(By open enemies) you now shall please
To take true notice of the detriment
Sustained by them, who seem no adversaries;
Or them, who friend-like in your Quarters live;
Whose hand, at once, both fire and water carries;
And, mean worst actions, when best words they give:
If you shall heed, how they have cheated bin
With honest shows, and outward piety,
When there was little, or naught else, within
But rotten falsehood, and hypocrisy,
You would not murmur, as if you had thought,
This Parliament had failed you in ought.
Nay, you their power and prudence would extol,
Or his great wisdom, rather, and his power,
Whose mercies are exceeding wonderful,
That, quite you were not ruined, ere this hour:
And, marvel that your Senate could subfist
Another day; if truly you did know
How many months, a dangerous Vipers-nest,
Did in the very bosom of it grow;
Or, if you had a perspective, to see
What Engines are still moving to unfix them;
What failings, yet, in their own Members be,
What foolings, in their favorites, to perplex them,
And, what a New Division now they run,
Unthought on, when this Parliament begun.
For, that divided Clergy, out of whom
(As thou fore-saw'st, and did, long since, fore-shew)
The present Plagues upon these Lands are come,
(And by whose factions they will endless grow,
If not prevented) have betwixt them got
Another Quarrel, and another Creature,
Of which, the world abroad yet hears not;
And which, till now, among the things of Nature
Had not a Being. Nay, it has not yet,
So true a Being (though it has a name)
That any man may so discover it,
As truly to express, or know the same.
For, it is not what it was; nor will it stay
To be to morrow, what it is to day.
It is indeed a Thing, which neither had,
Nor shall, nor can have any certain shape;
A thing, in making still, but never made,
A Card drawn out of some Vtopian-Map,
To make your Pilots steer they know not whither,
Till they arrive at the Antipodes
To saving Truth; or, else be carried thither
By many changing winds, on moving Seas,
Where they shall split upon the rockie shores
Of Heresy; or suffer ship wrack there,
Where melancholy Desperation rores;
Or else, into those Creeks be driven, where
They moored lie in dull Security,
Or, land upon a Carnal Liberty.
Your Linsie-woolsie Faction (not appearing
So Jesuited as they are) made use
Of Simon Magus (a bewitching hearing)
And, by that Sorcerer, did late infuse
This fancy, and it has occasioned
Such difference in Opinions, and so rent
Men from each other, that the same has bred
Obstructions, which disturb the Parliament,
In their proceedings. Yet, your enemy,
By whom this late unlooked for Offense
First came, shall not effect his end thereby.
But, they who are to be approved, shall thence
Draw Observations, and a pious use
Of means unthought on, which will Good produce
For, at the present, though Offense be given,
And, men of Belial, by Deceiving-lights,
Have, to their power, endeavored and striven,
To work their ends, by cheating of your sights,
With false appearances, and shows of Good,
And, though right pious men, who see fair shows,
And, have not yet their purpose understood,
Do, for a little while adhere to those;
Yet, when (by trial, and assisting-Grace)
The bottom of it, fully is discerned,
The work desired shall be brought to pass:
Yes, by this wrangling, somewhat shall be learned,
To bring a prudent Reformation in,
And make it purer than it would have bin.
The Public Peace, then, interrupt you not,
Nor vex your private spirits, to promove
Those Fancies, which Distemp'rature begot,
And will, at last, not worth your owning prove.
Let not Demetrius, to maintain his trade,
Make up-roares in the Land; as if more care
Were of his Occupation to be had,
Than, of those things, which of most value are,
But, let Discretion teach you to appease
Tumultuous spirits, by some sweet allay;
Which, peradventure, shall prev^ile with these,
Not only, to give ear to what you say;
But, also, for the Truth, to be ere long,
As zealous as they were, to do it wrong.
So foolish be not, as to shut your eyes,
Or stop your ears, from all that seems new;
Or, all things, as new sangles, to despise,
Which, at first sight, seem useless, or untrue.
So furious be not, as to prosecure,
With an uncharitable prosecution,
All those who (in opinion) shall not suit
With Disciplines, of your own Constitution.
Nor, be so mad, as, wholly, to deface
All Superstructures, on the true Foundation,
Which are not uniforme, to that which was;
Or, that which shall be settled in this Nation.
For, to avoid great inconveniences,
Wisemen will bear with inconformities.
Those Doctrines, that make void the Morall-Law;
Those, that the Fundamentalls do infringe
Of saving-faith: Those, that men's hearts withdraw
From Piety, or, give the flesh her swinge:
Those Disciplines, that break the bands of Peace;
That interrupt the Civill-Government;
That slight the means of Pieties increase,
Or, courses, that Ill-manners may prevent:
These, are not to be borne with. These, you may,
Nay, these you must, (with all your power) suppress;
And fine, confine, cut off, or send away,
And, so, that you may therewithal improve
GODS praise, the Kingdoms Peace, and Christian love.
And, if that any one can means propose,
Whereby your duties may be better done;
If any person, can a truth disclose,
Which has been clouded, since the Day begun:
If he can tell you, or, believes he can
Inform of any thing, that may concern
GODS glory, or the saving health of man;
And, thinks himself (to teach, and you to learn)
Obliged in conscience: And, if he shall so
Proceed, (in doing that which he supposes,
The Will of GOD requires him to do)
That, no ungodly aim his Course discloseth,
Or, ought which does your, Publike-peace annoy;
Why, such a Freedom, should he not enjoy?
If any man a tender conscience has,
Which makes him fearful, to offend the same,
And, therewith walks in so discreet a Path,
That, he deserves not a publike-blame,
In any point aforesaid: Why should he
Be wrought upon, by any other course
Save that, whereby the heart may wooed be
By Grace, and Faith, and Reason, without Force?
How shall the Gospells passage be so clear,
As is desired, and as thereto is due,
If all men be not free to speak and hear,
On such conditions, as before we show?
Since, to the Church, compulsion none invites,
But, some few fools, and many hypocrites.
Coercive power indeed is to be used
In things which to the Outward-man pertain;
And wherein Words or actions have abused
Those Laws, which words or actions, do restrain;
The plots preventing, or the practices,
Which root up those Foundations, whereupon
You are to build up Piety and Peace;
Or, remedy an evil, being done:
Or, for expulsing, or correcting those,
Whose principles, whose practice, and profession,
Does diametrically, that oppose
Which GOD and Nature, puts in your possession;
As Popelings, or such like, who do resist
Essentially, the Government of CHRIST.
But, he that dreams, by any Humane-Law,
To force Belief, or bind the Inner-man,
To think, to hope, to love, or stand in awe;
Dreams, to effect, what none accomplish can.
For, this, would be a tyranny far worse
Then to inslave the body. This, does lay,
Strong fetters on the Soul; and, would enforce
The Reason, if not, take it quite away.
By this, you, to dissemble, may be brought,
Or, else, to fear: But, never to believe,
Or hope, or love aright, or, Change a Thought.
Nay, this would, rather, so inrage and greeve,
As that, in stead of propagating Peace,
Your Quarrels it would every day increase.
Make then, in things Divine, GODS Word your Law,
In Naturals, let REASON be your Guide;
And, from no Civill-Pow'r obedience draw,
Which does conformable to these abide.
Hear all; but, give assent to what is best:
Prove all, who in the name of CHRIST shall come;
But, choose that, only, which abides the Test:
And, Truth once found, the same depart not from*
Let no true Principle be changed, or shaken,
Let not an ancient Bounder be removed;
Or, Ceremoniall-Precepts be mistaken,
For Moralls; nor a Shadow be improved
Before the Substance. Quarrel not away
The Essence of Religion, or of Peace,
For Tristes; which, though them enjoy you may,
Will never bring thee to that happiness,
Which you expect: And, which will make you sorrow,
No less to day, and more, perhaps, to morrow.
Be not so foolish, as to pull down all,
That was set up before; as if you thought
The Government, because Prelaticall,
Was not to be adhered to in ought.
For, therein, without question, have remained
(Among their vain Inventions) many things,
Which, to the Church, in purest times, pertain'd;
And, whereto, none a just exception brings.
Be not so indiscreet, to sweep out these,
Among their rubbish; or, to take away
Those Vtensils, or those Indifferences,
Which for conveniencie, still keep you may,
(And edifying too) without abuse;
Or, any vain or superstitious use.
Be not so sottish, as to think, the Way
Now termed Independent, nothing has
By which the Throne of CHRIST advance you may,
Depresse his foe, or else prepare his path:
Or, that, GOD may not, yet, some beam reveal,
Or, branch of truth, unto his Church disclose,
Which he has hitherto kept under-seale;
Or, whereof yet, he scarce a glimmering shows.
Nor, let those whom you Presbyterians name,
Of their own structures be so confident,
As to conceive, there may not to that Frame
Of Discipline, which they to you present,
Additions or substractions, yet, be made,
To make more perfect, that which they have had.
So inconsiderate, let no man grow,
As to believe it ever was intended,
By taking of your Covenant and Vow,
The Scots-Presbyterie should be befriended
Without respect, to whatsoever might
Be found, upon due trial, to accord
With those instructions, which to set you right,
GOD gives, in the Canon of his WORD:
Nor, misconceive you so that noble Nation,
As to suppose, they think their Church is grown
To such perfection in true Reformation,
That, thereon, nothing more may be bestowne:
Or, that; they come to set you one way free,
That, you, another way, enslaved might be.
Mistake not so their piety and love;
But, be assured that what you and they
Upon deliberate advise may prove,
To be the safe, unquestionable way
Wherein you ought to walk; that they will join,
(Whether unto the Civill-Peace it tends,
Or, unto Doctrine, or to Discipline)
As your aff^ctionate, and faithful Friends.
Nor, let them so mistake you, or these times,
Of public Visitations, as to dream,
That either private weaknesses, or crimes,
Shall hinder GODS intended work, in them:
But, let both Nations labor to excel,
In right believing, and in doing well.
The way to Peace is rather to be just,
And faithful in your selves, and to rely
On GOD; than to suspect, or to distrust,
Or quarrel with another honesty.
The way to Peace, is down along the Vales
Of Meekness, leaving quite behind your backs
The hills of Pride, and those partition walls,
Which Selfe-conceitednesse, and Self-love makes.
The way of Peace, is to examine more
Your own Offenses, and your neighbors less;
To learn more Charity than heretofore;
To be in Deed, what you in Word profess;
And not to strive who long'st shall keep the field,
Against the Truth; but, who shall soonest yield.
Thus far, is this Discourse, now, carried on,
That, it may show both what is pertinent
To Outward Peace, and what is to be done,
The loss of outward quiet to prevent.
For, as there be False lights, of late, set out,
Which give occasion unto some to wander
In giddie paths, to make some also doubt,
Where is no cause; or, else to bring a slander
On sacred Verities; even so, there are
True-lights, of late discovered, which long since
By evill-meaning Builders, stopped were:
And, they who would nor give, nor take offense,
Must learn, more perfectly, to understand
(Then yet they do) those things they take in hand.
Desire of Uniformity, does carry
So great a sway with some, as if it were
Unto the Church of CHRIST, as necessary
As UNITY, or, did the same appear.
But, they are wide: For as within a palace,
There may be more convenience, more state,
More beauty, and more pleasure for the solace
Of him that builds it, when there are, in that,
Some equal Structures; higher some, some lower,
Some pyramids, some flats, some rounds, some squares,
With here a single, there a double tower,
And such like, as in Princely Piles appears;
So, in the Church, true comeliness, may be,
And Union, without uniformitie.
Nay discords, do not generally mar
Essential unity: For, as you find
Some notes, which founded, by themselves, do jarre,
Make up, when they are musically joined,
A perfect Diapason: so, may they
The unity of love, and faith retain,
Who walk not uniformly in the way,
Yet, on the true foundation, fixed remain.
And, as for those poor creatures, who through pride,
And ignorance, have now impostumations
Of fancy broken in them, which they void
At mouth, upon the silly Congregations
Collected by them; be not discontent
That, they with others, their corruptions vent.
For, such like bubbles, still, were wont to rise
In such disordered times: And, they will fall
Of their own selves. The wind that yet supplies
Their tumor, when Peace coms, quite break them shall
The Devil of their proud simplicity,
Makes use, at present, to delude that rabble,
Which are in love with their own vanity,
And, in the ways of Piety unstable.
Because, a Prudent-Preaching wonders wrought,
And Carnal wisdom judged it Foolishness;
By foolish preaching, these have, therefore, thought,
Their Arrogancy shall prevail no less;
But, GOD, when they repent, will free these Nations,
From all such failings, and Infatuations.
Observe this well, and, in true patience, bear
With one another, till God shall make known,
To what intent these broiles permitted are;
And, let your discontents be rather shown,
Upon the Common Foe: Yea, do your best,
(Whilst you have means) to settle outward Peace,
According to your power; and, for the rest,
Depend on GOD, who sees the faithfulness
Of every Soul: And, suffer not vain jars,
Among your selves, to multiply contention;
Lest you, thereby, both make these present wars,
To bring forth an incurable dissension;
And, hinder (as you have already done)
That Work, which God, among you, has begun.
Such differences, obstructions have begot
Retarding Peace. But, doubtless, for the same,
To your great Senate, there belongs not
An imputation of the smallest blame.
Nor, were it faulty, though it could be said,
And proved too, that some among them, now,
Their weighty consultations had betrayed,
And, to your Foes, their secrets daily show.
Nor, ought they to be blamed, though you see
A Spider sent among them, for an Ant;
A Butterfly, or Hornet, for a Be;
Or, those that wit, or honesty, do want:
For such, when they are found, they still cast from them,
With as much forwardness, as does become them.
But, they, they only, do deserve the blame,
(Of all those falsehoods, which these Lands disease)
Those brainlesse fellows, who had so small shame,
And little grace, to make their choice of these:
Those (falsely termed) freemen, who, for porredge,
Would sell their birthright; and, who, to uphold
Their lawful freedoms, have not so much courage,
As to maintain them, though they see they could.
They, whom a petty Justice, by the nose,
May lead to what absurdities he pleases;
And, make them think, he favor to them shows,
When he their loss, and slaveries increases:
These, and their fellow Burgers, have undone you;
Their slavishnes, has brought these plagues upon you.
These, to the House of Commons, sent that Rabble
Of Runawayes, and Traitors, which betrayed
Your liberties, as much as they wereable:
And, on their heads, the blood is justly laid,
For what you suffer. These were, first, unjust,
In sending in, to be their Deputies,
In stead of men, Pride, Avarice, and Lust,
Oppression, Folly, Fraud, and Vanities.
These, having neither honesty, nor wit,
Nor care to make a prudent choice of those,
To whom so great a Trust, they should commit,
Some persons, for the public service, chose,
So like themselves; that, wonder it is none,
To see so many do, as they have done.
For, such a choice they passed, that unless
Some prudent Boroughs, and some wiser Shires
Had made elections with more wariness,
And sent brave spirits forth, to balance these,
You had been quite undone; and you, and yours,
Of all the Christian world had been the scorn;
Perpetual Bondslaves to malignant Powers;
And, hated of your children, yet unborne:
For, ever, therefore, let that providence
Which so provided for you, be renowned:
And, let there be a blessed difference
On them, and on their seed, for ever found,
To honor them, and mark them out from those,
Who to the public welfare, now, are foes.
And, let your Burgers, and Freeholders learn
In time to come, how much, how near it may
The public, and their private weal concern,
To be advised, on whom their trust they lay:
For, what is more unsafe or more unwise
Then to commit (as many times they do)
Their goods, their persons, liberties, and lives;
Yea, and the means of their salvations too,
To their disposures, whom they rather fear,
Then well affect? of whom no good they know?
Of whose corruptions, frequently, they hear,
Of whose injustice, sinsible they grow?
Whose worths, are their revenue? and whose wait
Is mere formalitie, or nev'r-a-whit?
What can be more absurd, then to suppose
They are the wisest men in all the Shire,
And fit'st for public service, to be chose,
Who wisest, in their own opinions are?
Who come uncalled, and shuffle out their choice
By suit and friends, or having got, perchance,
The overplus of one poor single voice,
With much ado, their purpose to advance?
Or, what a greater indiscretion shows,
Then to elect for Giver of your Laws,
A fellow, that nor Law, nor Gospel knows?
Nor difference, 'twixt a good, and evil cause?
And, till that day, pursued no other course
But, hunting, hawking, or else somewhat worse?
What, more dishonorable can be thought,
Then, to your Court and Senate most supreme,
(For which the worthiest persons should be sought)
To send a fool or knave, to sit with them,
Whose reverend presence should not be polluted
With such companions? or, what one thing may
A truer sign of madness be reputed,
Then thus to fool their dignity away?
For, since they cannot their debates decide,
But by most Voices, what else will ensue,
(If many places, be with such supplied)
But, those events, which all the Land will rue,
When worst designs, are by the most promoted,
And, reason shall, by noise, be over-voted?
There never was a time, in which you ought
To be more careful of your choice then now,
If you recruit your House: For, men are taught
By this long Parliament, so well to know
Each others mind, each others interest
And inclination; that, unless you see
The number wanting, in due time increast,
And made complete, by men that worthy be;
You will be as assuredly undone,
As if the King had tyrannized; nay, more:
For, to oppress you, there had been but one,
But, then, you shall, perhaps, have many a score.
And therefore, as you here forewarned are,
In your elections, use more prudent care.
Thy Letters of Advice, ere while directed
To those in whom the choice of these does lie,
Have partly signified what was effected;
And, what events will still ensue thereby,
While such are chosen; And, what Caveats ought
To be observed, that a better choice
May be hereafter; and, that men be sought
Who wit and conscience have, as well as voice.
For, these defects breed vip'rous worms within
The very bowels of the Parliament,
More dangerous then outward foes have bin.
And, if the Members wanting, be not sent
With better heed, then heretofore you took;
For peace embracing truth, in vain you look.
Let therefore, those true Patriots which are left,
Put forth a strong endeavor to complete
Their wasted number, e're they are bereft
Of power, and means, themselves to re-beget
Into a perfect body. And, let none
By fallacies delude you, with a fear,
It may not now as legally be done,
As when the Members first convented were.
For, that they are lawful Parliament,
(Although the King be absent) it is confessed
Even by the King: In whom, now to prevent
Their being so, the power does not consist,
Nor ever did, of right; while cause you know,
Why SALVS POPVLI, should have it so.
Believe it, whosoever shall pretend
This Parliament, has not a legal power
Her body to recruit; is no true friend,
Nor fit to be a Counselor of your.
For, seeing they have power to make a Seal,
It were a great absurdity to dream,
They had not legally, a power, as well
To use, as make it. And, if you in them,
Allow an use thereof, that private men,
The benefit of justice might obtain;
It should much rather be allowed, then,
In things, which to the Publike-right pertain:
And, most especially, in all affairs
Concerning their own being, and repaires.
If really, a Parliament they be
As (without peradventure) they are One,
Then, without limitation they are feee
To do, what may by Parliaments be done.
And, that is, every reasonable thing
Which to their weal and safety may belong;
(And their ability to pass may bring)
If to Divinity, it be no wrong.
And, whosoever, in these extremities,
Persuade, that they should take upon them less;
Unto the public peace, are enemies:
Yea, they defer, or mar your happiness,
By weakening of their hands, who are your friends;
And, strengthening his, who now your spoil intends.
Let them not therefore act, as if they had
But half a power, or seemed to be lame;
Or, as if they a Parliament were made,
To be no more, but only, so in name.
With prudent conscience, and with confidence,
Let them proceed in what they undertake;
And, in what e're pertaines to their defense,
On just resolves, let them no haltings make,
Through want of presidents: For, power they have
To make new presidents, as well as they
Who lived before them. And, if they will save
Their Country and themselves, this is the way:
Since, in an extarordinarie Cause,
True Reason, binds as firmly, as the Laws.
And, though it greatly grieve you (as it ought)
Yet suffer not the absence of the King,
To fool you, with so frivolous a thought,
As that, a diminution it may bring
To their authority. For, wheresoever
He bideth, when his Parliament shall sit,
The Kingship, vertually, is always there,
And cannot possibly divide from it.
The Person of a King, may ramble forth,
As his own fancy hurries him about,
Or do things derogating from his worth,
Or die, or from the Kingdom be cast out;
And, yet the Kingdom, and the Kingship too,
Continue still, as they were wont to do.
The life of Bodies-naturall, indeed,
Departs out of them, when their head is gone;
And, thereunto, no other can succeed,
To make it live, or, not a headlesse-one.
So it is not in this Bodie-politike:
The vitalls of it in the body lie,
Not in that head-ship: and, though it be sick
When that falls from it, yet, it does not die.
A King, is but a substituted-head,
Made for conveniencie: And, if thereby
The body seem to be endangered,
(If Power it has) it has Authority
To take one off, and set another on;
As Well, as, at the first, to make it one.
And when that Body shall be represented,
As this has been, according to the Law,
Or, shall be by necessity convented;
Therein resides, that Sovereignty, that Awe,
And Rule, whereto the Laws of GOD and nature
Injoyne obedience; and not in that thing
Corrupted; which was but that Creatures creature,
And, which to serve it, was first made a King.
When, therefore, GOD injoynes you to obey
And honor Kings; these duties, are not meant
To those who from their Kingships run away;
But, rather, to th'essentiall Government
Of whatsoever kind, by Law ordained;
Or, by a strong necessity constrained.
For, were it otherwise, the pride, and lust
Of an injurious Arbitrary power,
Would all men out of their possessions thrust,
And all the freedoms of mankind devour.
Let therefore, neither fear nor flattery,
Prescription, or vain custom, make you cleave
Unto an accidental Majesty,
And, that which is substantial, quite to leave.
At this time, chiefly, take a special care
(As, of what very much conduces to
Your Peace and Safety) that, as now things are,
Your just advantages you let not go;
Lest, by a faint, and conwardly endeavor,
You loose your freedoms, and be slaves for ever.
And, yet take heed, that zeal to Innovations,
Nor private fears, nor hopes incline your mind
To subjugate these Kingdoms, or these Nations,
To Governments of any other kind.
But, rather use your utmost diligence
To rectify those things which are amiss
In that which is established: and, from thence
Cast out or purge, whatever therein is
Repugnant to those Charters, which by grace
Or nature were conferred: And, let your care
Be so to settle it, that place you make
The Throne of CHRIST, among you, up to rear;
Lest, when his Kingdom comes, you else be fain
To pull your new-devices down again.
Take likewise heed, that you no means neglect,
Whereby the King may be reclaimed and won,
GODS honor, with your safety to respect;
And do the duties, he has left undone.
For, by rejecting him, how just soever
The Causes be; you shall delay the peace,
Which is desired: And make your quarrel, here,
With much more difficulty to decrease:
But, if your industry shall win him home,
And, he return sincerely to his charge,
It shall a blessing to these Isl^s become;
Your honor, and your joy it shall enlarge,
And, as CHRIST'S Viceroy, he shall sit upon
A righteous, and an everlasting Throne.
Walk, therefore, prudently in this straight path,
And, turn not to the left hand, or the right.
That power, which GOD to you committed has,
Improve for him, according to your might;
Him, in the reasonable-meanes attend
With Faith, and Patience; that, he may, at last,
Your King new-moulded, back unto you send,
Your King new-moulded, back unto you send,
Or, him, out of his ruined Kingdom cast.
If, possibly, he can his course repent,
GOD, will restore him, yet. If you amend,
Then, all these Troubles, and this grievous Rent,
Shall in true Peace, and sweet agreements end.
If both conform; Both, shall true Peace enjoy:
If both be wilful, GOD, shall both destroy.
But, hark! my Scribe, I hear a dreadful cry
Of wounded men; and, therewith, as it were,
The shouts of those that have a Victory,
Of much concernment. Therefore, go and hear,
What now is done: For, somewhat has been wrought,
From whence, if well it shall improved be,
Enlargements of those means will forth be brought,
Which may effect, what thou desir'st to see.
As soon as thou have Information had,
Of what is rumoured, and duly weighed,
What profitable uses may be made
Of that, which either has been done, or said:
Retire thou hither, and give ear, again,
To that, which to your Peace, does appertain.
The fourth Canto.
The Contents.

While here, our Author does recite
His Musings after Naesby fight,
The VOICE returns; and, does begin
To show us, what must usher in
Exiled Peace. Then, told are we,
How kept our Vows, and Covenants be:
How we reform, and fast, and pray:
What Thankfulness we do repay:
What, must in general be done;
What, by each Jndividuall-One:
What course both King and State must take,
E're they their Peace with God shall make:
What he expects from every Nation,
From every Town, and Corporation,
And every House, in some degree,
Before our Peace renewed will be.
WHen from attention to that Silent-tongue, (heard,
Which, without words, reveals what you have
I came abroad; the Streets, and Temples rung
Of Victories: and, Signalls there appeared,
Not only, of a valiant Resolution,
In those that conquered; but, of some divine
Disposure of them, too, for execution
Of that, which GOD himself, did fore-designe.
The scornful Adversaries rushed on,
To Policy, and Strength, themselves commending.
The LORD of Hosts, our Friends reli'd upon,
With Prayers fighting, and with Faith defending:
And, lo, GOD gave their Foes into their hand:
For, when he sighteth, who can then withstand?
The Victory was great, and every one
Observed what circumstances pleased him best;
But, that, my thoughts did most insist upon,
(Which others, peradventure, minded least.)
These Royall-Ensignes from the Field were brought,
The Lion-Rampant, and the Dragon-flying,
The Roses, and Portcullis; which, me thought,
Were Pledges, future Mercy signifying.
And, so, no doubt, they shall be, if that Race,
To which GOD calls us, we now shall run;
And better heed the tokens of his Grace,
And, Earnests of his love, than we have done.
For, valiant Fairfax, now, has sent us home,
In Hieroglyphick, signs of things to come.
The Ramping-Lion, (which does fignifie
A Raging-Tyrant) may an Earnest be,
That, GOD will from oppressing Tyranny,
Upon our Good-abearing, set us free.
A Dragon, is that most prodigious Beast,
Whereby the Holy Ghost has typifi'd
That Foe, by whom the Saints are most oppressed;
And, by whom, daily, they are crucified.
The taking of that Ensign, may fore-shew,
That (if we faithfully the work endeavor)
The power of Antichrist we shall subdue,
And, from these Islands, cast his Throne for ever.
Vouchsafe us power, o GOD! vouchsafe us Grace,
To drive him, and his Angels, from this Place.
The joining of the Roses, does declare,
That GOD will to those honors us restore,
Wherewith he crowned us, when in peace, and war,
We on our Crest, those lovely Flowers wore.
Their blushing Beauties are, to me, a sign,
Of that delightful, and soule-pleasing grace,
Which will make lovely our Church Discipline,
When GOD has changed our Discords, into Peace.
The sweetness, and the virtues of the Rose,
Do seem to promise to us those effects,
And fruit, which from internal Graces flows;
Yea, and their prickles are, in some respects,
Significant; for, I by them foresee,
That his corrections, always, needful be.
By taking their Portcullis from the Foe,
It may portend (and if with penitence,
We prosecute the Work, it shall be so)
That, we have taken from them their defense.
It may betoken also, that GODS hand
Will bar our Gates, and make our City strong,
And, by his Mercy, fortify the Land,
Against all them, who seek to do us wrong.
But, for a surer token of his Grace,
GOD sends us home, among the spoils of War,
That Cabinet of Mischief, wherein was
The proof, of what our Foes intentions are:
And, that, their projects, GOD will still disclose,
And fool their Policies, this Prize fore-showes.
I then observed, in that Victory,
(Wherewith GODS hand, at that time, magnified
The Peoples-Tribune) how much vanity
Is in the Arm of flesh, and vaunts of pride.
And, with what good success, he shall advance,
Who seconded with Meekness, Faith, and Prayer,
Does fight against the rage of Arrogance,
Of Guilt, of Selfe-Dependence, and Despair.
I, furthermore observed, that this stroke
Was given, by a Hand contemned of those,
On whom it fell; and, that their strength it broke,
When, to themselves, great hopes they did propose:
Yea, when they seemed assured of our fall;
And thought to ruin, and devour us all.
And, they received that amazing-blow,
From those Vnited-Brethren, whom they thought,
Their policies had dis-united so,
That, ruin on themselves, it should have brought.
But, this, by their agreement, GOD prevented;
And gave that victory to be a sign,
That, if we shall hereafter be contented,
In love, against the Common-Foe to join;
And, trust him with our Conscience, and our Cause;
We, by that blessed union, shall subdue
Th'opposers of our Liberties, and Laws;
And feel the droppings of Mount-Sions dew
Be sprinkling all these Islands, with increase
Of saving-knowledge, joined with endless peace.
I mustred up, the many black-events,
The many jealousies, and new-made factions,
The discontentments, and discouragements,
The frights, the losses, dangers and distractions
That might have followed, and o're-whelm'd us all,
If but that day, our spoilers had prevailed;
If on that day, GOD had not heard us call,
If on that day, to help us he had failed.
And I desire, that we could thanks express
For such deliv'rances, as well, in deed,
As in a Verball-form of thankfulness;
That, GOD might always our devotions heed,
And answer us, when in distress we pray,
As he our prayers answered, that day.
My heart rejoiced much in that salvation,
Because, I knew it greater then it seemed;
And, that it wrappeth up a preservation,
To few men known; of fewer men esteemed.
So much, I joy not in the victory,
As in that good, whereto it may conduce:
For, in GODS Judgments, as much joy have I,
As in his Mercies, when I see their use.
I laugh not, as when I have outward ease,
When I do feel GODS hand correcting me:
Yet, inwardly, it comforts, and does please
As much, as when more glad I seem to be.
And, more I fear a failing, on my part,
When I am most at ease, than when I smart.
And, I have seen, so frequently, a failing,
In prosecuting public executions;
And, such neglects (upon a small prevailing)
Of good Designs, and prudent Resolutions.
With such a dull proceeding in pursuit
Of those advantages, which GOD bestows:
And find them, still, produce so little fruit
In substance, answerable to their shows;
That, when I should express my joyfulnesse,
With such a sense as other entertain:
A melancholy does my soul oppress,
As if it feared my joy would be in vain;
But, at that time, some better hopes I had,
And, in those hopes, my Prayer thus I made.
Eternal GOD! as merciful, as just,
And, of both these the Essence in perfection:
Thou know my heart, and know I nor distrust
Thy Power, thy Providence, or thy Affection;
Though outwardly I do not much rejoice,
It is not an unthankefulnesse to thee,
That sads my Soul, or silenceth my Voice,
Whiles others tuning Hymns of Praises be.
For, often, my heart, enjoyes thee all the day;
Aloud to thee, my Spirit often cries,
When, with my mouth, I not a word can say,
When not a tear will trickle from mine eyes:
And, though I neither pray, nor praise thee, then,
As I am bound; I do it as I can.
Thy mercies I confess, and am as glad
Of Thee, and them, this day, as he that sings;
Yet, when I mind what use of them is made,
And, what effects from thy compassion springs,
It mars my mirth: And therefore, now, in stead
Of their thanksgiving Psalms, I sacrifice
My heart in Prayer; which, vouchsafe to heed,
And, do not LORD, my humble suits despise.
For, if thou grant them, it shall praise thee more,
Thanif that favor, by ten thousand tongues,
Were, at this present time, repeated over,
And celebrated in a thousand songs.
That has begot thee, one Thanksgiving-day.
But, this, shall make thee praised, here, for aye.
The many Mercies, LORD, I do confess,
Which, by thy Bounty, we have here enjoyed;
And, do acknowledge, with all thankfulness,
That, ere this day, we had been all destroyed,
Unless thy Goodness, and thy Providence,
Had curbed the fury of the raging Foe;
Yea, thy Abounding-love was our defense,
Or, we had, else, been our own overthrow.
From thy free favor, and preventing-grace,
It does proceed, that our despised Host
Fled not before their Adversaries face;
Or, fell not by them, who the field have lost:
And, that, the Joys which now our City has,
Are not, this day, in Askalon, and Gath.
But, what will these prevailings be, at last,
If Grace thou, likewise, give not to pursue
Those victories, which thou bestowed have;
And, to improve the mercy thou did show?
What will our sad rejoycings, at the length,
And bloody enterchanges, prove, O LORD?
But, an impairing of our native strength,
To make a passage for the Forraine-sword?
And, what from our divisions, and the spoils,
Torn daily from each other, can arise,
But utter devastation of these Isles?
And, (which is worse than foreign enemies)
Selfe-murthers? Or, perhaps, a Dearth so great,
That, men shall kill each other for their meat?
Such things have been; and such, for ought I see,
May here befall us, ere these wars be done,
If, thou permit our cruelties, to be
As wilfully pursued, as begun.
Thy judgments teach us, therefore, LORD, to fear;
So, make us, thy forbearances to weigh;
So, let thy kindnesses our hearts prepare,
That, we no longer fool our Peace away.
Let not the sighs, the prayers, and the cries
Of thy afflicted children, be in vain.
Behold, how desolate their dwelling lies;
Look on their wounds, observe how they are slain;
How many, of their Fathers, are bereft!
How many widows, desolate are left!
Or, if this move thee not, mark how the Foe
Blasphemes thy Name: See, with what height of pride
Against thy Truth, his malice he does show,
And, how thy holy things, he does deride.
Mark, what damned Oaths, and curses forth they roar,
And, with what lies and slanders they do wrong us:
Mark, how they scorn the counsels of the poor,
And, to betray us; how they lurk among us.
Mark, how they play the hypocrites, arrayed
Sometime, like Bosome-Friends; sometime disguised
With outward Sanctity, while snares are laid,
That, unawares thy Saints may be surpised:
And, let not us, who in thy Truth have joy'd*
By those, who persecute it, be destroyed.
If not on us, yet, LORD, compassion take
On those that shall out of our loins descend*
If not for our, yet, for thine Honour-sake,
To these destroying times, impose an end.
Even for the sake of thy Beloved-One,
Who, through our sides, is wounded by our Foes,
Behold, what spoils, what mischieves they have done,
And help us, ere our sorrow helpless grows.
Teach us to see, and know, how miserable
We are, and may be, if we persevere,
As we begun; inform us how unable
We are to save our selves, from what we fear:
And, to consider, too, how worthless, we
Are of that mercy, which I beg of thee.
Vain is the help of Armies, Foot, or Horse;
Vain is the power of Nations, and of Kings;
Vain is united policy, and force;
Vain is the aid of all terrestrial things:
Thou make War; thou only make Peace,
And, out of nothing, can create the same;
Nay, out of that, which discords does increase,
An everlasting Concord thou can frame.
Although the people, like huge waters, rage;
The mountains, yea, these Islands moved be;
Thou, in a moment, can the storm assuage,
And, make all quiet, when it pleases thee.
O LORD! command a Calm, command a Peace,
That our unnatural debates may cease.
To us be reconciled, and (to begin
That reconcilement) let us so endeavor,
To break the league, which we have made with sin,
That Thou, and We, may now be friends for ever.
Make, for us, an Atonement with our King,
Let him perceive, in what his course will end:
What Mischeeves evil Counselors do bring,
What Vengeance does on Tyranny attend.
Give him both sight, and sense, of that huge flood,
Which threatens daily, to o'rewhelme his head;
That roaring torrent, nay, that sea of blood,
Which, in these Isles, has wilfully been shed.
And, with his wronged, and enraged Nations,
Make thou, for him, his Reconciliations.
His heart, is in thy hand; and, if thou please,
Thou can return him to us, wholly changed.
Thou can yet make us mutually, with ease,
As dear, as if we had not been estranged.
Thou that restor'dst Manasseh, can restore
Him to Himselse, to Us, and to thy Grace*
And, it may glorify thy goodness more,
Than to advance another in his place.
Yea, and for us, it shall be better too,
If, with a true forgiveness of each other,
We, that have lately been divided so,
Shall lovingly unite again together.
For, what more sweet, than when unkindnesse ends,
In reconciling of divided friends?
Thou know, O GOD! that we have no desire,
To take from Him, or His, the Royal Throne,
Or, pull it lower; but, to raise it higher,
And, set him, rather, faster thereupon.
Thou know, that though his courses we abhor,
We love his Person, and would feign prevent
That mischief, which he seems to labor for.
By hunting after his own detriment.
If, by his wilfulness, that blood be spilt,
Which we would save; of them require it, LORD!
Who make him to be Patron of their guilt;
Or, bring him within danger of the Sword:
And, keep us, and our children, ever clear,
From all the blood, that shall be spoiled, here.
And, as for me, whom our Opposers blame,
As having my first principles forsaken,
( Because I, now, against the Royall-Name,
With Reall-Majestie, a part have taken)
Thou know my heart, had never an intent,
The Shadow, for the Substance, to adore:
And, that if I, so foolishly had meant,
Discretion, bids me so to think no more*
A Single-Person, or a Factious Rabble,
The King, by Arms, opposing, acts Treason;
But, Kingdoms joined by Counsells-warrantable,
Against a Tyrant, do the work of Reason.
Yea, it is the hand of GOD, that strikes him, then,
Although he does it by the sword of men.
Thou know, O GOD! that, not a hand of our
Is raised against his Person, or his Seed;
Or, to diminish any Royal power,
Which to discharge his Office he may need.
Or, for due honor. But, we, rather, fight
(As he would know, if undeceived he were)
To save his Dignity, to do him right,
And, keep him from Destructions drawing near.
Thou know, we no offensive War intended;
Nor, armed came, for any private Cause;
But, as our duty binds, to have defended
Thy Truth, our Countrie's Liberties, and Laws:
And, to remove the wicked from the Throne,
That, he may rule, with righteousness, thereon.
And, though to fright us from this duty, LORD,
The sons of Belial, whom we pursue,
Cast terms on us, which better do accord
With their proceedings, as to them most due:
Yet, thou can witness, that we called are,
And, come in true obedience to that Power,
Of which, He but the name does only wear;
Whilst he abuses his own Rights, and our:
Thou know his Wilfulness does us compel
( Since nor his Parl'aments, Thy Laws, nor His,
Nor, other course prevails) now to appeal
(In that, which at this time, depending is)
To thy Arbitrament: and, that, the Sword
May to our differences, an end afford.
Wherein, we pray thee, pass^ thy Sentence so,
That, in thy Judgments, Mercy may abound;
Lest, though but small Severity thou show,
The innocentest party, may be found
Unable to abide it. For, mine eye,
Which only can behold the scam, or skin,
Of our Corruptions (and not much epsy
Of those Pollutions, which lie hid within)
Perceives the best so faulty; that, by thee,
If so put off this Bloodie-Triall were,
That, we might, now, some other way, agree:
It would the safest course, for both, appear.
But, LORD, thy will be done, though it be that,
Which flesh and blood, most fears and trembles at.
For, who, that loves thy Attributes and Thee,
And sees how they are slighted? who, that viewes,
How impudently broke thy Precepts be,
How spightfully thy foes thy friends abuse;
And, how presumptussly this age goes on,
(Even while the avenging Angel is abroad)
To do as wickedly as it has done,
Without regard of man, or fear of GOD?
Yea, who, that loves thine honor, grudgeth now
Thy saving of it? or, who wishes good
Unto thy Saints, who grieveth to allow
Thy Justice, in avengement of their blood?
Or, who can think thy judgments have exceeded,
That has our great offenses duly heeded?
I do confess, thy coming to this Nation
In these unlook'd-for Judgments, makes it
To be a sharp and dreadful visitation
To those, that in security did sit,
And, lived at ease. But, they who long have born
The violent oppressions of thy Foes,
The insolence of Tyrants, and their scorn,
At thy approaches, tremble not, like those:
For, their Deliverer, and Friend appears,
And, therefore, though we stand in awe of thee,
It is with conjug all, and filial fears,
Mixed with whose tartuesse, sweetuesses there be:
Yea, though thy judgments, fright us, when we hear them
Yet, LORD, we love them, more then we do fear them.
Whilst thus, or unto such effects I prayed,
And meditated, by my self alone,
The VOICE began to speak again, and said;
Thy GOD observes, what thou musest on,
And will not fail thy hopes, if thou believe,
And persevere. For, he is readier far,
His blessings, and his benefits to give,
Then, they, who want them, to desire them are.
And, when he does deny them, or prolong them,
It is not out of back wardnesse in him,
To condescend; but, that you might not wrong them,
Or entertain them with a slight esteem.
Most, little prize good things, till much they cost,
Few, know their happiness, till it be lost.
You may perceive, by that, which GOD has wrought
For these afflicted Isles, in their distress;
By many things, which he to pass has brought,
When mischiefs were, almost, beyond redress:
By those diliv'rances, which you have had,
When to the brink of ruin you were come;
By those escapes, which he for you has made,
From plots, which none but he could save you from;
Yea, see you may by his often freeing you,
When, carelessly, advantages you lose;
And by that mercy, which he shows, now,
That, he would soon secure you from your Foes,
Could you so mind, what does to you belong,
That, mercy might not do his justice wrong.
Alas! he takes no pleasure in your cries,
By your afflictions he can reap no good;
Your wound, are not delightful to his eyes,
Nor joys be in the shedding of your blood.
He better likes of Feasts, then Fasting-dayes,
If you could use them, to your more avail,
Your mournings would not please, like songs of praise,
If you had fewer failings to bewail.
He is not such a cruel GOD, as many,
Blasphemouslie, have fained him to be,
Delighted in the death, or grief, of any;
But, Love, and Joy essentiallie is he:
And, gave his Dearest to be crucified.
A saving-health for sinners to provide:
Of him, if peace you rightly seek, believe it,
He will vouchsafe it, when you shall appear
A people qualified to receive it:
And, to expect it sooner, vain it were.
Your pride is not, as yet, enough abated,
Your wisdom, is not, yet, enough befooled,
Your own deservings, are, yet, over-rated,
You, by the rod, are not, yet, thoroughly schooled.
You have some ayerie Castles, yet, in building,
Some false dependencies, yet, undestroy'd,
Some groundless hopes, not to despair, yet, yielding,
Some lusts, and some vain pleasures, yet in joy'd:
And, many such obstructions, making, yet,
These Kingdoms, for that happiness, unfit.
Your lofty minds, must, first, be stooped lower,
Your separations, must draw, somewhat, nigher,
Your Forms of godliness, must get more power,
Your base affections must be lifted higher:
Your headstrong wilfulness, must more be tamed,
Your Anchor, must with deeper hold, be grounded,
Your Charity, must farther be inflamed,
Your Faith, must on the rock, be better founded.
Your selves, must, by your selves, be more denied,
More care of public duties must be took;
Your wanton flesh must more be mortified,
And, for your sins, your hearts must more be broke,
E're these afflicted Isles will repossesse
A safe, a real, and a lasting peace.
Delude you not your selves, with guilefull shows;
For, when they promise most, they most deceive.
To win, is, many times, the way to lose:
And, Victories, of safety may bereave.
Security, may lose you, in a day,
What, watchfulness was gaining, many years;
And, in a moment, GOD may take away
Your greatest strength, when strongest it appears.
Were now, your adversaries in your power;
Were not a dog, to bark against you, left,
And, Peace confirmed; you might, within an hour,
Of all that happiness, be quite bereft.
Yea, and it should be lost again, e're long,
Unless, on better terms, you made it strong.
Upon the justness of the Cause, some trust;
But, that, a vain dependence may be found:
For, if they, who defend it, be unjust,
A righteous Cause, may fall unto the ground.
The Jews did fly before the Canaanites,
While but one Achan, in their Camp, remained;
They fell before the wicked Benjamites,
While, their impenitencie they retained.
Some think, because the Word of Truth, is here,
GODS Ordinances, and his holy-things,
That, you a privileged people are:
But, no security, at all, this brings:
It, rather, calls for vengeance on that place,
Which answers not, in fruits, their means of grace.
The Arc, it self, from Israel, was borne,
And, they who kept it, slaughtered, for their sin;
Even GODS own House was ra'zd, and made a scorn,
And, they inthral'd, who served him therein.
GOD, for his Temples sake, spared not oppression,
Nor, for that Worship which they did profess:
But, them he turned out of their possessions,
For acting sin, in cloakes of holiness.
Do you suppose, that, GOD, will for the sake
Of those few righteous men, that, yet, remain,
The present troubles from these Islands take,
And, settle all things here, in peace, again?
How can you such a benefit expect,
Till righteous men, you better do affect.
If you, by them, such blessings may enjoy,
Why are you not, to those, more faithful friends?
Why seek you to undo, or, to destroy
Those men, on whom your weal so much depends?
Though, for their sakes, you reap, at other times,
Great benefit; and often are secured,
From public mischiefs; yet, there have been crimes,
For which, this privilege is not procured.
Though Noah, Job, and Daniel, interceded
At such a season, grace should not be shown:
They should not get a pardon, when they pleaded,
For any souls offending, but their own.
And, so it may be, for ought yet, you know,
With every unrepentant sinner, now.
Some, of you, have a hope, as vain as this,
Another way; for, many men suppose
To be secured, by the wickedness,
And crying sins, of their blasphemous Foes.
But, Edom did Jernsalem suppress,
Although the former had transgressed more:
The Saints, although their errors may be less,
Are daily murdered by the Scarlet-Whore.
GODS Magazine, has punishments enough,
To seize on all at once, that him offend;
He Scorpions has for them, and Rods for you,
And, both will scourge, if both do not amend.
He, as he lists, can make you whip each other;
Or, spare the one, or, punish both together.
Indeed, a Kingdoms laying-wast, has bin,
And, is sometimes, deferred for the sakes
Of righteous men, inhabiting therein:
But, that, but little for the safety makes,
Of Individual sinners. For, you see,
They, by the Sword, are picked out every day,
Their habitations daily ruined be,
And their posterities are swept away.
Yea, when, quite round them, all the neighborhood
Stands unimpaired, they are sometime seized,
That, others may observe it, for their good,
Or, that GODS wrath may, thereby, be appeased:
And, otherwhile, the just are taken from
A wicked-place, toscape the plagues to come.
But, what, or whom, need you suspect, or fear,
Though both your Horse and Foot, this day were routed?
Of your own selves, you well-conceited are
Of your own courses, nothing is mis-doubted.
You have designs, wherein you can confide,
Though GOD be very little in your thought:
You, in a blindfold hope, can quiet bide,
Though, in due means, his aid you have not sought.
You seem so knowing, that none must advise;
So righteous, that, you reformation hate;
So holy, that, your brethren you despise,
So powerful, as if you preserved the State:
And bear your selves, as if unto these Nations
GOD, were obliged, by special obligations.
And, if but with a superficial look
A view of you were taken, on that side
Which fairest shows, you might be, then, mistook,
For better then you will prove, when you are tried.
You are now frequent in humiliation,
You are professed Reformers of your ways;
You are become the longest-praying Nation,
And, holiest-talking people, in these days,
Your simplest tradesmen are grown mighty Preachers,
Your soldiers guifted are with double power,
Young silliest women are admired teachers,
And speak, and pray among you by the hour.
The chiefest places in your Commonweal,
Supplied are, with men of noted-zeale.
The godly party, now preferments gets,
(At least, they who the form thereof put on)
And, when some of them, are proved counterfeits,
The honest party will be thought upon.
To keep the foremost-table of the LAW
Inviolate, you care, of late, have took;
And, many think, it shows you stand in awe
Of GOD; and, that you at his honor look.
And, peradventure, (if it hinder not
Your lusts or profits) when you are at leisure,
Some Orders or Provisions may be got,
To make you careful, in some better measure,
To keep the second-Table: wherein, lies
The proof of your faire-seeming sanctities.
You zealously have, likewise, overthrown
The monuments of Popish superstition;
Pulled Crosses, Images, and Altars down,
Even those things that gave but just suspicion
Of an Idolatrous or fruitless use;
As well appears, in not lettting pass
(When you demolished them, for their abuse)
The gilded Organs, and the painted glass.
You have for every week a Sabbath, now;
For every moon a Fast; in private, more:
Thanksgiving days, you likewise do allow,
For holy days, observed heretofore;
Which, of those feasts, will well supply the room,
Until you weary of them shall become.
These works are found among you, and of those
Some part from upright-heartednesse does flow,
And from those rectified consciences,
Which do a real Reformation show.
And, though the works themselves have no deserving
In their own nature, or, through imperfections,
Concomitant: yet, GOD, in you, observing
A will renewed, and following his direction,
According to your power, accepts so
A frail performance, from a weak intent,
That, he as much, by Grace, imputes thereto,
As if it perfectly were done, and meant.
And (for a few thus qualified) GOD has
Deferred full prosecution of his wrath.
But, so far off, your Reformations, yet,
And pious shows, are from deserving ought,
Or from a likelihood, that they will fet
The peace, for which, you have both prayed and sought;
That, if more mercies GOD vouchsafe not to you,
Then by your Sanctity deserved are,
Your holy-things, would utterly undo you,
Though all your other sins remitted were.
For, as, before their thrall, the wicked Jews,
Did act a seeming-sanctified part,
Approaching near to GOD, in words, and shows,
Yet, kept themselves, far from him, in their heart:
So, most of you have done: And, GOD therefore,
Your Sabbaths, Fasts, and Praises does abhor.
To him, your hands you lifted in a VOW;
A serious Covenant, with him, you made,
You made it also, not without a show,
As if unfeigned purposes you had
To do, as you professed: And, you have seemed
Not only to have rightly understood
That League, and highly thereof to have deemed,
But, thereby, likewise you received much good.
Yet, as if, with well-doing, tired you were,
(Or, rather, as if you besotted grew)
To tender it, you very little care,
Or, thereunto, conformity to show.
A needless duty, this, by some, is thought,
Or, pressed farther, then of right, it ought.
But, if it has imposed unduly been,
Why were two Realms, so unadvised, to make it?
If righteo, us in your eyes, the same still seem,
Why is not every man required to take it?
If, necessarily, it was enjoined,
And lawfully, why should you suffer them
Both liberty, and favor, too, to find,
Who, therein, shall your Ordinance contemn?
Why, is there not a difference put, 'twixt those
Who take it; and all those who shall refuse it?
And, punishment why do you not impose
On them who take it, only, to abuse it?
Since, breach of public Cov'nants is a sin,
Which, always, brings a public vengeance in.
A Covenant broke, through with the Gibeonites,
(Who gained it a surreptitious way)
Brought down a Plague upon the Israelites,
Which cost, the blood of Princes, to allay.
No branch of this, is any way unjust,
Or inconsistent, in the least degree,
With any duty, which perform you must
As Christians, or, as moral men you be;
Nor is it (being understood aright)
A bar to any Christians Liberty,
Or, humane Privilege; though, at first sight,
To some, these, may appear infringed thereby:
For, by that Covenant, you vowed no more,
Then, what you were obliged to before.
It binds you no profession to embrace
Of Doctrine, Manners, or, of Discipline,
Ought farther, then conformable it is
Unto the Canon of the Word-divine:
You vowed nothing to reject, but what
Shall prove, upon due trial, to be found
Destructive, or repugnant unto that;
Or, to the Bond, wherewith you should be bound:
And, as you are obliged, by the same,
To nothing, any way unwarrantable;
So, likewise, you thereby, engaged became
No further to perform, than you are able:
Nor harm, thereby, to any can befall,
But, praise to GOD, and safety unto all.
And, yet, this sacred Covenant, and VOW,
Which tends to the prejudice of none,
Which Law-divine, and humane does allow,
Which need constrained you to have undergone;
Which was resolved on, by two prudent Nations,
Which, by the highest Senates, in both Lands,
Was made, and took, with due deliberations,
And, signed with twenty hundred thousand hands.
Those Vows, which you have sealed with your blood,
Those Vows, which in ten thousand Congregations
Attested were; and which you called on GOD
To witness too: These Vows, and Protestations,
Vowed so religiously, and so attested,
Regarded are, as if you had but jested.
Who dreamed to see a VOW, cried up like that,
Observed no better, than conditions made
By Boys, or Girls, at Push-pin, or at Cat?
Who could have thought, that Christians should have had
Of conscience, or of credit, so small care,
As to forget, nay, so much to despise
A Duty, wherein so concerned they are?
And, whereupon, Life, State, and Honor lies?
He that your Ordinances does peruse,
With your instructions, and marks what is done;
Can find out nothing, whereby to excuse
Your ill pursuit, of what you well begun.
Or why, he should, till you reform your ways,
Much heed, what such a Nation, does, or says.
For, both so negligent, and false are you,
In what you vowed: yea, both to GOD, and M^n,
So foolishly, so shamelesly untrue,
Most have been, since this Covenant began:
That (if you soon repent not) this one sin
Will make a curelesse Breach: yea, this offense
Will bring incurable-Destruction in,
Without a speedy, and true penitence.
Thus, that, which might have much advanced your peace*
Is like, by your corruption, to procure,
In stead of what you hope for, an increase
Of Plagues, and Troubles, longer to endure:
Yet, this is not the only means of Grace,
Which is, by you abused, in this place.
Your Provocations are as much, or more,
In other sacred things: For, though some few
Have better outsides, now, than heretofore,
They are not really, the same they show.
The hewing out of Reformation makes
Good chips; and, for each Carpenter, such Fees,
That, whatsoever pains therein he takes,
No fear of any outward loss, he sees.
In setting up of public Disciplines,
There are Devices, to contrive it so,
That men shall thereby act their own Designs;
And few perceive, what they intend to do:
For, underneath a cloak of outward-zeale,
More projects are pursued, than they reveal.
And, otherwhile, GOD brings so about
His purpose, that, he makes men Instruments
To plot it, work it, yea, to fight it out,
Against the current of their own intents.
Sometime, the furious zeal of Hypocrites,
Or wilfulness of Tyrants, by the wages
Of Balaam, to his service he invites;
And, them, against his enemies ingages.
By these, he Superstition does deface,
Pulls down Idolatry, and way does make
For them, to build his Church, up, in that place
Who seek to do his will, for Conscience Sake.
Yea, thus, he more then once or twice has done,
Where famous Reformations were begun.
Thus Iehu, in a Fiery zeal, destroyed
Baals Idols, with his Prophets: and, for this,
That Crown, which by his Master was enjoyed,
GOD, for a while, entailed on him, and his.
Thus likewise, in this Kingdom, your eighth Harrie
Made way for that which he intended not:
And, then, from many a wealthy Monastery
Both Lands and goods, for his reward he got.
Yea, many others furthered that work
Beneath whose outside zeal, much avarice,
Much pride, with much hypocrisy, did lurk,
And, many another secret lust, and vice.
For which, now draws near, the fatal day,
Of rooting them, and all their seed away.
Yet, their example makes not These times free
From those corruptions: for, much dawbing, still,
With an untemper'd mortar, you may see;
And, with pretense of good, much doing-ill.
Much show of Reformation, here, is made
In civill-matters; even by them, that steal,
And suck the nourishment it should have had,
From this distressed, and sickly Commonweal.
Yea, where it is expected, that extortion
Should most be punished; there, now, are fees
Exacted, in the most extreme proportion:
And, He, that every secret action sees,
Will, shortly, find out some among them, too,
With whom, a Bribe, can more then conscience do.
Yet, such as these (when they are in the Chair
Of Judgment, Equity, Examination,
Or set in some Committee) offer fair,
In zealous language, toward Reformation;
These look big on offenders; threaten vice,
And make some honest men, who come before them,
To take them for the birds of Paradise;
And ready, for their Virtues to adore them.
They grow familiar with your ablest Preachers;
They hear them often (in appearance gladly)
They thank them, praise them, as most powerful Teachers:
They can bewail the Times; look very sadly,
And seem to be exceedingly affeard,
When they the threatenings of the WORD have heard.
Yet, when all this is done, they pass away,
Through all these threatenings, and through all their fears,
To prosecute their lusts, the selfsame day,
In which GODS wrath was thundered in their ears.
Yea, thus they do, when vengeance on the Road
Is marching toward them, and in their view;
Thus brazen-faced, thus fearelesse of their GOD,
And thus irrational, themselves they show.
Their fasts and praises are but complements,
With GOD and men, to furnish out their scoene,
Or, serve to cover-over their intents:
But, little to that purpose they should mean.
What e're the Preacher or the Propher says,
Resolved they are, to follow their own ways.
The Times, which you have either for confessions
Of sins, or public mercies, set apart,
Are solemnized with such dull expressions,
As if they were performed without a heart.
And, though your Fastings, as Kings Ahabs, had
Some recompense obtained in outward things,
In lieu of Outward-showes, that you have made;
Yet, little real fruit that dutle brings.
You fast not from Oppression, Fraud, and Strife,
Nor from your Avarice, and base-designes;
You fast not, from a wicked course of life,
Nor from those lusts, whereto your flesh inclines:
Your heads, you, in the morning, humbly bow:
And, look, e're night, with an imperious-brow*
GOD cares not for your solemn Fasting-day,
Except you come before him, more prepared:
You meet, and grant the Preacher leave to say
What he shall please; but, give it no regard.
Once, in a Moon, what is it, to repair
Unto the Church; and, there, sit out a meal?
Sleep out, perhaps, a Sermon, or a Prai'r;
And, then come home, and fill your bellies well?
Or, what avails it, to sigh, and groan,
And, make a crabbed face, an hour or two;
Or, whine out words, in some affected tone;
Or, yawne out Lamentations, as some do?
What will all this avail, if you depart
With an unsanctifi'd dissembling heart?
When, on the set Humiliation-dayes,
Your well-affected Brethren fast, and mourn;
When every Congregation weeps, and prays,
That, GOD, in mercy, might, to them, return:
Some (as if in despite of that Decree,
And, in contempt of GOD) dance, feast, and sing;
Or, drinking healths, to their confusion, be,
Who, for the Publike-Weale, Peace-Offrings bring.
And, many, who would seem to sacrifice
A contrite-spirit, and a broken-heart,
Come, loaded with so many vanities,
That, back, unto their dwellings, they depart,
Not only, less accepted then before;
But, more despised, and polluted more.
It is not to be thought, GOD does regard
A Formall-habit, so you do appear
With hearts reformed, and with a soul prepared,
His holy-Word obediently to hear.
Yet, know, that he expects, when you profess
A sorrow for your sins, you should put on
That outward, and that inward humbleness,
By which, the duty may be truly done.
He does expect, that, when you near shall draw
Unto his Throne, you should approach thereto
With so much reverence, and filial awe,
That, to the same, you no dishonor do;
Nor, make profane Beholders, to contemn
His Worship, by your mean esteem of him.
For, some would scarce believe, you served a GOD,
Who has a power to punish, or to save;
Or, be persuaded, that you feared his rod,
Or, that you need of his compassion have;
If they observed, how clothed to him you come,
Or, heeded your behaviors, in his sight,
Or, saw you, after you returned home,
And, what your conversations were, that night.
For, many, of you, habited appear
Like those, which to the Revells are invited;
And, not, as if you men of sorrow were,
Or, with GOD's anger, or your sins, affrighted;
But trimmed with toys, which, at that time, and place,
Shows, either want of wit, or, want of grace.
And, when you should appear, with looks composed.
According to the service you pretend,
Your thoughts, by your deportment, seem disposed.
As if employed to some other end.
Your voice is more imperious, and more loud,
Then, well befits a Fast: you laugh, and grin,
And, often, have those looks, and gestures, showed,
Which fitter for a Theater have been,
Then for a Temple, in a day of Fasting:
Which, if GOD should, severely, look upon,
Your days of mourning, would be everlasting;
And, your afflictions never would be done:
For, he would see (not without Indignation)
You come, but, with a feigned Humiliation.
And, then, among those errors, and presumings,
Which make your holy-things abominable,
(And, which you must repent) are your assumings
Unto your selves, what you are never able,
Nor, warranted to practice. For, the Pride,
Which has begot this Boldness, does bring on
Those dreamings, and o're-weenings, which divide,
Distract, and trouble you, as they have done.
You, missing his true meaning, who has said,
You should be Priests, and Prophets to the LORD,
From Truth, and Decency, have lately strai'd;
And, made your Prayers, and Preaching, so abhorred,
That in the stead of what you have expected,
Increase of Plagues, and Discords, is effected.
And, some of you, this Ignorance has brought
To such presumption, that you vilify
That PRAYER, which by CHRIST himself was taught,
And, turned Devotion into Blasphemy;
You, have not only offered strange-fire,
But, also, things unclean: for, you present
Your Lusts unto Him; and, those things require,
Which, make Him with your offerings discontent.
When, therefore, you present the Sacrifice
Of Prayer, know, that as you are not bounded
To Verball-Formes; so, you should not despise
The Rule, whereon that duty should be grounded;
Lest that, which might of Bliss, a means have bin,
A means become, of letting Curses in.
Of GOD, they seem not prudently conceited,
Who think, that those Petitions he despises,
Which his own Spirit has, for us, indicted;
And only likes of those, which man devises:
Or, that, he will impute it as a Vice,
If in those wants, which formerly you had,
You shall present him one Petition twice,
Or, oftener, though with true devotion made:
Or, that, at all times, all men, should repair
Unto his Trone, with suits extemporarie,
Because, those few that have the gift of Prayer,
Can, quickly, to fit words, their meanings marry*
For, this is but a novell-imposition,
Arising out of Pride, and Superstition.
(As of Virginity, long since was said)
Let them to whom GOD gives the same receive it.
But, let it not on any man be laid,
To whom it has not pleased him to give it.
To speak in public, Moses was less able
Than Aaron; and, yet, GOD did him endow
With kowledge, and with gifts more honorable;
And, from his Holy-Spirit they did flow.
The wisest heart, has not the nimblest tongue:
Nor is it, still, the Spirits inspiration,
Whereby, so many preach, and pray so long:
But, Memory, upon premeditation,
And, that, makes often a fairer show, in words,
Than Grace, with gifts more sanctified, affords.
And, by this help of Nature, carnal men,
Not only gain esteem beyond their merit;
And, Player-like, act parts, which, now and then
Are, falsely, thought out-flowings of the Spirit:
But, by this quality, have, also, brought
Contempt on better men: and, often, thereby,
Into their simple hearers hearts, have wrought,
In stead of Truth, bewitching heresy.
Yet, this their Tongue-craft, now, has such esteem,
That he, who to himself, assumeth not
This gift, does scarce to them a Christian seem:
And, therefore, many, now, the same have got,
Who care not, though these offerings of the tongue
Be wholly Nonsense, so they may be long.
GOD values your Devotions, by their strength
Of Faith; and by your pious inclination;
And, not by that tautologie, or length,
Which has, of late, begun to be in fashion.
It was a Pharisaicall-Tradition,
Arising partly from hypocrisy,
And, partly, from a Jewish superstition,
Which fooled their Feminine simplicity,
As it does ours. And, therefore, though he seem
Almost a Reprobate, who dares reprove
That custom, (which those men do most esteem,
Who, with their own conceptions, are in love)
Yet, many of them, as your Savior said,
Have only prated, when they thought they prayed.
Let, then, your Praying, and your Preaching, too,
Be such, as may True-Pietie advance:
And, not the work of your Destroyer, do,
By pleasing Self-conceit, and Ignorance,
In giving leave to every giddie brain,
To preach what ever Fancy shall invent;
And, heaps of those false-Teachers entertain,
Who bring you Tidings, which were never sent.
A mystery, I will to you unfold,
Whereof, if you take heedfull observation,
A glimmering-light, you shall, thereby, behold,
To help promote both Peace, and Reformation;
And, give some hint, whereby you may provide,
Against those Errors, which do much divide.
There were two SIMONS, in the primitive,
And purer times, who typified that
Which does concern you: For, you do derive
Your Evill-being, and your Good-estate,
From what they signify. The Name imports
In English, HEARING; and, these did fore-show,
That, in the Church, from Hearers of two sorts,
Great Schisms, and much Heresy would flow.
From SIMON-PETER, which is in your tongue,
Hearing-the-Rock, the Faithfull-Hearers came:
From SIMON-MAGVS, all those Hearers sprung,
Which were seduced, according to his Name:
For, by Interpretation, it is as much
With you, as if ye said, Hearing-the-Witch.
As Simon-Peter, and the Sorcerer,
Long since contended, whether of the two,
Should get possession of the Peoples ear,
Even so those hearings, at this present, do.
As Simon-Magus, until Peter spoke,
Had so bewitched the common people, then,
That, for the POWER of GOD, they him mistook;
So, Formall-hearing, now, bewitcheth men.
So, it is idolized: and, some have thought,
When, formally, that Duty they had paid,
The Holy Ghost might for the same be bought:
But, as then, Peter of the money said,
Their Hearing with them perish, who suppose,
That, GOD his Graces, for such wares bestows,
You, of this itching, this bewitching Hearing,
Have had Experiments: and, at this day,
There are such bitter fruits thereof appearing,
That, you had need be watchful: and, to pray,
That, GOD would please, to sanct^fie the ear,
And, circumcise your hearts, that you may know,
When, you the Witch, and when you Peter hear,
That, you, in Grace, may edified grow.
And, that this Information make you not
Respectlesse of that Hearing, or that Preaching,
Whereby, that Saving, knowledge may be got,
Which no man has, but by the Spirits teaching:
And, that, you so may Hear, that GOD may bless
Hearing, with Faith, and Faith with Truth-full-Peace.
Take heed unto your Prayers, that they reach not
Their length, that Widowes-houses do devour;
Take heed unto your Preachings, that, you preach not
The Spirit weak; and raise a fleshly-power.
Take heed in Giving thanks, you do not say,
In heart, when GOD has victories bestowne;
That, of your Foes, his hand did thousands slay,
And, that, there fell ten thousands by your own.
Unto your Fasts, and your Humiliations,
Take, likewise, heed, lest by your negligences,
Those Duties may be greater aggravations
Of your, but, seeming-sorrow'd-for-Offences.
And, take heed, lest hypocrisy may breed
Obstructions in you, of due Taking-heed.
If truly you desire a happie-Peace,
Repent your false Repentance; and, in haste,
Your suits, with true sincerity address,
Before the Day of mercy shall be past.
Reform your Public Fasts; and let them show,
Even in the Out-ward-man, so truly sad,
That, others may your inward-sorrow know,
And, by the same, so sensible be made,
Of what you feel; that it may make them find
A change in their own hearts; and, by that change,
Become to pious duty so inclined,
That, them from Vanity, it may estrange;
And, every day, one, thus, draw on another
To Penitence, till all repent together.
To make this duty further to extend,
(And, grow more general) you shall do well,
Unto your Adversaries to commend,
(And unto those, who in your quarters dwell)
This motion: That (since both of you profess
One GOD) you might assemble on one day,
To meet before his Presence, to confess
Your wickedness, wide open, there, to lay
Your Causes; And, for judgment, to refer
Your selves to him. For, such an introduction,
A means to draw you somewhat nearer were,
And, to remove, it may be, some obstruction
Which hinders Peace; or, else, to bring that, on,
By which, your work, the sooner may be done.
If, they that have the better Cause, think fit
(With some such meek and pious invitations
As they might frame) for this end, to admit
That day, whereon their Foes humiliations
Pretended are; it either shall allure
Your Adversaries to that Penitence,
Which will a speedy amity procure:
Or, aggravate, so greatly their offense,
That GOD shall quite reject them, as if they
Refused your Appeal; or, to abide
His Doom: and did intend some other way,
Or, by some other Censor, to be tried:
And, what event will thereupon ensue,
It were a needless matter to fore-shew.
When all are thus assembled, on one day,
Or else, of all, so many as GOD's grace
Shall make, therewith, content: (For, though it may
To you, be somewhat, yet nor Time, nor Place,
Are, in respect of Him, considerable)
Yea, when you in his presence shall appear
To this effect (as he shall you enable)
Fall down before him, with all meekness, there.
Together then; with seriousness, begin
The Fast anew. In true humiliations,
Let all bewail their errors, and their sin,
Till, in their mournings, and their Lamentations,
The famous mourning, equallize they shall
Of Hadadrimmon in Megiddo Vale.
Let, jointly, People, State, and King, unite
In penitence, as they in sin have done.
Themselves, let them, for all their sins, indite.
(Their new and ancient sins) before GOD's Throne.
And, forasmuch, as in this later-Age,
And, in this place, he seems, as it were,
To bring all things, again, upon the stage,
Which, heretofore, in action, did appear:
(Yea, since they, who will heed it, may behold
All that concerns the Estates, or conversation
Of Saints, or sinners, in GOD's Word foretold,
Epitomized in this Generation)
Let not his warnings, both by Word, and Deed,
Be frustrated, through want of taking-heed.
Remember to be wail your Gentilismes,
Your Babylonish-whoredomes, heretofore,
Your ancient-heresies, and moderne-Schismes,
That, GOD, for these, may judge these Isles no more.
Observe, and well observe it; that, because:
You governed less by Law, then by your will;
That, GOD, almost, deprived you of those Laws:
And, that, because (your projects to fulfill,
Or, to promote your carnall-Policies)
Morality, and Piety, by you,
Were made but stales: the worlds old-Heresies,
And Heath'nish-manners, are sprung up anew,
To interrupt, and mar the publike-Peace,
For your dissembling, and unthankfulness.
Remember, that, like Israel, you have spared
The Canaanites, that should have been destroi'd:
That, like rebellious Saul, you had regard
To Agag, and forbidden spolles enjoi'd.
Remember, how you staggered off, and on,
Betwixt the LORD, and Baal, in ancient-time,
And, how far, you, in later years, have gone
To repollute these Islands, by that crime.
Remember, that, like Judah, you have made.
Confed'racies, with such as are GOD's Foes;
Though warnings, counsels, and commands you had
To shun their friendships, who the Truth oppose:
And, mindful be, how you on them reli'd,
Whom Egypt, and whom Asbur, typifi'd.
Remember, that, you have, like Solomon,
(Though you had his example to beware)
Been careless, those Alliances to shun,
Which, both pernicious, and forbidden were.
For, all this Empire, guiltiness contracted,
As well, by heeding not, to have prevented
What, by your Kings, and Peers of State, was acted,
As, in not having, yet, this sin repented.
Repent, that, as in Judah, by her Kings,
You have, by halves, reformed Religion too:
Call, therewithal, to mind, what fruit it brings,
The work of GOD, with negligence, to do.
And, humbled be, for every other sin,
Whereof these Isles have, jointly, guilty bin.
Let those three Parties, which have made, this day,
These Islands wretched, by their great Transgressions,
And, chased their Glory, and their Peace, away,
Make, jointly, and asunder, their confessions:
For, all have much offended, even the best
Are guilty of enough, to have destroi'd
The temporal well-being they possessed,
And, all their hopes of what may be enjoi'd.
Let lukewarm Newters, those poore-spirited,
Degenerated Britains, without heart,
(Who, as ignobly, have demerited,
As those, who persecute the guiltless part)
Repent, and change their temper, out of hand,
Lest they be justly spu'd out of the land.
Let them, that are supposed best affected,
And, who, the best approved Cause befriended,
Examine, how their duties are neglected,
How false they are, in what they have pretended;
How faintly they the publike-Guard began;
By what ill means, they their Good-Cause pursued;
How little trust in GOD, how much in Man,
(And in an outward aid) has often, been showed;
How heedl^sse, of their Covenant, they grow;
How many of them slight the Vow they took;
How they enlarge, how they contract it, now;
How wilfully, how frequently, it is broke;
And, how the public sorrow they prolong,
By doing Pi^^^, and Justice wrong.
Let your Malignant-partie (or, of them,
So many as are, yet, not gone so far,
That they all timely warnings must contemn)
Remember, of what crimes they guilty are.
Let them consider that to have their will,
Or, that ambitious humors they may feed,
Or, that some other lust they may fulfill,
How, they have made their Country smart and bleeed.
Let them consider, that they have pursued
Their tyrannies, in these unhappie wars,
As if they meant a pattern to have showed,
Of Rehoboam, and his Councellers;
Or, how King Ahabs party went to fight
At Ramoth-Gilead, as in GODS despite.
Let ENGLAND mourn apart, for all those crimes,
Which do poilute her at this present day;
And, those committed in preceding times,
That GOD may take his heavy hand away.
Her fickleness, in faith, and in attire;
Her great abuse of plenties, by excess;
Her persecutions, both by sword and fire,
Of those who did the holy faith profess.
Her wantonnizing with the means of Grace,
Her thanklesnesse for that long Peace she had,
Her sleighting it when she forewarned was
Of that great breach, which GOD on her has made.
Yea, all her other sins let her lament:
Let her, all Nationall-defaults repent.
Let SCOTLAND mourn apart, and search, wherefore
Her sins upon her face, and on her back,
GOD, at this present, does so deeply score,
Now, when she does of sin most conscience make.
Let her examine, if she has no End
To seize on some advantage, for her own;
While, her distressed Sister to defend,
She, piously, a readiness has shown.
If she be guilty, of so base a thought,
Let her repent it, e're GOD search it out:
If she be clear, Truth shall to light be brought;
And, they who of her faithfulness, now, doubt,
Shall praise her Children; if they have a care,
Their lying, and their bragging to forbear.
Let IRELAND mourn apart; and, not, alone,
For her late Trecheries, and for the guilt
Which her inhumane Natives brought upon
Their heads, for blood of Innocents new-spilt;
But, also, for the sins of all those Nations,
Within her borders, who, for their oppressions
Were cast out of their ancient-habitations;
And, lately, driven from their now-possessions.
Let her, that brutish Ignorance lament,
Where with, she, many ages, was polluted;
That Heath'nish-Christianity repent,
Which, her blind Children, piety reputed;
And, her Rebellions, and Idolatry,
Let her bewail, with true humility.
Let her observe, what her Transgressions be;
That She, unto the praise of GOD, may say;
In all his judgments truly just is he,
And, that, with Mercies, he did them allay.
For, if a strict inquiry he had made,
For all the Blood, the Oppression, and the Guile,
Of which, he, Information might have had,
There had not one been living in that I Will.
Both Scot, and English, very studious were,
To plant themselves upon her fruitful plains;
But, how, Religion might be planted there,
They took but very little care, or pains.
To save the Soul, not many were employed,
And, therefore, many Bodies, were destroyed.
Had her late Planters, as industrious bin,
Her Natives, with Religion to enrich,
As how to make themselves great men, therein,
(Or, if their care had been but half so much)
Some hundred thousands had, this day, possessed
Their lives, and livelihoods; who, at their cost,
For times to come, Examples have increast
Of goodly-hopes, through want of Prudence, lost.
And, therefore, let them learn, who yet survive,
Not to neglect CHRIST'S Kingdom; if they would,
Their Kingdom, or their Heritage should thrive;
Or, that, their Hopes, or Labors prosper should.
Yea, if they seek on Earth a firm possession,
Let them not build their houses by oppression.
For, not a few of her Inhabitants,
Both out of England, and from Scotland came,
Mean in esteem; oppressed with many wants;
And, many of them, many ways to blame;
Some, with projections, nor discreet, nor just;
Some, to defraud their Creditours, and Friends,
Of their estates; some, to enjoy their lust,
And, other some, for other such like ends,
Came over to that Kingdom, nor much known,
Nor much regarded; who, in little space,
Were not alone exceeding wealthy grown,
But, made both Earls, and Barons of the Place:
And, they, who suddenly, aloft did clime,
Were pulled to the ground in shorter time,
They, whose ^bundance, overnight was more,
Then they could value; e're the following day
Disclosed it self, were made exceeding poor;
And, glad from all their wealth, to run away:
Scarce leisure had they (lest they lost their lives,
With their estates) to take, of all they had,
Enough, wherewith their children, and their wives,
Might clothed be, when their escapes they made.
The loss, the frights, the blond-shed, and the cries,
Felt, suffered, seen, and heard, in those black-nights,
Present O Ireland, still, before thine eyes:
Still, I let thy children keep them in their sights.
That Visitation, let them so bewail,
Especially, the sins that caused it,
That, they, nor their posterity, may fail
To mind the same; and, let them not forget
To mourn apart, for that sad desolation,
Nor to be thankful, for their Preservation.
Let every Corporation, Town, and City,
Within these Islands also mourn apart;
That, their Inhabitants may find more pity,
Then may be challenged, by due desert.
Some, of them, have the benefit enjoyed
Of GODS protections, both from fire, and sword:
Some of them, have been touched, but not destroyed,
For which, what can they less then thanks afford?
Let them acknowledge his preventing-Graces,
Who, yet are safe; and, that, GOD pleased has bi^
To keep Dstroyers from their dwelling places,
So often, so much polluted, by their sin:
And, let all those whom he began to smite,
Be thankful, that, they were not ruined quite.
For, great are those oppressions, which, of late,
Have cried for vengeanch, on some Governors,
Of Mysteries, and Townes-incorporat^,
Who have abused both their Trust and Powers.
Those Privileges, which to them were deigned,
With chief respect unto the Common-good,
Are often insisted on (yea, and maintained)
As if their Granter should be understood,
To mean some favors to particular Places,
With damage to the Public; which, makes void
His CHARTERS, ipso facto: For, such Graces
Are by their own excessivenesse destroi'd,
If Reason may be Judge; which, heretofore,
The greatest sway, in humane Actions, bore.
Yet, you have Cities, Towns, and Mysteries,
Which do not only, by such Grants, as these,
Oppress the Public, without Remedies;
And, injure Strangers, by their Franchises:
But, also by mis-usage of their Grants,
And, by their Power do many times oppress
The poorest of their own Inhabitants;
Enslaving them, by wrongs, without redress.
For, of those profits, which conferred were
(As well their needy members to sustain,
As, decently, that port and charge to bear,
Which, to those Corporations do pertain)
Most part is swallowed, by a private purse;
Or, spent in Feastings, which is somewhat worse.
And, when so bad a Corporation grows,
As to oppress a Stranger, or their own,
He, that their tyranny then, undergoes,
Is irrecoverably overthrown,
For, to a Body-politike belongs
No Soul: And, if no Soul, what Conscience, then?
And, if no Conscience, how can it, of wrongs
Be sensible? when it had wronged men?
It does consist of many, and can raise
The larger Bribe; the sooner find a friend;
Or, search out, by what persons, or what ways,
It may (him whom it profecures) offend:
And, which is worst (when other enemies;
Time, slaies;) This, is a Foe that never dies.
Let, therefore, all your Bodies-Politike
Lament their sins apart, lest GOD destroy
Those Privileges, which, without desert,
And, to the wrong of others, they enjoy.
Among the rest, let every Academ,
Lament apart, till they, are purged from
Their great corruptions, lest, from out of them,
Your bane, as from a poisoned Fountain come:
For, their pollutions one maine cause have bin,
Of all your present mischiefest yea, from thence
Proceeded not alone much of that sin,
Which has desil'd these Isles; But, that offense,
And, those divisions, also, which of late,
Have almost ruined both Church, and State.
For, there, through want of prudent Government;
Good principles, and pious education,
Your youth, which were, for knowledge; thither sent,
Lost civil manners, wit, and reputation.
Thence was it, that your Clergymen became
Such Roarers, and such Tosse-pots, as they were.
Their Life, and Doctrine, grown so much to blame,
Was first corrupted, and perverted there.
There, they were taught to fawn, and flatter, well,
For their preferment; and, how to become
Fit Priests for Ahab, Baal, and ^abel.
Or, Pimps, and Panders, for the Whore of Rom^s
GOD grant, that for their sins, they so may mourn,
That, they to GOD; and, GOD, to them may turn.
Let your Assembly of Divines, ^^part,
Repent and mourn; themselves, examining,
What aims, what hopes, what purposes, what heart,
And, what desires, they to their meetings, bring.
Let them consider, whether, none advances
Traditions of their own, to be received,
And to be practiced, as Gods Ordinances;
Which are; in truth, not such to be believed.
Let them examine, whether they do carry
A due respect to Christian-Liberty,
If they enforce those things, as necessary,
Of which there is no true necessity;
And, whether, they have not removed hence,
What, might have edifi'd, without offense.
Let it be heeded whether they have care,
As CHRIST himself, and, his Apostles had,
What things the people, and the times, can bear,
E're they impose them; lest; they make them mad,
Instead of right reforming: Let them try,
Their spirits well, and search, if there be none
Who dare pretend divine Authority
For that, which GOD commands, not to be done.
Let search be made, if any Discipline
Has been projected, for a private end,
Or, to advance a politic Design,
Which needlessly, weak Christians might offend;
Or, which may causlesse jealousies increase,
Enlarge your troubles, or defer your Peace.
Let all their Brethren of the Clergy, too,
In every Faction, seriously repent,
And mourn apart; This, let them chiesly do,
Who looked one way, while they another went.
Let them consider, whether they pretend not
Great diligence, and zeal, to bring to pass
That just, and pious work, which they intend not
So much, as that, which therewith covered was;
Let them examine, also, if the while
They cozen others, others will not seek,
With falsehoods, their Deceivers to beguile,
And, to requite their practice, with the like,
Till all these Kingdoms, and these Churches, rue
The paths and vanities, which they pursne.
For, as they had designs upon the State.
Their aims to further; so have others had
Designs on them, whereby they have, of late,
To wicked purposes, advantage made.
Some, to the Presbyterian-side adhere,
Some to your Independents: But, with those,
Who, busiest, in partaking, do appear,
Another Faction, secretly, does close,
Which parts it self among them, and, thereby,
Spies out the strength, and weaknesses of either;
Foments their quarrellings, and, does comply,
As friend to one side, yet, is true to neither;
But, covertly, by means of those two Factions,
Increases public dangers, and distractions.
These, by this craft, have made the zeal of those,
On either side, whose purposes are good,
The Kingdoms peace, unheeded, to oppose,
With such, as, openly, the same withstood.
So that, if Envy, Avarice, and Pride,
Whence sprung that Aconite, that Clergic-bane,
Which has your Clergy, lately, giddifi'd,
Shall not, by penitence, away be taken,
Your quarrels will perpetuated be;
And, neither Church, nor State, nor Corporation,
Nor Families, be from divisions free.
Now, therefore, in a true humiliation,
Let every one of them, prepare his heart,
For his transgressions, to lament apart.
Your Militarie-Men, apart, must mourn,
As Well as these. And, therefore, that, they may,
With true compunction, from their ways return;
Let them, to heart, their many failings lay.
Let your Commanders mourn, for all those harms,
Which have been suffered, under their Commands,
By their neglecting of that Law of Arms,
Whereon, the honor of a Soldier stands.
Let them bewail the plunders, rapes, and murders,
The Breaches of Lawes-morall, and Divine,
The violences, riots, and disorders
Committed tho of Di c
And, for their Avarice, and their Ambition,
Whereby, they do prolong your sad condition.
Let them not think, that none so worthy are
To be advised withal, (or of esteem)
For Soldiery, as they that boast, and swear,
Or arrogate to be, what they, but seem.
Let them not think, they better may confide
In Officers, who have not so much brain
To keep their legs from slaggering aside,
Then in a Soldier of a sober-straine.
Or, that this War had e're the worse went on,
Had all been countenanced in their Command,
Who, for the worke-sake, ventured thereupon;
And did, as well as others, understand
The moderne-Discipline, and, therewith, too,
Knew what the Greeks, and Romans use to do.
Let them repent their treacherous complying
With your professed foes; their favour-showing
To men suspected; and their grace-denying,
Where be^ter trust, and more respect was owing.
Let them be sorry, that the faithfulness,
Or, at the least, the prudence, which they wanted,
Made public charge, and dangers to increase
By Passes, and Protections, lightly granted.
And, let their hearts of adamant, and steel,
Be pricked with such remorse, and penitence,
That, in themselves, a loathing they may feel
Of their inhumane spoils, and insolence
Committed in that Country, which has bred them;
And, on their friends, who paid, armed, and fed them.
Moreover, let the Gentry of the land
Bewail their many vanities, apart;
The duties of their calling understand,
And lay their many failings more to heart.
For, most have lived, as if to idleness,
And to debaucherie they had been borne,
And large estates, for nothing, did possess,
But, for supplies of lust, to serve their turn.
A die, a cock, a hound, hawke, horse, or whore,
Were chiefest objects of their contemplation:
Their sins alone, are, though you had no more,
Enough to bring a Land to desolation:
And, they have been chief cause, and instruments
Of all these Plagues, for which this Realm laments.
But, much will want of perfecting a peace,
Until your Men of Law persuaded be
To mourn apart. For, they will re-increase
Your quarrels, else, as soon as you agree.
By their formalities, and slow proceeding,
Your remedy, for injuries is made
A mischief, the disease, often times, exceeding:
And, if some eye, unto them, be not had,
So many places in your Parliament
They will supply, and fill so many Chaires
In your Committees; that, much derriment
Unto the Subject; and some close impaires
Of public freedoms, (e're you be aware)
Which slip upon you, if you have not care.
They have, already, made the common way
Of Trialls, very greatly, to enlarge
Your troubles, by impertinent delay,
And circumstances, to the suitors charge.
So strong a party they have always had,
That your Great-Charter, which does interdict
Delay of Justice, was, in that point, made
(E're since the grant) a Law without effect.
But when their Courts, and practices have reached
Oppressions height; They, as the Clergy were,
Shall down, into another Orb, be fetched,
And taught to keep a constant motion there.
This Work, upon some Courts, has been begun;
Another time, it shall be fully done.
Let every Oiconomick-Government,
And every single person, through the Nation,
In every Family, apart lament,
And take his ways into examination.
For, all Estates and Common-weals, that be,
Consist of these: And, whensoe're you shall
Those Pettie-Governments reformed see,
You, then, are in the way, of mending all.
If every Houshold-Prince, and Officer,
Within his Jurisdiction, would but please,
To make complete a Reformation, there,
The Work-desired, should be done with ease.
Let each one, therefore, take the same in hand,
In all relations, wherein he may stand.
Let every Master, prudently direct;
And, every Servant, faithfully obey:
Let every Husband, husband-like affect,
And, every Wife, a wife-like love repay.
Let Parents, parent-like, their hearts enlarge,
Their filial duties, let the Children do;
Let, singly, all of these their parts discharge,
Both to the Family, and Strangers, too.
Yea, let each person, individually,
Now, take himself, apart, and, all alone,
His heart examine, what Impiety,
By him, has been occasioned, or done,
Whereby your Peace was broke; and, then assay,
To help renew it, by what means he may.
But, chiefly, let the Royall-Family
Admit this Discipline, that others may
Receive encouragement, and light, thereby,
To find a Penitentiarie-way.
Oh I let the King, if ever he expect,
To see the City of his Throne, in peace,
Go mourn apa^^; and, let his thoughts reflect
Upon his folly, and unrighteousness.
Let him like David; (and not Ahab-like)
Take meekly those reproofs, that GOD shall send,
And, let them on his heart so kindly strike,
That, he enraged grow not, but amend.
With that great Pattern, of true Penitence.
When he, like sheep, beholds his people slain;
Let him not look, too much, on their offense,
But, rather, let him of his own complain,
That, they may do the like; and, GOD perceiving
True penitence, quit both, by free forgiving.
Let not the Jezabel of Rome delude him,
With her black witch-crafts, and her fornications,
The cup of her delusions; if in vain
His warnings prove, the deepest he shall sink,
Into that Lake, whence none can rise again.
Because, he has not only had a sight
(Beyond them all) of her seducing ways;
But, also, has acknowledged that Light,
And, wilfully, himself to her betraies:
Yea, and to make his sin, and shame the more,
Betraies the blood of others, to the Whore.
Yet, that he may have all the means to fetch him
Back from perdition (if he be not gone
So far, by wilfulness, that none can reach him)
Let him be personally called upon,
To look unto his ways. And, since you know,
His Flatterers, present him their false glass,
Himself, thereby, unto himself, to show,
And make him seem the man he never was;
Help thou to undeceive him; lest he may,
With his three earthly Kingdoms (now half lost)
Fool desp'rately, a heavenly Crown away
And, think, he shall redeem it, at the cost
Of trimming up the Western end of PAVLS,
By Fines, extracted from afflicted Souls.
First, bid him call to mind (with mourning for them)
The sins which did his Fathers-house pollute;
And, in his heart, so seriously, abhor, them,
That, it may bring forth penitential fruit.
The blood of War that has in Peace been shed;
The manifold uncleanness therein;
The superstitions, thereby, cherished;
Offenses known, and those that hid have bin:
The prosecution of the royall-bloud
In Arabella; (guilty of no crime,
Except it were offensive, to be good,
And, to have had her being, in his time.).
The matchless profanation of a Day
For Gowries death: his many great oppressions;
The fooling of the Kingdoms wealth away,
And Subjects lives, by cheating Expeditions:
With whatsoever offenses, of this kind,
He shall, upon a strict inquiry, find.
Wish him, with like affections, to recall
The slips of his own Reign, and of his life;
The mischiefs, which to Him, and you, befall,
In hunting for a superstitious Wife:
His making of Nobility a scorn,
By dignifying men of base-condition;
By choosing Counselors, to serve his turn,
In settling things, unworthy his fruition.
By suffering of his royal Proclamations
To be abused to injurious ends;
By making shows of verbal Reformations,
For public good, when rapine he intends.
By faining fears, when cause of fear, none give him;
And, by protesting, until few believe him.
Let Him consider, that, all those, for whom
Against two Kingdom, he, in Arms, appears,
And, whose Protector He is now become,
Are men, whom nothing, but their sin, endears.
Let Him consider, what a sea of blood,
In his three Kingdoms, has, of late, been spilt,
For those, who share among them all his good,
And, make him culpable of all their guilt.
Let him consider, that, what, now, he strives,
And fights for, is, but, power to be undone;
Or, that he may, by his Prerogatives,
Without control, unto the Devil run:
For, unto him, that power, or that supply
Which may be for his good, none shall deny.
Let him remember, what the German-horse
Should have been sent for: Let him call to mind
Distressed Rochel: And, that, which will worse
Afflict him, when his feeling he shall find,
Poor gasping Ireland; whose wide-gaping wound
Calls out for vengeance, and, his honor taints
With deep-di'd stains. His flat'rers feign a sound
From Straffords blood; and other such black-Saints;
But, that Illusion will not keep him long
From hearing Ireland: For, two Kingdoms more
Have sent in blood, to make a triple-Song;
Which, will, so dreadfully, so loudly roar,
That, he shall hear (unless repent he do)
Ere long; and hear it, with a vengeance, too.
Let him repent, his having, long, attempted
His loving-people, to inslave, and grieve:
For, he from vengeance will not be exempted,
By pleading an usurped Prerogative.
Let him repent, the covering his intents
With Protestations, and religious shows:
Since, these are made such threadbare complements,
That, every one, almost, their meaning knows:
Nor let him longer fool himself, to think,
The World perceives not, what his projects be:
For, he is blind, or, wilfully, does wink,
Who cannot, at a hundred loop-holes see,
That, many years, before this war begun,
He purposed the course, he, now, does run*
Then, that he may, without despairing, hear,
Let him, with penitence, before it comes,
To all those wholesome Counsels lend an ear,
Which, timely, may prevent ensuing doomes.
To mollify his heart, let him present
Before his understanding, and his eye,
How spoiled, and how miserably rent
His three late-happy-Kingdomes, now, do lie.
Let him give ear unto those just complaints
Which his distressed Subjects have preferred;
Let him regard the sufferings of the Saints;
Let living-moanes, or, dying-groanes, be heard:
The Widows prayer, and, the Orphans cries,
Lest, GOD, to hear him, in distress, denies.
Let him remember, that, they, who complain,
And, of whose Towns, he, now, does ashes make,
Are those, who, for his safe return from Spain,
Made joyfull-Feasts, and Bonfires, for his sake.
Let him consider, that, these are the Nations,
(Even these, whom, now, he tramples under-feet,)
Who him received with glad acclamations,
And him did, often with love-expressions, meet.
Let him consider, that, they, who enjoy
His presence, now, are those that prey upon him;
Even some of those, who lab'red to destroy
His Fathers house; and, those that have undone him,
Both in his reputation, and, estate;
And, merit not his favor, but his hate.
Let him take notice, that, by his digression
From prudent Counsels, his most cruel Foes
Have so imprisoned him in their possession,
That, of himself, he cannot, now, dispose.
And, since all Europe knows it, let him know,
That, though they flatter, and, upon him fawn,
He, despicable, in their eyes, does grow;
And, is, by them, esteemed but as a pawn.
Yea, let him also know that, he has got
So little credit, upon either side,
That, as the Parliament, now, trusts him not.
So, but few other much in him confide.
Nor will his lost repure, to him return,
Till, for his errors, he shall truly mourn.
Let him consider, that, whereas he sought
To multiply wild-beasts, within his land,
That, GOD, in justice, now, the same has brought
Almost into a Desert, to his hand.
To nourish Beasts, his Huntsmen took away
His peoples birthright: And, behold, now, he
Is, therefore, hunted, like those Beasts of Prey,
By which, the neighboring towns molested be.
When he was in his artificiall-heav'n,
Which flatring Poets, and his Painters made,
Let him re-minde, what Attributes were given;
With what high Epithetes, they made him glad;
What joy, in vanities, he, then, did take;
And, what a GOD of him, his Priests did make.
Let him take notice, that, there was a doubt,
His Father came not, fairly, to his end;
And, that, when means was made to search it out,
And, Witnesses commanded to attend,
The Parliament, abruptly, up was broken;
And, no proceeding, afterward, therein.
Let him consider, what this may betoken,
What jealousies, it, justly, might let in.
If any were suspected, without cause,
Their Innocence, by trial, had been cleared:
If justly taxed; why had not, then, the Laws
Their course? why was not that accuser heard?
Clear, or not clear, some body was to blame,
That, such an accusation quasht became.
Nay, these three Kingdoms did neglect, in this,
Adutie, which they, questionless, did owe:
And, partly, for that negligence it is,
That, GOD, for blood, does make inquiry, now.
For, of each Subject of the meanst respect,
Even of the Beggar, by the highway side,
The King has an account, upon suspect,
That, by the hand of violence he di'd.
And, should a King, that, living, had protected
So many millions, dying, so be fleighted,
That, when he to be murdered was suspected,
Not one should be examined or indicted?
Believe it, this Neglect is, now, rewarded:
For, thousands die, and petish, unregarded.
In all three Kingdoms, was there never a one
To second, the Physicians, Eglesham
And Ramsey? had he not a powerful Son?
And his Beloved servant, Buckingham?
Were there not some about him, who then had
No hopes, but those which on his life were laid:
Had he not Lords, and Earls enough, then, made,
Who, by this duty, might have partly paid
For his respects? Could none of all those things
Called Bishops, upon whom in life he doted;
Whom he esteemed the Angell-guard of Kings,
Whom he, out of the dunghill, had promoted,
To sit with Princes? could of all these, none
Repute him worth regard, when he was gone?
Let him remember, and consider well,
What judgments, have, on that neglect, ensued;
How suddenly, the Duke, soon after, fell;
What direful vengeance has this Land pursued
Even to this day: and know, there is a GOD,
Who (though Kings do neglect it, or, assay
To hide it) will be searching after blood;
And, all concealed mischiefs open lay.
This, let him do; lest, he, that might have worn
The glorious'st Christian Wreath, ere long, become
To be abroad, (...) laughing stock, and scorn,
And, past regaining honor, here, at home.
For, yet, he may return; and, if he do,
He shall recover all his Honor, too.
There is a way (if he will seek to find it)
To greatest Honors, through this Disgrace:
There is a means (if he will, truly, mind it)
By which, this wonder may be brought to pass.
To no worse end, this VOICE does, now, discover
His failings, but, to drive him to this course.
To no worse purpose is he, thus, blackt over,
But, that, he might not be defiled worse.
And, this VOICE prophesies, that, if he shall
With upright-heartednesse, pursue that Path,
He shall not only be restored to all
His honors lost, and be redeemed from wrath,
But, also, far more honorable grow,
Then all the Kings of Europe, reigning now.
Belief works greater wonders; let him then,
Believe it may be; and, it shall be done.
He has, too much, believed many men,
Whose Word was less to be reli'd upon.
The precious'st Pe^rles lie deepest in the Seas,
The richest stones from hardest recks are hewed,
The darkest mornings have proved glorious days.
Great mercies to great Sinners, have been showed.
When, to repentance, GOD was pleased to call
Manasseh, few were better Kings then he:
When he converted perfecuting Saul,
A glorious change in him, the Church did see;
And, so there may be, now: For, who can tell,
But, that, to make you rise, your Sov'raigne fell?
If he suppose, that, he may find evasions*
From any thing, against him, here, expressed;
Yet, of offenses; since he gave occasions,
Let him not, in his own uprightness, rest:
But, since GOD, both with Scandalls, and the Sword,
Pursues him at the heels, let him repent.
Let him endeavor, in a true accord,
To meet him in his lawful Parliament:
For, if, with humbleness, he can submit
To GOD's corrections, he will, soon, forgive him:
He has another blessing; for him, yet;
He, unto favor, will, again receive him:
And, when his Sov'raigne shall, thus highly grace him,
With their old love, his Subjects shall embrace him.
But, ere this reconcilement can be had,
His Parliament, reformed must, also, be;
And, their Atonement, must, with GOD be made
For, him they have provoked, as well as he.
And, though the better Cause their party has*
And, prosecutes it, stoutly, now and then,
Their failings, also, have deserved wrath;
And, many of them, are no better men.
The greatest Counsels, in the world, may err
In Judgment, and in Fact: For, they consist
Of many men, among whom, some there are,
Who do not what they should, but, what they list.
And, such, have, in your choice Assemblies, bin
Occasions of much error, and, much sin.
Then, let the Bodies-Representative
Of these three Kingdoms; but especially,
Thy Parliament, O ENGLAND, now, receive
This summons to a true humility.
Let every Individual Member, there,
Lament apart. Let him, both as a Man
And, as he qualified, does appear,
For public service, do the best he can,
To purge out, by an humble penitence,
What guilt soever, he, by wilfulness,
Or weakness, has incurred, ever since
A place in that High-Court, he did possess:
And, let him not disdain, who ere he be,
To take this counsel, though it come by thee*
Remember him, if he be of the Peers,
The duty of his Peerage: For, between
The Sov'raigne-Person, and the Commoners,
He stands, as an Honorable Mean,
The Body-Politike, to temper so,
That, every Part, and Member, of the same,
May, to that due, and fair proportion grow,
Which will be most convenient for the same.
For, while they keep their Station; and so long,
As, in the Three-Estates, there is retained
A comely Symetrie; there can no wrong,
By either, from the other, be sustained:
Nor, can all humane policy invent,
A nobler, or a safer Government.
But, if those Parts encroach upon each other,
Or, act to other purposes, than those,
For which they were ordained, they will fall together,
Into that Chaos, from which first they rose.
If therefore any Peer, through some distrust
Of others, or corruption of his own,
Math any way been failing, in that Trust,
Which GOD, by birthright, has on him bestowne,
Or, if for his advantage, he has sought,
To gain a power, or privilege, whereby
A damage, on the Public, may be brought;
Let him repent him, of that injury;
Lest else GODS justice, and the Peoples wrath,
Tear from him, that poor honor which he has.
Bid them not think, that their Immunities,
And their large Privileges granted were,
That, they the common people might despise;
And, wrong that power, with which they trusted are.
Bid them take heed, they do not so comply,
To help enlarge an uncontrolled Power,
That, they at last, enable Tyranny,
The Lords, as well as Commons, to devour.
For, by that means, they shall not only bring
The Commons into bondage; But, make way
For him, that is a tyrannizing-King,
Their honors, also, in the dust to lay;
And, to advance those Vndeserving-Groomes,
That, shall out-brave them, and possess their rooms.
Is It not enough, that some of them, of late,
Were lifted to their Station, from among
The Commons, for their falsehood to the State?
And doing Innocence, and Virtue wrong?
For, some of them, at this day, had not won
The honor of a Lordship, had they not,
With stoutnesse, for the Commonwealth, begun;
And, by betraying it, their Titles got.
Is It not enough, that, by such means as these,
They have attained to that high degree,
Those Freedoms, and those Princely Privileges,
Which due unto the noblest Virtues be;
Unless, now they are up, it seems meet,
To let them tread the Kingdom, under feet?
Is It not sufficient, that nigh forty years,
Most Honors, prostituted did become
To sale? and, that so many of your Peers
Have raised been, out of the very scum
Of all mankind? Can they not be content,
With what they have acquired, to go away?
While they are winked at, cannot they repent?
That, what they have, they may, in peace, enjoy?
But, will they, still, endeavor to oppress,
And, to encroach upon the public right?
Until the People, stirred with furiousness,
Deprive them of their May-game-Honours quite?
Let them, with wisdom, rather be content,
To save what they have gotten, and repent.
For those exorbitancies, let them mourn,
Whereby they have irregularly moved.
Let them, with meekness, now, to GOD return,
And not be mad, because they are reproved:
Lest, if this VOICE displease them, they enforce,
E're long, the sending of a Messenger,
Which will afflict them, and enrage them worse,
Than he, whom at this present, they shall hear.
Let them, their Persons, and their Families,
Hereafter, with that vertuousnesse ennoble,
Which gets favor in good peoples eyes;
And, spite of envy, makes their honors double:
So, they a reall-Honour will possess;
And, none shall thrive, who seeks to make it less.
Let every Member of the Commons-House,
For his Transgressions, also, mourn apart.
Let him, in secret, by himself, peruse
The thoughts, and inclinations of his heart.
Let him examine, how he first came in,
To be of that Great-Councell: whether he
Was not begotten, and conceived in sin,
A Member of this Parliament to be.
And, if it has been so; then, all alone,
Let him that Crime-Originall repent;
And, all that he has actually mis-done,
Since he has sitten in this Parliament:
For, till these be repented, all the fruit
Of his endeavors, will be like the Root.
As, he were very foolish, who supposes,
Where he but Brambles, or but Nettles planted,
To gather Tulips, Violets, and Roses;
So, out of question, they no folly wanted,
Who could conceive, that Burgess, or, that Knight,
Whom, first, corruption chose (and who still dotes
On that which gave him power) can be right,
To Piety, or Justice, in his Votes.
Let him search, whether that strict Oath he took,
At his Admittance, and the VOW, since made,
Has not been either negligently broke,
Or, wilfully, some violation had:
And, if he find it so, let him condole
His failings, with repentance, and be whole.
If he has more pursued his own ends,
Than public services: If he has striven
For fear, for gain, or for respect of Friends,
That, an injurious censure should be given:
If he has found himself, since his Election,
Puffed up with that intolerable pride,
Or, that opinion of his own perfection,
Which is in some of them, with scorn, espied:
If he has, by his Power, or by his Place,
Occasion took, on absent men, to throw
Aspersions undeserved, to their disgrace;
Or, damage, e're themselves they wronged could know;
Let him be sorry for his impudence,
And, seek to make amends, for that offense.
If he has injured any, by delay;
Or, by unfit advantages, or times,
Procured Votes, a surreptitious way;
Or justified sinners in their crimes:
If he has crossed Virtues due reward,
By plotting, packing, siding, or partaking;
By hiding that, which ought to be declared,
By cowardly, an honest Cause, forsaking:
If, he has under blame, or censure, brought
Those innocents, who, merely, out of zeal
Unto the Public, have, sincerely, sought
His folly, or his falsehood, to reveal;
And knew it true, (although their proofs did fail;)
Let him, his cruelty, in that, bewail.
And, let your Parliament take special care
Of this abuse; lest, else, a ground be laid,
Whereon, their cunning foes may engines rear,
Whereby, they may be wronged, if not betrayed.
For, though in justice they should vindicate
The honor of their Members, whenever
Rash levitie, malignancie, or hate,
To injure or asperse them, shall endeavor;
Yet, when good probabilities, induce
The well-affected, to mistrust, or fear,
Some public damage, danger, or abuse,
By that, which they shall either see, or hear,
By any Member, either done, or said;
Why should it not, unto his charge be laid?
If, where, it ought, a secret be revealed;
If, for the public, without private spleen;
If, past due time, it has not been concealed;
If, probability thereof has been;
If, he that speaks it, be no way defamed,
And, of concernment if the same appears,
Why should the speaker, be reproved or blamed,
For thus disclosing, what he thinks, or hears?
If it be false, th'accused, need not fear it;
For, if he be not otherways suspected,
None, without proof, unto his wrong, will hear it.
And, if he blameless be, and well affected,
The zeal of his accuser, he will commend;
And, count him his, because, the Kingdoms friend.
Your Senators, their privileges have,
Not for their own, but for the public sake;
And, they abuse the trust their Country gave,
Who, any further use, of them shall make.
And, who can judge it reasonable, then,
To make the people more afraid to wrong
The privileges, of your Single-men,
Then those, which to the Commonwealth belong?
Were it not fitter, to adventure on
Dishonouring a Commoner, or Peer,
Then suffer all of them to be undone,
Through want of speaking that which you shall hear?
Let them, who Freedoms-personall would cherish,
To public damage; with their freedoms, perish.
This way, the Royallists did first begin
To screw up their Prerogative, to that,
Which, made it more indulgent to have bin,
To serve their turns, then to secure the State.
And, if there be not still a prudent care
That, Privileges clash not; and, that they
Which are subordinate, may not appear
In force, until their Betters, give them way;
Destruction will succeed. Let, therefore, so
Each Member, on his Privilege insist,
That, both by claim and practice, he may show,
They are not to be used, as men list;
Or, turned into Bug-bears, to affright
The Commonwealth, from claiming of her right.
Let, therefore, care be took, and, quickly too,
That, her due rights the Commonwealth enjoy;
That, private men their duties better do;
And, that, divisions do not all destroy.
Let not those foolish Toys, who do besot
Themselves, with arrogance, presume to prate,
As if a Parliament had them begot,
To be the heires-apparent to the State.
Permit you not Religious-Melancholy,
Phlegmatick-Av'rice, or, Zeale-Cholerick,
Nor an excessivenesse of Sanguime-Folly,
To make both Church and State grow deadly sick,
Nay, rather mad; and, in their mad distractions,
To tear themselves, into a thousand fractions.
Let not your King and Parliament, in One,
Much less apart, mistake themselves, for that,
Which is most worthy to be thought upon:
Or, think, they are essentially, the STATE,
Let them not fancy, that, The Authority
And Privileges upon them bestown,
Conferred, to set up a Majesty,
A Power, or a Glory, of their own.
But, let them know, 'twas for another thing,
Which they but represent; and, which, ere long,
Them, to a strict account, will, doubtless, bring,
If any way, they do it wilful wrong:
For, that, indeed, is, really, the Face,
Whereof, they are the shadow, in the glass.
Moreover, thus inform them, that, if either,
They, still, divided, grow from bad, to worse;
Or, (without penitence unite together)
And, by their sin, provoke him to that course;
GOD, out of their confusions, can, and will
Create a cure; and, raise a lawfull-power,
His promise to his people to fulfill;
And, his, and their Opposers, to devour.
Yea, bid both King, and Parliament, make have,
In penitence, united, to appear:
Lest, into those Confusions, they be cast,
Which will affright them both; and, make them fear,
And, know, there is, on earth, a greater-thing,
Then, an unrighteous Parliament, or King.
More might be said; but, that which is behind,
Requires another season: Thou, therefore,
Another opportunity must find,
If, thou desir'st to be informed more.
Perhaps, thou have, already, more expressed,
Then many will approve, if thou reveal it:
Yet, if thou look for any temp'rall-rest;
Let hopes, nor fears, compel thee to conceal it*
Thy Scorners, in derision, lately, said,
Thou art a Prophet; but, when all is told
Which is behind, their pride will be afraid,
Tha^, some ensuing things, thou did behold,
And, that, what e're thou art, thou have declared
Those Counsels, whereof notice should be took;
Those warnings, which are worthy of regard;
And, like a true-man, and a freeman spoke.
Let it be therefore, spoken, without fear:
And, Let him, that has ears to hear it, hear.
The VOICE here, left to speak; and, here, will I
For this time, leave to write; and, fit, and mourn
For Britains, and mine own iniquity,
Until, that VOICE, with perfect Peace, return.
O GOD! return it, quickly; and, let not
This portion of it, be divulged in vain;
Or, so despised be, or so forgot,
That, Words of Peace, we never hear again.
Speak Peace, how ever, to thy Servants heart;
Speak to his Soul, in grace and mercy, LORD!
That, from thy ways, he never may depart;
Or, dis-obedient be unto thy Word.
Forgive him, all the vanities, that lurk
Within his heart; All deeds, by him, misdone,
And every word, and thought, whereby this work
Defiled has been, since, first, it was begun.
Of outward-mercies, and, of some more ease
From his afflictions, too, he should be glad:
But, since there is as much bane, as bliss, in these;
Give, what thou know fittest to be had.
And, let an Echo, from this VOICE, redound
Unto thy praise, an everlasting-sound. Amen.
FINIS.

