A Sudden Flash Timely Discovering, Some Reasons wherefore, the style of
PROTECTOR, should not be deserted by these NATIONS, with some other things, by
them very considerable. It was first made visible, The fourth day, after the
Author heard it reported, that the Lord Protector, had waved the Title of KING.

By BRITANS REMEMBRANCER.

-- Poetis
Quidlibet audendum, semper fuit, estque Potestas.
A Preoccupation, relating to this Title.

If some shall think, this Book mis-nam'd has been,
Because, so long a Flash was never seen;
Know; that, through Cranies it did thither fly,
Where Touchwood, and where smoking Flax did ly,
Which kindling, made it longer then intended;
And, was a chance, that cannot now be mended.
But, Flashie Names, and things, those times beseem
Which, do not solid-serious things esteem.
And, they who are not pleased to run a Course,
On Pegasus, may, like a Hobbyhorse.
LONDON, Printed for J.S. in little Britain, and are to be sold there, and at
the Pile of Bibles, the corner shop of the East end of the Fish-market in the
Stocks, looking into Lumbard street; 1657.

To his Highness, the Lord PROTECTOR.
SIR, though this Poem's Title, fitted be
To what I hear, the World expects from me
Upon this Subject; yet, a seriousness
It has, and shall no Flashie-things express;
For, it is a Flash of light, as well as Fire,
Which, may give sight of something you desire,
And such, as will no way disparage you,
To give them, either hearing, or, a veiw.
Betwixt your Highness and the Parliament,
I, purpose not to cherish that Dissent,
Which lately was begun; nor do intend
That, which may justly you, or them, offend;
But rather, to unite you so together,
That, Disadvantage, may befall to neither
By what, your Adversaries hope to find
Effected; (if, you have a changing mind)
And, upon hope whereof, they did prepare
To act, according as resolved you were.
I am not for my self, yet, grown so wise
That, when at hazard, Public safety lies,
I can be silent; though I both disease
My self; and others, oftentimes, displease,
By my expressions, who, have power and will,
To mischieve me, who, purpose them no ill:
For, though a well approved Author says,
To please great men, it merits not least praise;
I think, he merits more, who speaks in season,
Truths, warranted by conscionable Reason,
(Although on him, a Prince's wrath it brings)
Then, if he flattered Parlaments and Kings.
In that respect, I judged it not amiss,
Unto your ear, or eye, to offer this,
A few weeks past: But, things did intervene
That seems of more concernment to have been;
And kept it off, until nigh out of date,
It was become; and came almost too late.
Yet, since good use may thereof still be made,
And some advantage also, thereby had;
It, now comes forth, that, witness it might bear
To that, which now, resolved on, does appear.
For, though we know there is in every thing,
But one Essential Truth; yet, thence may spring
Such various Illustrations, as perchance,
The certainty thereof, may much advance,
When it appears, they, did the same Truths own,
Whose judgments, to each other were unknown:
For, when there is thereof no mediation
But, as their spirits have communication,
It does assure, it flowed from Providence,
And, not from any carnal influence.
Your eye, sees much: and yet it cannot see
It self, or, what the colors of it be,
Save by inferior things; and, through inspections
Acquired, by the medium, of reflections
From sight-less objects; through which; you may lear^
Those truths, which they themselves, do not discern:
And, such like Objects, peradventure, He
Who offers this and these his offers be.
SIR, therefore now* be pleased, one hour, to hear
What, by my Muse, is fitted for your ear,
And was prepared long since, to be presented
(Though accidentally, till now prevented)
And, if it be not such, as, then, will seem
To merit, some part, of your good esteem,
And, useful to preserve, and to increase
Your Honor, safety, and the Common-peace;
Return it, with an Ignominious Dash,
And, let it then, (in scorn) be called, a Flash.
Britans Remembrancer.

A Sudden Flash
Made visible, the fourth day after his Highness the Lord Protector had first
waved the Title of KING.
A Prologue, to him, who shall behold, or hear, this Flash.
A Flash, I term this; and it is like enough
That, many men, will call it so, in Scoff;
But, I have got before them; and have, too,
Some Reason, wherefore I have called it so:
For, to, mine ears, when first that news was brought,
A thousand thoughts, Flusht in, and this Flasht out;
Which, I have, now, thus Paper'd up, for thee,
To bring to mind what is, and what may be.
Although it speaks in Rimes, it Rimes with Reason;
And comes in Have, that it may come in Season.
If thou regard it, so. If not: my Cost,
Is Paper, Inck, and part of three days lost.
Thine may be more; For, much afraid I am,
That, thou, who saw this Flash, wilt see a Flame,
(Unless an intervening Providence
Prevents, what likely seems, to give Offense)
Which, here will burn, as well as give a light,
Till it has purged us, or, consumed us, quite.
The Flash.
MY Muse, has on a sudden, once again,
Invited me, to this unusual strain;
Which, as the state of my Affairs, now stands,
Has put upon me Dangerous Commands:
But, I, who must obey Her when she calls,
(What ever hazard, on my self befalls)
Submitted to express, what I should find
Infused by her power, in to my mind;
And, hearing that his Highness, had denied
The Kingship, thereupon, thus versifi'd:
For, Poets (priviledg'd, as Prophets were)
Their Inspirations freely may declare.
But, has he waved that Title? and, I pray,
Are you aright informed of what you say?
Did not a false-report, your ears abuse?
A Crown! a Triple-Crown does he refuse?
And will not he, as Bishops used to do,
Say, No, and take it, as compelled thereto?
Oh Miracle of men? does he deny
A Kingship! freely offered! which, to Buy
So many thousand Princes, have made sale
Of Fame, Faith, Conscience, Body, Soul, and all?
If this (as you affirm it is) be true;
Friends; bid henceforth, your jealousies adue:
And, let him who mistrusts him any more;
Suspect his Honest wife, to be a Whore,
And in his breast, the torments thereof cherish
Till he repent that injury, or perish.
But, since I know what many do surmize,
(And, what objections malice does devise)
Let me a little more expostulate;
Is it not (think you,) done to palliate
The soldiers humor? or, a Trick of State
To draw on some thing more, yet aimed at?
Is it not by Design, to bring about
Advantages, by oversight left out?
Or to delay, a while, what he intends,
To feel the Peoples pulse? or for such ends?
No doubtless: Then, make answer but to Three
Short Questions more, and they the last shall be.
Expects he not, when twenty days, are past,
It should be, Nolens volens, on him cast?
Nor is it so; for, by that Instrument,
Which does yet regulate this Government,
No Law thereto repugnant, can be made
Whereto, his free assent, shall not be had:
And, Really, refusal he does make,
In Christian prudence, and for Conscience sake;
That, he may give no cause of those Offenses,
Suspicions, Scandals, and ill consequences,
Which may ensue; And, whereof, Honest men
Are much affrayd: Why, did he suffer, then,
So long time in Debatings, to be spent,
(Since he at first discovered what was meant)
And, did not interdict them to proceed?
That, had been a dishonorable deed:
For, in so doing, he should have prejudged,
The Parliament; them, disimpriviledg'd;
And, thereby, some Experiments, have lost,
Which are more worth, than twice the time they cost.
Beside, the matter is of too much weight,
Each way, to pass, till balanced aright;
And, you have heard it said, what those men are
Who Judge a Cause, before the same they hear.
Thus far it is well: But, will he not at last
When some few more, fit Complements are past,
Accept what is offered? what he did, is known:
But, what he will do, cannot be foreshown:
And, we shall wrong Him (as he should the State
Have injured) if, we him prejudicate.
We may conjecture: And, if I may give
My Judgment, by the Symptoms I perceive,
He never will accept it, till, he shall
By Faith and Reason, be convinced in all
And every Scruple, which, this day, offends
His Conscience; or dissatisfies his Friends:
Beyond which, he, that ought would move him to,
Does, what no wise, or honest man, should do;
And, would not care, though he were quite destroyed
So, his own Lust, and Will, might be enjoyed.
If so, then, me he has not, yet, deceived
In any thing, which I of him believed
Since first I heeded, by what Point he steers;
(What Rock on this hand, what on that, appears;)
What most men are, with whom he has to do;
And, why, few know, which way, he means to go.
His Foes, though with his Bullocks they have plowed,
Have got naught thereby, whereof to be proud.
And, as I live, I, am thereof, as glad,
As, therefore, many others will be sad;
And, if I were (as I have been) a Boy
I should make Squibs, and Bonefires, now for joy,
As many would have done, had he compli'd
With their desires, whose Offer is denied.
For, in his condiscending to be King,
He could have been, at best, no greater thing
Than other Earthly Princes: But, hereby
He may ascend unto a Sovereignty,
Which raises him, nine Orbs above their Sphere,
To be inthroned, where Immortals are:
And, me, it hopeful makes, to see that Age,
Which, Britains genius, did, long since, presage
In that Prediction, wherein, was among
Some other things, this following distick sung:
A King, shall willingly himself unking,
And thereby grow far greater than before.
For, now, fulfilled seems, in effect,
What, that vaticination did predict;
Although there should a Power elsewhere reside
To bring to pass, what is by him denied.
Victorious Cromwell! thou, have, herein, gone
Beyond thy self; and such an Act have done,
As few or none, in this, or foreign Climes,
Have equalled, in any former times.
A self-denial like this, none, but He
Could teach, who, that he might our pattern be,
The Thrones and kingdoms of this world did slight,
When he was born up thither, where, he might
(And did) behold them, spreading forth to view
All their Enchanting pleasures, false or true:
And from him only, could that grace proceed,
Whereby, thou do perform so brave a deed.
Thou often have deserved Mural-Crowns,
For taking Castles, with high walled Towns,
And making in subjection, to thy powers,
Great Cities, fortified with Walls and Towers:
To thee, for brave Achivements on the Maine
The chief of Navall Trophies, does pertain:
Triumphant Laurel, to adorn thy brows,
To thee is due, for giving ovethrows
To dreadful Armies, that, had else enslaved
Thy Country; which, God, by thy sword has savd.
Thou have subdued Kingdoms, and great Kings;
Whereby, their Crowns, their Scepters and all things
Belonging to such Conquerors, are thine,
As truly, as the Clothes I wear, are mine.
Yet, these are slight, and petty Foes compared
To some, with whom, thou secretly have warred:
And, for those Conquests, thou I hope, do carry
A Tablet, with a secret Honorary;
Whereby thy virtues fully be rewarded,
With Trophies, of most worth, though lest regarded.
These ways, thou were Victorious heretofore;
And, I will mention one great Conquest more.
By few observed: Thou have stood the Shock
Of malice and detraction, like a Rock,
On which the waves and billows of the Main,
Have spent their strength, and foamed out rage in vain.
I, very often, have observed the fell,
Feirce, raging, and three headed dog of Hell,
With his three double rows of teeth, assay
To tear thine honor, and thy power, away;
With his foul tongues, bespattering thy fame,
To turn thy blooming honor into shame;
I Have seen this Cur often, dog thee in the dark,
In hope to bite thee, when he durst not bark;
And, I have heeded, by what sacred Charms,
Thou have been hitherto, preserved from harms.
This Helhound, thou have tamed without so much
As giving him a crust, a spurn, or touch;
Merely by meekness, and, as passing by
With disregard of causlesse injury;
And, now he sometimes fawns on thee and those,
Who are thy friends; and, snarleth at thy foes,
As if he were appeased: which, I believe
Is but a cunning dog trick, to deceive.
And, yet, among those victories, which lie
Most visible unto the vulger eye,
This, thy last conquest, merits admiration
Beyond the rest; And, with perseveration
If thou maintain the same, as thou may do,
By his help, who has aided hitherto,
Thou have thereby a pledge, that, God will never
Forsake thee; but, thy guardian be for ever.
Thou have already escaped, the best tried snare;
That Satan, or his agents, can prepare:
For, 'twas the last, of those temptations, which
He practiced by, our Savior, to bewitch:
And, as when that grand-tryall, had an end
His Angels, did forthwith, on him attend
Rejoicing in his conquest; so, will, too,
For thine, all, thy most faithful servants do.
Thou have thereby, so strengthened all their hands,
So cheered all their hearts, throughout these lands,
Who prayed, or feared for thee, in this trial;
That, thou, of nothing now, can have denial,
Wherein their love may serve thee; and they shall
More fortify thee, than a Brazen wall;
More comfort thee, than ought that can be had
From any Title, that the world shall add:
And, thou at last, shall find, thou do not lose
One grain, of what thou lately did refuse,
By that refusal: for, thou shall have more
(If not in kind) in value, than before.
Yea, peradventure, that, in specie, too,
When, qualified, no offense to do;
And, when it has been proved, whereto thy mind
Without dissimulation is inclined.
For, it is not mere negation of that title,
Which is thy Test; since, that avails little
One way or other, save as unto that
Which brought it has unto dislike of late;
Or, as it may concern some past transactions,
Which, have occasioned dissatisfactions
In many of this Nation; or, as thou
May scandalize them, by thine actings now.
But, that, wherein thy real proof will be,
Locked, from men's eyes, lies hid, with God, and thee:
And, whatsoever thou resolv'st upon,
Will either Well, or else not well, be done,
As, unto those things, they relating are,
Which unto God, and Thee alone, appear.
The washing of the Assyrian in the water
Of Jordan, was but an indifferent matter,
Till made the sole condition of his Cure:
And, doubtless, had not that, been in his power,
He had been Cleans'd without it. David's sin
In Numb'ring of the People, lay not in
That simple Act; but, in the secret Pride
And Disobedience, which did then reside
Within his Heart; And, when it shall appear
That Thou, from Guiltiness, art that way clear;
And, have repented all those Humane failings,
Which have, in ought, obstructed thy Prevailings:
Then, shall the gift-refused, neither be
A Scandal unto Others, or to Thee,
Although accepted; when thou have resisted
So far, as Grace and Reason, have assisted.
For, should the Pow'r-Coordinate with thine,
O're-pow'r thee so, that, thou thereto incline
(Consenting to their Motives at the last)
Thy Conscience bearing witness, that thou have
Complied there withal, rather by force
Than Choice; to keep bad things, from being worse:
Or, if by strength of Reason, swayd thou art
To that Acceptance; thou, have done thy part:
And, shall by yielding, pass another Trial
As honorable, as, is this Denial.
Thou shall be safe, from all that was portended,
Should thou by Levity, have condiscended,
Or, tempted been by Self-ness, to forgo
That Title, thou have owned hitherto;
And wilt be free from blame, what ever shall
Hereafter, by the Change thereof befall.
For, nothing shall amiss to thee succeed,
By what, is not Thine, but, another deed.
No Reason, binds any to withstand,
What, Power, and stronger Reason, does command;
And, when perhaps too, God, his aid withdraws,
From thy assistance, in this dubious cause,
To bring on them, what is due for their offense,
Who trust their own Wits, more than Providence.
This, I express here, not to leave a Gap
Whereby, thou may from Just Resolves escape:
(For, God will find it out, if there be ought
To such a purpose, lurking in thy thought:)
But, that, thou may not fall into a Snare
By things, which in themselves, Indifferent are;
(Nor good nor evil, but, as unto that
Which may be good, or Evil, they relate;)
And, to preserve thine Honor, among those
Who shall, perchance, their Expectations lose
By what may come to pass; (yea, to prevent
That, which may thereof, be a Consequent
To thee disserviceable) I, am bold
To tell thee, what my Muse to me has told;
Which, dictates, otherwhile in Slighted rimes,
That, which does much concern these present times;
And, would, it may be, had it not been Mine,
Supposed have been, an Offspring, more divine.
But, I, my, Musings now, to those will bend
Who may, perhaps, mistrust what I intend.
Although I have, by this Anticipation,
Presented that unto consideration,
Which may be profitable (if reversed
His purpose be, on Terms before rehearsed)
Yet, least, I may with one hand, be suspected
To pull down, what the other had Erected;
I will not smother ought, which I shall find,
May justly fortify him in the mind,
By him professed; until, to drive him out
Of his Resolve, Those Reasons may be brought,
Which will be stronger; lest, some, should surmize
He; without Cause, denied what he denies;
Or, lest my late Rejoycings, may appear
As Reasonlesse, as many think they were.
My gladness of it, flowed from no respect
Unto my self, or, fears of an effect
By Kingship, which my profits might impair:
For, I have, that way, likelihoods more fair
Than I have now (if nothing it occasions,
To break our Peace, at Home, or, by Invasions
From Foes abroad) nor can I scandal'd be,
Thereby, through ought, which will reflect on me:
But, I rejoiced in it, for the sake
Of Him, who did this Title undertake;
And, for their sakes, who Acted and Enacted,
Things, whereby possibly may be contracted
Great Scandals; or, which may a new expose
My Country, to be spoiled by her Foes.
For these, and such respects as these (together
With what may be again transferred hither,
My Heart, that was through fear of them, grown sad,
Became through hope of their prevention, glad.
For, what a black Scene, should we here have seen?
How many greeved hearts, would here have been,
Had our Protector, either been estranged
From what he was, or, ( seemed to be) so changed,
As, lightly to forgo his interest
In that, wherewith he had been so much blessed?
Or, should by others, have been so deluded,
As, to let that upon him be obtruded,
Which He himself disclaimed? and, may bring back
A King upon us, with his Pedlars Pack
Of Vanities, which have been by this Nation
Rejected by a solemn protestation:
And, which are Trinckets, as unseparable
From most Kings, as is from a Fool, his babble?
For, there is naught more likely, in, to bring
Him that is expelled, then, to make a King,
At this time; and, to make on that account
(Which is designed) that Title paramount:
Nor can there be, for what our Foe intends,
A better groundwork laid, by all his friends.
These things I feared; and, my soul foresees
That, all those things may creep in by degrees,
Which, to the Kingdoms of this World pertain;
Which, may inslave the Saints of God again;
And, which, may in a short time, reinvest
With that power, which empowered Antichrist:
Unless, it by his Mercy, be withstood
Whose wisdom, can from Evil, bring forth Good.
These things I feared, and if a Parliament
Can make a King, which may these fears prevent;
Him, and his Nobles, if it can so bind,
That, we may be secured in this kind;
And keep our Sovereign, and these Nations free
From scandals, which occasioned may be;
I, should not only yield, on that condition
To make a King, but beg one by Petition.
Redouble, that rejoicing, which appeared,
When, of what was resolved, I first heard:
And, make my heart, the first step whereupon
He might set foot, to mount up to his Throne:
Yea, sing a Panegyric in their praise
Who moved it, that should long out-last my days.
We look for such a Government, as shall
Make way for Christ: not that fantastical
Fifth Monarchy, whereof some people dream,
And Conquer would an Earthly Throne for him
With Carnal weapons: But, that, present here
He, may so be, and so to reign, appear
As he has promised; and, that Righteousness
And Truth, may every Throne on Earth possess,
According to that measure of his grace,
Which is apportion'd, to this earthly place.
His Highness, has made progress in a path
As far forth toward it, as any has
Since Christ ascended; if, the Depths and Heights,
The Rugged passages, and Narrow Streights
Considered be, through which his March he makes,
To bring to end the Work he undertakes.
He must now pass a Rock, which will require
An Ingeneer with Vinegar and fire;
And, cut a Passage, which (as by a thread)
Must on each hand, even to a hairs-breadth, lead
'Twixt Conscience and sound Reason: whence, to vary
Were irrecoverably to miscarry.
Oh God! assist him; and, to what I pray
Amen, let all, who wish our welfare, say.
He, hitherto, in that which he has done,
His Work, with prudency, has carried on:
And, firm to his own Principles abides,
Though many strive to bring him to their sides:
Yea, though there be some too, of whom he may
(As David of Zerviah's Sons did say)
Complain, that, they, were often for him, too hard;
Yet, Him from his Resolves they have not stirred.
And (be it well considered of all you,
Who read this, and, perchance miscensure now
Of his Heroic Act) he does not wave
Ought necessary for a Prince to have;
Which had been a Denial, in effect,
Of that Power, which his People should protect;
And, were no Self-denial, (as I gather)
But, a denial of his Duty rather.
The Kingship is not waved, but, as it tends
To what may much disconsolate his friends,
Or glad his foes; And, which, as things yet stand,
Relating to Pre-actings in this Land,
Might draw on very evil Consequences;
Or give just cause of many great Offenses:
Could these removed, or prevented be,
So that his Conscience, might from them be free,
Perchance, That, to take place it would permit
As rational, which so appears not yet.
For to the Clean, he knows all things are Clean,
And (if I guess aright what he does mean)
That, whereof, he does chiefly scruple make,
Is, Giving an offense unto the weak;
And, that, therewith, all things now startled at
Might pass, when he upon them shall debate,
If God, informs his Conscience, that they may;
And Reason shall his Reasons oversway.
He nothing has refused with disrespect
To them who offered it: Or, with neglect
Of ought proposed for Public benefit:
But, only, what may possibly beget
More Jealousy than Love: more Envy, then
Glory to God, or good to Honest men.
And, he by his Refusal, unto none
Denies ought, but, to himself alone;
Or, that, which he does probably believe
Will mar our peace, and Civil wars revive:
For which, if worse, he rather speed than better,
His merit is the more; his praise the greater;
And, they, who shall the less affection show him,
For that, deny the duty which they owe him.
What, if he thinks the changing of his Title,
Implies a levitie, which does but little
Beseem a Prince? and may occasion too
A quarrel, which might all his work undo?
Or propagate a mischievous effect,
To their destruction whom he should protect?
Is he not bound in Conscience to beware
Of such a Title, whosoever they are
That shall propose it? should he not betray
His Trust, by giving easily away
That earnest of Protection, which does seem
To be, by God, conferred upon him
For safeguard of his Saints? or, might there not
Some blemish be in Reputation got,
Relating to that Style? if, he, the same
Should change for that, by which their bondage came?
And can he think it nothing signifies,
That, they, who are his greatest Enemies
Do more rejoice, in that which was intended,
Then they, by whom, he has been best befriended?
If, likewise, with a serious heed, he shall
Be pleased to consider therewithal,
What kind of men, the greatest number are
Who, for this change most zealous do appear;
What Interest it is, which they would save:
What Principles, the most among them have;
Can he suppose, more safe for him, it were
To these, then to his best friends, to adhere?
Whose Conversations, are to him well known?
Whose cause is his? Whose principles his own?
Since, Reason does incline him, to the last,
And Conscience, too, the balance that way cast?
That Title, which has hitherto been owned,
With victories and blessings, has been crowned;
It, now, has rendered it self exempt
For ever, from that undeserved contempt
Which novelty occasioned; and, throughout
The World, is with much honor spread about.
He, thereby had a power, which lately shook
The walls of Babel; and with terror struck
His proudest foes; and, is it vanished, now,
We neither know when or by what, or how?
Except it be, for thanklesly despising
So prosperous a Style, and idolizing
Of that, which forced us, in our affliction
To take up that we have, for our protection.
When, Israel would be King-rid, God, to show
His anger, and, what thereon would ensue,
Destroyed in Harvest time, their corn with showers;
And at the Seed-time, he did hazard ours
By extreme Drought; until that was denied
Which is proposed; and, then, forthwith suppli'de
Our present want: perhaps, to make us seek
His will, and, know our sin, and theirs alike:
Lest, in his wrath, he give us what we crave,
And take away, what he in mercy gave.
What will ensue, by settling Kingship here,
For common good, it does not yet appear:
Some, do pretend, it render will, to us,
Our laws more fixed, and much more vigorous,
Because, by Kings, they were to us derived,
And confirmation in their name received.
But, wherefore, may not all that, which relates
To King, or People, Freedoms, or Estates
In our preceding Laws, be so Compacted
Into one Statute, now to be Enacted,
That, they may by his Highnesses assent,
Be made as firm, as this new Instrument,
By our Protector, who, must be the Stone
First laid, to build their new framed work upon?
Why may not He, who now is our Supreme,
Make both unto Himself, and unto them
Who ask it of him, all our Laws forepast
As Useful, and as Binding, as this Last?
Why may not He, who is a Conqueror
For Us, and did for us, receive his Power
Confirm our Laws, or any other thing,
(As strongly, as if he were called a King)
To Us, and to Himself, with their consent,
Who by his Power, are made a Parliament?
Why, should it unto him, ought less afford,
Than to all Princes, raised by the Sword?
No man, can justly, that to him denay.
For, Conquest is the ordinary way,
Whereby, God changes Governments, and flings
From off their Thrones, great Emperors and Kings.
And it is Gods mercy, not our own desert,
Which, hitherto, has so inclined his heart,
That, though he has been straightned more than any,
His Arbitrary actings were not many;
Nor, till they were constrained by some distress,
For preservation of the Public Peace.
Some, think it will Secure his Person more,
And, Charge the People less, than heretofore,
To style him King. But, these men much mistake,
And, will perceive they Dream, when they awake:
For, can we think, when he away has thrown
A Title, which God gave to be his own,
Without a Rival, that, assume he may
A Name, whereto another claim does lay,
With greater Safety? Is there some new charm,
Infused into that word, to guard from harm?
Or, will it make the Royalists more true
To him, because, he takes what they think due,
Unto another? Quite desert the Lord,
They owned, and, do their homage to a word?
And, (where they hated) Loyalty profess
Rather, for doing More wrong, than for less?
So foolish can we think them, as, to prize
A Complement, which nothing signifies,
Save, either some poor Hope, or vain Desire
To be in Us, which may advance them higher,
In those Resolves, which they had heretofore?
And, make our Dangers no whit Less, but more?
For, when they do perceive our Giddiness,
Our falling from, those things we did profess,
Our doting on those Bawbles, which we seemed
Not much (a while ago) to have esteemed,
Our Taking up, what we had Thrown away,
Our sleighting that, to Morrow, which this day
We made a Law; and that our Protestations,
Were for the most part, but Dissimulations;
Thence, they will take occasion to conclude
That, we have, all along, such Ends pursude
As they have had: And, that, what ere to seem
We have made Show, we are just like to Them.
That, we did wade and swim, through streams of blood,
Not to accomplish what is Just and Good;
But, to obtain our Lusts: That, we have sought
By Policy, and by our Battails fought,
Against Opposers; not so much to save
Our Liberties, as, others to inslave:
That, our contests, were not for God, or, for
Our Country; but, (which Goodmen will abhor
To think upon) our own selves, to invest
With, that, which was by other men possessed:
That, being Hypocrites, in all we did,
With Cloaks of sanctity, the same we hid,
Thereby, to draw in those who were sincere,
To be deceived, in what we made appear.
(Even to the ruin, of their Children, Wives,
Their Peace, their Freedoms, their Estates, their Lives)
That, we might get high Titles, large Possessions,
Power and Prerogatives, by their oppressions,
And, that instead of setting Christ upon
His Throne, we, might install our selves thereon.
This will be thought: And, they who are our Foes,
Will peradventure, thereupon suppose
That God is not among us, as they feared;
Nor for us, as it formerly appeared;
And, thence take courage, to begin again
That, which they hitherto pursued in vain.
And, such will be the safety, which your King
Unto Himself, and us, is like to bring.
Good God! how are they changed? how stupifi'd?
By whom these dangers are not yet espied?
How blind, does selfness, make us quickly grow,
In that, which might prevent selfe-overthrow?
Will Kingship, make him safer than he was?
How may that be? how can it come to pass?
That Title, not much more then eight years past,
Could not preserve his Head, who reigned last.
No, not preserve him, from the dreadful fate,
Of dying on a Scaffold, at his gate:
And, if all things be weighed well together
That Style, as possibly may bring him thither,
Who rules now; yea, and a tragical
Effect therewith, perhaps, upon us all,
Before the malice of our foes is ended,
How safe soever, to be, it is pretended.
We may perceive, (unless we will despise,
The Light within us, and feel up our eyes,)
There is no likelyheod, it will abate
Their fury, who pursue us with their hate;
But, so increase it, that it will increase
Those dangers, which we dream, it will make less:
Yea, make Him, whose safe being it pretends,
Unsafe among those, who have been his Friends,
And, them among themselves: It will go near,
To make men of themselves, to stand in fear.
It will increase suspicions, till the effect
Grows worse, than many of us can suspect:
Divide, and subdivide, till there be naught
Left possible to be said, done, or thought;
To cure the mischieves, which will be effected;
(And are by some, both hoped for, and projected;)
Except in mercy, He, that heretofore
Has often so done; shall (pleased be) once more,
To draw forth an Expedient, from our failing,
Which, will for our advantage, be prevailing.
More might be said; but, ought more to express
Would be in vain to those, who cannot guess
The rest by this. And, yet, because the reason,
Of saving charges, comes in such a season,
As gives it weight; Let us examine, whether
The Season, and the thrift, agree together,
Lest, in that frugal humor we may die,
And, gain an Epitaph, like this, thereby:
Here, lies interred the Miser, Father Sparges,
Who might have lived: but died to save charges.
I find your Thrift, you, think we might disband
Those Armies, which are quartered through this Land,
If our Protector were proclaimed a King.
It may be so; and I, the self same thing
Should also think; if I considered not,
We might thereby, as good as Cut our throat.
Is any man so void of Common sense,
As, not to see what might result from thence?
May we not save the charge of paying One,
And, let Two Armies in, when that is gone,
To pay themselves, until at last, they shall
In Contributions, and in Pay have all?
You fear, perhaps, that by the Souldierie
Our Laws, our Freedoms, and Propriety
May be destroyed, if long imbodied here;
And, cause enough there may be of that fear:
But, will a King, prevent it? may not we
Another way as much oppressed be,
By some, who for our Liberties pretend
Yet, Cry up Kingship, for their private end?
May we not suffer at the Lawyers Bar,
As much as we endured by the War,
Through those Formalities, which make the Laws,
Of our most sad oppression, one chief cause?
The Sword unsufferably, (I confess)
If not well disciplined, will us oppress:
But, hitherto, it has been in those hands,
Which kept it serviceable in these Lands,
With so much Moderation, that no time,
Bears witness of the like in any Clime:
And, though an Insolent proud Fool or twain,
Cause, to some few, has given to complain,
Their Arbitrary actings, were not many;
^or to the ruin, or great loss of any.
^onder, any man can stand inawe
(...) Swords and Guns, who feels the plague of Law;
^d, would not rather be devoured twice
(...) Lions, than once eaten up with Lice.
^ould I illustrate (which, my private wrong
^y, peradventure, force me to e're long)
^e sad discoveries which I have made
^ce first that Gangreeve, I, upon me had;
(...) what impertinent vexatious ways,
^stly devices, or undue delays,
^e Suits of wronged Clients forth are spun,
^re than twice twenty years, and yet not done;
(...) what excessive Fees (twice or thrice took)
without one Line writ down, or one word spoke,
^d, at how dear a rate they sometimes buy
^ain hope, which augments their misery;
^w, Motions, Orders, and Reports beget
^h other, till their brood grows Infinite;
^d, how some Registers, put out, or in,
^ose words, which may another Round begin,
though they who heard the Judges Order, thought
^e Cause, would thereby to an end be brought)
^u would suppose (and might suppose it well)
^e Courts we toil in, were some Rooms in Hell,
^d, that, we had imposed there on us
^e never ending Plague of Sysiphus,
^o, up a Steep hill, rolled with great pain
(...) Weighty Stone, which still rolled down again.
Should I declare, how frequently our Laws,
^e pleaded to maintain a wicked cause;
^w rarely, good success on him attends,
^o makes not way, by Kindred, Bribes, or Friends:
What hazzards he is in, to be betrayed,
By them, for whose assistance, he has paid?
And, then, how far about, they make him run
E're they will suffer him to be undone,
You, would not greatly fear (no not at all)
Courts-martial, or a Major General,
But, rather, fear to fall into their claws,
Who, to men's ruin, turn our wholesome Laws,
Whose practice, being regulated, might
Preserve our private and our public Right:
For, that, our Laws are good, confess I do,
And, that, we have some honest Lawyers, too.
No men have more oppressed been of late
This way, then, they who best have served this State,
And to support it, did themselves expose
To hazzards, by accepting what our Foes
Had forfeited, to be therewith repaid,
When, others, of such bargains were afraid:
For, if it were observed, how they have slighted
Those Acts of Parliament, which, us invited
Upon the Public credit, to lay forth
Our selves, for Titles of such little worth
In most men's value, that, but few or none
Will take thereof, ten pounds, in pledge for one;
It would appear, that, we, among the rest
Of those by them grieved, have been most oppressed.
For my own part, I, now five years together,
Have sought for Justice, and can yet get neither
My Land nor Money: though by further cost,
A thousand pounds are added to what is lost;
Nor whither, for redress I may retire,
Do I yet know; nor where, I can enquire:
And, should I in each circumstance, declare
My wrongs thereby, and what effects they are
Which thence have followed you would say, the sword
^erewith compared, Mercies did afford;
^d, that, it more to our vexation tends,
(...) be destroyed by our seeming-friends,
^ith lingering torments; then, with one great blow,
^be made senseless, by an open Foe.
^d, therefore, when I have considered well
that I (and many more) in this kind feel,
^re conclude, that if no course be found,
^hereby, that Justice, may be here enthroned,
which will redress these wrongs (and those that lie
^housands of Petitions hurled by,
without regard) the sword, will act once more;
^d, prove (I fear) more sharp than heretofore,
^annag'd by a King; which, both to us,
^d to himself, will now be ominous.
When we have made a King, which, will enlarge
^e common burden, by a further charge,
^d added to the multitudes of those
^ich now are known, new bands, of bosom foes,
^o, mad with vengeance, and with discontent,
^ll any way, their brutish passions vent;
^ll it be thriftiness, the charge to spare
^t, should for such a time, a guard prepare?
^eed, they few good pennyworths afford,
^o measure all things, by the Pike and Sword;
^d none of us, I think, could well abide
(...) Suits should in a Martial Court be tried;
^r, where they managed are, till we could get
^re expedition, than we can have yet,
^h less expense) but, better sure it were,
(...) spend a little quantity of tar
^en lose a Hog; and, to be some while willing
(...) saving of a Pound, to pay a Shilling.
Hard things, in great straights, must be undergone
Offensive guards, are better much than none.
Are you asleep? and, see you not already
That, being in our Purposes unsteady,
Makes Bees, as well as Wasps, to Buz and Humme,
And show their Stings, portending what will come
Do not you hear what is murmured, as among
The People, to and fro, you pass along?
And, know you not, that, what is voyc'd abroad
By them, is otherwhile, the Voice of God?
Then, know it now; lest, shortly, that be spoke
Which, when once said, he never will revoke:
And, though you slight the Scriblings of my Pen,
Learn wisdom, from your prudent Husbandmen.
Does any sober Country Fellow, judge
He saves ought, by pulling up his hedge
Before his Corn be housed, to leave (the while
He therewith warms himself) his Crop to spoil?
Or, put away his Dogs, that were employed
To guard the Sheep, till Wolves are quite destroyed?
Consider these things; And, by these conceive
What Prudence does obliege us to believe
Of all those other Arguments, you bring
To make us change Protector into King;
Or, to disarm these Nations, till we see
This Commonwealth shall better settled be.
But, it is the Reason of a Parliament,
Which to our Prince, a Kingship does present.
True; And, it is the Reason of the Prince,
(Yea, and his Conscience, too) which takes offense
At what is offered; and it is not a case
As yet decided, whether should give place.
My Private Reasons, they might oversway,
And, though 'twere not convinced, I must obey,
Or Suffer: And thus for my Conscience too
It must be, in things, which I cannot do.
But sure, his Highness (if it may be judged
By private men) is much more Privileged:
For, he whom God has Raised up, or Sent
To lay the Groundwork of a Government,
Is with a Spirit, in all likelihood
By him who raised him, for that work endowed;
Yea peradventure, he is qualifide
To that End, more than all men else beside,
As will appear (though this to some seem strange)
If we look back on every former change;
And when to new Works, GOD does Princes call,
What Spirits, them he furnishes withal.
Both Parlaments, and Councels general,
Do many times into great errors fall;
And for their Own, or for the Peoples Sin
(Or for some other causes) often have been
Deserted by their Guide; that, men may know
Their Weal, from their Joint wisdom, does not flow.
When God will prove a People, or a Prince,
It must, by somewhat, likely to convince,
Attempted be: The Spirit, to be tried,
In somewhat, must imbodied abide
That Is venerable: else, no Approbation
Can thereon follow, worth Consideration.
A Prophet, by a Prophet was deceived;
And yet, was therefore of his life bereaved.
It was even by those men who seated were
In Moses chair, (and whom Christ bad them hear)
Who did so misadvise them, that, they cried
To have the King of glory crucified.
Yet, they have been accursed till this day,
Because, they did not as well try, and weigh,
As hear their counsel; having, so to do,
A rule of Faith, and Light within them, too.
The Reason, therefore, of a Parliament,
May be demurred upon, though it present
A Kingdom: and, if any man may be
Thus privileged, then, no man more than he
Whom, it now most concerns; and, who, must
Give an account, for what he has in trust.
But, there is something, that persuades my heart,
This Parliament, in acting of their part
Has not alone, done that which providence
Will make to be, at last, without offense;
But, serviceable also to that end.
Which, God, and our Protector, did intend:
Or, that they will, at least wise, have a care
That nothing shall be urged to ensnare
His Conscience; or, be further on him pressed
Then so far, as the public interest,
And his, it may advance: For, these are gifts
That often have put many to hard shifts
To get them; but, till now I never did know
A Prince, that might not such a gift forego
Without offense; or, that a Conqueror,
To choose his Title had not always power.
Nor can I think, that, he did so dispose
Of his whole power, when he empowered those
For his assistance, that, himself he left
But as a Cipher, of all power bereft:
Even of enablement, by his negation,
For that, which tends to the preservation
Of his own conscience: and, of means to do
That, which the Law of Nature, binds him to:
For, their Petition, seems to imply
That, somewhat, which they ask he may deny.
And Reason says, that none should be confined
From Power, to do the work to him enjoined;
Which, he would want, if of a Negative
In such like things as this, they him deprive.
I must confess, I staggered am, well near,
And almost overawed with a fear
Of meddling any further in this Point,
Lest, I, may bring things farther out of joint
That stand awry: for, I am not a stranger
To those Concernments which it may endanger,
If, I, to common view, should bring out that
Which is conceived a Mystery of State;
Or, should entrench upon the Privileges
Which, due to Parliaments, this Nation judges:
Nor am I ignorant, what might to me
Thereby befall, should I suspected be,
(As it is somewhat probable I may)
For Arbitrary actings, to make way
Beyond due Limits (which, I do abhor
With all my soul, to be a pleader for.)
Yet, I were false to truth, should I not show
What Tools are to his undertakings due,
Who must secure our Peace (because he may
Make use of them perhaps another way.)
The Drunkard sins by excess of Wine,
Yet, we allow the planting of the Vine;
And, I conceive it lawful to express
That, which may public injuries redress,
Although it may occasion some offense,
Which is of an inferior consequence.
I know, what to a Parliament has been
Ascribed; and, I have felt, as well as seen
What power it has, and what that power may do,
If, that exorbitance belongs thereto,
Which many claim; and, which, it had obtained
Until it was by Providence restrained.
It has, to give it an enablement,
The Peoples never failing Argument,
Thereby, to make good, and oblige us to
What they are pleased we should believe, or do:
Even this, (which often does puzzle and becumber
The wisest men) an Over-voting Number.
It acts by Presidents, which, may sometimes
Make virtues to be punished as crimes:
It takes a power to make and unmake Treason;
To bind and loose, as well our Faith as Reason;
To raise, or pull down Kings; from their possessions,
To throw men out; to punish for Transgressions,
Before there have been Law, to make them such;
And, has unto it self assumed so much,
That, doubtless, if there be no power in Him
Who should be Vmpire, betwixt us and them,
To moderate (nor any other way
To qualify) that which impose they may;
No single Tyrant, now or heretofore,
Did, or can for the future, grieve us more,
Or more inslave, then we our selves may do,
By means of those whom we shall trust unto:
Nor to so many can those wrongs extend,
Nor be so hardly brought unto an end;
Consid'ring, that, things present to enjoy,
Some, would their own posterity destroy.
We have had dear experience, both, long since,
And lately, what effects may flow from thence,
If, neither in our selves, nor in another,
Nor in them and a third power, joined together,
There may be means to save from what we fear;
Yea, we of our best hopes deprived are,
And have but leaped (by ought that see I can)
Into the Fire, out of the Drying Pan:
For, as things stand, when Deputies are chose,
Whether, they be our faithful friends, or foes;
Whether, they have been well, or mis-begotten;
Whether, their Principles be sound, or rotten;
Whether, they shall be Prudent, or unwise;
Whether, their votes be gained by surprise,
Or not; and, whether, that which they conclude
Be right or wrong; or, for our harm, or good,
We have no remedy, but, must submit
To whatsoever is adjudged fit:
And, not presume to let a word be spoke
Against it, lest their privilege be broke.
But, sure, there should some bounds be set to them;
And, I believe there is, by that Supreme
And Common law of Nature, which, in part
Is writ (though much defaced) in every heart.
Therefore, that Law I very often read,
And, many times, for common freedoms plead,
As I find cause; and, will not be afraid
To plead it, when aside I see it laid,
Though I have blame; And, though, some will suppose
And say, Beyond his Last, this Cobbler goes.
On that account, my Muse compels me, here
To treat of things that seem beyond my Sphere;
But, having for Affairs wherewith I deal
A Warrant in my bosom, under Seal,
I will proceed unto the point in hand,
So far forth as the same I understand:
For, that which is in question, differs not
In what may follow, from the Gordian-knot;
And, I should grieve to see it knit so fast,
That, by the Sword, it must be cut at last,
Or, all, thereby into a danger slide,
If still, or overlong, it be untied.
I know not what this Parliament can do,
Nor whether it be limited or no,
By him who called it: but, I believe,
It power with limitations did receive.
And, this I know; that, if there does reside
A power therein, to force what is denied,
Maugre his Conscience, who the same to save
From violence, does one Proposal wave;
I, thereupon conclude, it may as well
Against his single-Reason, him compel;
And with more show of Justice, if the state
Of that, which is in question, does relate
To Civil things; because, the reason shown
Is jointly then, the peoples and his own,
They, being both his chosen Counselors
For such affairs, and Deputies of theirs;
Who may as justly take his power away
To morrow, as his Title, on this day,
Against his will; and, Him and His, expose
To all the rage and malice, of his foes.
If, from constraint, his Conscience be not free,
Sad will the consequences thereof be.
If He, that freedom shall be barred from,
What of our Christian freedoms will become?
Who as'tis thought, have given them a power
Without control, to spare or to devour,
As they shall please. But, sure empowered thus
They never were by God, our Prince, or us,
By ought which tacitly did them invest
With such power; nor by any thing expressed;
At least de jure, though we are in Fact
Concluded by those Laws they shall enact.
For whatsoere the law of God or nature,
Confers upon the Reasonable creature,
No Trust, as Deputies of ours, have they
To meddle with (much less to take away)
Until by those Laws forfeited; unless
For Public weal, or succors in distress,
For common safety. Nor then, have they power
Over person, freedom, goods, or ought that is our
In equity: unless, they also lay
As equally as possibly they may,
Those burdens upon all; lest, some bear naught,
As lately; and, some be to ruin brought;
Whose prayres, cries, and vnredressed wrongs,
Is that which our Vnsetlement prolongs.
It will be, therefore, our securest way,
The Groundworke of our Government to lay
Upon some Just Act, which may expiate
Those Sins that have committed been of late,
Through our defect of Justice and Compassion,
To them who have been faithful to this Nation,
Even to their own undoing: were this done,
The works which now go Backward, would go on;
And, God, would make us lovingly comply;
Instruct us what to Grant, or to deny.
Till this be done, we only shall contrive
Snares for each other; or, at best, but strive
Like Bees in honey- potts; and, be at last,
Destroyed by that, in which our hopes are plast.
Yea, till these Nations, do so constitute
Their Parlaments, and them whom they Depute
Obliges to fundamentals, they, shall never
Their Liberties enjoy; but be for ever
Exposd to Hazzards (which might be prevented,
And none be therewith justly discontented).
As now things are, at every Parliament,
May our Religion, or the Government,
Be innovated, to our greise or shame,
According to those Model, they will frame,
Who may by frau'd, or other manes unjust,
For such end's, screw into our Public trust.
Sometimes, we shall be governed by a king;
A few years after, by an other thing;
Then, by a king again; and, to all these
Be forced to engage, as others please;
With every wind, turned like a Weathercock,
Now fast, now Loose; out Nettle and in Dock;
Yea, and to swear, till we may safely say
And swear, that, most have sworn their faith away:
Which, to prevent, either from God, or him,
Who, has in all Affairs, the Power Supreme
Our help must come; and, from a Parliament
Which, thereunto shall give a full assent:
But, this can never be, (as I have said
Elsewhere) until the Groundwork be new laid;
And, till by good and perfect Chymestry,
Natures three principles, Salt, Mercury,
And Sulphur, be to that just temprature,
And such proportion brought, as will procure
To govern us, a Civil-Trinity,
Made up into a blessed Unity,
It self (so far forth as it may be done)
Conforming to the Eternal three-in-one
In Righteousness and Mercy. This product,
Our selfishness, does hitherto obstruct;
And will, till God, in some things, has a choice
By Lot, when they are past by humane voice:
For, much corruption that will cure; and, then,
Christ's kingdom, will begin to be with men
More manifest; and, no false Christ's appear
As now, and heretofore, they have done here.
But, know, that when a Government consists
Of three Estates, 't will wrong those Interests
Which to a Free Republicke do pertain,
Unless it be provided, that, those twain,
Which are Superior, shall descend to none
By Birthright: But, that, thereto every one
Shall be elected; and, no person bear
Such Place, who was not born a Commoner;
Or, whose Posterity, shall not return
To that Condition, whereto he was born.
For, he, or his, will Tyrants be at last
By whom, this Proposition is transgrest.
These things, perhaps, will come to pass in time,
Whereof, I seem at present, but to dream;
And, peradventure, we till then, to gain
A Setlement, shall plodd, and strive in vain.
Mean while, his Highness, or he, whosoere
God, to the supreme Office does prefer,
A Suffrage-negative, should have in that,
Which, Public safty, does necessitate
To be by him, or them, sometime Denide:
By no means, can he otherwise provide
To keep his Honor, or, those Dues, which must
Preserve him able, to perform his trust,
Or bound them in their Orb, who else, (as we
By proof have found) exorbitant may be,
And, like a Heard (if not well kept together)
When some break out, run all, they know not whether.
Nay, till there be a Gouvernment here fixed,
Things ballancing, so evenly, betwixt
Prince, Peers, and People, that, each may subsist,
And not infringe each others Interest,
He, that is our Supreme, must trusted be
With Arbitray Power in some degree,
To carry on his work, and to secure
The whole, whilst our unsettlements endure:
And, to effect that end, God did, perchance,
Destroy the Power, that was; and this advance.
Without such Power a Prince chose out of Logs,
Like that which was bestowed on the Frogs,
Would be as good: Him, we might deal with all
As we should please; and any thing might call,
And leap about him; till ashamed we be
Of such a Block, and choose a worse then he.
This Parliament, has done what them became
In offrong; he, has also done the same
In his refusal: And, still to adhere
To that whereof resolved he does appear,
Shall do as well, until that be removed
Which gives Offense, or, Inoffensive proved:
And should he be compelled to accept
Till that be done, Decorum were not kept.
They therefore, as I hope, will qualify
That, which he is enforced to deny,
(And thereby save the labor and the Cost,
Which, else, would in an evil time be lost)
Rather then force him to an acceptance
Of that which would be an abomination
Both to himself and others: Which would prove
No Symptom of their Piety or Love:
For, should he be compelled unto that
Which most of his best Friends abominate,
And, his own Conscience cheks at; It would give
A Kingdom, which no wise man would receive;
And as it were inthrone him, (shall I tell
In plain terms where?) even, in the Depths of Hell,
Within whose cursed bounds, is comprehended
A wounded conscience, wilfully offended.
It is confessed, the Title of a King
Is honorable, and may profit bring
To some who would conserat; But, to Him
No benefit (yea, and perhaps, to Them
At last as little) For, if he grow less
In Power, that Title, will in his distress
Not so much help as hinder: And, then, they
Who gave it, will, first, take the same away:
Yea, if on that side an advantage grow,
They will bestow it on his greatest Foe.
But, if his Power continue, he may still
Support his Title, call him what you will;
And, that, to which none can lay claim but he,
Will safest upon all Adventures be.
Indeed, all things considered well together,
There will be Hazards, both in the one and the other;
But, least in that, which will in proof be best
To keep that conscience, which gives Inward rest.
Though, in it self, we do confess the Title
Is honorable, it can add but little
To his Repute: Nay, it will be a blot
As things are, to that honor he has got;
Which, if it seriously considered be,
Is of a higher nature and degree,
Than that which men confer; and, they shall do
No more who add a King-ship thereunto,
Than he, who Diamonds in Lead does set,
Or, makes an Earl or Duke, a Baronet.
And, Gideon, peradventure, did therefore
Refuse a Kingship, being honored more
By what he was, then by what he thereby
Might have conveyed to his Posterity.
Kingship is lawful; yet, wise men do know
Things lawful, inexpedient sometimes grow.
The Style of King, was but an Ordination
Of men; and afterward by Toleration,
At their request, by God himself allowed
Unto his people (so, that neither proud
They did become, nor pufft up with ambition
Over others; which, thereof was one Condition.)
Yea, it is an Attribute of God, whereon
Was raised, this incommunicable one,
The King of Kings. If therefore, at the Name
We simply take offense, We are too blame:
Or, if we think, the Power they give is less
Who, by Synonoma's, the same express,
As many Nations do, who never had
A King among them, since the world was made,
Yet give their Princes power, whereby they may
Rule well, and make their Subjects well obey.
The Supreme Person, always is the same
In Sover aignty, whatever him you name:
And, they who do pretend, our Laws to bring
Advantages, to him that is called a King
Which other Titles give not, do well know,
If, he be their Supreme, it is not so:
For, every thing within our Laws expressed,
Wherein our former Kings had Interest,
Is virtually, even by those Laws, derived
To him, who for our Sovereign is received.
And, whatsoever they make show of, may,
Who make the Law, speak what they please to say,
Were that, which is now conquered by our Swords,
Brought to their Bars, to be new tried by Words,
The Judgment would be given on that side
Where Power, not where the Kingship did reside,
Although the Law spoke for it, and forbad
All other Governments: For, Laws are made
To speak, too often, not to that good end
For which, Lawmakers, did them first intend:
But, what best makes out their Accommodation,
Who take upon them their Interpretation.
Else, they could tell you (without my direction)
That, he, whom God has raised for our Protection,
Had for his Church, and for his Commonweal,
The Power he owns, confirmed on that Appeal
They made to God, when that, for which they fought,
To Trial, in an Open Field, was brought.
Conquest, is by our Law, the utmost Trial
That can be had: and He, (without denial)
And his Adheres, have right in that respect,
To any Title which they will elect:
Yea, and may Change, Confirm, or make the Laws
Such, as their Safety, and the Common Cause
Shall now require: Provided, it accord
With their Trust, for whose sake they drew the Sword;
And with those ancient Rights, by God and Nature,
Conferred upon the Reasonable Creature:
Which, if they shall invade, their Swords now worn,
Upon Themselves, just vengeance will return:
For, that Power, was conferred to provide
A form of Government so rectifide,
That, neither Prince, nor Peers, nor People might
Entrench, hereafter, on each others Right:
Yea, (that by what shall be, and what is past,
God's purpose might be manifest, at last)
It them impowers, to lay down those Foundations,
That shall by This, and future Generations
Be built upon: In which work, if they should
Leave any Arch, or Pillars, raised of old,
Mis-laid, or Crooked, Rotten, or Mis-wrought,
It would, at last, bring all the Pile to naught.
And therefore, to this end, obliged they are
Touse their Power with Prudency and care.
To this end, Providence, into their hands
Let that Power slip, which at this day commands;
And they, who merely for their own ends use it,
Are Tyrants, or else Traitors, and abuse it.
That, which may of Protectorship be said,
Was, long ago, made public to be weighed;
(Not without cause, although to many men,
It seemed an Impertinency, then)
And, as if that had been foreseen, which would
Be offered now, the Sequel was foretold,
Which would ensue on changing of that Title,
With other things regarded but a little;
Which, to repeat here, were but (in effect)
To offer them again to your neglect.
New Titles, future Grandeur, do foreshew;
The greatest Titles, at the first were New:
And, though the Government which we yet have,
Was only modellized, but to save
From likely ruin, till we strongth should get
To raise up that, which might be more complete;
You, in this Title no defect can see,
If, but Imperial thereto added be,
Or, somewhat else, to put a difference
'Twixt This, and that in Nonage of a Prince:
And, those additions which do not estrange,
But help explain a Title, are no change.
What, if his Highness, does suppose it given
(As I believe) by Providence from Heaven?
And thinks Himself engaged, not to neglect
That Gift? And what, if for the like respect,
His Friends conceived it might be Ominous,
Either to Him who owns it, or to Us,
Without an urgent cause to change the same
For King, or any other Sovereign Name?
Should this great Title be rejected for
That, which his best affected Friends abhor?
And, they, thereby grow jealous, that his heart
(Which seemed inclined to the better part)
Had left it for the world, and for those toys
Wherein her foolish Favorites rejoice?
Might not thereon, some Consequence ensue,
Which, peradventure, He, or We, might rue?
What, if God gave that Title for a Test
Of his adherence to that Interest,
Which does concern Christ's Kingdom? and to show
That if what God conferred he shall forgo
(For what the World will offer) he best prizes
The things of this World, and his Grace despises?
Or what, (if as that Blood, which heretofore
Sprinkled the Posts, and Lintels of the door)
God, gave this Title for a difference
Betwixt the Kings of Babel, and his Prince?
That he may be secured, when to destroy
Christ's foes, he shall that Army here employ,
Which will cast out their flesh, to Beasts and Fowls,
To Devils, give their miserable souls?
Make, that abominable Scarlet-Whore
Their painted Mistress. desolate and poor?
And, throw them irrecoverably thither,
Where, they shall burn perpetually together?
This may be; for, the time is drawing on
Wherein, such Executions will be done.
And therefore, in his Highness, it implies
Much Christian Prudency, that he denies
What Is offered now; and, he shall be innobl'd
Much more thereby, then by those Offers doubled,
If he persist; Clear Symptoms, he has given
Of good events, by having so long striven
Against what, seemingly, does offer him
Things, of most value in the worlds esteem:
For, they infer, that he is raised above
Their Sphere, who on such objects set their love;
That, his Promotions, he expects not from
The East or West; nor cares for those that come
By Oblique Winds: But, most account does make
Of what the World, can neither give nor take.
Those Outward Trappings, which make so much show
Of what these Nations do on him bestow,
Are not on him bestown, but, on the State.
The great Allowances, much murmured at,
Are upon him conferred, for their own sakes,
Even to secure Themselves: And, them he takes
For that intent; because, thereby, he must,
And cannot otherwise, perform his Trust.
Whereas, if he perceived it would as little
Secure the Public, as their Offered Title,
And, on his Conscience press, as that will do,
I, do believe, he would refuse that, too.
Presume I may not, to declare to those
Who are in Power, which way, they might compose
Their Diffrences; nor have I ought to say,
To that End, which, I warrantably may
Propound: For, if I had, neither the fear
Of those Wits, who, take liberty to jeer,
Nor worse things, could affright me; I, have told
As much, as I can seasonably unfold:
Except this Hint that follows, does conduce
To somewhat, which, may safely be of use.
Perhaps, it is Cast in, but to Ensnare;
Perhaps, to make proof, how inclined you are.
Be wary, therefore, how far you proceed
Therein; and mind, I warned you, to Take heed.
Should it offend, I dare not change a Line;
For, though I speak, these Arrands are not mine.
God, sets before us, this, and that, to choose,
And leav's us free, to Take or to Refuse;
And, such marks gives, of what may prove amiss,
That, if we choose not well, the fault's not His.
They, who sincerely think, the Style of King
Will to this Commonwealth advantage bring;
And, they, who fear it would portend no good
The title of Protector to explode,
May, if they can agree, join them together,
And please perhaps, both Parties; perhaps, neither,
Till somewhat reconcile them, which, fit Season
More likely seems to bring to pass then Reason.
These Titles are consistent; and, if that
Which is refused, be made Subordinate,
And this Supreme; that it may thereunto
Be Vassal, and a kind of Homage do,
As conquered; it might be serviceable
With less offense, (for ought that I am able
To countersay:) for, that wise Legislator
Who was preserved, by Rushes, from the water,
Was called a King; and, therewith had the Power
Which, constitutes with us, an Emperor,
And in that Commonwealth (which was the best)
Both Kingly, and Imperial Power possessed;
Which, if conferred on him, who governs us,
His Title, might be then contrived thus,
Or, some such way: On feet, in Verse, it goes
But lamely; Therefore, take it here, in Prose.
Sovereign Protector, or, Protector Imperial of the Commonwealth of Great
Britain, King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Islands, Territories
and Dominions, to them belonging. This, is not Magisterially proposed,
As if thereby all Ruptures would be closed;
Nor is it my desire, it should so be,
Or, not be so; for, it concerns not me.
It, almost, into words was thus far brought,
E're it was fully formed in my thought;
And, slipped out, (as do such things now and then)
Rather, to try the minds of other men,
Then to declare my Judgment; which, I give,
(When I intend so) in terms positive.
But, thus much, I will say; This is by none
Yet claymed; neither gives to any one
Just cause of Quarrel: Honorable Power
Holds forth: Is, by the Law of Conquest our,
And, may within our own Realms, be assumed,
Yet, nothing be undecently presumed,
If we, know by what means, to limite so
The Power, which therewith all, we shall bestow,
That no offense it gives; nor may produce
Pride, Folly, or Oppression by abuse.
But, what would follow, should this fancied be,
It is not in my dim sight, to foresee;
And therefore, to be weighed by those, I leave it,
Whom it concerns to Offer, and Receive it:
To whom (if sought where such things may be known)
It shall be, to their satisfaction shown,
How far this, or the Title of a King
May be assumed, and no disturbance bring.
Power, though bred Tame, is an unruly beast,
Which if it feed much on self interest,
Grows quickly wild; and every thing commands
Except it self; yea breaks the strongest Bands,
Which once cast off, Restraint it will avoid,
And never more be bound, till it is destroyed.
Our best course therefore is not to be struggling
With Power (Although it seems upheld by Juggling
As well as by good means) or to contend
With things without us, which War has no end:
But rather to compose and order so
All things within us, as we ought to do:
For, there we may have Peace (when we have done
Our Duties) In externals, there is none:
And what we get by Politic Contrivings
By Falsehood, Force, Dissembling, or Connivings,
Does for the most part, but the more disorder
Our minds; and from our hopes divide us further.
Yea, whether our chief Magistrate, we shall
A King hereafter, or Protector call,
'Twill not be much material, what the Name
Shall be, if all things else be still the same.
Nor His, nor our condition will be betterd
Whilst we are with those Vanities befetterd,
Which to cast off, we lately made a show:
Or, whilst in secret, we do still pursue
Our old ways, and continue, in effect,
What we in Circumstances, do reject.
Some are persuaded, that the style of King
May be as well assumed, as that Thing
Which gives like Power: And so it may, if he
A Jehu, or a Jeroboam be,
Who, neither conscience makes whom he offend;
Or scandalizeth, to obtain his Ends;
Or if he use that Power, which is bestowne
For public works, to bring to pass his own.
But, howsoever, let it be our care
Still to perform what our Obligements are:
Which are not to engage him unto On^
Offense, through fear another may be done:
Or, to resist the Power we should obey
Because it seems by an unlawful way
Acquired or kept: For, every Wise man knows
Power, Thrones, and Glory, are at GOD's dispose.
It is by other some not meanly feared,
Such Power is by Protectorship conferd,
That he may now infring our freedoms more
Then any of our Princes heretofore:
Which may be likewise true; yet, what GOD gave
Wherewith to do him service, he must have
To whom he gives it; If he then abuse it,
To their wrong, for whose welfare he should use it,
GOD will aveng it: And though he defers
That Vengance, (and the Politician Jeers
At such a Vindication) 'twill be paid
With Interest, for all the time delayed,
As soon as our Repentance, and those wrongs,
Are for that ripened, which to them belongs.
These Nations, and their Parlaments, talk much
Of Liberties, and Freedoms, as if such
To them pertained, now, as they have had.
Indeed, there is an Image of them made,
Whereby, we, them a little honored see
Before the People, (as Saul sought to be.)
But, of those Privileges, we have none;
Their Glory is departed; they are gone:
We, by no tenure, any claim can lay
But Courtesy of England, at this day,
To what, by Birth was ours; or unto ought
Which we have purchased, or for which we sought:
And till our supreme Magistrate repaires
Our Losses; Or, till GOD shall hear our Prayers
And cries (if he oppress us) we shall still
No other be, but, Tenants at his Will.
Yet is not he in fault; nor is our Case
So bad, or in such hazard as it was.
For, if it were not so, it might be worse;
And, that which we suppose to be a Curse,
May prove a Blessing. Otherwhile, men lose
By having all things at their own dispose;
And sometimes gain by loosing. what was our,
Did lately slip into another power;
Who, thereof takes (by that forfeiture)
But so much, as our Freedoms may secure
To us hereafter. When, he seems to wound
He does but lance a soar, to make that sound
Which would destroy us: when, unto some cost
He puts us, it is that all may not be lost.
Yea, for our welfare, he is means contriving,
When we most wrong him, by a misbeleeving.
And does discharge his Trust (as I believe)
By doing that, whereof we misconceive.
Though he permits us to capitulate
With him, as it we did participate
In his Power; suffering us to claim and take
Those Privileges, whereby he may make
An advantageous use, with least offense,
To bring to pass the work of Providence;
And to such purposes, is well content
To all our just requests, to give assent:
Those things, do not to us of right pertain;
They are mere Acts of Favor; no remain
Of our old freedoms: And, 'twill hazzardize
Their Restoration, to think otherwise:
For, those Thoughts hindering that complete submission
Which GOD requires, will hinder their fruition,
By making us, perhaps, that means endeavor
To gain them, which will lose them, quite, for ever.
In provocations, IS'RAEL did proceed
So far, that thereupon GOD had decreed
No Ransom from destruction should redeem
Their glorious Temple and Jerusalem,
But, their submission to a foreign King.
On Us, for our transgressions, GOD does bring
A Judgment somewhat like it: And, before
He, will to us our Liberties restore,
We must quite lose them, and submit to Him
Whom, as (in that respect) we did contemn.
And, now, no humane Policy, or Force
Can put us into any likely Course
Of repossessing them, save that Compliance,
With which we have been long time at defiance;
And, whereto he that should advise, might speed
As bad, perhaps, as Jeremiah did
When he in vain, his Countrymen persuaded
To fly to him, who had their Land invaded.
But, so it must be; and, if to believe
What must be, may assurance thereof give.
Or, if things probable in Reason, may
Confirm that, which I now believe and say,
Our much averseness, rather will bring on
Then hinder, that which must at last be done.
For, we are torn into so many fractions,
Grown of so many minds, by our distractions,
(Or Coun^eractings) every Party striving
To bring to pass things of their own contriving,
Al men so apt, whom place of trust, enable
For their own private ends, to scrape and scrable;
And every man so jealous, and afraid,
Of being to his Opposite betrayed;
That, (as the World was, when it first begun)
Our Commonwealth, must be the work of One;
O^e, that has Power, and, in whom, to agree
They, who are most concernd, most likely be.
This One, GOD, has provided to restore
All, that our Kings usurped heretofore
(Or, our Sins forfeited) And to resetle
On us, those blessings, by a stronger Title;
(If neither He, nor these divided Nations
Shall, wilfully, make frustrate their Probations)
Though, many are, yet, fearful that he may
In some things, act the quite centrary way.
Those Counsels, he has often together brought
Which we in former times, most proper thought
For such a Work; and, much has taken in,
Which offered, by some private hands, has been,
But, both their Ends, and Contributions are
So diffring, and from Unity so far;
That, what he has desired should be done,
Less perfect seems, then when it was begun.
And it is not possible their work should be
Long-lasting, who, in so few things agree.
He, therefore (as in all times past, we find
It has been done) who, is by GOD designd
To change a Government; and, unto whom
He always, an Assistant will become,
For his own works; that spirit, must improve
Which GOD on him conferreth to promove
His Vndertakeings. Then, resolve he must
On what his Conscience judges to be just,
And by his Power confirm it: else, the Ways
Now followed, will destroy him, by Delays.
By this Course, and by weighing well those things
Which faithful men, and his experience brings
To be considered, he himself, alone,
Shall do that, which will never, else be done;
Even he alone, if, he, himself deny
(And on that wisdom, and that power rely,
Which hitherto, has carried him along)
Shall, for his undertakings, be more strong
Then, if he were with all the strength, supplyd
And all the wisdom, of the world beside;
For, that shall teach him, what advise to choose:
What he must alter, what he must refuse,
And what to fix upon: which, will be ^ore
His Honor, then his Conquests heretofore;
Or, then to leave through future Generations,
A Kingship to his seed, over many Nations.
This done; a Parliament well constituted
Will crown the work: then, such as are reputed
Just Privileges, will be all restord;
Then, they, who now agree not, will accord:
Then, will our Laws, which yet are made a Snare,
Have those effects, for which ordaind they were,
And, other things, be fairly carried on
Which, now, in crooked muddy Channels run.
We, in this work of Providence, most heed
Those gross, and oblique Actings, which proceed
From man's corruption; and, the deeds of those
Whom for false friends, or else, for Open foes
We do suspect; and, greatly vexed are
With those misactings, which, in them appear;
As if, their failings only, were occasions
Of all our losses, and our Preturbations;
But, were it well observed, we should find
That, those grand-works, which are by GOD designed,
Are no less furthered, by our oversights,
Our weakness, follies, and our foes despights,
Then by our Virtues, Prudency, or Power,
Or, any sufferings, or good deeds of our;
And, thereupon, prepare a way for Peace,
By prizing others more, and, our selves less.
Or, if our Intellectual eyes could see
What GOD has done, or, what those actings be
Whereby, his finger, does make manifest
What changes, have infringd our interest;
We, in true meekness, would incline unto
What he expects, we, should believe and do;
Then, we should find, those changes were permitted
That, for GOD's, work we might be better fitted;
That, his great Love and Justice, might be known;
That, our great failings, we, might know, and own;
That, it might give us many Evidences
How little trust there is, in earthly Princes,
In Parlaments, or, in the best of those
External things, wherein we trust repose:
And, that, we thence may learn, when we have tried
Their Trustlesnesse, in whom, we should confide.
As sure as, GOD, ten tribes from David rent,
And, made Belshazers doom, a president
For future times to heed; and, took from Saul
And other Kings those Kingdoms wherewith al
They were indowd: so surely, was the Throne
Of our preceding King, by GOD, broke down:
So surely, he, who now inthroned sits,
Was raisd by him; and, that if he forgets
On what Conditions, he, that grace received,
So surely, shall he be again deprived,
Of what he yet injoyes; and be devoured
By that, whereby, he was at first empowered.
As sure, as Jacobs sons delivered were
Into the hands of Nabuchadnezer,
Of Eglon, Jabin, Sisera, and those
Who, did on them great Slaveries impose;
So certainly, did GOD give up these Lands
In former times, into Oppressors hands,
Both Temporal, and Ghostly; causing them
In various wise, to be from time to time,
Either afflicted, eased, inthrall'd or freed
As to do well, or ill, they did proceed:
And, lately, has powered forth his vials here
On Priest and People, upon Prince and Peer;
Yet, if we grow not better than we be,
Far sadder Changes, we may live to see,
Because, such Provocations, ours have been,
As, in no former ages, have been seen.
Mark what I say; and heed what will ensue;
For, what I tell you, is, and shall be true.
GOD, for their many sins, did justly bring
These Nations, into Bondege, to their King:
Not to destroy them, as a foe, but rather,
Them to correct, as it became a Father.
That Power, He, exercised not to fulfill
GOD's mind, but, to accomplish his own will;
And, did exceed the bounds of his commission,
To make them footsteps, up to his ambition.
Then, unto GOD they cried, and did repent;
Who, thereupon, unto their Parliament
Gave all his Power; whereby, they did proceed
Against his life, and reigned in his steed.
When they were thus in-thron'd, in leiw of giving,
Forgiving, disinthralling, and releiving.
Their Brethren, by whose hazzards, blood, and treasure,
They, of the sov'raigne Power, had gotten seizure;
Their Helpers, Friends, and Servants, they forgot,
Or (which is worse) them, they regarded not;
(Nor in their greatest need, were some of those,
So civilly respected as their Foes)
Nay more; them they oppressed; slighted their prayers,
Exposed them to shame, wants, and despaires;
Endeavored chiefly their own exaltations,;
Th'inriching of themselves, and their relations;
And, had not that succeeded, which befell,
What else they would have done, no man can tell.
In sight of GOD, of Angels, and of Men,
These things were done; and, this, compels my pen
To leave it on Record, here to be read
By future Ages, when that I am dead.
These, and more such like things, which I have been
Enforced to have felt, and to have seen,
I, from beholding them, long time desn'd
My self, into some nook to have retired;
But, my Engagements always kept me here:
Perhaps, that thereof, I might witness bear
To glorify GOD's Justice; and to show
From whence all our destructive changes flow.
And (being that which I seem born to do)
With willingness, I, now submit thereto,
That, to their Faces, I may testify,
What, thousands living, know to be no lie.
For these Exorbitances, (as this day
^e do perceive) GOD, took their power away,
^d gave it to their Servant, whom they slighted;
Whom, they, perhaps, as ill would have requited,
As other men have been; and, they, are now
His servants; and enforced themselves to bo^
Before his presence, whom they did contemn,
Till, GOD, had with their power invested him,
Who, is (GOD speed him well) on earths wide stage,
The greatest expectation, of, this age:
Yet, at his Exit, he, his doom shall bear
According, as his part, is acted here.
To every one, of whatsoever Degree,
Such as his works are, such, his meed shall be:
And, this, nor strength, nor wisdom shall prevent;
No, not an Army, nor a Parliament,
Nor long time, shall Prince, Priest, or People thrive
In any thing, they hope for, or contrive,
But pussell, plague, and still afflict each other
Till they in Righteous-things agree together;
And, sanctify this Commonwealths foundation
With much more Justice, and with more compassion.
I hope, this downe-right-dealing (which proceeds
From Conscience) no Apologizing needs:
But, of their wrath, I no whit am afraid
To whom, truth, may offensively be said;
For, if that any thing thereby befall
To me destructive, much more greive I shall
For others then my self; because, their ends
I do foresee, who shall destroy their friends;
And, that, if Justice be not more enjoyed
I, shall be safest, when I am destroyed.
Yet, Reader, pleased be before thou go
With Candor, to peruse a few Lines more
For my Indemnity and, then I Have done;
Make no false Comments (prithce) hereupon;
Infer thou not from any word here said,
One thought, whereby, aspersions may be laid
On that great Council, by whose prudence, care,
Zeal, pains and love, those things proposed are
For his assent, without whose approbation,
They cannot have Authentic Confirmation.
The cause is weighty; and, no Humame eye
Can all the ways of Providence epsy.
Although their Offers are demur'd upon,
They, their devoire, as I believe, have done
To give advance unto that Interest,
Which, in their Judgment, has appeared the best;
And done Gods work, so far forth as they could
His purposes, with humane eyes behold;
Or, execute his Will, by Reasons light:
And, I do hope, they shall (ere that be quite
Resolved upon, which yet remains to do)
Receive Divine Illumination, too.
By that which I have heeded, I conceive
(And hold my self obliged to believe)
That, both they, who did on that Instrument
Agree, and also they, who yet dissent,
Their Consciences, have with an equal Zeal,
To God, their Prince, and to this Commonweal
Therein discharged; and, that those things which be
Well done, are Best done, when, some disagree:
And, that, Truth does appear in her perfection
When she is polished by Contradiction:
We, therefore, to both Parties, owe both Love
And Civil thanks, what ere the Sequels prove.
Believe me herein; and observe, I pray,
Which heedfulnesse, that which I next shall say;
For, it will much concern us: (and I press
This Caution, therefore, with such earnestness)
When, that which was proposed, once in vain,
(And, which is to be offered now again
Unto his Highness) all debates has past;
If then, your Expectations fail at last
Which must fall out, on the one or the other side;
With that, which comes to pass, content abide:
And, though in Judgment, you divided be;
In your Affections, loveingly agree.
If they, who their Proposals lately brought,
To be allowed, obtain not what they sought,
Miscensure not of them, as if they had
With ill intentions, those Proposals made;
Nor judge amiss of him, who gave Denial;
If, when repugnant Reasons have their Trial,
He shall be swayed to consent, at length,
By Reasons of the most prevailing strength.
For, if his Highness, on such terms admit
Of that to which he gives denial, yet,
As in his Judgment, and in Conscience too,
Well satisfied, in that which he shall do,
And has beforehand, Gods direction sought,
(As I believe, he has done as he ought)
Know, it proceeds from God; and, that what ere
We thereupon think Probable, or Fear,
We must leave God, and Him, to act their part;
Not meddling with what is hidden in his heart,
Or in an unrevealed Providence,
Lest, we to both of these, give just offense;
And by prejudicating things unknown,
Destroy the Peace of others, and our own.
When things are done, (for ought that we can know)
As, God, does unto him his duty show;
If, then, we still suspect him, and foment
Those Jealousies which nourish discontent;
If we shall then imagine his Delay
And Scruples, were but only to make way
To new Designs; or, to accomplish that
Which, we think he has always aimed at,
(Pretending other things, thereby to gain
A Larger Power then else he should obtain)
If we think thus, as I know many do,
Because they have been pleased to tell me so;
Then, there will be no remedy or end
Of what we may Injuriously pretend;
And, how oblique so e're, his aims may be,
We, make our selves as culpable as he;
And, there is somewhat in us, which, no doubt
Does from a Root of bitterness spring out,
That will produce our Shame; or, which is worse,
Engage us into some Destructive Course.
And, if his heart be right, so much the greater
Will our Shame be, as his designs are better
Then we believe they are; and, questionless,
It will to us contract a Guiltiness,
That will bring on a Plague: and manifest
That, though against Self-seeking we protest;
We, have not so much prayed, that, Gods will
Should take effect, as, our own to fulfill.
What, of this great Debate will be the effect,
I know not; nor presume I to collect
From what I know: for, Princes hearts are deep,
And, I, into their secrets will not peep.
When Abraham, to sacrifize his Son
Expressed a Will, although it were not done,
It pleased as well; And, GOD, for that proceed,
His willingness, accepted for the deed.
It lies not in our Actions, to fulfill
What is required, so much, as in our will:
For, two men in one cause may fight (or grind
At one Mill,) yet, but one, acceptance find;
And, what to Act, the Law, on us does call,
Sometimes, by grace, may be dispensed withal.
I, therefore, know not how enlarge we may
Or circumscribe his Highness in his way;
Nor how far, GOD, in this Cause, will allow
A dispensation after Trial now;
Nor which way he will bend his heart at last;
But, by those things which are already past,
(And, by some other symptoms which I find
Of many good performances, behind)
I hope the best: and, since no better way
I, can be serviceable; thus, I pray.
On Earth, vouchsafe him better things, oh LORD!
Then, Justice, can for Man's best works afford.
Within the World to come, let him inherit,
Not that which He, but, that, which Christ does merit.
And, give him power before he thither go,
To settle righteousness and mercy so,
Upon his Throne; that, they who now condole
May sing a blessed Requiem to his soul;
And, that their hopes deferd, may be injoyd,
Before, they, or their patience, are destroyed.
Our God, has many ways to bring about
What he has foreintended to work out.
That, which Conditionally to be done
He Wills, must take effect in every one
As those Conditions are performd by them,
To whom, his Offers are proposed by him;
And, that which he has absolutely Willd,
Shall doubtless, absolutely be fulfilled,
What ever Contrarieties, here, shall
Thereto obstructive, seemingly befall.
For my part, therefore, when the Trial's ended,
Which, I unfeighnedly have recommended
To God, my Prince, and Country; I Will rejoice
More in their choosing, then, in mine own choice.
Although I suffer by it; with belief,
It will, at last, produce more joy, then grief.
In that Ship, which the common Freight does bear,
I, am but only a poor Passenger,
Who, moved thereto by an honest zeal,
Have spoken, what I thought concernd her weal;
And, though I have hereby insisted much
On my own sense; and think it to be such
As may be owned; Though, such it be reputed
By others, and shall never be refuted;
Yea, though, I may discover some things done,
By which, my just rights are intrenchd upon;
Yet (having done my duty) I will bear
Those things with patience, which concluded are;
And, not alone submit, to what they do,
My Goods and Person, but, my Reason too:
At least so far forth, that, I will not press
One Argument, by which the common-peace
May be indangerd; but, do what I may
To serve my Country in a sober way:
In silence, things which are amiss deplore;
Think my own sins deserved that, and more;
Mark my own failings; and persuaded be
These things have happend, to make proof of me,
And such, as I, as well, as proof to make
Of those who were engaged for our sake:
And, praise God, though all things be not so well
As I desire, that, nothing worse befell.
For, from those difficulties and confusions,
Which we are in, to draw forth such conclusions
As may not be gainsayd, in some repsect,
Is more then Human wisdom can effect.
The Course by which we purpose to pursue
Beloved Peace, loathd Discords may renew;
And, whilst we fighting are, from Foes to clear
Our Vann, we may be routed in the Rear.
By those Contrivements, whereby, we suppose
To save our Lives, our Honors we may lose.
By that, through which our Persons might be free,
Our Consciences, perhaps, enslaved may be;
And, what, for present safety, we endeavor,
May for the future, ruin us for ever.
So finite is our Wisdom, and our Power,
And, those things which may weaken or devour,
So infinite; that, we as well may span
The Firmament, as, by the wit of Man
Contrive, or settle such a Government,
As will our dangers every way prevent.
For, that which is best done, and best intended,
Will still have somewhat in it to be mended:
Yea, even the best things, which best men can do,
Insnarings have injected thereinto,
To catch themselves, or others; which, none scapes
But, he, that always looks before he leapes;
And seeks for Council and Protection, from
That saving-powr, whence all our safeties come.
He therefore is injurious, who suspects
All deeds ill purposed, which have ill effects;
Or, who, those Men's Faiths into question calls,
Whose Council under some Aspersion falls:
No less unjust are they, who froward be
Because, he takes his freedom who is free,
Yet, takes thereof no more then does belong
Unto himself, without his Neighbors wrong:
And, they, are not in every point so wise
As they might be, who, good advice despise
(And timely ay'd, when they are like to suffer)
Because, that man, whom conscience mooves to offer
His services; within the Camp, has hid
Himself, as Eldad, and as Medad did.
These things considerd, I, persuaded am
That neither I, nor any merits blame,
For ought well proposed: and, that now the day
Is near at hand, which will prepare a way
To what Good men desire: and, that a deed,
Which did from Conscientiousness proceed.
Justice and Piety, no bar shall prove,
To that which may our Grievances remove.
In this hope, I with patience do attend
What God will do; to whom, I recommend
The perfecting, of what men strive about,
For, he must do it. Now, this Flash is out.
A SPARK.
BUt see, here is of that Flash, a little Spark
Yet unextinguish'd; which, I pray you mark.
My life's tenth Clymax is now spent well near,
And yet, my warfare is unfinished here.
I therefore, by this Flash a trial make,
How, if need be, Old Powder, fire will take;
That when occasion calls me so to do,
I, therewith might discharge a shot or two,
Or light a Beacon, timely to Alarm
Those, who may by surprizall, suffer harm;
And save that, by the Artillery of words,
Which, cannot be secured by Guns and Swords.
For, though by age, my Arms, are useless found,
My Heart so strong remains, my Brain so sound,
That both by Action, and by Contemplation,
I may, yet, some way serve this Generations;
Whose Welfare to promote, I have bestown,
More time and cost, then to advance mine own.
But, when my heart's broke, and has cracked my brain,
When all those helps, which unto life pertain;
When all the present hopes of things without me,
(Which to and fro, do flutter yet about me)
Are flown away; (as daily it is expected)
Then, will to mind be brought, things now neglected:
And that be done, which, yet, self-love and pride
Obstruct; and will, till they be laid aside.
Yea, then, with good respect, that will be heard,
Which, at this present, has but small regard.
Meanwhile, I rest contented with my Lot;
For, I have that esteem which others got
In former times, who did this way, declare
Those Notions, wherewithal inspired they were;
And, to discharge my duties, am a debtor,
Though my requital, never should be better.
There lies a little Grain, racked up within,
From whence, my better-being will begin:
And, when most Weaknesses appear in me,
My Power, shall then, in full-perfection be:
Yea, when I have nor Life, Flesh, Blood, nor Bone,
Then, that, which could not by those Tools be done,
Shall be performd; and, many things which are
Yet dark, will plain, and useful, then, appear.
Meanwhile, O God vouchsafe thou, to forgive
What, hinders their performance, whilst I live.
So prays, Britans Remembrancer.

A Cause Allegorically Stated,
With an Appeal therein, to all that are wise and honest, from an injurious
censure, lately passed.
A Goodly Ship, with precious lading fraught,
Late, in a dark night, near to land was brought.
Through many dangers, and much Blustering weather,
The Providence of God, had brought her thither;
And, by the Waters motions, and some Humming
Among the Shrowds, another storm seemed coming.
The place ariv'd at, was a dangerous Bay,
From which, into the Port, two Channells lay,
Divided by a Quicksand, with great store
Of Shelvs, and Sharp-rocks, upon either Shore:
She had a brave Commander, Merchants many;
Stout Seamen, Pilots too, as good as any,
With Passengers of all sorts; among whom
Some could (had need been) have supplied the room
Of well experiens'd Seamen, and advised
Such things, as Prudence would not have dispis'd.
But, these among themselves, divided were,
Through which of these two Channels, they should steer,
One party, thinking that the safest way,
In which the other, thought most danger lay:
And in the dark, it could not well be seen,
In which, the greatest Hazard would have been.
There was a poor Old man, that time, a board,
To whom, God, had been pleased to afford
A faculty, to see things in the dark,
Which others could not view, or, did not mark;
He, seeing what great straights the Ship was in,
And what their loss was likely to have been,
Called out to those, who there had Chief Commmand;
And said; there stands a Rock; here lies a sand,
Another yonder, and, a Whirlpool there;
Be careful therefore, thither not to steer;
Bear up a little while into the Wind,
(Although a show of danger there you find)
And take heed, that a causless fear or doubt,
Prevails not now, to make you Tack-about:
Lest all be lost, and, you, upon a steep
Ridge strike; and, over-set into the deep.
Now, by the Starbordside a compass fe^ch,
Half way to you point, to avoid that Beach;
And then, upon the Larbordside again
Wheel off, and you the Harbor shall attain.
Thus spoke the Old man: for although 'twere night,
He saw as well, as when the Sun gives light;
And then, all they who had a will to see,
Saw how to find the way, as well as he.
The greater part, not heeding what they heard,
(Nor knowing their own danger) grinn'd and jeered;
Supposed him mad, to talk, and make a show
Of Demonstrations, which they could not view;
Crept from the hatches, down into the hold,
And let them look unto the Ship that would.
But, they, who more sought their own will to have,
Then to be counseled, or, the Ship to save;
Disdaining that an aged doting fool,
Should put their Wisdom, as it were, to school;
(And, seeing his Relations tend unto,
That, which their Captain had resolved to do)
Grew angry, Therefore, though he neither fears
Their wrath, nor much for their disfavour cares;
Hereby, he has appealed unto you,
Who, are known honest, wise, goodmen, and true;
And, prays you, to be Judges, how he has,
Or wherein, any way deserved their Wrath:
For, here in brief, his Cause is plainly show'n,
And, it is to some among you, so well known,
That, if you shall condemn him, he will submit
To make what Satisfaction, you think fit.
If this comes forth too late to take effect,
My Conscience knows, it was not my neglect:
For I, my utmost labor, had bestown,
To make it, in a timely-season known.
If, therefore, ought amiss thereby ensue,
There lay the Fault, to whom the Blame is due.
Here being vacant Pages, the Author has filled them with a Copy of certain
Verses, wherewith he lately enclosed two Petitions to the PARLIAMENT, and laid
them within their Threshold; hoping by that Expedient, they might have been
presented to the House; The Paper was thus Superscribed; To that Member of
PARLIAMENT, who takes up this Paper, with the Petition enclosed.
The Verses are these:

SIR, if you are not of this PARLIAMENT,
Herewith to greet you, it is not my intent;
But, if a Member of this House you are,
Your taking up this Paper (as it were)
By Lot, ingageth you to manage those
Petitions, which, therewith I did enclose,
As, you would have another, use his power,
Therein, for your avail, were my case your:
Whereof take this Account; and, why I play
My Cards refused, in this unusual way.
Three Parlaments (the eldest of which three,
Might, had it pleased our LORD, have outlived me)
Are dead and gone, since first I did complain
Of Grievances, which hitherto remain
Without Redress. I, also have survived
To see a Fourth, which has it self outlived,
And may continue, till it has supplied
What, Providence, is thereby to provide
For needful supplements, to carry on
Those Works, which in these Nations are begun.
God grant it Power, and Will, and Time, to do
What, they by Duty, are obliged unto,
That, they from wrongs, the wronged may release;
Proceed with Honor, and conclude in Peace.
To such Atchievments, there is a middle-way,
'Twixt This, and That; 'twixt have, and long-delay:
Which, if mistaken, or not timely found,
May (as it has done) lead into a Round,
(Or Labyrinth) whereby, we may be brought
To pits and snares, which have no passage out;
And multiply distractions, till our prai'rs
Are turned to indignation, or dispairs:
Which, is their drift (and not their least design)
Who, seek this Commonwealth, to undermine.
When public wants, require to be suppl'd,
A private plaint may then be laid aside,
But, not too long deferred, lest it become
A festring-soar, not meanly perilsome:
For, since an Universal-weal consists
Of many Individual Interests,
A perfect Body cannot be injoi'd,
Where, One by One, the Members are destroi'd;
And, when the Eye or Ear, unheedful grows
Of what, afflicts the fingers, and the Toes;
Much less, when it neglects what appertains
To keep it, from an Ulcer in the Brains.
The cures therefore, of private wants, betwixt
Public transactions, should be intermixed;
(At least sometimes) in those immergent things,
Wherein, delay of Justice, losses brings
Beyond repair; or where the State at last
Must bear the damage, when the cure is past;
Or else, in point of honor, suffer more
Then all the public treasure will restore.
I grudg not, when GOD's glory is at stake,
That they, who conscience of their Votes do make,
Should take the freedom to debate at large,
What, may their duties in their place discharge;
Or, when the Common-safety does appear
In hazard, though my life in danger were:
But, when those brunts are over, if men please,
For their mere pleasure, profit, or their ease,
To leave us in a perishing condition,
It, of their faithfulness, may give suspicion;
And, I more grieve, for what I thereby see
May on the public fall, then falls on me.
There Is time enough in all streights whatsoever,
For all things, if it well divided were:
And, for our not apportioning aright
The time we have (as wisemen see we might)
GOD, cuts off half the days we should have had,
And our designments are abortive made.
As we from week to week, from day to day
Do put off those, who for our succors pray;
So likewise, are our suits and hopes put by,
By him, on whose assistance we rely.
An hour therefore, should otherwhile be spent,
To give Reward, as well as Punishment;
To think on them who help us in our sorrow;
As well to make repaiments, as to borrow;
And, like the Tree that is planted by a spring,
Expected fruits, in season, we should bring;
Not nine or ten years after they are dead,
(Who, by our timely fruit should have been sed)
Lest we be felled by the Wood-mans hand,
Or, like the Fig Tree, wither where we stand.
One day, is as well spared sometime, to save
An honest-man, as nine to doom a knave;
And, of an useful Plant to take due care,
As, from the good-corn, to weed out a Tare.
Some private acts of Justice, with our zeal
To Piety, and to the Publick-weal,
(Or works of mercy) sprinkled here and there
Among them, like embroid'ries would appear,
Or flowers of gold and silver interwove,
And helpful be, devotion to improve:
For, where few private grievances are heard,
God, gives their public prayers small regard:
And, few are in that Commonwealth much joi'd,
By which, their own well-being is destroi'd;
Or, which is senseless, of their sad estate,
Who did help save it, from a sadder fate.
Among such suff'rers, I my self am One,
Who, gladly would be better thought upon,
For your own sakes; who, peradventure, may
Have by my loss, twice mine, another way.
As many years as are equivalent
To two men's lives, I have already spent
To seek for Justice, with such cost, such trouble,
And loss of time, as make my losses double:
So that if many suits, here, at this rate,
I had depending, three times my estate,
And three men's lives, would scarce afford me time,
And means enough, whereby to finish them:
For, my Petitions, either were deferred
From mouth to mouth, from year to year, unheard,
Or answered so, that when my suit seemd, done,
My Case proved worse, then when it first begun;
And, to obstruct the Justice I emplore,
They, voice me to be rich, who make me poor.
With mock-shews of relief, I have been fed;
With stones, In my distress, instead of bread;
Which, had ere this day starved me, but that GOD,
Turns many of them, into wholesome food;
And raised me a subsistence, out of that
Which was designed to ruin my estate.
His Highness, also stored me with a Dish,
Which has converted Scorpions, into Fish:
Else, that small portion, which I yet possess,
(And some Envy) had long ago been less,
(It may be nothing); for, that Act of Grace,
Is made less valuable, then it was
By him intended, of whose free donation
It was conferred, beyond my expectation.
Oh! if that I, who have some friends, thus fared,
How speed poor men, whom no man does regard?
And, who, from none, can claim an obligation,
Either by Friendship, Faction, or Relation?
But, now, new-misadventures me beset,
Which, by delay of Justice, do beget
Increasing mischiefs, that admit no cure,
Save, what must from a Legislative power,
Derived be: And, this befalls me so,
Perhaps, that I, in every Change, may know,
The general temper, by the pulse that beats
Both in Superior, and Inferior seats;
That, I, thereby may calculate the length
Of our oppressions, and improve my strenth
To bear them: mark, how well our public Acts,
Engagements, Orders, Bargains, and Contracts
Will be performed; and, that, as by presage,
Of things that since befell, I told this Age
Before they came; so, I, might likewise tell
The next Age, what I saw done ill, or well.
(...) many have besought to entertain,
And offer my petitions, but, in vain.
Now therefore, having with some patience stayed
Six months at door, to get my suites convayd
unto this House, where, seeing every day,
New suitors more and more stop up the way,
And small sign, that, with any I should meet,
To hand them in, I laid them at their feet
Who pass in thither; hopeful, that it may,
For my enclosed Petitions make free way,
Through those Obstructions, which have shut the gate
Against them, till they come almost too late.
He, who shall take them up, and get them read,
Where, with effect, they may be answered;
A Favor shall confer, by doing so,
On me, and likewise upon many more.
For, if my suits, obtain respective heed,
Some other men, will hope, as well to speed;
And of my wrongs, if no redress I have,
Both I, and they much future cost may save.
GOD speed it well: for, I, with what event
He gives it, am resolved, to be content;
And, am assured, that though I be neglected,
By men, I shall of him, be still respected.
Britans Remembrancer.

A Postscript to the Preceding Verses.
THey, who to neither Side, nor Back, nor Further
Can turn, or pass, need no Restraints by Order.
Nor greatly be afraid what next will come,
Their, just resolvings, to divert them from;
And, that, whereto necessities compel,
Is done excusably, though not done well.
If much oppression, cracks a wiseman's brain,
Who knows, whereto, it may a fool constrain?
They, whom delay of Justice does make poor,
Do lose but their estates, and, may get more:
If, therewithal, they are of life deprived,
They feel not, what to feel, they might have lived:
But, he who does in lifetime, thereby lose
Both wealth and credit, shall to friends and foes
Become a scorn; whereat, if mad he be,
And, makes ten thousands grow as mad as he,
The fault is theirs, who, without mercy, stretch
A weak man's patience, farther then 'twil reach;
As if, he, of his suffering sense had none,
Because, they no more feel it, then a stone.
My principle (which makes me often abused)
Injoins me, when I scurvily am used
Where I expect relief, to show my wrongs;
And, vengeance leave, to whom the same belongs;
But, some men, cannot be content to stay
GOD's leisure, or, for Justice, in his way;
And, what, their wants, neglects, and indignation
May tempt them to, is worth consideration.
There is to all things, an appointed date;
And, they are unwise, who are wise too late.
Necessitas, and indignatio quid non possunt
FINIS.

