THE QVAKING PROPHETS Two ways proved FALSE PROPHETS, UPON Their own Grounds
laid down in an aerie whimsical Answer to three Queries:

FIRST, They are proved false, in that they have not that Spirit that they
themselves say is the Spirit of a true Prophet.

SECONDLY, They are proved false, in that they have not only discovered to
have in them the ground of all those abominations the which they say are Notes,
Characters, and Signs, of false Prophets; but that in visible appearance some
of those Fruits already sprung up in them.

With a Discovery of their juggling the People out of their Understanding,
whereby they are not only made incapable to try the Truth of what they declare
to them, but fitted to do whatsoever they command them.

Also how Christ lighteneth every man that comes into the world, (a sentence
continually in their mouths) and how, and from whence men's actions arise, in
so plain a method, that every one may apprehend and feel them daily working in
them. With a brief Answer to three Queries, sent by the Quakers to the Author.

By T. WINTERTON.

London, Printed by ROBERT WOOD, 1655.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have presented to thy view this small Treatise, wherein I have proved the
Quaking Prophets false, upon their own grounds whether I have, or no, I leave
it to thy impartial judgment. And forasmuch as thou may think it high
presumption for so weak and unable a person, to engage against such a Sect,
when so many able learned men, the sons of the Churches, have (...) off with
loss I confess, the Objection is of weight enough to have kept me silent, had I
not known the grounds on which these Rabbis opposed them on were as unsound as
the Quakers were; so as they but clash their errors together: And a new Opinion
that does but equally defend it self always gets ground; and upon this score,
I am confident, they have gained a multitude. Howsoever, I have put forth my
firstborn The which I have begoten upon their own grounds
in whomly dress; but if this were all, I should be glad: I fear there may be
many faults the which I see not; I have cause enough to be jealous, in that I
have seldom read a piece that has bin wholly empty of mistakes; and though
this is no excuse for me, yet it casts a shadow of encouragement to crave so
much favor of thee, as to except the Will for the Deed, it being the first
fault, to the which the greatest Tyrant in the world will contribute mercy;
especially where the mind is upright. Howsoever, I thought my self the fitter
for this work, in regard I have formerly trod these ways of imagination bare,
till I was as bare my self in a worldly eye: so great was my desires, and yet
no greater then my intention good; for heaven it self was not more choice to
me, then the true worship of the pure God the which I imagined I had attained
to; and in that back of imagination I transported all my hopes for many years,
and through many dangers, till at length I began to question my security in
her: whereupon making a through search, I found her fit for naught but to set
me ashore, where I left his, and returned with my adventure, the which amounted
to no less then a sad remembrance that I was deceived. Howsoever, my love and
desires are still as strong, and my spirit as free, to serve the Lord,
whenever he shall be pleased to set my feet upon a sure ground: till then I
wait, and till then I think it better to sit still, then rise and fall; for I
am resolved that imagination shall no more deceive me: Howsoever, I would be
loath to change my condition with those that assume an infallible spirit, or
something in them above Nature, the which they cannot demonstrate to a natural
capacity; because if they were disabled, and nothing left them but what they
had of this, it might prove a tedious work to find in the world a lesser thing
then they.

T. W.

To the QVAKERS.
I Having heard some certain passages in your Exercise in Whitecross street,
the which I desire to have had cleared; but understanding you were too wise to
dispute, I have refted satisfied; till of late there came to my hand certain
Queries sent by you to the Anabaptists; and conceiving you so righteous, that
you will give no more then you will take, I have sent you three Queries.

1. If there be false Prophets in the world, as you say, whether there be not
certain notes, characters, and sights, to know a true Prophet from a false; and
what that is; and whether for any to affirm and declare, that he is immediately
sent from the Lord, and that he speaks by the spirit from the mouth of the
Lord, and what he speaks is infallibly true; and yet can give no other
testimony, but his own word, and his Associats; whether this be not rather a
character of a false Prophet then a true; but if a true, then whether every one
may not be a true Prophet that will?

2 Whether there be any light in man, but what is seated in the understanding;
and whether the understanding receives not its light from the information of
the sense; and whether any information, but what is from thence, is not merely
imaginary?

3 Whether it be necessary to believe any that shall say, they have something
in them above Nature, or supernatural, unless they can demonstrate something in
them that cannot be found in a natural person; and whether there be any
greater note of one truly spiritual, or having something in them above Nature,
then so to love Christ and the Gospel, as freely to lay down his life for the
truth of it; And whether many Jesuits of late at Tyburn, have not done this;
and whether there be not an opposition between you and the Church of Rome?

T. W.

An Answer to three Queries coming out of a dark mind, from a blind
understanding; propounded by Thomas Winterton to us called Quakers.
1. Query. IN this Query thou ask, whether there be a certain note,
character, or sign, to know the true Prophets from the false, and what that is,
and whether for any to affirm and declare, that he is sent immediate from the
Lord, and that he speaks by the spirit from the mouth of the Lord, and what he
thus speaks is infallibly true, and yet can give no other testimony but his
own words and his associats, whether this be not rather the character of a
false Prophet then a true; but if a true, then whether every one that will may
not be a true Prophet?

Answ. Yea, there is a note, a character, and a sign, by which the true Prophet
from the false may be known, and they are read by the spirit of the Lord, which
comprehends the ground from which each does spring; which spirit was, and is in
the true Prophet, which is Christ Jesus: And is is written, and if any man have
not this spirit he is none of his, but an enemy to him, and knows not the false
Prophet from the true; nor cannot read the note, character, and sign; having
no salt, is without savor, for they are known by their fruits to him that has
the spirit: men cannot gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles; if thou
can read this parable, thou may know the difference, for this is the sign
which Christ gave of them. Who were they that cried, Lo here, and lo there;
and was, and is known to him who is the true Prophet, who abides within, and
says, Go not forth? if thou be in this Doctrine, thou can understand, and this
is the note, sign, and character which the Prophets and Apostles gave of them:
They looked every one for his gain from his quarter, and preached for hire, and
went in Cains way to envy, and in Baalams way after the gift; and through
covetousness made merchandise of people, and their Ministry was such that
always people were learning, but were not able to come to the knowledge of the
truth by them, but were led away with diverse lusts: And such were not sent (nor
now are not) immediate from the Lord, nor speaks not by the spirit from the
mouth of the Lord, and what he speaks is fallible, and a lie; and whatsoever he
affirms and declares is for condemnation; for his Testimony is from man, and
his Call from man, and he speaks his own words, and the world hears him, and
receives such; and such are exalted in it, called of men master, and has the
chief seat in the Assembly, and are proud, covetous, heady, and high-minded;
and such are in the enmity against the true Prophet, which is Christ, who
receives not his Testimony from man, but from God; and such who are in him
now, as ever was, is hated and mocked of the world (who are children of
darkness) though they speak from the mouth of the Lord infallibly, yet they
cannot give testimony to the world, nor to thy adulterous Generation to be
believed of them, that he is sent of God: And this is the sign of the true
Prophet, not to receive testimony from man, nor to speak his own words in his
own time; and this Prophet is born and brought forth contrary to the Will of
man; nor speaks not his own words, but the Word of God, who are in his own
will, speaking his own words, is a false Prophet, and runs in his own will, and
is not sent of God; and none that will, in his own Will, can be a true Prophet,
but they; and thou in that Will stands in the enmity against God; and here thy
Character is read.

2. In this Query thou asks, whether there be any light in man, but what is
sealed in his understanding, and whether the understanding receives not its
light from the information of the senses, and whether any information to the
understanding, but what is from the senses, is not mere imaginary?

An. The light of Christ, which lighteneth every man that comes into the world,
which shines in darkness, thou cannot comprehend; but by it are comprehended
and judged, thy sensual state, the light which shines in darkness, which is
seated in the conscience, is received from God; and it is ground is God, and not
the senses, but it reproves the motion of the senses, which arises in the
disobedience, and judges the information of the sensual nature, which
informs into disobedience unto God, and conformeth but unto the Saints words
and practices in the sensual understanding, contrary to the true light; and
this is from imaginary light, and is for condemnation, which the true light
which thou cannot comprehend, but stumbles at.

Qu. 3. In this Query thou asks, whether it be necessary to believe any that
shall say, they have in them something above nature, till they can demonstrate
something in them, which is not to be sound in natural persons; and whether the
note of one truly spiritual, is not so to love Christ and the Gospel, as freely
to lay down his life for the truth thereof; and whether many Jesuits of late
have not done this; and whether there be not an absolute opposition between the
Church of Rome, and you?

An. It is only necessary for thee to know thy self, and to believe in the
light which lets thee see thy evil deeds, and thy corrupt heart; the light
which has lighted every man that comes into the world is eternal and
spiritual, and which condemns the natural man in his works and knowledge, and
is not of the natural man, though in him, for light shines in darkness: To thy
dark mind, this may be, and is demonstrated in word, though not believed by
thee; for thou that stumbles at the light art an unbeliever, in the natural
ground, among the natural persons, who cannot discern the things of God, though
declared and demonstrated unto you; and this is thy note and character, a
stumbler at the corner stone, who is him which is the light of men; and so no
friend to him, nor to his Gospel, but an enemy to both, to the light I do speak
in thee, which shall one day answer me, who art in thy fleshly mind and lust,
and queries with thy busy mind, and in thy natural knowledge, in which thou
also corrupts thy self: To the latter part of thy Query, I do answer, the
Jesuits have never of late, nor of former days, laid down their lives for the
truth of the Gospel, but out of a fiery zeal without knowledge, in the
darkness, and not in the light; between which, and Us, is an absolute
opposition, as between thee and us, who art both in one ground and nature;
their Church of Rome, and the Church of England (so called) which is not the
Church of Christ, we do stand in opposition against by the true light, which
clearly manifests unto us, that the one is worshipping an Image, and the other
an Imagination, and are both in the cursed ground, enemies to the Worship of
God, which is a spirit, and among them thy name stands, in opposition to the
true light which removes their ground, and art a stumbler at it, following thy
own will, and the desires of thy own mind: Therefore (friend) repent, and
search thy own heart, and try whose servant thou art by the light which will
show thee, and bear witness for the righteous God, and against all thy ungodly
ways and words: This light is in thee, and comes from Christ, thy way to
salvation, if thou love it; but thy condemnation for ever, hating it. This will
resolve all thy doubts, and will let thee see from whence thy Queries did
proceed. Thus I have answered them, and do expect an Answer from thee, of these
following:

1 What is the ground in which the Church of Rome stands, and whether it be
removed in thee; and if, how was it removed? and whether the Vial be powered
upon the seat of the beast, yea, or nay, and what is his seat, and his mark and
the number of his name? 2 What is the mouth of the false Prophet, and where
speaks he, and whether thou do witness his mouth stopped in thee, and
whether thou can be deceived, yea or nay? 3 What is the end wherefore Christ
was manifest into the world, and whether thou have received the end of his
coming; or when, where, or how, thou expects to receive it; and where, and what
is the ground of thy knowledge of him: Answer these in plain words, or lay thy
hand upon thy mouth, and utter not words before the Lords; but confess thy
ignorance, and own thy Condemnation.
EDWARD BVRROVGH.

The Authors Reply, to the Quakers Answer to his three Quaeries.
I Have out of my dark mind, and blind understanding, (as you please to say)
took a through view of your pretended Answer to my three Queries, the which
consist of 12 particulars; and thou have made a direct Answer unto two of them,
and they are the two last of the last Query. To the first part of the first
Query, you leave out the word certainty, the which is the life of the Query;
and answer, that there is a note, character, and sign, to know a true Prophet
from a false. And in the second particular of the first Query, I query what
that note, character, and sign is; and to this you answer nothing at all, but
run into a mere aerie whimsical story, that may serve to prove as well the
greatest abomination in the World. And though I will not trace you in your
aerie whimsie, yet I will observe what has passed from thee that has relation
to the Query; and that is two things: The first is, That a true Prophet cannot
give testimony to any that his Calling is of God, but those that have the same
spirit. The second is, That a true Prophet cannot make a visible demonstration
to the world that his Calling is of God. Now as these two conclusions are truly
drawn from your aerie whimsical story, so I shall endeavor to reply to them.
And for the first, It is an ancient shift, and has long since by the
Antinomians been put upon me, they boasting like the Quakers of their great
light, inward teaching, and incomes of the spirit; and I desiring a
demonstration of these things, they like the Quakers told me I had not that
spirit, and therefore I was not capable: So of late your Predecessor John
Roberts, of whom his Disciples cried, Cursed was he that worshipped any other
God then John Roberts the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in new prison,
in a conference with them, I called upon them to make those things good they
uttered. They told me, I had not the same spirit, therefore I could not
believe: And now as they laid their Foundations in aerie Whimsies, so they are
blasted and vanished before you, yet they out-stript you in their devotion,
abstaining from all things but bread and water, by which they drew (to my
knowledge) many to ruin, as you are like to do. And now as this is a subtle
shift to break the lorce of an Argument, so it will serve for any Whimsie: as
if a Jesuit should affirm that the Pope was above God. This whimsical story
will serve to tell those that shall inquire into the truth thereof, that they
have not the same spirit, and therefore it cannot be demonstrated to them. And
it is as usual for he great Sultane to prove his great Prophet Mahomet to be
true. Yea, if a Quaking Prophet should affirm, that the Spirit of Christ has
carried him through the Moon, and that he there saw Christ sitting at the right
hand of God his Father, and that he see many glorious mansions prepared for
them that obey the Commandments of Christ, and that was to worship the Moon. I
say, if he should thus affirm, his aerie whimsical story will serve him for as
much use to prove that true, as it will prove he is a true Prophet, and that he
speaks infallibly from the mouth of the Lord; and if he would but outface this,
as he does the other, without all question he would have as many unstaid minds
to follow him in the belief of this, as in the other. And now for the trial of
you in the second particular, I must rouz you out of this lurking hole, and
chase you in the plain field of the Scriptures, the which you say you own, and
bear witness to; and there try, whether you are not covered with sheeps
clothing, or no. And in order thereunto, I shall observe, that you affirm that
the spirit that was, and is in Christ, is the same that is in the true
Prophets, (I suppose you mean the Quaking Prophets) I cannot but acknowledge,
that we are for this beholding to you, in that you have given us a Rule to try
whether you are a true Prophet, or a false; and that is by comparing your
spirit with Christ and his Apostles spirit.

Now Christ says of himself, That he came to convince the world of sin,
righteousness, and judgment; the manner by which he did it, was by giving a
demonstration suitable to his Doctrine, that as his Doctrine was such as never
man taught, so his Works were such as never man did. Here you see the nature of
Christ's spirit that brings the world to the knowledge of him by visible
demonstration, yea to their very outward senses; for he says, the works that I
do bear witness of me: And thou say, that the Quaking Prophets spirit can
give no testimony (that is) demonstration to the World: therefore the Quaking
Prophets spirit and Christ's are not of one kind. Again, when Christ commanded
his Disciples to go preach to the world, he bid them to stay at Jerusalem, till
they had received that spirit that should demonstrate them to the world from
false Prophets that he had said would come. Now upon your account they need not
have staid, for they had tongue testimony barely to tell the people, that they
were sent from Christ; but you see that the spirit of Christ acts in pure
reason, when it sends forth a strange doctrine, it sends forth as strange a
demonstration, for as the people were to be preached to the world, who had by
nature come to know the invisible God, by things visible; so he gave them that
spirit that should demonstrate to their understanding, that they were sent from
that invisible Power. Therefore by thy own assertion, and by thy own
affirmation we have found by thy spirit, by comparing it with Christ's spirit,
and his Apostles spirit, to be a juggling false deceiving spirit: and therefore
I shall apply thine own words, to thine own self, as of right they belong, that
thou art not immediately sent from the Lord, nor speak by the spirit from the
mouth of the Lord, but what thou speak is false and a lie; and whatsoever
thou affirmest and declarest, is for condemnation, for thy testimony is from
man, and not from God.

The 2d. Query thou writest down as though thou intendedst to give answer to
it, but by that time thou had done, thou either forgot what to answer, or
else thou supposed that the bare writing of it down was sufficient. For I
query, Whether there be any light in man, but what is seated in the
Understanding? If I had queried, Whether there be any light in man, but what is
seated in the heel? the Answer that thou gives is as satisfactory to the one,
as to the other. But instead of answering, thou tellest me, that Christ
lighteneth every man that comes into the world; about which, thou and I differ
not: but where this light is seated, whether in the understanding, or no; and
this thou might have seen, if thou had not been a blind, as well as a
false Prophet. To the two first parts of the last Query, thou dealest as to all
the rest; and that is like to a man that should engage to meet his enemy in the
field, should keep his appointed hour, and when his enemy comes, repeat the
quarrel, and then run away: so thou ingageth to answer my queries, the which
thou repeastest, and then runnest away from giving an Answer. For the query is,
Whether its necessary to believe any that shall say, they have in them
something above Nature, or supernatural, unless they can make it appear that
they have in them something that cannot be found in a natural man. Thy answer
is, that it is necessary for me to know my self; and then like one far more
fitter to rail, then to answer, accuses me with evil deeds, and a corrupt
heart, one whom thou never saw, or so much as heard the least jealousy of the
least guilt of the least crime against me: so although thy boastings are as
great as any false Prophets, yet thou have as few brains as the least of them:
howsoever thou have blundered up an Answer to the two last parts of this last
Query; and that is, that the Jesuits have neither former nor latter laid down
their lives for the truth of the Gospel; and yet thou say; they did it out
of a fiery zeal, the which is a contradiction to your denial, for zeal argues
they did believe it true; for there is no zeal but what is grounded upon a
confidence. And though I have proved you Quaking Prophets false, yet if you
should (the which I am confident you never will) lay down your lives for your
Opinion, I could not but believe that you did conceive that true you died for:
and if I should say the contrary, and yet say you did it out of fiery zeal, I
contradict my self as you do. Lastly, thou say thou art opposite to the
Church of Rome, yet thou art one and the same in foundation, the which is no
more then mere imagination, and in many, grand errors, as assuming an
infallible spirit, and damning all that will not believe you, as they likewise
do.

Thus having proved thee a false Prophet, in that thou have not the mark,
character, and sign of a true, I yet have a few more things against thee, and
that is to prove thou have the Root and Ground in thee, of all those
abominations the which thou say are marks, characters, and signs of a false
Prophet; and that is proved thus: Thou sends me 3 Queries to answer, and thou
chargest me to answer them in plain words, and thou feignest an Answer to me in
aerie Whimsies, without either direct answer, or plain words: thus thou asking
more then thou will give, thou give a perfect sign of self-love in thee, the
which is the ground of all abominations; Its the ground of running in the ways
of Cain after envy, and the way of Baalam after gifts: its the ground of
making merchandise of the people and ministry: its the ground of all
covetousness, pride, and ambition; yea, its the very Corner stone of all the
abominations in the World.

Now these false Prophets, of whom thou say these are the marks, characters,
and signs of, they came not with these marks, characters, and signs, in their
foreheads; but they privily hide them under their sheeps clothing, from the
understanding of the people: yea, they came in with two horns like a Lamb,
till they had got into the affections of the people, and into a way of
settlement, they then spoke like a Dragon. Again, as thou haste the foresaid
Ground and Root in thee, so there are many Branches appear:

The first is, that thou blamest me for inquiring, and says, its out of my
busy mind: yet thou sends me as many, as I sent thee, and four times as many
to the Anabaptists: Thus thou blaming me for sending 3 Queries, art much more
to be blamed for sending 15. The second is, a branch of falsehood; for in the
beginning of thy pretended Answer thou say thus: (An Answer to three Queries)
and at the end thereof thou say, (thus I have answered them) yet thou have
answered but two parts of twelve. The third is, a branch of pure folly; for you
say that I have a dark and blind understanding, and all along in thy aerie
Whimsie conclude me in darkness yet thou sendest three Queries to me for
information, or else thou dissemblest; and that is a perfect mark, character,
ane sign, thou art not a true Prophet. The fourth branch, that does spring out
of this bitter Root, is that which thou say is a mark, character, and sign of
a false Prophet; and that is to be always teaching the people, and never bring
them to the knowledge of the truth: so thou with thy antic carriages, and
whimsical teaching, juggles the unstaid people out of their own understanding,
that so they may see by thy eyes, and hear by thy ears, and understand by thy
understanding: so that their eyes are made useless, their ears useless, and
their understanding useless, even like the Papists, the poor unstaid people
rely upon thy pretended infallibilities, as the Papists do on the Church of
Rome. And whereas thou tellest them, that Christ lightneth every man that
comes into the world and of the light within them; but thou either can not,
or wilt not show the people what they are to understand by it. Wherefore, to
undeceive the people thou and the rest of thy fellow deceivers have beguiled,
and to keep others from being deceived by you, I shall endeavor to show what
this Light is, or what of necessity it must be; and that I may do it in
plainness to their understanding, I shall change my Method into a Dialogue.

Quest. Whether Christ lighteneth every man that comes into the world inwardly
or outwardly? Answ. Both inward, and outward; that is, the eyes of the body,
and the eyes of the understanding. Qu. How can that be made appear? A. The same
ground that proves he lightened man in any part, the same proves he lightened
man in every part where light appears: for as he was God, he did the one; so he
did the other, so the World was made by him; and without him was made nothing:
and again, speaking as he was man, he says, (Of my self I can do nothing.) Q.
What is that Light the which Christ lighteneth man with? A. None can really
tell, what it is in its real Essence and Being. Qu. Can it not be defined? A.
No otherwise, but as Faith, and Love, and other Graces are, that is, by their
Effects. Qu. What are the Effects of Light? A. It discovers unto man visible
forms. Qu. Can the eyes or light of the understanding discover visible Forms?
A. The light and eyes that is said to be in the understanding, is no more
properly light, then properly eyes, but is figuratively called Light, because
it has as it were the properties of Light that is to discover; for as the
bodily eyes discovers visible forms, so the understanding discovers the
different Nature of those Forms. Qu. Is there no inward light, but what is
seated in the understanding? A. No; in the good sense that is without relation
to carnal inclination, there is no knowing, no believing, no affecting, no
liking, not there is no disliking, nor disaffecting, but it arises and
proceeds from the determination of the understanding. Qu. Does every man bring
into the World this light that Christ lighteneth every man with in full
perfection? A. For the outward eyes of the body, they are perfect at their
coming in or never perfect; but for the light of the understanding, they bring
in that as they bring in their full strength; that is, a capacity to grow to
it. Q. In what order or method does the actions of the body arise from? A.
There are inherent in man five distinct faculties, the which are the ground of
all his acting. Qu. Which are they? A. The first are the senses: the second,
are the understanding: the third, the Will, or affection: the fourth
Imagination: the fifth, Carnality or Lust. Q. What is the place and office of
these several faculties? A. The office of the Senses is to inform the
Understanding of what they hear, see, smell, feel, and taste. The offices of
the Understanding, is to judge and determine those things by the Senses
presented. The offices of the Will or Affection, is to put the body upon
action, according to the determination of the understanding, the which if it
determinateth good, it moves the body toward it; if ill, it moves the body
from it. The offices of the Imagination is to bring information to the
Understanding, beyond the reach of the Senses. The offices of Carnality, or
Lust, is through a vicious, inclination to overpower the Will, upon some
pretended good, to move and cause the body to act quite contrary to its light
and understanding. Qu. Are all the five Faculties of one and the same nature?
A. No, they differ as much as Light and Darkness. Qu, Which are they that
differ? A. The three first differ from the two last, and the two last differ
one from another. Q. What is the nature of the three first? A. They are of that
nature, that whilst man acts under these distinct from the two latter, his
actions are pure, as unto man, without the least commixture of unjustice or
deceit, or provocation thereunto, neither can he: For first, the Senses they
deliver up to the Understanding what they partake of without the least self
end; and the Understanding judges as purely, according to that light it has;
and the Will as sincerely puts the body upon action.

Q. What is the nature of Imagination? A: Its nature is to give information to
the Understanding of things oftener false then true. Q. What is the nature of
Carnality, or Lust? A. It is of a most mischievous nature unto the sons of men,
it corrupts their actions, it destroys society, yea, it destroys or
depriveth man of all comfortable being. Q. Are not Reason and Conscience
faculties also? A. Yes, they may be said to be faculties, because they may be
said to act, though more remote then the rest; for Reason is nothing but a
Conclusion drawn from Experience: Now there must be Understanding, and from the
Understanding there must be Experience, before there can be Conclusion, the
which is Reason. Qu. What is the effects of Conscience. A. First you must know
upon what it works, before we can find its effects; for it acts not as
other faculties in every one, neither has any ground but in one single
Opinion: that is, When the Understanding shall fully determinate that there is
a place of everlasting Plagues, wherein the sons of men or some degree of them,
shall be tormented for ever; I saw, whose Understanding soever does determine
thus, it does also determine its own case, either to a confidence that he is
one of those that shall thus be damned, or else is confident he shall not, or
else doubts whether he shall or no. Now when a person comes to be possessed with
this confidence that he shall be damned, if now he be inclined to fear,
Conscience now blows as it were a flame about him, and like an Executioner
presents unto his present view, all those Plagues, as if they were in present
being to the wounding of his Spirit that no man can bear, but seek all means to
destroy themselves. Again, he that stands doubtful, Conscience has not that
power over him, yet if he be inclined to fear, Conscience will ever be snarling
at him, and keeps him from extravagancies, and that is the good that
Conscience does, to make a man that is viciously inclined, to be artificially
honest; even as a ravenous Cur, that whilst his Master has a cudgel in his
hand, he lies still; but so soon as his back is turned, he seizes upon what is
next: But the glorious actions of the sons of men is, from a natural
inclination of delight to do justly, and to see no benefit nor profit but in
what is his own, this is a Dye in grain that will never change: Let this man be
in what condition he will, let him change his opinion, or change his Religion
his actions, as unto man, will be the same still. But he that has not a
natural delight to deal justly and honestly with all men, such will make use of
all opportunities (especially if they happen in dark corners) to deceive. And
now, as Conscience is of singular use to make this sort of men honest, so it is
piety but that that Opinion (whereupon Conscience does depend) should thoroughly
possess them. Q. But the Quakers in the second Query, speak of a false Light in
the Conscience, and of the Senses, acting in disobedience, and of a true Light.
A. But if they would lay down these things in a methodical way, so as the
people might out of heir own Understandings feel them working in them, it were
something: but this would bring their craft in danger, for their Quaking then
would soon be at an end, For as man's chiefest certainty lies within the reach
of his Senses, that what he sees, and hears, and tastes, and feels, and
smells, is more certain then what others say they heard, they saw, they
tasted, they smelt; the which while he there keeps, he cannot be deceived:
But they tell the people, that the Senses, and all the rest of the faculties,
are carnal and fleshly, and are to condemnation, and that they are contrary to
the true Light (the which is to believe their Infallibility:) And having
brought the people to a belief of this, they are not only made incapable of
trying the truth of their Doctrines, but fitted to fall down before the
greatest Idol that ever was in the world, yea, to cry, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians, and to Worship the Image that fell down from Jupiter: And then
having ballaced them with this ayrie whimzie, to tell all that shall oppose
them, that they have not the same Spirit, they are then sufficiently furnished,
till they split themselves upon another Novelty, or sink through the weariness
of the old.

An Answer to three Queries, sent by Edward Borough, a supposed Quaking
Prophet, in that he commands to Answer them in plain Words.
Q. What is the Ground in which the Church of Rome stand?

A. The Church of Rome, and the Church of the Quakers stand both upon
Imagination.

Qu. And whether it be removed in thee?

A. Yea, for Imagination He trust no more.

Qu. And if how was it removed?

A. By that Light with the which Christ lighteneth every man that comes into
the world.

Qu. Whether the Vial be poured upon the Seat of the Beast, yea, or nay,

A. I cannot tell.

Qu. What is his Seat, and his Mark, and the Number of his Name?

A. I cannot tell nor th^^ neither infallibly.

Qu. What is the Mouth of the False Prophet?

A. Edward Borough, and the rest of his fellow Quaking Prophets.

Qu. And where speaks he?

A. Sometimes at Alderfgate, sometimes in More-fields, and in diverse places in
the City.

Qu. And whether thou do witness his Mouth stopped in thee?

A. No, he will rail upon me still.

Qu. And whether thou can be deceived, yea, or nay?

A. No, I am not deceived that the Quakers are False Prophets.

Q. What was the end wherefore Christ was manifest unto the Worlds?

A. To save sinners.

Q. And whether thou have received the end of his coming?

A. Yea.

Q. Or when, where, or how thou expectest lo receive it?

A. The Answer to the last Query takes away the Answer to this.

Q. And where, or what is thy Knowledge of him.

A. The Scriptures, without which it is probable thou and I should never have
heard of him.

FINIS.

