Carmen Expostulatorium: Or, A timely EXPOSTULATION With those both of The
City of London, AND The present Army, Who have either endeavored to engage
these Kingdoms in a Second War; or neglected the prevention thereof.
Intended, for averting (if it may be possible) of that general Destruction
thereby threatened; and to that purpose, hastily (upon the immergent occasion)
published. By GEO. WITHER.

2 COR. 11.19. Suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise.

Printed in the Year MDCXLVII.

Carmen Expostulatorium: OR, A timely Expostulation with those both of the City
of LONDON, and the present ARMY, who have either endeavored to engage these
Kingdoms in a Second War; or neglected the prevention thereof.
THough, I have spoken heretofore in vain,
And may do now; yet, I will speak again,
In hope, that what by Reason, nor by Rhyme,
Could be effected, may be done by Time:
And, that, although my words be lost to some,
They shall not fruitless, unto all, become.
Hark! how the Drums beat! how the Trumpets are
Sounding Alarums to a second-warre,
Before the first is done! and, whilst yet green
The wounds upon our bodies may be seen!
Behold, that, which was coming long ago,
Draws now so near, that none shall need fore-show
What next will follow; or, what will ensue
On that: For, we, without a glass, may view
Such things in kenning, that unless our GOD,
To them shall please to set a period;
Or, make some such diversion, as no man
Conjecture of, by any symptom, can,
An universal Plague, on us will seize,
Instead of Remedies, for our Disease.
Why, then, shall I, in time of need, withold
That, which my conscience tells me, should be told?
Why should I keep those premonitions back,
Which I conceive, my friends at this time lack?
A poore-mans counsel, once, (as we hear say)
Did save a City: So, perhaps, this may.
Excuse me therefore, if (much grieved at
Your rash proceedings) I expostulate,
The sad condition, wherein, you to me,
By this renewed war, may seem to be.
Renowned Citizens! what do you mean,
To make your dwellings, that unhappie Scoene
Whereon there shall, in probability,
Be acted, now, the bloodiest Tragedy,
That e're this Kingdom saw? Are you grown mad?
And, is there no Physician to be had
For, this Distemp'rature? But, must it, here,
Be Cuckow-moneth, or Dog-daies all the year?
Have you no drugs, that may lost wits restore?
Can Patience, Herbagrace, nor Hellebore,
Nor any other Simple, or Confection,
Work out that noy some humor and infection,
(That has besotted you) till you grow fit
For Bedlam? where, are no such madmen yet.
Will nor Plaine-speakings, Parables, nor Charms,
Make you regard, your safety, nor your harms?
But, that, as in despite of all that can
Be threatened, or foretold, by GOD, or man,
You will resolved be to hurrie on,
Till you beyond all remedies are gone?
Are you distempered so, that naught can please,
Save, what, still more increases your disease?
Think you no Balm, or Salve, or Physic good,
But, that which mortifies, or draws blood,
To your destruction? would you feign make void
All your late hopes? would you see all destroyed
That, so much treasure; so much blood has cost;
And, let it, everlastingly, be lost,
Your humor to fulfill; or, for a toy,
Which, also, you perhaps, may never enjoy?
Nay, will you now for nothing? or, for worse,
Will you to purchase mischief, and a curse
To you, and to your children, re-ingage
Into a war? and, by a brutish rage,
Expose those Freedoms to an overthrow,
For, which your fathers did their lives bestow.
To leave them unto you? And, which might be
Confirmed for ever, if you could agree
Upon those principles of common-Reason,
Whose violation is the highest Treason?
Have you not yet discovered who be they
Who cheat you? nor whose game it is you play,
By your divisions? And, when others find
Your falsehoods for you, will you still be blind;
Or, wink, as careless of the things you heed,
Till, by long winking, you grow blind indeed?
Discern you not whose Kingdom is befriended,
Whilst, GOD and CHRIST, are formally pretended?
Nor whose designs, promoted are, the while
Some, with fair shows of piety, beguile
Well-meaning men? And, carry on their actions,
By working with, and in, those differing factions
Which they first raised? Mark you not, how, by,
And in, that duplifi'd-capacity,
Their Ingineers do screw themselves into
Most secrets on both sides? how, they undo
(By means of that their unperceived gin)
What, has most privately contrived been?
And, see you not, that thereby they do bring
What, e're the City, Parliament or King,
Or any other party, does propound,
Advise or act, to give it self a wound,
And further their particular design,
Till GOD prevents it by some countermine?
Can you not yet discover (through their mist)
Those juglings, which the spawne of Antichrist
(False Priests, and lying Prophets) practice, now,
To raise themselves, and work your overthrow?
Nor, with what impudence they spread their lies,
Their bitter jeerings, and their blasphemies,
To make new breaches, or to widen those,
Which Love, and Prudence, had begun to close?
And, which ere this, quite closed might have been;
Had not they cast untemper'd dirt between?
Perceive you not, that, some of both your factions,
Do labor an increase of your distractions,
Because they seem not safe from questioning,
For falsehoods, to the Parliament, or King,
Unless they shall endcavour to prevent
The settling of that peaceful Government
Which furthers justice? Yea, and see you not
How, they conspire; how, they contrive, and plot
To ruin all, in hope they may, by hap,
Amidst the tumults, their just doomes escape?
Or, by dispairing of a good conclusion,
Bring all things, with themselves, into confusion?
Is it a time your Quarrels to renew,
When all is hazzarded, that is dear to you?
Observe ye not, three Factions, like to them
Which were the ruin of Jerusalem,
At strife within your walls? Do you not see,
What spighfull sparklings in their eyes there be?
How sharply, they at one another whet
Their slanderous tongues? how grinningly they set
Their teeth against each other? And how they
With pens dipped in black poison, do assay
To re-ingage you; and, by cursed words,
Provoke the re-unsheathing of your swords,
That every son, and father, friend, and brother,
May sheath it in the heart of one another?
Are you besotted so, not to perceive
Who has befooled you? who, the snares do weave,
That have intrap'd you? and who spic'd the Bowl
Which makes you drunken, stagger, reel and roll
Into perdition? does it not appear,
That, to prevent the mischiefs which you fear,
You run a hazard, to draw down upon you
A greater, then they ever could have done you,
Whom you distrust? And, that, in hope to shun
Uncertainties, to certain deaths you run?
Is GOD, now acting for you, and does lurk
Within a cloud, to hide from you his work?
And, will you work against him, to destroy
That preservation, which you might enjoy,
By living to behold that saving-health,
Which he was bringing to this Commonwealth?
Have you concluded never to retire
In your Career, till all is on a fire?
And you, and yours, lie sprawling in the plashes
Of your own blood? or, in your Cities ashes?
Or, till you view this goodly spacious frame,
(The work of many Ages) in a flame?
Have you so often heard it said, from him,
(Whose true presages, no man will contemn,
But Reprobates) what miserable Fate
Attends that House, that City, and that State,
Which is divided? Have his Prophecies
So often been fulfilled before your eyes?
And, are they, at this day, so likely, too,
To be, ere long, fulfilled upon you;
And, yet, will you a new-division run,
As if you studied how to be undone?
Or, as if you resolved on that path,
Which to avoid, even GOD fore-warned you has?
Have I my self, by GOD's permission, too,
So often told you, what you would mis-do,
What courses you would follow; what, reject?
Fore-shown you plainly, what it would effect,
If you did otherwise? Have you often seen
Those things fulfilled, which foretold have been,
And spoken of them? Nay, have you often read,
And descanted on that which I have said,
And jeered my predictions? yet, will you
In every circumstance fulfill them now?
Shall I be made (as me in scorn you call)
A Prophet, as it were, in spite of all
Which I fore-shewed you, with an intent,
That you might take occasion to prevent
What was foretold; and make my true predictions.
By penitencie, to appear but fictions?
Have you cracked all my Almonds? And (instead
Of making them a means of taking heed
What course you steered) so acted, as if you,
From them, had took occasion to pursue
Forbidden paths? that, future times may know
GOD'S providence was pleased to fore-show
What would be done by men impenitent,
Though warnings do precede their punishment?
But, let that pass, which cannot be undone;
And, to prevent, what you, as yet, may shun,
Let me upon the credit gotten from
Things past, find means from perils yet to come,
Your City to preserve; and, let me lose
Or thrive, as I to you shall things propose
To be considered on, without design,
For any private, or base end of mine;
Or to contribute strength to any Faction,
Or, weaken any Party now in action,
But as relating to the preservation
Of this endangered City, State, or Nation.
Have you considered rightly of the cause
Which on your City, this engagement draws?
And rightly weighed it, with all circumstances
Thereto belonging; and what it is advances
Your quarrel to this height? or how you find
Those Leaders, by their principles inclined,
Whose prudence you depend on? do you know
How dim the sight of wisest men may grow
By private interest, or by respect,
To those men whom they malice, or affect,
Or to opinions? If not, have a care
How you engage: especially if war
Be like to follow. For, we daily see
By those discourses which divulged be
By disagreeing parties; that, when they
Each others writings happen to survey,
At every page they seem to take offense,
And judge it void of learning, truth, or sense;
When he that is as wise, and in his ways
Unbiassed, peruseth it with praise.
Have you considered, seriously, how strong
Your foes may prove? how chargeable, how long
This war may be? who, shall the cost defray?
How willingly the Citizens will pay
That aid which you may need, when they are made
Unable by a long decay of trade?
Yea, when so many thousands want their bread,
Who were by constant labor daily fed,
And, shall consume their lives, or strength away,
By watchings, and hard duty, night and day?
Have you well-weighed, for how long a space
Provisions may be stopped from this place?
How greatly, Famine may increase your charge?
How, want, and nastinesse, may then enlarge
The Pestilence begun? how much, the three
Dissenting Parties, which among you be,
Your troubles may augment? Or, do you know,
When you advanced are, to meet a foe
Without your walls, what mischiefs may begin
By means of some, whom you must leave within?
Especially, when poverty extreme,
Revenge, or avarice, has tempted them,
By unexpected opportunities,
To act things for their own advantages?
Are you, in these particulars, assured,
To be, at each extremity, secured?
Have you conceived, how truly miserable
You shall be rendered, if you prove unable
To overcome? And, though you victors be,
How little comfort thereof you may see
When you have summed up, what you shall lose?
And (by removing them) what other foes,
You may make way for, to the consumation
Of all the strength, and glory, of this Nation?
Yet, once again, look down into that hell,
Wherein you are preparing now to dwell:
Can you suppose, that all, whom you intend
To arm, your Cause, and City, to befriend,
Will act as you expect? Or, think you, they
Can do, as much for you, as they can say?
Can you, by any caution, be assured,
Your goods and families will be secured
From your own Party? Or, your persons free
From outrage, when, among you, there shall be
A general confusion, and their need?
And yours, shall daily new distractions breed?
Which every day, and week, will still grow greater,
Till your afflictions have advised you better?
Can you believe, that all your power and wit,
(Which make small show of such effects, as yet)
Shall able be, by force, or, gentle ways,
To conjure down the spirits you may raise?
Or, draw a circle, or provide a charm
So strong, that none of them shall do you harm?
Have you some works, which fain you would have done,
For your own ends? and, think you, they have none?
Or, that, they who did slight a greater power,
Will conscience make of trampling upon your?
Or (if provoked) of treading on you, too,
When they dislike of any thing you do?
Can you conceive, that though you armed were
Against all those whom you abroad may fear,
That, in your streets, your houses, (nay, within
Your chambers) there will not (as there has been)
A Party be, which will assay to make
Your hopes abortive, if this course you take?
Yea, multiply your sorrows, till the event
Grow desperate? Or, you too late repent;
And, shall be overwhelmed with disorders,
Fears, outcries, violences, flames, and murders?
Do you believe, those listed Reformadoes,
Who puff you up with vauntings and bravadoes?
(Mistake me not; I purpose no disgrace
To all (who now abiding in this place,
Are cast out of imploiment) do you think,
Those, who are most courageous in their drink?
Those, of the roaring Frenchified-Rout,
With untruss'd breeches, with shirts hanging out,
And Codpeeces beribanded about
With partie-colour'd Inkle? Or, that those
Apprentices, who late in tumults rose,
And, without check (to your perpetual shame)
To force th'unguarded Senate, rudely came,
(And foamed raging fury at their door,
Like billows beating on the patient shore)
Think you, that such as these ordained have been
To save you from the fears that you were in?
To be Deliverers, do you believe
These likey? or, are those, who to receive
New entertainment (and perhaps old pay)
Have only aimed at, such like men as may
Be so reli'd upon; as, to engage
Your City now, a second war to wage?
If so; Oh! be more cautious, be more sage.
Oh, where! where now, is all that piety,
That prudence, and that Christian charity,
Which you pretended to? where is that care
Of public safety which did once appear?
Where is that conscience of the preservation
Of your own families from desolation,
Which does or should in every Christian dwell,
That is not far below an Infidel?
Oh! be not wilful in the prosecution
Of an unfit and frantic resolution,
Which, doubtless, by the malice of the Devil
(And by his instruments) is now for evil
Instilled into you; that, he might make void
Those hopes, which we, e're this time, had enjoi'd,
If want of faith, and love, to one another,
Endangered not our perishing together.
Be, therefore, well advised, what will ensue,
Before this cursed war you do renew?
Be not deluded, or provoked by those
Who care not how your City they expose
To hardship, and to hazard: For, it may
Endanger all; if J know what I say.
Invite you not, from every quarter, hither
Those plagues, and those confusions, altogether,
Of which most places now have had a taste;
Lest, all the storm descend on you at last;
And you constrained be to swallow up
The very dregs of their most bitter cup,
As you by Riddles, intimation had;
Though you of them, out small account have made;
And, as all use to do, whose sins are ripe,
And, take no warnings, till they feel the stripe.
Regard not, what your flatterers pretend,
But, rather, hearken to your faithful friend,
Who plainly does foresee, the sad effects,
To which your course intended, now directs.
Be, yet, persuaded, your own selves to pity;
Your friends, your little ones, your wives, your City;
And do not unadvisedly fulfill
Your foes designs; by your perverted will:
What is it to me, what course you pitch upon,
Who to the world-ward wholly am undone,
And ruined already, by neglects,
Of justice, on the one side; and by the effects
Of war, on the other? and, whose cheef wealth lies
In those things, which the world does most despise?
And which (I hope) till I my life shall finish,
Nor peace nor war, nor ought else, shall diminish?
What have I got? or what can I obtain
By seeking thus, your madness to restrain,
But their displeasure, who delight in war?
And, my despightfull foes, already are?
The profit will be yours; And, this alone
My recompense will be, that I have done
My duty, in persuading you unto
That, which my heart believes, you ought to do.
Contemn not, therefore, what I now advise,
Though I may seem despised, in their eyes,
Who counsel otherwise. Seek to be quiet;
And, add this short-receipt unto your diet:
To qualify your selfe-destroying-rage,
Take, Time, Rue, Patience; and as much of Sage
As may be needful: Then, mix speedily
All these ingredients, and, them so apply
As you have often been taught; So, GOD shall cure
Or qualify this English-Calenture;
Which is, an Epidemicall disease,
That, on this nation, every where does seize,
As did the Sweating Sickness: If we may
Confide, in what Chronologers do say.
Why will ye perish and endanger all
Your neighbors; and, three Kingdoms by your fall,
Since you may shun it, and be safe and blessed?
A refuge, to the needy, and oppressed?
What moves you, that, to escape a fear,
You fly into a mischief, or a snare?
What is it makes you fear, where no fear is,
And, fearelesse of true dangers, but, even this,
That, neither of GOD'S threats, you awefull grow;
Nor love your neighbor, as you ought to do?
Some of you, have, it seems, a thirst for blood,
And, peradventure, for that reason, GOD
Will give them blood to drink. Their heart is far
From peace; and, he will come to them, in war.
The sons of Consolation have been scorned;
And, therefore, he his Messengers has turned
To sons of thunder, who, as they desire,
Will speak to them in Sulphur and in Fire.
A Spirit of detraction, and of lying,
On paper-wings, among you has been flying,
Till, as it seems, GOD has, for that offense,
Exposed you to a reprobated sense,
Believing lies; and, to an Appetite
Bewitched with a gluttonous delight
In blasphemies, and falsehoods; which are vented
For every mornings breakfast, newly minted:
And, that gross diet, has begot in you
Those evil humors, which distemper, now,
Your Bodie-Politike; and makes your Peace
Disrelish, by a loathsome nauseousnesse.
You may, perchance, believe, by their delusions,
Who have abused your trust, to your confusions,
And their own shame; that, you your selves are banding,
For Christ his Kingdom: And, arm, for withstanding
Of his opposers: But, take heed, I pray,
Lest you prove, rather, to be such as they,
Who, think they do GOD service, when they spill.
The blood of those, who seek to do his will.
I will, and must acknowledge, that in you
There is a zeal: But, this is also true,
That, most of you have not obtained, yet,
That knowledge, which true Zealots does befit.
Religious, I confess, you are; and, so,
The Jews were too, when GOD did overthrow
Their greatest City; yea, they never seemed
So worthily devout to be esteemed,
(According to their Law) yet, then GOD shook
Their whole foundation, and quite from them took
That Law, and place, for which they did not spare
Their lives, nor ought, which unto them was dear.
Yea, through that means, by which they would prevent
That loss, they lost it: Even when innocent,
And guiltless blood they spilt: And, they who run
Their course, will doubtless fare as they have done.
Your selves therefore delude not, with bare shows
Of sanctity; but seriously dispose
Your minds to charity, that Christian peace
May settled be; and brutish discord cease.
For, all your pious, and your moral works
Are nothing better, then are those of Turks,
Or Pagans, till a will renewed does move
To action, by a principle of love.
You preach; but, preach ye Christ, with less contention,
And, that shall be of strife a good prevention:
You write; but, put less gall into your ink;
And, let not your expressions taste, and stink
Of bitter slanders, to the provocation
Of vengeance, and of furious indignation:
For, when from us unseemingly speeches flow,
Although out cause be right, we are not so.
You fast: But, if you fast not more from strife,
Oppression, pride, and from a wicked life;
Your fastings, never will procure your peace,
But, rather, your confusions more increase.
You pray: But, pray as Phineas did; and we
Shall better fruits of your long-prayer see.
You list your selves, the Army to resist:
But, to be reconciled, have better list
Then you have had: And, seek, and follow more
The likely way of peace, then heretofore.
For, you may conquer more with loving words,
Then with your pistolls, and your naked swords:
And, you shall get more profit and more praise,
Then by those Forces you intend to raise:
And, thousands, who would dying, curse your rage,
Shall live, and bless you, in another age.
What makes you, and our Army now to be,
So jealous of-each other as, we see,
But, even self-love and pride, which you, and they
Pursue in others? Or, because each day
You more and more, in manners grow like them,
Whose guiltiness you rail at, and condemn?
For, most of those, who in these times pretend
To Reformation, do but seem to mend
Their neighbors faults, that, they, thereby, to make
Themselves, and Fortunes, may occasion take;
Yea, zealouslie they labor to remove
And punish Tyrants: But, it may from love,
And not from hate of Tyranny arise,
That, they remove those men who tyrannize.
For, it is done, perhaps, that in the room
Of Tyrants, they, like Tyrants may become;
Else 'twere not possible, that we should see
Suppressed Tyrants, every day to be
Out-vi'd by their Successors; and out-gone
By those, who blamed most, what they have done.
It Is not, because you seek the public good,
That you renew this War: For, letting-blood,
(Especially, now when the Dog-starre reigns)
So near the heart, and in those master-veines,
Now likely to be opened, seems, to me,
Not Physic, but, true butcherie, to be.
It Is not for GOD, that you do now promove
This Quarrel: For, you know, that GOD is Love;
And, when he does engage you in a war,
It always evidently does appear,
How it conduces to the preservation
Of amity, and union, in a Nation;
And that we cannot otherwise avoid
The having of those Freedoms quite destroid,
By which we should conserve it: But, in this
Your quarrel, no such thing apparent is.
It Is not, because one Party does incline
Unto a differing form of Discipline,
Which the other side dislikes, from whence arose
This Quarrel, (though from thence it partly flows:)
For, prudence, wheresoever love remains,
In any measure, tempers or restraines
From all extremes; as you by those may see,
Who moderate in either Party be,
And firm to principles, which do preserve
The essence of our Faith: And, they observe
That your contentions, rather, do arise
From fleshly lusts, and carnal vanities,
Then from that zeal pretended; and, there is none
Will doubt it, if you wilfully go on
In bloud-sned; and, endeavor not for grace,
To make your fury, give discretion place.
It Is not the fallings, or the imperfections
Of your opinions, but, of your affections,
Which heightens discords; and a will to please
Backsliding Demas, and Diotrophes,
Which has surpised you. It Is a disregard
Of Justice, in chastisements, and reward,
And, that respect of persons, which each side
Is guilty of; if both be not beli'd.
For, if by simptomes, I the truth may gather,
The City, and the Army too, had rather
Adventure their safe being (by denial
Of yielding up their minions to trial)
Then to permit, that Justice shall proceed
Impartially. Both are, it seems, agreed,
What ever their well-willers do propose,
To save their Malefactors, though they lose
Themselves, and all their Tribe, (as, for that crime,
The Benjamites once did, in former time)
And (which more aggravates) even thus they do,
Though they have seen the King, for doing so,
Set half beside his Throne; And, though they see
This Parliament, endangered to be,
Even for the selfsame fault: So hard a thing,
It is, even for the best of men, to bring
Their wills, and their affections, to submit
To justice, though they cannot fly from it.
But, they will still be trying to avoid
Her just injunctions, till they be destroi'd,
And hence, hence, chiefly flows all those factions,
Those mischiefs, discords, and all those distractions,
That are among us; And, he that assayes
To show them the disorder of their ways,
(And their unsafenesse) though with no intent,
But, their, and your destruction, to prevent:
Or, when he minds them of it, though he spares
Their persons; And the matter so prepares,
By couching it in generals, that they
Who are to blame, correct their errors may,
Without disgrace; yet, they return him still,
Unkindnesses (at least) for his good will;
Deprive him, of his freedom, or estate;
Eclipse his credit, or his person hate;
Or, at the best, regard what he has spoke,
No more then does a Starve, or a block.
And, ten to one, when some of those do hear
These motives unto peace; they, will go near
To question it before Authority,
As if I had enfeebled much thereby,
The peoples hands. The Jews, to this effect,
In such a case, did spightfully object
Against the life of Jeremy; but, he
Who saved him then, will do the like for me.
Oh! let the City; Let our Army too,
Consider wisely, what they have to do;
And, that, among the best, are imperfections
Which call to us, for brotherly affections
To cover them; and, helps, to cure them, rather,
Then Instruments to seek, or, Arms to gather
To spoil each other. It Is our Ignorances
And want of, love and meekness which advances
Our spleenes against our brethren. We so long
Have, at each other, bitter-speakings flung.
And shot the Arrows of revising words;
That, they provoke us, to unsheath our swords,
And, execute; before it does appear
Which party is to blame; and which is clear:
Or, whether any cause may be perceived,
Why both (though guilty) may not be reprieved.
Their party, or their single interest
Does, often, so biasse men from what is best
For them to practice: And, vain policy
In outward seeming, does appear so nigh
To blameless prudence; that it draws them on
To think injustice warrantable done:
Or, that, (at least) it warrants them to think,
They, at injustice, in their own, may wink:
Especially, if they conceive, it may
From any good design, take strength away.
And this false principle, and wrong proceed,
Made thereupon, much injury does breed.
This makes, the Presbyterian-Party mad,
That, any of their side, though never so bad,
Should questioned be. This, also blinds them so
From seeing what it does invite them to,
That it has rend'red them much willinger
To hazard all by a renewing-war,
Then, leave them to that trial, which perchance
Would clear them; And their innocence advance.
This makes many, on the other side,
As partial, and unable to abide
That, their partakers, should with ought be charged:
Whereas, had their impeachments been enlarged
With such of their own party, who, by fame
Proclaimed are, to be no less to blame,
Then some accused; And, of whose offense,
They might have got as good intelligence;
It had prevented all those jealousies,
Which from their seeming partialities,
Have lately sprung; and, which will be removed,
When they, who so advised, have improved
Their counsel into practice; As e're this
It had been done; but, that, you know there is
A Remora in most things; and, that some
To all good motions, opposites become.
Had they (as I presume they mean to do)
Cast resolutely off, all leaning to
That, which their party does denominate,
And, only sought the settling of the State,
According to the Laws; and how to bring
An Union 'twixt the people and the King,
By bringing all, indifferently to bide
Th'impartiall Test, by which they should be tried;
It had, before this day, a period set,
To our chief troubles. And, this peace is, yet,
But, for a time, deferred; unless you mar
That future blessing, by a present war.
Demur, therefore, a while, e're you pursue
Those thoughts or actions, which your hearts may rue,
Do not false courage from those vap'rings take,
Or, those high-flying vaunts, which they do make,
Who would engage you; though, with fair preten
To reason, justice; and with confidence,
They would beguile you. For, no men appear
More arrogant, more bold, or less to fear
Then they, whom GOD infatuates, rejects,
And gives over unto those effects,
Which their own wit to put in action those,
As in despite of what he does propose.
Let not those foolish, fruitless, policies,
(Those impudent and those truth-seeming lies)
Which they on all occasions do invent,
As their most useful gin and instrument
To work their ends; Let not these draw you to
Their course, from that, wherein you ought to go:
For, they do but delude you. When ye hear
That, they give out, the Counties will appear
To be your aid; believe it not, till you
Perceive them coming: For, they do not know
Your Quarrel; neither why you should oppose
Your most deserving Friends, as greatest Foes.
When you shall hear them, for the King pretend,
That, they may draw his party, to befriend
Their new design. Or, when they cry, The King!
The King! The King! with promises to bring
His person hither; and make show to settle
Your peace by him: Believe them, but a little,
For, they who so pretend, do neither dare
To bring him hither; neither able are.
And, though they were; The King so well descries
Where, his best play, and chief advantage, lies;
What, with his principles, may best agree;
Why, they, who would not have him, willing be
To have him now: Yea, so to him it is known,
Who for the public ends; who, for their own,
Restrain him, or enlarge him; whom to trust;
Who, firm, or fickle were; who false, or just,
Either to him, or others; And, has made
So many proofs, of things whereof he had
No trial heretofore; that, well I know,
His bought experience will permit him, now,
To trust to none but them, whose honesty
Is their chief honor, and best policy:
And, when GOD has inclined him, so to do;
He shall trust us, and we shall trust him too.
That, this Conjunction may not be prevented,
Let that, which you determine, be repented.
Quench, ere too late, the fire which is begun;
And, lest, to be unquenchable it run,
Remove the fuel; power upon the flame
True penitential tears; And, grow more tame,
More wise, more charitable, yea, more meek;
And, in GOD'S grace, your peace and safety seek:
Which, cannot be expected, whilst with them,
You are at variance, who are dear to him;
Or, whilst you those resist, whom he does call
To do his work; although, perhaps, they shall
Not do it for his sake, as they pretend;
But, for their own, and some unworthy end.
By, generally, shutting up your shops,
Make not a sad obstruction, in the hopes
Of your subsistence; which, will over-soone
Consumed be, though that were left undone:
For, by this Stratagem, your Politicians,
Will but accelerate their own perditions,
By heightning of their fury, who thereby,
Shall feel the gripes of helpless poverty:
Use, rather, what good means your wits afford
As well to keep off hunger, as the sword;
That, you may have a being, till GOD please
To consummate the cure of this disease.
Take heed, what those good Priests, and Prophets say,
Who preach to you, a charitable way,
Unto your peace; And, do not be beguiled
By those, who counsel to divide the Child;
But, trust unto his wisdom, and his doom
From whom, the sentence, on your ways, must come:
And if you needs will armed be, put on
(As you ought, long ere this time, to have done)
The Christians complete Arms. For, then, if you
Shall be destroyed, so, will I be too.
If, for the publike-weal, that Host appear,
Of whose intents, you seem to stand in fear;
You have no cause of dread. If, they conceal
A private aim, beneath a public zeal;
Or veil their pride, their Avarice, or hate,
With Godliness, or service to the State;
If they shall seek, one faction to suppress;
Indulge the wicked, or the wickedness
Of their own party; And, proceed, as tho
God would not heed, what they unjustly do;
Then, God himself against them shall appear;
And, for your Cities guard, a standard rear:
A buckler he shall weild, and interpose
'Twixt you, and them, to ward away their blows:
Then, he shall save you from their cruelty,
And, be avenged on their hypocrisy,
Without your guilt: And, crumble them, till they,
With all their hopes, and glories, fume away;
As theirs have done, who out of grace were thrust,
In former times, for their abused trust.
And, this will be, successively, the doom,
That shall on all our false Reformers come,
Till all such perish; and, till such appear,
As, neither will, for profit, love, or tear,
Corrupted be. If, for sinister ends,
You false have played, with your wel-meaning Friends:
If, you, to gain advantages, have straid
From due performing ought, which you have said:
If, out of wilfulness, or, out of pride,
And haughtiness of mind, you thus provide
To give them battle; GOD will find it out,
And punish, till amendment he has wrought.
Yea, both of you, if both of you shall be
Alike perverse, alike reward will he.
But, hark! a strong Alarm I do hear,
The Army, you so dread, is drawing near,
And, will not long be hence; I will therefore
(Before the Drums beat, and the Cannons roar
Too loud for them to hear me) now direct
Some words to them, in hope of good effect:
For, thousands of them know me: and, perchance,
It may more profit you, then an advance
With all your force against them. Howsoever;
I Will try, how GOD will prosper my endeavor.
Friends of that honored Army, by whom, we
Have had assistance; and, yet hope to see
This War concluded; me with patience hear.
And, to that end, a little while forbear
To prosecute that work, which may be done
Yet soon enough. And, oh! I fear, too soon.
I come with no defiance; nor to bring
A charge against you, touching any thing
Wherein you may be censured to abuse
Your power or trust: For, thereof to accuse,
I neither have Commission, nor intent:
Nor knowledge, have I, were I thereto bent,
Of the determinations, or the ways
Which you pursue; save, as that Rumor says,
Whose contradictions, do so much condemn
Her own Relations, that, I trust not them.
Nor do I blame you, though it be confessed
In your expresses, that you have transgrest
The bounds of Common-Order, in some things:
Because, to me experience, knowledge, brings
Of that Necessity, which lawful makes
What Law forbids: And, that when self-will takes
A lawless Liberty, which may disable
To save the public, by means warrantable,
In ordinary course; the SUMMUM JUS
Of humane nature, then, intitles us,
Unto a rightful freedom, to dispense
With any humane Law, in our defense.
Because, our preservation, is that end,
Whereto all Laws do principally tend.
Now, whether you necessitated were
To such a course, you more concerned are
In weighing it then I; and, better know
Upon what grounds you have conceived so.
I know that such necessities may be;
I know, that they, who feel them, best can see,
How great they are: I, likewise know, that they
And their adherents, who the tyrants play,
Have seldom such necessities confessed,
To light on any, till they were oppressed
Beyond repair; And, therefore, leaving, now,
This matter to be scanned, alone, by you,
And your own consciences; I will present
What, I think, future mischiefs may prevent.
If, therefore, now, among you, any be
Who need it, take this brief advice of me.
If you come armed, not for war, but peace,
And, look, that GOD should your proceedings bless;
Remember those main principles, whereon
You seem to ground, what has, by you, been done.
GOD's glory, public safety, and the Laws,
With your just liberty, were all the cause
Of your engaging; and, therefore take heed,
That, you for no designement, now, proceed,
Of private consequence, least you destroy
The hope of that, which you might else enjoy.
Let, in your sight, your brethrens blood be dear;
Let not the riches of this place, appear
A prize, to draw, or tempt you, further then
Becomes just, and bravely-minded men.
To this renowned City, wherein you
Have many Friends, a true compassion show,
Though she provoked you; know, that nobler, far,
Are Saviors, then an Executioner.
Let Justice have due course, though hand she lay
Upon your Darlings: For, one Achan may
Endanger your whole Camp; and you have seen
How plagued, for Injustice, we have been.
From needless violence, withold your hands,
Let moderation be in your demands;
That, by your actions, they, whose Papers fly,
To your dishonor, may receive the lie.
To utter now unto you, I have more,
Yea, many things material, yet, in store.
But, whilst this line is writing, I am told,
Oh, Line is entered, and our Southerne-Hold.
And, therefore, here I pawse --
These words are vain; and, all, that we can do,
Except, GOD adds his blessing thereunto.
"O LORD! thou great Peacemaker, therefore say,
"Amen to that, for which I now shall pray.
"Out of our present dangers, safety bring;
"Out of our darkness, let thy true light spring;
"Peace, out of these our wars; love, out of hate;
"Out of disorders, a well-setled State.
"Let People, City, King, and Parliament,
"And, all dissenting-parties, now, assent,
"And, so, unite; that, none may them divide:
"Make us well principled; and, so, abide.
"Make us sincerely practice, and profess
"A single-Truth, in simple-Righteousnesse.
"Yea, now, when all the Powers within this Land,
"Are in confusion, and amazed stand,
"Affrighted by each other; now, when sin
"Is like to hazard all; do thou begin
"To work alone; and, raise, thou, out of that,
"A Change, which all the Land shall wonder at.
"And, if my own corruptions be not, yet,
"Too many, such a blessing to permit,
"Mind me in mercy too; And, mind me, so,
"That, they, who have oppressed me, may know,
"I am a Servant, who, to thee, is dear;
"What ever, to the world, I may appear:
"And, hasten that Deliverance, O LORD!
"Which thy compassion shall to me afford:
"For, in my sufferings, I am left alone;
"And, friend, or hope, but thee, LORD! I have none.
Fiat voluntas Dei.

