THE Virtuous Wife: OR, THE HOLY LIFE OF Mrs. ELIZABTH WALKER, Late Wife of A.
Walker, D. D. sometime Rector of Fyfield in Essex.

Giving a modest and short Account of her Exemplary PIETY and CHARITY.

Published for the Glory of God, and provoking others to the like Graces and
Virtues.

With some useful PAPERS and LETTERS writ by her on several Occasions.

London, Printed for N. R. and sold by J. Robinson, A. and J. Churchill, J.
Tailor, and J. Wyat. 1694.

To the Honored Friends of my late Dear Wife, for whose sake chiefly these
things are Written.
Much honored Christian Friends,
THough when I first set upon this Work, I designed to thrust it forth into the
World without any Address farther than the short Introduction with which I
began it, yet when I had finished it I judged it not amiss to premise these few
things following; partly by way of Advertisement, partly by way of Apology.

First by way of Advertisement.

1. That all I relate as hers, as written, or spoken, or done by her, were
exactly hers, not feigned or pretended to be so. I have not writ her Life as
the Roman Historians did the Lives of their Great Men and Heroes, made Speeches
for them, and put Words into their Mouths, rather fit to be spoken by Men of
their Figure and Character, than really spoken by them.

But all that is Comma'd in the Margin is transcribed, verbatim, from her
Writings, which I have showed to many Witnesses, and am ready to show to any
Friend, who shall desire it. And what is related as spoken, is her Words, as
near as my Memory could retain them, at so many Years distance; always the true
sense and substance of what she spoke; and which was often heard by many, besides
my self.

2. The things she wrote she could not have the least prospect they should ever
see the public light; and therefore did not dress them up, to appear with the
best advantage she could have given them.

3. That she was a plain, private Woman, and conversed only with obscure
Persons of low Degree, not to say, as contemptible as our selves, unless it
were now and then, a day or two in a Year some Persons of Honor might
vouchsafe her their Conversation, and therefore just Allowances are to be made,
and too raised an Expectation ought not to be brought to the Perusal of what is
offered; if it be useful to Persons of her Level, it may suffice, and others
ought to exceed her as much in their Improvements as they do in their
Advantages to be improved, and their Opinions of themselves above her.

4. Though some Phrases occur in her Papers or Letters more than once, and may
seem Tautologies now they are put so close together into one piece, yet had not
the least shadow of being so, being written at so many Years distance upon
such different Occasions, and to diverse Persons.

5. Lastly, I pretend not to satisfy those who relish nothing but the flashes
of frothy Wit, elegansie of Elaborate Periods, and a Chime of fine Words, and
modish new Notions; but for solid, experienced Christians who desire to
exercise themselves unto Godliness, and expect what may encourage and assist
them thereto, I humbly hope they may meet an Entertainment which will not make
repeated Perusal dis-agreeable to them, or think their Labor lost.

For Apology, I know it is better not to need any, than to be able to make the
best.

Yet two Apologies seem needful for my self, one for attempting the Work, the
other for performing it no better.

For the first, some know, though I forbear to mention, what put me upon the
Resolution, and I think might be allowed as a fair Excuse.

Admitting it useful, it must be done by my self, or the World have lost the
Benefit of it.

And for the avoiding an Envidious Suspicion, that I design my own Honor
behind the Curtain, and would slily steal a Reputation under Pretense of paying
her Name a just Tribute of deserved Praise. I know the best way to break the
dint of a Blow is to latch it, and meet it halfway, and I could more than
almost spoil such Objections by preventing them, and making them as piquant and
stinging as any would screw them up to be; but when all is done, there is no
Fence against Ill Will, but obligingly to declare, I hope I shall meet with
none, or unconcernedly, that I pity and despise its feeble impotency; and if
any will say, not so rudely as the Captain concerning the young Prophet sent to
anoint Jehu, Wherefore came this mad Fellow? 2 Kings 9.11. Yet what means this
vain Man to write the Life of his own Wife, and thereby insinuate, etc. Jehu's
Answer for him shall suffice me for my self to you, (for, and to whom I write,)
You know the Man and his Communication.

2. Why I have performed it no better? To which I reply first, if I have done
it as well as I could, it is my Infelicity more than my Fault that it is
performed no better.

3. That if I could have adorned it better, yet some Circumstances may excuse
its appearing as it does.

The truth is I begun it in haste, and with some precipitancy, not foreseeing
it would grow up into so great a Bulk or Length; and that I might dispatch it
quickly, began the Impression as soon as a Sheet was ready, and so was forced
to keep pace with the Press, that I could not alter or correct a Line, nor lick
the rudest Features into a better Shape, either for Method or Language, nor
transcribe a Page, or add to the first flowings of my Thoughts or Pen. It Is
said indeed, That Honey is the purest which flows of its own accord, without
pressing of the Combs, (yet even that needs clarifying;) but that Ink is the
palest, and most faint, which swims at the Top, and is poured out without much
shaking of the Bottle. If what I have written this hasty Treatise with be
censured as such, I cannot help it now; I writ most of it at London, or Chelsy,
and the whole in the midst of many Diversions; that it is in a great measure an
heap, not only of first Thoughts, but of sudden ones.

And had I had opportunity of a strict review of the whole, some things I would
have retrenched that are Minute, more I would have added very weighty, most
might have been expressed more politely; yet, take it with all its
disadvantages, though it may be defective in the Ornamental part of its Dress,
it is not so in the Substantial part of its Truth, which is more than the
Ornament, the Life and Soul of History, and with the ordinary measure of
Candor, which I reckon my self bound to allow to others when I read their
Labors; this may pass in the Crowd, and prove neither despicable nor useless,
which is all that is begged or expected, and I promise my self shall not be
denied by you my much honored Friends, to

Your very Humble Servant, Anthony Walker.
May 10. 1690.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. page 3 SECT. I. Of her Birth and Parentage. page 5 An
Account of her Book, out of which most is transcribed, concerning our selves
and Children. Time and Place of her Birth. page 9 Her Parents. Her Father's
early Prudence, and a strange overruling Providence, which brought him to be a
Citizen, which was the spring and occasion of many consequent Mercies to her
and others. page 10 The tenderness of her Spirit when a Child. page 13 A great
fault she was guilty of when young, which was turned to her benefit in future
Caution. page 14 Her Father's great Care of her, and Confidence in her. page 15
SECT. II. How she was first awakened to a deep Sense of Religion by
Temptation. page 17 The first Onset by a blasphemous suggestion. page 18 How
she overcame the Temptation to Atheism. page 19 Her long struggling with
Temptation, and the first glimpse of Comfort. page 20 Kept half a Year by it
without sleep, or very little. page 22 Means of her Recovery, and some gradual
Relief; of which she has an excellent Passage. page 24 Yet she suffered
renewed Onsets. page 25
SECT. III. Of our Marriage; remarkable Passages concerning it. page 27 SECT.
IV. Her Life in concise Epitome. page 30 SECT. V. How she spent a Day. page 32
Rose constantly at Four of the Clock. Spent two hours with God in secret. An
account of the rest till bedtime. page 41
SECT. VII. (For the number Six is omitted by the Printer) How she spent a
Week. ibid. Her exact circumspection, in sanctifying the Lord's Day. Her whole
method in it, to Page 44 Monday Mornings Prayers for the Church of God, which
she constantly observed with great Zeal and Charity, both for all the Foreign
Churches and our own for many years, ever after she had been informed of that
commendable Custom set up in so many Families quite through the Nation. ibid.
Constantly spent Friday, the Passion-day, in Fasting and Prayer; or if she
foresaw Diversion unavoidable on that day, chose one before it. page 48
SECT. VIII. How she spent a Year: Where are set down the Heads of the
following Sections. page 49 SECT. IX. Her Character as a Wife. page 51 -- In
time of Health, to Page 55 -- In times of being Sick, to Page 61
SECT. X. Of her Lyings-in in Childbearing. ibid. SECT. XI. Of the Baptising
our Children. Her very commendable Practice on that occasion. page 64 SECT.
XII. Her Care of the Education of her Children. page 66 to page 82 I give no
touch at the Particulars of this long Section, because I arnestly recommend the
reading of the whole often over, as being very Exemplary and useful.
SECT. XIII. Of monthly Sacraments. Her constant Communicating, and serious
Preparation. page 82 SECT. XIV. Of her Writings. page 84 SECT. XV. Discreet
management of her Family. page 86 SECT. XVI. Visitations by Sickness on our
selves, or some of our Children. page 92 to page 115 This is so large, and has
so many exemplary passages of indefatigable Watchings, fervent Prayers,
gracious Answers, humble Submission to God, that I leave them to the Reader's
own Observation. SECT. XVII. Renewed Assaults of her Enemy by Temptation. page
115 The usual Seasons of which were Indispositions of Mind by Sorrow, or of
Body by Sickness. page 116
Her Methods of Resisting, 1. Conference with Experienced Christians. 2.
Reading suitable Books. 3. Entering her solemn protest against them under her
hand, in appeal to God, which you find, Page 119. with this Title, In time of
Temptation writ by me Elizabeth Walker; followed with a most devout pathetick
Prayer.
SECT. XVIII. Friends she used to pray for by name, and the form of Prayer in
which. page 123 I name those in the Body of the Prayer, but omit to name them
in the Margin, above Thirty Heads of Families, not being set down in order,
according to their Qualities. SECT. XIX. Some trying Calamities on the Nation,
on Friends or Family, and signal Deliverance from Dangers. page 126 The great
Plague, and the number that died. ibid. The Fire, the number of Churches and
Houses burnt. page 127 Other Afflictions on particular Friends. page 12^ On our
selves. page 129 to page 13^
SECT. XX. Of our going to Tunbridge-Wells. ibid My reasons of writing on it.
How she made that plac^ of Divertisment and Hurry, a place of Retirement an^
Vacancy to Devotion. to page 14^
SECT. XXI. Of keeping our Wedding Day, and Ente^tainment of our Friends. ibid
SECT. XXII. Of the Marriage of our only Daughter and her Death in Childbirth
the same Year, yet leaving a Son. page 148. It Is no wonder she wrote so much of
he^ own, who used not to pass by what concerned others, (...) the Lady Mary
Rich, and the Lady Essex Rich, the^^ Marriages, with a devout Prayer for each.
page 149. Th^^ is a large Section, most transcribed from her own Papers, full
of most excellent Devotion, and humble Submission to God's smarty blow, to page
161. And then (...) most pathetick tenderness to the Dear Child. page 16^ SECT.
XXIII. Acts and Kinds of her great Charity ibid An account how it might be
called her Charity, though she were a Wife, and great Charity by which she
gave, though all she had to give were, in truth, but little. I allowed her what
my small Estate would afford, all she gave of that was properly her own
Charity, and mine also, in several respects, might properly be called here is, to
page 171. She gave considerably more every Year out of her allowance, than she
spent upon herself. She would buy Cloth from London by the whole piece to
Clothe the Poor, cause strong Linsey-woolsey to be made, to give away; employ
the Poor who wanted Work; never buy any thing too cheap of the Poor People,
etc. was bountiful to her poor Relations. page 175 Yet never reproached her
self or me, by a sordid garb but secured her own decency with great Prudence,
while she relieved the Poor with great Charity. page 176 Her Charity in Pains
was next to that of her Purse, in getting and using her skill in Physic and
Surgery, and Women laboring with Child. page 180 Her forgiving Charity.
page 181 Her Moderation toward them who were not of the same Communion. page
182 to page 185
SECT. XXIV. Of her care to promote God's Glory and the Salvation of Souls.
page 185 SECT. XXV. Several Graces in which she was most Eminent. page 188.
Knowledge, Faith, Charity, Patience, Sympathy with others, pity to the Poor
Repentance. Reverential Fear of God, Love, Obedience, Sincerity, Modesty,
Courage, Meekness, Contentedness, Thankfulness, Tenderness of Conscience,
Improvement of Time, Zeal, Humility. from page 188 to page 209 Her Sickness and
Death. page 210 The APPENDIX. page 232 Directions to her Children concerning
Prayer. page 214 to page 223 Some Heads of Prayer formed according to those
Directions page 224 Marks of a Regenerate Estate. page 229 to page 233 A
Consolatory Letter written to the Right Honorable Isabella Countess of Radnor,
upon the surprising Death of her dearly-beloved Daughter, the Lady Essex
Specot. page 234 to page 246 Another Consolatory Letter, written to a good
Christian Friend under Trouble. page 246 An account of the Care she took of
young Scholars which came to live in my Family, page 247. As it should be,
though mis-printed page 227. Two Letters, in part, which she wrote to one of
them, to stir him up to Faithfulness in his Ministry. page 250 A good Letter to
a Country Farmer, who Married her Kinswoman, which I hope may be useful to all
my plain Parishioners. page 258 A very large, but excellent Letter, writ to her
dear Grandchild, about two Months before she died, which I hope may be very
useful to young Gentlemen of the like Age. page 270 The Conclusion. page 296
It is not needful to run over the whole, to amend the Mis-printings, which
are not many, nor great. Prayers for Praises; Amnestry for Amnesty; revenerable
for venerable; Glassock for Glascock, page 258. and a few like, are all I
remember, and some Mis-pointings.

THE HOLY LIFE OF Mrs Elizabeth Walker.
The INTRODUCTION.
I Am not so short sighted, as not to foresee the Censures I may expose my self
to, by this Undertaking, especially if it fall into the Hands of such, as are
prone to make sinister Interpretations of other Men's Actions, and receive with
the left hand, what is most innocently offered with the right.

Yet considering it would be very ill becoming that endeared Affection I always
bore to her living, and owe to her precious memory now God has bereaved me of
her, to baulk a Duty, and neglect an Office, which may be as useful to others,
as kind to her, upon such fears: I shall freely run that hazard, to perpetuate
her Memory with just Honor, and deserved Praise; but principally to glorify
God for that abundant Grace vouchsafed to her, and to carry on that Work her
Heart was so intensly set upon; that is, the promoting God's Interest in the
World, and the good of Souls. That the Bushel of unkind silence, and sudden
forgetfulness may not be whelmed over so burning and shining a Light, whose
Heat and Luster may warm and enlighten others, though set upon so low a
Candlestick, as my hasty Pen must place it on.

I willingly wave an obvious Preface, of the usefulness and efficacy of good
Examples, to enlarge on which, it may elsewhere appear, I am not wholly
unfurnished, because I design the concisest brevity; and for the same reason I
shall pass by what concerned her in all other regards, but those the Title Page
suggests, or touch them no farther than seems necessary for decency and order's
sake, to introduce what I mainly and indeed solely design in this Essay, that
those who read it, may more fully know of whom these things are spoken. To
effect which, I shall begin with an Account of her Parentage and Birth, left
under her own hand.

SECT. I. Of her Birth and Parentage.
BEfore the Transcribing of which, I shall premise thus much concerning her
Papers, from which I am chiefly furnished for this work. I sometimes coming
into her Chamber, when she was Writing, she would slide her Book or Papers into
the Drawer of the Table on which she wrote; and this having happened several
times, she one day, on the like occasion, bespake me thus;

My Dear, let me beg one promise from thee; Which when I had assented to,
having demanded what it was, she replied, That I would never look into the
Books and Papers in that Drawer, so long as she lived. So tender was she rather
to improve her time well, than to have it known, even to my self, how well she
spent it. Which promise, as she fully acquiesced in, was on my part most
faithfully made good.

Since her Death, amongst her many most useful, excellent, and pious Writings,
I found a large Book in Octavo, of the best Paper she could buy, neatly bound,
gilded, and ruled with red, provided for the use to which she so well employed
it.

On the second Page of which I find thus written; Elizabeth Walker her Book,
all writ with my own hand, though the Character does vary, I striving to write
a little deeper, my sight growing weaker; I say, there is not one Syllable,
which I have not writ with my own hand.

In this Book, from the beginning at one end, in about two third parts of it,
are written many excellent Instructions and religious Directions, for the use
of her two Daughters, who were then living, to teach them how to serve God
acceptably, and promote the Salvation of their Souls: Which I shall have
occasion often to refer to, and to transcribe many Passages out of it, in the
sequel.

The other End bears this Title; Some Memorials of God's Providence to my
Husband, Self, and Children.

Then she begins thus; My Husband was born, etc. and so gives a very exact
Account of my Parentage, Family, Education, and many signal Mercies and
Diliverances vouchsafed me before she knew me, of which she had informed her
self at several times, by enquiries of me, and Discourses with me, I suppose to
inform our Children after us, That the Generation to come might know them, even
the Children which should be born, who should arise and declare them to their
Children: That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of
God; but keep his Commandments: As the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. lxxviij. 6, 7.
And after every one of them testifies the sense of a very pious grateful Mind,
in such Expressions as these; Blessed be God for his Mercy to him then, and in
his farther goodness to me therein -- for which merciful Providence I bless
God -- Blessed be God that upheld him in it, and delivered him from it, etc.

I can scarce obtain of my self to add more on this Head, yet begging the
Candor of the Christian Reader, I will venture to subjoin the last Passage,
which in this Paragraph concerns my self, because it savours no less of pious
Gratitude to God, than most endearing kindness toward me.

When he was ready to commence Master of Arts, good Bishop Brownrigg commended
him to worthy Doctor Gauden, to teach Mrs. Mary Lukenor, Dr. Gauden's Wife's
Daughter, who was afterward the Wife of my Lord Townsend, and died Childless.
After Three Years spent in that Employment, and assisting Dr. Gauden in the
Ministry at Bocken, my Dear came to be Household Chaplain to the good and noble
Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick, at Leez, where he received many
Mercies; the chief to be esteemed, the Crown God was pleased to give to his
Ministry, in the Conversion of the then Lady Mary Rich, since the Right
Honorable Countess of Warwick: A most incomparable Woman in all Ornaments of
Nature and Grace, and his most sincere and entire Friend, whom I beseech God in
his infinite Goodness to preserve, and crown with all his Mercies.

Excuse the pathos of a grateful Mind, which cannot refrain crying out
concerning these two holy Women. Never Man had better Friend than the one, or
better Wife than the other. Blessed be my gracious God for his great Kindness
to me in them both.

After Three Years continuance in that Family, upon the Death of Dr. Read, my
Lord presented my Dear to Fyfield in Essex, a competent good Living and
Subsistence, blessed be God for it. Good Lord crown his Ministry there, with
the Success of the Conversion and Bringing in their Souls to the Obedience and
Knowledge of Jesus Christ. Give him abundance of the Graces of thy Holy Spirit,
and store his Heart with the Treasuries of thy heavenly Truths, and continue my
Dear Husband a faithful, painful, able Labourer in thy Vineyard.

If what I have thus far touched may savor of any Vanity, the modesty of what
I have past over may excuse the Error, at least to them who may see the
Original Manuscript.

Now to return to her of whom I write; she proceeds,

I was Born at London, in Bucklersbury, on Thursday the 12th. of July, in the
Year of our Lord 1623, and Baptized the 20th. Day of the same Month. The Lord
vouchsafing me a reception into the visible Church of Jesus Christ, when he
most justly might have suffered no Eye to pity me, but have cast me out, to the
loathing of my Person, in my original Defilement, and Stains of my sinful
Nature. But to my first admittance, good Lord, enable me to ascend, that being
a Member of thy Church militant here on Earth, I may attain to be one of thy
Church triumphant in Heaven

My Dear Father was Mr. John Sadler, a very Eminent Citizen, and of a most
generous, loving, and charitable Disposition; and a most tender Father to me,
and a kind Father-in-Law to my Husband. He was born at Stratford upon Avon in
Warwickshire, where his Ancestors lived.

My Grandfather had a good Estate in and about the Town. He was of a free and
noble Spirit, which somewhat out-reach'd his Estate, but not given to any
Debauchery I ever heard of.

My Father's Mother was a very wise, pious, and a good Woman, and lived and
died a good Christian.

My Father had no Brother, but three Sisters, who were all eminently Wise and
good Women, especially his youngest Sister, who married my Father's Partner in
Trade; a religious good Man.

In process of time my Father was desired to change his single estate;
accordingly a Match was provided for him, but he, by God's Providence, approved
not of it.

His Father then provided him good Clothes, good Horse, and Money in his Purse,
and sent him to make his Addresses to a Gentlewoman in that Country. But he
considering well how difficult a married Condition was like to prove, his
Father having reduced his Estate from about 400 l. a Year to 80. His own
Prudence, but especially God's good Providence overruling his mind, instead of
going a Wooing he joined himself to the Carrier, and came to London, where he
had never been before, and sold his Horse in Smithfield; and having no
Acquaintance in London to recommend him, or assist him, he went from Street to
Street, and House to House, asking if they wanted an Apprentice; and though he
met with many discouraging Scorns, and a thousand denials, he went on, till he
light on Mr. Brokes bank, a Grocer in Bucklersbury; who though he long denied
him, for want of Sureties for his Fidelity, and because the Money he had (but
Ten Pounds) was so disproportionable to what he used to receive with
Apprentices, yet upon his discreet account he gave of himself, and the Motives
which put him upon that Course, and promise to compensate with diligent and
faithful Service, what ever else was short of his Expectation, he ventured to
receive him upon Trial, in which he so well approved himself, that he accepted
him into his Service, to which he bound him for Eight Years, to which he
willingly submitted, though he was then full Twenty-one Years old; and there he
served a faithful and laborious Apprenticeship, but much liked of his Master
and Mistress: And after served him Five Years Journey-man; they not being
willing to part with him. In which time he had his Master's leave to Trade for
himself in Drugs and Tobacco, by which he left Grocery, and was by Trade a
Druggist in London. And by that Profession God blessed my dear Father with a
very plentiful and good Estate, with which God gave him a bountiful Mind, and
liberal Heart, to do much good to his Relations, and others.

My Dear Mother, Mrs. Elizabeth Sadler, was the Daughter of Mr. Dackum,
sometimes Minister of Portsmouth. Also my Grandmother Dackum was a very wise
and prudent Woman.

In my Infancy I was very sickly, and of a weakly Constitution. Blessed be God
for the Love and Care of Parents and Friends in my Childhood Estate.

She was her Parents first Born, after Five Years Marriage, and despair of
having Children, which rendered them exceeding tender of her; and yet was she
well nigh starved at Nurse, at Lusam in Kent: For though her Parents sent so
bountifully, besides the Nurses Wages, as might near maintain the Family, yet
have they found the Meat they sent ready to stink, for want of dressing.

In my fuller Age I was of a pensive Nature God saw it good that I should bear
the yoke in my Youth, but I did not consider the hand that put it on.

When I was Young the Lord was pleased to deliver me from many Casualties.
After naming them she always concludes with Praises -- Blessed be his
preventing Mercy -- Blessed be God that preserved me in that danger -- And such
like.

If St. Augustin's confessing of his robbing an Orchard be so much approved,
why may not I touch so small a thing as I meet with here, which shows the
tenderness of her Spirit?

When I was a Child, my Mother would send me where she less trusted my Sisters:
In what I might fail, I cannot call to mind; but I remember she sent me where
she kept her Apples; they suited my childish Appetite, I took one, I could not
keep it, but thought I had stole it; I went back, unlocked the Door, but with
some regret laid down the Apple. Blessed be restraining Grace.

But I must pass over a great many things for brevity, which might be useful
unto others, and are very pleasant to my self in reading, for the savory sense
of pious Gratitude which all along breaths in them; yet I will not hide the
greatest fault I ever knew her guilty of, in my own observation, or find her
charge her self with, either in her Book or Diary.

Having written many things which I pass by, and last concerning the burning of
her Father's House, she thus proceeds. About half a year after the Fire (which
was when she was about Thirteen or Fourteen years old) my Father had a great
fit of sickness, which held him a quarter of a year, and in great danger of
Death: In which time of his sickness, I, poor wretched Creature, through a
sudden surprise and provocation, spoke a wicked word to a superior, of which my
Father was informed, and most justly very angry with me. I being exceedingly
afraid, and ashamed to confess what or to whom I had spoke, dreading my
Father's displeasure, denied it. Good Lord pardon this Transgression, with the
aggravations of it. O Lord, I thank thee for thy patience, forbearance and
long-sufferance extended to me. Thou might most justly have stopped my corrupt
breath, and allowed me neither space nor time of Repentance. I beseech thee
with this abhorred provocation, forgive all my relative Sins. Good Lord pardon
my Sins of Childhood, Youth, riper Age, single estate, married condition,
wheresoever, whenever, against whomsoever committed; that they may not shame
me in this world, nor confound me before thee, when I shall appear at thy
Tribunal.

The abhorrency she had of this fault was so great, that I firmly believe she
never knowingly spoke an untruth after to her dying day. So gracious, faithful
and able is our good God to bring Good out of Evil, and by setting home the
smart of one Sin, to prevent the committing of the like for ever after.

After many passages of God's goodness and her Father's indulgent kindness to
her, which I omit, I meet with this evidence of her Father's confidence in her
Prudence and Integrity; That keeping a petty Cash for him of an Hundred Pounds
or more, he would not so much as read over the particulars charged, as
disbursed for her self, but would say, 'Pray thee take at any time what thou
need: By which freedom, I bless God, I was not made lavish, but more
sparing. Lord, I bless thee for the indulgent Care and Love of a Parent. How
much more will thou give good things to them that ask thee? and no good thing
will thou withhold from them that walk uprightly.

My Dear Father was very tender of me, and in time of the Civil Wars sent me to
Ipswich for my safety, where I stayed a Year and a Quarter; in which time a
Gentleman of a good Estate in Land, and a Merchant by Profession, had a great
Kindness for me, one whom, in the best of my thoughts, I did then approve; but
in the extension of God's goodness to me, in preventing my future
disappointment, as to things of this Life, by a strange overruling Providence
my Father slighted that offer; two or three Years after the Gentleman decayed
in his Estate by great Losses at Sea.

About a Year after my return from Ipswich I went into Warwickshire, to
Stratford, in both which places I acknowledge I did not improve that vacancy as
I might to better Advantages, but squandered it away vainly, and in idle
Visits, not providing for Eternity with my time. Lord pardon my neglects.

Whilst here, a Gentleman of a very considerable Estate was very importunate
with me for my liking; but though his Estate was a great Temptation to me, I
could not fancy his Person. God's goodness reserving for me my best Choice.

Having thus run over with what brevity I could what is but Prefatory to my
main design, and for that end been forced to omit many things well-worthy to
have been taken notice of, I shall make nearer approaches to what I chiefly
propounded to my self; which is, to represent, though in too faint Colors, the
amiable Beauty of that resplendant Holiness and signal Chatity, with which the
God of all Grace, to whom be all the Glory, vouchsafed to adorn this blessed
Soul.

SECT. II. How she was first awakened to a deep sense of Religion by Temptation.
AND because great and weighty Fabrics, require deep and strong Foundations,
that they may stand firm and last; that God whose work is perfect, thought good
to use that method toward her. He suffered her weary Soul to be dug deep and
long, with sore and great Temptations. And as it is usually said, a Storm makes
a Mariner, a Battle a Soldier, and Temptation makes a Christian. She was
certainly an excellent Christian; and to render her such, she was long buffeted
with horrid satanical Suggestions, and blasphemous Temptations; which not only
made her go mourning all the day long, but many Months and Years; and not only
those fiery and envenomed Darts drank up her Spirits, but brought her Life to
the gates of the Grave, and her distressed Soul to the gates of Hell.

I shall, for the comfort and support of others who may fall into the like
Distress, give the account of it, as set down by her own Pen, which may at
least relieve them against one difficulty which oppressed her very heavily;
that is, she thought her case to be singular, and that never any had been in
the like condition; and one of the first glimpses of comfort which shone into
her dark Soul, was from her good Aunt's acquainting her, that she had had
experience of the like Trials.

When I had been at home about half a Year I grew Melancholy, occasioned by
some discontent, which God was pleased to cure with a smart Corrosive, through
suffering Satan to take advantage of that humor; which affliction swallowed up
all my other troubles.

I going to Prayer, according to my usual custom, before I kneeled down, by an
outward action of my Hand, which was in it self very innocent, and at that time
not irreverent, farther than the Devil made it so, by casting a blasphemous
suggestion into my mind, which looked very hideously upon me: But,
notwithstanding, I prayed without farther molestation at that time. I cannot
remember what notice I took of the Temptation in my Prayer; but when I had
ended my Prayer, my Enemy fiercely assaulted me: I could neither see any thing,
nor hear, or do any thing, but evil Motions were forced into my mind; and
though I besought the Lord, more than thrice, I could not be free from that
affliction.

Sometimes, through my dark and cloudy fancy, I had temptations that there was
no God, which was very vexatious to me. And I, impatient of it, desired to
apprehend a God, all Vengeance and Terror, rather than no God at all.

But the Lord was pleased to obviate that Temptation by my meditating on the
Creation. My Father much loved Flowers, and, as the Season of the Year would
afford, always had his Flower-Pots standing by him, where he sat writing in
his Shop, but then were above in the Parlor window, to which I often went, to
countermine my Temptation, in admiring the curious Works of the God of Nature.
With others there was then in flower a Calcedon Iris, full of the impresses of
God's curious workmanship, which the Lord was pleased to make use of to raise
my poor heart and thoughts to the admiring and adoring of him. Blessed be God
that that Temptation was not above my strength.

In the time of my extremity, I went to Mr. Watson, a good Man, Minister of
Stephen's Walbrook, the Parish wherein we lived. To him I imparted somewhat of
my trouble; he strove to comfort me; I found little ease with my burden; it
grew more heavy; I repented I had made my condition known.

I thought my estate to be singular, and that I should hear Books and Ballads
cried of me about the streets; though I had not acquainted any with my trouble
but only Mr. Watson.

My Father's Sister, my dear Aunt Quiney, a gracious good Woman, taking notice
of my dejected Spirit, she waylaid me in my coming home from the Morning
Exercise, then in our Parish. She surprised me with an inquisitive desire to
know what I ailed; but I not readily informing her, she asked me if I were not
troubled with Temptations. I marvelled at the Question, and then acquainted her
with my Affliction. She, from her own experience in the like case, advised me,
which for the present was a refreshment to me; for before I was not acquainted
with any in the like condition with my self.

Some little time after my dear Father, taking notice of me that I was not
well, but not fully understanding what I ailed, sent for a Physician to me, Dr.
Bathurst, who I hope was a good Man; but I was much troubled at his coming,
though I knew my Father sent for him in his great care and love to me. The
Physician came to me one Morning before I was out of Bed; he perceived my
Distemper to be most Dejectedness and Melancholy: With other talk, he
discoursed very piously with me. I took the freedom to tell him, I thought I
did not need a Physician, and with the expression of my respects, desired him
to forbear coming to me; which the good Man did not take ill, but with good
counsel left me.

It pleased the Lord sometimes to refresh me with those Words of the Psalmist,
Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
thou in God, for thou shall yet praise him, who is thy help, and health of thy
countenance, and thy God. How sweet is this propriety, my God! Lord, where thou
give thy Self, thou give All; and thou who have showed me great and sore
troubles wilt revive me again. Thou have brought up my Soul from the brink of
Hell: Thou will keep me alive, that I shall not go down to the pit of
Destruction.

I desired to go from home into the Country to some private good Family, where
I had no acquaintance; which when my Father knew, he readily granted my
request. My good Aunt understanding my mind, she acquainted Mrs. Watson, our
Minister's Wife, a good Woman, with my desire; by which means I went to her
Father, Mr. John Beadle, an honest worthy good Man: He was Minister of Banston
in Essex.

My dear Father hired a Coaeh, and went with me to Mr. Beadle's, and with the
expression of his tender love, said to me, That I should not want any thing to
do me good, to the one half of his Estate. And he was very bountiful in the
requital of my receipts in that Family. God's goodness to be acknowledged, my
dear Mother then was very kind to me. I lived at Mr. Beadle's half a Year;
where I had the fatherly Care, and Counsel, and Prayers of that good Man, with
the great love of his Wife, a very good Woman, and very kind to me; and the
manifestations of the respects and care of their Children and Servants, in any
thing that might tend to my satisfaction and comfort. The Lord requite it to
them in spiritual Blessings, with the Mercies of this Life.

In my continuance at Mr. Beadle's the Lord afforded me, with other
opportunities and helps, much time in reading and secret Prayer, which through
Grace I strove to improve for spiritual advantage; and humbly hope, for the
sake and merits of Christ, remains upon the file of God's Mercy, for fuller
returns of Grace.

For half a Year I do not know that I slept, if I did it was very little; and
yet I did not want either sleep or health. Blessed be God for his sustaining
and supporting Arm.

If I desired any thing that was grateful to my Appetite, when it was brought
me I durst not make use of it, because I thought it to be the satisfaction of a
base sensual Appetite.

I did eat very sparingly, which, with my much weeping, occasioned me some
little inconvenience, which became habitual.

When I had been at Banston about four months (by God's providence for me) Mr.
Beadle exchanged one Lord's Day with Mr. Walker, then Chaplain to my Lord of
Warwick, at Leez; the first time I saw my dear Husband.

When I had been at Banston half a Year my Father writ to me as to my coming
home; to which I was inclinable, though my Father gave me my liberty: It was in
my thoughts, that I was without natural affection.

Mr. Watson and his Wife being at Mr. Beadle's, and returning to London, I came
home in company with them; enjoying more calm of Spirit than when I went from
home, I bless God.

My Troubles wearing off more gradually, which, to my satisfaction I desired,
if God had seen it good for me, might have been more signal in the discovery
and manifestation of his favor, in my Victory and Conquest of my temptation.

It is not for me to prescribe or limit the Holy One of Israel. If I may take
leave to beg and wait on him, in whom are all my fresh springs, for supply of
Grace and Comfort; if the Lord will give to me, his unworthy Creature, in pence
and half pence, what in bigger sums he sees fit to bestow on others, that my
dependence may be continually on him, I desire to be thankful.

Lord, if thou will not subdue my Enemies at once, yet make them tributaries to
thy Glory, and my spiritual advantage; that these Amorites may be hewers of
Wood, and drawers of Water, useful to me; that I may see my own deficiency,
and thy strength in my weakness: For if thy presence go not with me, I shall
soon desert thy cause; and though I may be assaulted, let me not be overcome;
but seeing the quarrel is thy own, Lord undertake for me in this my military
life here, where there is no cessation of Arms; that I may war a good warfare,
that those my Enemies which now affright me, I may see no more for ever: So
grant Lord Jesus. Amen, Amen.

This minds me of that apposite passage in Dan. x. 10, 11. and very applicable
to her Case, verse. 9. Daniel was asleep upon his face, with his face toward the
ground; then verse. 10 And behold an hand touched me, which set me upon my knees
and the palms of my hands; and then, verse. 11. he says to him, Stand upright.
On which place I meet with this Note; The Lord does not at once restore his
Servants from their frailties, that they by gradual comforts may prize every
drop of Mercy, beings not quickened all at once when they are mortified; but may
be admonished by the remainders of fears and frailties, to keep their hearts
humble, and in continual dependence upon God.

I shall have occasion more than once to touch this doleful string again. It Is
recorded of our Lord, that when he was Baptized, He was driven of the Spirit
into the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, and being forty days tempted of
him, St. Luke iv. 2. then ver. 13. When the Devil had ended all the
temptations, he departed from him for a season. I would be cautiously tender of
making comparisons to that Divine Pattern, yet we remember that St. Paul tells
us, Romans viij. 29. Whom God did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn amongst many
Brethren. And the instance of the likeness betwixt Christ and his Brethren is
placed, Heb. ij. 18. in being tempted.

God restrained her Enemy, (as she always called the Devil both in Speech and
Writing,) sometimes for shorter, sometimes for longer seasons. Sometimes she
hardly stood her ground and kept the field; sometimes she so resisted as to
make him fly; and sometimes, though more rarely, by the help of the God of
Jacob, who taught her hands to war, and her fingers to fight in this spiritual
Combat, (and whom she used to importune to carry on this War at his own charge,
because the quarrel was his own,) she obtained signal and triumphant Victories,
and in the sense of them was filled with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory;
was more than conqueror, through him that loved her, Romans viij. 37.

Yet even after these she would complain, that at some distance Beelzebub, the
God of Flies, like that restless, impudent, and importunate Creature, would
return to Buz, yea, and attempt to blow her mind, especially if there were any
sore place found to light on, any small remisness, or bodily infirmity, which
abated her vigor to resist or keep him off. But I shall leave at present this
more dark and cloudy Scene, and hasten to that which our gracious God of his
infinite Goodness rendered so lightsome and comfortable to us both. Blessed be
his Mercy for it.

SECT. III. Of our Marriage.
WHEN I had been from Mr. Beadle's half a year, and then at Home, my now dear
Husband came to my Father's, and, as a consolatory Friend, gave me a visit.
Some time after he came again and some Months having passed in more frequent
Conversation, God, having determined our mutual love and liking, did
graciously, with the approbation of my Friends, consummate our choice in
Marriage: For which good Providence I bless God.

I was married by Mr. Watson at Hammersmith, on July 23, 1650. my Father and my
Mother, with other Friends, went with me to Hammersmith. The morning was
lowering, with small Rain, and very likely to be a wet day, which was
uncomfortable, and much troubled me: But recollecting my self, my Thoughts
suggested to me, what is matter for these Clouds, if the Sun of Righteousness
shine through them upon us. I had not got to the Waterside, and into the Boat,
but the Sun expelled the Clouds to my comfort; it broke forth and shined with
that vigor and splendour, that to the best of my observation, which had great
impression upon me, I do not know that the Sun disappeared one moment that day,
from the first time I saw it, to the going down of it, but was as clear and
bright a day as ever my Eyes beheld. Thus God was pleased to condescend to my
weakness. Thus far my dear Wife's Pen.

Let me take the freedom to subjoin. The first visit I made to her, with design
to obtain her for my Wife, walking some time alone in her Father's Parlour, in
which lay a fair Folio Bible on a Desk; I casually opened it, and the first
verse I cast my eye upon was Prove. xix. 14. House and Riches are Inheritance of
Fathers, and a prudent Wife is from the Lord, which I have many times
comfortably reflected on since. To which I Will add another good Omen; When I
went to buy a Wedding-ring, the first which was offered to me had this Posie,
Joined in one by Christ alone, which I liked so well, I looked no farther, and
it fitted so exactly for the size, no care or art could have made it fitter. I
am so far from putting any great stress on such little matters, that I can say
with the Psalmist, I hate those who hold on superstitious vanities; yet let me
with due thankfulness remark not the effect, but event and consequent. Our
whole married Estate was like the light of the morning when the Sun rises,
even a morning without Clouds, and as clear shining after Rain. And if ever Man
was blessed with a prudent Wife, I owe the depest acknowledgments to him that
gave me that choice Mercy.

For though God sometimes did us the honor to suffer his own Enemies to
declare themselves ours, he often convinced them, always restrained them, that
they could not considerably hurt us. And when unkind Envy has levelled at us,
it rather recoiled than hit the mark. Blessed be our defense, and the God of
our Mercies. And for the constancy of mutual Affection, if we sometimes
differed in small matters, we never disagreed, or once closed our Eyes to sleep
in Thirty nine years seven months in discontent, or under dissatisfaction on
either part. So graciously did he who joined our hands and hearts turn our
Water into Wine, not only on our Marriage-day, but till the mournful period of
it. Blessed be his loving Kindness for it.

We were in great danger of a short conjugal Society, as will appear from what
next follows.

When we were first married we lived the first Year at Croyden in Surry, with
much love of the People, and with other Expressions of kindness, their great
unwillingness to part with us, my Husband's Ministry being very desirable to
them. The very next week after I was married, there happened a contageous
Disease at Croyden, occasioned by the Nastiness and Stench of the Prisoners,
the Assizes being then kept there, of which Disease both the Judges, some of
the Justices, and many Inhabitants died; my Husband preached at the Assize; he
was both with the Prisoners and the Sick, yet God spared him for farther use
for his Glory. He had some degree of the Disease, but, I bless God, it went off
with Sweating, and some other helps, at my Father's House in London, from
whence we were not then fully removed.

SECT. IV. Her Life in a concise Epitome.
IF I may hitherto seem to any to have forgot my Text, I mean my Title Page, I
beg their pardon, if they think I need it. I shall in what remains keep closer
to it, and might draw her lively Effigies in Miniture, with a Scripture Pensil,
and with few touches truly represent her Icon. Such as these, To her to live
was Christ, and to die was gain. The life she lived in the flesh, she lived by
the faith of the Son of God. Her life was hid with God in Christ. Her life was
a continual Warfare against her restless Enemy. Her life was a course which she
so ran, that she might obtain. Her life was a daily Meditation on Death, and
serious preparation for it. Her life was to follow after peace with men, as
much as in her lay, and holiness, that she might see God. Her life was the
gainful Trade, to sell all to purchase the Pearl of invaluable price, and buy
that oil which might fill her vessel, and feed her trimmed lamp, to meet the
bridegroom of her Soul. Her life was to be so employed, that when her Lord
came, he might say to her, Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into
thy master's joy. In a word, her life was to live Holily, that she might die
Happily, like Enoch, to walk with God, that he might take her; to abide in
Christ, and in her measure to walk as he also walked, to promote God's Interest
in this World, that in the next, she might be ever with the Lord.

But this is to affirm, not to prove; and though I comfortably know all this to
be most true, that is no Conviction to the incredulous World: I must therefore,
and, God assisting, shall produce my vouchers to satisfy others, and to excite
them, and assist them to be like her.

And a brief method occurs to my thoughts to accomplish this also; for our
whole Life being Epitomized into twenty four Hours distinguished into Light and
Darkness, Day and Night, of which the longest Life is but a repetition; or at
most into a Week, dividing its days betwixt God and our selves, what he allows
us and what he reserves to himself. And at utmost into a Year (with what may
occur in such a compass) comprehending Heat and Cold, Summer and Winter, and
vicissitudes of Seasons which begin and end, and begin and end again, and
circulate over and over, till Breath and Time both cease together.

To describe one Day, one Week, one Year of her Life, who was so constant,
even, steady in her course, (I mean in kind and substance, not in degrees and
measures; for she grew in Grace, went from strength to strength, exceeding her
self, forgetting what was behind,) were in some sort to describe her Life in
Epitome. The following Day being parallel to that which went before, and the
succeeding Week the copy of the precedent, only fairer written, and the like of
Years.

SECT. V. How she spent a Day.
I Shall therefore first faithfully relate how she spent a Day; (that is, every
Day.) She always rose early, and lived with the least sleep I ever knew, or
heard of any. Her long and frequent weeping, and sleepless months in the
Agonies of her Temptation, had made it easy to her to be satisfied with little
Rest: But after she had ceased from Childbearing, she constantly rose at four
a Clock, Winter and Summer; I say constantly, when in Health; yea, sometimes
when under Indisposition: When I say constantly, I do not deny but sometimes
she might be prevailed with to lie till Six, or after, but then she at other
times much oftener rose by Three, yea two in the Morning, which much more than
equalled the account to say every day at Four: And yet her Heart was always up
before her, when she awaked she was still with God, darting up Prayers and
Praises to him who gives his Beloved sleep. I confess I have often kindly argued
the case with her, to dissuade her, fearing it would prejudice her Health,
urging that Mercy was required more than Sacrifice, that overdoing was undoing,
and it might turn to disadvantage; then she would reply, Good my Dear, grant me
my liberty; it is the pleasure of my Life, when all is still and quiet, no
disturbance or interruption, but a calm Serenity, and silent Stilness, to enjoy
my self; and when I have told her she shamed, and by her Practice upbraided my
Sloth, who slept much longer, she would answer, Thy Constitution will not bear
it, and thou have nothing to divert thee, but may be alone all day in thy
Study, but my Family-Imployment and Inspection requires my care and attendance;
and if I lose my Morning, and break my measures, it renders me uneasy, and
puts me into an huddle all the Day.

When she had slightly slipped on her Clothes, she would go softly into the
Chamber, which she called the Chamber of her choice Mercies, and beloved
retirement, and without calling of a Servant, kindle her own Fire, having
Charcoal or Dry-wood laid ready, and so she spent two hours at least with God;
and then at Six, or after, would she call her Maids, and duly hear one or both
read a Chapter, then sit and read her self, till the Servants had had what was
fit for them, which she despised not to do, to keep all in good order: Then
would she inspect the ordering her Dairy, and put her humble hands to some part
of the work; then direct prudently and plentifully for our own Table, and the
Servants, and afterward dress herself decently with small expense of time;
then read, or work with her Needle, till Family Prayer, when she would have all
day-labourers about the House called in.

And if any took their work by the great, not for day wages, whose time was
their own, not ours, she would out of her own allowance, or the Box, (I hope
that Phrase is not unintelligible to many Families, if it be, St. Paul's
Expression of laying by, as God has prosper'd them, may help them to
understand it,) give them a Penny a day, as much as she thought they might have
earned in the time of Family Duty, that they might not be robbed of their time,
(God hating Robbery for an Offering,) nor grudge, or come unwillingly when
called in; and the like satisfaction would she make them, if she gave them any
diversion from the work they took by the Great, as our common Phrase is,
without the least incroachment on their time, under pretense of the advantages
the Family afforded them. At Dinner, which was the only set Meal she ordinarily
made, she would hardly be prevailed with to drink more than one glass of Wine,
or Sider, and never any Ale, or strong Beer, and eat moderately: In the
Afternoon, if there were any Neighbors sick, she would visit them, and call on
every poor Neighbor nigh going or coming, to counsel or encourage them, and as
the Season of the Year required, prepare Medicines for the Family, the Poor,
and Neighborhood; distilled Waters, Syrups, Oils, Ointments, Salves, etc. or
distribute them out, or apply them to those who needed, and for the rest, work
with her Needle, read good Books, and order Family concerns, but chiefly the
Education of her Children, of which more fully afterward.

About Five she retired to her private Devotions, and, they finished, came to
me, and brought the Children with her, whilst we had them, to be seriously
exhorted and counseled alone, and then to Pray in secret; for the happy
success of which good Custom, I have as much cause to bless God, and do it most
heartily, as for any circumstance of my Life; and if any will deride and scorn
it, I can say with Job, Mock on: If idle diversions yield them more comfort, I
envy not their choice, much good may it do them.

I learnt this Practice by reading the Life of holy Mr. Robert Bolton, more
than forty years ago; and oh that these Papers might be blessed to induce any to
follow an Example set to me and them by so famous and so good a Man! To
conclude and shut up this,

I will transcribe, and allusively apply the words, wherewith devout Bishop
Hall concludes his Art of Divine Meditation.

Give me leave to complain with just Sorrow and Shame, that if there be any
Christian Duty, whose omission is notoriously shameful, and prejudicial to the
Souls of Professors, it is this of Meditation. This is the end God has given
us our Souls for, we mispend them if we use them not thus. How lamentable is it
that we so employ them, as if our faculty of discourse served for nothing but
our Earthly Provision; as if our reasonable and Christian Minds were appointed
for the slaves and drudges of this Body, only to be the Caterers and Cooks of
our Appetite!

The World fills us, yea, cloyeth us; we find our selves work enough to
think, What have I got? What may I get more? What must I lay out? What must I
leave for Posterity? How may I prevent the wrong of my Adversary? How may I
return it? What answers shall I make to such Allegations? What entertainment
shall I give to such Friends? What courses shall I take in such Suits? In what
Pastime shall I sp^nd this Day? In what the next? What advantage shall I reap
by this Practice, what loss? What was said, answered, replied, done, followed?

Goodly thoughts, and fit for spiritual Minds! Say there were no other World,
how could we spend our Cares otherwise? Unto this only Neglect let me ascribe
the commonness of that Laodicean temper of Men; or (if that be worse) of the
dead coldness, which has stricken the hearts of many, having left them nothing
but the Bodies of Men, and Visors of Christians, to this only, they have not
Meditated.

It is not more impossible to live without an Heart than to be devout without
Meditation. Would God therefore my words could be in this (as the wise Man
says the words of the wise are) like unto Goads in the sides of every Reader
to quicken him up out of this dull and lazy Security, to a cheerful practice of
this Divine Meditation. Let him curse me upon his Deathbed, if, looking back
to the bestowing of his former times, he acknowledge not these Hours placed the
most happily in his whole Life, if he then wish not he had worn out more days
in so profitable a Work.

Let me have leave without offense to draw a Parallel, and make a short
Application of this Passage, (though it is hard not to write a Satyr, and
enlarge on such an occasion,) What is the reason why the Married state, which a
Gracious God appointed, that Man and Wife might be meet helps to one another,
not only in Sickness and in Health, and the joint concerns of this present
life, but also, yea chiefly, to help each other to Heaven, by building up each
other in their most holy Faith, as Heirs together of the Grace of Life, as St.
Peter speaks, and training their Children up in the nurture and fear of God, as
both the Scripture, and our Liturgy direct we should? What, I say, is the
reason that this holy State so often falls short of attaining this designed
Blessing, and rather proves a Cross, yea a Curse? Is it not from the neglect of
the fore intimated Practice and Duty?

Whence comes uneasiness in mutual Society, Discontents, Jealousies, Brawlings,
Weariness of one another, to name no worse?

Come they not hence, from the neglect of God, and each others Souls and
Spiritual Good? And because Men enterprise, and take in hand that honorable
State unadvisedly, wantonly, and lightly, to satisfy their carnal Lusts and
Appetites, as brute Beasts that have no understanding, not soberly, advisedly,
and in the Fear of God, (against which our Liturgy so gravely and Piously gives
warning,) and continue in it as bad, or worse, than they entered upon it, or at
most respecting their secular concerns, void of any serious Care of promoting
God's Glory in the Eternal Salvation of each others Souls. If hundreds censure
me for this, I am content to bear it, if but one couple in every Hundred will
vouchsafe to imitate our Custom intimated above.

And if upon performing it with Sincerity and Seriousness themselves repent it,
or God impute it to them as mispending time, let it be charged against me for
seducing them from using it better, at the Day of Judgment.

She always allowed her Maids time to Pray alone, and would mind them of it
till they were accustomed to it.

But to proceed to the finishing the Day. She would then eat a small piece of
white Bread, with a draught of household Beer, and because we had long dis-used
set Suppers, when we were alone she would always herself bring me up some small
matter, and would not be entreated to send it by a Servant, because she would
not lose the Pleasure and Satisfaction of expressing her tender and endeared
Affection, the kind and thankful remembrance of which is the only cause of my
mentioning so small a matter.

Then for an hour before Family Duty, she would Catechize the ignorant
Servants, and teach them to read which could not; for often hiring Servants out
of places where there wanted opportunity to teach the poor Children, and
Catechize them, it is scarce to be believed how Ignorant many came, and yet I
remember not any who stayed any time with us, who could not read competently
well, and say both a Catechism which I find amongst her Papers, with this
Title, A short and easy Catechism which I used to teach my Children when they
were very Young, suited to their Capacity: And also the Church Catechism, which
she taught them when they had learnt the former, and she used to hire them to
their own good, giving them Sixpence to accomplish the first Task, then a
Shilling, and so on, promising them a Bible when they could use it, of which
she gave many, and always new, and good ones, of double the Price she might
have bought for. After Family Prayers, when she went up into her Chamber,
whilst she undrest herself, one of her Maids (and if one read not so well as
the other, she that needed most to be perfected) read a Chapter, after which,
committing her self to God, she went to Bed, and after short Ejaculatory
Prayers for the Mercies of the Day, and Petitions for Protection from the Sins,
Temptations, and Dangers of the Night, she betook herself to rest. And this is
the shortest Epitome of her Life, which at the lowest size was a constant
revolution of days thus spent with the fewest idle vacant spaces that humane
frailty can keep free from, not to say none at all.

SECT. VII. How she spent a Week.
THE next abbreviation of her Life, is to give an account how she improved a
Week; for though every Week contained seven so well managed Days, yet more
occurred in every one, well worth observing.

To begin with the first day of the Week, or the Lord's Day, the Queen of days,
the firstborn of all the Children of time in her esteem, to which she
accounted a double Portion to be due of religious observance, and most raised
Devotion, and always paid it.

She was scrupulously sollicitous both of the Negative and Positive Duties she
judged to be required on that day, both to prevent the violation of that holy
Rest, and to sanctify it: I might subjoin a short Treatise of that Subject, if
I should collect and put together what I meet with from her own Pen concerning
it in several places.

For the first, as she gave it the full dimensions in early rising, so she
would not suffer it to be entrenched upon by any works, but of absolute
Necessity and Mercy; ordered things so, that her Maids must never make a Cheese
that day, and would seldom use the Coach to carry her to Church, except in
extremity of way and weather; and though none gave freer welcome on other days,
would forbear inviting any on that day, to prevent diversions; and if Friends
sometimes came in, would, as soon as it was possible, without uncivil rudeness,
withdraw into her Chamber. After Dinner, at which she especially eat sparingly
on that day, to prevent drowsiness at Church. She constantly called all the
Family together to hear them read the Scriptures, and if any Neighbor were
sick within such distance as would not hinder her timely attending public
Worship, would not fail to visit them, and all the day she practiced her self
what she often advised others. Isa. 58.13. She turned away her foot from the
Sabbath, from doing her pleasure on God's Holy Day, and called the Sabbath her
delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and honored him, not doing her own
ways, nor finding her own pleasure, nor speaking her own words, but delighted
herself in the Lord, and in his Service.

For the positive Duties. Being early up, she spent as much time in dressing
her Soul to meet God, and as little as was possible in adorning her Body to the
Eyes of Men, though always with a grave and decent neatness. She always
retained a profound Reverence for the Name and Presence of God, so that she was
always attentively devout, at Prayers and Sermons, to which she brought all her
Servants with her, that they might not stay loitering idly at home, or by the
way; and her Eye and Example would awe the ruder youth into becoming Carriage,
for which end she would sometimes rise up and look about her, with good effect.

After public Worship finished, she would retire for a considerable time to
recollect, and pray over the Sermons, and after finishing what was her custom
on other days to do. Besides the Servants reading every one a Chapter, when my
weariness would not allow me to repeat the Sermons, she would desire my Curate
to read some good Book, and often would she do it her self. She read in the
Family the Lord's Day the seven night before she died good part of Dr.
Sherlock's Treatise of Death, and I must say, I remember not I ever heard Man
or Woman exceed her in this kind: I confess with shame, I could not do it so
well; for though she altered not a Syllable of the Author's words, her Reading
might be called a Reading, and giving of the Sense; for though she read quick,
she did it so smoothly and distinctly, and would place the Emphasis upon some
word in every Sentence so intelligently, without any affected tone or vehement
alteration of her Voice, that the change was scarce perceptible, (not so much
as betwixt what we call flat and sharp in Music,) and yet would strangely
facilitate the understanding of the Sense to low Capacities, an infallible
evidence of her clear understanding it herself.

After Family Prayer, spending some little time more than on other nights, in
committing her self to God, she went to Bed, and adding to her usual
Ejaculations Praises for the liberty of another Sabbath, Prayers for acceptance
of the days Services, and pardon for the Iniquities of her holy things, she
went to rest, and such were every Week's First Fruits.

On Monday Morning awaking with God, and having blown off the Ashes which
veiled the Embers, kindled by the ardent Fervor of the preceding days
Devotions, she kindled them into an holy Flame, with which having offered up
the daily Morning-Sacrifice, she next brought her Peace Offerings for the whole
House of Israel. She had a very public Spirit, and enlarged Heart, on which
she always bore the concerns of Zion, and preferred Jerusalem above her chief
Joy. She stretched out her craving hands over the World, (as you will find her
express her self,) that the mighty God who calls the Earth from the rising of
the Sun, to the going down thereof, would shine out of Zion the perfection of
Beauty, that he would pity them who sit in darkness, and the region and shadow
of Death; that he would destroy Satan's Kingdom, and set free those who are in
bondage to it; that he would exalt the Kingdom of his dear Son, till the little
Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, might become a great Mountain and
fill the whole World, and all the corners of it might see the Salvation of God;
that he would effectually call out of Babylon his captivated People that yet
are detained in it; that he would water abundantly with the fruitful Showers of
his Grace all the Churches which his own Right Hand has planted; and that he,
with whom is plenty of Spirit, would pour it out abundantly, and furnish
himself with fit Instruments to carry on the work of his own Glory, and
Salvation of Souls; that he would give Pastors after his own Heart, who might
feed his People with Knowledge and Understanding; that they may be delivered
from Ignorance, Error, Heresy, and all Ungodliness; that they may adorn the
Gospel with such a Conversation as becomes it; that all over whom the Name of
Christ is called might depart from Iniquity. Beseeching the Lord to pour out
abundantly the true Spirit of the Gospel on all who made profession of it, with
all its Operations and Graces; as a Spirit of Wisdom, Knowledge, and the Fear
of God, of Faith and Holiness, Repentance, and universal unreserved new
Obedience, especially as an healing Spirit of Unity and Peace, mutual
Forbearance, true Christian Charity, and Brotherly-Love, and as a mighty Spirit
of Grace and Supplication, to obtain these Blessings for themselves and one
another, for the Churches of the neighboring Nations round about, by name;
that God would give them one Heart, and one way; that the nicknames of
Lutherans and Calvinists might be forgotten, and Ephraim and Judah might be one
Stick in the Lord's Hand; especially for the distressed Protestants of France;
that God would turn his Anger from them, cause them to be pitied by their
Brethren, and effectually relieved; that God would show them why he contended
with them, help them to repent of whatever had provoked him to so heavy
displeasure; that their dross being consumed in the furnace of Affliction, he
would choose them to himself, break the Iron Yoke from off their Necks, bound on
so close by the hand of proud and cruel persecuting Tyranny; that being fitted
for it, they might once more be entrusted with their Civil and Religious
Liberties, and be gathered home from all the Countries into which they are
scattered, to their own Land in Peace and Safety, and never forfeit it again.

But with more ardent Zeal, if more be possible, did she pray for the Peace of
our own Jerusalem, and wrestle with God to render these Nations fit for Mercy;
for though she had a grateful sense of vouchsafed Deliverances, yet when hopes
were gayest, and affairs most promising, she was full of Fears and Expectations
of impending and approaching Judgments; and would often, yea, very often say,
(for out of the abundance of her Heart her Mouth spoke) That if we traced God's
footsteps in the Scriptures, he must change his usual methods, if he took not
Vengeance of so provoking a Nation, which would not be healed; but in the midst
of so many changes, would not be changed from open Profaneness, mutual Hatreds,
and scorning and opposing serious Holiness, and solid Religion, and the power
of Godliness. Good Lord avert from her survivors what she so reasonably feared,
and thou have freed her from the feeling of. The Righteous are taken away from
the Evil to come. The rest of this Day she spent as others are described, and
so the rest till Friday, the Weekly memorial of our Savior's Passion. On this,
after some necessary Family Affairs dispatched, she constantly retired, and
spent it alone in religious Fasting: The House of Levy apart, and their Wives
apart, Zach. xij. 13. And remembering who had blamed, exacting all their labors
on a fasting Day, Isa. lviij. 3. she gave her Maids that day to work for
themselves, to read, or spend more time in Prayer, if they had hearts to do
it. And if she foresaw any unavoidable diversion, as being from home, or
Strangers to come to us, she would prudently prevent the loss of that Day, by
choosing one before, which might afford her the best vacancy. And though I
confess she usually set but one day in a week apart, when I was at home, I have
been, since her death, informed, both by those in my Family, and by her Diary,
that in my absence she spent two, three, yea and more days in a week so. I add
no more concerning her Week, but her awakened remembering on the last day of it,
the approaching Sabbath, and solemn preparing to meet the Lord of the Day, on
that day of our Lord, whose presence I comfortably believe she now enjoys, in a
continual Sabbath, everlasting Rest. And this is the second Edition of her
Life's Epitome, how she spent every Week.

SECT. VIII. How she spent a Year.
I Next proceed to give account how she used to spend a Year, in the larger
Revolution whereof there occurred many things, which fell not within the
narrower compass of a Day or Week; nor all precisely into that circle, (taken
strictly and with rigor) yet are fairly reducible to that Head.

Many of her Years, which consisted of such Days and Weeks as above described,
being filled up with her prudent, holy, submissive Deportment under, and godly
Improvement she made, of such Circumstances and Conditions of Life, as these
that follow, many yearly, at least often.

1. Her most endearing Affections, and obliging Observance, as a Wife, to my
self. 2. Her Lyings-in in Childbearing. 3. The Baptizing of our Children. 4.
Care and Methods of their Education. 5. Monthly Sacraments. 6. Of her Writings.
7. Discreet Management of Family. 8. Visitations by Sickness on our selves, or
Children, and some of their Deaths. 9. Renewed assaults of her Enemy, by
Temptation. 10. A Catalogue of her Friends she used to pray for. 11 Some trying
troubles on the Nation, on Friends, or Family. Signal Deliverances from Dangers.
12. Going to Tunbridge-Wells. 13. Keeping our Wedding Day. Entertainments of
Friends.
14. Marriage of our only Daughter. Her death in Childbed the same Year, yet
leaving a Son.
15. Acts, and kinds of her great Charity. 16. Care to advance God's Glory, and
Salvation of others. 17. Several Graces in which she was most eminent. 18. Her
Character.
All which, If I should pursue, not in an historical Narrative of them, (that is
neither my design nor business) but in her glorifying God in them, and making a
spiritual Improvement and Advantage of them, and to teach others how to do the
like, I might write a Volume of them, from the wise, pertinent, and holy
Memoirs her Pen has left me, and my own observation and memory would supply me
with.

My greatest labor therefore here will be to contract, and I must leave out
much of that which my own Judgment tells me (if my Affection do not greatly
bribe and flatter me) might not only be passable, but very exemplary and
useful.

I might have added more particulars, and set them in better order, and not
blended, so promicuously together, Heavenly and Earthly, Spiritual and Secular
Concerns. But it matters not, they both come within the compass of my design,
to show how good she was in all relations and conditions; she was Mary and
Martha both unto perfection, and acted Martha's part with Mary's Spirit.

SECT. IX. Her Character as a Wife.
I Should be too ungrateful to her Memory, should I not begin with the
endearing Affections, and obliging Observance she always paid me as an Husband;
on which Subject it is impossible to exceed, or Hyperbolize, though Love should
render so dull a Pen Eloquent, (if that be not an impossible supposition.)

Our mutual compellation was always, my Dear, not a word of coarse, or empty
Compliment, but the sincere interpretation of the Language of our Hearts.

All my concerns were nearer to her than those which were immediately her own;
were I in any sort afflicted, she would with Passion wish she could exempt me
from it, by bearing it her self. Whatever touched my Reputation, Peace, or
Saftety, touched her in the most sensible and tender part: I could give two most
trying Instances of Envy and Malice, but I lay my Finger on both those Sores,
that it may appear (blessed be God's Grace) I am guided by a better Spirit than
to revive the memory of what we both so heartily forgave, and so often and
earnestly, jointly and severally, have begged of God both to forget and pardon
unto those, who by their present Passions were hurried so far, as to afford us
the trial and exercise of Christian Fortitude and Patience; and so meek, yea,
generous a Charity, as I would not stand in need of from any Man, for all the
World.

On both these occasions, how did she comfort me, how did she counsel me to
commit my innocent Cause to God; assuring me he would not fail to plead and
defend it, and bring forth my Innocence as Light, and my Righteousness (in
those particulars) as the Noonday, telling me nothing could ever make her
shrink or quail, but guilt of which, blessed be God, we comfortably knew there
was not the least Spark to raise that Blasting Smoke.

How did she pray to God! (for she knew the Case would bear Appeals to him.)
How did she write to, and solicit Men! How did she walk, and ride, and repeat
long Journeys beyond her Strength! Had not her Affections been both more strong
and swift than Legs, or Horse, or Coach; and when a Gentleman had treated her
less obligingly than by a message sent from himself, he had encouraged her to
hope for, by her meekness of Wisdom, by her calm Replies, and by a convincing,
prudent Letter which she wrote him, she obtained this acknowledgment from him,
That she was a very good, yea, excellent Christian; but no more of these
matters, let them be buried in her Grave, they will not disturb her Rest, and I
heartily pray, that when she shall rise to Glory, they may rise to no Man's
Shame. Amen, Amen.

Next to the things of God, my Company was the delight and satisfaction of her
Life, and when I went from home, she would importune my speediest return, and
if she had any Friend to visit, she would take the opportunity of my absence,
that she might not be from me when at home; and if any Family affairs gave more
trouble and bustle, she would not fail to have them finished whilst I was
abroad, that there might be no molesting puther or noise in my Sight and
Hearing; and as she often told me, next to the pleasing God, her greatest Care
was, that I might never be displeased.

If passing the love of Women be a superlative Expression, hers was more than
so, passing the love of most Women, that there was not a Man on Earth I had
cause to envy as happier than my self, in that respect: She was a Wife
according to my own Heart, and even exceeded the Character of such an one, as
with most earnest Prayers I begged of God to vouchsafe to me, when I was
inclined to enter on the Marriage State. In this God did abundantly for me,
beyond what I could ask or think, and, as a good Friend who came to comfort me
since I lost her, was pleased to phrase it, alluding to the Expression, Ezekiel.
20.6. Of God's giving the Land of Canaan to his People. God had spied out a
Wife for me, and as we have some hundred times blessed God for singling us out
from all other Persons in the World, to be joined in that most near Relation,
so I repeat those Praises with profoundest Gratitude, from the bottom of a most
humble Heart.

She would often come into my Study to me, and when I have asked her what she
would have, she would reply, Nothing, My Dear, but to ask thee how thou do,
and see if thou want any thing; and then with an endearing Smile would say,
Do thou love me? to which when I replied, Most dearly; I know it abundantly,
would she answer, to my Comfort, but I love to hear thee tell me so. And once
when I was adding the reasons of my Love, and began first for Conscience, she
stopped me ever I could proceed, as she was very quick: Ah my Dear, I allow
Conscience to be an excellent Principle in all we do, but like it worst in
Conjugal Affection. I would have thee love me, not because thou must, but
because thou will, not as a duty, but delight, we are prone to reluctate
against what is imposed, but take Pleasure in what we choose; so innocently witty
would she be. They that have such Wives will easily pardon my fondness in this
short Paragraph, and that all may do it, I wish that no Man living had a
worse; but I Will not offend the most sour, or most squeemish, in like kind for
the future.

As she was all the best of Wives could be in time of Health, so if God sent
Sickness, more than is credible to any but Eyewitnesses.

It once pleased God to visit us with Sickness both together, she was taken
first, my self in few days after, and both so ill, our death was expected by
our selves and others; but God was pleased to spare us longer. I recovered
first, and when I could leave my Bed, and creep into her Chamber, the sight of
me was like Life from the Dead. She has often told me, she could not express
what alteration it made in her, the joy so revived her Spirits, it helped to
cure her.

There Is not a Sickness nor imminent danger I escaped all the time we lived
together, which she has not recorded with most ardent Prayers, and signal
Instances of God's gracious Answers of them, and most lively Praises, which
might thaw a Heart of Ice into streams of devoutest Thankfulness; which even
the fear of being prolix, can scarce restrain me from transcribing, but I will
confine my self to one out of very many.

November 30. 1675. being Saturday my Dear Husband came from London, and not
well with a Cold. The Lord's Day following he Preached both parts of the Day.
Monday he took Ruffi's Pills, he grew very ill with his Cold, which was
accompanied with a Fever, and a Pleurisy. Tuesday Morning very early, I sent
for Dr. Yardly, and Dr. Godfrey. On the Wednesday I sent to London for Dr.
Walter Needham. My Dear Husband having Pains in his Side, was, by the
appointment of his Physicians let-Blood three times.

After his third Bleeding, he had a very sick Night, but not sensible of his
Illness; for when I asked him how he did, he said, pretty well, though to my
apprehension he was very ill. He groaned all Night, and very restless: when I
raised him in his Bed, to take something to refresh him, he had tremblings, and
a fumbling in his Speech, and sometimes speak incoherently, which made me fear
he was a little delirous; these bad Symptoms gave me the fear of the sudden
approach of Death. I again sent for Dr. Needham, who lovingly came again to us:
These Colds, with Fevers, were then the Epidemical Disease both of City and
Country, of which many died, by which distemper my Dear Husband was brought
even to the Mouth of the Grave, from which God mercifully retrieved, and gave
me him again.

Thus far the History of my Sickness, by her Pen, to which before I transcribe
the Devotial Part, I must add from my own Memory to the Praise of God's Grace
and Patience.

The third time of my Bleeding, was by my own peremptory Resolution, which I
hardly obtained the other Physicians consent to, it being the night before Dr.
Needham came the second time but God, whose Mercy put it into my Mind, inclined
them to consent to the Arguments I used for it, which were these, I told them
my Pain continued in my Side, my Water as high and thick as ever, my Heat also,
and dryness of my Mouth; I raised purulent and bloody Matter, and I bled at
Nose, and urged, that Nature indicated thereby, what must relieve, and rising
up in my Bed, I stretched out my left Arm, and humbly committing my self and
the Success to God, said, I would Bleed again. The Physicians then consented,
and proceeded to the Operation, and opening a Vein in my Left Arm, the Blood
sprang out so abundantly, that they drew at least ten Ounces. After the closing
the Orifice, being laid down again, My Dearest Dear, who had been all my
Sickness my tenderest Nurse, my wakefull Watcher, and all, yea, more than could
be wished, or expected, or possibly performed, without a spring of so strong
and endearing Affection, to give and guide the Motion, became my Chaplain, if I
may have leave to use such an Expression; and before the Symptoms she has
mentioned arrived at their height, kneeled down by my Bedside, and wrestled
with God in Prayer, with such spiritual Fervency, and expressed herself so
appositely, so pertinently, so suitably, and with such holy Ardour poured out
her Soul to God, as I never knew exceeded, if equalled, by the ablest
Christian, or Minister, in all my Life. Surely if ever the promise of pouring
out a Spirit of Grace and Supplication was signally made good, it was then made
good to her, and the effects of it to me; for as she was a true Daughter of
Abraham, an Israelitess indeed, she rose from her Knees a Female Israel; she
prevailed with God, I fell into so great a Sweat as was scarce ever known; and
though the Night was full of the Symptoms she names, which so afflicted, and
affrighted her, yet she retained her Presence of Mind to assist me with holiest
Words, and kindest Deeds: In the Morning Symptoms abated, and when Dr. Needham
came, and had felt my Pulse, He told me he came directly from Dr. Willis, who
dyed that day at Eleven a Clock of my Disease; but added, with a Smile, he
would not have told me so but that my danger was past; and said, That under
God, my last night's Bleeding and Sweating saved my Life, without which,
humanely speaking, I could not have escaped; blessed be God, who put that
Resolution into my Mind, and heard her earnest Prayers.

Now to return to her Pious grateful Words.

I desire to bless God for every Circumstance of his Mercy in my Dear Husband's
Sickness. The helps and love of Friends, the use of Physic, with other means,
the constant and frequent Visits of Neighbour-Ministers, their Prayers for us,
and of many other Friends, and good People in our behalf, to which I ascribe a
great share of indulgent Mercy in sparing to me a little longer, my Dear
Husband. God did not cast out the Prayer of the Afflicted, but in my Distress,
when I cried unto him, he graciously inclined his Ear unto me, and helped me.

Good Lord enable me with my yet continued Mercy, mutually to acknowledge thy
Kindness, and by an exemplary holy Life, to declare thy great Goodness to us;
Building up each other in our most Holy Faith, as Heirs together of the Grace
of Life: And this Mercy wherewith thou yet intrusts me, Lord help me more to
improve to my Spiritual Advantage, and continue him to length of Days, with the
abundant Gifts and Graces of thy Holy Spirit, a choice and signal Instrument of
thy Glory.

I bless thee for thy supporting Mercy in my Relative Duty, in my many
sorrowful Nights and Watchings; that when my Sleep departed from me, I still
might make my Addresses to thee, who never slumberest, nor sleep; for thou
always see the afflictions of thy People, and know their Sorrows, and wilt
not despise them that seek thee; thou have restored Comfort to me, and to my
Mourners, praised be thy Mercy.

It Is hard to pass-by her tenderness to me, of so recent Date as my last Year's
Visitation, which held me so many Months, and brought me so low, and at length
settled in my Righthand, with such swelling and lameness, as took away its use,
and under God, I owe the recovery of it to her Skill, and Pains, and Kindness,
by her frequent bathing, fomenting, and anointing of it, and preparing other,
both inward and outward Medicines, so far to use my Pen, to pay this small
tribute to her happy Memory.

SECT. X. Of her Lyings-Inn, in Childbearing.
GOD was pleased to give her strength to go out her full time of eleven
Children; six Sons, and five Daughters, besides some abortive, or untimely
Births. And if ever Children were Baptized in their Mothers Belly, (excuse the
Expression) doubtless hers were so; I mean solemnly Consecrated to God, with
fervent, frequent Prayers, and washed in a Jordan of her Tears, who bore them
as truly in her Heart as Womb.

I find all their Births recorded, with most savory and devout Reflections,
though some with more Enlargement, as attended with more signal Circumstances: I
might transcribe them all, that the sweet Spirit of Praise, which breaths so
fragrantly in every of them, might kindle and excite the like Temper in others,
no Incense being more grateful to the Nostrils of that God, who says, He that
offers Praise, glorifieth me; but I must contract.

The twelfth of July, 1651, God mercifully Delivered me of my first Child.

In 1652, I being big with-Child, had an high Fever, and was after a great and
very hot fit delivered of a Daughter, Aug. 29. Being Lord's Day, between four
and five in the Morning, my Fever turned to an Ague, and held me ten Weeks, and
brought me very low, yet God in his Mercy graciously spared me, and restored my
Health, I bless him for it.

Feb. 5. 54. God delivered me of a third Child, our first Son.

God gave me a fourth Deliverance of a Daughter, still-born, Dec. 23. 55. I
went my full time, and might have been ever big: Blessed be God that spared his
unworthy Creature.

God gave me a gracious Deliverance of a fifth, a Son; May 15. 57.

God gave me a Merciful Deliverance of a sixth Child, a Daughter; June 8. 58.

After a long, and hard Labor, continued three days, and three nights in great
Extremity, all about me despairing of Life.

God mercifully Delivered me of a seventh Child, a Son; October 22. 59. which
Mercy much affected my Dear Husband, and for which my Deliverance I most humbly
Bless God.

I confess I never knew to what degree I loved her till that time, and never
experienced such Raptures of Joy and Thankfullness, for any worldly Matter, as
on that occasion; the Impression of which was so deep, that the remembrance of
it has a pleasing relish, even to this Day.

God gave me a gracious Deliverance of an eighth Child, a Son, still-born,
after an hard Labor; December the 11. 1660.

In this Lying-in I fell into Melancholy, which much disturbed me with Vapors,
and was very ill. It pleased God to suffer my old Enemy very impetuously to
assault me, etc. But more of this when I touch the return of her Temptation.

God gave me Deliverance of a ninth Child, a Son; October 9. 1662.

God graciously gave me a speedy, and safe Deliverance of a tenth Child, a
Daughter; November 14. 63. Of this Child more hereafter.

God gave me a merciful Deliverance in a difficult and hard Labor, my
eleventh, and last Child, a Son still-born; May the first, 1665.

Lord, I bless thee for my manifold Deliverances in these, and all my straits.
I beseech thee enable me to render unto thee suitable returns of Praises and
Thanksgivings.

Three of my Children were still-born, which, with the rest the Lord has been
pleased to take out of this Life, I humbly hope, and do believe, are now happy
in Heaven, enjoying God to all Eternity.

SECT. XI. Of the Baptizing our Children.
THose of my Children whom God wa^ pleased to admit by Baptism into his visible
Church on Earth, I can truly declare, and that without Hypocrisy, whatever may
be my censure, that notwithstanding my present weakness in Childbed, I made it
my Practice to importune God for a Blessing upon his own Ordinance, fitting my
self for those Addresses as I thought most suitable to Prayer, by getting up
out of my Bed; which I made haste to do, as soon as the Company which went to
Church with my Child, had quitted my Chamber, which was always, and most to my
Satisfaction, on the Lord's Day. Lord this is for my Comfort, and for which
Practice I humbly bless thee, and for the liberty of all thy Holy Ordinances,
and Privileges by them.

And blessed be that God, who styles himself a God hearing Prayer, that he
suffered not his Face to be sought in vain, for all the Children who lived to
any years of Knowledge, gave very comfortable Evidences of their living up to
their Baptismal Covenant, as shall be accounted for when their Deaths are
spoken of.

And upon this occasion of speaking of Baptism, it brings to my mind, (what I
hope I may without Prejudice relate, to show how impartially I write of her,)
what I have heard her argue concerning the use of the Cross, very modestly and
prudently; she had indeed no Bigotry for the outward appendages of Religious
Worship, yea, was fearful many lost much of the Substance, by being over-fond
of the Shadow. Yet would she not run into the contrary Extreme, and she would
say, she wondered so many good People took offense at the sign of the Cross; for
said she, though I know the Papists superstitiously abuse it, and I fear some
put more stress on it than they should, or is designed, or required by our
Church; yet their abuse of it should not prejudice the use of it, as rightly
understood; which, said she, I take not to be intended as any part of the
Sacrament, nor to effect, or produce any thing in the Child which it would want
without it, but to be a Memorial of our Savior's Passion, and the Shame, and
Pains he bore for us, and whatever may put us in mind of these, methinks should
not be hardly thought on.

I should be partial here, should I forbear to add her declared dissatisfaction
at the imposing the whole charge in the Administration of Baptism on the
Susceptors, without including jointly, at least one of the Parents, for which,
with other Reasons, she would rarely undertake the office of a God-mother, and
when she did, owned it as a Bond upon her Conscience, to be strictly discharged.

SECT. XII. Her Care of the Education of her Children.
NExt to their Baptism, properly follows her Prudent, Pious Care in the
Education of her Children, that they might want no Accomplishments in this
World, she could assist their attainment of; but especially to train them up in
the true and early knowledge of Religion, and Nurture, and Fear of God.

And here I might write a Treatise larger than the whole Book, without
borrowing from any, but only her Pen and Practice.

She considered Children as the nursery of Families, the Church, and Nation;
and that Errors in their Education were hardly Corrected ever after; therefore
she improved her utmost Diligence and Wisdom to teach them whilst young, the
way in which they should walk, that when they were old they might not depart
from it.

She accounted it not only an Indispensable Duty to be done, but an high Honor
to be entrusted by God, with the care of bringing up a Child for him; and she
did not more truly travail in pain of them to bring them forth, than she did to
bring them up, that Christ might be formed in them.

Without Vanity, she was as completely qualified for this Performance as was
possible to be desired or wished; she was Mistress of her Needle to that
degree, that she would blame herself that she had spent so much time and
industry, to attain it in Worsted, Silk, and finest Thread for Point; none
exceeded her, though they earned their Living by it.

And for Houshould-Imployment, all that knew her, wondered she could so soon
attain such universal Dexterity, and accomplished Skill in Country Affairs,
being bred, and living most of her time in the City; but she being of very
quick natural Parts, and close application of Mind to Business, soon made
herself Mistress of whatever she set herself to, not only in what strictly
concerned her Family-Inspection, to direct, and instruct her Maids, in Cookery,
Brewing, Baking, Dairy, ordering Linen, in which her neatness was curious, even
to Excess, and the like: But in Physic, Surgery, to assist the Neighbors
of the Parish, and some Miles about, which she performed Skillfully, Readily,
and with great Success, as they acknowledge by their grief for her loss, and
the Furniture of her Closet still will witness, which she left furnished better
than many Country Shops; and also in Preserving, making all sorts of English
Wines, Gooseberry, Curran, Cowslip, Quince, etc. and whatever else was curious,
to entertain, and please her Friends of higher Rank, to whole Testimony I
appeal, whether this is not less than might be truly said; and yet her Wisdom
(the true Wisdom of preferring Religion above all these) remained with her; and
all she knew, she was ambitious to infuse, and to transmit unto her Daughters,
who did not abuse her Hopes, nor shame their Teacher.

I shall not insist on her Prudent Methods to accomplish them in the affairs of
this Life, my Business being to make good Christians, not good House-wives, by
her Example.

Her first Care was, to keep their Minds uncorrupted by Vanity or Pride,
therefore kept them at home, not to save Charges, but avoid Inconveniences; and
therefore that they might not want what she could not perform, entertained a
French Dancing Master in the House, and had a Writing, and Singing-Master come
to them at fit Seasons.

How much, and how well they performed by their Needles, by the help of a well
qualified Servant, but chiefly by their Mothers guidance, who taught both them
and her, I wave the recounting of; because if it seemed not incredible, I own
it would be Impertinent, and it may be censured as Vanity.

But all this was by-Business, comparatively, her Work and Business was to
cultivate their Minds, improve their Intellectuals, to season their tender
Hearts with a due Sense of Religion, that they might be glorious within, she
having no desire so Pathetick, no Joy so great, as to see her Children walking
in the Truth, and in the Love and Practice of Serious Holiness.

To promote, and forward this, she taught them to Read as soon as they could
pronounce their Letters, yea, before they could speak plain, and sowed the Seed
of early Pious Knowledge in their tender Minds, by a plain, familiar Catechism,
suited to their Capacity, whilst very young, which I find among her Papers,
that serious things might have the first Possession of their Hearts; and would
strictly charge the Servants not to tell them foolish Stories, or teach them
idle Songs, which might tincture their Fancies with vain or hurtful
Imaginations, and choke the good Seed of Pious Instruction, or draw them from
it.

When they had attained the first, and smallest Sense of God, she would cause
them to kneel down, and lift up their little Hands and Eyes to Heaven, (those
humble Gestures being the silent Language of Natural Religion,) then would she
dictate to them such easy words of Prayer, as were most level to their budding
Reason: And when they arrived at four or five years old, she would teach them
somewhat a larger Prayer, and cause them to go by themselves, till they were
accustomed to do it of their own accord; and as they grew up, gave them
directions concerning Prayer; of which I find a Treatise, which I would have
called an excellent one, had it not been hers, so nearly Related to me; of
which, more ever long.

When they could read tolerably well, she caused them to get by Heart choice
Sentences of Scripture, then whole Psalms, and Chapters, which she often called
them to repeat, and gave them small pecuniary Rewards to encourage them, and
that they might have somewhat of their own to give to the Poor; and when she
gave Farthings or Victuals to traveling People at the Door, she would cause a
Child to give it to them, to accustom them to be Charitable: And in this
Pious, Maternal Care did she spend good part of every day, which should not
have been omitted, when I gave account how she spent a Day and Week.

When they had learned the Church-Catechism, she would have them answer
publicly, that the meaner sort might be ashamed not to send their Children,
and the poor Children might be quickened, and encouraged by their Example and
Company.

And having observed that many would read commendably in the Bible, where the
Sentences are shorter, and the distinction of the Verses, and frequent use,
much helped them, who could scarce do it intelligibly in other Books, where
the Periods are longer, and not so well distinguished: She would give them
other Books, and often hear them read them, and would make a prudent choice of
Books of Instruction, and Devotion, and sometimes useful Histories; as the
Book of Martyrs, and Abbreviations of our English Chronicles, and Lives of
Holy, Exemplary Persons, especially of those who were so while Young, that she
might do several things at once; both perfect their Reading, and inform their
Judgments, and inflame their Affections to an imitation of their early Piety.

She was also very Circumspect, not only to keep their Morals untainted from
Pride, Immodesty, Lying, Contempt of, or deriding others, for their natural
Infirmities, telling Tales, or causing Debate, or Anger, and the like, showing
them the evil of those Courses; but also of their Gestures and Carriage, that
they might contract no indecent Habitudes, or uncomely Postures, which might
expose them to Contempt; but above all of this kind, pressing them to
Cleanliness, and Neatness; intimating that it was a sign and evidence in some
measure, of inward Purity, and would often tell them, that though all neat
People were not good, yet, almost all good People were neat, and that she had
rather see an Hole in their Clothes, than a Spot upon them.

I pass by her Diligence in Teaching them whetever might fit them for all
Family-Imployments, in Pastry, and Seasoning, of which her Friends were use to
say, her Hand was never out, causing them to transcribe her best Receipts for
things which were curious, but especially for Medicines, with Directions how to
use them, that if God had spared their Lives, they might have been as useful
in their Generation, as God vouchsafed her the Honor to be in hers.

But I must by an enforced Brevity deny my self the pleasure of recording more,
lest by a seeming Prolixity I displease others, and hasten to finish this
Section with transcribing what her dear Pen had prepared for her Children many
years ago, and I never saw till I was bereaved of her.

For my Dear Children, Mrs. Margaret, and Mrs. Elizabeth Walker; A Collection
of Scriptures, some to excite, and move to, etc. Then follows many Heads, under
which they are ranked; but because the order is changed in the Book it self, I
shall rather touch the order in which they are at large set down. Then she
concludes (what I may call the Title Page) with these words, Directed to each
of them singularly.

All which to the Glory of God I humbly beg may be to your Souls Advantage; so
Prays with most earnest Request to God for thee, thy Ever Loving, whilst Living
Mother, Elizabeth Walker.

The first she begins with, bears this Title,

It is the Duty of Christians to pray fervently and frequently, with Faith,
with Humility, with Sincerity, with Constancy, with Watchfulness, in the
Spirit, with warmth and Life.

Then she begins with a description of Prayer, what it is, both as a means of
Worship, whereby we honor, and give Glory to God, and a means of Grace,
whereby we obtain Mercy and Help from him, and subjoins in seven large Pages
whatever she conceived Expedient and useful for its answering both those ends;
all which she confirms with most apposite and proper Scriptures, and Examples.
I thought to have abbreviated it here, but when I went about it, I could not
find one Line to be omitted, as useless, or that might well be spared,
therefore must wholly pass it by, or add it entirely in the Appendix, amongst
some other Papers of hers.

The second Head is this. It is the duty of those whom God blesses with the
good things of this Life, to supply the necessities of those who want them,
which God's Word, as our Rule, abundantly expresses; or, a Collection of
Scriptures to excite to a liberal Distribution to the Necessity of the Poor;
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

Then she adds three Pages of such Scriptures Judiciously chosen.

The third Head; Diverse Scriptures which exhort to Meekness of Spirit: This
contains six Pages.

Then follows this single Page without Title, which I shall transcribe with my
Pen, because she did it so signally in her Practice, that it contains her
Picture to the Life, and was to teach her Daughters what they should be.

Prove. 12.4. A Virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband; but she that makes
ashamed, is as Rottenness to his Bones.

Prove. 31.17. She looks well to the ways of her Household, and cateth not the
Bread of Idleness.

She stretches forth her Hands to the Poor, yea, she reaches forth her Hands
to the needy.

She rises also while it is yet Night, and gives Meat to her Household.

Col. 3.18. Wives Submit your selves to your own Husbands, as is fit in the
Lord.

Ephesians. 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands as unto the Lord;
and the Wife see that she Reverence her Husband.

1 Pet. 3.1. -- 6. and ver. 3, 4, Likewise, ye Wives be in Subjection to your
own Husbands; even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord.

Let not your adorning be platting of the Hair, wearing of Gold, or putting on
of Apparel: But let it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not
corruptible; even the Ornament of a meek, and quiet Spirit, which in the Sight
of God is of great Price. Good Lord grant me this, with all the other Graces of
thy Holy Spirit. Amen, Amen, Amen.

This last named Scripture was the Glass which she always dressed herself by,
with exemplary, modest Decency, as became a grave, and holy Matron, and a
Minister's Wife, as she would often urge as one reason of the plainness of her
garb, which was never sordid, or negligent, though always in Black, never
appeared abroad in any other Color, so much as to a Knot or Ribbon: I with
great Thankfulness acknowledge she was my Crown and Glory, and the Heart of her
Husband did safely trust in her.

The fourth Head which she Collected out o^ the Scriptures for her Childrens
use, is, The Threatenings in God's Word he has denounc'^ against Sinners, to
keep your Hearts in a^ awful Fear, that you neglect not God; remembering that
as he has, and was, so he sti^^ is and will be Just, in the Punishment of the
Breach of his most Holy, and Righteous Commands, in observing of which, there
is gre^^ Rewards. If his Wrath be kindled but a little who can abide it; but
who knows the Power o^ it? How then shall we be able to dwell wit^ Everlasting
Burnings, and devouring Fire* Stand in Awe therefore, and Sin not.

Then follow no less than forty nine Page^ closely written, of God's severe
Threatning^ against Sin and Sinners in general, and the particular kinds of
Sin, all exactly cited, as to the Book, Chapter, and Verse. Oh, how richly di^
the Word of God dwell in her! How did she Meditate in it Day and Night! That
she could so readily turn to almost any place, only by he^ own Memory and
Observation; for she would sometimes, though seldom, come to me into my Study,
and say, Pray, My Dear, tell me where are such Words (repeating them) for I
know no^ how to find them by a Concordance, never having used one.

The fifth Head. The Promises for the Pardon of Sin, the faithful Sayings of
God, worthy of all Acceptance. Jesus Christ came into the World to Save
Sinners, yea, the chief of Sinners; in him all the Promises are, yea, and in
him. Amen.

Then she begins with Genesis 3.15. He shall ^ruise thy Head; a very comfortable
Word to ^er who had so many Conflicts with the Old ^erpent, her Enemy, as she
always called him. Then follows a choice Collection in ten Pages, which she
concludes with, Romans 10. For the ^cripture says, Whosoever believes in him,
shall ^ot be ashamed.

The Sixth Head. The Promises to Perseverance in Grace: God which begins a good
Work in the Hearts of his People, will perfect it; for he works all our Works
in us, and for us, and to him be the Glory, who is the Author and Finisher, for
we are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation.

Then follow twenty nine Pages of such Promises.

The seventh Head. The Promises in Affliction for Support and Comfort. God does
not willingly grieve the Children of Men; there has no Temptation overtaken
you, but such as is common. But God in his Faithfulness will not suffer it to
be above Strength, but will with the Temptation also make a way to escape; for
he knows our Frame, whereof we are made and will not contend for Ever. Then
follo^ twenty one Pages of these Promises, upon Habak. 1.12. Art not thou from
Everlasting O Lord, my God, my Holy one, we shall not dy^ She adds, Blessed be
God for these Words, an^ all his blessed Promises, for which a Reason will
appear afterward, when she shows wha^ support they yielded her in an hour of
Temptation; in the close she directs her Words (...) her Children, for whose
use chiefly she ha^ taken this Pains.

Having these great and precious Promise^ cleanse your selves from all
filthiness of Flesh, an^ Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God* For
Godliness has the Promises of this Lif^ and of the Life to come; therefore
seek first t^^ Kingdom of Heaven, and its Righteousnes^ and all these things
shall be added unto you. The^ concludes thus:

I intend not by this Collection of Promise^ and Threatenings, transcribed out
of Scripture, (...) take you off from the Historical, and precept^ry part of
God's word, to which as nothing (...) to be added, so nothing is to be
diminished from it; but only to get Wine and Oil near-hand these precious
Cordials not far off, when mos^ need of them; therefore I request and charg^
your Conscientious Reading all the Truths o^ God, revealed in your Bible, the
Holy Scriptures.

The eighth Head. An abbreviation of Faith and Christian Principles, which
(says she) I have collected out of diverse Authors; with some things of my own
conceptions, as God helped my understanding. This contains eleven Pages, and is
a very judicious, and useful, and methodicall discourse; but because she
distinguishes not between what was her own, and what she collected from
others, I transcribe nothing out of it. She concludes it thus, These Truths I
do, with the best of my judgment, assent to; and beseech God to establish my
heart in the firm belief of his Word. Good Lord let my Faith be sound, and
saving also.

The ninth Head I may call a Body of Divinity; which she gives no intimation
whether it were collected from others, or of her own Composure, as she did in
what went before; and therefore I have reason to think it was her own.

It begins with a description of God, as to his Essence, Persons and
Attributes, then proceeds to his works of Creation and Providence, etc. and
proves, by apposite Scriptures, all she sets down. It Is very methodical and
clear, in 44 Pages. If I have any judgment, an able Divine need not be ashamed
to own it: and I think it would be no reproach to wish, That all could exceed
it.

When she has spoken of Death and the Resurrection, she adds, Good Lord fit me
for a dying hour: Bring me to it: In thy infinite Mercy be with me in it, and
carry me through it.

And after three Pages, in which she describes the happy estate of the Saints
in Heaven, and ends with these words; It is an eternal Happiness, which is the
crown of our crown. She concludes the whole with Prayer.

Dear and blessed Lord, how unsearchable is thy Wisdom, Goodness, and
unspeakable loving kindness to poor Sinners! I beseech thee take off my
affections to the transient things of this World; and wean my Heart from the
Love of this present Life; for at thy right hand are rivers of Pleasures, and
in thy Presence fullness of Joy, which no mortal Eye has seen, nor Ear heard;
neither can it enter into the Heart of Man, what thou have prepared for those
that love thee: for which blessed estate and rest, good Lord fit and prepare
me, thy poor and most unworthy creature: even so, come Lord Jesus. Amen, Amen.

The Tenth Head is marks of a regenerate Estate, by way of Question or
Examination, Do thou, etc. which she shuts up with this Prayer, after three
Pages;

Blessed Lord, thou art good, and continually do good unto thy People. I
beseech thee deliver me from a fluctuating and hesitating Mind, and help me,
that I may, with full resolution, and fixation of Soul, cleave unto thee; that
no lord, besides thee, may have Dominion or Rule over me; but that I may, with
full purpose of Heart, choose thy Service; which may obviate all the Temptations
of this World, either in the good things or bad things of it, or any thing
which would stand in competition with thee, to allure me, or deterr and scare
me from thee: Thy Service is perfect freedom; Lord help me to make that good
choice. Amen.

The last Head is a very large and devout Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving; that
as she had before, in the Theory, described Prayer, and given Directions how to
render it acceptable to God, and prevalent with him; so she might exemplify
those Rules that her dear Children might be taught, both by Rule and Example,
how to make their Addresses to the Throne of Grace, to honor God, and obtain
Mercy to help in time of need.

I am sensible how long this Section, concerning her Care of her Childrens
Education is; yet I might have easily made it twice as long; yea, 'twas hard to
avoid so doing. I wish it may be exciting and useful to any Women, to stir
them up to, and assist them in, the like diligence; that a Duty, the neglect of
which is of so bad consequence both to Parents and Children, yea, to the Church
and Kingdom, may be more laid to heart, and wisely and conscientiously
practiced. Amen.

SECT. XIII. Of Monthly Sacraments.
I Take the Liberty to call them so, because that was the designed, stated
return of them; though I confess, they were sometimes deferred to five or six
Weeks Revolution, because our plain Country People in some more busy times had
not the Vacancy, from their urgent, pressing Employments (as Harvest) for
Serious Preparation. She was a frequent, yea, constant Communicant; I remember
but one Sacrament in all the Years we lived together, from which she was
absent, and that was one of the Easter-Sacraments, when she had Received the
Lord's Day before.

She was always very Devout at the Celebration, and had an high Esteem of that
Office in the Liturgy, and her Preparation was always very Serious before;
never omitted to spend one Day at least, in Ritirement, to Fast, and Pray, and
examine herself, and humble her Soul before God, and most of the Week would be
much alone, Reading the best Books of that Subject, of which she had many; or
Reading them in the Family to prepare the Servants, and would often prompt and
exhort others not to turn their Backs upon that Holy Feast, to which God
himself so lovingly Invited them; and yet withal, caution them, not to run to
it Rashly, and without Consideration; that they might neither Starve themselves
by neglecting that Food of their Souls, nor Surfeit on it, for the want of
those Graces, upon the Exercise of which depends the Digestion of it, into
wholesome and strengthening Nourishment, and when she came Home, she would give
Solemn Thanks, and beg of God to make her constant in the Covenant she had so
signally renewed with him.

SECT. XIV. Of her Writings.
I Know not whether most to wonder at the quantity, or quality of her Writings;
I find so many, and they all so wise and good, and the rather, because her Pen
was the only thing at which she was slow, and the time spent in Devotion, and
Family-Affairs was so much, that either of them might have exhausted all, had
she not improved every Moment, and let none run to waste. She was exceeding
Expeditious in whatever she took in Hand, and would dispatch a Business while
another would be going about it; yet (which she would bewail, but could not
conquer) she was slow at Writing, beyond what was ordinary. She had been used
from a Child to a kind of Set-Hand, and took off her Pen almost at every
Letter, which put a great stop to her speed. She writ very straight, fair, and
legibly for such a kind of Hand, yet was long about it; which notwithstanding,
besides the large Book, of which so much before, she has left many, both Books
and Papers, Copies of good Letters, Meditations, and the like.

There is one endorsed thus, Contemplations on the 104 Psalm, 10th Verse.

In which, besides a large, Ingenious, and Pious Introduction, showing what led
her to the following Thoughts (which was chiefly the consideration of God's
unlimited Goodness to all the Works of his Hands, as the great Benefactor of
the whole Creation; (which she handsomely illustrates in four Pages,) contains
190 Pages of the largest Paper of Twelve-pence a Quire. Having set down the
Words, He sends the Springs into the Valleys, which run among the Hills; she
thus begins: This Scripture has a large Extent, it has a double Blessing in
it, Temporal and Spiritual Enjoyments; the one may be extracted, or drawn from
the other, it affords the upper by the nether Springs. The Valleys and Hills
represent two sorts of Men; the fruitful Valleys are the Character of good Men,
the barren Hills are the Character of bad Men; both Temporal and Spiritual
Blessings are given, at least tendered to both good and bad, but they are
differently received; and so she proceeds to so great Enlargement, and by many
more Allegories Piously to fill up near thirty Sheets close written, but I
refrain giving a farther Taste.

There is also a large Meditation of a Be caught in a Spider's Web, and
assaulted by three Spiders successively after she had been dis-entangled once
and again; to which she compares a Christian hampered in the Snares of Satan,
and after some Freedom, yet again, and again molested by him; and very Piously,
and Ingeniously runs the Parallel in many Particulars, in near two Sheets,
which she concludes with a very devout Prayer, which respects her own
afflicted, and vexatious Trials, by renewed Temptations, which may be suitably
touched when I come to that Head: There is also a Treatise of the Grace of
Humility, which was so much in her Heart and Practice. She describes it has
many Sentences about it, and there are Scriptures collected concerning it in
loose Papers, but this was rather desired than finished; abundance more there
are, besides Copies of very good Letters, which I forbear to mention, because I
intend to publish some of them in an Appendix.

SECT. XV. Discreet Management of her Family.
SHE often, and very well considered of what Consequence it is to discharge the
Duties incumbent upon us in the several Relations and Stations in which God's
Providence is pleased to place us, and that not only the credit of Religion in
the Eyes of the World, but also the Power and Comfort of it in the Sight of
God, and sense of our own Consciences has great dependence on it, and that he
or she cannot be a good Christian, who is not a good Husband, or Wife, Parent,
Master, or Governess of a Family, and therefore much studied to know her
Relative Duties, and to approve herself in the well discharging of them.

Therefore she oftener Read, and oftener thought of the thirty first Chapter of
the Proverbs, and her Practice was as good a Comment as can be made upon the
oeconomick Rules there given. She was, as I touched before, Martha and Mary
both unto Perfection, yet always acted Martha's Part with Mary's Spirit,
(though Martha also was a good Woman;) she spiritualized her Worldly
Businesses, behaved herself in her Family, as became one who was of the Family
of the Firstborn; made all her Employments a Sacrifice, by performing them in
obedience to God, whose Providence imposed them on her, in setting her in a
Station, in which they were required of her; not only submitted to them as
Mortifications, (as is said of Marquess Renti, in the two years Drudgery, and
Diversion he was content to undergo, in rebuilding the Seat of his Ancestors,
because he esteemed himself called to it when he was the Head of his Family,)
but with a willing Mind cheerfully engaged in them, accounting all as done to
God, which his Appointment made her Duty: For if the Maidservant may sweep the
House to God, (as Mr. R. Bolton expresses himself) by considering it as a Duty,
in the condition to which he calls her, how much more may the Mater-familias,
the Mistress, govern it for him, while she has an Eye to him who is the God of
Order, and has designed every one their Work, as well in the less, as in the
larger Societies of Men.

But I have already insisted on so many things justly reducible to this Head,
that I have prevented my self, especially considering the more weighty part of
Family-Discipline relates to Persons, and the lighter only to Things; having
said so much of her Care of her Children and Servants, the other Branch may be
quickly dispatched, with slighter Touches.

What the Apostle says of the Vessels in an House, some are to Honor, some to
Dishonor; I may allusively say of Affairs, some are more Honorable and
Becoming, some more Mean and Base; to this latter sort she put not her Hand, as
it was not fit or decent that she should; yet would she not disdain to inspect,
and order those, to whom they did belong. And therefore, though she was neither
her own Cook, or Dairy-Maid, yet was she always Clerk of her little Kitchen, if
I may so speak.

But whatever required more Art and Curiosity, for the Closet or the Parlour,
as Preserving, drawing Spirits in an Alembick, or cold Still, Pastry, Angelots,
and other Cream-Cheeses, of which she made many, both for home Expense, and to
present to Friends, (and have been begged, and sent, at some hundred Miles
distance,) they always past through her own neat and Skillful Hands; especially
since the Death of one, and Marriage of our other Daughter, on whom she imposed
those Matters, to perfect them by Practice, in what she had so accurately
taught them.

So for all sorts of English Wines, and Sider, which when Friends have
commended, (it may be too highly,) saying, I had constantly the best they ever
drank; she would betwixt Jest and Earnest sometimes reply, His Sider! it is my
Sider: I have all the Pains and Care, and he has all the Praise who never
meddles with it. To gratify those whom such an Account may please, I will
venture to set down her last Years Experiment. Having a good Plantation both of
Redstreaks, which are the Herefordshire Sider-Apple, and Gennet-moils, which
are the Worcestershire, and make a Sider of a very different Body, Color,
Gust, and Flavor. I desired they might be put into sundry Vessels after they
were ground, and pressed severally; but she came to me and said, My Dear, thou
know not the trouble of drawing off so many Vessels, I Will make an Hogshead
of them, putting both together. I left her to her Liberty, and it succeeded so
well, all that taste it, say, they never drank so good.

But I have staid too long in the outward Court of her Secular Accomplishments,
and Care, I will hasten out of it by a few Paces more. She was Careful without
sollicitous Anxiety; Frugal without sordid Parsimony; Liberal, without
squandring Profuseness; Laborious, without servile Drudgery; Decent, without
vain Ostentation; Circumspect, without disquieting Diffidence; Neat, without
Niceness, would not sound ill if my haste would allow me to study Cadencies,
and Truth would permit it; but I want a without to follow that Epithet Neat;
for if in any thing she knew no Bounds or Limits, it was in this; and she would
often say, she envied Great Persons for nothing but the neatness of their
Living, which a plain Country Family would not admit of.

I shall conclude this Section with some few of her oeconomick Axioms; such as
these, among many: Want nothing, but waste nothing. I hate a base, fordid
Spirit, but I reckon it not such to spare well, what would be spent ill; what
is spoiled does no body any good. When she laid by what was not at present
beneficial, she would say, What is not useful now, may at another time be
needed; and though she would not use the Proverb, Thrift is the fuel of
Magnificence, that lofty Word sounding too big for her humble Mouth, and Mind,
yet a Note or two lower she liked well, Honest Frugality is the Nurse of Decent
Hospitality; and if we had not the most, her Prudence took care that what we
had was usually of the best, at least made so by her well ordering it.

She was exceeding watchful to prevent danger by Fire, and to that end, would
see all raked up safe before she went to Bed, a small Negligence often losing
what the greatest Diligence cannot recover.

But no Circumspection could be greater than what she constantly Exercised, to
prevent both Extremes, of Quarrels betwixt Fellow Servants, or too great
Familiarity betwixt Men and Maids, which might turn to worse Inconveniences;
and if she spied any uncivil, or wanton Gestures, she would severely reprehend
them, and wisely and gravely admonish them of the Evil; telling them, that
Modesty was a Woman's Ornament, and Guard of Chastity, which would seldom or
never be attempted, did not some lightness, or unwary Carriage embolden those
who did assault it, and the Flames which scorched the Female-Honour, were
mostly kindled by Sparks of their own striking.

SECT. XVI. Visitations by Sicknesses on our selves or Children, and Death of
some of them.
THough there was not one of these which she has not Recorded, yet I shall
touch but few of them, she being always the same under the like Dispensations,
all of a Piece.

I am very sensible how little others are concerned to be acquainted with God's
particular Dealings toward so private, and obscure Persons; yet her
affectionate Tenderness, her devout Addresses to God, her Faith in dependence
upon him, her meek Submission to him, her silent Acquiescence under them, and
the Supports God vouchsafed her in such Trials, I think may be useful to other
Women, Wives, and Mothers in like Trials, which is the end for which I write
the whole.

I have given one Instance of her Behavior in one of my Sicknesses, and could
add many more, in all which she manifested no less endearing Love to me, nor
less fervent Addresses to God in time of my Danger, or Pious and enlarged
Praises upon my Recovery.

December 1660. After Lying-in she had a long and sore Sickness, of which she
thus writes:

I acknowledge, to the Praise of God, that in this Sickness I had many
Manifestations of the Love of God in his People, besides the very great Care,
and most endearing Love of my Husband, so exceedingly expressed to me. Most were
much concerned for me, and were great Sollicitors at the Throne of Grace in my
behalf. I bless God that did not suffer my strong Enemy to Triumph over me,
though he impetuously assaulted me; for greater is he that is for me, than he
that is against me.

I remember that in this Sickness, which held me long, and brought me very low,
that almost a quarter of a Year I had one or two to watch with me every Night,
in which as in other long Sicknesses I was never unprovided, but had the
continued readiness of Friends to me or mine in their Attendance and Help, for
which I bless God. A plain Neighbor, a poor Woman, came to see me, and, with
much Joy, seeing me out of my Bed, told me, she never awaked in the Night but
she Prayed for me, and according to her plain Expression, said, that I had as
many Prayers as if I were a Queen. Good Lord shower down the Blessing of Prayer
upon my Soul.

God's good Providence has been such to me, that with other signal Mercies, I
cannot choose but express his kindness to me, in restraining the Smoking of a
Chimney, in a Chamber which was most convenient for me at my Lyings-in, and in
times of Sickness; which at other times, when I have had little use of it, has
been very subject to Smoke, but then it never annoyed me, how fantastic this
may seem to any; yet I bless God for it, who compasses me about with loving
Kindness, and tender Mercies.

My Daughter Margaret had a long Quartane Ague about the Year 1663. which held
her three Quarters of a Year. We used several Medicines, but they proved
ineffectual; but by God's Providence, a very holy good Man, -- my very choice
good Friend, a great support to me in my Afflictions, came to see us; and
advised me to the use of Matthews's Pill. My good Friend helped me to weigh out
twenty Grains, for twice taking; which had so good effect, that after the first
she took, she had not the least Symptom of a Fit; which before was very
afflictive. I bless God for the Mercy; and verily believe, the benefit was more
from the Prayers of the good Man, than from the Medicine, which has been used
often by others, and not had the like success.

In the Year 1667. my Daughter Margaret had a most dangerous Fit, which
exceedingly surprised me with great Fear. The more because my Husband was a
Mile or two from home. She was suddenly taken with most violent Vomitting,
viscous, green, and black Matter; and so sick withal, as if she would have died
presently. She Vomited tough Phlegm, like Grissels, with which I thought I saw
digested Worms; which Matter I believe was contracted by her long Quartane. We
could not tell the certain occasion of her ilness; but feared, it might be the
giving her some Mercurius Dulcis, which having been kept long, was grown Crude
again. But whatever it was, we hope it contributed much to her future health,
through the overruling Goodness of God; for the abundance of corrupt Matter
which came away must needs have been very prejudicial to her, if it had been
retained.

O Lord, I bless thee, who can, and do bring Good out of those Evils which
are most affrighting and disquieting to us. I beseech thee with this, and all
other thy providential Dispensations to her, quicken and excite her to a
thankful Acknowledment of thy Mercies, in an Holy Life, and her future
dependence and trust in thee.

Such devout and grateful Improvements did this holy Woman constantly make, on
all God's Providence toward her self and others: Which I humbly and heartily
pray they may kindle in all who read them, in the like circumstances, to
themselves and theirs: which is the only reason of my transcribing them.

The next afflictive Providence I shall take notice of, having past by many, is
the Sickness and Death of her Daughter Mary; which she sets down, more largely
than usually, with the circumstances which attended it. I shall shorten it what
I can, retaining the substance; because it may be useful to provoke Children
of the same Age to an early sense of Piety.

My sweet Child, and dearly beloved Daughter Mary, a sweet tender hearted
obedient Child, of great Prudence, and early Piety, and exemplary Inclination
to the knowledge of God, and concerns of a better Life; she fell suddenly ill
of a Sore Throat, Jan. 17. 1669. and after four Days ilness, sweetly fell
asleep in Jesus Christ, Jan. 21.

She was Six Years and a quarter old when she departed this Life. She was of a
quick apprehension, an even temper, cheerful but serious; of a pretty
presence, not bold but of an innocent confidence; a sweet composure of Love and
Humility; of such Generosity she would not lie; I do not know that ever she
spoke an untruth; she was Religious; she coveted the best things; much loved
her Books; and when she read got most of it by heart, Psalms, and diverse
Scriptures; which when rehearsed to others, she would repeat so sententiously,
that thereby might be discovered the affections of her Heart and Soul in the
love of God's Word.

Half a Year before she dyed she would scarce give her self the liberty of her
meals, but would be taken down from Table, if she might, to get to her Book;
and would by Candlelight sit reading by me an hour, sometimes two by the
Glass. She would be attentive at the reading the Scriptures in the Family, and
ask her Sister the meaning of some Passages she understood not. She would
constantly go alone to Prayer. She told one of the Maids the Devil tempted her
to Play at Prayers; but she had prayed against him, and that he did not trouble
her so much since.

She desired one of her Sisters to grant her a Request, and said, that she must
not deny her: Which was, Not to refuse any good Counsel, when ever it was given
her; but to accept of it from whom soever it came. Another time, being with her
Sisters as they sat at Work; she told them, all those things would be dirt in
Heaven: And it most concerned them to get their Sins Pardoned, and an Interest
in Jesus Christ. Discoursing of the Vanity of this World, and Happiness of
being Good, and fit for Heaven.

As she had opportunity, she would frequently be giving good Counsel, with much
Sweetness and Gravity.

If she were ill, she would strive to hide it, for fear of Grief to her Father
and my self; saying, when we asked her how she did, Pretty well, I thank God.
Four Days before she died, when the Maid went to help her up in the Morning,
she told her she was very Sick; but God would do her good by that Sickness,
and she should love him the better for it.

In this last and short sickness, she had very serious apprehensions of Death.
Said she should die, but was not afraid of Death: And desired she might die
quietly, and without disturbance. The Physician desiring to give her a little
Wine, asked her if she loved Sack? she answered, No. He desired her to take a
little: She said she would if he pleased; but she did not love it to fuddle
with. A few hours before she died, she desired to go to Bed, (out of which she
had been taken by reason of the Phlegm that troubled her,) and I being
unwilling, she said, she would now go to Bed for adieu, and for all: Where she
fell a sleep in Jesus; enfolded in the Arms of Everlasting Mercies. She
resigned up her Soul with these, and the like Expressions, Lord let me come to
thee, my Lord and my God: And, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. I acknowledge the
Words were given her, but she readily received them, and often repeated though
she could not speak but with difficulty; she had been so affable and winning to
all, Rich and Poor, that many shed more Tears for her, than at the departure of
their own Children; she was much desired in Life, and of all who knew her, much
lamented at Death.

How partial soever this Relation may seem to any, and as from bribed
Affection, yet I assert the Truth to God's Goodness, who has ordained Praises
in the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings, and has, I humbly hope, now perfected
the same in the Consummation of her Eternal Bliss, in the Fruition of himself
to his Everlasting Praises.

I have hitherto in this Account left out many remarkable Passages for Brevity;
let me obtain liberty to transcribe the rest of the Paragraph verbatim, word,
for word, as her Pen left it.

Lord I bless thee that of Eleven, for whom I Praise thee, thou have yet spared
me two; I beseech thee, if it may consist with thy good Pleasure, continue them
in this World, keeping them from the Evil of it, to a good Old Age, choice
Instruments of thy Glory. God Lord Sanctify them with thy Grace and
Holy-Spirit, and with an Indelible Character and Inscription, stamp thy own
Image on them, that they may be thine by Grace and Adoption. Lord be thou their
God and Portion. I beseech thee put them not off with any thing less than thy
self. Good Lord, I beg that thou will take a through and full Possession of
their Souls, and give them to retrieve my Errors by a more early knowing,
serving, and loving of thee, and punish none of mine Iniquities with their
Sins, but keep them blameless to thy Everlasting Kingdom, and bind up their
Souls in the bundle of Eternal Life, Amen, Amen.

January 23. 1669. Was a day of Mercy to me in the midst of my Affliction,
being Lord's Day, my sweet Mary lying then Dead with us in the House; the
extremity of my Affection forced me into the Chamber where she then lay, a cold
piece of Clay: I there poured out my Soul to God in Prayer, and from thence
returned into to the Chamber of my signal Mercies I have received from God, who
comfort those who are cast down. Though he denied my vehement Desires, and
wrestlings with him in the time of her Sickness, for her longer continuance
with me in this World, the Lord abundantly made up, and compensated my Loss.

I took my Bible, and my Intention was to Read in the New Testament to allay my
own Grief, with the dolorous Sufferings of my Savior, but my Bible suddenly
fell open in my Lap, and my Eye presently fixed upon Habbak. 1.12. which was
powerfully set home upon my Heart, with great Comfort, and Refreshment, with
full Measure running over, streams of Mercy, and Loving Kindness; yea^ of
tenderest Mercies flowing into my Soul; an Eternal God in exchange of a
transient Comfort. The Lord tendered me himself, who is from Everlasting, with
this Propriety; the Lord my God opposing his all-sufficient Righteousness
against all my Unrighteousness, My Holy One, I should not Dye, but Live. Lord,
how have thou silenced my inordinate Passions, and Affections, in
superabundantly out-bidding all Creature Comforts and Relations! I beseech thee
enable me so to live here, that I may ever live with thee, where I shall sin no
more, and Grief, Sorrow, and Sighing shall flee away.

The same Lord's Day in the Afternoon, my Daughter Elizabeth, (whom God gave me
June 8. 1658.) to our great Satisfaction and Comfort, suddenly broke out into a
Flood of Tears, and most Pathetical, Vehement Desires after God, and his Grace;
with Confession, and bewailing of her Sins with such sensible, and suitable
Expressions, as showed it came from her very Soul, which drew plenty of Tears
of Love and Admiration from us all

O my God, how shall I love thee, how shall I Praise thee for this Grace, which
I trust was the Work of thy Blessed Spirit! Good Lord confirm and establish the
Thoughts of her Heart before thee for Ever.

This day was a Tragi-Comedy, if I may so speak; Bitterness turned into
surprising Sweetness; Weeping had continued for a Night, but Joy came in before
the succeeding Morning, even Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. I never
remembered my Dear under such transports of Spiritual Peace and Satisfaction, as
from the Consolations of God, from the Manifestations of his Love, which flowed
into her Soul from that Scripture abovenamed; and I may truly say, the
Impressions of it never wore wholly off, but even at many Years distance, the
naming of those Words would renew the Spiritual Relish she tasted in them, and
the briny Tears for the natural Death of one very desirable Child, were
swallowed up by the Tears of Gladness for the lively Symptoms of the spiritual
Birth of another, not less dear to us; The House was a Bokim, not one dry Eye;
the Pathetick Earnestness with which the Child cried for Pardon, and supplies
of Grace, enflamed and melted all that heard her, and the abundance of Tears
she shed so freely, were like Water put into a Pump; it brought up even Buckets
full from all that saw them: What would I not give for such another Evening?

I know there are too many in the World who will make these things the Subject
of their Mirth and Scorn, and opening other Books much oftener than the Holy
Bible would be more affected, with an auspicious Cut, or turning up a lucky
Trump, than lighting on the divinest Promise in the Sacred Volumes, and will
stigmatize such Impressions with the Contemptuous Brand of Enthusiasm; or at
the mildest, slight them, as the Effects of warmed Fancy: But let them alone,
I Will not disturb their pleasing Dreams; yet, Wisdom is Justified of her
Children, and though I will not presume to say, We speak Wisdom to them who are
Perfect, and write such things for them who have their Senses Exercised, to
discern and relish them. Yet I cannot but call to Mind how Petrus Blesensis
endorsed his Treatise of the Love of God, Secretum meum mihi, My Secret to my
self; and I hope this will meet with some Readers to whom it may not be as
insipid, as the White of an Egg, to allude to Job's Expression; and for those
who think it the cheapest and quickest way to ease their Minds, in their
unacquaintedness with such things, to ridicule them in others, I say, Mock on.

I pass by, for Brevity-sake, many excellent Passages of most Exemplary Piety,
in several Pages relating to the Occurrences of near three Year. Then follows,

In the beginning of September 1671. my Daughter Elizabeth had a great Fit of
Sickness, which brought her very low, a Fever, with a Rhumatism; we had the
Advice of eight or nine Physicians from London, and Chelmsford, and five upon
the Place, etc.

My self watched many Nights with her, the time I could spare in my careful
attendance on her, I spent in Prayers and Tears at the Throne of Grace in her
behalf, from whence I had a Merciful Return. One Night she rutled, and
breathed short, which made me fear the approach of Death. I having by me Oil of
Sweet-Almonds, new drawn, I desired to give her some of it, but was afraid to
attempt it, and her Stomach did so nauseate what was given her, though in it
self Pleasant. I went from her into another Chamber, and earnestly besought God
if he saw it good for her, to incline her to a willing taking of it. I brought
her five or six Spoonfuls in a Silver Cup, which she received of me without
speaking one Word against it, and drank it off, without the least reluctance or
Regret. I do most heartily bless God who did not cast out my Prayer, the Oil
caused her to Vomit much tough Phlegm; and withal gently Purged her, after which
she recovered Health, I thank God.

Blessed God, I beseech thee enable her to render to thee suitable returns of
Love and Obedience, that the residue, and remainder of her days here, may be in
thy Fear, not to offend thee, but faithfully to serve thee, who did remember
and help her in her low Estate, that when thou shall Consummate her Days on
Earth, she may be ever with thee in thy Eternal Kingdom and Glory. Amen.

I shall conclude this Section with the Account of her Carriage, and Demeanor
in the last Sickness, and Death of this Dearly Beloved Child. I confess she is
very large in what she writes of it, therefore I shall contract it what I can,
though I find not an impertinent Line in so many Pages, and I hope it will not
seem tedious, because it is so suitable to the End I design; which is to
propound her Example of Motherly Affection, and Christian Submission to, and
Holy Improvement of God's smarty Trials. She thus begins:

I have now one of the saddest of God's Providence to record, which has
befallen me in the Comforts of this Life; I beseech God to sanctify it to me,
and those concerned with me. Then having at large related all the Circumstances
of her Sickness, she proceeds. She was sixteen Years, three Months, and eleven
Days old when she dyed. After fourteen Days Sickness of the Smallpox, she
changed her Corruptible State, I humbly hope, into Immortal Glory, where she
shall never Sin, and the Effects of Sin shall be no more.

She was a very Beautiful and Lovely Woman, etc. God gave her a good
understanding, etc. And so having described her Body and Mind exactly, she
corrects herself; but thus to Characterize her may not suit my Pen: But I may
acknowledge these Accomplishments to the Praise of God's Goodness.

The ground of my Comfort is, her sweet Inclination to the things of God, and
her Souls concerns, as to her eternal State, unto which she is gone unspotted,
from the gross defilements of the World, and was Mercifully preserved from ever
falling into any scandalous Sin, and is set out of the reach of Sin,
Temptation, and Sorrows, got into Harbor, off a Tempestuous Sea.

I bless God we have good hopes of her Eternal Peace and Safety; for besides a
blameless Conversation, free from gross Enormities; she was very Conscientious
in the Duties of Religion; she would always speak the Truth.

She was meek of Spirit, very humble and charitable to the Poor, and Pitiful,
and would relieve them as far as she had wherewith to do it; she was very
tenderhearted, fearful of Sin, and of being found an Hypocrite.

Besides Family-Prayers, she Worshipped God in private twice a Day in secret
Prayer; in the Morning she read the Scriptures, and in the Afternoon spent an
hour or more in reading good Books. She did exhort others to serious Piety, and
in time of Health, would be counselling, and advising the Servants privately to
be Religious, and to take heed of delaying, and putting off their Returns to
God.

She had great Impressions on her Heart, as to the careful observation of the
Sabbath, and when she had made any digression with Worldly Discourse with
others, she would make acknowledgment she had done amiss; a Sin lightly
considered, and as little bewailed.

'Then she relates the Impressions of Gods Spirit on her Heart when twelve
Years old, (of which before;) and her Patient, and Pious Carriage in her
Sickness three Years before this. Then proceeds,

She had also Experience of Spiritual Temptations, but resisted them with
Abhorrence. In this her last Sickness she acquainted me with them; telling me,
she had been much troubled with a wicked thing; I asked her what it was, she
said she would not speak it for all the World, it made her fear lest she had
committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost. Poor Lamb! she kept this Trouble to
her half a Year, only her Sister knew it, and often see her sit and Weep most
bitterly; but I humbly hope, God gave her strength against the Temptation, and
quieted her Mind: After she revealed this Affliction, and better understood the
nature of these Troubles, which as God enabled me I informed her, and strove to
Comfort her.

In the time of this last Sickness, she often asked me to Pray with her; which
when I performed, I was too absolute with God for her Life, all the time of her
Sickness, without express Submission to his Will. The Lord pardon the Extremity
of my Affection.

In this Sickness she was very tenderhearted, expressed herself very
Understandingly, and Piously in Prayer, with other sweet and gracious Requests
to God, she begged of the Lord, that the Infection of her Disease might spread
no farther in the Family; which Desires of hers the Lord heard, and granted.
For which Preservation I do desire to be thankful to the God of our Mercies,
which in the midst of his just Judgments for my Sins, in this heavy stroke,
showed us much Compassion, in preventing our farther Calamity in that Disease.

The dear sweet Child often said, She should die; yet saying, If the Lord pleased
to spare her, she would labor with watchfulness to serve him better, and to
amend all she had found amiss; desiring me to be her faithful remembrancer.

She was troubled that sometimes she had lain in bed too long in the morning;
especially for being straitened for time on the Sabbath Day, which caused her
to slubber over those Duties which should have been better performed; bewailed
her unprofitableness, and promised, if she recovered this sickness, better to
observe the Lord's Day.

To the Physician that attended her, in her sickness, she said, That he had
many opportunities in going to sick and death Beds, to mind him of Mortality,
and though none should be excusable before God; yet they should be most
inexcusable, that had such frequent warnings: Said, That in health was the
fittest time to prepare for death, for in sickness she could do little more
than consult her ease.

Dear Child, she one Morning desired to see her Father, and that she might see
his Face; saying, She had now taken her leave of her dear Father's Face. But
the Lord spared her a little longer, and she did see him again; and now I
humbly hope she sees the face of her Father in Heaven.

Dear Child, she desired her Father and my self to forgive her, in what she had
at any time offended us; saying, If the Lord saw it good to spare her, she
hoped she should double her Diligence in her Care, that she should never grieve
us in any thing. But this testimony, I bless God, I can give of her, Few
Children exceeded her in dutiful loving Obedience to her Parents.

She expressed her self very affectionately and honorably of her Sister, and
that she was sorry she had sometimes diverted her, by staying in her Closet
when she would have been better employed.

Sweet Child, she was very tender spirited, and was troubled for several little
things, which were very small or no Offense; and if she had done any thing
amiss, would ask forgiveness.

She would sometimes say to me, my dear Mother, you cannot conceive what passes
through my poor head, nor what your poor Child endures. And then she would
bless God that what she suffered was not Hell, where the Damned had not a drop
of water to cool their Tongue: And said, What is that I feel compared to the
sufferings of my Savior, who under-went such torments to save Sinners?

Dear Lamb, she desired that what Money she had might be given in the Parish to
some poor people whom she named; and that her dear Father would extend his
Charity out of what he would have bestowed at her Burial. Which was performed.

In the whole time of her sickness I was not from her but one night, not being
well; the last night but one before she departed this Life; neither was I from
her at any time, but when the pressing necessities of my frail Nature urged it
for a little rest; and she was very glad when she saw me again, and would
express her loving Affections and Thankfulness to me for my Care of her. I had
many sweet endearing expressions from her, of her Love and Duty. She said, If
the Lord spare me I hope I shall do thus as I have promised: But if I die, my
dear Mother, you will remember what I now said to you; and I could be content
to be a little Child again, that I might lie at your Breast and Bosom.

I have transcribed this long account, hoping it may be useful to some young
Gentlewomen, Daughters of my dear Wife's Christian Friends, or others into
whose hands, their kindness, or God's Providence may put it. Now follows her
exemplary Submission and Improvement.

She was exceeding desirable to us, for the loveliness of her Person, sweetness
of her Disposition, readiness of her Obedience, quickness of her Parts, serious
Inclination to the ways of God, and many sweet and winning Qualities, which
rendered her exceeding amiable, and very pleasant to all that knew her.

But it was the Lord, the sovereign Lord of us, and her, and all the world,
whose she was much more than ours. God does all things well, wisely,
righteously, graciously, and most faithfully.

The Lord was pleased to stir up great sympathy and tender Compassion in his
People, with many Prayers for her in her sickness, and for us since; and though
it pleased God to deny them for her longer continuance in this World, yet,
blessed be God, we have great cause to hope in his Mercies, that those Prayers
are not lost, but for the Sake, Merits, and Mediation of her Redeemer and
Savior Jesus Christ, are granted to an higher end in eternal Bliss.

Good Lord, sanctify all our Afflictions to us, that we may bear them with
meekness and submission, that they may not only be the Effects of thy
Displeasure, but of thy adopting Love.

Good Lord, sanctify this heavy Affliction to us, and show me in particular
why thou contendest with me: Therefore, besides thy Holy, Righteous, and Wise
Providence, and Immutable Decree, which had determined her time, and the
measure of her Days, which I desire humbly, and with all Submission to Adore
and Acquisce in. Good Lord, give me to know and lay to heart the forfeiting
Cause on my part, which moved thee to smite with so severe a stroke, in
bereaving us of so desirable a Child, and so great a peace of the comfort of my
Life in this World. Lord, pardon my Ingratitude for Mercies enjoyed, that I
have not so improved them to thy glory, by a more careful, circumspect,
exemplary, holy Life. I beseech thee forgive my slackness in seasonable
reproofs, admonitions, advice, and counsels to my Children or others. Although
thou see good to cut short my opportunities, yet help me better to improve
what thou will still entrust me with, and forgive me all my neglects of my
relative Duty. I desire to own thy Righteousness, and that thou have punished
me less than my Iniquities deserve.

I bless thee that thou have spared to me my dear Husband; I beseech thee
mightily to furnish him with the Gifts and Graces of thy Spirit, and give him a
long continuance in this Life, very instrumental to thy glory, the benefit and
great advantage of thy Church and People, and at last full fruition of thy self
in eternal Glory. Lord, I bless thee that thou still intrusts us Parents to a
Child, I beseech thee bless this only one, and enable us with much Wisdom and
Diligence to exhort, instruct, and train up for thee, her thou have yet spared
to us. Good Lord bless her, and she shall be blessed: Bless her in Soul, with
the plentiful Effusions of thy Holy Spirit, and all the Graces of it. Bless
her Body with an healthful Constitution, and Honor her with long Life in the
ways of Righteousness: Suffer not her heart to be set on the gilded Vanities of
this World, but grant her of the things of this Life, what thou think good
for her, and be thou her God and Portion; and when thou shall conclude her days
on Earth, I beseech thee receive her to thy heavenly Kingdom. Amen, Amen.

I am sensible of the length of the preceding Section, and will not make it
longer by a needless and useless Apology, needless to those who are acquainted
with the actings of that sweet Spirit, that breathed so fragrantly in her, on
such occasions; and useless to those who are not only Strangers, but Enemies to
such a temper of Mind; and had it contained but twenty lines, would have
esteemed it too long by fifteen of them. I shall endeavor brevity in those
which follow.

SECT. XVII. Renewed Assaults of her Enemy by Temptation.
THis was her almost constant trouble for many Years, which she used to call,
emphatically, Her Affliction: For 'twas with her, one of his living Members, as
with our Blessed Lord, her, and our Head, of whom I noted above, When the Devil
had finished all his present Temptations, he departed from him for a season,
which clearly intimates his returning to renew his Assaults. She sometimes had
a breathing time vouchsafed her, by the gracious Restraints God laid upon her
Enemy; but usually not very long: for using to afford her the best Assistance
that I could, I sometimes for some Weeks or Months have refrained to mention
them, that I might not awaken the sleeping Lion; and she taking no notice of
them, I have often said, I hope, my Dear, thou have been now some good space
free from thy Affliction. Alas! my Dear, would she reply with a deep sigh, I
have kept silence, because I would not weary thee with my continual complaints.
And other whiles would gratefully acknowledge God's goodness, in yielding her
some Respite, some Calms and quiet Intervals. Yet after the Day God so strongly
comforted her by Habakkuk i. 12. though I cannot say she was wholly free. I do
not remember she ever complained of her Temptations being either too fierce or
frequent, as they had been before, nor did she once mention them in her last
Sickness. Blessed be God's goodness to her.

This cruel, but cowardly Enemy, usually made his fiercest Onsets when she was
exercised with Indisposition of Mind or Body. I will give one Instance of each.

First, Under Indisposition of Mind with great Sorrow.

In the beginning of May, 1680. an Affliction befell me, my former Troubles
returned upon me. A wound not healed brake forth with deep Trouble of Mind,
much Afflicted with blasphemous Suggestions. The good Lord rebuke them, and
with his All-sufficient Grace, cast out of my Soul whatever may offend and
provoke him to so severe a Scourge, which in my own strength I am not able to
stand under, so unsupportable is the burden: But the good Lord give me to see,
that by the supporting Grace of his former Compassions, I am preserved from the
poisonous infection of them. Satan taking advantage of my melancholy
Disposition, growing upon me after the Death of my dearly beloved Child, Mrs.
Margaret Cox, renewed these Assaults.

And as in such Cases, the subtle malicious Enemy will follow his blow home,
as far as he is suffered, and multiply every Molehill into a Mountain, as we
speak Proverbially; so he endeavored to increase her disquiet, by another very
small Circumstance. For she proceeds in her Complaint. I had also a great damp
and check on my earnest Endeavors to teach my little Boy his Book. He at
little more than three Years old would read well in his Primmer, on a sudden he
forsook it, not through any evil Disposition in him, I am not able to give an
acccount of it; but it occasioned me much grief and trouble. But I bless God
for his Mercy to me. Half a Year after I began anew with him, and he has with
greater readiness to it, and love of it, learned much better than before. So
indulgently condescending was the divine Goodness, to relieve her suitably, and
prevent the occasions her Enemy caught at to disturb her by.

Secondly, Under Indisposition of Body, by a long Sickness.

It pleased God to suffer my old Enemy impetuously to assault me: This
Visitation was very cloudy, which then I could not see through, nor apprehend
God's Goodness, though he vouchsafed many discoveries of his Favor to me.

I shall not multiply Passages of the same import, nor pursue all the Methods
her Christian Prudence made use of for her support, as frequent Conference with
my self, and some few choice Christian Friends, whom she much esteemed for
their great Piety, experience in spiritual Matters, and prevalence with God in
Prayer. She made no noise with her Troubles, revealed them but to few, and to
those whom she judged fittest to counsel and comfort her, and sympathize with
her in her Temptations, as having had Experience of the like, or been often
consulted by them who had. But her best Defense was to take to her self the
whole Armor of God, and her chief Refuge was to the Throne of Grace, to appeal
to God who comfort them who are cast down, and to wrestle with God for help
in time of need, whom she used to importune to teach her hands to war, and her
fingers to fight in her spiritual Warfare, and to carry on the War at his own
Charge, because the Quarrel was his, and managed against the grand Enemy of his
Glory, as much as of her Peace,

I shall transcribe a Paper which I find Endorsed thus: In time of Temptation,
writ by me Elizabeth Walker.
O Most holy, wise, powerful, gracious, faithful, unchangeable, and eternal
God, I thy poor afflicted Creature, tossed on Waves and Billows of Sin and
Temptation, fly unto thee for Refuge in this Storm, begging of thee thy
supporting Grace, helping me against the Assaults of my spiritual Enemies, by
what wile soever they invade my Soul, with abhorred impure Motions, vile and
detestable Suggestions, which, through thy Grace, I loath, O blessed Lord, and
enter my solemn Protest against them; Defiance and Detestation of them. Good
God, I would not have an irreverent thought of thy sacred Being,
incomprehensible and most excellent Perfection, and transcendent Glory, which I
would, and do with my whole Heart, Soul, and all the Powers of my whole Man,
with all integrity acknowledge and subscribe to with mine own Hand, to which, O
Lord, I beg the Seal of thy Spirit, as a Witness to my Soul, that I am, in
Christ Jesus, thy Child and Servant,

Elizabeth Walker.

Engaged I am, O Lord, by Covenant with thee in Baptism, to fight thy Battles,
I beseech thee put on me that whole and complete Armor, that I may be able to
resist my strong Enemies, which war against my Soul, and fight against thee.
Blessed Lord, I desire to prostrate my self at thy Feet, in the deepest sense
of my own Unworthiness, that thou should look upon, and help such a
Miscreant, and forlorn Sinner. But for his sake that never sinned, I beseech
thee support me with thy compassionate Mercy to me a loathsome and defiled
Sinner, and give me not over to spiritual Judgments, hardness of Heart,
blindness of Mind, Impenitency, an evil Heart of Unbelief, departing from thee.
Give me not up into the Hands of them that hate me, and would work my Ruin. I
beseech thee do not choose my Delusions, leaving me to a deceivable Heart, to
which I dare not trust, without the Guards of thy Holy Spirit. Leave me not, O
God, to my own strength, in which I cannot do the least good, and without
thine shall fall into the greatest evils of Soul and Body, and sink to the
bottom of the bottomless Pit of Sin and eternal Misery; from which, O God, I
beseech thee let thy unfathomed Mercy in Christ Jesus speedily prevent me, and
give a mortal stab to all my Corruptions, by what Course soever thou will take
with me, only let me fall into thy Compassionate Hands. Good Lord bind up my
Wounds, and heal my Putrefying Soars. I beseech thee forsake me not in the time
of my older Age, when Strength fails; and suffer not the defects of my Body
to become the Sin of my Soul.

I beseech thee suffer no Trial to be above my Strength; but Blessed Lord, thou
that have suffered being Tempted, make a way for me, that I may be able to bear
it. I beseech thee lay that Hand on me thou tookest hold on Peter with, that I
may not sink in the deep Waters, in which there is no standing. Good Lord
suffer no Weapon formed against me to Prosper; but bring me up out of my
Astonishments, and Confusions of Soul; though the Enemy break in like a Flood,
let thy Holy Spirit in my Heart, lift up a Standard against him. Good Lord take
a full Possession of my Soul, and suffer no Rival with thee; let me be guided,
governed, and acted by thee. Good Lord let no Sin have Dominion over me. I
beseech thee fill my Heart and Soul with the Graces of thy Blessed Spirit. Deep
Reverentialness of thee, much Love, Fervor and Zeal for thy Glory, which I
beseech thee cause to be ever very and exceeding dear and precious to me, and
suffer not the Envenomed Arrows of my Enemy to stick on me; but I beseech thee
quench all those Fiery Darts, the Poison of them drinks up my Spirits. Good
Lord apply to my Soul that healing Balsam, made of the Blood of the Son of God;
and with an Indelible Character let thy Law be written on my Heart, O Blessed
God, Father, Savior, Sanctifier. I beseech thee make this the transcript of my
Soul, in an Holy Life, in Submission and Obedience to thee in all things, with
all possible Adoration, Thanksgiving, and Praise unto thee, O Lord, most due,
in Heaven and on Earth, to which I say Amen, Amen, Amen.



She Read also all the good Books with intentest Diligence she could enquire
out, or be informed of on this Subject, and wept Buckets of Tears to quench
those Fiery Darts; which, though she had an Excellent Eye, brought her many
Years since to the use of Spectacles, and caused her often to use the Psalmist's
Expression; My Eye is Consumed because of Grief, and waxes Old because of my
Enemy. And would often Pray that her Bodily-Infirmities might not be her Souls
Dis-advantages; and say, That though they were not her Sins, they were the
Effects of them.

Thus was her Life a continual Warfare, in which she fought the good Fight of
Faith, and was more than Conqueror through him that loved her and helped her,
and I am comfortably, upon good Grounds, persuaded, has received a glorious
Crown of Righteousness, from him whose Appearance she so heartily Loved, and so
constantly and earnestly waited for. Her Warfare is accomplished, and she rests
from these, and all her Labors; and as she overcame in his Strength who taught
her Hands to War, and Fingers to Fight, and covered her Head in the Day of
Battle; so to him be all the Glory, and Eternal Praises. Amen, Amen.

SECT. XVIII. Friends she used to Pray for.
I Subjoyn to the Precedent, an Account of another Paper, which, as the last
abovenamed, I found in a distinct Sheet, with this Title:

A Catalogue of Christian Friends, whom I desire in a peculiar manner to
present in my poor Prayers to God, at the Throne of his Grace, and that God
would do for them, for Soul and Body above what I can ask. Then follows this
Prayer:

GRacious God, thou have commanded to Pray for all Men, but especially for the
Household of Faith. Lord thou never said Seek my Face in vain, but have with
great Condescension and Encouragement Invited thy People to make their
Addresses to thee, for themselves and others. And have joined with the Command,
thy Promise to hear, and grant agreeable to thy Will what is best for us. Lord
thou give Liberally, and do not upbraid, and wilt not send thy People away
Empty, seeing thou always have it plentifully by thee. I come unto thee in the
Name, and for the Sake and alone Righteousness, Merits, and Mediation of thy
Son, and my alone Savior, Jesus Christ, in the behalf of my Self, and
Christian Friends. Lord, I beg of thee for thy Church, and peculiar People, and
by name present before thee, some known to me, my Christian Friends; them, and
their Joynt-Relations. Good Lord shower down on them the Blessings of Prayer.

Gracious God I do beseech thee extend thy choicest Favors to my most near
Relations, my Dear Husband, my Dear Grandson, his Father, and his Relations,
with my other near Relations.

Good Lord be very gracious to our Neighboring Ministry; Mr. Alchorne, Mr.
Hublon, Mr. Lo, Mr. Arrowsmith, Doctor Fuller, Mr. Siday, with the rest. Lord
give them the Plentiful Increase of their Labors, the ingrafting many Souls
into thy Kingdom. And be very gracious to those who have known my Soul in
Adversity, and have been earnest Petitioners in my behalf at thy Throne of
Grace. Good Lord grant me the Blessing of Prayer, and requite them and theirs
in Spiritual Blessings.

Good Lord, remember in much Mercy the Relations of my dear Deceased Friends.
Be thou the God of the Widow, and the Father of the Fatherless Children.

Also any that ever asked my poor Prayers. Gracious God, though these I name, I
stretch out my craving Hands over the World. I beseech thee let thy most
suitable Mercies reach them.

Good Lord be Merciful to this Town and People in a sound Conversion: Bless our
Family with Soul-Mercies, and all our Servants.

In the Margin are named about thirty Heads of Families, with their Relations,
of almost all Ranks and Degrees; from Right-Honourable, down to them of low
Condition, for whom she had a peculiar Esteem, and endeared Affection, who so
far suffer with me, that they have lost a sincere Friend, and humble, earnest
Intercessor at the Throne of Grace. I will use an Expression of her own Pen,
touched above on the like occasion.

I humbly hope these Prayers remain upon the File of God's Mercy. And I humbly,
and heartitly beseech him they may be answered with Blessed Returns upon my
self and mine, and upon all them and theirs, for whom they were sent up with so
devout and commendable Charity and Zeal. Amen.

SECT. XIX. Some trying Calamities on the Nation, on Friends and Family, and
signal Deliverances from Dangers.
AS she was none of those who regard not God's Works, nor the Operation of his
Hands, but duly observed, and humbly adored his Providential Dispensations; so
she cast them not behind her Back, but constantly Recorded them with Awakening,
Pious Reflections upon them, whether relating to the Nation, Friends, or
Family. I shall scarcely mention one of twenty, only touch a few, one or two of
a kind, as Instances and Examples to others, to provoke to Imitation.

About four years after King Charles the Second's coming into England, began
the great Plague, May the 5th, 1665. of which died in and about London, 68592.
(I think it should have been 98592, her Pen by an easy Mistake, pointing the
first Figure upward, which should have been turned downward,) as has been
Computed; besides great Multitudes in other Parts of the Kingdom.

In the Year following was the Dreadful Fire, September the Second, which
Consumed and Burnt down Eighty nine Churches; and, as Account has been given,
13200 Houses. Lord how manifold are thy Judgments! Give the Inhabitants of the
Earth to learn Righteousness thereby.

If some might blame me, yet I believe some would have thanked me, had I added
many more of these National Concerns, as a very brief Chronicle; especially
with her useful Reflections. Whosoever are Wise will consider these things, and
they shall understand the Loving Kindness of the Lord; whosoever does his great and
wonderful Works, that they ought to be had in Remembrance. But for Brevity I
refrain.

And as she took notice of public Concerns, so did she also of what touched
particular Persons, especially her Friends; as for Instance: January 13. 1672.
God was pleased to suffer a sudden and lamentable Fire to Consume in a few
hours a large House, the Habitation of a good Gentleman, our Friend and
Neighbor, Mr. Luther of Miles's, three Miles distant from us, upon which she
wrote a most kind and Christian Letter to him, of which I find the Copy.

She records the Deaths of many Friends, and always with a short Character of
them, and useful Improvements. As for Instance:

April 12. 1678. It pleased God to take to himself the Most Excellent Lady, the
Countess of Warwick. She was Eminent in Religion; a sound Christian in
Knowledge and Practice; exceeding Charitable; did very much good; a very
sincere and obliging Friend; very sweet in Disposition, and in Condescension to
all; even to those much below her; she did excel both in Religion, and in all
other commendable Virtues; she lived very desirable, and dyed much bewailed, as
a deep Loss to her Relations, to the Neighborhood, to the Church, and People
of God, to all that knew her, amongst whom, to my Dear Husband; to him she was
a most entire Friend, and to my self.

Good Lord Sanctify to us this heavy Deprivation, the loss of our Honorable
and most Endearing Friend. Lord make up the Breach, which for Extent is very
wide; yet, not beyond the Bounds of thy Boundless Compassion. Good Lord fill up
to us, and all that share in this smarty touch of thy Hand, with full Supplies
fetched beyond Creature-Enjoyments, more immediate from thy self in thy
immutable Friendship, and never-dying Love and Favor, in that unchangeable
Rock of Ages, Christ Jesus; which Lord vouchsafe to grant. Amen, Amen.

And having named several Deaths of other Friends, with true Characters of
them, she concludes:

Good Lord Sanctify to me these frequent Warnings of Mortality, and Death. I
beseech thee fit me for my Departure out of this World.

She mentions also three Eminent Deliverances from the Danger of Fire breaking
out in our House, in which we inhabited, and one in another House of ours, in
the Parish, which were prevented by signal Providence, which she sets down,
and closes with most thankful Praises.

There Is not an Eminent Danger, into which I fell, and out of which God's Mercy
rescued me, which she remembers not, with Expressions which testify a most
Dear Affection to my self, and a most Pious and Devout Sense of God's Watchful
Providence, and Comfortable Instances of his Gracious Answers to her Prayers.

I shall touch but one or two out of very many.

August 1660. My Dear Husband coming from London, fell into the Hands of four
Robbers, which prevented his coming Home that Day, which much troubled me,
being Saturday Night, and being very Tempestuous with great Rains, Lightning,
and Thunder; but after some time spent by my self, the rest of my Family being
in Bed, I powered out my Request to God in his behalf; my Heart being much
quieted, I went to my Rest, where God gave me the Repose of the Night, and in
the Morning brought home my Dear Husband, to our mutual Comfort, and his
performing the work of that Day in God's own Service. Blessed be God.

He received no eminent Harm; but attempting to escape, one of the Thieves with
a Club struck him on the side of his Head, but his Hat broke the Blow, that he
had not much hurt, I bless God.

They took his Money, Watch, and Rings, but none of his Clothes; and though the
tender Mercies of the Wicked are cruel, God so overruled their usual harsh
demeanor, that one of them pulled off one of his own Coats and wrapped it about
him for some time, and set him under a Tree to shroud him from the Rain and
Tempest. Blessed be God for his Preservation in this Danger.

Some Passages in the preceding Paragraph run so parallel with what we read,
St. John 4.50. that I shall transcribe the Words, and then make an unforced and
appposite Application of them to the purpose for which I produce them, and
allude to them. Then enquired he of them the Hour when he began to amend: And
they said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh Hour the Fever left him; so the
Father knew it was the same Hour in which Jesus said unto him, Thy Son Lives;
and himself Believed, and his whole House.

She intimates that, and when she powered out her Requests to God in my behalf,
and that her Heart was much quieted, and she went to her Rest, and God gave her
the Repose of the Night; and I know it was the same Hour in which I was
delivered from those violent Men, and I do believe God heard her Prayer, and
Bless him for it: And O that others would believe him to be a God hearing
Prayer, and would be encouraged to call earnestly upon him!

There follow after this more than twenty eminent Dangers by afflictive, trying
Providence, and very signal Deliverances from them. I Will touch but one of all
these, (before I reach one at about thirty Years distance from what I last
mentioned, (though all attended with Devout Reflections.

July 4. 1676. My Dear Husband was under some Indisposition of Health, he was
Feverish, I feared he would have had a Fit of Sickness, which had very
sorrowful, oppressive Impressions on me. My Dear Husband then made his Will,
(that is a new one, for I had made one many Years before,) and read it to me,
expressed his much Endearing Affections to me, in his great Love and Care of me,
with so great a part of his Estate he gave to me for my Plentiful Susistence
after his Decease. This Kindness I desire to acknowledge with Thankfulness to
God and my Dear Husband. Lord, I Bless thee for thy sparing Mercy in the
reparation of my Dear Husband's Health, which I beseech thee continue to length
of Days in this Life, and when this shall be no more, Lord crown with thy
exceeding Weight of Eternal Glory. Amen, Amen.

Since which, making another Will, I gave her my whole Estate Personal, and
Real, (what designed for Charity, and a few Legacies excepted,) with power to
sell any, or all my Lands, lest any un-foreseen Emergency should need
extraordinary Supplies; but she earnestly entreated me to alter that Power of
Selling, being abundantly satisfied to confine herself to the Personal Estate,
and Revenue of the Land, which I gave her liberty to raise Money upon, to be
repayed in some Years after her Death, to make as sure as I could she should
never want any thing which I was able to supply her with; which I mention to
encourage Wives to deserve as well, and Husbands to compensate so
well-deserving Wives.

What should have been immediately subjoyned to my Escape from violent Men in
1660* because of the too great similitude between them, is my deliverance in
1685. I will not say from more unrighteous, yet I must say from those which are
more inexcusable; for God himself seems to extenuate the Fault of them who in
Necessity take from others, to satisfy their own Hunger, and pressing Wants;
but I never read that either God, or any Man, (except those like them,) excused
those who sin of Malicious Wickedness, and gain nothing, besides the filling up
the Measure of their Iniquities, but the satisfaction of their own spightful
Malice; in troubling and afflicting others.

I will not transcribe what her Pen so largely, so truly, so piously sets down
on this occasion, only the number of the Days, which I confess she calls the
short Triumph of the -- being exactly Ten, puts me in mind of Rev. 2.10. and if
this fall into the Hands of any who made themselves Accessories, and guilty,
post factum, by a snearing Pleasure they took in the wicked Oppression of the
Innocent, I pray God give them Repentance.

And I think it is no harder to forgive them, than it was for Tertullian to
glory in the Christians behalf, that Nero was their first Persecutor; whom he,
speaking in their Name, calls Damnationis nostrae Dedicatorem; It must needs be
good which Nero persecutes. And we have a surer word, St. John 15.18, 19.

A great many more afflictive Dispensations the Divine Wisdom and Faithfulness
saw good to exercise us with, to enforce us often to the Throne of Grace to
obtain Mercy to help in time of need, and many most signal and surprising
Deliverances from them, did his Goodness and Loving Kindness seasonably
vouchsafe us from them, and most gracious Supports did his tender Compassions
afford us under them, frequently bringing Meat out of the Eater, good out of
evil, filling thereby our Hearts with his Love, and our Mouths with Songs of
Praise and Thanksgivings to him, the Rock of our Salvation, and our Refuge in
times of Trouble, and repeated Experiences of his readiness to pity and to
succor us, raising up those hopes which make not ashamed. All which she
records with so savoury a sense of God's Mercy, and such lively Expressions of
most humble and holy Hallelujahs, as might inspire most serious Sentiments into
the Reader; but I shall slide over them in silence, because, as I hope many do
not need those Sparks to kindle their gratitude into Flames; so many are of so
prejudiced a frame of Spirit, that to use so base a word, as fitted to so base
a temper of Mind, they would rather put them out, than suffer them to kindle
into a blaze of Devotion, on so damp an Hearth as are the Hearts steeped in
impure noisome Lusts, not only destitute of all Sense of the Power of
Godliness, but implacable Enemies to it, in all who own and love it.

SECT. XX. Of our going to Tunbridge-Wells.
THough it be known to many, that we most frequently went to Tunbridge-Wells
from 1661, and after some Intermissions, almost every Year till 1689. yet more
may wonder why I write a Section of it here, to which this short Account might
serve for answer. I do it because I find so much concerning it under her Pen,
who is the Subject and occasion of the whole. But that is not all, it is to show
how she behaved her self there, as well as with what Christian Frame of Spirit
she attended God's Providence, in expectation of a Blessing from him who made
the Fountains of Waters, and gave to them their useful Properties, and rendered
them very beneficial to her. Many, it is true, go thither solely, or chiefly, to
drink these Waters for their Health; but it is as true, many go thither for
Pleasure and Diversion only; as many for a mixed reason including both; and to
this last Rank belongs her going thither: But lest any should be surprised by
this, I must Interpret my self.

She went thither to drink the Waters, which often proved very advantageous to
her, and that End was common to her, with many others; and she went for
Divertisement and Pleasure, as many more; and this also was common to her with
Hundreds, in Sound, but not in Sense or Meaning, and it may be was peculiar to
her; and it is possible, few, if any, ever went so many years to
Tunbridge-Wells on her design, and so improved it as she did; for while too
many place their divertisement in easing their Minds of the Cares of their
ordinary Employments, and as a Carnaval, to gratify their looser Fancies with
freer Conversation, displaying their gaudy Bravery, Walking, Dancing, Gaming,
not to speak so severely as to say, to drink Iniquity like Water, without
numbering either Draughts or Glasses.

She went (I do not say at first with that Design, but when Use and Experience
had taught her the opportunity and satisfaction of that Practice) as to a place
of Privacy and Retirement, to be vacant to God, and her Spiritual Concernments,
which I hope I shall evince to be unquestionably true, though it may seem a
Paradox, and next to Impossible.

Let me introduce this Narrative, (to render it more Intelligible,) with the
Examples of two Fathers (if I may so call them) of two very different Churches;
Cardinal Bellarmine, and Mr. Isaac Ambrose. Bellarmine, as Scholars well know,
was for many Years engaged, and as we speak Proverbially, over Head and Ears in
deepest closest Studies, in Reading, and Disputing, and Publishing his
Controversies; yet he reserved to himself a Month out of every Year, his Dear
September, which he wholly spent in Devotion, in Contemplation, Prayer, and
such like Holy Exercises, which immediately, and solely respected the purifying
and perfecting his own Mind and Heart, and Saving of his Soul.

Mr. Isaac Ambrose, who was, I think, a Nonconformist Minister, though I
cannot affirm it, whose Works have sold so well both in Quarto and Folio; his
Prima, Media, ultima, and his Looking unto Jesus; Printed first in a large
Quarto Volume, and which was highly Commended to me by a very Learned
Roman Catholic, and the devoutest Man I ever knew of that Communion. This Mr.
Isaac Ambrose, though he was indefatigably Painful in his Ministry all the
other parts of the Year for the Souls of others, yet in Autumn, for a Month,
silenced or suspended himself, if I may so phrase it, which Month he spent most
part in the Fields, and Solitary Woods, (Places like Southburrow, Canes, -- or
Mercers-Woods; like Culverden, Rusthall-Common, Cuverly-Plain, or Fant-Hill,
(this is Tunbridge-Wells Language,) and the Places adjacent to the Wells, which
I have known almost a Wilderness, though now become a kind of Pentapolis, an
Heap of Cities joined in one, by such a Multitude of Commodious, Sumptuous
Houses.)

And in these lonesome solitary retreating Places, far from disturbing Noise,
or distracting sight of Men, looking off all other Objects, did he spend the
days of this Month, looking steadily to Jesus, Conversing not so much as with
Books (if I remember right what I read so many Years ago, and have not now by
me to consult again) in Meditation, Contemplation, Thinking, and with
intensest, closest, most fixed Application of his Mind to unseen and Celestial
things.

And what these two sequestered Months were to the abovenamed Fathers in their
several ways, was the Water-drinking Season to this good Daughter of the Church
of England, an Advantage as conducive to her Soul's Health, and Vigor, from
the still Waters of the Upper Springs, as those of the Nether Springs were to
the relief of her Body.

It Is fit I should account for what I say, which I will do when I have a little
touched some Passages left by her own Pen, which speak the Pious Sense she had
of God, as in all things, so in the Tunbridge Journeys; one or two Instances
may suffice for this.

July 5. 1680. I went to London through the great Love and Care of my Dear
Husband. In order to my going to Tunbridge-Wells to drink the Waters, I being
not well, my Dear Husband, Self, and Maidservant with us, the Eighth of the
said Month, through God's Merciful Providence we came safe to Tunbridge, and
were well accommodated, and stayed drinking the Waters six Weeks, I hope with
good Success; with other Mercies there received, 'twas not the least, that I
there met with some of my choicest Friends: Blessed be God for that his Favor
to me, and for all the rest. We came Home August 21. where we were very welcome
to our Family, and Parish-Neighbours, with much Expression of Kindness, and
found all well, Praised be God.

July 16. -- 81. My Dear Husband, with my Self, and Child, went from Home to go
to Tunbridge-Wells on my Account, to drink the Waters; we lodged the first
Night at Bromly, next Night at Tunbridge Town, not being certain of our
Lodgings at the Wells. But the next Day through God's good Providence we were
received and accommodated where we were the Year before. That Morning, 18. My
Husband and self drank the Waters, and continued them twenty nine Days with
good Success, Thanks be to God for all the Mercy of that Journey and Place. We
returned August the 16th, and came home the 18th, found all well, blessed be
God, and for Welcome of Neighbors and Friends.

Thus did she continually in all her ways acknowledge God. This taste is enough.

Now to confirm what I affirmed before, how she improved this Retreat and
Retirement to Religious Purposes, I know it is one of the most common Rules
given to, and received by Water-Drinkers, to relax their Thoughts, not to be
Intent, or over Serious, not to Read, or to apply their Minds closely to any
thing during the time that they stay; which Rule I fear is not so good as
common, nor needful to be observed, as easily believed through too much
Propensity to Self-Indulgence; for I never knew the Waters more beneficial to
any than to my Dear Wife, who never purchased the Success at the p^^ce of
losing so much Precious Time. But on the contrary, as that Month used to be at
Home the most busy and interrupting time of all the Year, by reason of
Harvest; and being Blessed with Servants to whom we could and did entrust those
Affairs, without sollicitous Diffidence of their honest, prudent Care and
Diligence; it was the quietest, and most sedate and calm Vacancy which fell
within the twelve Months Circle, which she employed accordingly.

Being now free even from the moderate Cares of usual Inspection of her Family,
she rose at her constant Hour, four a Clock, and spent two hours or thereabouts
with God; then having begged a Blessing on them, about Six began to drink her
Waters, Walking, and Conversing with serious Christian Friends, till she had
finished that Day's Waters, and dined about one a Clock, and sat an hour after
in Converse. The rest of the Day, which was here free from Domestic Cares and
Inspection, and had no Diversion but receiving Visits, (which some Persons of
Quality would condescend kindly to make her, and of which she would repay with
Civility, as many in one day, as she received in four or five,) she improved in
Devotion, Reading the Holy Scriptures, and other useful Books, Meditation, and
secret Prayer, and walking in a private commodious Walk, (which lay near our
Lodgings,) which she much delighted in, and called her Walk, for the
Convenience it afforded her, both for the Health of her Body, and Satisfaction
of her Mind. Only she would appear once, or at the most twice in the whole
Season, on the Greens on a Dancing Night, not so much by Inclination, as to
avoid the Imputation of Moroseness and Affectation. Her Charity was also always
very considerable at Tunbridge-Wells; where she obtained signal Mercy from God,
she showed Mercy for his sake to those she judged fit Objects of it; though she
had but a shallow Purse, she had deep Compassions, and I find above twenty
Shillings in Money given in a Water-Season, besides Bibles and other good Books
which she carried down with her, sent for to London, or bought there, to give
away to poor People as often as she went.

The commodious Privacy of our Lodgings, (which we never changed, after we
found the convenience of them, for many Years,) contributed much to her
undisturbed Retirement; for the House standing alone, out of the noise of
Ranting Neighbors, and of no great Receipt, that we could usually fill it with
our Friends, and so choose our Company; we had little Molestation by noise or
hurry, or disagreeable Conversation which is not the least troublesome
Grievance of that Place.

I know we were censured for the reputed meanness of our Lodgings, but though
we had no obligation to please any but our selves in that Particular, yet for
the Reasons mentioned, and many more, we would not have changed them for any we
knew of thrice the Weekly Rent, though they had been offered us on equal terms
we paid for ours; and therefore we used to send beforehand to secure them, my
Dear using to say, She had rather not go, than be disappointed of them when she
came thither. So dear was the advantage of so calm a Privacy to her in the
midst of so great a Noise and Hurry, as usually attends that Place and Season.

SECT. XXI. Of the keeping our Wedding Day, and Entertainment of Friends.
SO deep a Sense of the Divine Goodness (which singled us out from all other
Persons in the World to be joined together in that nearest Relation) had the
mutual Satisfaction, and constant well-pleasedness with each others Society,
impressed upon us, that our humblest and most hearty Praises for it were not only
as a Drink Offering, poured out upon every daily Sacrifice; but upon every
annual Revolution of the 23d of July, we doubled our solemn Thank-Offering to
God, and rejoiced before him with (I Will for once step beyond the usual modesty
of my Pen) a generous and noble Festival Entertainment of our Right Honorable,
and other much Honored Friends, who often vouchsafed us the Favor to rejoice
with us, and I have had near thirty Bucks from Leez on that occasion, so well
was our Day and Custom known and approved of.

And I have had many pleasant things said at my Table in our Innocent Mirth, of
the fewness of those who could keep their Wedding Day with so cheerful, and so
serious thankfulness; the very last, three Coroneted Heads, and others of best
Quality, (next to Nobility,) honored us with their Company, and numbered
thirty nine Pyes in one Dish, made by the Hands which received a Wedding-Ring
so many Years before, and seemed well pleased with the neatness and plenty of
their Entertainment; but especially with the grateful acknowledgments we made
to God, and one another, that his Mercies, and our Contentments, had much
exceeded the number of our Years.

At other Feasts, in which we often Entertained our Worthy Friends, and Loving
Neighbors, though it was our joint Charge, yet it was usually her sole Care
and Trouble; and when I have asked her what she would have, though sometimes
she would tell me, yet other whiles she would reply, I pray thee let me alone,
trouble not thy self; let me but know whom thou Invitest, and leave the rest to
me; I Will be thy Warrant, there shall not want what is sufficient and convenient.

But some may say, to what purpose was this waste? Why was not this rather
given to the Poor? (But rememember it was Judas Iscariot who asked that like
Question.) And others may object, St. Luke 14.12, 13. When thou make a Dinner
or Supper, call not thy Friends nor thy Brethren, nor thy Kinsmen, nor thy Rich
Neighbors, lest they also bid the again, and a Recompense be made thee: But
when thou make a Feast, call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, the Blind, and
thou shall be Blessed, etc.

To which let me make this modest and true Reply: She did all this in Effect.
For she provided so liberally, (and for that very End,) that there was more
left when all our Guests and their Attendents, and our own Servants, and
Laborers about the House (who were all called in) were satisfied, than was
Spent, and Eat. And usually more than, in a stingy Niggard's Hand, would have
maintained a bigger Family than ours at least a Fortnight. All, or most of
which she distributed so liberally the following Days, that she feasted more
poor Families with the Remainders, than Persons at the first furnishing the
Table.

And the next Morning after a Feast, she had always store of Patients, for the
forwardest would disguise their Errand, and send a big Girl with a Glass or
Gally-Pot, to pray her to send her somewhat for a Pain of the Stomach, or some
such like Infirmity; to whom she would merrily answer, I know her Disease, keep
your Glass; and would cause her Maid to bring a good Platter full of Victuals,
and bid the Messenger tell her Mother, She would have her take that, and it
would not fail to cure the Pain at her Stomach. And those who came not of their
own accord, she would send for, or send them their Dose of the like Physic;
having before distributed it into as many Heaps as she designed to feast
Families; and I never saw her more pleasant upon any occasion; for she fed the
Poor with more delight than she Eat her own meals. So true is that Saying of
that great Advocate for Charity, the Reverend Doctor Hamand; No Sensuality is
so great as this, to give.

And this was not the only Feasting them, but every Christmas all were
Invited, Rich and Poor; and she would encourage them to bring all their
Children, and provided a Table for them by themselves; and when their Parents
would excuse their bringing them; she would say, Trouble not your selves, I
love to see this little Fry; they are as welcome as your selves, though you be
very welcome. I write not this as if it was fit for the Great ones, to tarnish,
and stain their Husband's Dignity, by condescending to like Familiarity with
them of low Degree, but to be a Pattern to such mean Folks as we, who stand on
the same low and humble Level, who, I dare secure them, will lose neither Love
nor Honor by it.

I shall conclude this Section with a few Words, to show how Providence
prevented, that this kind Custom dyed not before her. Last Christmas, not to
spare my Purse, but my Dear Wife's Pains and Trouble, I told her we had now
continued this Custom a great while, and that I thought it too burdensome to
her; a Dinner signified not much to the Rich, and for the Poor I would take
Care they should be no losers. She at present seemed well pleased with what I
said, and acquiesced in it. But upon second Thoughts she said, My Dear, I thank
thee for thy Tenderness to me, to prevent my Trouble; but I am rather willing
to undergo it, were it greater, than to discontinue a Practice so long used
constantly, and thereby occasion any mis-interpretation, as if it proceeded
from Parsimony, or abatement of Kindness; therefore I entreat thee let us
continue to do as we have hitherto done Yearly, only let us try to have all in
two Days we used to have in three; and if our House will not contain them all
at twice, to some of the poorest I will send double as much as they could have
eaten here. And so it was agreed, and performed, and so her last Christmas was
as kind and Charitable as those of former Years.

SECT. XXII. Of the Marriage of our only Daughter, and her Death in Childbirth
the same Year, yet leaving a Son.
IT is not to be wondered at, that she should write so many Pages of this
Come-Tragedy (as I called another Providence mentioned before, a Trage-Comedy)
whose Pious Kindness was so mindful in Holy Prayers and Praises, not of her
self alone, but of her Honored Friends. I shall touch but one or two for
Instance, and I cannot single out any more suitable than of those Right
Honorable Ladies, whose sweet Condescension not only vouchsafed to give this
our Dear Daughter frequently their kindest and familiar Conversation, but
borrowed, and desired hers almost whole Summers diverse Years. Concerning these
young Ladies thus her Pen speaks:

The Lady Ann, the Lady Mary, and the Lady Essex Rich had a Pious Education,
under ^he tender Care of the Right Honorable the Countess of Warwick, their
Aunt, whose great Care of them, and Kindness and Love to them, supplied and
over-shot the measures of what could be expressed to them by the tenderest
Mother. Of two of their Marriages she writes thus:

December the 11th, 1673. The Virtuous and Right Honorable the Lady Mary Rich
was Married to Mr. Henry St. John, the Eldest Son of Sir Walter St. John, a
Pious, good Family, and an ancient Barronet, and great Estate. Blessed Lord
thou have abundantly enriched them with the Blessings of the Nether Springs,
full streams in the good things of this Life, let it not be their all, but turn
these Waters into Wine; give them the Blessings of the Upper Springs, the
plentiful Effusions of thy Spirit flowing into their Hearts and Souls, that
they may build up each other in their most Holy Faith, as Heirs together of the
Grace of Life.

June 16. 1674. The Honorable Lady Essex Rich was Married to Mr. Daniel Finch,
Eldest Son to his Father, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. Good
Lord give them the Blessings of thy Right Hand, and continue to them the
Blessings of thy Left Hand also. But let not their Portion be only in this
Life; let thine own Prerogative have the Supremacy in their Hearts, and
accelerate and quicken them to thy Service, that Glorifying thee on Earth, they
may be in Everlasting Glory with thee in Heaven. Amen, Amen.

I will mention no more like Instances, and humbly beg Pardon if I have been
too bold in touching these.

I now come to the Title of this Section, and shall add nothing of my own, only
transcribe, and that with Abbreviation, what her Pious Pen has left me; not
that one Word need to be retrenched upon other accounts, but only to avoid
Prolixity.

January 17. 1675. My Dear Husband, and my Dear Child Margaret Walker, went to
London, in reference to our great Concern, her Marriage, our only one, so dear
to us. She was Married February the 1st, 1675. to Mr. John Cox, Barrister of
Gray's Inn. His Father lived at Coggshall; his Relations very honest good
People, and very well to live in the World. God has graciously provided for
her a loving Husband, a sober Person, and I hope, a good Man. God consummated
their Choice by Mr. Gifford, a worthy good Man, Minister of St. Dunstan's in
the East, in London; whither she was accompanied by the Right Honorable the
Countess of Warwick, with the chief of the Family, from Warwick-House, and with
many other manifestations of Kindness God shined upon her, and in all respects
gave her a comfortable Day. I draw the Curtain of a modest, etc. over the rest,
lest the Thankfulness of her who was so truly humble, should incurr the unkind
censure or suspicion of Vanity, and concluding what I have omitted, with these
Words: And with many other Favors God has honored them. She proceeds:

Lord, I desire to own thy Goodness, as the Fountain Head from whence flows all
Good, to be enjoyed in the things of this Life and concerns of a better, and
more endurable Estate for their Souls advantage.

For which, I beseech thee give them a capacious Heart to know, love, serve,
and enjoy thy self, and vouchsafe them of the good things of this World, what
thou see convenient for them, and help them to be contented to be without
what in mercy thou deniest them.

Good Lord keep both them and theirs inoffensive in this World; and when they
shall go hence, and be no more in this Life, Lord grant that where thou art
they may be also, in Eternal Glory. Amen, Amen.

Thus far the pleasant and more lightsome part: Now follows what is more dark,
and doleful.

I have now a very smarty, afflictive Dispensation from God to record, very
pressing by his afflictive Hand on us.

I acknowledge, very deservedly for my Sins the Lord has taken from us out of
this Life our only One, the most dearly Beloved Daughter, and Child of my
choice A^fections, Mrs. Margaret Cox; she was m^^ried February the first, 1675.
The 19th (...) November following she was Delivered of a Son, Lord's Day seven
a Clock in the Morning. She continued pretty well two or three Days; Tuesday
following sickned of a Fever, and dyed December the 5th, 1675. But God in the
midst of his just Judgments remembered his Mercy to us, has spared the little
one to us, Blessed be God for it, and received the Motherless Babe into
Covenant with himself by Baptism. I Bless God he is the Son of good Parents,
his Father a very sober and a good Man, his dear deceased Mother was a fine,
lovely, handsome, well accomplished Woman, both in Nature and Grace, to God's
Praise I do make my Acknowledgments, let it have no other Censure. She was of a
quick Apprehension, modest, humble, discreet, and of a good Judgment, and well
fitted for Family-Government and Employment. She had a sweet amicable
Deportment, and graceful Behavior; these Endowments through God's Kindness to
her, rendered her very desirable to all that knew her.

God was pleased to give her much Honor and Esteem in this World, with which
she retained a lowly Mind, with much sweet obliging Kindness to all acquainted
with her. She was very Friendly to the meaner sort, very kind and charitable to
poor People, to whom she had a very compassionate Heart, and bountiful Hand in
relieving of them, which she did with great Privacy, though God has been
pleased since her Death to make it known by them in their Acknowledgments, and
bewailing their loss of her. I bless God she lived very desirable, and dyed
much lamented; she was a very loving, dutiful Child to her Parents, a very
endearing Wife to her Husband, and very sweet in all her Relations; she was
very acceptable to all her Husband's Kindred, by whom the loss of her was much
bewailed. God was pleased to make her married condition very Satisfactory to
herself, and all concerned; and though God was pleased to conclude it in so
short a time, taking her out of this Life scarce eleven Months from her
Marriage, which was accompanied with great Joy and Kindness of Friends; yet God
filled it with the close crowded manifestations of his Love and Favor to her;
yea, her whole Life, from her Cradle to her Grave, to which she went with much
Decency and Honor, and which is much more valuable, unblemished, free from the
gross defilements of this World. The Lord was pleased to fit her for himself by
a tender crazy Constitution of Body, she was much afflicted with Headache, and
other Illness, which she bore with much quietness and submission under God's
Hand, by which he led her to the consideration of a better Life.

About four Years of Age, on days of Prayer and Fasting, she would sit by me
the whole Day, and at Prayer hold up her little Hands, which in her riper Age,
with continuance from her Childhood, she performed more understandingly.

She was constant in Religious Duties, conversant in God's Word, the Holy
Bible; which whilst she was a Child she often read through, and got much
Scripture by Heart. Also read many good Authors, several good Books her Dear
Father or my self commended to her, which Practice she did not decline, neither
before nor since her Marriage. She constantly, at least twice a Day, made her
Addresses to the Throne of Grace in Prayer.

When she was very young she would give an account of a Sermon, and repeat most
of the Particulars, or Heads of it; and as she was religiously habituated from
her Childhood, I do humbly hope, God confirmed her by his Grace to Perseverance
in the Ways of God.

She would excite others, not only in her own Practice, but by her Counsels as
to their Souls Concerns.

Amongst other her good Advices, as her Dear Husband since her Death has
informed me, she said to him; 'That she did not question but he Prayed alone
before he had her, and said, so did she; and desired him to continue the same,
that one Prayer might not be lost by their Joint-Prayer, which they used once a
day, going together alone to seek God, besides public and Family Worship. They
often said, that nothing should more oblige them to each other, than their mutual
Love to each others Souls, in their helping one another in their way to Heaven.
I bless God for his signal kindness to her in him so near and dear to her; not
only making them one Flesh, but one Soul, and both one Spirit in himself.

In the time of her Travail, and following Sickness, she was very Meek and
Patient, as in all her former Sicknesses, and Pain: The Disease took her Head,
which deprived her of her Understanding; but I bless God, that so guarded her
Tongue, that she did not dishonor him. The Lord was pleased to give her some
little relaxation of her Disease, in which Intervals she expressed her self
Piously: And desired of her Relations the careful and good Education of her
Child; said she had often begged of God in the behalf of her Relations by
Marriage, and for those who were not disposed of, that God would fix them so,
as might be their best advantage both for Soul and Body, and desired there
might continue a Loving Respect between both Families; which I do beseech God
to preserve.

Her Disease did not give her leave to express herself, as otherwise she might
have done, much more to God's Glory, and the Comfort of her Friends. But
Blessed be God for his Grace bestowed on her, that her Evidences for her
Eternal Happiness were not to seek upon her Dying-Bed, but were in the safe
Hand of our Savior, and sealed with the Signet of God's Right Hand, with an
indelible Character and Inscription of God's Holy Image and Law on her Heart,
by his Holy Spirit, as a Title to those Eternal Mansions of Glory purchased for
her with the precious Blood of her dear Redeemer, Jesus Christ; in which
Blessed Estate I humbly hope she is, in the Everlasting Fruition, and Enjoyment
of God, his Elect Angels, and those Blessed Spirits of the Just made perfect.
Her Flesh also shall rest in hope of a glorious Resurrection; when Mortality
shall be swallowed up of Immortality, God will join Soul and Body in an
indissoluble Union with himself, in that abundant Entrance, into the
Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; so shall she be for ever with her
Lord in thy Eternal Praises. In which Persuasion, good Lord quiet my Heart,
that I may acquiesce in thy unerring Wisdom. Good Lord scatter the Foggs and
Mists of my unruly Passions, that hinder the sight and view of thy reconciled
Face, and Favor to me. I beseech thee Pardon my Sins and Offenses, which have
provoked thee to this manifestation of thy displeasure against us, bereaving us
of our Children, that of eleven none remains; and of this, the loss more
grievous than any of the rest, though they, with her, through thy Kindness very
desirable to us, but she our last, one and all. Lord, should thou take my
Forfeitures, how destitute should I be, not only of Children, but of all thy
sustaining Mercies, and above all, in the irreparable loss of thy self, who art
abundantly better to me than Sons and Daughters.

Good Lord sanctify to me this Dispensation, and help me to find out the
accursed thing which provoked thee to smite with so heavy a Blow. I beseech
thee, with this correcting Hand beat off the busy Flies of Sin and Temptation,
that they may not corrupt my Soul. Good Lord cleanse me from all filthiness of
Flesh, and Spirit, that I may perfect Holiness in thy Fear, run with Patience
the Race thou have yet set before me, finish my Course in thy Service, and
conclude my Life in this World to thy Glory, in the Salvation of my Soul, for
Christ's Sake.

Lord, as for my self; I beg of thee to be very Gracious to those related to us
by the Marriage of our Dear Child; though thou have loosed the Knot that so
nearly joined our Families, I beseech thee do not untie those Affections that
should continue Mutual Love. Good Lord let that dear Chid she has left behind
her, cement and join our Hearts in joint Thankfulness unto thee, and unite us
one to another. Lord, give them thy choice Favors in Jesus Christ, pardon of
Sin, with the Graces of thy Holy Spirit, and order and dispose for the best
whatever may concern them and theirs, as to a happy tendency to their
well-being in this World, and attaining of thy self in endless Glory.

I beseech thee be very gracious unto him whom thou had united so nearly to
her in a sweet Conjugal Relation: Lord, I have sinned, and he also suffered.
Good Lord, let all Grace abound to him in all concerns in this Life, and for a
better; and let her gain be his great Advantage, joining his Heart more closely
to thy self.

Good Lord bless that single Posterity of his and ours, left of her who was his
dear Wife, and our dearly Beloved Child. I beseech thee be his God in Covenant
with him; and, Lord, give him the Efficacy of his Baptism, that he may be thine
by Grace and Adoption. I beseech thee take full and early Possession of his
Heart. Good Lord keep out the Vanities and Follies of Childhood, and Youth,
that while he is Young he may be a Beloved Disciple of Jesus Christ. If thou
see it good to continue him in this Life, I beseech thee grant that he may in
his dear Mothers room Honor God in this World, with an exemplary, holy Life, a
choice Instrument of thy Glory. Good Lord, charge thy Providence with him in
the whole course of his Life, and make up all Relations to him in thy self:
Graciously support him in, and through this World. Good Lord preserve him from
the Soul-ruining Evils of it, and when thou will take him hence, I beseech thee
receive him to thy self, in thy Everlasting Kingdom, in the full Fruition of
God in Glory.

Lord, though thou was pleased to clip off so great a piece of the Comfort of
my Life in this World, denying my Vehement Desires and Requests, with the many
Prayers of thy People, and our Christian Friends, for the longer stay of our
Dear Child with us in this World; yet thou art not the less a God hearing
Prayer, but have heard, and granted to an higher End, not here on Earth with
us, but in Heaven with thee, received in the Arms of Everlasting Mercies, to
which Blessed Estate I beseech thee bring me, and those Relatives very dear to
me. Good Lord sanctify to us this Chastening Hand; and though thou cuttest off
the Streams, my Comforts of this Life, let not my Soul be as a parched Heath,
that receives no good, but draw me to thy self, the Fountain of durable
Mercies; give me those Living Waters from the Wells of thy Salvation, the Light
of thy Countenance, with thy reconciled Face and Favor, those Rivers that make
glad the City of God. Good Lord vouchsafe me the sweet refreshing gales and
incomes of thy Spirit, and with thy Grace conduct me off these ruff Seas of
Sins and Sorrows, to my desired Haven and Port, in those Eternal Mansions of
Glory, where all in thee shall meet with full Enjoyments of God, and one
another, with sweet acclamations of Thankfulness and Praises to thee our God,
for Ever, for Ever. Amen, Amen, Amen.

I have transcribed this long Paragraph, without altering, or changing the
order of a Word; if some may account it tedious, who either have not been
exercised with such Trials, or have other shorter and cheaper ways to relieve
themselves against them, let them use their own Methods, without censuring, or
despising hers. This was her Heart's Ease when she was overwhelmed, pouring out
her Complaints to God in secret was her best Anodine; but I hope it will need
no Apology with most, and if it does with any, I Will not run the risque of
losing my Labor by attempting it, where the Success is so doubtful and
unpromising.

I shall venture to enlarge this Section a little farther, for three Reasons;
First, To show the ardour of her Zeal for the Spiritual good of this Child, so
exceeding dear to her, which may be an Instructive Example to some Mothers or
Grand-mothers to stir up the like toward their Descendants, as nearly Related
to them as this Child to her. Secondly, Because I foresee I shall not in the
Body of this Book have much farther occasion to trouble the Reader with any
long transcripts out of her Writings, what remains being designed for the
Appendix, which will be entirely her own. Lastly, To imprint upon the Child due
Sentiments of Gratitude to God and her.

I meet with many Expressions of most Pathetick Tenderness toward this dear
Child, who now, next to my self, was the Center, in which all the lines of her
strong Affections terminated.

July 14. 1679. Our dear sweet Child went to Coggshall to his Father's House,
the Lord preserve him from all Evil, and Bless him, and comfortably restore him
to us again. About a quarter of a Year after he returned well to us again:
Blessed be God for it.

We went four Miles from Home to visit a Friend; our dear Child was preserved
in an apparent Danger. The hinder Wheel of the Coach was very like to have
borne him down, and gone over him, as he was going into the Coach, the Horses
being disturbed by a strange Horse, went away; but through God's preventing
Goodness I had a quick apprehension of the danger. I suddenly pulled him away:
Blessed be our good God for this Deliverance of our dear Child; he had no harm,
the Wheel durtied his Hat and Coat; good Lord help me to live thy Praises, who
art the God of our Mercies.

Some may say these are small Matters, but I say they are no small Evidences of
a very thankful sense of God's Mercies, and will leave them inexcusable who
are not thankful for greater.

In the Year 1682. God was pleased to put me in fear of the speedy dissolution
of our dearly beloved Grandchild. He was in a languishing, consumptive
condition, with other symptoms of the Disease: His Breath was very short; had
lost his Appetite; he looked very Pale; was very Lean; which impressed on my
Thoughts that God would take him from me. To his Righteous Will I labored to
submit, but God was pleased to reverse the Sentence, with a Blessing on means
used; the Prescriptions of Dr. H. whom we sent for from London to him, and with
my own great Care of him, he recovered Strength, to God's Blessing I ascribe
the Praise, who did not cast out my Petition. Good Lord, let this pledge of thy
compassionating Mercy to me, strengthen my Faith in the grant of my more
Earnest Request, that I may assure my self, agreeable to thy Will, of his
Sanctification. I beseech thee season his tender Mind with the savoury
Knowledge of thy Blessed self. Lord, I do not ask of thee the Excesses and
great things of this World; not Earth, but Heaven, thy Blessed self: I beseech
thee put him not off with any thing less than thy self. No Lord, I beg thou will withold the grandeur of this Life from him, farther than thou will give
him an Heart to lay it out to the best advantage of thy Glory on Earth, the
procuring a better Estate in Heaven, those Everlasting Mansions, where are
durable Riches, an Eternal weight of Glory, purchased with the Precious Blood
of Jesus Christ, which good Lord grant unto him. Amen, Amen, Amen.

June 19. 1688. My dear Grandchild escaped, by God's gracious Providence, a
very terrible Danger of being Wounded, or sudden Death, (which danger she
describes) had not God's watchful Compassion interposed, I cannot express the
terrible Consequence which might have happened. I am not able to recount thy
multiplied Mercies in delivering us from present Dangers, and many we know not
of. For this, and all, good Lord, accept as I would render them, from a Heart
sensible of thy Mercies, my most grateful Acknowledgments; and in
consideration of this, I beseech thee make deep Impressions on the Heart of my
poor Child, and us his Parents concerned for him, that he and we may live thy
Praises. Amen, Amen.

I will satisfy my self with the Perusal of the rest, and not trouble the
Reader by transcribing more, though all improved to Holy Purposes, and the
Reflections made with such warm Expressions, as I conceive might be very apt to
kindle the Flames of Devoutest Thankfulness in those who read them, no words
being more likely to affect the Hearts of others than those which so evidently
proceed from the Hearts of those who Speak or Write them, and feel what they
utter; according to the Advice good Bishop Felton used to give his Chaplains
(of which the Excellent Bishop Brownwrig was sometime one) to steep their
Sermons in their Hearts before they Preached them.

SECT. XXIII. Acts and Kinds of her great Charity.
THough the Title Page gives this Section a Right and Claim to one moiety of
the whole I write concerning her; yet, I would have it interpreted with some
grains of Allowance; for, alas! how could any thing she gave be called her
Charity, who was a Wife? or how could it be called great, when all we both
possessed, had the whole been given, could not in rigor bear that Epithete. I
will therefore account for both in a few words. First therefore, though a Wife,
she had a freedom of my little All, where I was Cajus, she was truly Caia,
according to the old Roman Phrase; she had free access to whatever I was Master
of, so abundantly was I satisfied in her Integrity and Prudence; (and to touch
so small a thing as a Testimony of her wise Care, and our mutual Confidence to
avoid the clog of many Keys, she contrived to have five Locks open with one
Key, and had two made, one for each of us, that upon no occasion of the others
Absence, either of us might be shut out from what was kept under them; and so
for a few other Locks she provided double Keys, one of which she kept, the
other hung up in my Study.) Now when any object of Charity offered it self, she
would, serve the occasion, as she also did for her own Expense out of my Store;
but would after, always tell me to a Penny what she took, which I have, times
without number, not only excused her from, but almost chid her for; but she
would not be persuaded to mend that Fault, so tender was she. Whereupon I told
her, I would ease us both of that needless and uneasy Trouble, by allowing her
a fixed certain Sum, that she might have no shadow of a Scruple left in using
of it as she pleased.

I may indeed be ashamed to name it, and it had been a niggardly, and indecent
Proportion, had I had more than one competent Living; but being as it was, she
would have no more; only said merrily, My Friend, this shall not debarr me of
my former Freedom; which on my part it never did, though on her part never was
made use of. The Sum was the rents of a small Farm of Nineteen Pound a Year,
which was always called hers, and I used to call her my Landlady cheerfully,
when I duly paid her Nine Pound, ten Shillings on the half-years day, and some
little Perquisites about the Yard, more than were spent in the Family, which
were also her Propriety, and which might together amount to about Twenty two,
or Twenty three Pound a Year in the whole. Out of which she clothed herself
very decently, and many Poor, very warmly, and did much other good, as I shall
convinsingly evidence in what follows. So true is the Saying, Nullum numen
do si sit Prudentia, Wise Contrivance will supply all other Defects. And as
an observing Gentlewoman said, She never knew any had the Art so perfectly as
Mrs. Walker, of making a little show a great deal, or going a great way. This
small Pittance being absolutely her own, her scrupulous Tenderness was freed
from giving me account what she did with it, and I from the irksome trouble of
receiving it; and what she spared out of it was properly her own Charity.

Now, though to give more than her whole Allowance, would be a lean and
starvling Charity from those who have more than they know well what to do with;
yet, our gracious Lord, the most unexceptionable Judge of these Matters, tells
us, the poor Widdow's two Mites was more than the bulky Sums which the Rich
cast into the Treasuries of God out of their Abundance, who rather squander
their Superfluities than retrench from their Necessities, to help the wants of
the Indigent; (though I wish there were not too few even of such Squanderers.)
And the Holy Apostle tells us, If there be a willing Mind it is accepted
according to what a Man has, and not according to what he has not, 2 Cor.
8.12. And I bear her Record, that to her Power, yea, beyond her Power, she was
always willing and ready to communicate to the Wants of others; for how strait
soever her Ability might be, she was not straightened in her own Bowels.

And though what she did from her own allowance was in strictest Sense her
Charity only, yet this only was not all her Charity; for she having a joint
Interest in what was mine, she was sharer with me in the disposing or retaining
of it; and I can with Truth and Comfort testify, she never dissuaded me from
giving, often encouraged me to give, and would say to me on such occasions, My
Dear, I think none of our Estate laid out so well as what is laid out so, nor
any part kept so safe as what is deposited in God's Hand, and committed to his
keeping.

But this is not all, she would be over-ballanced against her own Inclination,
if there were Charity in the case. She was not more averse from any thing than
the enlarging our Family, loved to have it as small as might be, that it might
be still and private, free from disturbing Noise, and distracting Diversions,
which unavoidably attend the increased numbers in an House; yet, was cheerfully
content when Charity opened the Door, made the Fire and the Bed. As in the Case
of Dr. Tongue, whom we entertained so many Months; and Monsieur Barnaby
Gennays, who was sent to me but for four Weeks, and left to my sole Charge
(five Pounds only allowed toward his admitting into St. John's College in
Cambridge,) for six whole Years; two in my Family to be Clothed, Fed, and
Taught, till fitted for the University, and four there, till he had his Degree
of Batchellor; and yet she never repined or grudged the Cost; yea, took daily
Pains to hear him read English, and teach him to pronounce it right. I Will touch
no more Instances, lest I be suspected to borrow my own Praise under the
disguise of paying hers, only adding the last, which is not liable to that
suspicion, because it rather tends as much to my own Reproach as to her Honor.
My Curate dying in my Family of a Consumption, and other Infirmities, September
last, which had occasioned to us both much Charge and Trouble, and who had been
attended with as kind Diligence and Care as if he had been our own Child. After
some little time I told her that I would forbear taking a young Man, at least
for the present, into the Family, because the public Charges were so great;
and I thanked God I was able to perform my Work my self, to whch she presently
replied: Nay, My Dear, whatever thou sparest in, spare it not in that. Thou
never keptest them for thy own Ease, but for their Benefit, to train them up to
be fit for God's Service, and useful in the Church, and seeing they have all
proved so well, and been so well preferred and provided for, and so approved of
in their Ministry, continue to do as thou have done so successfully so many
Years; there is as much need still, as ever, of so assisting Young Men, and let
not that Practice cease, the reason of which is not ceased. I yielded, took her
wise and honest Advice, and wrote immediately to a worthy Friend in Cambridge,
who provided me one whose Character answered my Desires. But his Mind altered
since my Wife's Death, by prospect of Preferment in the College, and I wish he
may never have cause to repent it, by being worse disposed of. And if so mean,
and so obscure a Person as my self may have leave to speak out, and declare my
Sentiments in this Affair, without imputation of Vanity, or Offense to my
Betters; if every Minister of my Ability, (not to say of double to mine,) would
please to take a poor Scholar into his House as soon as they have commenced
Batchellors in Arts, and then are forced to leave the College very raw,
because they can no longer have subsistence as Sizers, and would lend or give
them Books, direct them in the reading them, and assist and inspect their
Studies, (to say no more) there would not so many young Students be at loss for
Maintenance, and be forced so Callow, and Pin-feather'd, (I borrow that
Expression from my Dear, which she was often heard by others, as well as by my
self, to use,) and like young Partridges, to run with the Shell upon their
Heads; and to get Bread, be constrained to undertake the teaching others, what
themselves have so imperfectly learned.

But to return to what was properly and purely her own, the acts of her Charity
were more than the kinds, and both as many as she met with Objects that wanted
it, both in giving and forgiving, and both proportioned to the Necessities of
those who needed; that before her Rent-day came, she was often near, or quite
exhausted; and would pleasantly tell me; Thou must expect no hoard of Money
when I am Dead, for I am almost Bankrupt. Then I would tell her, I would
supply, or if she would, advance some part beforehand; which I never remember
she accepted more than once, three Pounds.

She used, as soon as she had taken her Allowance, to separate nine Shillings
six pence out of it, into her poor Man's Box, to be ready for smaller common
Charities. But though this was her first Quota, this was far from being all;
for I find twenty six Pound, three Shillings, Four-pence set down in two Years
given away; besides what she might forget, or omit, though some small part I
confess was rather Courtesy than strictly Charity, as given to Friends,
Servants, or the like. And she would give liberal Sums; I find twice five
Pounds, ten Shillings given to the French Protestants, for whom she had a great
Compassion, one year after another; and I have been informed by an Honorable
Lady that she left five Guineys at a time with her for their Relief; but it may
be these might be the same, and I would not make it more than it was in Truth.

She also gave twenty Shillings a time to the Briefs, for both French and Irish
Sufferers, and other Guineys at a time I find set down in her Paper, and know
of by other means. Also, ten Shillings, five Shillings, and very often,
Half-Crowns. I find also twenty Shillings in a Year given at Tunbridge-Wells,
which she distributed to the Poor in smaller Pieces, Shillings, Six-pences, and
Farthings, besides the Books she gave.

But besides what she gave in Money, she both bought good Cloth to cloth poor
Women and Children; the day but one before she sickned, she enquired of the
Tailor what poor Children he had made the last Clothes for, that she might
order the rest, which then remained in the House to some other. And a little
before she bought that whole Piece of Cloth from London, she caused Wool to be
spun, and strong Linsy-Woolsy to be made, to supply many poor Childrens wants;
and she was as careful of their Bellies as their Backs; to feed the one, as
warm the other, as wants no Proof nor Instance. She used also to buy Primmers,
Psalters, Testaments, Bibles to give away, and other good Books, Crook's Guide
especially, to give to poor Children and Families. She much delighted and
abounded in that kind of Charity, giving useful Books; and before she was
prevented by settling a School to teach all the Poor, that not a Boy or Girl in
all the Parish, but may be taught to read perfectly, unless it be their own, or
Parents fault, she used to pay for the Schooling of poor Children.

And being put together, it amounted to a pretty considerable Sum; what she
yearly gave to poor Women when with-Child, not only old Linen, but a good new
Blanket every Lying-in, which was so customary and constant, that it was almost
claimable as a due Debt; and not only the Parish poor Women, but some Borderers
have been Partakers of it. And I have been told already by one in that
condition, Now her Mistress is dead she must come to me, so unwilling they are
to let so known a Custom dye with her; with which freedom, as I was not
offended, so I discourage not others from making use of the like. She would be
also ready to supply the Poor with Work when she heard they wanted, though she
had no present need or use of what they wrought in, and sometimes gave it away,
and so made at once a double Charity; yet, would never take advantage of their
Necessity, to make them work the Cheaper. And she had learned a commendable
Rule of her Father when she was young, which was, Never to buy too good a
Pennyworth of poor People, or higgle too much with them; which she would do
with others, and would buy very prudently, of which I could give a pleasant
Instance; but never forgot her Father's Rule in Practice.

I esteem it no reproach to her Memory to acknowledge that some of her
Relations were fallen into a mean and low condition; especially seeing they had
fair and decent Portions left them, equal, or very near what I at first
received with her; and although their straits were the effect of their own
Folly and Indiscretion, which might have been a plausible Excuse for neglecting
them, yet, she rather pitied than upbraided them, and was very kind and
liberal in relieving them and theirs; and as a Testimony that she was not weary
of well-doing, I confess I have forty Shillings in my Hand she gave me in her
Health, to be sent to one of them, which was not done, for want of opportunity
to return it to her at North-Allerton; but, God willing, shall be done by the
first opportunity I can meet with to do it safely. I mention no more of this
kind, but her excess of Thankfulness, wherewith she over-payed me for any thing
I did for any related to her; always telling me on such occasions it was a
trouble to her that any of hers should be burden some; and, I thank God, I
never reckoned it a burden, because she always owned it as a Testimony of my
Endearing Love to herself.

This I think sufficient for the account of her Money-Charities, though I
believe several have sliped my Memory; upon the whole, taking one Year with
another, she did not fall short of that Excellent Lady, the Countess of
Warwick's Proportion, (or quota pars,) which was so wondered at when I first
acquainted the World with it, the third part of her separate Maintenance
separated to Pious Uses. But, if we may compare small Sums with great, Mites
and Sheakles, with Pounds and Talents, the Charity of this little Woman was so
great, she gave more than half away; and out of her twenty two, or twenty three
Pound a Year, seldom expended ten on herself; I believe some Years not above
seven, or eight, and gave away the rest.

But lest the endeavor of my Quill, which is to persuade other Women to be
Charitable by her Examples, should prove like throwing Feathers against the
Wind, be blown back in the Face of him who throws them, and not reach them at
whom they are thrown, (I speak of Women of her Rank and Size, not of those who
prune themselves with the sick Feathers of their Husband's Estates, as Eloquent
and Pious Mr. Shute, checked the gaudy Excesses of the moderate and modest Days
in which he Preached,) and be rendered unsuccessfull by their Fears, that such
supplying others, will make them moult what is otherwise necessary to maintain
that Port and Decency which becomes their Quality and Station. Let me assure
them, by her Experience, they are more afraid than needs; a moderate Sum
prudently managed, will answer both designs; that Body may be dressed neat and
fine, and its Hands may be open and munificent, in which there dwells a
discreet Mind, and a charitable Heart.

I dare appeal to Persons of the best Quality, who often honored her with free
admittance to their Conversation; yea, to the Female-Criticks of
Tunbridge-Wells, and Walks; the severest, (the Court its self not excepted,) if
she ever appeared in a sordid or contemptible garb, she was not garish or
flaunting, she despised and hated that, but all the ornamental Part was as good
as any of her Condition wore; it is true, she bought not often, but she bought
the best, and kept them so neatly, they always showed like new, and she was not
concerned or ashamed to be seen more than once or twice in the same Dress, and
she had an Art to disguise what was the same, to look like quite another thing.
I know I am beside the Cushion, and should be much ashamed of what I write were
not my honest Design my just Apology: Which is, if it be possible, to remove
one of the most obstinate Objections which hinders Female-Charity, (though not
in all;) they fear it is inconsistent with their appearing so fine and trim, as
is expected, without a great Fund, or a Spring as quick as Tunbridge-Wells,
which yields Waters sufficient, and to spare for all that come. But repress
your Fears, silence your Excuses, what has been done may be done again; a small
Root in a good Soil, will spread to admiration in Branches, and in Fruits; a
large Heart will pick a great deal out of a narrow Purse. Hers was a faint
Spring, yet it let no Channel be dry, not to say filled them all. I am
confident, if others would set their Hearts as God inclined hers, they would
equal, or exceed her; and my hearty desire, that they may so do, both in Work
and Recompense, I hope will excuse what I write, to help, yea, to press and
push them forward.

Next to the Charity of her Purse was that of her Pains and Kindness, of her
getting and improving Skill to assist the infirm and indisposed by inward
Sicknesses, and outward Wounds and Sores: She had a competent good measure of
Knowledge both in Physic and Chyrurgery, which she attained with no small
Industry and Labor, and increased by Experience. Her first and main stock she
acquired from a Brother-in-Law, a very able Doctor of the London College, who
Married her Sister, and was very freely communicative, who wrote her many
Receipts, and directed her what methods to proceed in for most common Diseases,
into which her poor Neighbors might be incident; and she was very inquisitive
of other Doctors, and had many English Books, Riverius, Culpepper, Bonettus,
etc. which she read, not to say studied. And good store of Vomits, Purges,
Sudorificks, Cordials, Pectorals, almost all kind of Syrups, strong and simple
distilled Waters, several Quarts of which she left (yea Gallons of them she
used most,) which it is pity should be lost. These cost some Money, but more
Pains and Labor to prepare them; and as much variety for Chyrurgery Ointments,
Oils, Salves, Sear-cloths, etc. and she pretended more to the latter than to
the former, and had been very inquisitive to inform herself by Men and Books;
and as she was very ready to help, so she had been often very successful in
both.

Many, it is possible, might exceed her in what follows, whom I know not of, but
none ever equalled her, that came within my Observation, in the obliging
Charity, to put forth her utmost Ability and Strength in assisting the Sick,
and Infirm; not the meanest Neighbor whom she would not visit and help in such
Circumstances; administer to them what in her Judgment she thought most proper
for them, and not only direct how to use what she brought them, but stay with
them, or come again to see the Operation or Success; and she confined not this
Kindness to the limits of the Parish, but would extend it to some distance. I
will take the freedom to give one Instance, because the Reverend Person, for,
and to whom she performed it, in thankful Acknowledgment ever after, used
(both while she lived, and since she dyed) to call her his Nurse.

A Neigbouring Minister having a long and dangerous Sickness, when upon a Visit
made him, she took notice, that (as she feared) he wanted Persons of Experience
about him, (having before lost his Wife, and his Physicians by reason of
distance could not be long or often with him,) she daily went to him for many
days, at near two Miles distance, and staid with him most part of the Days. I
affirm not that she watched with him any Night, (but I am sure she has done so
elsewhere, and perfectly remember when, and where,) because it has slipped my
Memory; and though she was so modest as not to assume much to herself, I have
heard her say, She thought God made her Instrumental, not only to the speedier
recovery of his Health, but preservation of his Life.

Another object of her Painful Charity (which I the rather name because our
Litany expressly reckons it amongst the objects of our devoutest Prayers,) was,
Women Laboring with Child, whom she would rise at any hour of the Night to go
too, and carry with her what might be useful to them, having good Skill, and
store of Medicines always ready by her for such occasions; and there was
scarcely ever any difficulty in that case round about, but recourse was made to
her, both for Advice and Medicines; and, if might be with Convenience, for her
Presence, which was always very acceptable and comfortable to the distressed
Women when the distance was such that she could afford it.

I might write well near as much of her forgiving as her giving Charity; for,
though the objects and occasions of exercising this Grace were not so many and
so frequent as those of the other; yet, what they wanted in number, was made up
abundantly in Weight and Measure, under which pressures and provocations, she
behaved herself as became the Daughter of him who was Dumb before the Shearers,
and opened not his Mouth. She would not recompense Evil for Evil, nor answer
reviling with reviling; but committed her Cause to him who Judges Righteously,
knowing it was for his sake she was so despitefully used, and thought it not
strange, that seeing the Master of the House was called Beelzebub, those of his
Household should ^e called so too. She had well studied our Savior's Sermon on
the Mount, and considered that Passage especially, (for she reckons the
Practice of that Lesson amongst the signs of a Regenerate State,) St. Matthew.
5.44. I say to you, Love your Enemies; Bless them that Curse you; Do good to
them that hate you; Pray for them that despitefully use you, and Persecute you;
that ^e may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven.

And, to confess her Weakness, I am persuaded she thought it as true a sign of
a sincere Christian to love an Enemy, though a bad Man, for the natural Image
of God remaining in him, as some do, to hate a Friend, though a good Man, for
the renewed Image of God which appears in him: If her Opinion be an Error, I
hope it is on the Right Hand, and so may escape being reputed an Heresy. But I
remember I am writing of Forgiving Charity, and I would not give occasion to
start such a Question as I once heard started by a Gentleman after a lashing
Sermon, Preached on a Text of Mercy. He said in Droll, 'Twas a Sermon of Mercy;
but the question is, whether it were a Merciful Sermon. -- Sed motos praestat
componere fluctus, Peace, and be still unruly Passions. What has added to her
Crown o^ Glory, as I am confident her Carriage in such rancounters did, should
be taken by the better Handle, esteemed favors for the Issue^ rather than
injuries for the Design. When Bee^ fight, the throwing dust upon them, it is
said, will puiet them: She is dead, and her Dus^ shall for ever extinguish all
Resentments, and let them be buried in an Eternal Amnestry.

Had she lived, or I wrote of her in another Age, one thing more might have
been added to the List of, or brought up the Rear of her Charity; that is, the
temper of her Mind and Carriage toward those who were not altogether of her
Size and Dimensions, nor cast exactly in her Mould. I confess, she was one of
the old-fashioned Christians, who thought her Heavenly Father's Example an
Authentic Warrant for her Imitation, of whom whosoever fears God, and
working Righteousness, is accepted. And though Virtues and Vices change their
names, and grow unmodish and obsolete, like Garbs and Words, yet old Wine
relished best to her Palate, which so many spit out as soon as taste, and cry,
it is vapid or eager. Some perhaps may wonder that so wise a Man as St. Paul
should not only allow Moderation to be commendable, but enjoin it as a Duty,
and press it by the Medium of the Day of the Lord drawing near; Let you
Moderation be known unto all Men, the Lord is at hand. When now his coming is
sixteen hundred Years nearer, most Men are as many Miles more distant from
Moderation than when he wrote. But I must acknowledge, how much soever it may
lessen her in the Esteem of any, that she had a Latitude (not in her
Conversation, for she always walked in the Narrow Way) in her Judgment, about
little indifferent Matters. (Oh, how Diametrically opposite are some in both!)
She observed there were Men of all Complexions, and Blacks and Tawnys, as well
as Whites, were Descendants of the first Adam, and so she hoped those of
different Persuasions might be ingrafted into the Second Adam; and therefore
thought Job's Words Canonical to this Day; Why Persecute we him, seeing the
Root of the Matter is found in him?

She did not think all, that in a few things dissented from the Communion in
which she lived, such rank Heathens; that if she heard a Man name them without
setting a stigmatizing Brand upon them, like the bigoted Jews of St. Paul,
upon the mere naming of the Gentiles, Acts 22.22. She should cry out, Away with
such a Fellow from the Earth; for it is not fit that he should Live.

It is a true and weighty Saying, worthy our Remembrance and Imitation, That
the prime Object of God's Love is his Dear Son, and next to that, the Image of
his Son wherever he finds it. And she wrote after this Copy, she loved the
Lord Jesus in Sincerity; she loved the Lord her God with all her Heart, and all
her Soul, with all her Might, and all her Strength; and her Neighbor as
herself. She would speak evil of no Man; do evil to no Man, but did all the
good she could, as she had opportunity; especially to the Household of Faith.
And though she loved the whole World with a love of Benevolence, she loved
those chosen out of the World with a Love of Complacency. She had a peculiar
Esteem of, and Affection for God's People: Her choice delight was in the
Saints, and those who excelled in Virtue.

She was not ashamed to be accounted their Sister whom Christ was not ashamed
to call his Brethren; the Profession, but much more the power of Godliness was
so far from being terminus Diminuens, an abatement of her value and kindness,
that it much endeared those to her in whom she found it, and fastened those
Bonds more strongly which had been tied by Nature, Neighborhood, or Friendly
Conversation. I excuse not the length of this Section, it being not easy to
write too much of that of which she never thought she practiced enough; though
she had, as it were, habituated it into her Constitution, it being as the
Element in which she lived.

SECT. XXIV. Of her Care to advance God's Glory, and the Salvation of Souls.
I have so far prevented my self in both those in what I have already written
of her, that scarce any thing remains to be farther added anew concerning them;
and I confess it seems to my self somewhat improper to make a distinct Section
of what is the Subject of the whole. The Care to promote those was as the
Spinal Marrow in the Body; yea, as the Soul, which animated the whole; as the
Pith which ascends from the Root of a Tree through the Trunk to every Branch
and Twig. She set the Lord continually before her, had respect to him in all
her Thoughts, and Words, and Actions, and reveered his Presence in all her
Natural, Moral, Civil and Religious Performances. Seeing him that was
Invisible, that nothing might escape from her which would provoke or dishonor
him who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, she yielded the Throne of her
Heart to God; and whether she spoke or wrote to others, or Prayed for them, she
exhorted, or entreated, that the Interest of God's Glory might be uppermost,
obtain the Supremacy, and nothing be its Rival, or stand in competition with
it. Such Expressions frequently occurring in many of the Passages above related
and transcribed from her Papers; and for the promoting the Salvation of others,
she remembered and practiced our Savior's Counsel to St. Peter; Thou, when thou
art Converted strengthen thy Brethren. I have given account above of her
indefatigable Care, and zealous Diligence in instructing Children, Servants,
Neighbors; and it is unreasonable to conclude I have little to say on this
Head, because I will not say over again what I had so fully said before. Her
Converse was generally very Serious, Savory, Edifying; few have come to see me
since she dyed who have not told me how frequently and faithfully she used to
give them good Advice and Exhortations to be sincerely Religious; and indeed,
she was endowed with an extraordinary measure of Courage, Prudence,
Faithfulness, to give necessary, free, kind and seasonable Reproofs,
Admonition, and Instructions, and would not suffer Sin to be upon their Souls
whom she had any opportunity to rescue from it; at least, would use her best
Endeavors to effect so good a Work, and would speak so home and plainly to
them who needed it, that I confess I have sometimes thought she rather
exceeded, and have between our selves intimated so much to her, to which she
would wisely, and with just Apology reply; My Dear, we must deal freely, and
speak home in such Cases, not mince the Matter and speak slightly, it will not
be minded if we do, and as good never a whit as never the better; it is well if
all we can say will effect what it is said for; and if they be not convinced
both of their own Error, and our Good Will, and made to feel what we speak by
our plain and faithful Earnestness, all the rest is lost to them and us;
they will be no better for it, and we shall not have the comfort of discharging
the part and duty of true Christian Friendship. And she had often good success;
but once above other times, so eminent and signal, I can hardly forbear to
relate it, and I have heard her more than once or twice make mention of it with
Thankfulness and Comfort, and as a good encouragement to do the like. She had a
very awakened Sense, and deep impressions on her Mind of that Estate which is
on the other side of Death, and was full fraught with Love and Pity to Immortal
Souls, and would do all she could to the saving of her own and others, and
therefore accounted all kindest offices not worth the name of true Friendship,
which stopped short, and reached not to, at least, had not a fair tendency
toward the Eternal Salvation of her Friends.

SECT. XXV. Several Graces in which she was most Eminent.
I Have cause to repent those hasty Thoughts set down before, page the 50th, as
Heads to be touched more fully, by which I have made my self Debtor to the
Reader's Expectation, to write somewhat of the Title of this Section; for when
I set my Thoughts to single out in the Prospect of them all, which shined with
the greatest Luster, all were so fair and bright I am at a loss on which to fix
the Preference: For I may say of her with Modesty and Truth, what St. Gregory
Nazianzen says of his Sister Gorgonia with wonder, That she excelled in all
Virtues; and St. Jerome of Nepotian, that he was so Eminent in all Graces as if
he had excelled but in some one alone. She was complete in Christ, had taken to
herself the whole Armor of God; not an almost-Christian, but thoroughly
furnished to every good Word and Work. And as God had preserved her, that
though she was assaulted by many Buffetting Temptations, she was not overcome
by them, and that no Iniquity had Dominion over her, to Reign in her Mortal
Body, or Immortal Soul to blot her Name or Profession with any Scandalous
Offense; so every Grace of the Spirit, with all which she was very plenteously
adorned, exerted its self with Vigor, was not raked up in faint and lazy
Habits.

Her Knowledge in which the New Man is renewed, and without which the Wise Man
tells us, the Heart cannot be good, was clear, solid, and indeed Masculine,
beyond the Proportion of her Sex and Degree, as may appear by all she wrote;
and she would discourse and argue very knowingly, and with sound Judgment upon
any Point of Divinity, as occasion offered. The Oil which fed this Lamp was her
much Reading good Books, but especially the Holy Scriptures, in which she
meditated Day and Night; and if the Saying be true, a good Textuary is a good
Divine, she might have some pretense to that Character; for though I will not
say (what is said of Apollos) she was mighty in the Scriptures; yet, I may say
truly, the word of Christ dwelt richly in her; and if David's delight in the
Law of God made him Wiser than the Ancient, yea, than his Teachers, she might
be near as Wise as some of them, considering that her Knowledge was not merely
Notional and Swimming in her Brain, but Experimental and Practical. She felt
and tasted, yea, lived the Truths she knew; and teaching her Children the
grounds of Religion, grounded herself more deeply in them.

Her Faith was strong, by which she gave Glory to God; not an Airy Fancy, but a
firm Persuasion, built upon the Rock of Ages. She knew whom she had Believed;
it may appear what Mettle that Shield was made of, by the many Fiery Darts of
the Devil so impetuously thrown at her, and so incessantly for many Years, and
so successfully, and so triumphantly quenched by it.

Her Charity, that greatest of Graces, the very Bond of Perfection, the Crown
of all the other, and which covers a Multitude of Sins, that Bud or Blossom of
Glory which shall be full Blown, and arrive at maturity in Heaven, where it
shall never fade or fail; it was so fervent and fruitful, (as may appear by
what I have so truly written of it in a distinct Section,) that I dare appeal
even to the most uncharitable and prejudiced Ill Will, if it were not Eminent,
to Superlative Degree and Measure.

For her Patience, which met with so many, and so smarty Trials both from God
and Men, yet had its perfect Work, and by it she possessed her Soul in submiss
and silent Acquiescence, charging herself Humbly and Wisely, but never charging
God frowardly and foolishly; meekly complaining to him, never peevishly
complaining of him.

Her Sympathy with others, in their sufferings and sorrows, was as signal as
her Patience in her own. And as she had very tender and strong Affections, her
usual saying was, great Affection, great Affliction: And that they who had many
Friends, must needs have many Sorrows; because they must share with them all,
in their Troubles and Crosses. She had well learnt that Apostolical Lesson, to
Mourn with them that Mourn, and bear others burdens, and so fulfill the Law of
Christ; as I find her more than once express her self, in Consolatory Letters,
many of which she wrote to her distressed Friends, under calamitous
Providence; and would tell them, she would willingly put under her Shoulder to
ease the pressure of their loads, they groaned under: And would often from her
own Experience declare, That she judged the Griefs of others to be the biggest
part of our uneasy disquietings in this Life. But no Afflictions were so
pungent, and entered so deep into her pious tender heart, as those of the
Church of God; and the tyranous Persecutions on those who suffered for the
Gospel of Christ, and for his sake were killed all the day long, and counted as
Sheep for the slaughter: As the Hungarian, French and Peidmount Protestants.

Her Pity to the Poor was very great, not only in the cases touched before, but
in her care to rescue from present and eternal Ruin, those who were
desperately running into both. To this end, she ventured to take up several
Beggar-boys and Girls at the Door; and after cleansing them from their
nastiness, receiving them into the House, of which some proved well, and she
obtained the end she aimed at; but more untractable, and deceived her
Expectation and Desires: yet this did not discourage her. I shall give one
Instance, which will hardly meet with its parallel.

And, as in many more like cases, she exceeded most others, so in this she
out-did her self. About three or four Years since, there came a forlorn
Creature begging to the Door; a Girl of about Thirteen Years old, in such a
loathsome pickle, as may stain my Ink to write, and turn the stomachs of the
Nice to read it; almost eat up with Scabs and Vermin; and as ignorant of God
and Christ, as if she had been born and bred in Lapland or Japan, and scarce
Rags to cover her; yet this blunted neither the point nor edge of her
Compassion, but rather whetted and sharpened both. When she had asked her many
Questions, both of her miserable Condition and Religion; of the latter of which
she knew not one syllable; but that her Christian Name was Mary, her Surname
was Bun. The case seemed so desparate, it almost posed and put her Pity to a
Plunge what to do to rescue her from the very Brink and Precipice of Temporal
and Eternal Ruin; but while she was Eating what she sent her warm, being well
nigh starved, she considered what might be done; she feared, if she dismissed
her so, her Ruin was next to inevitable, and not to prevent that to her Power,
she judged inconsistent with the Love of God dwelling in her Heart. She then
resolved, not on the shortest, but the safest Course, having engaged her to
promise to be honest, humble, thankful, and a good Girl if she could be
recovered. She ordered clean Straw to be laid in an Out-House, where she
lodged, and fed her, until she procured a Charitable Neighbor to strip her,
cut off her Hair, and wash her; for it was not possible to cleanse her
otherwise; she also provided old Cloths to keep her sweet and warm; then she
used means to cure her Itch, and when some Months had perfectly recruited her,
and made her like another Creature, she clothed her new, took her into the
House, taught her the Catechism, to read, and do somewhat in the Family which
might fit her for a Service, and prevailed with a Rich Farmer who had Married
one of our Maids, to take her Apprentice, promising to cloth her well. She
wrote a large and excellent Letter to persuade him, besides discoursing with
him.

He consented, received her upon Trial; but when she was to be legally Bound,
that the latter Years of her Apprenticeship might compensate the
unprofitableness of the first, a new difficulty arose; none could bind her
validly but her Father, or the Parish from whence she came; many Messages, and
one or two special Messengers were sent, but all in vain. What should she do
more, she resolves to go herself, orders the Coach to be ready to carry her the
next Day, entreated me to go with her as far as North-Hall, twenty Miles
distant, a troublesome Journey cross the County. We came to Sir William
Lemmon's, because the Girl told us her Father worked constantly with him; it
was our unhappiness that Worthy Person was from Home; and though we found the
Girls Father, no words could make the least Impression on him, or extort other
answer from him but, That she was a naughty Girl; He would neither meddle or
make with her; We might do what we would; not so much as once I thank you for
all your Cost and Trouble. We left him, found another chief Man of the Parish;
but the Over-seer for the Poor being absent, nothing could be farther done at
present; only the Person we last spoke with seemed sensible of the Matter,
promised to take effectual course that the Girl should be duly Bound to the
good Master provided for her; but after tedious waiting and expecting, and
nothing done, we were forced to send her back with Horse and Man to the Place
from whence she came, only with this difference, She was in good Plight, and
well Clothed, and taught somewhat, who, when we took her up, was one of the
forlornest, miserable Objects I ever saw. And if this will not prove the Pity
of this good Woman to be a little above the ordinary Pitch and Size, I must
confess I have mis-titled this Section, and own she was Eminent in no Grace at
all. I hope naming Persons and Places will give none offense: I conceived it
necessary to make it evident I write not Romance, but matter of Fact, and
unquestionable Truth.

For her Repentance, it was her daily Business to renew it, and approve it to
be sincere; as if she had thought herself as Tertullian wrote, Born for nothing
else but ad agendum poenitentiam, To do Penance, or Repent. She was a great
Weeper, (though innocently Cheerful in Conversation when she liked her
Com^any.) I am persuaded she shed more Tears (...) especially in the time of
her Temptati^n) to prevent Sin, and in Praying against it, ^han some Hundreds
ever did to bewail it when ^ommitted; and she was frequent in keeping ^olemn
private days of Fasting and Humiliation, as was hinted when I showed how she
^pent a Week, page 48.

Her Reverential Fear of God was very remarkable; she could not endure to hear
Sacred things spoken of with lightness, much less with scorn and ridicule. If
any had heard a Story of the Profaneness of any other, and went about the
telling of it, she would put forth both her Hands, as thrusting him away, or
move them to her Ears as if she would stop them, and cry out, I pray tell no
such Stories in my Hearing; and if they desisted not, would hasten away. These
Holy Impressions were first rooted in her by the Practice and Example of Mr.
Martin (who published Bishop Brownrig's Sermons,) whom she frequently heard
when young; whom I have often heard her mention with Honor, as a Person who
always spoke of God with profoundest Reverential Awe she ever heard any Man,
and grew up more and more in, and after the time of her long and sore
Temptations by Blasphemous Suggestions, lest her Enemy should take advantage by
any Profane Word spoken in her hearing to tincture her Mind with any Thought
or Notion unsuitable to the most adorable Divine Perfections.

Yet this great and solemn Reverence she always retained toward God and
Christ; notwithstanding, I must acknowledge she used not to bow at the sound
and mention of the Name of the most Holy Jesus.

Her Love of God was as raised and fervent as her Fear of him was submiss and
calm. She was a Terrestrial Seraphim; this Grace was always flaming; all her
Sacrifices were offered up with Divine Fire, upon an Altar not built of hewn
Stone, but of Earth or unpolished Stones, upon which no Tool had been lifted up
(if I may allude to that passage of the Law,) which might pollute it; I mean,
an Heart profoundly humble. As the Glory of God was the End she always
propounded to herself, and his revealed Will was the Rule and Measure of all
she said or did; so the Love of God was the Spring and Principle from whence
all was derived and flowed; as the Heart panted after the Waterbrooks, so her
Heart panted after God. Her Soul was a-thirst for God; the Living God; crying
with David's Pathos, When shall I appear in the Presence of God. She loved God
for himself, and all she loved besides, she loved for his Sake, and the more of
him she found in any thing or Person, the more dearly did she love it.

And because she knew mere Pretenders are but God's Flatterers, they only who
intend what the Profess, are God's Friends; as Maximus Tyrius, a Heathen
Philosopher, could observe; and she had learned from a greater and better
Master, who bids us, If we love him keep his Commandments.

Her Obedience was very uniform, universal, unreserved, constant; she did not
pick and choose, but that she might not be ashamed, had respect to all God's
Commandments. She did not cull out cheap and easy Duties, and draw back her
Hand from touching what seemed more burdensome and heavy; but what was God's
Will Commanding, was her Will Obeying; and what was his Providential Will in
ordering and disposing, was hers in approving and submitting, without regret
and murmur. And for Sins, she dealt not with them as Saul with the Amalekites
Cattle, slay, mortify only the lean and refuse, and spare the fat ones,
abstain from such as had no bait of Pleasure or Profit to bribe her, not to
pass Sentence against them, but shut her Eyes against such Bribes; she kept
herself from her own Iniquities, would not taste the least Morsel of forbidden
Fruit, seemed it never so pleasant to the Eye, or liquorish to the Taste; in a
word, The Law of God was written on her Heart, and her Life and Conversation
were a Counter-part and Transcript of it.

My thoughts of her Virtues bringing to my Mind the remembrance of other good
Women, and amongst them Huldah the Prophetess, in whose time the Law was found,
(the Copy of which had been lost in the Evil Days before Josiah,) almost
transported me to write what others would call (and I would not deny to border
on it,) an extravagant Hyperbole; that if the Law had beed lost with us, it
might have been renewed and copied out from her Life and Practice.

Her Sincerity was very Eminent, she hated Guile and Hypocrisy with a perfect
Hatred; how often has her Pen left it written, and her Heart and Tongue uttered
it an hundred times more, Let Integrity and Vprightness preserve me. She would
not, could not disguise and act a Part; her Conversation was in Simplicity and
Godly Sincerity; she knew God could not be mocked, and she dreaded the Thoughts
of doing it; and she was of so generous a Temper she scorned to deceive Men,
and she feared exceedingly to deceive herself; and therefore was often
searching and trying herself, and ways putting herself into the Balance of the
Sanctuary, and crying to God in David's Language: Lord, search me and try me,
and see if there be any way of Wickedness left in me, and lead me in the Way
Everlasting.

I will join her Modesty to her Sincerity, because there is no greater
Impudency than to be an Hypocrite, who cunningly hides (to escape the reproach
of open Wickedness) from the Eyes of Men, what, with Atheistical Boldness, he
is neither afraid nor ashamed to display before those Eyes which are as a
Flame of Fire, from which nothing can be hid, and as easily will detect it as
earnestly detest it, and severely avenge it.

Her Modesty, (which you heard before she called the Woman's Ornament,) was so
undeflowred, that she loathed in others what had the slightest appearance of
staining or tarnishing that orient Beauty and adorning Comeliness, and which
she strove to plant in her Daughters, as the fairest Flower in that Garden,
which she cultivated with her best Industry; and for herself, I can, and do
give her this true Testimony; I never heard a Word proceed from her Mouth of
unpure defiling Sound or Sense, or of least tendency to either. Her Garb and
Dress, her Carriage and Gestures, and her whole Conversation were all of a
Piece with her Communication, which was always Savoury; Seasoned with Salt that
it might Minister Grace to them who heard it.

I confess, I reckon neither a slattering fordidness in Dress, nor
Pusillanimity to speak out in reproving Sin or Sinners as occasion required,
any branches of Modesty, (as I fear some do) in respect of Garb or Words, for I
have showed before, both how exact her Neatness, and how great her Courage was,
to make and keep her Faithful to the Interest of God and Souls. The Righteous
is bold as a Lion, and so was she.

But this hindered not her Meekness, she was as meek as a Lamb in her own Cause,
though bold as a Lion in the Cause of God; no true Virtues interferre, or are
inconsistent; I could prove this by Instance. She indeed was quick, and prone
to be hasty, this was, if any, the Sin of her Constitution; but, aware of it,
she doubled her Guards to prevent a Breach upon her weak Side. She had gathered
more than five Pages of apposite Scriptures which exhort to meekness of Spirit,
as I touched before, page 74.

The third of which is Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright before him, and kept my
self from mine eniquity. Which I conclude she did upon that account, because
she found herself liable to be surprised by that Infirmity of her Natural
Temper, Hastiness, the contrary to Meekness; those Sins being most properly
called our own which proceed from our Constitution, Callings, and prevailing
Custom. And the next is, Job 13.31. If I did despise the cause of my
Manservant, or my Maidservant when they contended with me. Which she set down
to keep her from being angry without hearing their Excuses, if they had any, to
extenuate a Fault, or not beyond Proportion to it, if they had none; and many
or her Servants, as well as my self, can witness, if she had exceeded in her
Reproofs or Chiding, she would chide herself more than she had done them, and
pray them to forgive her; so much more willing was she to bear Shame than
Guilt. She proceeds; Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thy self in
any wise to do evil, Psalm. 37.18. And next, A froward heart shall depart from
me. But I shut the Book, or I should with transcribing and remarking fill a
Sheet, and weary my Reader.

She was a very discreet, wise, and prudent Woman, and of a good Judgment; she
was indeed, sometimes pretty positive, stiff, tenacions and adhesive to her
Sentiments; which I have gently reproved, as being a little overweaning and too
well conceited of her own Wisdom, which I remember with great regret; but clear
her, and confess my own Error without any regretting what I now do therein;
for I must acknowledge that the Event for the most part proved, she was in the
right, and persisted not out of Humor, but because her Opinion was well
grounded, and fixed upon good Reason.

She was an excellent Proficient in satisfied Acquiescence, and had learned the
Art of Contentment to Perfection; she had attained to a Ne plus ultra, in the
things of this Life; she did not only not desire, but was afraid of being
greater or richer in this World than God had vouchsafed to make us; she chose
to follow, not to lead, or dictate to the Motions of Divine Providence, and she
knew my Mind so well, she needed not to do it when we were alone; but she has
often said before many Witnesses what I am about to relate.

When many Friends who knew her Humor would be saying, I would be shortly so
or so preferred; I suppose in Merriment rather than that they really thought
so; she would reply, and entreat them to hold their Peace, saying, Such
Discourse was very unacceptable to her; and lest their vain Breath should
Infect me, (though I thank God, whose Sacred Name I would not use in vain, I
never found my self susceptive of that Infection,) she would drop such
preventing Physic: What can we desire that we want? What have they who have so
many Preferments more than we, but a greater Account to give at the Day of
Judgment? We have enough to answer all the ends of Necessity and Decency, and
somewhat to spare for Charity; we know not what it is to be in straits, and
often lend, when others who have so much more are forced to borrow. It is a low
and easy thing in our Circumstances to be content, it is too cheap a Return
for our Enjoyments; it concerns us to be highly thankful, the Good Lord make
us so: And therefore I pray find some other Discourse, and leave this idle and
unwelcome Twattle. So freely would she speak when they had teazed and warmed
her, not to say vexed her, with their impertinent Harrangs.

And indeed she was very thankful; what a sweet Spirit of Praise breaths in
all I have transcribed from her Papers? and she did truly abound in this Grace.
She had well learned the Apostle's Lesson, In all things to give thanks: she
blessed the Lord at all times, his Praise was continually in her Mouth. She
seldom enterprized any thing without Prayer, and as seldom finished it without
Praise; comparatively, she esteemed Praise much more excellent than Prayer, not
only as it is more like the Employment of the Holy Angels, and the Spirits of
Just Men made perfect, but as it is less selfish, and has a more immediate
aspect upon God; our own Necessities constrain us to cry to God for Relief, and
the worst Men will Pray, yea, and make Vows when they are in fear, but only
good Men will return to pay their acknowledgments when their turn is served;
all the ten Lepers cried for Mercy, but where are the nine? there was but one
of them found to render Thanks. St. Gregory the Great gives this Reason why, of
all the holy Men of God mentioned in the Sacred Oracles, David only is called
the Man after God's own Heart: Because he wrote the Book of Psalms, those
Divine Praises. Praise is so agreeable to the Heart of God, (he that offers
Praise, glorifieth me;) that the Man of Praise is the Man after God's own
Heart; and this good Woman has left this comfortable Evidence, and ground of
hope behind her, that she is gone to the place where Eternity will be spent in
endless Hallelujahs, and Songs of Thanksgivings, who did so anticipate that
State and Work whilst here below. She has left sixteen whole Pages of one form
of Thanksgiving, which she begins thus:

Lord what shall I render to thee for all thy unspeakable Benefits in thy
Mercies to me! I beseech thee in the remembrance of them, let thy Holy Spirit
excite and stir up in my Heart a thankful Acknowledgment. Lord, I bless thee
for thy self, in whom all Perfection is Eternal and Unchangeable, an Everliving
and Immortal God, filled with all adorable Excellency, the Author and Original
of all things, the first Principle of all good, who art most amiable to an
Intellectual Eye, most adequate and proportionable, most suitable to Immortal
Beings. Thou Lord, art the Felicity and Bliss of Souls, etc. And so she
proceeds sixteen whole Pages without any vain Tautologies, only beginning the
several Paragraphs with Lord I bless thee, or the like, (this is written the
most curiously of any thing I yet have found of hers) and continues to the End
with most raised Fervours of Holy Praises; I can scarce forbear to say, with
flowing streams of sweet and Pious Eloquence.

I will venture my Reader's Candor to excuse my adding the last Lines.

I bless thee for the hopes I have of a glorious Resurrection when thou will be
glorified in thy Saints; thou will say to the North give up, and to the South,
keep not back; that thy Sons may be brought from far, and thy Daughters from
the ends of the Earth; and all as Faithful Depositories shall restore to thee
at that universal Jubilee; then shall my Dust arise and Praise thee. I bless
thee for thy Kingdom, afree Donation and Inheritance of thy Saints; there shall
be no pricking Briar, or grieving Thorn, when I shall neither fin nor sorrow
any more, but for ever be in the Exaltation of Eternal Bliss, where thy Angels,
Cherubims, and Seraphims adore and worship thee with the highest fervor of
Zeal and Love, and where my Soul shall shine in its full Strength in thy
Everlasting Praises. Amen, Amen, Amen.

And there is not one Line less warm and savoury in all the other than are this
Beginning and Conclusion of it.

The time would fail me to recount and reckon up all the other Graces in which
she was Eminent, and to blazon their Luster, and reflect their Brightness. The
tenderness of her Conscience, which was very remarkable, as I could Evidence in
many Particulars; this Pulse of her Soul beat very quick, but withal was very
even and uniform, she used not to strain at Gnats, and swallow Cammels. Her
Rule was in dubious Cases, always to choose the safest to the best of her
Judgment, not to consult with Flesh and Blood, and be swayed by the Advice they
suggested, to do nothing rashly, but with due and prudent Deliberation. She was
afraid of Sin, as Sin, and therefore of all Sin, and would abstain from all
appearance of Evil. Though she was not such a Stoic as to esteem all Sins
equal, yet she esteemed none in it self little, because there is no little God
to sin against; no little Law to be despised; no little Heaven to be lost; no
little Hell to be endured: But an Almighty God, a Royal Law, an Heaven of
unconceivable Glory, and an Hell of endless and easeless Torments were
concerned in all, and it renders the least Sin in its own Nature, a very great
one to venture on it boldly against the light and dictates of Conscience.

Her Care to improve that Inch of precious Time on which so vast an Eternity
depends, was very signal. She squandered not an Hour, scarce suffered a Moment
to run waste; she used, she knew no Games, nor needed other to relax or
recreate her Spirits but vicissitude and variety of commendable Employment; the
change of Business sufficiently relieved her, when she was weary of one, she
counted it a Refreshment to set upon another. As a Traveller who sometimes
Rides and sometimes Walks, but still proceeds, continues his Journey, changes
his Posture, but not his Design; and few ever made Religion their Business more
intently, and with fewer Interruptions.

Her public Spiritedness should not be forgotten, the concerns of the Nation,
especially of the Church, lay very near her Heart: She preferred Jerusalem
before her chief Joy.

I will wrap up this Section with two which were diffused and spread over all
the rest. Her Zeal and her Humility.

Zeal is not so properly a distinct peculiar Grace, as the Cream and Flower of
them all, the Oil which swims upon the waters of the Sanctuary, the Varnish
which both preserves them from fading, and gives a shining, advantageous Luster
to all the Colors with which the lively Picture of the new Creature is drawn;
not a distinct piece of the Divine Armor, but the Edge and Keenness, the
Furbishing and Brightness, both of offensive and defensive Arms.

Her Zeal was very vigorous and lively; she knew not what it was to be dull and
sluggish: Whatever her Hand found to do, she did it with all her Might; and
Nature, which too often is the remora of Grace, in her was a nimble and useful
Handmaid to it. She had an agile active Body, Spare and Lean, feared to be
Fat; saying, She hated to be clogged with a foggy bulk of Flesh, and of a
vivacious sprightly Soul, and these streams being in the right Channel Whafted
her as Wind and Tide, to her desired Port and Harbor, that she was never
becalmed or Wind-bound, but Sailed amain, and kept on her Course with swiftest
Expedition, till she had finished it with Safety, and with Joy; not that I
ascribe it solely or chiefly to these, but principally to the Divine Gales of
the Holy Spirit of God, so freely and plenteously vouchsafed to her; that Wind
which Blows where it lists: And for ever Blessed be his Goodness which so
often filled her Sails.

Lastly, She was clothed with Humility, as the Apostle counsels; this I might
call her Dust-gown, for the aptness of the Allusion, but it hung not so loose
about her, but was girded on with the Girdle of Truth about her Loins; she wore
it constantly, no dress was more becoming herself or others in her Account; she
studied to bring it into Fashion by her Example and Advice; she bought several
of Mr. W. A's Treatises of that Subject to give to Friends; those who received
them will attest it; and I hinted before she had made preparations to write a
Tractate of it. Amongst other things she had to say of it, she had prepared
this Encomium, That it is the Foundation that gives Stability, the Strength
which gives Security, the Ornament that reflects Beauty, and the Completion
which gives the finishing strokes to all other Graces.

I shall not, after all this, need to draw her Character distinctly; if I do
any thing in that it shall be added in the close of all.

I am now arrived at my Mournful Heavy Loss, and her much waited for, and
desired Gain, and great Advantage, her much bewailed Death, to prepare for
which had been her daily work for many Years, which happened February the 23d,
this present Year 1690.

Her Sickness was short, but blessed be God her great Work was not then to do.
She began to complain Wednesday Noon, but dined with me; took her Bed that
Afternoon with design to sweat with a Dose of the Lady Kent's Powder, but could
not sweat. I sent for Dr. Yardly early Thursday Morning, a Vein was opened,
other Administrations ordered, which seemed to succeed so well, that we had
scarce any apprehensions of Danger. She sat up four hours Saturday, till seven
at Night, and thought herself, and so did we, refreshed and better by it; but a
complicated Disease, a Rheumatism, Erysipelas, and Peripneumonia, by God's Wise
and Holy Righteous Ordering prevailed against her Strength and our Hopes. And
on the Lord's Day she passed to her dearest Lord, and the well-beloved
Bridegroom of her Soul, to begin that Eternal Sabbath which shall never be
interrupted nor cease. She spoke not much in her Sickness, hindered by the
shortness of her Breath, and swelling of her Face. What she did was suitable to
her Holy Life, and I believe God hid from her as well as us, the near approach
of her Death, in Mercy to us all. One of the last Words she spoke to me was
before my going to Church; A short Prayer my Dear before thou go.

She was Buried February the 27th following with that decency which is fitter
for others to relate than my self, and now she sleeps in Jesus, who, by his
Burial perfumed and warmed that Bed of the Grave for all his Members, where we
leave her in hopes of a Glorious Resurrection when her Dust shall rise to
praise him.

AN APPENDIX: Containing some few of the Directions she wrote for her Childrens
Instruction, mentioned Sect. 12. And some few Letters written by her.
I Desire it may be remembered she wrote these, not for grown and experienced
Christians, who might be fitter to instruct her than be assisted by her, much
less with the least Prospect they should ever be published or seen by many
Eyes; my own never saw them till hers were closed; but I hope may be useful for
young ones and Beginners, and as such I recommend them to her Friends to
communicate to their Children, if they think good, and have not given them
better of their own; and therefore it is not just to measure her Abilities by
the scantling of this Performance, but to consider the End to which it was
designed, to suit the Capacities, and assist the tender Minds of those for whom
they were written, when I guess they might be about twelve, or fourteen years
of Age; for one of them died at sixteen; and with this equitable Allowance I
hope they may be very passable, if not commendable and useful.

For my Dear Children, Mrs. Margaret and Elizabeth Walker.
IT is the duty of Christians to Pray fervently and frequently, with Faith,
with Humility, with Sincerity, with Constancy, with watchfulness, in the
Spirit, with Warmth and Life.

Prayer is a means whereby we give Worship to God, giving him the Glory of all
his adorable Perfections.

Prayer is the Soul's Motion to God; Desire and Expectation are the Soul of
Prayer.

Prayer is a knocking at the Door of God's Grace and Mercy in Christ for all
manner of Supplies you stand in need of.

Prayer is a Wrestling with God; the Lord is willing to forgive, ready to hear
and help, yet he delights to have his Strength tried, Genesis 32.24, 25.

The work of Prayer is not so much to lift up the Hands, and Eyes, and Voice,
as to lift up the Heart and Soul.

In Prayer is required extensiveness and intensiveness of Mind, and Heart, with
Importunity, which consists in a frequent renewing of our Suits to God,
notwithstanding all discouragements, with a patient waiting for returns of
Grace.

Prayer must be a Premeditated Work, as to the Sins to be confessed, the Wants
expressed, the Mercies acknowledged; but especially to have right apprehensions
of the Purity, Majesty, Immensity, All Sufficiency, Fidelity, and Bounty of the
Lord, to whom you Pray; with Faith in his Promises and Providence, and his
Almightiness to supply your Wants in the things of this Life, and the Life to
come.

Be much with God in Secret Prayer, and let not the fire of the Spirit, and
Holy Zeal be wanting in any Duty, which, in the Hearts of God's People send out
Holy Vapors of fragrant spiritual Desires and Requests to God, Vials full of
Odours, which are the Prayers of the Saints, Rev. 5.8. compared to sweet
Incense, Mal. 1.11. How near are the Saints thus exercised to Jesus Christ?
There is but a step, as it were, between them and Heaven. What precious answers
of Grace receive they oftentimes from the Oracle of God.

You will do well to observe the fittest Season for Secret Prayer; though a
Christian is to Pray at all times, yet at sometimes more especially; when we
meet with any new Occurrence of Providence, every fresh dispensation of
Providence is a prompt to Prayer, as when any Affliction befalls us, Jam. 5.13.

So when any fresh Mercy is received, it is a fit season to go aside, and to
acknowledge God's Goodness, and our own Unworthiness, 2 Samuel 7.18. When you
find the Spirit of God moving upon your Soul, exciting you to the Duty, Cant.
2.10. your Hearts should answer again, Thy Face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27.5.

When you find your Heart in a settled and composed Frame; then also is a fit
season for secret Prayer. When, as David's, your Heart is fixed, not disturbed
with any Secular Business.

The Morning also is a fit Season for Secret Prayer, the Mind is most composed,
and troubled with fewest Diversions. (See her Practice, Sect. 5. page 33.

It were well to be with God as soon as you awake, to offer up to him the
First Fruits of every Day; this was, with others, David's manner, Psalm.
5.3.139.3.

The Evening also is a fit Season for Secret Prayer, Psalm. 55.17. not only to
begin, but to conclude the Day with God: Sleep not till you have begged his
Pardon for your Sins committed, and Praised him for the Mercies received that
Day.

When you go about any Holy Duty, set by all Worldly Occasions; say to them as
Abraham did to his Young Men, Stay you here while I go aside and Worship God,
Genesis 22.5.

Do not ordinarily go to Prayer when your Anger is stirred, and your Mind full
of Perturbation, 1 Timothy 2.8. lest you offer up the Sacrifice of a Fool, 1 Kings
19.11, 12. and speak unadvisedly with your Lips.

Do not actually engage in Prayer when you are inclined to Sleep and
Drowsiness; you must be wakefull when you Pray, if you would watch unto Prayer.

Also allot, and set out a due Proportion of Time for the Duty of Prayer; a
slighty huddled Prayer is a blind Sacrifice; carlessness in Prayer, breeds
and feeds Inconstancy, and Instability in Prayer.

Slightiness in Prayer is an inlet to delusive Fancies, and is a forerunner of
Apostasy, if not seasonably reduced: Such Religious Performances go out like
the Snuff of a Candle.

It is not enough to choose a fit time, but you must allow sufficient time to
Pray: If you are straightened in your Time, you will be straightened in your Prayer.

Also a great help in the well-performance of the Duty of Secret Prayer, is to
take Pains with your Heart by Meditation.

As the offering of sweet Incense was prepared and compounded of many costly
Materials, Exodus 30.34. so is a Spiritual Prayer, not rudely and confusedly,
but deliberately, advisedly, preparedly, and very particularly presented before
the Lord.

It is usually from want of preparation you find such deadness and
indisposedness in Prayer; a heedfull and deliberate reading of the Holy
Scriptures before Prayer, is also a great help for the well-performing of the
Duty.

A farther help in the duty of Prayer, is to have right conceptions of God,
conceive of him as he is, and as he has revealed himself in his Word to be; an
Omnipresent God, Psalm. 139. that he is really, though not visibly, present in
all Places, and in that Place where you are Praying; that he sees your Heart.
Whenever you set about this, or any Holy Duty, set God before your Eyes, and
represent him under the Notion of an Omnipresent, all-seeing God.

Conceive of God as one full of Majesty and Greatness, infinitely above any of
his Creatures: This Apprehension may much both quicken us, and awe us in Prayer.

Conceive of God as one that is exceeding Gracious, and Plenteous in Mercy to
all that call upon him.

To apprehend God in his Greatness, does stir up Fear and Godly Reverence; to
apprehend God in his Goodness, does stir up Faith and Holy Boldness.

Conceive of God in Prayer as one God, not divided in Essence, yet
distinguished into three Persons; the Father, the Son, and Spirit, all
concurring to the Prayers of Believers, and have a different office about them;
there is the Father Hearing, the Son Interceeding, the Spirit helping our
Infirmities.

Conceive of God not absolutely but in Christ. God in himself is a consuming
Fire, Heb. 12. But in Christ he is a Merciful Father; there is no coming unto
God but by Jesus Christ, Heb. 7.25.

Entertain, and maintain very honorable Thoughts of the Duty of Prayer it
self, this will both move you to the Duty, and much quicken you in the Duty.

What the Psalmist says of the City of God, Psalm. 87.3. that may be said of the
duty of Prayer, Great and Glorious things are spoken of it.

You may read of wonderful effects of Faith; the effects and fruits of Prayer
are as many and great. Heb. 11. It has obtained Promises, subdued Kingdoms,
turned away Enemies; it has raised the Dead, stopped the Sun's Course; yea
made it go back; it has opened Prison-Doors, and unlocked Secrets; it has
opened Heaven, and shut it again, with much Reverence be it spoken; it has
laid hold upon God himself, and put him to a merciful Retreat, when he has
been marching in Anger against Persons or People. God speaks as if his Hands
were held and tied up by Prayer: Let me go, says he to Jacob; and, Let me
alone, says he to Moses; as if the Lord would indent with Moses, and offer him
a Composition to hold his Peace, Exodus 32.10.

Wonderful is that passage, Isa. 45.11. if read right, God says, Concerning
the Works of my Hands command ye me.

The prevalency of fervent Prayer is very great, it prevails much with God,
Jam. 5.15, 16. Keep your Hearts close to the duty, and suffer them not to stray
or wander, a straying Heart must needs be a straightened Heart in Prayer.

If you would have your Heart enlivened, and enlarged in Prayer, remember to
repel every vain Thought that comes in to your disturbance; resist it, and
call in help from Heaven against it.

Let the guilt of no one Sin lie upon your Conscience, that will clog,
disquiet, and check your Spirit in Prayer.

It is not amiss to observe a method in Prayer, especially when you Pray with
others, (as she would sometimes do, when both my self and Curate were absent,
rather than Family Worship should be wholly omitted) though not tied to Words,
but confused Repetitions and disorderly Digressions dis-affect those that join
with you.

(Though some profane Scorners may mock and snear at this, what real Evil
scorn-worthy is there in it, for a serious, holy Mother to instruct her
Daughters aforehand, to Pray with their Maids and Children, if God had spared
them, and given them those Relations? I wish no Mothers would give their
Children Counsels or Examples more liable to Exception.)

Choose such a Place to Pray in as is most convenient, where you may not be
disturbed by noise in your Ears, nor be diverted by any Object before your
Eyes; shut also the Door lest the Wind of Vainglory get in thereat. Mat. 6.5,
6.

Be much in the use of Ejaculatory Prayer, which is a short, yet serious,
lifting up the Soul in desires to God. Genesis 43.14, 49.18. Neh. 2.4. 2 Samuel
15.31. Luke 23.42. John 12.27.

Ejaculatory Prayer is a special means to keep our Hearts very Spiritual and
Savoury when often in Heaven; it is a special means to fit them for more solemn
and continued Prayer.

You may find this way of Praying very fam^^^^r with the best of Men; yea, with
Christ himself.

Also remember to set their Examples before your Eyes, who have performed the
Duty of Prayer, with life-enlargement and importunity. See Genesis 32.24. Matthew.
26.26.39. Heb. 5.7. Hos. 12.3. Examples sway us sometimes more than any Rules
or Precepts.

For farther Encouragement to this Duty of Prayer, consult with many other
Promises: That of our Savior's, where he says, Matthew. 21.22. Whatever you ask
in prayer, believing, you shall receive. And in John 14.13, 14. Whatsoever you
shall ask in my Name I will do it. If ye shall ask any thing in my Name I will
do it. And Matthew. 7.7, 8. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall
find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks,
receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened.

Call upon me, and I will answer thee; and show thee great and mighty things,
which thou know not, Jer. 33.3.

Jam. 5.15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up; and if he has committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. -- The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.

Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.3.

If any man want Wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally
and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith,
nothing wavering; for he that wavereth is like a wave of the Sea, driven with
the Wind, and tossed.


Thus she concludes, it may seem somewhat abruptly, I can give no reason, and
will not guess; only the unwritten Paper which remains may seem to imply, she
designed more. This is just the fortyeth part of what she had written for her
Childrens use, being 6 Pages in her Book, of Twelve score; so that I have
enough, if I would enlarge, to tire my self, and satisfy, not to say, clog, my
Readers. But I will consult my own ease, and theirs, in adding little more of
what an account is given, Sect. 12. under Eleven or Twelve distinct Heads.

I confess, I am tempted to add the Example to the Rule, I mean the large Form
of Prayer and Thanksgiving, each containing 16 Pages. But I Will forbear, only as
I touched a few Lines of the beginning and end of the Thanksgiving before.

So I shall give a little taste of this Prayer which she begins thus.

Good Lord, give me to know thee, who passest all Knowledge, and though I
cannot comprehend thee in the perfection and fullness of thy Glory, yet
vouchsafe to give me to apprehend thee, in thy Love and pardoning Mercy to me a
poor miserable Sinner; who in my first Being was invested with an happy and
righteous Estate, from which, O Lord, in my first Original, I soon declined,
etc. And so proceeds most humbly to acknowledge the guilt and pollution of
Original Sin, as I think, yea know, most Orthodoxly. If our Bibles, our
Articles, our Homilies, yea our Liturgy, be more Orthodox than Socinus, and
those Ephramites who lisp his Sibboleth, because they cannot, or will not,
pronounce aright the Shibboleth of the Church of England's good old Doctrine.

Then she proceeds to a large Confession of actual Sin, both of Omission and
Commission against both Tables. Acknowledging the demerit of them, proceeds to
sue out the Pardon of them in these words.

O God, thou know my foolishness, and my Sins are not hid from thee, I
beseech thee pardon my Iniquities, and blot out my Transgressions, though they
be as a thick Cloud. Good Lord, wash me from my Impurities in that Fountain set
open for Sin and for Uncleanness, the precious Blood of Jesus Christ which is
not only able to expiate my guilt, but to cleanse me from all my filthiness,
that through his stripes I may be healed, and cleansed from all my Original and
Actual Defilements, etc. Having enlarged upon this, she proceeds to pay for
Sanctification and Inherent Righteousness, that she may be a new Creature in
Christ Jesus; then most fully and earnestly against Temptation; then for the
Assistance of the Spirit to render all God's Ordinances, and the means of Grace
effectual; then for growth in Grace; for Comfort; for an Heavenly frame of
Heart and Life; for assurance and manifestation of God's Love to her; then for
Wisdom to consider her latter End, and to be helped in that Spiritual
Arithmetic, so to number her Days as to apply her Heart to true Wisdom; then
that God would fit and prepare her for her Dissolution, that when her days
shall be consummated on Earth, her Corruptible may put on Incorruption, and her
Mortal put on Immortality. Then she concludes with these Words:

Then shall Death, my last Enemy, be vanquished and swallowed up in Victory,
and from thy unworthy Creature Everlasting Praises shall be rendered unto thee,
through Jesus Christ that gives me the Victory, for thou have redeemed my Soul
from the Power of the Grave. I beseech thee receive me into thy Eternal Kingdom
and Glory, that neither Death nor Life, things present, nor things to come may
be able to separate me from thy Love, O God, which is in Christ Jesus my Lord.

Then she proceeds to Pray for the Church, of which a taste was given in her
Monday-morning Prayers, Sect. 7. page 45. Gracious Lord, the Mercies I ask of
thee for my own Soul, I earnestly beg of thee for thy Church and People.
Blessed Lord, Thou have made the Earth by thy Power, established the World by
thy Wisdom, and stretched out the Heavens by thy Discretion; thy Arm is not
shortened that thou can not Save. Good Lord take care of Zion, build up the
Walls of Jerusalem, that in Zion there may be Deliverance, and Holiness in thy
House; let the Mountain of thy House be established in the top of the
Mountains; be thou a Wall of Fire round about, and her Glory in the midst
thereof, -- But I forgot my self, it is hard to stop my Pen. Then, I beseech
thee especially for the Land of my Nativity, the Nation of which I am a sinful
Member, -- here is a large Paragraph. The next is for the World; Give thy
Gospel a free and glorious Passage through the World. Good Lord pity those that
sit in the region and shadow of Death. -- Then, I beseech thee be merciful to
all the Sons and Daughters of Sorrow, and Affliction, -- the Disconsolate, the
Sick, those who contend with Poverty, Imprisonment, Reproach, Disgrace. -- Then
for them who suffer Persecution for the Truth: Then for her Relations. I
confess, I am almost ashamed that I have thus mangled so excellent a Prayer, so
Piously, so Judiciously, in such suitable Scripture Phrase and Language. I
think it had been better to have transcribed the whole, or let it quite alone;
but her Friends may command a Copy of it if they please. Having finished her
Intercessions for others, she returns to conclude with renewed Petitions for
herself, which I will venture to set down.

Good Lord, be the God and Portion of me thy unworthy Creature, and of those so
dear unto me; give me a Relation to thee, an Affiance in thee, and a Dependence
upon thee, that in all my concerns I may come to thee, in whom are all my fresh
Springs, the riches of free Grace to poor Sinners, and treasuries of Mercies,
purchased with the Precious Blood of Jesus Christ. I beseech thee withold not
thy tender Mercies from me, but give me of that hidden Manna, the sweet
refreshing Incomes of thy Holy Spirit into my Soul, and when my Heart is
overwhelmed, I beseech thee lead me to the Rock that is higher than I, for thou
have been a shelter to me. Lord be thou a strong Tower to me, to which I may
continually resort; for whom have I in Heaven but thee? And if I know any thing
of my own Heart, there is none comparative on Earth that I desire besides thee;
thou art my God, besides thee there is no Savior. I beseech thee guide me with
thy Counsel, and when I shall go hence and be no more in this World I beseech
thee receive me into thy Glory.

Then follows the Thanksgiving, full as large as the Form of Prayer, and, if it
may be, more Spiritual, raised, and Divinely Savoury; but I will not repeat the
Error, to mangle it, and set down so Imperfect Pieces, and spoil its Beauty,
but signify to her Friends, that I shall freely allow them to read the
Original, which is fairly legible, or if they think it worth the while, to Copy
it out, or at more leisure to Print some few Copies of it, and others of her
useful Papers, if desired, which I omit at present for fear of swelling this
into too great a Bulk, though I am sure several of them equal, or rather exceed
any thing I have now Published of hers.

MARKS OF A Regenerate Estate.
I add this because it is concise, and will not take up much Room or Time.
Giving her Children Directions how to examine and try the Estate of their Souls
toward God.

DO you consent to the Law of God, that it is true, and Righteous?

Have you perceived your self Sentenced to Death by it; being condemned and
convinced of your natural, undone Condition?

Have you seen the utter Insufficiency of every Creature, either to be in its
self your Happiness, or the means of curing this your Misery, and making you
happy again in God?

Have you been convinced that your Happiness is only in God as the End, and in
Christ as the way to him, and the End also, as he is one with the Father; and
perceivest thou that thou must be brought to God by Christ, or Eternally Perish?

Have you seen hereupon an absolute necessity of your enjoying Christ, and the
full sufficiency that is in him to do for you whatsoever your Condition
requires, by reason of the fullness of his Satisfaction, the greatness of his
Power, and Dignity of his Person, and the freeness and Indefiniteness of his
Promises?

Have you discovered the excellency of this Pearl to be worth the selling all
to buy it?

Has this been joined with some Sensibility, as the Conviction of a Man that
thirsts, of the worth of Drink; and not been only a change in Opinion,
produced by Reading, or Education, as a bare notion in the Understanding?

Is there an abhorring of all Sin, though your Flesh do tempt you to it?

Have both your Sin and Misery been a Burden to your Soul, and if you could
not weep, yet could you heartily groan under the unsupportable weight of both?

Have you renounced the hidden and unfruitful works of Darkness, having no
fellowship with them, but with Courage and Zeal for God reprove them?

Do you labor to be Holy in all parts of your Conversation, watching over your
ways at all times, and in all Companies?

Do you make Conscience of the least of God's Commands as well as the greatest,
avoiding idle Words, and vain Jesting; abhorring all reproachful Speeches, as
well as violent Actions?

Do you love, and esteem, and labor for the powerful Preaching of the Word
above all Earthly Treasures?

Do you Honor and highly account of the truly Godly, and delight in the
Company of such as sincerely fear God above all others, esteeming them the
excellent of the Earth?

Are you careful of the Sanctification of the Sabbath, neither daring to
violate that Holy Rest by Labor, nor to neglect the Holy Duties belonging to
God's Service, public or private?

Do you not love the World, neither the things of the World, but heartily
desire and love the things that concern a better Life, and so do in some
measure love the Appearance of Jesus Christ?

Can you forgive your Enemies, are you easily entreated, desirous of Peace, and
to do good to them that despitefully use you?

Do you set up a daily course of serving God, and that with your Family too, if
you have any; and renouncing your own Righteousness, trust only to the Merits
of Jesus Christ?

Have you turned all your Idols out of your Heart, so that the Creature has no
more the Sovereignty, but is now a Servant to God, and Jesus Christ?

Do you accept of Christ as your only Savior, and expect your Justification,
Recovery, and Everlasting Happiness from him alone?

Do you also take him for your Lord and King, and are his Laws the most
powerful Commanders of your Life and Soul?

Do his Laws prevail against the Commands of the Flesh, of Satan, and the
greatest on Earth that shall countermand?

And against the greatest Interest of your Credit, Profit, Pleasure or Life, so
that your Conscience, Soul, Body, Life, is directly subject to Christ alone?

Has he the Highest Room in your Heart, and Affections, so that though you
cannot love him as you would, yet nothing else is loved so much?

Have you made an Hearty Covenant with him, and delivered up your self
accordingly to him, to be his for Ever without Reserve?

Do you take your self for his and not your own; is it your utmost Care, and
watchful Endeavor that you may be found faithful in his Covenant, and though
you fall into Sin, you would not renounce your Bargain, nor change your Lord,
nor give up your self to any other Government for all the World?

And if this be truly your Case, you are one of God's Children and People, and
as sure as God's Promises are true, there is an happy and blessed Estate for
you; only see that you abide in Christ, and continue to the End, for if any
draw back, his Soul will have no pleasure in them.

Then she concludes with the Prayer set down above, page 81.

For the Right Honorable Isabella Countess of Radnor.
This was written to her Ladyship, as a Consolatory Letter upon the surprising
Death of her dearly-beloved Daughter the Lady Essex Specot.

Ever Honored good Madam,
I Do truly Sympathize with your Ladyship, in your great Sorrows under God's
afflicting Hand, taking from your Ladyship a very dearly Beloved, and desirable
Child. She was very deservedly so; and to all acquainted with her, she was a
very sweet amicable Friend; she lived very desired and she has died lamented.
She was not affected with distant Pride, a Spirit hated of God, and all good
People. Dear Lady Essex, She was of a sweet, courteous, affable disposition,
very winning in her loving condescension. I am sensible of my own loss, who had
a share of her favor, much more of your Ladiship's, to whom she was so near
and dear. Good Madam, would I could help to alleviate your Sorrows, I would put
to my Shoulder to help bear your burden, which is to fulfill the Law of
Christ. But it is not in created Beings farther than God will use them
Instrumentally. But above, in the great Creator, in Him is all supply of Grace
and Comfort; God is a present help in the needful time of trouble, an approved
Friend, that will not fail you in what you go unto him for, agreeable to his
Will; which assuredly is the best. Therefore, Good Madam, retain kind thoughts
of God; he has not cast away your Prayers, nor rejected the Prayers of Friends
for you, though God did not see it good dear Lady Essex should stay longer with
you in this World, he has done better for her and you: God has granted to a
higher end, he has taken her to himself in Heaven, from thence, Good Madam,
you would not have her to return into a troublesome World; it is fit to
acquiesce in God's most wise Dispose, He knew what was best for her and you,
and to keep silence before the Lord, because he has done it; whatever second
cause he might use as Instrumental; yet it was the Lord, the Sovereign Lord of
her and us, who does all things well. Good Madam, What you cannot see now you
may know hereafter, if not in this Life; of all in it you shall have clear
Manifestations in Heaven; that all Dispensations in this World, were for the
best for you; the most I can do is to pity your Ladyship with my poor worthless
Prayers, in themselves they are so: But I would beg of God to uphold you in the
Arms of his Mercy, that you may not sink under any Trial, and that your
Affliction, which at present may be grievous, may appear not to be the Wound of
an Enemy, but the Chastisement of a loving Father, who deals with you, as with
his Children, in his adopting Love to you in Faithfulness. God corrects his
People, in his distinguishing Love from those which shall never see his Face
with comfort. Good Madam, I know you do desire to be in subjection to the
Father of Spirits. The Lord will be King, let the People be never so impatient;
God will not grieve nor correct for his own pleasure, but for his Childrens
profit, that they may live. God's own Vineyard needs pruning as well as
manuring, that the Branches thereof may not waste too much of the Life, and
Spirits, and Affections in worldly Satisfactions. Good Madam, God has taken
away a Branch, dear Lady Essex, she is not withered but transplanted, for his
own pleasure and delight, that the Fruits of your Love to God may more appear
in your willing Resignation of her, who was so dear to you, not offering unto
God that which costs you naught. Good Madam, You shall sustain no loss, God
will reimburse, and this Breach his Hand has made he will fill up and repair
at his own Charge. He will, in exchange for a Daughter, bestow on you his only
Son, and build you a House better than Leah and Rachel did Jacob's: God will
give you a Name, better than of Sons and Daughters, and make you one of his
Firstborn in Heaven. God took it exceeding well that Abraham did not withold
his beloved Isaac from him; and for his ready compliance in what God required
of him, he had God's Promise, That in blessing he would bless him. Good Madam,
God has more Blessings than one; when God proved Abraham, he gave him back
again his Isaac, whom he loved, and promised, that in him all the Nations of
the Earth should be blessed; of which Promise, Good Madam, you do partake, with
an additional Favor, God having ransomed dear Lady Essex out of a troublesome
World, with a better Sacrifice than that he then provided for Isaac, a Ram
caught in a Thicket, with which Isaac was redeemed, unto a transient Life. Dear
Lady Essex, she is redeemed by Jesus Christ, unto eternal Life. Good Madam,
What cause of complaint? Dear Lady Essex is freed from the many temptations she
might have met with in this World. Isaac's prolonged Life found it so in his
unsettled Condition, he met with Affliction in his Posterity, with other
Troubles of this Life; the World is unquiet like the tumbling Ocean; dear Lady
Essex she has found a resting Place, got off the rough Seas of Sins and
Sorrows, God has placed her in the serene Region above; God knew what Sail she
was able to bear in worldly Prosperity or Adversity; he has taken her from the
boisterous Winds that might have disturbed the Coast of her even walking with
God; God has steered her Course; dear Lady Essex, she is got safe to Harbor,
from the windy Storms and Tempests of this World. God took Enoch in the midst
of his days, as they then lived in that Age; he walked with God; therefore God
took him: I do humbly hope so did she. God bestowed on her a very sweet
disposition, which I hope God made susceptive of the best impression. The best
people want their grains of allowance. Good Madam, Do not drive your Comforters
far from you, God preserved dear Lady Essex from the great Soul-wasting Sins,
from all gross Enormities; God kept her from ever falling into any scandalous
Sins, she is gone unspotted out of the World. Good Madam, better is a good
Child dead, than a wicked Child living. Good Madam, I am more than content God
has disposed of all mine, I hope through Grace they are safe; but I have found
much affection much affliction. Though Mary had chose the best part, assured
and confirmed to her by Christ's own Word, should never be taken from her; yet
her Eyes were so filled with tears at the Death of her Lord, that she could not
see Christ. The two Angels that sat in Christ's Sepulcher, could not pacify
her grief, nor slew her tears, till Christ dried her Eyes with that loving
Rebuke, Why weepest thou? Then she said, Raboni, and made him Master of her
Passion. God has placed all the affections of humane Nature for great
advantage, if kept in the right Chanel, bounded with his Grace; that of Grief,
though for Sin, which has the greatest use of it, and needs the highest and
fullest Tides, God would not have it swell beyond the Bank of his Mercy: If God
would have his People easy to be entreated, himself will not be inexorable, or
hard to be entreated, as good People are prone to think in time of Affliction;
neither should they be unjust to God and themselves, denying the Grace God has
bestowed on them. It is best to judge our selves, but not unjustly. Good Madam,
Do not misconstrue God in his Dispensations to you. Afflictions are often more
for Trial than Correction, but how ready is God to receive repenting returning
Sinners? the Arms of his Mercy are open to embrace them, and to cover their
Imperfections with his best Robe, sent by his Son from the great Wardrobe of
Heaven; Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, and inherent in them, adorning
of them with the Graces of his Spirit, rendering them acceptable to their
spiritual Spouse, Christ Jesus. He is the good Shepherd which laid down his
life for his sheep. If he send Afflictions, they are not to worry, but to bring
his People nearer to himself. If God put his People into the Furnace, it is to
purify them, not to consume them. Good Madam, when you are tried, that you may
come forth as Gold, a meet Vessel for God's own use in the fuller Measures of
Heaven. Though God has taken from you the Delight of your Eye, Dear Lady
Essex, he will not take away himself, but dissipate and scatter your grief with
the Light of his Countenance, which is better than Life. God knows our Frame,
and will debate in Measure. He will not stir up all his Displeasure, but will
stay his rough Wind in the day of his East Wind, that no Temptation may be
above your Strength. Good Madam, fain would I comfort you, but I know your own
Thoughts can better suggest to you than I, where you may find Grace to help in
a time of need. God's Promises are supports for the most afflicted Condition,
with them, Good Madam, they teaching you, you may by the Art of Divine
Chimistry, extract and draw from Afflictions the refreshing Cordials of the
Love of God, by his sweet composure of them in his Love and Faithfullness to
you, you may get from the most unpleasant bitter Potion, a healing Medicine,
you may get Meat out of the Eater; God will make all subservient to his People,
though in their own nature contrary, like Elisha's Ravens, which were Birds of
prey, to bring the Prophet bread and meat: By the overruling goodness of God,
Afflictions bring God's Children meat to eat, the World knows not of; and those
Afflictions that look most terrible and most affrighting, great in Stature,
like unto the Philistine's Champion, that did so terrify the Israelites. Good
Madam, You may as David did, overcome with that smooth white Stone St John
speaks of, wherein is that new name written, which none can read but they that
have it. In that Stone it is written, Be of good cheer, your Sins are forgiven.
It was the Custom of the Romans to which St. John alludes, they gave a white
Stone to those their Law acquitted, and a black Stone to those their Law
condemned; this white Stone St. John speaks of, is that Stone cut out of the
mountain without hands, Christ Jesus. Good Madam, On this Rock you may build
safe and sure, that if the boisterous Winds of Affliction beat vehemently upon
you, you may be able to stand in the day of your Visitation. If God should
suffer Afflictions, like unto St. Paul's, which he called, Deaths often, they may
be to you as they were to him, they were lifts unto his greater degrees of
Glory, which made him to call them Light Afflictions, that lasted but for a
moment, and that they shall work for God's People an exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory. Good Madam, As the Afflictions of this Life shall not last
long, so the Prosperity of this World is but short also; they are but Pageantry
Delights, that pass away, and leave Dissatisfaction behind them; but God would
not have his Peoples Spirits always flag, they have their intervals in the day
of Prosperity to rejoice, but in the day of Adversity to consider; God having
set the one over against the other, and both on the Wing of Time, which many
drive away, not considering a dependant Life, which of it self flies away so
fast; the things of this World, and Life also, they do make haste to give up
their Accounts to God; for a short work will the Lord make on the Earth, and
finish his Work in Righteousness. He will say to the North, Give up; and to the
South, keep not back: bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of
the Earth, and all shall as faithful Depositors restore to God; yea, every one
shall give an account of himself to God; and if God suddenly call for them,
they hasten their speed, and swiftly fly away, as an Eagle toward Heaven. Good
Madam, You have experienced it; dear Lady Essex, she has taken her flight from
all mutations of this Life, and is gone to God, whose she was, that lent her
you but for a time. She is not lost, but restored again, where she is in an
unalterable and happy Estate. Good Madam, What cause of complaint? Do not
account her gain your loss, the most and best she could have enjoyed of the
Blessings of this Life, Relations, Friends, Pleasures, Riches, all promised
well in her Marriage, but all uncertain; but is now in a fixed, uninterruptable,
more blessed Condition, to which nothing in this World has any proportion; and
the most splendid things of this Life comparatively, are but shining
Glowworms, which must have the advantage of the disappearing Sun for their
glimmering Beauty. Who would choose Candlelight rather than the clear light of
the bright Sun. Dear Lady Essex, she has the sweet smiles of God's reconciled
Face, which shine on her by the Sun of Righteousness, Christ Jesus, the
Bridegroom of her Soul, and is with her best Relations, God and Angels, and is
one of that blessed number of his Triumphant Saints made perfect in endless
Glory never more to die: She has passed the dark Valley, and is got safe to
her Inheritance in the highest Heavens, purchased for her by an invaluable
Price, bought for her by her best Beloved Jesus Christ. Good Madam, Why do you
greive? You would not have her back again into a Sin-defiling-World, where the
happiest Estate or condition is intermixed with intervening troubles,
accompanied with sorrows, which would have been as jointly yours as hers, from
which God has freed you both. Good Madam, Believe God means you no ill, he
does sometimes by one great Affliction, free his People from many, that might
be greater than that, which God only can foresee; sometimes a large Orifice
effects the perfectest Cure, and the bitterest Potion the best Health. Good
Madam, cheerfully take the Cup your heavenly Father has put into your Hand; of
this relation you can receive no hurt. Christ has told his People, That
through many tribulations, they shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; be not
afraid of your way, it is no untrodden path, the best of Men have gone that
way: God has one Son without sin, none without suffering: If Suffering abound,
your Consolation shall superabound; that being made Conformable by suffering,
you may be more fitted for greater degrees of Glory. Good Madam, If God sees
fit to lengthen out your Days, it is to give you more work, to exercise those
Gifts he has given you, to improve for his use and your own advantage; your
Love, Patience, and Submission to him, with the rest of the Graces of his
Spirit, he has bestowed on you, let them have their perfect Work; and be not
grieved that he has given dear Lady Essex a less task than your self. Good
Madam, Run with patience the race that is set before you, finishing your work
in well-doing, unto which God will afford you his assisting Grace. God will not
deal with you as Pharaoh's Taskmasters over the Children of Israel, they would
give no straw and yet required the full tale of brick; God will afford you his
strength, and extricate your difficulties; his Providence shall comply with
you, and his Grace assist you; in your hardest work he will put to his helping
hand. God will order the whole Series and Frame of this World for his Peoples
best advantage; then, when all have acted a part, God will take down the Stage
of this World by the hand of undistinguishable Eternity. Then, Good Madam, a
past Error cannot be retrieved, when Time and Place in this World is taken
away. A little while the longest Life is so, but he will come, and will not
tarry; when his Peoples work is done, he will bring his reward with him, and
acquit them from all the troubles of this Life, and receive them where there is
no pricking Briar, nor grieving Thorn; Sin, Sorrow, and Sighing shall flee
away; then, Good Madam, in endless Joy you shall meet again dear Lady Essex,
never to part, but shall be for ever with her, the rest of the blessed Saints
and Angels, and all in an indissolvable union with God, and Christ, in eternal
Glory. Amen, Amen. Good Madam, It is the Prayer of your singular good
Ladiship's Obedient Servant,

Elizabeth Walker.
I beseech you, Good Madam, excuse the trouble of a long Letter.




Another Consolatory Letter, written to a good Christian Friend under Trouble.
Good Friend,
I Have had troublesome solicitous thoughts, of what I did not well understand
at parting, when I last saw you, therefore I desire to be farther informed, how
it is like to be with you. But however it may be in this present Life, when it
concludes, it shall be well; your comfort is, It will be well with the
Righteous, of which number you are assuredly; One of those exercised with God's
discriminating Character of Adoption, and Sonship: Affliction's his preparatory
work upon his People, to fit them for a better Estate; that should encourage,
because it will compensate and reward God's Faithful Ones, for all their
sufferings for his sake, with an eternal weight of Glory, which, if their
Enemies well understood, they would in pure Enmity be less injurious to them.
As to this World, if the Death of God's Saints be precious to him, so are their
Sufferings considerable; though he bear with his, and their Enemies for a time.
Fellow Creatures, through Fear or Cowardice, may forsake and desert, but God
will not. You know whose Case it was, but he had the strongest Party on his
side, the Lord stood by him, he will not forsake his own Inheritance, but his
Truth shall be their Shield and Buckler; so tender is he of them; he would not
have their Thoughts disturbed with anxious Sollicitousness. And that his People
should be continually dependant on himself, he sets no Period, but promises a
continual supply of Grace, giving in that Hour that which will make them
Justifiable before their Adversaries, which they shall not be able to gainsay
with the verdict of Truth. The Lord fortify his People for any Trial he sees
fit to call them to, that I may be one of those found Faithful, Dear Sir, I
beg your Prayers for me, who am

your truly Loving, and Affectionate Friend, Elizabeth Walker.
Sept. 24. -- 83.

Part of two Letters written to a young Minister who had lived several Years in
my House, and was well preferred from thence to stir him up to Faithfulness in
his Ministry, and may be useful to other such.
It may not be unseasonable or unusefull here to take notice what singular Care
she would take of the young Scholars which came to live in my Family; who,
though when they were first received, (bringing more Learning than Religion
from the University;) for sometime would seem a little uneasy, and be rather
shy of her, and undervalue her pious and strict Example, and weighty, serious
Counsels for their Morals, and God's Service; yet after a while had a very
great Respect for her, and loved and honored her, as if she had been their
Mother. I own it as a great Mercy, it was so with them all who staid any time
with us, but shall instance only in the last, who, though at first seemed to be
possessed with a greater prejudice, yea averseness, than his Predecessors, yet
before one Year was out, was more than convinced of his Error, and daily
increased in his value of her, and deference he paid her; and when toward the
end of the third Year his Consumption prevailed so as to threaten his Life; and
she declaring her concern for him, and how much she was troubled, he should
come to die with us. He with a very Pathetick Gratitude cried out, O blessed be
God that I ever knew this Family! I know I must die somewhere, and if God would
give me my Choice, I had rather die here than in any place in all the World.

I will not presume to commend her Conduct toward such young men from any
thing but the good Success; and for the sake of that I Will briefly touch it. Her
Method was not to be always harping on the same String; not to be constantly
pressing them with an affected tyring Importunity, which like the falls of
Nilus, rather makes Men Deaf than open their Ears to Discipline; her Rules were
short, but her Example long; her Advices few, but Wise and Home; her Reproofs
fewer, but Seasonable and Grave; but the Copy of an holy, diligent, serious
Conversation was never wanting. A small number of wholesome Counsels well
exemplified, prevails more than a long Series of starched and studied
Aphorisms, confuted by his Life, whose Head conceived them, and Mouth dictated
them. She rarely spoke to them directly, and in the second Person, and never
but when the occasion was fair, and the necessity urgent, frequently what
concerns them as of a third Person, and it is observable that many times a
glancing Blow, and a Side-Wind cuts deeper, and fills the Sails better than a
downright Stroke, or a Wind directly in the Stern. I remember some of her
Prudent Rules, but because there are so very few to be assisted by them, and it
is possible none into whose Hands these Papers may fall, they would but vanish
into idle Speculations, with which I will not trouble my unconcerned Reader.
And she was not only kind and careful of their good whilst in our House, but
continued her Prayers for them, and good Counsel to them when removed from us;
witness the following Letters.

Good Mr. Ph.
I Do assure you my Affections have not been froze, though my Ink has this
cold Season, which may help make an Apology for a bad Scribe; but I now return
you my acknowledgments for your kind Letter I have received. Good Mr. Ph. I
heartily desire to approve my self your true Friend, and would not be wanting
in any thing you may expect from me, whenever opportunity may afford the Trial.
Especially, I shall endeavor you may not meet with disappointment in that you
set so great an estimate and value on; my poor Prayers, Oh that they were more
worth! that not only you, but with my self, the Church, and People of God might
have some Benefit by God's Assistance and Acceptance of my small Mite, which I
would, as my All, cast into that great Stock and Bank committed to the sure
Hand and Improvement of our Great Factor and Mediator, Jesus Christ, who
affords great Returns, to which Intercourse is given more than his People can
ask or think; therefore, my good Friend, afford me your Remembrance at the
Throne of Grace, at which be frequent and fervent; but I need not excite you to
so advantageous a Duty, by which you may obtain so much for your self and
others. The pressing Necessities of the Church of God at home and abroad, cry
aloud for Intercessors to prevent the Judgments we have cause to fear, and may
justly feel. Oh! be one of those who meet God with humble, earnest
Supplication, which may help ward off the Blow which may fall heavy on the
Churches. God will set his Mark on the Mourners in Zion, and will hide them in
the Day of his fierce Anger, that the destroying Angel shall not hurt them. I
have much wondered at the diverting of Judgments, but I fear the longer God
bears with, and the higher his Hand is lifted up, the more weighty will it be
when it falls. But to withhold it, Pray, Pray; the fervent Prayer of the
Righteous prevails much, often puts God to a Merciful Retreat, when in his
provoked Anger he is going forth against a Nation, or People. Oh! but they must
be clean Hands that lay hold on him, that is, of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity. Good Mr. Ph. beware of warping from the straight Rule of God's Word,
by which every Man's Work must be tried, it will be your best Preservation in
Evil times, if God should call you out to bear Witness to his Truth, which to
decline, may cause God to lead you forth with the workers of Iniquity;
therefore the Psalmist Prays, that Integrity and Vprightness may preserve him;
the Upright are God's Delight. I remember the Inscription on Abraham's Shield
was Vprightness, to which was annexed, against all Fears that might shake his
Faith; God, that can compensate and make up all that his People can lose or
suffer for him in this World, promised that he would not only be his Shield,
but his exceeding great Reward; which Promise Moses eyed, on good Consideration
making the best choice, to acquit Courtly Pleasures and Preferments; he well
knew they would last but for a short Season; he took his Happy Lot with God's
People, to suffer Affliction rather than Sin. Happy he! though he passed
through a barren Wilderness, in which God often proves his People, whether they
will be content to wave the things of this Life to possess a better Inheritance
than an Earthly Canaan, those durable Riches prepared for those who are
accounted Worthy; of which Blessed Number good Lord grant, good Mr. Ph. you may
be found.


Then after twenty Lines of a Business which concerned himself, written with
much Wisdom, Kindness, and Faithfulness, which I pass over, She proceeds:

I am sure I do heartily desire your Welfare in this Life, and Godliness being
sought in the first place, the good things of this World, as may be good for
you, may be added to you. The Promises are conditional; it is a hard thing to be
a good Christian, not easy to be a good Minister, which not to be, are the
worst of Men, and will find the severest Account for their own and others
Souls, over whom God has placed them Watchmen, and Overseers of the Flock of
Christ, for which Work I am persuaded, the Grace of God bestowed upon you,
shall not be in vain. My Friend, excuse this Freedom I have used to you from
Plenary Affection, I confess it Impertinent to suggest to you who are so much
more knowing and conversant with Books, especially that which excells all
others, the Holy Scriptures, from which you may be furnished to every good Work
for Doctrine and Life. I have sent you a Book more worthy your acceptance for
the Author's sake than mine; I commend him to you as a Pattern of a strict holy
Life, so conformable to our Savior's, he was always doing good; read, look on
him, and do likewise. I am sensible of the Trouble given you by a long Letter,
therefore no more, but to subscribe my self as indeed I am, good Mr. Ph.

Your truly Loving and Affectionate Friend, Elizabeth Walker.
Sept. 19. -- 83.

A Second Letter to the same Person.
Of which I will omit much, to prevent being tedious, and I fear this
concluding Paragraph may seem too long.

My good Friend Mr. Ph.
I Truly would, as may be acceptable, and my capacity reach, not be wanting in
real Friendship; the like very grateful to me. The reminds of a future Estate,
which is the greatest concern we have to mind in this Life: which if neglected,
the Error cannot be retrieved. Oh how vigilant should I be! my Enemy is so.
One Soul is more worth, in the Estimation of our Savior, than the whole World;
the price has made the purchase so. Oh! that I could better improve my little
remaining time, the Talent my Lord has entrusted me with, that I may not be
idle or worse, found in the works of darkness. He that had least was
accountable, therefore shall not I be excusable from my little measure. As the
Eyes of Servants are to their Masters, for their Work as well as Wages, so must
mine be to him, for his Assistance and Help, that of his own he may receive:
But where God gives much, he requires the more. Good Mr. Ph. God has committed
to your trust more than to a private Capacity, in Abilities and Advantages,
placed you a Steward over his Household; you are strictly required to be
Faithful. Be so, that God may reward and crown your Labors in his Service,
with that that far excells the fading Diadems of this World, which puts a Lie
in our right hand, promises its prostitutes more than it has to give. Be not
deceived, it is Vanity and Lies, your Work is Wages. It was our Savior's Meat
and Drink. He told his Disciples so, when he was about his Father's Work, not
only in his public Ministry, in which he was constant, but also as a pattern
left you, He was always doing good.

Though he met with hard and rough usage from Men, expect the like; it is no
untrodden Path; but for Encouragement, if for Righteousness sake, Yours is the
Kingdom of Heaven. What can be given in Exchange? The more you do or suffer,
the greater your reward. The Blessings of this Life are not excluded, let God's
Work have the pre-eminence, the first place in your Heart and Practice, and, as
may be good for you, they shall be added to you. I observe from the last
Chapter of Saint John, our Savior's great care for his Disciples at his
parting with them. As they lacked nothing whilst he was with them, as
themselves on that question had confessed; so then our Savior, to strengthen
their Faith in their Dependence on him, he before had promised to be with them
to the end of the World; and rather than they should want, our Savior works a
Miracle; but with the provision, he gives but one single Invitation, Come and
dine; as if he would intimate, he had greater things to bestow on them, more
than the Meat that perishes, the Bread of eternal Life; and as they had freely
received, so he would have them freely give. For which purpose our Savior
singles out Peter, not so much to mind him of a former unkindness, but more
earnestly to engage his watchful diligence for the future. Peter, (not as
exclusive of the rest, but he as a representative of the rest,) our Savior,
instead of one Invitation to dine, adds a threefold Injunction, to feed his
Sheep and his Lambs.

You have put your hand to God's Plough, good Mr. Ph. let not the flattery or
fear of Men make you warp from the straight Rule of God's Word. You know the
most and worst that they can do, and with the same resolution make the
Apostles choice, Acts 20.24. He that will put the evil day from him, may
soonest fall by the evil of the day; and instead of finding may loose this and
eternal Life. The evil of Sin will produce much worse than present Sufferings.

If God call you forth as he did the Martyrs with their Flood, to give
testimony to the Truth, even those Sufferings they esteemed light for the Hope
set before them, an Eternal Weight of Glory; at the greatest length, our Lives
are not long in this Word. Death spares none, not the greatest Monarchs; a
great Man is fallen in our Israel, our late Sovereign.

I have very valuable Thoughts of you; you will not despise small things, which
gives me this Presumption. I know you have greater Motives from God's Exiting
Grace in you to quicken you to, and assist you in your Master's Work than my
narrow Scantling can afford; happy they that so do; they shall neither be
ashamed nor afraid when their Reckoning-day comes, of which happy number Lord
grant you to be. I am, good Mr. Ph.

Your Assured, Well-wishing Friend, Elizabeth Walker.
March 15. -- 84.

I publish the following Letter, because I intend to give the Book to my plain
Parishoners; most of whom stand upon the same Level, with him to whom it was
written. Persons of higher Rank may pass it by, or give it to their plain
Country Tenants.

I thought to have given an account how one of her Sister's Daughters came to
be in so low a Condition, whose Father might have given every Child more than a
Thousand Pound, had he continued the Diligence which he used for several Years,
after his Marriage with her Sister, and the fair Portion he had with her; but
as she was not ashamed of her Condition, no more am I; and, as things were,
it is well she had an Aunt to assist her, to match with a sober, industrious
Man, and their joint Stock enable them to manage a Farm of about Fifty Pounds a
Year, on which they hitherto have, and I hope will continue to live comfortably
and contentedly.

Cousin Robert Glassock,
YOU have not a Friend that more truly desires your Welfare than my self, and
shall be most affectionately glad of your well-being in this present World,
but, I hope, I should much more rejoice in your certain and assured Interest in
a better Life; I desire you may obtain both of God, who is the giver of all
good. I beseech you, that you may, to apply your self to that direct Rule, and
guidance of God's Word, which counsels you to seek the Kingdom of God, with his
Righteousness, in the first place, and then you have the Promise of him that is
both faithful and able to perform his Word, That the things of this life shall
be added unto you, as an additional to your future Happiness; to which, if you
could gain the Wealth of the whole World, 'twould be but like picking up of
Straws and Pebbles, compared to that Blessed Estate; for any thing in Exchange,
he will make a bad Bargain that ventures the loss of his Soul. It was the
saying of a good Man, that gave a right Judgment, That the whole Turkish Empire
was but a Crust the Master of the House threw to the Dog: How then shall not
God, the Lord of the whole Universe, provide for them of his own Family, that
are Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven? I request you let it appear to whom you
belong, show it by your Christian Profession in the whole Course of your Life,
to which your Baptism has engaged you, with the Inscription of God's Law,
which get writ with an indelible Character, by the Finger of his Spirit upon
your Heart; by the use of God's Word you may acquaint your self in your Bible.
There God gave his Commandments in few and plain words, that the meanest
Capacity might understand and remember them. A great part of the Bible is an
Exposition of them. You can read, it is your Mercy, improve that Talent to your
Master's use. You cannot do his Will, except you know it: Therefore, as God's
Word directs you, so observe to do his Will, that you may have regard unto all
his Commandments; in keeping of them there is great reward. Therefore mind the
Precepts, and put them into practice; heed the threatenings against whom, and
for what, that they may deterr and affright you from the way of Sin, that you
may avoid the end of Punishment. Take notice of the Promises and value them as
they are worth; make them yours by fervent and frequent Prayer, and fulfilling
the Conditions of them. This I do earnestly request of you, and the same of
your Wife, and that you will Pray together and apart, that you may be Heirs
together of eternal Life. Set up religious Worship in your little Family, the
smalness of your Family will not excuse the neglect. God, as he does require
it, he will regard; where there is but Two or Three, he has promised to be
with them. I beseech you do not deferr in any known Duty, least disuse give you
more difficulty to future performance. Habitual Customs are most prevalent. But
to quicken you to this Duty, consider for the default of it God's threatening,
Jeremiah 10. the last. I pray you take that Counsel, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Not to be
so bad as others, is a step to a good Life. But he that goes no farther, will
fall short of eternal Life. I have so good thoughts of you, your disposition is
not to the Debaucheries and Vices of some; but negative Righteousness is not
enough. With other religious Duties, I have already mentioned, I most earnestly
press you to a strict Observation of the Lord's Day. Sanctify God's Seventh
Day, and he will Bless your Six Days Labor. It will also be a good Hedge, not
only to secure your eternal State, but all that God may bless you with in this
World: See the two last Verses of the 58. Isa. Read the whole Chapter, it may
be very profitable to excite you; but, I beseech you, do not violate that Holy
Rest, by unnecessary Employments in worldly Affairs, nor spend that Day in
Idleness or Sleeping, more than you would in the other Six Days. Do not
sacrilegiously rob God of his Worship in any part of his Day, do not divert by
vain talk, but give every proportion of time the Duties it requires. Be not
like those that were weary of the Sabbath, Amos 8.5. See likewise Malachi 1st.
and 3d. Mark the extent of the Fourth Commandment, it does not only require
Masters of Families, but reaches all under their Charge; their care is
required, as well for their Souls as their Bodies, or else there is no
difference made of them from their Cattle; therefore you must by your
inspection over them, and example, excite them to their Duty to God and their
Salvation, as well as your Service, giving them Instruction, Catechizing;
endeavoring their Reformation by restraints, reproofs, and encouragements; for
these neglects many Masters and Parents will have a sad account to give to God:
Therefore, I beseech you, resolve, as you find for your Example, Joshua 24.15.
For your encouragement to so good a work, read the last of Daniel the 3d.
verse. So to do, to your great comfort, will be a good Evidence you have chose
that good part that shall never be taken from you. It is the whole Duty of Man
to love God, and keep his Commandments; it was that Test by which Christ would
try his Disciples and Followers. He also says, Why call you me Lord, Lord, and
do not things I command you? On that Question asked our Savior, Which was the
great Commandment of the Law? you may find a brief Exposition and Account
given, Matthew. 22. from the 36 to the 40 verse. From thence observe how
dependant the Second Table of the Commandments is on the First Table; in few
words to help our forgetfulness, you are to have both sincere Love to God, and
to Love your Neighbor as your self; the neglect of the first, occasions a
breach of the second: If you break one Link of that golden Chain, you will
violate the whole Chain. Men's Actions would be more just and regular, would
they do as they would Men should do unto them. I have no bad Opinion of you,
caution is no unkindness. To keep a good Conscience will afford you a continual
Feast, a Feast affords more than bare necessity needs; for no good thing will
God withold from them that walk uprightly. The Just Man walks in his
Integrity, by which he entails a Blessing on his Posterity; but by
Unrighteousness Men gain to themselves, and leave a Curse to Succession: Our
Savior tells such, If they are not faithful in the things of this World, they
shall not have the true Riches. To be Just, affords great Serenity of Mind, it
gives not only a good, but a quiet Conscience also, and what you have of this
World you shall have it with God's Love as well as his leave; all this I press
you to, cannot be understood to take you off from your Praiseworthy Industry
in your secular Calling, nor to slacken your Hand from Labor, I would not
bring you under that prohibition of the Apostle, you may find 2 These. the 3d.
and the 10th. I know God has said it, That in the sweat of the Brow Man shall
eat Bread. Many Scriptures I could cite you for this purpose, but I know you
need no prompt; I am satisfied and need not urge your diligent Care for a
comfortable subsistence in this World, of which if you have not the most, you
have not the least; however it is the Blessing of God that makes Rich,
therefore when your Hand is on your Plough, let your Eye be up to Heaven, and
if God should afford you that Blessing, wherewith to give rather than to
receive, be willing to relieve them that are in want, by which Charity you may
gain Treasure in Heaven, and the greater Increase on Earth. Read the 3d. verse
of the 37th. Psalm, also 25. Matthew. from the 32d. to the last verse of that
Chapter, it is a very profitable excitation. Our Savior in that Chapter
quickens to a watchful care and diligence for a Departure out of this World by
the Parable of the ten Virgins, from which we have a caution from the foolish
Virgins, not to deferr our preparations for another World, lest through sloth
we be surprised, as they were, and the Door of everlasting Life shut against
us, to our irrecoverable loss. Time is precious; that which is gone cannot be
brought back; that which is to come cannot be assured ours; only that that is
present, which quickly slips from us, is ours for our greatest work, the
Salvation of our Souls, to which all other is but by-Business; for which
purpose God has entrusted us with several Gifts and opportunities, as so many
Talents, to occupy with to our Master's use, till he come and call to a
reckoning; then none shall be excusable. He that had but one, was called to an
account with a heavy Doom, for not improving that* God has, with other
Blessings, bestowed on you a good Understanding, in your allowable worldly
Affairs, and he will expect from you by the same measure, of which I think you
have not the least given unto you; your Understanding, your Will, your Memory,
your Affections, all the Faculties of your Soul and Body, your Time, all that
God intrusts you with, are so many Talents or Instruments allowed you for to
work with, which will be your own gain. God will reward your Labor of Love. He
has with his own Glory twisted your Interest, and to which also he will afford
you his gracious assistance, if you seek it as it may be had in those ways I
have already hinted unto you. God is not like the Egyptian Taskmasters to the
Children of Israel, who required the full Tale of Brick, but would afford no
Straw; God is not extreme to mark what unwillingly is done amiss; you cannot go
about your Indispensable Work too soon, many have too late, as the foolish
Virgins did: Hell is paved with good purposes. In the Law the first ripe Fruits
were required, and the Young without blemish must be brought to God in
Sacrifice; do not give the World and its Vanity the prime of your Strength, and
Time, and put off God with the dregs of decrepid feeble Age; remember the
youngest Disciple was the Beloved Disciple; be not ashamed to own your Master,
wear his Livery in a Christian Profession and Practice of an unblameable Life,
that you may not either be a shame to, or ashamed of Religion, lest he be
ashamed of you when you would give all the World, if it were in your purchase,
to be owned by him; he is great as well as good, and will not be mocked with a
defective Sacrifice. See Malachi the first Chapter, and the eighth Verse. Do
not care if wicked Men should scorn and reproach you; how inconsiderable will
it be to you if you consider the recompense of Reward; see Matthew. 5. the
eleventh and twelfth Verses, and do not take up Religion as an uneasy Task;
you have not only a good Master, but his Work is so; Christ's Yoke is easy, it
will not gaul, as Sin will the Conscience. I request you read with good
observation the 119th Psalm, and see there what vallue the Psalmist had for
God's Commandments, his Word, his Precepts, his Statutes, his Testimonies, his
Laws, which you may find frequently mentioned in that Psalm. He says, That the
Law of God's Mouth was better unto him than thousands of Gold and Silver, and
that he counted it in all things to be right; therefore he took God's
Testimonies as an Heritage for ever, and a place of Defense. God is called a
Refuge, a hiding place, a strong Tower; but for whom? the Righteous, they run
unto it and are safe; great Peace have they that love God's Law, and nothing
shall offend them: the direction of God's Word will not only be your safety in
troublesome times, but your Counselor also in common Calamities; and you may,
as Luther used, read the 46 Psalm, and bid your Enemies do their worst; if God
give them leave to kill the Body, it is the most, they can do no more; if you
are not on Earth you may be in Heaven; be not afraid of a Man that shall dye,
but take our Savior's Counsel, fear him that can cast Soul and Body into Hell;
seek Righteousness, it may be you shall be hid in the Day of the Lord's fierce
Anger, which we have cause to fear is hastening to this sinful Nation. God's
Law writ on your Heart and Life may be as the Scarlet Thread that was bound in
the Window of Rahab's House, which preserved her from Destruction; or as the
Blood of the Paschal Lamb, which marked the Houses of the Children of Israel,
that the destroying Angel touched not their Dwellings with any of the Plagues
of Egypt; however, for your greatest safety, take heed and avoid any indirect
or unlawful means to obtain or preserve a Momentary Life, which is as
uncertain as short, and so provoke God to lead you forth with the workers of
Iniquity, and so your Redemption may cease for ever, and then a great Ransom
cannot recover you; therefore at any rate purchase the Truth, and fell it not,
to which choice the Lord grant you Wisdom, and Preserve you, both by his Grace
under his Protection unto his Heavenly Kingdom, giving you the Blessings of
this Life also, and prepare you both for that good Life to come, that when this
shall be no more, he may receive you with that happy Saying, Well done; and
reward you with Eternal Glory.

I am sensible of the length of my Letter, but hope it will not be tedious to
you; something more I would say, though of a much less Concern, but as a true
Friend I would not omit any thing that might render me so, but would caution
you with better Arguments than mine, you may have from undeniable Wisdom which
is not to be despised, and warn you of what some have smarted for, being
Sureties for other Men. I would sooner pay a Debt than be bound for any. See
Prove. 6.1, 2. Also Chap. 11.15. the same Author tells you, That he that hates
Suretyship is sure on these Considerations. I request you, you will not be in
Bonds to any but to me, by Promise that you will never be Bound for any Man.

In all I have requested of you, if you have not from your self or some other
Friend better Advice, let this Letter be my Substitute, review it sometimes,
and afford it a kind Reception of Friendship from me, who am your well-wishing
Friend, ready in any Kindness to express my self,

Your truly Loving Aunt, Elizabeth Walker.
1685.

A Letter of prudent, pious Counsels, written to her dear Grandchild, then at
Felsted-School, about two Months before she Dyed,
which I publish to preserve it for his use; and because I hope it may be also
useful to some other Youths of the like Age, and Quality. This was the last
large Letter she ever wrote.

Dear Johnny,
I Have some time since received a Letter from Mrs. Bribrist, much to my
Satisfaction, and I hope is thy due Commendation, she has been pleased to give
me of thee; do not forfeit the same by neglect to perform, in thy commendable
good Behavior as hitherto; but always render suitable to any good thoughts of
thee from herself or others; and as helps thereto, be guided by the advice and
counsel of thy Friends. Never forget thy Dear Grandfather's often Counsels when
thou wast at home, and since in several good Letters, with them make good use
of this also.

Dear Johnny, I would not be wanting to thee as far as I am able to express. I
advise in these following Counsels: Be modest, humble, and obedient to thy
Governors and Superiors in that Place; be always advised by them that are
able, and wish thee well; it is better, more ease and safety, to be governed
than to govern. Lean not to thine own Understanding. The Wise Man says, See
thou a Man Wise in his own Eyes, there is more hope of a Fool than of him. Dear
Johnny, Thou art not destitute of good Friends where thou art, ready to show
thee Kindness; thy Master Glascock, of whom be very respective and observant,
performing all Exercises he gives thee, as may be Praiseworthy; also Mrs.
Woodroof, Mrs. Boteler, they are thine and our kind Friends, I do not exclude
Mrs. Robarts.

Dear Johnny, Let none have cause with shame for, or of thee, to retract their
Commendations of thee; make the Word of God the Rule of thy Life; let it be thy
chief Counselor; let thy Reputation have a good Bottom, an honest Heart, free
from guile and hypocrisy, being founded on the Scriptures, fixed on the the
Rock of Ages, Christ Jesus, that by the winds of Worldly Prosperity, Honor, or
Applause, it may never overturn; neither by Adversity, Affliction, or any
trouble thou may fall into.

Dear Johnny, All things but God are mutable and full of change, there is the
day of Adversity as well as Prosperity; God has set the one over against the
other; make sure thy best and unalterable Estate, in which will be no change
nor alteration, but happy once and for ever, to that higher End make thy
Learning, and all other things, subservient. Improve all opportunities for thy
well-being in this World, but most for thy Spiritual best Advantage; give all
diligence, attend at Wisdom's Posts; Wisdom is the principal thing, its Price
is far above Rubies, fine Gold cannot equal it, nothing can be compared to it;
search for it as for hid Treasure in the holy Scriptures, there thou may
find the Pearl of so great Price that the World cannot purchase it, and it is
worth the selling all to have it. Let not this Price, be put into thy Hand, and
thou have no Heart to it; but let it be said of thee as St. Paul said of
Timothy, That from a Child he had known the Holy Scriptures; they will make
thee Wise unto Salvation, and will help thee in all Relative Duties, in well
discharging of which, consists much of the Power and Honor of Religion.

Mind the Precepts; let them be the guide of all thy Thoughts, and Words, and
Actions; do all God's Commandments, in keeping of them there is great Reward.

Take notice of all the Threatenings, that thou may avoid the evil of Sin,
and the Punishment due to the Commission of it: Heed the Promises, they are
full of the Love of God in Christ; let them constrain thee to a circumspect,
watchful, holy Life, in performing the conditions of them. Dear Johnny, get
God's Just and Righteous Law writ upon the two Tables of thy Heart and
Practice, with his own Finger, the Holy Spirit, that thou may receive the
Truth in the Love of it, being renewed in the spirit of thy mind. He that is in
Christ is a new Creature; and he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of
his. It is the one thing necessary to serve God, and save thy Soul, choose that
good part that may never be taken from thee.

Dear Johnny, Let no day pass, if in health, without reading the Scriptures,
one or two Chapters in the Old Testament, the like in the New Testament, read
with intention of Mind, and so hear the good Word of God in public; and as God
has commanded, keep Holy the Sabbath Day, do not violate that Holy Rest with
Play, Recreation, vain Talk, Sleep, or Idleness, or omitting any Duty it
requires. Eat moderately, that Fumes from a full Stomach may not cloud thy
Intellectual Performances; withdraw from that Company, and those Objects which
may hinder thee from thinking on the Sermons, or any other Religious Duty; in
them exercise thy self, and if God ever give thee opportunity, be helpful unto
others in the like, for their Spiritual Advantage, that all within thy Power
may serve the Lord; hearing the good Word of God, reading it; Meditation,
Prayer, and Praises to God are the Duties of the Sabbath Day; spend no part of
that in Visiting, except to the Sick and Afflicted, and allow it not to be done
to thee by others; sequester thy self from them, and all Worldly Discourse, but
endeavor to keep that one Day in seven, like the Angels and Saints in Heaven,
who serve and do not cease. The Seventh Day is God's Tribute out of the Week;
he has allowed thee Six for thy secular Concerns, out of them bring thy
free will Offering, sometime for thy Spiritual Advantage, for which the Sabbath
affords much, and upon the due observation of it, is assured from God to his
People, a communication not only of Spiritual Blessings, but of Temporal
Blessings also. Read the latter part of Isa. 58. Let no part of the Sabbath day
slip without some Improvement for thy best concern, for which also, every day
must be accounted for.

The Sabbath is an Hedge and Fence to all Religion, if that be broken down,
there will enter all disorders of Life which Men are prone to; to prevent
which, God seems to guard the fourth Commandment with the Authority of the
three foregoing, placing it in the midst, and the fifth Commandment next on the
other side, bearing the Sword of the Civil Magistrate; and by God's own
appointment, Numb. 15.35. Moses caused the Man gathering Sticks on the
Sabbath Day, to be put to Death. Dear Johnny, be afraid of the Powers, though
Men be remiss to punish the Breakers of God's Laws, yet himself bears not the
Sword in vain. Do not gather the Sticks of a misspent Sabbath, a Day, on which
God has set a special Remark, a Remember, to keep it Holy; the great neglect
and contempt of this Duty, makes it more necessary to be pressed more earnestly.

Keep all God's Commandments, to break one link of the Ten violates the whole
Chain, Jam. 2.10. Keep it entire, have respect to all God's Precepts in the
latitude of them, do not wander from them in the bypath of a sinful Life,
they are better than thousands of Gold and Silver; they were of such a concern
to David, that he begs of God an Holy Compulsion; make me to know thy Precepts,
Statutes and Commandments. And Moses uses this Excitation to the Children of
Israel for their observing God's Law. Thou shall keep the Commandments of the
Lord thy God, for they are for thy good, Deuteronomy. 10.13. and 11.18. Therefore
shall thou lay them up in thy Heart, and in thy Soul, and do and teach them.
Dear Johnny, this do thy self, and as far as it may be in thy Power, excite
others in the same Duty, that thou and they, with Joshua's Resolution, may
serve the Lord, Jos. 24.15. Own God in this World as thou would have him own
thee hereafter. Some glory in their Shame; be not thou ashamed of thy Glory, be
not ashamed of the Profession of Religion: Christ has said, He that is ashamed
of me before Men, of him will I be ashamed before my Father and his Holy Angels.

Dear Johnny, God has been very good to thee, thou have lacked nothing good
for thee, but God has provided well for thee; do not ill requite the Lord by
the neglect of any known Duty, or doing any thing contrary to the Law of God.
Sin is a very ungrateful thing; do not provoke him to withdraw his Loving
Kindness from thee for Soul or Body. Woe if God depart. What is said of a
Talebearer? That he separates near Friends; the same will Sin do, if not
watched against; it will separate between God and thy Soul, and will bring an
Evil Report to God with worse Effect than Joseph of his Brethren to their
Father, and will be of worse Consequence than stripping Joseph of his Coat, not
only the external Blessings of this Life, but it will deprive thee of all
Internal Comforts, God's favorable Countenance, which is better than Life, and
exclude from his Comfortable Presence for ever. Sin put the Flaming Sword into
the Angel's Hand to debarr our first Parents from the Tree of Life; divested
and stripped them, and all their Posterity, of their Original Righteousness,
and left them and their sinful Offspring naked, exposed to all the
Afflictions and Miseries of this Life, and under God's Displeasure, to their
Eternal Ruin, had not Free Grace recovered that lapsed Estate; Thanks be to
God for Jesus Christ.

Dear Johnny, That thou may know that thou art one of those whom he so
loved, manifest thy Love to him by that Test that Christ put to his Disciples;
If ye love me keep my Commandments. Love is a reflective Act; if thou love
God according to this Discrimination, thou may know that he loves thee, and
gave himself for thee, and has chosen thee one of his peculiar People, zealous
of good Works; therefore if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not; go not with
them, lest thou learn their ways and get a blot unto thy Soul. Let God's Law be
the prohibition of every Evil Way; set it with its drawn Sword against all
Irregularities of Life, that it may be unto thee as the Angel in Paradise, to
defend in thee the Tree of Life, that no ill Practice, with the evil
Consequences of it, may touch thee.

Dear Johnny, Show thy Love to God by thy Love to his People, and poor Members
of Christ. Christ says, Hereby shall Men know that ye are my Disciples, that
ye love one another. God requires the duties of the second Table of the Law as
well as the first, and Christ gives a concise and full account of both; he
being asked which was the first and great Commandment? says, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart with all thy Mind, with all thy Soul, and
with all thy Strength; the second is like the first, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. On this brief Account Christ put so great a stress, he
said, On these hang all the Law and the Prophets. And St. James says 28. If ye
fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scriptures, thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self; which God requires not in Word only, but in Deed also,
relieving their Necessities; if any be naked or destitute of daily Food, to
feed and cloth them; to say depart in Peace, and give them not those things
needful to the Body, it will not profit; therefore withold not good from
them to whom it is due, if it be in the Power of thy Hand to do it; it is a
more blessed thing to give than to receive. He that gives to the Poor shall not
lack, but he that hides his Eyes shall have many a Curse. Do not say I have
but little now to give, but I will give hereafter; remember the poor Woman's
Mite was more in Christ's Esteem than those who had of their abundance cast
into the Treasury.

Dear Johnny, It may be something might be spared from unnecessary Expense,
buying Fruit, or the like, of which too much may be prejudicial to thy Health,
and may be laid out to a better account. Do not give grudgingly, by constraint,
lest it be as the Lame or Blind, which was not to be brought to God; like
Cain's Sacrifice which he brought with an unwilling mind, not acceptable to
God: Let the object stir up thy Compassion that thou may not give too
sparingly; God loves a cheerful giver.

Dear Johnny, He that gives to the Poor lends to the Lord; he that makes all
Grace to abound will repay thee in temporal and spiritual Blessings, good
Measure, shaken, and pressed together, and running over, shall be given to
thee; God has given many Promises to the Charitable: to hint but a few, The
Lord will deliver him in time of Trouble, and will not deliver him to the Will
of his Enemies. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be
Blessed upon the Earth. The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of
Languishing; he will make all his Bed in his Sickness, Psalm. 41. For thy
Encouragement read Isaiah 58. Yield Obedience to God's Command. He has said,
Deuteronomy. 7. If there be among you a poor Man, thou shall not harden thy Heart, not
shut thy Hand against thy poor Brother; thou shall shurely give unto him, and
thy Heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him; but thou shall open
thy Hand wide unto thy poor, and to thy needy; for, for this thing shall the
Lord bless thee in all thou put thy Hand unto.

Dear Johnny, Thou art also bound by an obligatory Promise to thy Grandfather
and to me; we have sometimes given thee Money for this Purpose, to inure thee
betimes to be Charitable, that something of it thou might give unto the
Poor, as thou have promised, a Penny in every Shilling, it is but a little; do
not withold that, lest it become an accursed thing to thee, like Achan's wedge
of Gold, at the Last Day, the Day of Judgment. This duty of Charity, in right
performance of it, will be a distinguishing Character of those who shall stand
at Christ's Right Hand from those who shall stand at his Left Hand, whose Hands
were as strait as their Hearts were hard; they would have no Pity on the Poor,
therefore they shall find none. But Christ will say unto them, Depart, ye
Cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, with that
Infernal Company.

But those at Christ's right hand, which fed the hungry, clothed the naked,
visited the sick and imprisoned, which Christ will take as done unto himself,
he will reward with the Kingdom of Heaven. Dear Johnny, Make thee friends of
the Mammon of this World, that when this Life fails, thou may be received
into everlasting Habitations.

Dear Johnny, As God may bless thee with the things of this World, let not thy
little at present be the measure of greater plenty; He that sows sparingly,
shall reap spearingly; but he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully,
not only in this Life, but in that to come. There are degrees of Glory in
Heaven, the better here, the happier hereafter, though not of merit, but of
Grace. God will pass by the Imperfections of his People, which cleave to their
best performance.

Dear Johnny, With other religious Duties, continue thy custom of private
Prayer, at least twice a day, Morning and Evening, besides public and family
Prayer. Ejaculatory Prayer is also of great Benefit; it is short, but holy
Desires, lifting up thy heart to God: Let them be thy last thoughts before
sleep, that God may give thee, as his Beloved, sleep; the like as soon as thou
wakest in the Morning, before more solemn Prayer, and with both render him
Praise for the Mercy thou lie down in peace, and risest in safety, always
under God's Protection. These holy Desires may be often sent to Heaven, and bring
thee Blessings the World cannot give, and will defend thee from the Sin and
Vanity of it, keeping thy heart in a good frame; they may be as the Angels
ascending and descending upon Jacob's Ladder, where God is above it, ready to
receive thee, that thy return to secular Employment may be sanctified and
blessed; that God may, by thy holy wrestlings with him, as he did Jacob, bless
thee in thy way to Canaan, and New Jerusalem above: And in thy more lengthened
Prayer, with thy own necessities, and receipts from God, remember the Church
and People of God, as need requires, with Prayers and Praises. Go to God with
filial Fear, and holy Reverence of Body and Mind. God is in Heaven by his
Greatness, Superiority, and Majesty; thou on Earth in Weakness and Indigency.
Bring thy wants to his all-sufficient Fullness, and immense Goodness, ready,
able, willing to supply all thy Necessities; beg thee pardon of thy Sins, and
what thou need, for the sake, merits, and ever-prevaling Intercession of
Jesus Christ. Ask, that thou may receive his holy Spirit, as the Seal of his
Love to thee. With the imputed Righteousness of Christ, reconciling thee to
God. Beg that thou may also have an inherent Righteousness from him, renewing
thee in the Spirit of thy Mind, into his Image, that thou may become one with
him, his Law being writ on thy Heart, that he may guide thee by his Counsel in
this troublesome World, that no temptation may be above thy strength. These
things ask, with thy daily Bread, which implies the supply of all the
necessities of humane Nature, and be not desirous of more than God sees good
for thee; and for all the Receipts, for Soul and Body, be thankful; forget not
to render Praises to God, for what he bestows on thy self, and others.

Forget not Zion; pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
her. Pray for the Conversion of Enemies, that the Kingdom of Satan may fall,
and the Kingdom of Christ be exalted, that the Gospel may continue where it is,
and sent where it is not, and received in the Love of it through the World.
Pray for all afflicted, as their case requires, and with thy Prayers and
Praises, give thanks to God, for the prime Fountain of all his Mercies, Christ
Jesus.

In particular, thou may mention at the Throne of Grace, what Christ has
done and suffered for humble contrite Sinners. Labor and beg for such a frame
of Spirit, such God not despise.

Express thy thankfulness for what Christ has instituted and ordained in his
Church, for the Benefit and good of his People. Thou may in particular
express, with Prayers and Praises, That all may be applicatory to thy self.
These are short hints, thou may enlarge, God giving thee his Spirit of Grace
and Supplication.

Let not vain Thoughts mingle with religious Duties; beware of those wandering
Vagrants; do not take such Company with thee, when thou drawest near to God, in
any Religious performance; lest it be like offering strange fire, provoke God
rather to consume than bless thee; but keep off those busy Flies, they may not
corrupt thy Sacrifice. Say to all disturbing Thoughts as Abraham said to his
Servants, when he went to the Mount to Sacrifice, Stay you here below, till I
go to Worship God. Fervent Prayer is very prevalent with God; of it may be said
what is said of Faith, which is a justifying Grace, without which it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11. For he that comes to God must believe that
he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Good works
are the Life of Faith, being well performed for matter and manner; without
which Faith is Dead, and God is not the God of the dead, but of the living; as
the body without the spirit is dead, so without works faith is dead also; St.
James 2. The great things a lively Faith has done, fervent Prayer has done
the same. The little Book I sent thee, was thy dear Mother's, it is a good
Discourse of Prayer. Dear Johnny, let thy Prayers and Praises, with the sweet
Incense of thy Love to God be offered to him on the golden Altar of an humble
and sincere Heart, in the mediation of Jesus Christ; and put no religious Duty
off with that foolish, idle Excuse, I have not time, lest thou, as the foolish
Virgins were, be unfurnished of Oil for the Lamp of thy Christian Profession;
and for thy neglect, shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

If Time for Play, Recreation, Eating, Sleeping, or the like, a due proportion
of Time may be gained from them for thy best, therefore thy most concern, those
indispensable Duties, on which thy eternal welfare so much depends; the neglect
of them may be thy inevitable Ruin in this Life, and that to come; for
Godliness has the promise of both: Therefore seek the Kingdom of Heaven in the
first place, and the things of this present Life shall be added to thee, as may
be good for thee.

The things of this World compared to God and Heaven are but Straws and
Pibbles. St. Paul calls them dross; and Luther said, The whole Turkish Empire
is but a Crust God throws to the Dog. God has provided better things for those
that love and seek him. In this world is our preparatory Life for our future
Estate. I have often said to thee, That all Men are about this great Business,
but in a different way to a different end. Good Men prepare for Heaven, and
Wicked Men prepare for Hell; therefore avoid the broad-way of a sinful Life
which leads to Destruction, choose that way which, comparatively, few find, the
way of an holy Life; the end of which, is Peace, which the World cannot give.

Dear Johnny, Do not deferr thy great concern, to serve God and save thy Soul,
more worth than Ten thousand Worlds. Many much younger than thee have set about
this great work. Thou have often read Mr. Smythies's Book of the Benefit of early
Piety; also thou have had a civil and religious Education, and many more
Prayers than thou art Days old.

Thy dear Grandfather's Care, Counsel and Prayers; mine have not been wanting,
as far as able to perform, in my care and love of thee; let them not condemn
thee, but labor to answer the end of them, that thou may not disappoint God
and us, to thy own detriment and loss. Dear Johnny, where much is given, the
more will be required; Time is precious, use all lawful Industry and Diligence
for thy well being in this World, and make all subservient for a better to
come. Thou know not how long God may continue thy Friends to thee, (She was
not continued three Months;) nay, thy own Life is uncertain; all things in this
World are so, and there is no retrieving an Error on the other side of Death.
Do not procrastinate, take the wise Man's Counsel, what thy hand finds to
do, do it with all thy might, which inferrs speed and diligence, for the
obtaining internal and external Blessings. Deferring made St. Augusting cry
out, Too late, too late, Lord, did I love thee.

Dear Johnny, Do not put God off with a decrepid Love, and the chill Spirits of
old age, and bodily Infirmity, by which the operative Faculties of thy Soul,
through the organical Powers of the Body, may be obstructed with defect, and
impeded with the ill Habits and Customs of Sin. Avoid this Danger, give to God
the vigor and strength of thy Life; let it be without blemish. By God's
appointment, the young was brought to him in Sacrifice. Do thou as Righteous
Abel; give to God thy firstlings, thy first Love, and suffer no Rival or
Competitour with it; it was the Test Christ put to his Disciples, If ye love
me, keep my Commandments. Dear Johnny, I used to mind thee, St. John, thy own
name, let him be thy Example in thy Love to God; he was the youngest Disciple,
most eminent in Christ's Love. He was called the Disciple whom Jesus loved.

Dear Johnny, Be not taken with the Gauds and Vanities of this World, in any of
the profers of it; they will bite like an Adder, and sting like a Serpent, if
they draw thy Heart from God. Be not deceived by them, they will put a lie in
thy right hand, promising more than they can give. Be not affected with vain
Glory, it is but a Puff of breath, soon exhaled, and will vanish from thee:
Yea, so are all the things of this World, for the duration of them.

Remember thy Baptismal Covenant with God, thou did promise to forsake the
Pomps and Vanities of this World, the Devil and all his Works, and sinful
Appetites to them. I was a Witness to this Engagement, and one of thy Sureties.
Dear Johnny, let thy Baptismal Vow, through Grace, preserve thy Morals
untainted. Let none be corrupted by thy ill Example, and be not thou infected
by the evil manners of others.

Speak no obscene or scurrilous Language, and abhor the Company of those that
do so; Evil Communication corrupts good Manners. If thou commit an Error, do
not hide it with that, that is more base. Truth is a generous thing, and will
better cover a mistake, than that that is contrary to it. Keep thy heart with
all keepings; out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, the product of which are
evil Words and Actions. Dear Johnny, fear to be one of that number which did
not like to retain God in their Knowledge; and God gave them up to their own
Lusts to be filled with all Unrighteousness; Covenant-breakers, Thieves,
Adulterers, Drunkards, Liars, Covetous, Unmerciful, etc. From these and all
Soul-wasting Sins let thy Baptismal Engagement preserve thee; for they that do
such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Dear Johnny, keep thy way
and Life clean, by taking heed thereto according to the Word of God, and thy
Promise in Baptism.

Be very humble, better it is to be of an humble Spirit with the lowly, than to
divide the Spoil with the Proud. Prove. 16.19. By Humility and the Fear of the
Lord is Wisdom. Do not intrude into unknown Company, nor meddle with that thou
need not be concerned in; it may be of ill consequence. The Wise Man says,
He that passes by and meddleth with Strife not belonging to him, is like one
that takes a Dog by the Ears, Prove. 26. which he may sooner do, than
extricate himself from the following Evil.

Dear Johnny, I do farther advise thee with remote Counsel, which at present
may not concern thee, but hereafter may be useful to thee; I may quickly be
incapacitated by Death, and write no more, nor advise thee. Therefore be not
thou one of them that strike Hands, or of them that are Sureties for debts,
Prove. 11.15. If thou be surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy hand
with a stranger, thou art snared with the words of thy mouth: thou art taken
with the words of thy mouth. A man void of understanding strikes hands, and
becomes surety in the presence of his friend; but he that hates suretiship is
sure. And the wise Man farther advises therefore, Deliver thy self as the bird
from the fowler. And my request is, that thou never wilt be in Bonds for, or to
any, but to me by promise, that thou never wilt be bound to, or for any Man, on
no account whatsoever.

Dear Johnny, If God be pleased to continue thee sometime in this World, and
bestow on thee this World's goods, use them wisely. Do not abuse them by
profuse, expensive, prodigality; make not God's Bounty instrumental to his
Dishonor, nor Fuel to feed any Lusts, lest what Divine Mercy gave thee for thy
good, become to thee a trap, and occasion of falling. On the other extreme,
avoid sordid living and covetousness, which God abhors, and has branded
with the mark of all Evil. The brutish Prodigal came to eat Husks with Swine,
and the other may as bad. There is that withholds more than is meet, but it
tends only to penury; as Self-murder is the least excusable, because most
unnatural, so Self-robbers are the severeliest punished, being daily their own
Executioners.

Whatever Talent God may entrust thee with, Health, Riches, Honor, worldly
Prosperity, Wisdom, L^^rning, improve all for God, thy own best Advantage, and
the good of others.

Dear Johnny, Let all thy Deportment be with Wisdom, flashy wit is the froth of
somewhat called Wisdom.

In all things, so far as may consist with thy best part, and well-being in
this World, render thy self desirable to humane Society; take notice of any
Civility showed thee, with suitable returns of Friendship; be courteous, kind,
affable, of courteous and obliging behavior. a morose churlish Humor is like
Nabal, of no better esteem than a Son of Belial.

Dear Johnny, Do nothing that looks despicably, childish, foolish, pidling
with thy fingers, picking thy buttons, going with thy hands in thy pockets, or
the like. I pray thee do none of these unbecoming actions. I love to see thee
Gentile; keep thy Hands and Clothes clean; think of what I have sometimes said
to thee, All cleanly people are not good, but there are few good people but are
cleanly. I do not strictly place Religion in external accomplishments, but that
that is decent, is not only allowable, but commanded. Our Bodies are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, therefore due honor is to be given to them, without
Pride or Excess. In time of the Old Law, all outward Impurity was to be
avoided. God commanded, by Moses, the Children of Israel not to touch any
uncleanness, nor suffer their Camps to be defiled therewith, but to cleanse it
away; and not to have performed those Duties in externals, would have brought
them under greater defilements by Disobedience to God's Commands. In the
New Testament St. Paul writes to the Philippians 4.8. of both external and
internal Purity; Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
of good report, (thou may read in the Margin, or revenerable) if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things.

I would have thee always wear Gloves, but when it is not convenient; gratify
my Desire, I am willing to bestow them on thee, they will not hinder thy
Writing if the Fingers be short or cut. Dear Johnny, Thou shall not want them
or any thing else thy Dear Grandfather, or my self can help thee to, good for
thee, conditionally thou will not dis-oblige us. Sit, stand, and go upright
that thou may not grow a-wry, or full Shouldred; it will trouble me much to
see thee Crooked.

Dear Johnny, One thing more of concern I mind thee of, in which I much desire
thy Care, Pronunciation, in which a Deficiency may be injurious to thee, when
thou can less help it than now thou may by thy seasonable Care. Endeavor
to speak plain, clear and true, pronounce the last Syllable distinctly (and do
not drown it) of any Word; English requires it, and so may Latin and other
Languages as much; an Orator to which thou art designed, should speak good
Sense, Rhetoric, and Intelligibly. Get no ill affected tone in Speech, and be
not over talkative. The Wise Man says, The talk of the Lips tends only to
Penury, and in the multitude of Words there wants not Sin, but he that
refraineth his Lips is Wise; indeed Words with Wisdom fitly spoken, are like
Apples of Gold, in Pictures of Silver. Dear Johnny, I desire thy
accomplishments as may render thee lovely to Men, but more to God. Let this
latter part of my Letter be observed, but especially the former, and foregoing
part of it, and let not the length of either be tedious unto thee; an idle
Discourse, though much longer, may be pleasant to an ill Mind, but I have
better thoughts of thee. I know nothing I have writ, my Love to thee might have
spared; thou have had several good Letters from thy Dear Grandfather, therefore
the less need of this; but with his, I desire that this may be useful to thee
when neither he nor I can write or advise thee; all things in this Life are
uncertain, Life is so. The World passes away and the things of it, but he that
does the Will of God shall abide for ever. All things on this side Eternity are
on the wing of Time, they hasten away to their fixed Estate. Dear Johnny, Time
is precious, let it not be ill spent, but improved for thy well-being in this
World, but let all tend to attain and secure thy Eternal Happiness, which has
great dependence on thy manner of Living in this World, and there is no
retrieving an Error on the other side of Death, in time is thy time; that that
is past cannot be recalled; that to come cannot be assured; that present is
only thine, and will not tarry; let it not unprofitably slide from thee.
Acknowledge God in all thy ways, and he will guide thy Path that none of thy
steps shall slide; and when God takes thy Earthly Parents and Friends from
thee, thy Heavenly Father will take care of thee. Therefore Dear Johnny,
acquaint thy self with God, and serve him with a perfect Heart, and with a
willing Mind, for the Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all the
Imaginations of the Thoughts; if thou seek him he will be found of thee, but
if thou forsakest him, he will cast thee off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

This Scripture thy Dear Grandfather has often minded thee of, I do the same;
let mine, with his Counsels, and the Word of God, be to thee as a threefold
Cord, not to be broken, but let them bind thy Obedience to God's Righteous Law;
there will be no greater joy to thy Dear Grandfather and my self than to see
thee walking in the Truth. Dear Johnny, It is my earnest Request that God will
direct, guide, counsel and conduct thee in, and through this troublesome
sinful World, Sin has made it so. The Good Lord give thee his preventing
Grace, bless thee with Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, and when God will take
thee out of this World, receive thee to those Celestial Habititions in Eternal
Mansions of Glory prepared for them that love him, and keep his Commandments;
of which happy number I beg God will make thee, after length of Days in this
Life, preparatory for the fuller fruition and enjoyment of God, and of thy
dearest Frinds, with all the for-ever Blessed Saints and Angels in that
unchangeable Blessed Esta^e in Heaven, which make sure of.

Dear Johnny, This is my request to thee, and Prayer to God for thee, I am,

Thy truly Loving, and very Affectionate Grandmother, Elizabeth Walker.
Dec. 9. 1689.

I shall add no more of her Pious Papers, nor give any farther Character of her
Person, or exemplary Life; than the Book presents, supposing nothing can leave
a more savoury relish on the Godly Wise, or be fitter to conclude such a Work,
which is designed to render them so who read it, than this plain, but prudent,
honest Letter, written so providentially, so immediately before her Death, that
it may be called her last, or dying Words, which usually leave the deepest and
most lasting Impressions, and that with so strong and endearing tender
Affections, with so undisguised and native Simplicity, without Art or pretense
to Learning, or any other acquired Abilities than wise observation, and an Holy
Heart; and as it performs more than could be expected from the Writer, I humbly
beseech God it may effect ever beyond what might be ordinarily hoped for in the
young Reader, especially the dear Child to, and for whom she wrote it. Amen,
Amen.

FINIS.

