Salt upon Salt: Made out of certain INGENIOUS VERSES Upon the Late STORM And
the Death of His HIGHNESS Ensuing.

By which Contemplative Object, Occasion is taken, to offer to Consideration
the probable near approaching of greater Storms, and more sad Consequences.

By GEO. WITHER, Esquire.

SALT seasons all things, saving only those Which must feed Fishes, Maggots,
Dogs and Crows.

Read it, and heed it, For you need it; And so, God speed it.

London, Printed for L. Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley, 1659.

To the READER
OCcasion from a trifling Object springs,
Once more, to offer heed of serious Things.
For, by perusing some late printed Rimes,
That, which may much concern the present Times,
Was tendered to my Thought; and what to me
Was offered, shall to you now offered be.
When I began to know the World, and Men,
I made Records of what I found them then,
Continuing ever since, to take good heed,
How they stood still, went back, or did proceed,
Till of my Scale of Time, ascending Heaven,
The Round I stand on, makes ten times Seven;
And, being likely, now, ere long to leave them,
A Memorandum, I intend to give them,
Of what, this day, they do appear to me,
As also, what they may here after be;
(According as they shall direct their Course)
That, whether they are better grown, or worse,
It may be to GOD's Honor seen and read,
(What ere besals) when they and I, am dead.
When in this Isle my Muses first were known,
The heads of VICE were not so Monstrous grown,
(Nor then so numerous) as now they be;
For, Cerberus in those days had but three,
And Hydra seven: At present, they are more
In Number, and more Large, then heretofore:
So that these Monsters, for whose overthrow
I was engaged, nigh fifty years ago,
Are grown so formidable, that, they make
The Fortresses of Moral Virtue shake,
And, yield at present, work enough to do,
For Hercules, and Mighty Sampson too.
Yet I have lost no Ground, but kept the Field;
And will, till I have Conquered, or am Killed:
For, though some daily fall off, who pretended
Adherence to the Cause which we defended,
(And though my Elder Brethren do but flout me)
I find an Unseen Army, pitched about me,
Which takes my Part, and will effect at length,
That, which is far beyond my single strength:
And, he, who dies, in making good his Place,
Though he prevails not, dies without Disgrace.
The List, I enter not, with guileful Charms,
Of Humane Eloquence, nor with such Arms
Defensive, or offensive, as were brought
By them, who have of late, our Battails fought;
But only with a Sling, Stones, and a Staff,
At which my Friends jeer, and my Foes do laugh;
Yet (mark the Sequel) for, a day will come,
That shall place Justice in the highest Room;
That, they who by their Brethren were envide,
(Or by their Masters wronged) shall be tried;
That those Poor People, who oppressed be,
In Body, or in Conscience, shall be free;
And, that, though this be scorned, it shall be sed
Whilst I am Living, or, when I am Dead,
That, by those, now-contemned Pebble-stones,
Which I have flung, there will be Broken-Bones,
And Bruised Brains, which did to some of those.
Prove Mortal, who have been my Countries Foes.
Mean while, I Will prosecute what I intend,
Not much regarding what a Foe, or Friend,
Shall either Counter-act, or Counter-say,
But, bear their Spights, and Censures as I may.
Nor to my Theme will I so close be tide,
As not, sometimes, to make a step aside,
To take in that, which may conduce unto
The Work, which I in chief, intend to do;
But, act as my INSPIRER, moves me:
For, I Am by Him inspired, not He by Me.
And therefore, here, before I take my leave,
I Will warn you, (lest your thoughts I may deceive)
That Method not to look for, which by those
Is used, who express their Minds in Prose;
For, Things, not in pre-meditated Thought,
(To me upon a sudden, being brought)
I took in, as they came; and what they were
Often knew not, till in Words, they did appear:
Which having signified, you may thereby
Guess, what to judge of them, as well, as I;
And, whether, that should not your hearts incline
To think, there is somewhat in them more then Mine.
Last Year, I sent a FLASH, which is let pass,
Unheeded, as a Thing that never was:
Now follows the Report, or Clap of Thunder,
which have been seen and heard, thus far asunder,
To give the longer Warning; for the SHOT
And THUNDER BOLT'S, (if Grace prevent them not)
Will next year fly among you: GOD amend us,
And, then, I am assured, He will defend us.
Your Servant and Remembrancer, GEORGE WITHER.

SALT upon SALT: Made out of certain ingenious Verses upon the late Storm, and
the Death of His Highness ensuing; by which Contemplative Object, occasion is
taken to offer to consideration the probable near approaching of greater
Storms, and more sad Consequences.
The said Verses are these that next follow, according to the Author's printed
Copy.
WE must resign; heaven his great Soul does claims
In Storms as loud as his Immortal Fame;
His dying Groans, his last Breath shakes our Isle,
And, Trees unout, fall for his Funeral-Pile;
About his Palace, their broad Roots are tossed
Into the Air; so, Romulus was lost;
So, New-Rome, in a Tempest, mist her King,
And from obeying, fell to worshipping.
On Oeta's top, thus Hercules lay dead,
With ruined Oaks, and Vines about him spread:
Those, his last Fury, from the Mountain rent,
Our dying Hero, from the Continent
Ravished whole Towns, and Forts from Spaniards reft,
As his last Legacy to Britain left.
The Ocean, which our Hopes had long confined,
Could give no Limits to his vaster Mind.
Our Bounds enlargement was his latest toil,
Nor has he left us prisoners to this Isle;
Under the Tropic, is, our Language spoke,
And Part of Flanders has received our Yoke.
From Civil-Broiles, he did us dis-engage,
Found Nobler Objects for our Martial Rage,
And with wise Conduct, to His Country showed
Their Ancient Way of Conquering abroad.
Ungrateful then, if we no tears allow
To Him, who gave us Peace, and Empire too.
Princes, who feared Him, grieved, concerned to see
No pitch of Glory, from the Grave is free:
Nature herself, took notice of His Death,
And, sighing, swelled the Sea, with such a Breath;
That, to remotest shoars, her Billows rolled,
The Approaching Fate of her great Ruler told.
The Result, occasioned by the preceding Theme.
A Way with self-respects; For now of late
My Private, and this Public Weals Estate
Are much alike; and both of them, to me
Seem in this Crisis, at this day to be,
Threatening a Sudden Ruin, if much further
Confusion spreads, before reduced to Order.
My Genius therefore, does my Heart incline
To seek that Weal, whereon depends mine,
Lest, whilst for Private welfare, I endeavor,
That, and the Public Peace, be lost for ever.
This to prevent, (though some will think I dream)
There is occasion couched in this Theme:
And (notwithstanding, much it may be feared,
That, what it shall produce, will not be heard,
Among the tumults and confusedness
Which now abound) it will have some Success:
For, otherwhile, by Trifles, that is wrought,
Which could not by great Powers, to pass be brought.
A small shrill whistle, in a Storm, becoms
More signal then the beating of great Drums:
And, who knows not, (he breathing thereinto)
What, by a Ramshorn Trumpet, GOD, may do?
Our late loss, does on me to call begin,
As if I somewhat were concerned therein,
And had a part to Act, wherein I may
Supply, at least, a Fools part in the Play.
And, since occasion given there is none,
I, of my own accord have taken one,
Which, if a causless anger, it provoke
To mischieve me, the care's already took;
I am too low a mark for Supreme Powers,
Too high, to dread an equal when he low'rs.
The main prop, of this Government is gone,
The Stone, our Master Builders built upon
Is now removed; and, either I mistake,
Or, all that is built thereon begins to shake,
And quite asunder too, will fall at length,
Unless upheld, with more then humane strength.
No former Prince, whose Actions yielded matter
So worthy of a Muse that would not flatter,
Di'd at a time, wherein there lived so few
To give him that, which justly was his due,
(Without a diminution or excess,
Either of which, makes great things, to seem less)
For, having viewed most paper-monuments,
Whereby the Fancy of this Age presents
His Fame to memory; I find their Rimes
Are so distracted, as if with these times
Their Authors sympathized in their wit,
And knew not what they meant, nor what they writ:
Else, doubtless, none had failed so in expressing
His purpose, as to curse, instead of blessing;
As he, whose Pcem-elegiacal
Is closed up, with the name of Jerubbaal.
Some, so maliciously Invectives write,
As if their Pens, in Juice of Aconite
Were dipped (or rather in more venomed matter)
So opposite to that, which they who flatter
Hide underneath their tongues, that, in the stead
Of showing hatred only to the dead,
They, living men impoyson through the ear
When their uncharitable Charms they hear:
For, these have not alone in scurrile Verse,
Blur'd him with what their malice could asperse
True, or untrue; but, also, take GOD's room,
Dare to proncunce his everlasting Doom;
And, wickedly, with Damned souls in Hell,
(As others do with Saints) him parallel:
Which argues an Intention, to defame
The person, though he merited no blame.
Some others, on that subject wantonize
As if their Muse were hawking Butterflies:
Some, are all Oil: some, have but this one fault,
The want of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt:
And, few of them, save he, whose lines preceding,
I make my Text, afford ought worth the reading:
And, they now put me into such a fit
That, if I have not much more Grace then wit,
It may to harsher Censures me expose
Then any one of them, yet undergoes.
Except Obscene Verse, (and strong lines, from whence
Are hardly screwed intelligible sense)
Strains like to this, these Times, best prize to praise;
And, it is a smart neat Piece, THPIKION says:
Which, I deny not; for, it mounts as high
As any English Pegasus can fly,
And, is as well-pac'd: But he feels the Reins
Lie loose upon his Crest, and overstrains,
To know, what best the season does befit
With his own Ends, this Author wants not wit,
And, I believe, takes much more care then I,
What will best please, and wherewith to complie;
Though I, have more then forty years and five
Found, that my Course, is not the Course to thrive.
These Verses, which to make my Theme I choose
Are but the sportings, of their Authors Muse,
And seem to me like Knacks which in a Hall,
I Have seen hung up, for Flies to play withal.
These are Wits bubbles, blown up with a Quill,
Which watrie-Circles, with weak-Air does fill;
Or, like a squib, which fires, and cracks, and flies,
And, makes a noise, that little signifies.
I, envy not his Fame, who is deceast,
Nor ought, whereby, it may be more encreast:
I, never suffered ought by his Displeasure;
But, did enjoy his Favor, in some measure,
Which he knows, unto whom all things are known,
I, more employed for his weal, then mine own,
And, disadvantaged my self, to do him
Such services, as, I thought, I did owe him.
For these respects, none justly can suppose
I grudge him ought, which may by Verse or Prose,
Be added to his Fame; or, that the Mome
I Will play, by carping, or detracting from
Another's contributions, if I see
They are in truth, what they may seem to be.
I, should be pleased that those Lines, which precede,
(With what else does relate to him that is dead)
Whereby, some think, he may be honored much,
To all who hear, or view them, might prove such,
That, no occasion might from them be took,
Of what, to his dishonor, will be spoke;
Or, to increase those Vanities which are
Already, multiplied, over far.
I, therefore, now expect to be excused
Although at this time, I have nothing mused,
That, may concern him, in the common mode;
For, in that place, he, now has his abode
Where he regards not Bawbles. Praises, there,
Or Flatteries, no whit regarded are;
The most enchanting Charms, there, cannot charm him:
Detractions, or Invectives cannot harm him;
To write those Truths, which might have done him shame
Whilst here he lived; or gained the Writer blame,
Ought, now to be declared as well as those
From whence his highest commendation flows;
And, that may settle Peace, now being spoken,
Which in his lifetime, might the Peace have broken.
The sacred-Pen-men, future times acquaints,
Not only with the merits of the Saints,
But also, with their Failings; and as great
By the one, as the other, is man's benefit:
For, which respect, I will not be afraid:
To speak, what to good purpose, may be said;
Nor, from my Text (as now) to wheel about
To fetch in that, which others needless thought;
For, Method, is not so much my intent,
As by good means, a mischief, to prevent:
And, my digressions, may advance my end,
As much as that, which I did first intend.
It Is now, high time, for us to spend our hours,
In gathering Fruits, and not in picking Flow's.
I love to see truth, in her nakedness;
And, that, she should sometimes, put on a Dress,
With such Poetic Flourishes adorned,
That safe may keep her, and from being scorned;
To which end, I my self, compelled have been
To mask and vail her, when I have foreseen
Apparent Dangers; and another time
To cloth her, in that fashionable Trim
Which most affect; that, there with brought acquainted,
True Beauty, may be known from what is painted.
And, that, they who were drawn in, by the Sign,
Might Guests be, for the goodness of the Wine.
My Reverence to the Muses, is not small;
For, all true Poets are Prophetical,
And had a Preparation in the Womb,
Before they forth into the World did come;
Not, that their Faculty, should be applied
To stir up Carnal Lust, or puff up Pride;
But, that they should to Piety invite,
And make Mankind in Virtues more delight;
From which, prevaricating, they have lost
Their Honor; and are quite despised almost.
They should not strive for words to please the ear,
In which, no solid Matter does appear;
But, write so plainly, that, the meanest Wit
Might from their Musings, reap some benefit.
They should not weave their Webs of Stuffs that be
So, differing, that, they never can agree;
Nor, when our Sin, for Sober-Mourning calls,
Play us a Jigg, or sing us Madrigals.
Mere verbal Whimseys, in a Serious Cause,
Which most part of the Readers more amaze
Then edify; (by that which never was,
Nor is, nor shall hereafter come to pass)
Look like solemnizing an Ordinance
In Pious Duties, with a Morrice-Dance;
Or, like their actings, who, against the Forces
Of well-arm'd Foes, bring Troops of Hobby-horses.
What, in the Theme foregoing, is there said
Which honors him deceased, if well weighed?
And has not rather into question brought
Things, which to question, few men would have thought?
There, at his Death, a Storm, is feigned to roar,
Which was o'er-blown almost a week before;
And, had it not been so, some would from thence
Have drawn, perhaps, an evil Consequence;
More Fancies, forming in the People's Brain,
Then two such Storms, would have blown out again.
Allusions, too, are made, as if surmiz'd
That, He, henceforth should be Idolatriz'd,
As more then Man, whom we this day perceive
Laid lower then the meanest Men that Live.
To teach us, that, in Princes, there is no trust;
That, all mere Human-Glories, are but dust;
And, that, Death will, their Vanity discover,
At whatsoever cost, Double-Guilded over.
So, did His last Breath shake this Isle of our,
As Pellets from a Pot-Gun, shake a Tower.
For, all her Shakings, to my best perceiving,
Rise from our own Distempers who are Living.
So, for his Funeral-Pile, un-cut Trees fell;
So, Romulus and He were Parallel;
So, New-Rome, in a Tempest, mist her King,
Then, from obeying, fell to worshipping;
And, so, on Oeta, Hercules lay dead,
As Chalk's like Cheese, and Beer is like to Bread.
So, from the Continent, He Towns has torn,
As he, who teats a Hedge, and gets a Thorn
Which wounds his hand, and when he dreads no harm,
Does gangrene, to the losing of his Arm.
So, are our Freedoms, and our Bounds enlarged,
As his, who, from a small Debt, is discharged,
To re-oblige himself, in that, which may
Sweep Liberty, and all he has, away;
And, if our Endings prove like our Beginnings,
Our Losses, will be greater then our Winnings.
What Comfort yields it, to impose a Yoke
On others, if our Fetters be not broke?
What Pleasure brings it, if our Confines be
Enlarged, if in them, we are not free?
What Profit, is it unto us at Home,
That some in Foreign Parts, enriched become,
If, we mean while are Beggars? or else more
At least, impov'rish'd, then we were before?
What Honor is it, that, both Tropicks hear
Our Language, if to speak Truth, few men dare?
Or what by Conquests, will be got or saved,
If they who Conquered, are at last enslaved?
Not unto us, not unto us, be given,
(Or to our Chiefs) but to the GOD of Heaven,
The thanks and honor, that, both our Late Wars
With Neighboring Foes, and our Domestic Jarrs
Are Super-added: Would GOD, I could say,
Were wholy ended: (as I hope I may)
For, had not He, with our Protector stood,
We, till this day, had wallow'd in our Blood;
Yea, had not GOD, a timely aid brought in,
Destroyed long since, both He, and we had bin.
Our Ancient Way of Conquering abroad,
Which this Muse, does implicitly applaud)
What got we by it, but a Cursed Game,
Achieved with Blood, and lost with Blood again?
I know not what the Conscience of a State
Or Policy by Law, may tolerate;
With that I will not meddle: But to me
It seems not to Quadrate or agree
With Moral Honesty, or Sacred Laws,
(Unless there be unquestionable Cause,
And Power apparent, which does vvarrantize
GOD's calling us to such an Enterprise)
That, we, into our Neighbors Lot, should fall
With Fire and Sword; and Honorable call
Those Deeds, for which, LAW, to their Actors gives
The styles of Pirates, Murderers and Thieves:
Or, that, a few, should without free assent
Of all the People in a Parliament,
Engage them by a Quarrel, which may cost
Their Lives, and all that may with Life be lost:
I know no Law or Gospel, vvarranting
So hazzardous or reasonless a thing;
Or, that, we who subjection do profess
Unto the King of Righteousness and Peace,
Should take the Wages, and the Colors carry
Of him, that is both His and our Adversary.
Nor can I understand, how we then do
As we would willingly be done unto,
When to accomplish the ambitious ends
Of Princes, we have hazzarded our Friends,
To trouble, and infringe the Peace of those,
Who would not willingly have been our Foes;
Till many hundred thousands are undone,
To satisfy the boundless Lust of One;
Squandring away those Blessings to the increase
Of Discord, which we might have kept in Peace.
How many a goodly City, Town and Field,
Which did a comfortable Dwelling yield
To Millions, who were no way interested
In Tyrants Quarrels, have of late been wasted?
And, what a sad Account to make have they
Upon whose heads, that Blood and Spoil does lie?
Believe it; though to keep from Violation
Those Laws, which have respect to every Nation,
GOD's Universal Justice, does engage
The Nations on each other, War to wage;
Yet, use they should not make of His Commissions
To satisfy their Vengeance, their Ambitions,
Or Avarice; nor any way extend them
Beyond those Ends for which he does intend them.
It is but little less then Blasphemy
The Works of Nature, so to mis-apply
As this Muse does, who in a Strain does write,
As if none could express a Glow-Worm's light
Unless he did Hyperbolize, so far,
At least, to equalize it to a Star.
He seems, as if he would insinuate
That Nature, at his Death was passionate;
And makes that Creature speak, which never Flatters
Or Speaks at all, save only in such Matters,
As do concern GOD's glory, or, may shame
Those Wits who grossly mis-apply the same.
So, Nature, has took Notice of His Death,
And, sighing, swelled the Ocean with her breath,
The Death of her great Ruler to foreshew,
As 'twas presaged when my Cat did Mew:
For, Nature, never heed in such wise, took
Of any Princes Death, but, when it shook
The Universe, to see the SON OF GOD
Dead on the Cross, with Arms displayed abroad:
And from the Reverence that is due to such!
High Mysteries, this, has detracted much,
Of this kind, and of suchlike Airy-Puffs,
Of such deceivable, vain, empty stuffs,
Are most of all those Books, and Trophies made,
Which Princes, to eternize them have had:
And, so small credit, is attributed
To what is either to their Honor sed,
Or their Dishonor, that, wise Men reject it,
As of no Value; or at least, suspect it,
As an effect of Flattery, or of Hate,
Though many set it at a higher Rate.
For, their Praise, whom we find most prodigal
Of praises, merits no respect at all;
But, rather, from the Hearers, back returns
On him that is Praised, and on the Praiser, Scorns:
And, seldom, shall you find much worth in them,
That have immodest Praises, in esteem.
Yet, these vain Blasts of Fame, often, sound as loud
As Cannons, or as Thunder from a Cloud:
The People entertain them with Applause;
Of much Expense, they are the needless Cause:
By these, wise Men, are otherwhile bewitched;
By these, are Fools and Flatterers enriched:
But, thereby, such effects alone are got;
As Powder has, when fired without shot.
Yet, so to prize them, many men are given,
As if, without them, none could climb to Heaven;
Or, as if he, of whom most Lies we tell,
Should find least Torments, in the Pains of Hell.
The Principle I own, is to adhere
To that Power, which Supremacy does bear,
And I Will (without an Oath) be true to those
Who are by GOD, and by this People chose,
Till they advance another, whom I see
Invested with Pow'r-Absolute, to be;
And, whether he comes in, by Right or Wrong,
Leave that, to them, to whom it does belong.
Him, I will serve, not with base Flatteries
Which blind his Judgment, or put out his eyes.
In my Addresses, I will never tell
To him, what I may fear he knows too well:
Nor further then I know him, magnify him,
Lest his own conscience knowing I belie him,
(Or speak more then my knowledge can acquire)
He, hereby know, I am a fawning Liar.
Before him, I will those things only set,
Which I think, he may possibly forget,
Or, which unto his knowledge are not brought,
Or (if known) not considered as they ought;
And, do it so, that he shall not despise
What Is done, if he be either Good, or Wise:
If not, yet when my Duty I have done,
I Will bear with Patience, what ensues thereon.
In all the Changes, which have been of late,
I have preserved this Rule inviolate.
Though some think not, when one Power was made two,
And, wiser Men, knew not which way to go.
For, so far as my conscience would permit,
I served that Power which in the Throne did sit
Most visibly; in every change that came,
Siding with none in changing of the same:
And when the Sovereignty, on him was placed
By GOD's permission, who enjoyed it last,
I did, accordingly, employ my Force
To keep what might be naught, from being worse;
Adventuring, sometimes, so far therein,
That, to my disadvantage, it has bin.
I, was to him, in all things, always true,
Which nothing took from his Superiors due.
I did so far forth as it would consist
With GOD's Praise, with the Public Interest,
And his true Honor, do what in me lay
All those Obstructions to remove away,
Which, by disabling him, might heretofore
Have made his Dangers, and our Mischieves more.
And, though those Services which I could do him
Some will deride, they have been useful to him:
For, it is at present, known, to more then One,
Yet living, (and was known to him that is gone)
That, in the greatest hazard he ever had,
I, seas'nably, by Providence was made
An Instrument of Safety, when the intention
Was almost rip'ned, beyond all Prevention.
Yea, to prevent them, who by his Disgrace,
Endeavored to destroy the public Peace:
His Actings, too, I praised as I ought,
In what, I, them to be Praiseworthy thought,
Considered in themselves: But, his Desert
Left in the main, to Him, who knew his Heart:
And knowing it to be GOD's privilege,
(Even his alone) of Secret things to judge,
No further ever did, (nor ever will)
Of him, or any man, judge well or ill,
Since first this Principle to me was known,
And by Consideration, made mine own.
It is enough, that Princes whilst they live
Are borne withal; and that whilst they survive
We hide their failings, that, none might through them
That Power, and that Authority contemn
By which they Govern: for, a Tyranny,
Is somewhat better then an Anarchy.
If, I suspect my Prince a wicked man,
To make him better, I Will do what I can;
Lest, he that is next be worse: As once by Paul
Agrippa courted was, him court, I shall,
If, need be: or, will flatter him so far
As by our Servants, Children flattered are,
To make them do their Duties: but, not vvo hin.
For my own ends, to that which may undo him:
(Which I conceive, is such a Pious fraud
As GOD allows, and honest men applaud.)
In Life, I served him thus; now Dead he lies
I Will speak no more of him, then may suffice
To make those better, and take better heed
Who shall henceforward, in his Room succeed.
Examples, we from Holy-Writ, may take,
That of the Dead we nothing ought to speak
But, what is true; and that we are as well
Obliged, their failings as deserts to tell.
That, GOD, may have due Praise by every one;
That Men, by knowing truly, what is done,
In those things, which concern them; (and by whom
Their Mischieves, or their Benefits do come)
May actuate accordingly, in season,
The Dictates of their Conscience, and sound Reason.
It was not then thought (as now in these times
Perhaps, it may be) that, to blaze the crimes
Of Eli, David, or Jehosaphat,
Or Hezekiah; (though unto the State
Some of them had respect) was sawciness,
Or want of Manners, though they did express
Both to those times, and future Generations
Their Failings, with their proper aggravations.
And therefore, if a just occasion be,
Expect the like plain-dealing now from me:
For to the same End, I will do mine Arrants,
And make good my Commission, by their Warrants.
I, grant it Thanklesness, as he infers,
If we for Benefactors have no tears
When they are dead: For, I desire we may
Their Dues, both to the Dead and Living pay:
But, I conceive it more ingratitude,
Upon the World, our Fictions to obtrude,
And, let that as impertinent pass by,
Which GOD permits, or acts, to glorify
His Justice, or his mercy, whose neglect;
Make other things, to want their due effects.
GOD, make us grateful for what is bestown,
In such wise, that to every one his own
We may ascribe, and, not to any give
So much, that, of his dues, we him deprive;
Nor so much to one man, that, they may be
Defrauded, who, deserved as well as He.
Such Partialities, at first, brought in
All Tyrannies: By such, Freemen have bin
Enslaved by degrees, and thereunto
Our Fawnings add more, then all else can do;
And it is impossible a means to find
To keep those Free, who have a slavish mind,
Or Currish nature; For, the first want courage,
And give their Birthrights, for a Miss of Porrage:
The other, must like Bandogs chained be,
Else none who live among them, can be free.
GOD, grant us grace, so to bewail his Fate,
Who is deceast, as to rejoice in that
Which is thereby designed: and, to take heed
We do not complementally proceed
In formal mournings, till the Counterfeit
Makes us, those Christian mournings to forget
Which are now called for; and till we have more
True Cause of sorrow then we had before;
And, for the Dead, pursue a formal grieving
Destructive to the welfare of the Living:
Lest, when the Dead, their Dead, in earth shall cloth,
One day, become a mourning-day to both.
For, to suspect, just cause enough I find
Some mischief, for that day would be designed
And acted too, if Vengeance could raise power
To do, what might be done at such an hour:
As those despights, do questionless assure
Which on his Scutcheon and his Portraiture
Were lately acted, if believe we may
What seems believed, and common Fame does say.
Interments of the Dead, were first intended
Lest by them, they who live, might be offended
If not removed from sight: Therefore, by giving
Things to the Dead, belonging to the living,
Does injure both; and neither get, nor give
Such honor, as we may perhaps conceive:
But are occasions rather of Disgraces
And of returning dirt into our Faces.
So Cynical my humor never was
To think, men should be buried like an Ass;
Nor shall I Judas-like, be discontent
To see a box of precious Odors spent
In burying him; though for a while the Poor
May want it; if, their wants it make not more
Then they can bear; And, mends be made for that
Which they have suff'red ere it be too late.
But, I abhor it, when I do behold
Walls clothed, and poor men exposed to cold
And nakedness: or at their needless cost
Another honored whilst their credit's lost
Which is more worth then Life; and which to save,
They many times, their Lives adventured have.
Small honor, by that Fun'rall-Pomp, is got
Where they who bear the charge approve it not.
To bring a Prince, with glory to his grave,
Is not to make his lifeless Image brave;
To give as great a reverence thereunto
As Pagans, to their Idols, used to do,
Or, as they, who like worship have applied
Unto his Image who was crucified.
It is not to make Pageants at their cost
(Who think they have too much already lost)
With those vain Ceremonial Rites attended,
Whereby, the sober-minded are offended;
And till Spectators, Jeeringly do say,
It is a very costly Puppet-Play.
Or, till it gives them cause to be afear'd
That, way thereby, to worse things is prepared:
For, this way, was Idolatry brought in;
This way, most Superstitions did begin;
And, this way, if GOD let it be pursued
A little further, they will be renewed
Till that day comes, in which, what men endeavor
To build up, shall destroyed be for ever.
Philip of Spain, the Second (as it is said)
Did, of a Funeral-Pageant, thus arayd,
A Pattern leave; which is resembled much
By this; one circumstance, (and some few such)
Excepted, (and for ought that I yet know,
That might be privately, performed too.)
Those Anti-roomes of State, with Blacks beclad,
Through which, men to the Effigies passage had,
And, wherein they were forced to stand bare,
Because a property unuseful there:
For, Pater-nosters, they should there have sed,
And Ave-Maries, for the Soul that is dead,
If they that Ceremony had observed
For which those places were at first reserved;
And, whereto (though unpracticed at this day)
Such Innovations, will perhaps make way.
We are already, drawing very nigh
To superstitions, and Idolatry;
And, at the Backdoor, that is coming in,
Which at the Fore-door, has expelled bin.
Who, would have thought, that we, who do neglect
One of the goodliest Piles of Architect
In all the Christian World, because, long since,
It seemed profaned, by things which gave offense?
That we, should raise up Trophies, in its stead,
Of Straws and Sticks, and Kexes to the Dead?
And with exploded Vanities, defile
The Palaces, and Temples of this Isle?
Who, having seen what zeal expressed was
In pulling down of Crosses, painted Glass,
Old Altars, Images of Saints and Kings,
(And with these, of some inoffensive things)
Did then suppose, he should have lived to see
An Idol, in that place advanced to be,
Where heretofore, an Altar, and a Rood
To be adored by the People stood?
Who can believe, that HE, who viliside
Not long ago, the vanity and pride
Of former Princes? That, HE, who had spoke
Against the heavy burdens, and the yoke
By them imposed, and was himself the Rod
And sword assumed into the hand of GOD,
To root them out? That HE, who but of late,
When he dismissed the Counselors of State
Said to their Sergeant, Take away that Babble;
(His Mace at that time, lying on the Table)
Should ever of his own accord, think fit
Those Trinkets which he slighted to admit?
And, when he down into the Grave descended,
Should thither, with more vain pomps be attended
Then any English Prince, that heretofore
A Sovereign Scepter, in these Islands bore?
Oh! times, oh manners! how exceeding vain
Is man's Heart, and how giddy, is his Brain?
Who thinks not, that such a Change has seen,
And, heeds what they seemed who so changed have been?
But, that, far greater Changes, will appear,
If GOD, prevents not, that which we may fear?
For that old Leven, which aside was laid,
Into the lump, is secretly conveyed:
And now corruptions, do so overspread
The Body Politic, from foot to head,
That swarms of Hornets, and of Butterflies,
Produced and fed, by new-sprung Vanities,
Are like to multiply, till they shall drive
The laboring Bees, quite out of every Hive.
Excuse my zeal, if over-tarr I'seem
In this point; For, from no disgust of him,
For whose pretended honor this is done,
Nor from malevolence to any one
Who did design it, this expression flows;
Nor from what Prejudice, may mis-suppose;
But, from the Cause that is given of offense,
And, what I fear may be the Consequence.
What Meteors, Winds, and Tempests do foreshow
I know not, neither take much care to know;
Because, they rather warn us, to take heed
What Is doing, then declare what will succeed:
But, by our Flatteries, and by other things
Which Pride produces; by what daily springs,
From our self-seekings; from our Avarices,
And, from our many other sordid Vices,
This, I am sure's presaged, that if we run
Much farther, in the Course that is yet hel'd on,
(And, GOD, our folly to take place permits)
We shall ere long run quite out of our wits;
And, be at last destroyed all together,
By that Storm, which I see approaching hither.
But, who am I, that say I do foresee
A Storm, that you should credit give to me?
How can such things, to me, you say be known?
How know you, when the Sun is almost down
That, Night will follow? and the Day draw near
When you behold the Morning Star appear?
Look not on him, who tells what may ensue,
But look to that, whereby you may eschew
The threatened Plague, which (as GOD's threatenings all
Are for the most part) is conditional.
To that intent, your old neglected Friend
Amongst you, one Remembrance more, will send
To second this, before perceive he shall
A MEAN TEKEL, written on your Wall,
Unless he sees GOD's patience out of date,
And all fore-warnings, like to come too late.
Mean while, take this that follows: For he knows
You look for Signs, of that which he fore-shows;
And, these (although they trivial may appear)
Are true Fore-tokens of what is drawing near.
Black Clouds, are now ascending over these Lands,
Whose Figures do portend some humane hands
Promoting that great Storm; But, when abroad
It spreads, you will perceive the hand of GOD,
Who, by a slow-approaching does express,
He comes to punish, with unwillingness.
Each man, who is not wilful, plainly sees,
He etners into Judgment, by degrees,
To move us to Repentance, that the Doom,
But threatened yet, might vanish ere it come.
GOD, has made known unto us, in some measure,
By every Element, his just Displeasure:
Those things, without which, nothing is enjoyed,
Have all our late Enjoyments much destroyed.
By sudden Fires, our dwellings are consumed,
And, into smoke, our precious things are fumed.
The Waters, in their Wombs, have swallowed up
No little Portion of the Merchants hope,
And, overflowing new, and Ancient Bounds,
Swept Flocks and Herds out of the lower Grounds.
The Air, by Storms and Blastings, Frosts and Snows,
Destroyed our last Crops, in their fairest shows;
Yea, after publicly we made Confessions
That, GOD, accepting our Humiliations,
Had thereupon, vouchsafed pregnant Hopes
Of Future Health, and of more Plenteous Crops;
Even since that likely hope, we, for our Sin,
Deprived of that Expectancy have bin.
The Earth which bears us, too; for our Offenses
Withholds her Bounty. Their sweet Influences
The Heavens withdraw. Death, when unlooked for, seizes
More often then formerly, by New-Diseases;
And, they, to give Account, are call'[d upon,
Who lived, as if accomptable to none.
Hereto, the Naturalist, perhaps will say,
Such things do happen to us every day,
Or, in a short time, either more or less:
Which I will grant; but notwithstanding, this
He must grant too, that from the Worlds beginning
These were, and are, the known Rewards of Sinning:
That they are also Signs, GOD will bring greater
And more Afflictions, if we grow not better:
That Judgments, (though they be not general)
On Families, and Private Persons fall
Even day by day: That, we have lately seen
Large Vials of GOD's Wrath, powered forth have been
Upon the stubborn Irish, and the Scot,
To warn us what will also be our Lot;
And that none should GOD's Patience, therefore slight,
Because a long time, He forbears to smite;
Or, puffed by timely Warnings, when he sends them,
Because this way, to us he recommends them:
For, this way, they declared were of old,
And, this way, they shall now again be told.
But, hear me further, and relate I shall
Some things, which do not every year befall;
Our ablest Horse, (even those perhaps, wherein
More trust reposed was, then should have bin)
Die suddenly, and Ditches are bestrow'd
With those Eones, whereupon our Gallants rode:
Their Stink (as once a Prophet said) ascends,
Yet, still, his hand against us, GOD, extends.
Those Legs, likewise, which are our Second-Strength
Do reel already, and will sink at length
That Body which they bear: the Wings by which
We flew from Shore to Shore, and were made rich,
Begin to flag, and fly not to and fro,
With such Success, as they were wont to do.
Some, whose new Honors bloomed but last Spring,
Fell with the Leaf, to show, how vain a thing
Ambition is, and let them understand
Who flourish yet, their Winter is at hand.
Much, of our precious Lifeblood up is drunk,
The Sinews of our Power are cracked and shrunk;
Our Honor, with our Public Faith is lost;
Our Private Credits are destroyed almost:
And, hard it is to say, whether the Debtor
Or Creditor, is in Condition better.
The Parliaments Securities are slighted,
And, He, whom they have by their Acts invited
To purchase, (and, of paying whose just Dues
An Ordinance, and Orders made fair shows)
Though, more then ten years, are elapsed since,
Gets neither Money, Land, nor Recompense,
Nor hope of Justice; but, Suits, to the wasting
Of his Estate, which may be everlasting:
And, they, who should, from these Oppressions clear him,
Either regard him not, or, or sit and jeer him;
Though both by Law, and Oath, they stand obliged
To see the Public Credit dis-engag'd.
That which is due to Poor Men, is delayed
Till they have lost it twice, ere it is once paid.
He that has Lent, till he can lend no more,
Is sure to lose all, that he lent before;
And, that which to be given, has been thought,
Proves dearer otherwhile, then what we bought.
All which things, being rightly understood,
Are Signs (if not of much ill) of small good.
Should I here mention all Prevarications,
Which being fifteen Years together, tide
(As by the Leg) near London to reside,
They would fill up a Volume: and, but that
Thousands can vvitness what I might relate,
It would be thought, I did Untruths aver,
And, that, I were a shameless slanderer:
For, our Abominations have exceeded
All Measure, and are more then can be heeded.
It can by no true Englishman be born,
Without much Indignation, and more seorn,
To see Foot-walkers, when on Horseback set,
So much their late Condition to forget,
As, superciliously to look on those
By whom, out of Obscurity they rose;
And when men seek but Justice, and their own,
How these, (as if to have an Alms bestown
They were implored) provoke with harsh replies
The suff'ring-Suppliant, till his Blood does rise,
And Words are spoken, vvhereon does ensue
Another Wrong, because he spoke what is true.
Sometimes, from week to week, from year to year,
Suits are deferred, which they with speed should hear;
Yet, nothing then effected, but expense,
More adding to a former indigence.
Both Means and Time, which fully might enable
To do their Work; they spend in Bibble-babble,
Or needless Complements; and will not vvave
A Feast or Visit, though it were to save
A man from Ruin; and when Plaints are long,
By long Oppression, they away are flung.
Their Suppliants are forced to hunt them thorough
Their starting holes, like Rabbets through their Borough.
Yet, hardly come to speak with them, before
They (as it were) set Purse-Nets, at each door;
And then, unless they likewise, get a Hay
Pitched round about them, they will slip away.
That, which is absolutely in their Power,
And, might be finished in half an hour,
Is made a Business during term of life;
And, then, the Suitor dies without relief:
For, Suppliants are often deferred so long,
That, they at last, who should redress the Wrong
Are puzzel'd too; and such as have been grieved
So numerous grow, that few can be relieved.
No marvail; for the Body-Politick
In every part almost, is Lame or Sick;
So, that, those Limbs, which in themselves are able,
Are rendered by the rest unserviceable;
For, though the Foot be whole, it cannot go
Because, the Great Gout, lames the greatest Toe.
And, very mean performances are found
Where, in both Hands, there is but one finger sound.
If, it objected be, that such Delays
May justly be occasioned many vvwayes;
It Is granted, that, it may be so in some;
But not till twice seven years elapsed become,
Without apparent wrong: And, that abuses
Are this way offered, for which no excuses
May be allowed, some thousands living are,
Who, if need be, thereof can vvitness bear.
When Publick-Debts have many years been due,
And Creditors compelled for them to sue
Till they, in Labor, time, and other Cost,
The Principal, and so much more have lost,
The Shameless Officers instead of paying,
Put off the Creditors, with this harsh saying,
It Is an old Debt; as if men did them wrong
To ask for that which had been due so long;
And, that, the way to right them, who implore
Redress for old wrongs, were to do them more.
Nay, there is so much falsehood and deceit
In many, that, they make poor men to vvait
From day to day, from morning until noon,
From noon till night, Delay, still spinning on,
(Till many days and nights, and weeks are spent)
As if to grant their Suits they truly meant,
Although they from the first hour, did intend
To give them flat denial in the end.
And, usually, when they speak fair and smile,
They pick your Purse, or cut your Throat the while.
They, who are guilty of such things, and know
That I, and thousands, know them to be so,
Will say, perhaps, I Rail; but it is no matter;
To Rail, is somewhat better then to Flatter.
None but a Fool with term it Railing, when
Reproaching Vices, we conceal the Men.
None, but a Brazen-fac'd-Offender dares,
Exceptions take to that, which truth avers;
And none but Madmen cast reproach on those
Who chide them, to prevent their overthows.
I will proceed to further Demonstration
Of those Signs, which portend a Desolation.
Strange Prodigies, which not so often have been
In this our Clymate, are now often seen.
By Looks, or Language, it is hard to know
Whom you may now repute your Friend or Foe:
They, who have but one Head, have now two Faces,
And two Tongues: Both their Offices and Places,
The Members of the self-same Body shift;
Though neither of them, has the others gift.
The Little Toe, although to be a Thumb
It has been raised, will not content become,
Unless it may obtain that both the Hands
Shall be subjected under his commands.
The Head's cut off; and though that in its stead,
The Foot, may have admittance to be Head,
It (quite forgetting what it was before)
Will scarce be pleased, unless it may be more.
Nay, from Ambition, Vermin are not free;
That nasty Body-Lice, would Head-Lice be.
Those wicked Spirits that engender strife,
Among us, more then ever, are now rife.
Stupidity, Distraction, Giddiness,
With suchlike, many thousands do possess;
And, haunted now, our Habitations are
With worse Hobgoblins, then the Faires were.
To their own Principles, but very few,
Save Enemies and wicked Men are true.
Those Changes, which but rarely did befall,
Are in these Islands Epidemical.
The Servant rides, the Master goes on foot,
And, is his Servant's Servant, too, to boot:
The silly School-Boyes do presume to teach;
The Foxes pray, the foolish Geese do preach;
And, most things are so turned topsy-turvy,
That what looks best, methinks, is very scurvy.
Not only those Egyptians, among whom
We live, oppressors of us are become,
But Brethren also strive; yea, Saints, with ire
Are so inflamed, that they can out for fire
From Heaven, on those, who only disagree
From them, in things that but indiff'rent be;
And, we are told, by one whom I believe,
What it portends, where such things we perceive
By Natural Experience, we have found
That, Instruments which yield a differing sound,
(And Tones, are Voices, though they various be)
In Consort, do melodiously agree.
So, we should likewise, find these Differences
In Judgment, whereat we now take Offenses,
Would make true Harmony, if we to Him
Did leave it, who knows how to order them;
And took more care (then most of us have done)
To set our own Tongues, and our Hearts in tune.
Our Friends in Foreign Parts, and here at home,
Each of the other jealous are become;
And should there be a Breach, no Mortal knows
Whether our old Friends, or our elder Foes,
Would prove our greatest Enemies; or, whether
They, would to mischieve us, join all together.
Our New Allies, are likely at our need,
To be to us, but an Egyptian Reed,
Or, like a costly Armor, by whose weight,
We are more tired, then guarded in the Fight;
And somewhat sounds from them (unless Fame lies)
Which an unpleasing Sequel signifies.
These things, (at least united) do foreshew
That, some foul Weather shortly may ensue:
GOD, also stands, with Arm outstretched still,
The Sentence of His Justice to fulfill.
If we consult but with mere Human Reason,
What Is likely to succeed at such a Season
As this appears, by loss of him alone,
Who lately was removed from the Throne:
What Counsels and what Cost it will require
To keep so many Irons in the Fire
As he has left unwrought; and what it would
Cost more, to let them lie till they are cold.
If we consider, That he was of late
The Middle, and, main Pillar, of this State;
The Atlas (as the Attribute that is given
By one, has termed Him) of our British Heaven,
And, into what Confusions, it is thought
All things at his Decease, might have been brought;
Observing therewithal (without concluding
Upon false Theses, or, our selves deluding)
In what apparent Dangers we are left,
By being, at this time, of him bereft,
It may portend, although the Sun shines yet,
A Storm will rise before that he does set.
And yet, we ought not so much to reflect
Our thoughts on Him, that we those things neglect
Which more concern us; or suppose that we
Deprived of any such advantage be,
As is conceived; for, he had not gone,
But, that, the work ordained for him was done.
GOD, raised him, by Destroying, to prepare
A way for that which he intends to rear,
And, to that purpose qualified him so,
As they were, whom of old he called to do
Such Services; and, as it seems, intended
No further use of him, when that was ended:
He saw, the Power which was on him bestowne
Employed in Designments of his own;
Then, re-assum'd it: and, they had been troubled
Perhaps, who pray his Spirit might be doubled
On his Successor, if GOD, should have said
AMEN, to that, for which they blindly prayed.
We, likewise, (as of late that Parliament
From whom he took the Supreme Government)
So Idolized, that, we thought too little
Conferred upon him by the Sovereign Title
Which, GOD permitted him to undertake.
And, what his Army pleased of him to make.
To govern us, we longed for such a Thing
As other Nations have; forsooth, a King,
With all the former burdensome Array
Of Kingship, which was lately took away:
Though he, as much as Flesh and Blood could do,
Refused it, with some perseverance too.
And, not content to make him parallel
With all who are recorded to excel
In Virtues, by Profane or Sacred Story;
But placed him, in a higher Sphere of Glory.
We gave him Attributes, which unto none
Belongs, but to the Deity alone;
And toward him, our selves often so behaved,
As if by him alone, we could be saved;
Which peradventure, did provoke GOD's wrath
To do to Him and Us, as done He has.
GOD's dealing therefore, let us duly weigh,
To do him all the honor, that we may:
For no respect of Persons, Love, or Fear,
Should from that Duty, flatter or deter.
To that intent, it will have some Relation,
To know and heed, that his last Visitation
By Sickness, did that Day on him appear,
Which made the time completely just a Year,
Since he solemnized a Public Fast
To pacify GOD's Wrath for Failings Past;
As also for removing from our Clime,
Such Sicknesses, as raged at that time:
And, that, some Cautions, for that day prepared,
Were in their Season, unto him preferred,
To mind him what small good could be expected
From Formal-Fasts, where Justice was neglected;
And what at last would follow thereupon,
If Works of Mercy, were still left undone.
At that time, such Pre-Cautions tendered were
(As, if need be, hereafter you shall hear)
For, GOD, to offer them, did me incline,
And, to his hands, they were preferred by mine:
But, whether he perused them or no,
Since they presented were, I neither know,
Nor what Effect they had, if that be none,
Which at the years end, did ensue thereon.
We should consider too, how on that day,
Just that day twelvemonth he was took away,
(Wherein he kept a Formal Celebration
Of Thankfulness, for public preservation)
That very day, of his chief Triumphs turning
Into a sad and Fatal day of mourning:
How that day, whereon (if Fame has not lide)
He purposed to be crowned King, he did;
Leaving an Image, with a waxen Face,
To be instal'd, and crowned in his place:
Which, as since we defaced Crowns, 'twas the first
That wore one, I desire, may be the worst,
Who shall from this time forward, live to bear
A Sovereign Scepter, or a Crown to wear.
If we consider duly as we ought,
These things; with such like, as to serious thought
Are thereby tendered; more, from thence there might
Inferred be, then I think fit to write.
Or, should I tell, what was prepared, likewise,
To make complete his Formal Sacrifize
Last mentioned, and what effects it had,
Some wholesome uses, might thereof be made
Which must deferred be; because my Reason
Persuades me, that they are not, yet in season.
I know a Flatt'rer, feared not to say
That, was the third time, his Victorious day
By conquering Death: But, wisemen, do contemn
That Gloss, because, that day, Death conquered him;
And, do believe, and know, that none but he
Who did for our Redemption on a Tree
(And, raised himself, to breathe immortal breath)
Ought to be styled the Conqueror of Death.
He only, who, above the Heavens does dwell,
And conquered with Death, both Sin and Hell,
Deserves that Attribute: and they, who dare,
To others give the same, Blasphemers are,
Except in that sense, which, makes all who die
In him, partakers of his Victory.)
He had his share of Honor, and, not little
His Portion was; Let not his Masters Title
Ascribed be to him: For, they, who hear it,
And are his Servants, cannot, will not bear it;
Nor be afraid to speak, what may increase
GOD's honor, whose soever it makes less.
GOD called him hence that day, to make us heed,
That, he in all his Actings does proceed
By Number, Weight, and Measure; both to places,
And Times referring them in many cases,
To make observable his Visitations;
As also, to raise up our contemplations
To that, which he Designs: yea, he advances
Their executions, often, with Circumstances,
Not common; that, by fearching, we may find
His meaning, and conform unto his mind.
I know, he was upon that day, advised
To somewhat, which he should not have despised
Whereto he gave small heed, or none at all,
Till what was justly feared did befall:
And, who knows, what beside that vvwas neglected?
What was pretended then, what, since projected?
Or, what mise-prosecuted, or mis-done,
Which might provoke the great Almighty-one,
To call him on that very day from hence,
Which was the day of his magnificence;
And lay the Scepter level with the spade.
Oh! make thereof, such use as should be made;
For, knowing what I know, relates thereto,
I, cannot unobserved let it go.
We know that Death, which is the hire of Sin,
On that day, always payable has bin,
In which it is acted, though, GOD, by reprieve
Defers it often, or, wholy does forgive.
We know there are some sins, for which, even they
Who are GOD'S chosen ones, are took away
From those Enjoyments, which they might have had,
Until a Forfeiture of them is made.
Moses, for speaking rashly, was denied
The promised Land, and in that Desert dyed,
Where others fell; and, thus, it does befall
To many of GOD's Saints, if not to all.
We either know, or we should know, likewise,
That, for our National impieties
As well as for their own sins, Princes may
In wrath be given, or, be took away.
The Holy Ghost has said, that, when to lies
The King gives ear (and such are Flatteries)
The people, there are wicked. And, our sin
The Cause in chief, has peradventure bin,
Which, from his first Intentions, him declined,
To that which was not for our weal designed,
Nor for his honor: yea, our selves we may
Most justly blame, if he forsook the way
Wherein, he by the Publike-Card should steer:
For, some of us thereto his Tempters were,
And, by our servile Flatt'ries, both made void
His first Resolves, and our own Hopes destroyed.
As, therefore, when GOD, gave the Jews a King,
He then, did by a dreadful Thundering,
And by a great Rain in their Harvest time,
Declare that they had much displeased him;
So, peradventure, that Storm, which did roar
So universally four days before
He took hence our Protector, was intended
To signify, that he is much offended
With all this Land, even from him that is on high
Enthroned, to him, who in the street does lie:
For, not alone, high Palaces it rocked,
But, also very dreadfully it knocked
At every door; and made a signal spoil,
In every Shire and Province of this Isle.
Oh! let us therefore search out his intent;
For, when he speaks loud, there is somewhat meant
Deserving more then ordinary heed,
Whereon (if slighted) mischief will succeed.
He seldom, puts forth a dreadful Voice,
Save unto those, whom nothing moves but Noise:
And, if that, wakes them not, nor makes them fear him,
The next time, they shall feel him, ere they hear him.
Let not a vain respect to Worms and Dust,
Make us to GOD, and to our selves unjust:
For, what he acts, and how he does proceed,
We ought, in every Circumstance to heed,
Whomever it concerns, and nothing hide,
Whereby he may be duly glorifide,
Or, men reformed. Then, let us, since we may
Be dead to morrow, hear his Voice to day.
We have had many days, wherein, he has
Shown Mercy, and forewarned us of his wrath.
Sometimes, in Calm-still voices, he does speak;
Sometimes, in whirl-winds, which the Rocks do break;
As once 'twas said to Israel heretofore,
Then what he has done, what should he do more?
We have had many days, wherein, we made
Both Vows and Prayers, which acceptance had;
In them we made some shows of penitence
For that, which gave him cause to take offense,
And for an Ahab-like humiliation,
GOD, of his dooms, vouchsafed a mitigation;
Yet, still, the very same, our Courses be.
Now, GOD, will have his days as well as we.
He has decreed a time, wherein, he will
As we have done our pleasure, his fulfill;
And who can tell, how slowly, or how soon,
That, which he has resolved, shall be done?
What look we for? Lo, on a day of note,
Our Shepherd, our Protector, he has smote.
A Prince, of whom our own and neighboring Nations,
Had great proofs, and far greater expectations:
Beyond his set day, if he spared not him,
How can we hope, he will defer our time?
Who knows, but that, if it succeeded thus
With him in one year, One year more to us
May be as fatal, if we still put off
Repentance, and at this fore-warning scoff?
Protector, and ye Counselors of State,
Be therefore wise, before it be too late:
Ye Princes, and ye Judges of the Land,
Learn, and observe what GOD has now in hand:
And all ye people throughout these three Nations,
Take notice of those dreadful Visitations
Which are portended, that, they may be made
Quite void, and have Effects to make you glad.
Trust not in Riches, for, they wings have got,
And, will fly off, when you suspect it not.
Trust not in Earthly Power; for 'twill at length,
Break, and be ruined, by its own strength.
Trust not in Princes; For you can of none
Have more hopes, then you had of him that is gone;
But, trust him, who, does no man's trust deceive;
Of whom nor Death, nor ought else can bereave;
And, who, nor Love, nor Power, nor wisdom lacks
To finish, what for you he undertakes.
Think, and speak soberly of him that is gone;
For, he the work of GOD has carried on,
So far as his appointed Station went;
And, being but a mortal Instrument
Made of the self-same brittle earthen stuff,
That others are, was not, of so much proof
Against the baneful Flatteries of those,
Who seemed his true Friends, as against his Foes
In open Field, who could not act the part
Of such as made their Batt'ries on his heart.
I look upon his Failings as mine own,
And neither whilst he lived made them known,
(Nor will disclose them further being dead)
But, that the living may be profited,
And that, GOD may be honored as he ought
By that which to remembrance should be brought.
My Conscience bears me witness that I know
No malice, in my heart against a Foe,
Much less against a Friend, whom I professed
To serve; and who, to his own Interest
(In what he from the right-way did decline)
Did much more injury, then unto mine.
His Words and Deeds, were all the means I had
To know him by; and what Result was made
By me thereon, I did since his decease
Thus briefly in an Epitaph express,
Which here I Will add, the Censures to prevent
Both of the Flatt'rer and Malevolent,
Who (in a manner) crucify his Name,
Betwixt a Glorious and In-glorious Fame
As much as may be, to advance self ends,
And nullify, what GOD, thereby intends.
The EPITAPH.
HEre Dead He lies; who, Living here,
Was Britain's greatest Hope and Fear.
And, by what was on Him bestown,
Had all His Equals overgrown:
His Predecessor's Sins and our,
Made way for Him to Sovereign Power;
By rendering that an Act of Reason
And Justice, which had else been Treason.
No Prince, was ever heretofore
More praised, or dispraised more.
Advantages, few ever won
So great: None lost so great a one.
This World afford no Pattern can
Which better shows what is in Man.
His Virtues, were mough to do,
So much as GOD designed Him to.
He Failings had: But, when lived any
That had not every way as many,
If he (whilst here abode he made)
Such Tempters and Temptations had?
Presume not therefore; but with Fear
Mind, what you know, and see, and hear:
Yea heed, what GOD, and Men have done,
But judge none but your selves alone;
And aim in chief, how to increase
GOD's Glory, and the Public Peace.
This Change, and failing of our Expectations,
In many several Things, which have Relations
To Us and Him, forewarn us to pursue
Some speedy Course, Confusion to eschew,
And fortify our Peace: But, what to do
Few know, or what will best conduce thereto;
Nor shall know, till a Parliament convenes
To search what GOD, this Prince, and People means.
In order to their wished for Settlement,
The State has chose another Instrument,
Whom GOD, has in the room of OLIVER,
Permitted to be his Probationer.
In Prudence, this Expedient they have used,
Lest our Confusions, growing more confused,
Might bring in Anarchy: And if they now,
Pursue what GOD's, and humane Laws allow,
And shall not Arbitrarily proceed
Ought further, then unquestionable Need
Necessitates, till those things on their Basis
Are fixed, which were thrust out of their places:
It may in little time, conduce to that
Which Men of single Heart, have aimed at.
But, who, or what, will henceforth be a Bar
To Righteousness, the Sequel must declare,
And will make manifest, what Mask soever
It put upon an opposite Endeavor.
If he has conscientiously been chose,
(Which none but GOD and his Electors knows)
Our Peace, by this Prince, will be furthered more,
Then by him whom we wrought with heretofore.
Although he brings not such APPEARANCES
Either for His, or Our Advantages,
As did his Predecessor: for we may
Find those Defects supplide another way;
Yea, want perhaps, of what the former had
In some kinds, may to our advantage add.
Time, often discovers in a timely season,
What cannot be till then discerned by Reason.
Wise Samuel, failed in his conjecturing
Which of the Sons of Jesse should be King.
A Man of War, now fittest for the Throne
Some thought; but, we behold instal'd thereon
A Man of Peace: And if in his Probations
He bide the Test, he shall be to these Nations,
A Fortress of Defense, in spite of those,
Who, in his Government, shall him oppose;
Provided, we obstruct not Providence,
By persevering in impenitence.
The Supreme Title, is on him conferred,
And, by what way soever it was acquired,
That, for the present with a Sovereign Power
Invests him; and whatever we call our,
Is in his hands, with all the Authority
Which Scepters, Globes, or Crowns do signify.
And, of that Dignity he stands possessed
(By GOD's permissive Providence, at least)
Not that he should Usurp, or challenge them,
As due unto his Fathers House, or Him;
But, being forfeited by our Transgression,
Them, in his hands he has by sequestration,
To be secured there, till by Penitences,
A pardon, be su'd out, for our Offenses,
That, what, by Natures Law, and by GOD's Word,
To us belongs, may be then restored:
For, GOD, Almighty, to no other ends,
Such Seizures, by a Sovereign Prince intends:
Save when, on wicked Nations he bestows
A wicked Prince, for both their overthrows.
If to GOD's ends, he Quadrate his Desire,
He, shall become, far greater then his Sire.
He shall do nobler things, then ere he did;
More he shall Conquer, then he conquerred:
Affairs, which he of whom we are bereft,
Both difficult and in confusion left,
He shall reduce to Order; not alone
Subduing Men and Realms, as he has done,
But conquer also, those destructive Evils,
Which would destroy all, and triumph over Devils.
Nay, though he had been, either by his Youth,
By Flatterers, pretending zeal to Truth,
Or if he by a carnal Hope or fear
Of Danger, had been tempted to adhere
To those Designs, which under fair pretenses,
May, to the Public Rights, do violences;
Yet, if he shall conform to GOD, and them,
Whose Love, and Counsel, he should not contemn;
It shall (by much) a greater honor do him,
Then Scepters, Crowns, and Thrones, can add unto him.
Yea, if upon the day of his Probation
He to the Supreme Council of this Nation,
(Assembled lawfully, and duly chose)
Shall rather hearken, then give ear to those
Who flatter him in secret; they shall never
Forsake him, but his Servants be for ever.
It shall on him, confer more Happiness
Then, I in words, abm able to express.
VVin him more Love then can by gold be bought,
Bring in more Joy, keep Terrors better out,
And (whilst on Earth he lives) secure him more,
Then if each single Soldier were a score;
And, were my Life, of value to be pledged
For that Adventure, it should be engaged.
Contrary-wise, if he their Lore pursue
Who will persuade him, that all is his due
Which he can grasp; or shall instead of Law
Employ the sword, to keep Freemen in aw;
GOD, will arise; and none shall need to strive,
A Remedy, by Violence, to contrive.
For if we vvait on him, and sit but still,
Submitting patiently unto his Will,
Our Chief Oppressors he will cause to be
Their own destruction, and so set us free.
Or, make our Foes our Friends, and back restore
All that was taken from us heretofore.
By such means, GOD in former times releast
His People, who by Tyrants were oppressed,
As does appear, by that which did befall
In Babylon, and in the Egyptian-thral,
Where, not a man made use of hand, or tongue
To free himself, by violence, from wrong,
Except by Prayers, which (although offense
It gives to some) is lawful violence.
And, by some such means when GOD's time is come,
Our Bondage, we shall be delivered from.
GOD, has a thousand ways, to break the power
Of twenty thousand Tyrants in an hour;
Yet, may prove many Tools, till he finds one,
Or, more, to finish what he has begun.
If this turn Edge, he, peradventure may
Take those again, that have been flung away,
Which being purged in Afflictions Fire,
Will, now be pliable to his Desire.
Their Actings, whom we now impow'red see,
Will shortly, evidently signal be,
Of what shall follow: But, I fear the event,
Will not produce a happy Settlement,
Till our Trustees, Elected shall appear
For Conscience Sake, more then for Belly-Cheer,
Or suchlike by-respects; (by which we seem
To have our Birthrights in a mean esteem:)
And, till, GOD, likewise, has by Lot a Voice,
(As well as men) both in the future Choice
Of our protectors; and of others too,
Who must help act the work that is yet to do.
But, this will be no pleasing Proposition
To Avarice, Self-seeking and Ambition.
There Is yet a Sign (to which things fore-exprest
Relation have) more signal then the rest,
Which, if it shall continue as it has
Continued, will add Vengeance, unto Wrath;
And, what vain hope soever, we may cherish,
We, with our Prince and Government, shall perish.
GOD, where this grows predominant, despises
All Vows, Tears, Prayers, Cries and Sacrifices,
Fasts and Thanksgivings: For, he finds them all
Where this remains, but Hypocritical.
This is that Sign, which did in every Age,
Those irrevocable Fore-Dooms presage,
That introduced the final Desolations,
Of all those mighty Empires, Kings and Nations,
Whereof there is little left now, but a Name,
Preserved among us by an empty Fame,
For our Examples: This is that which shook
Their Thrones, their Crowns defaced, their Scepters broke:
Yet, this Sign is upon us, at this day;
From us, with speed, remove it LORD, away.
You look, as men expecting I should show
What Sign that is. Good GOD! what do you know
If this you know not? Do you not behold
That Sign, by what I have already told?
Are you asleep Friends? have you neither Ears
Nor Eyes, that, undiscerned this yet appears?
Do you not hear the Groans of Men distressed?
The Loud-loud Cries, of those who are oppressed?
Nor what a sad Complaint attested stands
This day, by many hundreds of their hands?
Have you not heard, how Prisoners do complain?
Nor seen what Tears are poured out in vain
By Widows and poor Orphans? see ye not
What vast Estates are by Oppressors got,
To their undoing, who their Livelihood,
Their Fathers, Husbands, or their Brothers Blood
Lost for the Public? see you not how sad
(Poor souls) they are? how lean, and how unclad?
Have you not heard a Merciless-Decree
Condemn the Just, and set the Wicked free?
Do you not see, that, hundreds of Petitions
Have many years made known Men's sad conditions,
Without Compassion? and what dis-regard
Befalls them, who have merited reward?
Observe you not, that they, who made complaints
Even unto those who are esteemed Saints,
Find them as senseless of their saddest moans,
As men hewed out of Blocks, or carved in stones?
And, that Hypocrisy (in GOD's account
The worst of sins) is now grown Paramount?
Have you not seen Blood, as if water spilt,
And Black Designs with Golden Colors guilt?
Nor many foul Offenses made appear
As if they meritorious Actions were?
Perceive you not, who joining are together,
Who give and take Power, to and from each other,
To re-infringe our Christian Liberty?
And, by pretending Zeal to Piety,
Or Civil peace, advance the Interest
Of our old Foe, the Seven-headed Beast,
With his False Prophet? and invented have
A Grin, both Soul and Body to inslave?
Perceive you not, that Importunities,
Which made one from his Bed and Children rise,
(And moved a Judge, who feared not GOD nor Men)
Prevails not now, as it prevailed then?
And, that, Men's tender Mercies are become
More cruel, then their Cruelties to some?
Nay, see you not, this Sign more signal made
By that, which our Apostacies now add?
And, that, this day, we do apparently
Stand guilty of the great'st Apostacy
From our first Covenants, Vows and Protestations,
Then ever could be charged on these Nations?
Observe you not, what foolish Prophesies
We take up? how, of Fictions and of Lies
We make us Refuges, as heretofore
They did, whose Paper-Works, we down have tore?
And how the lying Prophets and the Priests
Comply, to save their carnal Interests?
Have you not lately taken observation,
That Laws by gross, have had a confirmation,
Of which there is nothing on Record, (or little)
To warrant them, except their Names or Title?
And heed you not what Mischieves that abuse
With suchlike, may insensibly produce?
Well, GOD, forgive us all; for I believe
These things you may apparently perceive.
But, if you shall make doubt, whether or no
It be, as I believe, or else, not so,
To GOD Himself, for trial I Will appeal,
And, to the People of this Commonweal,
Who, know what is done, and will not be afraid
To justify what may be truly said.
For, when this Sign is fixed; though men look high
Or big, it shows Destruction draws nigh.
Yea, though the proud may seemingly contemn
This Sign, it will impressions leave on them:
For, horrid inward Pangs, and secret Dread
Will seize upon their Hearts, when this is read;
And that great Storm of Brimstone, Fire, and Snares,
Which GOD, for men impenitent prepares,
Will often to mind be brought; and waking keep
Their eyes, sometimes, when they desire to sleep.
But to be plain (why should there be a doubt
Of that whereof, Proofs need not to be brought?)
I, see the want of Justice and Compassion
(The most apparent Sign of Desolation)
So evident; that, I, do boldly here
Before GOD, Men and Angels, witness bear
That our Oppressions are at this day more
Then ere I knew them at one time before,
Since first I knew the world; though I have been
No stranger where men's actings best are seen;
And, where I saw (for their and our Offenses)
Six Parliaments cut off by Violences,
Or by untimely ends, within the space
Of these last twenty years, and somewhat less:
Yea, though I Have seen two Governments arow
Destroyed for Injustice; and see now
A Third endangered; which thus makes me speak,
And like the Son of Croesus, forth to break
Into expressions beyond Expectation,
To make men seek their timely Preservation.
For this Sign is so fatal, that unless
It quickly be removed by Righteousness
And Brotherly Compassion, we shall never
Enjoy that Peace for which we do endeavor.
Some, naytheless, will judge me worthy blame
And punishment, thus to disclose the shame
Of this my Nation; and, I should confess
That for so doing, I deserved no less,
If Malice had inclined me thereunto;
Or, if I ought have aggravated so,
That it exceeds Truth; or, if o'er-blown
These Crimes had been, unless by me made known.
But, it is not so, nor so; And, if he may
Deserve the Rod, who does but write or say
What is mis-done, (and speaks it with intent
Those Mischieves which may follow to prevent)
What merit they, who act them without care
Of what sad things, they certain Symptoms are?
That this bears Date the last day of December
In sixteen hundred fifty eight, remember;
And, that a Reconcilement be before
We have provoked GOD's Patience, one year more;
Lest, I my self, be made another Sign
Of what the former Symptoms pre-divine.
For, those Confusions Which distract this Sat,
Are typisied in my outward Fate,
And printed on me, by that violation
Of Justice, which defiles this Generation.
They seem to have enough in outward show,
To bear their Port, to pay the Debts they ow,
And for the future a sufficiency:
So also, if I had my Right, have I.
As (notwithstanding this) with much ado
They, now subsist: So, fares it with me too.
As, at the present, their Expenses be
More then their Incomes; So it is with me.
They have more Foes then Friends; And much I am
Deceived, if I may not say the same.
My Foes and troubles in another year
May ruin me; and so will theirs I fear
If he on whose assistance I depend
Prevents not what their Foes and mine intend,
Before another year wheels round, I may
Enjoy an outward peace; And so shall they,
If they embrace the means, that will be shown,
And, follow not Devices of their own.
Yea, that perhaps, which will to them betide,
Shall in my Lot, be first pretypifide.
If timely Justice, be vouchsafed to me,
By timely Mercies, they relieved shall be:
If I, permitted am to be destroyed,
Their power, may not long after be enjoyed:
And GOD so much incensed may appear
(As with the Jews once) that, he none will hear
But for himself, who ere from thenceforth stands
Within the Gaps, to keep Plagues from these Lands.
Thus, in plain language, and in homely Rimes
You have a brief Character of these times,
Made on a slight occasion; to awake
The drowzie; that more heedful, it may make
Men heedless; and him to be somewhat wiser
Who is not of good Counsel, a Despiser.
A Soldiers dream, but of a barly-Cake
Told to his fellow, when he did awake,
And Spirited with his Interpretation,
Produced an Effect, worth observation;
And so may this, although to some, it seem,
No better then a silly Soldiers dream.
I Will add no more (though much more add I might)
For, here will be too much for them to slight,
Who, in those Flatt'ries, much more pleasure have
That send them with dishonor to the Grave,
Then in plain spoken Truths, which would to them
Have brought salvation, if embraced in time.
And here, will be enough to startle some,
To stir up others, till the Alarm come
To such a number, as may then suffice
To make a reconciling Sacrifice.
Unless we Sodom-like, stand unreform'd
Until with Fire and Brimstone, we are stormed.
This SALT, made out of SALT, I took occasion
To boil up, for the service of my Nation
To this height, as conceiving it was meet
To keep what is yet unputrified sweet,
And those corrupted humors to expel
Which in GOD's nostrils have an evil smell.
I hope, men will not throw it in mine eyes,
Neither so universally despise
These timely warnings, that they shall by none
To good effect, be read, and thought upon:
And, if but two or three, shall thereby gain
Some benefit, I have not lost my pain.
Mine be the shame, if I, hereby to him
Intend disgrace, whose Verses, are my Theme.
I did but thus, his Mercury calcine
For Physic; Let him do as much by mine;
And, if, ought from my failings, he deduce
Which may to others, be of wholesome use,
I, shall be pleased; because, what lose I may
In one kind, will be gained another way.
But, if he has, so generous a mind
As to believe he has, I am inclinde,
He will return me thanks, that I have used
To no worse purpose, that which he has mused.
Yea, and rejoice, that, what in sport he writ,
This needful premonition did beget.
WHen I had penned this, and o'erview'd the same,
Therewith consid'ring what a worm I am,
What they are, who, offense thereat may take;
What misconstructions, Prejudice may make;
With what scorn and contempt it may be read;
And, having therewithal considered
That, I, am one adhering to no Faction,
To give me countenance in such an Action.
Nor having in my self, power to defend me,
From Injuries, nor Patron to befriend me;
It quail'd my Courage; and I Will not dissemble,
It made my heart ache, and my Flesh to tremble.
And I had hid my Talent in the ground,
Unless, a timely Cordial had been found.
But, he who gave it, my faint heart revived;
From him, new Resolutions I received,
Wherewith confirmed, my Soul to him addressed
Such Musings, as are next, in Words expressed.
LORD GOD, if, to thy- glory, this may tend,
Give it, some way a Pasport to that end,
And set thy Imprimatur thereupon;
For, Thou have done it, if it be well done:
If it be such, as will not honor thee,
It Is mine, and as mine, let it smothered be.
I feel a strong persuasion, in my mind,
That, hereunto, I was by thee inclinde
And, that, there may be somewhat more expressed,
Whereby, thine, and the Public Interest
May be advanced; which if it be so,
And, thou shall please, to call me thereunto,
By giving me a Spirit, that may fit
So weak an Agent, to adventure it,
I Will prosecute it home, although it shall
Cost all, which in this World, I mine can call.
I have been subject to some Hesitations,
Through pity, to those dear and near Relations,
Which thou on me bestow'dst; and thereby, have
Lost much, which by that means, I thought to save,
To make me take more heed, by, and from whom
All things that shall advantage me, must come:
Them, therefore, henceforth, I resolve to trust
To thy disposal, whom, I knew so just,
That, thou of those, unmindful can not be,
Who truly place their Confidence on thee:
And, now to fix in me, a Confidence
For time to come, upon thy Providence,
By those Experiments, which I have seen,
I will confess, what thou, to me have been.
So universally thou do extend
Thy Love, that, all men it does comprehend,
Who shall not wilfully reject thy Grace,
When thou, to them shall offer an embrace;
And, all things do vouchsafe, which may enable
To honor thee, or make life comfortable,
So far, as we may carnal things possess,
Without obstructing, our chief happiness.
To evidence this gratiousness of thine,
No living man's experience outgoes mine:
For, every Faculty of mine has heard
Thy wondrous Mercies, thereunto declared
In its own language, to the intelligence
As well of every Passion, and each sense,
As of my Reason; so, that I can say
They have to me, abounded every way.
For since I knew the World (even ever since)
Thine, extraordinary providence
Has watched over me; and, I, from none
Have had subsistence, but, from thee alone;
Or, by those, whom no temporal Relation
Could move thereto, without thine Invitation;
Kind'red have been to me, in wants and dangers,
If not my Foes, at best, more strange then Strangers:
And, not the smallest portion of my wrong
Has from their malice, or their envy sprung.
Few have been more Censorious of my ways,
Or, apter to believe what malice says.
That, which my secret Foes designed had,
To ruin my estate, thereto did add;
And, through thy mercy, more unto me gave
Then ere I got, by all the Friends I have.
Friendships acquired by mine own endeavor,
And, all my own works, have been fruitless ever;
Except it were, to bring those troubles on me,
Which have no less then twice or thrice undone me,
And made work for thy Mercy. Thrice, thou have
Redeemed me, when in Prison I was cast
By Supreme Power; and freed me without shame,
When I was threatened, by the voice of Fame
With loss of limb and tortures, and knew none
On whom I could rely but thee alone.
Through dangers, into safety, thou have led me;
And, when I wanted meat, by Ravens fed me.
Twice, nigh as poor as Job, I have been made;
And every time, that, which was lost, I had
To me returned double; without cheating
The Commonwealth; or private men defeating,
Of what to them belonged; Nor, by wiving,
(Which is to some, a sudden way of thriving)
Was my Estate repaired; nor thereunto,
Did I, by fawning upon Friend or Foe,
Add ought; nor ever had a Legacy
To me bequeathed, these losses to supply;
But, by such means, that, if I should declare it,
Few would, perhaps, believe it, when they hear it.
For, I confess, that I my self do wonder,
When past, and present things, I duly ponder,
In what great Wants, I, without Want have lived,
And under what Oppressions, I have thrived.
This makes the World, which hitherto has grutcht
That, I, with what is hers should be enricht,
(As many think I am) to wonder more
How I, whom she intended to keep poor,
Subsist in her despite, then, how all they
Grew wealthy, who were beggars the other day:
And from her sight, thy Bounty, being hid,
She thinks, I thrived, as her Servants did.
And, leaves no means unpracticed, to destroy
That Competencie, which, I yet enjoy.
When to be thought poor, it may do me shame,
(Or, make me poorer, then she thinks I am)
She takes all occasions, then, to say
That, more I owe, then ever I can pay.
When to be deemed rich, may deprive of that
Which is my due; she trebles my Estate.
But to prevent the mischief, which thereby
Had else ensude, thou sent'st in a supply;
And, always, have enabled me, at least
To bear the weight, wherewith, I was oppressed.
Thou, likewise, kept'st me without shame of face,
Maugre Detractions, malice, when Disgrace
Was then, and there intended, where it might
With most disparagement, on me alight:
And though but few, more scandalized have been,
Few, of my Rank, have lived in more esteem.
Thou, from the violence of great Oppressors
Of Pietie's, and Friendship's, false Professors
Have often saved me; yea, and from the Rage
Of those, to whom, I long since did presage
What they, and I, saw afterward inflicted,
According as my Muses had predicted;
And, they, who then, for that, at me did rave,
Have many years, lain quiet in the Grave.
In that great Pestilence (whereof no time
Has mentioned the like, in this our Clime)
Thou did preserve me, when on every side,
In short time, many twenty thousands did,
Though underneath the self-same Roof I lay,
Where many by that Plague were took away,
That I might leave that Judgment on record,
To them who were reserved for the sword:
And when the Sword was sent his work to do,
From that, thy Mercy, did preserve me too.
Thou have, moreover, from the menacing
And dreadful Wrath of an incensed King
Delivered me, without a Mediator,
Or back receding in the smallest matter,
From Truths aver'd. Thou from the unjust intent
Of Evil Members in a Parliament
Did twice preserve me: and, all those Neglects,
Of Justice, and those other sad effects
Which I have suff'red, Demonstrations be
What, most men are, and what thou art to me.
Nay (which is more then this) thou have, thereby
Not only shown to me the Vanity
Of other men; but also, made mine own
Deficiencies unto my self, more known:
And both my Sins and Follies to appear
More my advantage, then my Virtues were:
For, those things, which the Devil to undo me
Designed; and whereto Flesh and Blood did woe me,
Thou made to be a means of Preservations
From those, and also, from the like Temptations;
And all the troubles, which the world brings on me,
With those great Injuries which have been done me,
(Instead of harming me) have in the Dust
But tumbled me, to rub away the Rust;
Or been a necessary Discipline,
To fit me for those Services of Thine,
Which else had been omitted to this day;
Or, if done, not so done, as now they may:
For which my Soul out of that Dust does raise
A Voice, in Hallelujahs, to thy Praise.
Yet lest, these thy great Mercies, might at length,
Prove ineffectual, by that little strength
Which is in Flesh and Blood, if they were quite
Deprived of that, wherein they take delight;
THOU, who know what defects are in man's nature,
(And therefore art indulgent to thy Creature)
Have graciously been pleased to intermingle
What might distaste, or be unwholesome single;
So temp'ring sweet with sow'r, that I by neither
Might harm receive, but Good from both together:
And, vvheresoe'er I live, do still provide
To neighbor me, one of the Sons of Pride,
To make me vvatchful, and consider well
Where I yet am; and, among whom I dwell.
To me, Thou likewise have vouchsafed a share
In whatsoever Pleasant does appear
To men of all Degrees, who grow not mad
Or drunk, by those Delights, which they have had:
For Poverty and Sorrow have to me
Made Common things, more pleasureful to be
Then their chief Dainties, who to that are born
Which must be won by others, ere it is worn;
Who have but such Enjoyments at the best,
As they, who come full gorged to a Feast.
Yet, when of those Delights, I am bereaved,
By whose enjoyment, I content received;
They leave not, (when departing I do find them)
A Bitterness upon my Soul behind them;
But, give the better appetite to those
Whose taste, and pleasure, I shall never lose:
And LORD, it flows from thy great Mercy, too,
That, flesh and blood, should willingly forgo
What constitutes themselves, to place affection
Upon an inconceivable Perfection.
Though, (as Thou know) the world my Foe has bin,
And, would afford me little share therein;
A Portion I have also, there acquired
By thy Free Grace, more then I once desired:
And when I coveted more to possess,
(Though by a lawful means,) thou made it less,
To mind me, that, naught will with me endure,
Save what by Thy mere Bounty, I procure.
If, therefore, it be lost, confess I must
That, Thy permission of it will be just;
And, with contentment, I will let it go,
Though all the rest, be taken from me too:
For, I most covet those things to enjoy,
Which neither I, nor others can destroy:
And, though sometime, Thy Cup embittered be,
By those distempers which remain in me,
I take it, naytheless, with true Thanksgiving,
And would not change my Lot with any living.
Though out of Levity and Custom, too,
I, every day, think, wish, and speak, and do
Like other foolish Men: yet, if I know
Mine own Mind, though Thou would on me bestow
All I could vvish, for vvishing; I would vvave
That Grant: and only ask of Thee to have
What Thou vvilt; and that Thou would take away
My Self-will, though my Life upon it lay:
For naught I now desire, to have or be,
But what may be best pleasing unto Thee:
And, if this temper could be still retained,
Men would believe, what they, yet, think is feigned.
To fortify my Faith, and that desire
Wherewith, at present, Thou do me inspire,
Thus of thy Mercies past, I have in part
Confession made: and, if I know my heart,
I durst not them before Thee thus aver,
Who know all things, if untrue they were.
Yet, pardon my mistakes, if any be,
And, make, what I conceive thou art to me,
A Pledge, of what thou will be, to mine end.
Above all other Enemies, defend
And, save me from my self: For, World nor Devil,
Can then inflict upon me any evil,
That shall deprive me of ought transitory,
Which may advance my welfare, or thy Glory.
Next to my self, my second-self, and They
Who sprung from us, do stand most in the way
To hinder me, in that, whereto, my mind
Persuades me, it is by thee inclinde:
For, my respect to them, I must confess,
Often, makes me guilty of faint-heartedness.
Oh! be so merciful to them and me,
That, neither of us, may a Grievance be
Unto each other, in what does pertain
To Thy Affairs, whilst we on Earth remain;
Or make us, with Reluctance, to spare
Our selves to serve Thee; Or, what is more dear
To either, then our selves: But, give each other
To thee, that we in thee, may live together
When we are called hence, and timely know
Our Bliss consists not in things here below.
I know, Thou art well pleased it should be thus,
And that, hereto Thou will enable us:
For, though I feel them, to be somewhat nearer
Unto my Flesh, Thou to my Soul art dearer;
And, as thou gav'st them when they were desired,
I Will back return them, when they are required,
With mine own Soul to boot: Do not despise
This All; For, in these, All, I sacrifice.
To Thee, for these Relations, I am Debtor,
Then which I know no man enjoys better,
Who meriteth so little the possessing
Of any extraordinary Blessing.
Yet, if thou have a Work to call me to,
By which, I may my Self, and them undo,
I Will undertake it, so, Thou stand but by me,
And shall thereto, with needful Power supply me.
Yea, though Thou shall no more Thy Blessings double
As heretofore; but waste away in trouble
(By multiplied Sufferings, Wants, and Grief)
The remnant of my, yet, prolonged Life;
I am resolved, that, I will never more
Thereat, repine again, as heretofore:
But only pray, my Sins, may be forgiven,
Believe, and love, and seek my LOT in Heaven.
LORD, keep me in this mind; and then, let MAN,
World, Flesh, and Devil, do the worst they can.
Sarcasmus Aenigmaticus. Hereto is added the following Riddle, with the
occasion of composing it, as neither altogether impertinent to what precedes,
nor to what is counseled by this Portion of Scripture;
Answer a Fool, according to his foolishness, lest he be wise in his own
conceit, Prove. 26.5.
AS well, to Foes, as Friends, I thought it fit
To show this Poem, ere I published it,
Because a Foe, sometimes, lets fall a word,
Which (heeded well) more Caution may afford
Then friendly Censurers: And, to that end,
When I to some had read what here is penned;
By them, proposed jeering Questions were,
Fit for no Answer but by Counter-jeer.
Yet I will Answer them, when unto me
This following RIDDLE, shall unriddl'd be.
WHat may that be, which, when it is Expressed
Is most Unknown? Is Worst, when it is at Best?
And when it is at Greatest, then it is Least?
It Is Black and White, Red, Yellow, Blew and Green;
Yet, Understood, Felt, Smelt, Heard, Tasted, Seen;
Neither now is, nor shall be, nor has been.
To any one, who tells me what it is,
That Is answerable every way to this,
I do engage; and thereto set my hand,
To tell him any thing he does demand.
George Wither.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 20 for Vines, read Pines.
Page 9. line 25. for Super-added, read Superseded.
Page 18. line 32. for because, read became.
Page 22. line 8. for all, read of.
Page 23. line 11. for puffed, read pass.
Page 24. line 14. put out or.
A bitter-sweet Passion of the Soul, Expressed in A HYMN to GOD. By The same
AUTHOR.
MY dear, my gracious GOD!
From me, Thy Face, why hidest Thou?
Oh! why is Thy abode
So far, so long, removed now?
See, how alone
(Now Thou art gone)
And helpless, I am left;
Of every thing
That joy may bring,
Heed, how I am bereft.
2. I, who but lately seemed
Of many Friends beloved to be,
And, so of some esteemed,
As if their Souls had lived in me;
(Though, nor neglect,
Nor dis-respect,
Of them deserved I have)
Am now, forlorn
As one unborn,
Or lodged in his Grave.
3. The lovely Desart-Owl,
Which dares not fly abroad by Day;
That persecuted Fowl,
For which the Fowler Snares does lay;
Is not hipt at,
As I, of late,
By Wag-Tayls, Dawes and Crows.
Nor hardlyer scapes
His Gins and Traps
Who seeks her overthrows.
4. For, when with some Delight,
My heart began on Thee to muse,
This World, forsook me straight;
And, ever since, does me abuse.
To Hate and Scorns,
Her Love she turns;
Her Friends, my Foes she makes:
What sland'rous Lies
She can devise,
Of me, she faines, and speaks.
5. And, now, with Vaunts and Brags,
That, she, on me, avenged appears;
From me, her gaudy Rags,
With all her Gifts, away she tears:
And not content
So to have rent
What was by her bestown,
She would bereave
(With what she gave)
Those things, that are mine own.
6. She does corrupt my Friends,
My Wrongs and Sorrows to increase;
Job's Comforters she sends,
To make more grievous my Distress:
To mind she calls,
Things true and false,
Which may my Peace impair;
With whatsoever,
May make me fear,
And, let in Black Despair.
7. Not those Defects alone,
For which, she justly me suspects,
(Or Duties left undone,)
To my Vexation, she objects;
But, does devise
How, she likewise
May to my blame pervert,
What I designed
With upright mind,
And singleness of heart.
8. And, (which augments my care)
My Selfness often with her conspires,
Which ere I am aware
Lets in false Fears, and vain desires;
Which, taking part
Against my Heart,
Therein such Tumults make,
That, sometimes, they
Bear Spoils away,
And, cause my Faith to shake.
9. Yet this affrights me more,
Then all their Malice, Force or Guile;
Thou, though I Thee implore,
Stand'st by, as Newter, all the while.
What she has done
Thou look upon,
And, know what they intend;
Yet letst them still
Pursue their Will,
As if Thou were her Friend.
10. Oh! whither, or to whom
Can I for Health or Comfort fly?
If Thou, my Foe become,
Whereon, henceforth, shall I rely?
I hope may have
That in the Grave
Immortal Life may be;
And find as well
A Heaven in Hell,
As Joy in ought save Thee.
11. But, LORD, though in the dark,
And in contempt, thy servant lies;
On me there shines a Spark
Of Loving Kindness from Thine eyes:
Yea, though without
(Quite round about)
I am enclosed with Sin,
Increasing Foes,
Fears, Wars and Woes,
Thou, Peace preserv'st within.
12. For, when I looked on
Those Terrors which begirt me round,
I thought, Thou had been gone,
Because no outward Hope I found.
Yet hid Thou were
Within my Heart,
Still present, all the while,
And my late Fear
Does false appear:
For, now I see Thee Smile.
FINIS.

