Letters of Advice: TOUCHING The Choice of Knights and Burgesses.
The Superscription. To the Honorable Cities and Counties, of LONDON,
Westminster, Surry, and Southampton, (to whom I am especially obliged) and to
all other the Honorable and Worshipful Counties and Corporations throughout
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, to whom the choice of Knights
and Burgesses for Parliament does appertain; humbly present these.
Honored, and Beloved,
HAving, lately, received Information, that both Houses of Parliament, are not
only resolved to call their false and Apostate Members to a just account; but,
for ever, also to disable them from returning to ^^at Parliamentarie trust and
dignity, which they have unworthily disho^^ured and deserted; I presumed
thereupon, that the vacancie of those many ^^oomes which are now void by their
failings, and the want of those Wor^^ies, whom God has (perhaps for our
sins) called out of this life since ^^e Parliament began, would shortly
necessitate the renewing of that num^^r of Knights and Burgesses, which
compleats the House of Commons. I ^^jectured also, that the more speedy Summons
would be sent forth for ^^eir election, because the wisdom of our
Great-Councell fails not (I hope) (...) consider, how casual their precious
lives are who now sustain the heavy ^^^then of public affairs; how
intolerable it might prove, if the present ^^pporters thereof should be much
more diminished; how possible it is that, (...) me time or other, advantages
may be taken by the paucity of the number, ^^indammage the Public, by those
who wait for such opportunities; and, how many accidents may suddenly happen,
to disturb that means of a free election, which is now clear in many parts of
this Kingdom.

Therefore being woefully experienced, in the manifold miseries, whereinto this
Nation is plunged, by the corruption, and insufficiency, of Persons heretofore
chosen (or presumptuously intruding upon that High-Calling;) and perceiving no
public means provided for prevention of the like mischief hereafter, nor any
man privately contributing his advice, toward the regulating of those
Elections, from whence our present calamities have sprung; and whereupon the
remedy both of present, and future mischiefs, may depend: I have, upon these,
and the like considerations, hastened to send abroad among you my humble Letters
of Advice: Not, a^ one arrogating a sufficience fully to direct or advise in
all things pertinent to the due choice of your Knights and Burgesses; but
rather as one (sensible of the common danger) offering his weak endeavors to
be a means of stirring up, and provoking others, of more sufficiency, to take
timely notice of his intention; and to employ their better judgments, in
perfecting these good purposes toward the procurement of a prudent managing,
and execution of your Elections. And, I desire, for your own sakes that, my
good meaning may not be utterly despised, or made void.

For, I address not these lines, for such private and corrupt ends, as those
for which you heretofore received many letters from Lords, and Ladies, to
shuffle into your Elections, those of their Court-Cards, or of the vulgar pack
which might be most serviceable to their own designs; but, honestly to
discharge that duty, whereto I am obliged both by our National Covenant, and
my personal affection to the common-good; and, so, to prepare before the days
of Election, those of inferior rank, and meanest capacities to whom the free
choice, of Knights, and Burgesses, appertains, by presenting unto them
needful Cautions, and Considerations, that they might thereby (if possible)
be rendered more capable, and more conscionable (...) their Duties, to their
Country and themselves in that point; and become willing to be instructed, how
much it concerns their own, and the Public Interest and Safety, to be well
advised, and heed full in the said Elections And, to that end, I beseech you,
to whom these Missives do come, (and among whom, better Oratorie is wanting)
that their words, or contents may, in private, or at your Conventions in
public, be so signified to tho^^ illiterate persons, whose Voices are,
usually, given by an implicit Faith; th^^ they may more discreetly confer
them, for the time to come,

Lest, by that course, which these were wont to run,
Both good and bad, together be undone.
That my Advice intended, may be the more willingly entertained, I will first
make bold to remember you of those mischiefs and inconviences, which are
observed to be the fruits of inconsiderate Elections; and, how traitorous you
are unto your selves and Country, therein. I will next present you with a
brief Character, or Qualification, both of those whom you ought to reject, and
of those, who are fit to be elected for your Knights and Burgesses, in
Parliament. And, lastly, I will offer to your consideration, that, which I
conceive to be the best means for preventing partiality in choice; and so,
consequently, for replenishing the House of Commons with such Members, as shall
be likely (by Gods blessing) to become Instruments of removing our present
mischiefs, and of establishing a happy Peace among us for the future; if we be
not grown so corrupt a Body, that, we will not be represented, by good and
discreet men; which, it seems, was, formerly, our fault, and made us choose a
Representative Body, in corruptions and failings, like unto our selves.

The Butterflies produce not Bees;
Good-fruits grow not on evill-trees.
I will, as I said, only remember you (for, things apparent need no proof)
into how many plagues and miseries this Commonwealth is plunged, by the
rottenness and giddiness, of some, formerly chosen to be Members of the
Representative Body of our Commonaltie: and how perfidiously they have betrayed
their trust, to their perpetual infamy, and to the indangering of our
everlasting slaverie both to Tyranny and Popery; which joint-bondage would
have been nothing less accursed, then that of Egypt, whether considered as a
temporal, or spiritual servitude: and, God only knows, how long it will yet
be, ere these Islands shall be totally delivered from the dangers, whereinto
those Traitors have formerly brought them. Thus miserable are they able to make
us, on whom we confer a Parliamentarie trust, if they be not wife, and
conscionable men; for, we give them power, not only to make us Slaves,
Beggars, and liable to the Hangman at their pleasure; but, to submit us, also,
to those Decrees which may, gradatim, bring our Posterity to be Turks, Pagans,
and Vassals to the Devil; which, if you believe not possible, (because not yet
come to pass) believe, at least, that which you see, of the condition and
practice, of them whom you have unworthily and unwarrantably elected; and
consider, what may be further possible, by their bringing so far back upon us
(as they have lately done) those Antichristian slaveries which we thought past
fear of reviving.

But, perhaps, mischiefs and inconveniences of less concernment, will st^^ up
some to be more cautious in their Elections, then these; let such therefore take
notice, that, by heedlesnesse in this duty, they shall make Tyrants and
Fools, Lords over them, who will fawn and court them, till they are elected,
and then, scorn and trample them under feet, putting such an immeasurable
distance, betwixt themselves and others, of that Body whom they represent, and
out of which they were chosen, as if they had forgotten what they were; and
that the respect due to a whole Committee, at least, if not to the whole House
of Commons, were due to their single Votes, and Persons: yea, some of their
deportments shall be such, as if it were Crimen laesae Majestatis, to speak to
them, or of them, or in their presence, but as they please to permit: and they
will so take upon them, and so demean^ themselves likewise, as if to favor
their Clients, to suppress those who^^ they disaffect, to strengthen their
Faction, to further their private designs, to secure their own estates, and
to defend their personal Privileges (though to the utter ruin of all public
Liberties and true Piety) were the chief end of their Calling. And what good
can be had, or what benefit can be look for, from such a choice? Or what better
choice can be made; unless you seriously, prudently, and conscionably manage
your Elections?

When Wolves are by the Flock for Guardians chose,
Who marvailes if their skins, and lives they lose.
The only means to be delivered from such mischiefs, is, by humbly supplicating
the divine Mercy; by truly repenting our sins; and by taking mo^^ heed
hereafter (then we have done heretofore) that we be not traitors to our selves,
in foolishly giving up the disposure of our estates, lives, liberties and
consciences to them who will sell us for old shoes, and serve us, only to
serve their own turns to our destruction: Therefore, I beseech yout^ be
wary, whom you shall now, or hereafter, elect; and make us not irrecoverably
unhappy, by listening to the insinuations of unworthy persons, wh^ will
importune you, by themselves, or others, to put our Bodies and Sou^e into their
hands; complying with all shows of courtesy and humility, til^ their purposes
are obtained; and never afterward regard your Persons, you^ Cause, your
Miseries, or your Petitions: but, overlook you with such pride and despite,
as if they had neither received their power from you, nor for your welfare; but
merely to exalt their own vanity: or, as if every one of them had in his
single capacity, conferred on him by his Election, such a measure of all
Virtues and Sciences; and received such an extraction out of the Body
represented, that none of his Electors had left in himself, either wisdom,
hones^ie, or piety, in comparison of his; though but the day before his
Election, all the good you heard or knew of him, amounted perhaps to no more,
but that he was a good Huntsman, a good Faulkner, a good Gamester, or a
Good Fellow; who, having a good estate in his Country, where he was ^hosen, a
good opinion of himself, and a good mind to be a Lawmakers, was ^lected by his
neighbors, who had rather adventure the undoing of themselves, their
posterity and the whole Kingdom; then hazard his frown, or ^he Lords, or
Ladies displeasure who solicited for him: Which folly that ^on may now shun,
both for the remedy of present evils, and for the better ^stablishing our just
Privileges, with the common safety; let your care be ^o avoid the choice of
such as these.

1 Men over-lavish in speaking, or in taking extraordinary pleasure to hear
themselves talk: for, a man full of words is neither good to give, or keep
^ounsell.

2 Notorious Gamesters; for, though I have known some of them witty; (...)
never found a prudent, or just man among them. For, how can he be just, whose
daily practice is to cheat others of their estates? Or, how can they ^ave
prudence becoming disposers of the public Treasure, who are so foolish, ^s
needlessely to expose their certain estates to the uncertain hazzards of
^hance?

3 Men extremely addicted to Hunting or Hawking: For, most of these, so ^hey
may preserve and increase their Game and enlarge privileges for their ^wne
pleasure, much care not though it were to the depopulation and impo^erishing of
whole Countries, and to the multiplying of those wild beasts, which are one of
the curses threatened for sin.

4 The household servants, or, such as are the obliged dependents on Peers of
^he Realm except they be of known and approved integrity. For, though ^ome
Lords have honorably persisted faithful to the Re-publike, both now and in
all times of Trial; yet, the greatest part prefer their will and pleasure
before the just liberties and privileges of the Commons; yea, sometimes before
the safety of the whole Kingdom and the purity of Gods worship: And such
Noblemen will upon all advantages, expect from their Creatures, the ^romotion of
their own designs and interests, how repugnant soever to the ^enerall-Good.

5 Courtiers, depending merely on the King's or Queens favor; For, the
^largement and continuance of their fortunes depend on the Prerogative: And,
the more that may be improved to the depression of the Subject, the ri^her and
the greater these grow.

6 Choose not such as are evidently ambitious or covetous; for, how pro^^ these
will be to sell their Country and their Religion too, for titularie honors or
rewards, we have had too much experience of late years.

The Peoples trust, or Kingdom, to betray,
To be a Lord, is now the nearest way.
7 Men inslaved to Wantonness, and, with open impudence persevering (...) that
sin: For, such are a dishonor to that high-calling, and will not on^^ give a
way their estates and liberties, to fulfill their lusts, but betray also the^^
own Lives, their Country, and their Savior, to please their Dalilahs.

8 Take heed of choosing those, who are Superlatively proud: for, the^ will be
so pust up with their Legistatorships, that after they have sat while in the
House, they will be apt to forget they are a part of the Co^monalty, and be so
elevated, that we shall hardly know how to speak (...) make addresses or
complaints to them without danger of being question^ for breach of good
manners, or infringing their personal privileges, whi^^ usually they prefer
before the Privileges of the whole Commonwealth.

9 Choose not men immoderately adicted to popularity, for those have so many to
pleasure, protect, prefer, or comply withal; that their wit, leisu^^ and
abilities will be wholly taken up in the prosecution of private accommodations
and conveniences for their Clyents, who shall not only be serv^^ before the
public, but to the detriment thereof also, rather then fail.

10 Choose not men reputed of a Vicious conversation in any kind: for, s^^ will
be secret opposers of all Laws or Ordinances restraining Enormities and
constant hinderers of bringing Delinquents to condign punishment.

11 Make not choice of men Irreligious, or inclined either to antiquate
Superstitions, or modern Novelties: for, the first will neither further ne^^
full Reformation, nor be careful of preserving Orthodox Discipline (...)
Doctrine from violation; nor much regard, so their temporal possessions m^^ be
exempt from payments, and their persons from labor and danger, wh^^ happens to
the dishonor of God, or to the safety or perdition of Soul* And, the later
will advance nothing but what tends to the establishment (...) his Fancies.

For, how can he advance true Reformation,
Who neither has right Rules nor firm Foundation?
12 Elect not those Malcontents, who are observed by discourse or pr^ctise,
to be enemies to the whole frame and constitution of our Government for, these
will prove ill-Counsellers; and rather destructive then helpefull, (...)
repairing and curing the ruins and destractions of these Times.

13 Make not choice of Children under age: for, to me it seems not only
^nnecessarie, but ridiculous also, to commit the managing of the most weigh^y
aff^ires of the Commonwealth to those who are not by our Laws capa^^ of
governing or disposing their private estates: Especially; seeing the ma^or part
of Voices, which the vote of an ignorant child makes up, may con^^rme a
Resolution to the public damage.

14 Permit none of those to be Elected, who have heretofore procured, (...)
cuted, or countenanced oppressing Monopolies, or been active in extort^^g
Shipmony, Coat and Conduct-mony, or in any illegal exactions injurious ^o the
Rights and Privileges of the Commons: For, though some of these ^ay, now
perhaps, be better Patriots and other ways affected: yet, if there be others
untainted. not unworthy of your choice; good reason it is that they should be
preferred before these.

15 Choose not men who, knowingly, stand Outlawed, or so far indebted that they
dare not walk: abroad without protections, except in such cases as ^ay in
equity be allowable; for what can be more absurd or unjust, then that ^^ey
should sit as Lawmakers, who subject not themselves unto the Laws ^^force?
and what can be more unreasonable, then to make the Fountain of justice to be
an obstruction to her own due proceedings, to the scand l^of that High Court
which ought (as much as possible) to be composed of such ^embers as are every
way without exception? I hope the Land is not yet (...) full of beggars and
bankerupts, that there may not be 400. men found in it, ^^ly qualified for this
service, without straining a privilege in this kind.

16 Lastly, avoid in your Elections, the choice of those who make means to
^^ve themselves chosen: For, in my opinion, it discovers in them so much
^rrogance and self-conceit, that they are worthy to be rejected; though the
^^stome of the times made it heretofore seem no infringment of modesty and
^ought many discreet and honest men Insanire cum vulgo, to be over-seen or
company. Doubtless, the cause of most or those evils which are fallen ^^on
these Islands, have been occasioned by some of these Intruders. The ^^se-hood,
pride, co vetuousnesse, hypocrisy, apostacy, cowardice, ignorance,
^artialitie, Athiesme, sensuality, self-love and self-conceit of some of
^^ese, has distracted, divided, impoveri^hed, and almost undone us at this
pre^ent; and, the total accomplishment thereof will follow, unless God shall
^^ve you grace to be conscionably careful in your choice of the Knights and
^urgesses to be supplied: and cause those to purge themselves by repentance (if
^^y such remain in the House of Commons) who have intruded as aforesaid, (...)
been heretofore inconsiderately and unworthily elected by others: For, the
chief Deliverers of Gods people in distress, and their ablest Captai^^ and
Governors, were they who modestly sought to put off, rather then arrogantly to
intrude upon, such places: And, it may be observed, that Saul w^^ fitter to
Reign when they found him hidden among the stuff, then when (...) took care
to be honored before the people.

The cursed Bramble strove not to be chose
The Forrest-King* till some did him propose.
These are they, the choice of whom, I shall humby advise you to avoi^ in your
Elections, as much as possible you can: Yet, let your proceeding (...) with
such discretion, that you neither expect men absolutely free from (...)
imperfections (least you be compelled to seek them in another world) no^
examine every man's failings, with such severitie, as may scandalize ho^^^ and
deserving men: For, the best are sometime traduced, and evil spoken o^ by
Malignants and wicked persons, without cause: which may easily be discovered,
by diligently examining who they are that speak evil of such And, upon what
grounds they traduce them: Or, by a prudent and charitab^^ examination of
testimonialls given on their behalfes, who are traduced.

Now, in counselling to make choice of such as may be best confided (...) I
shall be very brief; because, by the foregoing Cautions touching their
qualifications whom you are to pass by, directions are tacitly given, to
inform^ what manner of men they ought to be, who should have Nomination in you^
Elections: To wit, Men whom you know, or believe (by their testimon^ whose
fidelity you suspect not) to be of upright conversations, unrepro^able (as
far as humane frailty will permit) prudent, stout, impartial, sober^
well-experienced, Lovers of their Country, grave, meek, humble, religious and
rather eminent for their virtues and abilities, then for their wealth, birth or
titles: And, yet not so poor or mean, as to make their persons liable t^
contempt, or in danger to be exposed to a temptation through extreme
necessities. Of these qualifications being assured, or at least well persuaded
by good information (and not wilfully deceiving your selves, or negligently
permitting others to deceive you) proceed cheerfully to an Orderly Election;
and commit the event to God, without distrust of his blessing therein that his
merciful providence may supply that, wherein your weakness (...)
improvidence may fail: and questionless, a good event will follow.

For, when our ways we prudently dispose,
God crowns our hopes, or better things bestows.
But, you will say, perhaps, evil customs have so disordered your Elections,
that though you have considered the danger of making Choice (...) Random; or,
according to their persuasions, who abused your credulity and simplicity
heretofore: and, though you are also truly desirous to regulate your choice
according to good Advise: yet, so much is ascribed to Custom (though evil)
And, the corruption and cunning of those who are most powerful in managing
those Elections may be such, that the well-affected shall be over-borne; or
those contrivances perhaps practiced, whereby your Votes may be nevertheless
transferred to a wrong Party; as it has often happened ^n times past.

To prevent this, I will offer to consideration, what I have conceived may be
helpful against such fraud or falsehood; and conducing to the regulating of
your Elections for the time to come: And (though the wisdom of this generation
may, perhaps, deride it) I shall not repent the proposal thereof: because I am
assured it will avail to the public security, and shall be both entertained
with approbation, and practiced with good effects, when the time comes in
which this Kingdom must be restored to that happiness, which we have lost;
and shall be made blessed, by that Reformation which we desire. My Propositions
are these.

1 That at your conventions of the Freeholders or Burgers, to elect Knights of
the Shire, or Burgesses, no man's presence may be admitted of, but his who is
interested in your Elections: For, they who intermeddle imper^inently, in other
men's matters, do very seldom busy themselves to an honest purpose.

2 That no man be permitted at such meetings, (before or after choice made) to
provide banquets, or make costly preparations, for their entertainment, by whom
they are chosen: for, it is a kind of embracing his chosers; and to me it seems
an unproper Complement (if nothing were corruptly intended) that he who confers
the benefit, should be at the charge of giving Thanks; for, he that is Elected
undertakes the service for his Electers.

3 That either at, or before the times of meeting about your Elections, you
confer together, and take care, thoroughly to inform your selves, what persons
you know, or by common Fame, conceive to be fittest, to serve the Republike,
for your several Counties or Buroughs, according to the directions
afore-expressed; and that you then give in the names of so many as are
conceived, and agreed upon, by a considerable number of voices, worthy to be
presented (be they more or less) rejecting none, who shall be so brought in.
And if two are to be chosen, let four of them, and if one, let two, which have
the most voices, make trial by Lot, to whether of them God will be pleased to
dispose the place, or places, to be supplied: so, both God and man, concurring
in their Elections, much corruption thereby will be prevented: and, where man's
judgment fails to make a right Election, Gods providence (if he has any
pleasure in us) will correct your errors; and if he has decreed our
destruction, what will it the more, or less, profit us, that we choose our own
Destroyers, by that means?

This determination of Election by Lots, though it may now seem new, was
warrantably practiced by the lews, in the election of their first King, as
appears, 1 Samuel 10.20. For, the Tribe of Benjamin was chosen, and Saul, out of
that Tribe, by Lot, before the Kingdom was established upon him. The like
course was taken, to supply the room of Judas, the apostate Apostle (eve^ in
those Primitive times, wherein the Gift of discerning Spirits, was conferred,
in greatest measure:) and after the Congregation of Believers had chosen out
from among the Disciples those two, whom (according to out ward appearance)
they judged fittest for the Apostleship, Matthias was elected by lot, out of
those two; perhaps, to be a pattern to succeeding times, in wha^ manner they
might best make choice of Officers, for prevention of a parti^^ election. And
doubtless, this way, of electing by lot, was, in after-ages, purposely
disallowed, omitted, and changed, as superstitious, by the fraud and
corruption, of those Priests and Prelates, who perceived, that, if such
practice should be approved and persisted in, as warrantable; it would neither
be easy, nor possible for them, to keep the disposure of Dignities, an^
Preferments, in their own power, for the advantage of themselves, and their
Favorites; by which they had wanted the chief pillar in their Antichristian
structure. This, other Politicians observing, the Civil Magistate, in mos^
States, learned their subtilty, and have followed, ever since, their example in
vilifying or neglecting lots; and in electing of temporal Officers, according
to such means, or Votes, as may bring in whom they please, and effect that
which will be most advantageous to their particular ends. Which no^ profitable
policy being discovered, if now elections by lot, were again revived, and
practiced in the choice both of Ecclesiastical, and Temporal Officers, it
might be a means to restore honesty and piety to their primitive being, in
Church and Commonwealth; where Officers have hither to been arbitrarily
chosen, by their corrupt Superiors, and Patrons, for private ends

Take this Overture into your consideration, as you see cause (for, I predit no
further) and therewithal, if you like the motion, take heed that your bose not
lots, to determine what is already determined, or determinable by the Word of
God, by positive humane Laws, or by common reason; and, beware also that ye
make not God an Vmpire in trivial and indifferers things, which are at your
own free choice: for, that were a sinful temptation of God, and a profanation
of that Ordinance, which, being considerably and rightly used, may be a means
of much good, and of preventing much evil. For, if the Kings Majesty, Supreme
Magistrates, Officers of State, Patrons of Church Livings, and other who claim
the disposure of the profits and executions of all places in Church and
Commonwealth, could possibly be persuaded to resign to the Church, and to
their Country respectively (and unto whom by most ancient right they
appertain) a free election or nomination of Officers to all public places;
referring all such particular elections to those unto whom, by calling, they
most properly belong; doubtless honest and experienced men would be still
preferred. Yea, should we refer to the Votes of both Houses of Parliament (when
they sit) or to the Votes of the Privy Counsel, they not sitting, the
nomination of all Officers of State, whose places are void? To the Sergeants at
Law, the voting of Judges, Chiefe-Justices, and such like Officers: To the
Benchers of the Innes of Court, the voting of Sergeants: To Clerks of the
Chancerie, and of other Courts, the voting of their chief Officers: To
Freeholders and Burgers, the voting of Knights and Burgesses, according to
their lawful customs: To the Universities, being first purged, the voting of
sending forth able Persons for the Ministry, when Church Livings are void: To
the Ministers within a certain limit, wherein Livings of greatest value are
vacant, the vo^ing of removing thither such persons from inferior Cures, who
are most eminently deserving in the Church: And so proceed in all other
nominations or elections considerat is considerandis; and then let the final
determination of the said elections and nominations be concluded, as it shall
please Gods providence to dispose of them by Lot; It seems very probable that,
by this means the Reformation we desire would be much facilitated, yea half
effected; and that most of the corruptions now complained of both in the Church
and Commonwealth, would be beaten down at one blow. For, if this course might
be taken, there would be no admission of ignorant and Symoniacall Pastors;
there would not be so easy an entrance for bribing-Magistrates, or other
corrupt Officers; Men would neither so glory or trust in Riches, as they do;
because their trash would be able to purchase nothing but things of it own
value: Honesty, Knowledge, Piety, and other Virtues, would be more accounted
of, more studied, and more practiced; as most conducible to our well-being
here, and to our happiness hereafter: and men viciously inclined, or
unprofitably spending their times, would by degrees become more conscionable,
or more ashamed of their courses.

Perhaps good and discrect men may, at first hearing, stumble at this: but,
sure I am, incurable Fools, and incorrigible Knaves, will be mad at the
motion, and never condescend thereunto. For, if they should put their
preferments to God and their Country, they would have little hope of
advancement: And therefore I neither expect their Vote in this Matter, nor
their approbation of this Letter, for being an Instrument to offer unto
consideration: Proposition so mischievous to their constitution. Howsoever, the
Overturn is now made, and tendered in public; Valent ut valere potest. Perhaps
it comes forth in a good season: if not, God has another time for it, whereto
I refer it, and the effects thereof to his good pleasure.

I will now conclude these my Letters of Advise, with that which must be the
beginning of your Elections; even with a heart lifted up in prayer to God the
Father, for a blessing on your endeavors; and, with an earnest desire, that
you may make choice of such men, as may be fitly qualified with natural
abilities, for the well discharging of that trust which you repose in them;
and, by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the sanctification of his holy
Spirit, be so furnished, and so separated, for the work which they shall be
called unto; that they may be a means of bringing peace again into our
Borders, even that Peace which passes all understanding; and which shall
prevail, to the establishing of Truth, and to the introduction of that
Kingdom, for which we patiently attend. Amen.

The Postscript.
AS I was about to make up these LETTERS, I remembered (by what I have observed,
and by such complaints as I have heard) how possible it is, through the great
hypocrisy now reigning, that, when your best endeavors have been used in
these Elections, many Members may nevertheless be chosen, whose performances
of their duties will be wilfully unanswerable to your just expectations;
(especially when by a long Session, or Parliament, the worst affected shall
find means how they may se urely know and serve each other, by secret
compliances, for their private advantages, to the public damage; or by
conceiving themselves so invested with an irrevocable Trust, that they are
above control?) And, when I called, like wise, to mande, how many (since this
Parliament began) seeming excellent Patriots at the first, have after turned
Faces about, for want or right affections, and good Principles, to the great
grief and amazement of their honest Friends; And how many accounted wise,
upright, stout and religious (yea, and some after they had been deeply engaged,
both by acting, and suffering for the best Cause) have afterward, through
sottish folly, fear, delusion, or dishonestie, ^^aggered, and fallen totally
from their first and just Resolutions; I thought (...) sitting upon these:
considerations, to add, by way of Postscript, a line or waine touching your
duties after choice made, for the better prevention of that general
destruction of our Liberties, which is threatened, by the spreading ^f that
pestilent Gangrieve. And my Advise to such purpose is briefly this.

When you have elected such as you conceive well qualified for the public
^ervice, you must as well endeavor to keep them, as to choose them such, by
^aving always a watchfull-eye over their demeanours, both in their private,
and public duties, and actions, so far forth as in civilitie, and without
inju^ie, they can be pried into. To that end, you must observe their
Associates, with whom they most converse; you must observe to whom they are
most ^inde; of whose affairs they are most zealous; in whose defense they
often^st and most readily appear, to whom they have hear Relations, of
strictst obligements: you must observe likewise, what Fame reports of their
affection or disaffection, to those Courses or Propositions which concern the
Commonalty; least you loose a Trustee before you be aware. Moreover, you ^ust
take notice of their diligence, prudence, faithfulness, or stoutnesse in ^our
Service, to cherish it by due thankfulness and acknowledgements; and ^f their
apparent negligence or failings; that if they be not unpardonably de^tructive,
they might be awakned and lovingly admonished, as there shall because, by
discreet and respective expresses from the Body of your Coun^ies or
Corporations; by whom they were chosen: remembering them lovingly (if they
forget it) that though they are above you, being joined to our whole
Representative-Bodie; yet (being considered apart in their single capacities)
they are servants and inferiors to their respective Counties and Buroughs;
and that, by them, they may be called to account, for every omission or
commission worthy questioning; either before the present Parliament whereof
they are Members, or before the next that shall be summoned: And doubt^esse,
that High-Court will commend and thank you for so doing.

This is your privilege by the supreme Law, called Salus Populi, which ^s the
most ancient, and most undeniable Charter, yea the sum of all the Charters in
the world, tending to the preservation of humane Society: and whosoever goes
about to take from you the benefit of this Law, is not only (...) Traitor in
the highest degree; but (against him so endeavoring) does make ^lso every
thing, without exception, to be lawful, which is necessary to the
establishment and preservation thereof. By this Law the Parliament humbly
requires of the King, that which pertains to it own and our safety, (...) the
preservation of those Privileges which are essential thereto; and, b^ the
same Law you may freely petition for, and boldly claim from all Parliaments,
whatsoever is necessary for the general safety; and from this Parliament in
particular, without fear of denial: For, I can witness their encouragement
hereunto, by their cheerfully accepting of, and by their open return of thanks
for Petitions in that kind.

Now therefore, to crown your Elections, and to secure your own safety if there
be any of your Knights or Burgesses whom you know, or probabl^ suspect to be
unfaithful in their Trust, by holding intelligence with your ^nemies; by doing
his duty negligently, or not at all; by complying or pl^^ting with Malignants
(as in the conspiracies and apostacies of Waller, H^tham, and such like) by
protecting, countenancing, or concealing dangerou^ Delinquents; by cunningly
obstructing the course of Justice, or Proposi^^ons tending to the common
welfare, or advance of Piety, and good manne^ by distracting or dividing the
Ministers or Agents of Parliament in their ex^cution of their Ordinances; by
discountenancing, opposing, or displacing those from employment in the public
service, who have given eminen^ proofs of their uprightness, fidelity, and
good affection to their Country If, I say, any whom you have chosen, shall
have by these, or by any such li^^ courses, justly caused jealousies to arise;
let (according to equity, and you^ late Covenant) information be speedily
exhibited against them, with such proofs and probabilities as you have thereof:
that such may be purged, or removed, and others (if need be) elected in their
steads; for the abating (...) your fears, and for the prevention of your
detriments; either of which (...) considerable motives.

By this Course you shall make those perhaps, who will grow over-bo^^ with your
Trust, to act more honestly for fear, if not for Conscience: An^ every
faithful Knight and Burgess in the House will be both advantage^ and well
pleased to have this band applied to keep their loose companion^ closer to
their duty; yea they will think themselves the safer in their work when they
perceive your eyes are open to watch for them, and to take care that they be
not undermined and betrayed by those whom you have sent (...) among them. If
the rest be offended, you need not care; and for my part (...) do not; though I
know they will be vexed at my Advice, and do me what secret mischief they can.

If you neglect this course, and this care overlong; the Malignant Party wi^^
perhaps, be as prevalent in the Houses of Parliament, as they have been in the
Kingdom: and, either peremptorily cast forth your just Suits and Com^^aints,
or else make them miscarrie, or be quite stifted, by Committees neg^cting them;
or else prepared and misinformed, to make them tedious, if not mischievous, to
the Petioners. Such things have been possible heretofore, and see no such
amendment among us, but that such things may be as possible ^ereafter.
Therefore, practice according to this Counsel, and do it quickly, before it be
too late; and yet better too late then never: For, if we must perish, is more
noble and more manlike, to sink discharging our duties with cou^^ge; then to
shrink from them, and fall sneakingly, with fear.

Much more I have to say: but, Sin and Pride
Yet, cannot well, the voice of Truth abide.
So wicked, or so good, we are not grown,
To hear that said, which must, ere long, be known;
Nor will self-love take warning, care or heed,
(By what is part) to help what may succeed.
Nor will I further urge it, till I see,
My labors will to better purpose be.
Malignant Falsehood, and Detraction, too,
Have parts to play, and some black works to do
Which must be done, and undone, (...)
With profit, publish that which must befall:
And, then (though never so wise our Charmings are)
The Scorners, and Deafe-Adders will not hear;
But scoff, and persecute me, till their spite.
Have scowr'd off all my rust, and made me white.
Gods violls powred-forth; yet, makes not them
So ready to repent, as to blaspheme.
His Hammer does not soften, but obdure:
The Bile must break, before the Cere-cloth cure:
For, while the Plague Sore swells, the Patient grows
So mad, he takes his friends to be his foes:
And will not be advised, till he leaves
His ravings, and Gods-marks on him, perceives.
But, when my hour is come, will be bold
To speak, what I am prompted to unfold.
For, therefore was I borne; yea therefore, yet
I live, to tell men that which they forget.
And, though but few regard what now I say,
Some do; and most men will, another day.
Your true-speaking, and faithful Servant, and REMEMBRANCER, Geo. Wither.

Printed by R. A. 1644.


