Witnesses produced AGAINST Mr. JOHN SHAW of Hull, Attesting the Public Charge
against him, and much more.

AS, To be A notable Turncoat and Time-server; Most scandalous in his actions;
An enemy to good men; And A disquieter of the peace of the place, etc.


SERVING For the Undeceiving of some, Informing of others, and satisfying of
all, as to the condition of the aforesaid M. SHAW.

By one who hopes and waits, to see Corrupt men, and Unjust things, less
countenanced, and more suppressed.

PROVE. 11. 10. When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices: and
when the wicked perish, there is shouting.

Printed at London, 1653.

READER,
THat thou may understand what necessity there was of publishing these Papers
which by Providence came to my hands, thou art desired to take notice that Mr.
John Can, in a book entitled A voice from the Temple, has in a marginal
note affirmed Mr. Shaw to be a Turncoat and Time-server, a corrupt man, etc.
Whereupon Mr. Shaw went to some in Authority, and made his complaint to them.
What satisfaction Mr. Shaw has had in private, it is not known; only he
reports that he is quitted of the Crimes, reputed a very honest man, and Mr.
Can cast and lost in his reputation with his friends at Court. This, and much
more then this, has Mr. Shaw and his adherents given out, in Town and City,
with unmeasurable boasting and insulation.

Now in regard (not in reference to Mr. Can, but) that the truth may no
longer suffer, honest and good men be abused, and those who are corrupt and
naught, hardened in their evil ways; I take it my duty to publish these things,
as knowing no other way (as the case now stands) to have truth and innocence
cleared and justified, and the mouth of iniquity stopped.

And howsoever particular persons are here mentioned, as M. Can and M. Shaw;
yet the truth is, the matter is of public concernment, and takes in, as the
interest of honest men, the Cause of Christ and his Churches in this Nation,
(to which M. Shaw has been an old professed enemy:) so it is to discover and
break in pieces a self-interest, and corrupt design, which has been too long
carried on by a late prevailing party, in oppressing the poor, and obstructing
justice.

As for M. Shaw, I pity him, and pray for him, and shall be glad if these
things which he himself has occasioned to be published, may do his soul good.
But I shall not keep the Reader any longer from the particulars: only let him
observe them well, and then judge.

A Letter written by Mr. Shaw, to his good Lord and Master the Archbishop of
York. The Original is in Hull to be seen, under his own hand and seal; the
superscription thus:

For the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of York his Grace,
Primate of England, and Metropolitan, these present.
The Letter word for word, follows.
Most Reverend Father in God:
MY own unfitness at present to travel, joined with some pressing business of
my own, compel me to this boldness, and (except your Grace pardon it)
unmannerly presumption, thus to importune your Grace by a Messenger with this
my Petition. I had resolved ere now, according to my duty, to have waited on
your Grace; but still hoped for more peaceable times to do it in. In the
interim, I am informed that the city of York presented a Petition to the Lord
Keeper on my behalf, for a presentation to the Rectory of Alhallows in York;
and another to your Grace, for your consent to their humble desire, your
approbation of me, and your Graces Certificate accordingly to the Lord Keeper.
And that your Grace would be pleased to excuse my necessitated absence, to
pardon this my boldness in sending this Messenger, for the speedy satisfaction
of the said honorable Lord Keeper; and to afford to me your Certificate to my
Lord Keeper, is my Who but a Time-server would beg thus (...) a Benefice? ^e 1 Samuel 2. 36.
humble suit at present. I know innocence it self is not free from accusation;
therefore may I be subject to slanders. Note how he suffers in his good name,
and for what.
I hear some have presented me to your Grace as no friend to the Kings Majesty
or Episcopacie: BOTH WHICH ARE SO NOTORIOUSLY FALSE, that whoever reports them,
either mistook me or their own conscience: which thing, if need were, THE WHOLE
And so they will, as to be the greatest Turn coat in Yorkshire, insomuch as it
is become a Proverb, John Shaw the Turn-coat.
COUNTRY WILL EVIDENCE AND DECLARE. Thus in all humility and duty (though in
haste) relying upon your Graces clemency and bounty, and encouraged by your
many wonted favors to the Clergy and Learning it self; I humbly crave your
approbation and certificate by this bearer, and assuredly No lie.
am

Rotheram, August 22. 1642. Your Graces most faithful servant, and daily
Orator, John Shaw.


I shall not comment on the Letter. M. Shaw was true to the Proverb, and has
learned it by heart.

Dum fueris Romae, Romano vivito more:
Si fueris alibi, vivito ficut ibi.
But this was ( So he told his Excellency.
he says) in the days of his ignorance, and when he knew no better. And in
this we may believe him: for had he known that Monarchy and Episcopacie would
have been so soon laid aside, he would not have acted so basely and grossly for
them as he did, specially the later, as appears by that which follows.

Sir,
I Cannot deny your desire of the discovery of my knowledge concerning M. John
Shaw, though I had rather have reserved it till I was called thereto.

I have known him about thirty years, before he was a Preacher; and I have seen
some of his ways, and heard of many at that time along. He was never to my
knowledge looked upon by any that were truly godly, as a man of any
consideration, but rather an enemy to the Truth, and persecutor of it, and the
sincere professors of it: Unless for a while he did deceive a few of
well-minded people at York, with his fair (though deceitful) appearances. He is
altogether looked upon in the West parts of York shire, as a coverous and
worldly man, cruel with his There is mention made in our Chronicles of one John
Shaw Clerk, for all the world like him. It is worth the while to compare these
two Time-servers together. See Speed, p. 705. Book of Martyrs.
Tenants: an oppressor and hard dealer with those he has had to do, either in
debts of his own, or of such as his father had left him.

He was always a conformable man in the days of the Bishops, and a pleader for
the Innocent Ceremonies (as he uses to call them) and a sharp inveigher against
tender-spirited men in those days, who did refuse conformity and subscription
to them.

I have not known him by any, either of them that were within, or of them that
were without, looked upon as a man of a good and Let those to whom he is
reported to be an honest man, consider the persons who they are that give on
such a report of him.
pure conscience; but always a complyer to the ruling times, and to great men,
of what condition soever; and with men of Religion, for his own worldly
advantage, etc.

This is what at present I can present unto you, and shall be ready to discover
particulars as to the making good of these in due time, when I shall be called
thereunto, and in the while am

Your humble servant, R. A.


We have his character here in brief, so clearly and fully related, as I shall
add nothing to it; only there are hundreds which know the same to be true,
and are ready to bear witness to it of their own knowledge. The Guises took the
Romish part, not for any Religion which they cared for, but being the stronger
side, by which they might get both credit, honor, preferment: so M. Shaw I
have heard some who know him well to say, that if it were to read the Massbook,
or Alcoran, he would do it for profit, such is the covetousness of his heart.
all along has run with the times, right or wrong: like a flying fish, if
preferment be among the birds, he is ready to flee after it, with the birds;
and if it be among the fishes, then among the fishes he will swim after it. But
to proceed.

There was published in print a scandalous pamphlet against M. John Can,
entitled, The humble Petition of diverse well affected persons within the Town
of Kingston upon Hull: the which being seen by the Officers of the Gason there,
they immediately drew up this Petition, and sent the same to his Excellency,
in the words following.

To his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell: The humble Petition of the
Officers of the Carison, and diverse well-affected persons in the Town of
Kingston upon Hull,
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners having lately seen in this place a Petition in print,
intimating, in the names of diverse pretended well affected persons, a grateful
acknowledgement of your Excellencies successful sorvices; further intimating
provocations put on them, for the vindication of their Pastor M. Shaw, against
the accusations of M. John Can, whose pains, approved fidelity, and
experienced piety, should we not endeavor to justify, and witness with and to
the world, we should not only show our selves slothful, in the silent
suffering of Religion, honesty, and innocence to be traduced; but also fail in
the discharge of our duties to your Excellency, to whom we owe an account of
our experiences in the particulars of this place, so publicly importing.

Therefore, that we may not trouble your Excellency with recriminations in the
like kind, which we might in many respects multiply, we shall only pray, That
the Articles which are or will be shortly exhibited against Mr. Shaw, may by
persons in this place approved for piety and fidelity, be This he will never
yield to.
examined and certified, that so it may appear who have been the greatest
sufferers, or who have lain under the greatest and justest Taxations, who have
been the most pure and pious dispensers of holy Ordinances, who the most
powerful and Evangelical Preachers, who the freest from hypocrisy, griping,
covetousness, self-seeking, time-serving, carnal Gospelling, worldly
mindedness, or undermining; who the most impudent oppressor, and opposer of
Gods people, or belyer of the Truth, in pretending a public charge of the
Parliament, for supporting the one or other party; who have been herein the
most innocent, pious, or impartial, that they may have protection, without the
testimony of these three worthy persons (yet by your power suppressed) to whom
Mr. Shaw is so well known, and without whose contradiction, vote, verdict, or
resolution, (blessed be God) we now believe his mistaken innocence may receive
a sentence and EXPULSION FROM THIS PLACE, where his spirit or impiety has
heretofore (to the disturbance of the peace of this place) so powerfully
prevailed.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Robert Overton, Rich. Elton, James
Greenlesd, William Fugil, Edward Bradshaw, Thomas Rakes, Robert Luddington,
Robert Leppington, James Thomas, W. Elward, Mr. Waterhouse, Edw. Rigge, Thomas
Brown, John Laten, Jo. Smith, Rich. Hogg, John Graves, John Maultby, Joseph
Rakes, Robert Winter, Thomas Richerson, George Calter, Joseph Custis, Lancelet
Gibson, Edward Andrews, William Fugil, John Fugil, William Newhouse, A. Nead,
John Aacon, Abr. Stracie, John Daffurn.



As I observe the close of this Petition, how they desire M. Shaws expulsion
from the place, for the peace and safety of it; it makes me to remember a
speech of a gallant Captain, when there was a hot debate between Caefar' s and
Pompey' s soldiers, he cries out often to them, Nil nisi Caesaris capite
delato: Never speak of peace (says he) if Caesar's head be not taken away. So I
understand to be the opinion of the Officers of that Garrison, Mr. Shaw having
there beaded a faction, the same must be broken, to settle a firm peace among
the people.

Concerning the Articles mentioned in the Petition, they are these.

I. That M. John Shaw is reputed a very time-serving and self-seeking This was
his constant course a little while before the Bishops were put down, as 100
will testify.
man; witness his siding with the Bishops in one place, and his speaking
against them in another, according to the disposition of the place and persons
amongst whom he preached. For howsoever in the Letter to his Lords Grace of
York, he professes himself to be for the King and Epis copacie; yet at the
same time, where he saw the people would bear the contrary, he would speak
against the same things. Hence it is, that the Bishop in his answer to the
Letter (the original of which is likewise in Hull) tells him that there are
some particulars spread abroad about him, and Note, the Bishop would not
believe him.
desires to be resolved by him. I shall set down the very words.

1. Whether you did stir and act an endeavoring to get hands to alter
Episcopacie, and the Government Ecclesiastical, contrary to your vow in your
Ordination. 2. Whether you did preach out of your Pulpit unto your Auditory,
particularly not to choose Sir William Savil Knight of the Shire. Which surely
was no Pulpit-matter, nor a theme any way tending to save souls. 3. Whether you
are at present (whatsoever opinion you were of) conformable to his Majesty's
Laws Ecclesiastical, wherein you know your Ordinary must be satisfied, before
you can be instituted.
II. He has frequently opposed the Garrisons Chaplains He was an open and known
enemy to Mr. Oxenbridge, for witnessing against his corrupt ways. Mr.
Oxenbridge found him a malicious enemy to him.
M. Oxenbridge and M. Can in the exercise of their Ministry, which he has
by his scandalous accusations endeavored to asperse, and also to disappoint
them of a place to teach in, urging others in Authority to do the like.

III. He has bitterly reproached the Army, as guilty of Herefie, Blasphemy,
Schism; whereby diverse have undoubtedly been alienated in their judgments and
affections from the Army and their adherents.

IIII. Upon the Scots Army coming into England, Mr. Shaw set up his
Presbyterian Government, and prayed in these or the like words: Lord, there are
two Armies now in the field, they both pretend thy Cause; its not in man to
judge, give thou a perfect let. Major John Bourn was present when he prayed to
this purpose.

V. His underhand complaints against the Governor, during the * He is noted
generally for a most perfidious person.
time of his pretended friendship to him; his supplanting Mr. Styles of the
Vicarredge and Charterhouse; whilst with Crocodile tears he seemed to deplore
his departure from this place: his insinuation with persons in place and power,
with their mutual serving one another ends and aims at London, and in the
Country, are not unknown.

VI. His oppression of the poor, and beating of the blind man; wherein he
behaved himself more like St. George, then like St. John. His profering to
forswear what was found by the Jury, and evidenced upon Oath in open Court, are
of notable, if not How he has most wretchedly sorsworn himself, thou shall
find in its due place hereafter.
abominable memory.

VII. His threatening a poor blind member of the Hospital, for complaining to
the Parliament against him; his thrusting him forth of the Hospital by the
shoulders, bidding him go again to the Parliament, discharging him of his pay
and place; although he had no power by the Donors will so to do: with other
unchristian practices and oppressions will evidence, and upon examination make
appear, how Episcopal, how Prelatical, how Presbyteran, how Arbitrary, how
Oppressive, how Proud and obstinate a spirit he is of.

Neither did the Officers of the Garrison, and other Godly and well-affected
persons in Hull, think themselves bound to appear in the Vindication of Mr.
Can from that false and scandalous libel, and to lay open the impiety and
baseness of Mr. Shaw; but the M. Shaw was so impudent as to affirm, before col.
Lassels and M. S. Nicholas that he had a Letter from this same Church: the
which he knew was a lie.
Church of Christ inhabiting in the said Town, presently hereupon gave in
likewise their testimony and witness, in these words following.

To his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell. The humble Address of the Church
of Christ of Hull: for and on the behalf of Mr. John Can Chaplain to the
Garrison.
May it please your Excellency,
THe manifold advantages which the good people of this Nation have through the
blessing of God received by your means, is, and ever shall be thankfully
acknowledged by us, and is matter of encouragement to this present application:
And we count it a great mercy, that God has given you a heart so ready at all
times to comply with the desire of his people, having made you as an Angel of
God, to discern between things and things.

Upon which consideration, and the sense of our duty, we are constrained to
present those ensuing lines to your Excellency, in the behalf of our Christian
friend Mr. Can, whom we conceive to be extremely traduced, in a Paper which
we have seen in print, entitled, A Petition of diverse well-affected persons
within the Town of Kingston upon Hull: of which Petition, and the persons
therein concerned, we shall say little, it being not our purpose to defile our
selves with raking into the puddle of other men's faults, (though too much might
be said) but shall rather leave the examination of Mr. Shaw's business to such
as shall be designed for that work. Neither shall we reflect any thing upon our
Magistrates, which the subscribers so much applaud; hoping the Supreme
Authority will settle such a Magistracy in the Nation, as shall not be
opposers, but encouragers of the godly party, and such as will best suit with
the Government of this Commonwealth. Nor shall we insert how much we judge that
Petition does It is said Dr. Witty was Penman of that Pamphlet, a known
treacherous enemy to the proceedings of the Army all along. This is be that
kept a vapouring when our Army went first into Scotland, and would lay wagers
we should be all destroyed
reflect upon your Excellency and Council of Officers late proceeding in the
dissolution of the late Parliament, the expression being so obvious to every
eye, and like an open Casement lets you see the sense thereof. It being our
main intendment to give in our testimony concerning Mr. John Can, whom they
have endeavored to render odious, not only to your Excellency, but to the
world; and so at once weaken his reputation with those that have been your
Excellencies truest well-wishers.

We could no longer sit still, lest by our silence we should be found betrayers
of his integrity. We are bold to witness with him, and of him, that, to our
knowledge, since his abode amongst us, (which has been some years last past)
he has diligently, (and, so far forth as we can judge, faithfully) and
laboriously preached the Gospel, and opened the mysteries of the Kingdom, to
the profit and comfort of those that have heard him; and was at all times, and
upon all occasions, a clear owner of the work of God in this age, as foreseeing
it all along; and both publicly and privately manifested his good affection
thereto, and that upon the purest grounds, without any self-advantage thereby,
as was sufficiently manifested by his constant pains in preaching, though he
met with great discouragement, his pay being detained for many months together,
which was all that he had for the livelihood of himself and family. It would be
too large to call in his owning of persecuted Truths under Episcopacie, and his
Which was almost 17 years, occasioned by such time-servers as was Shaw and the
like.
long banishment, by reason thereof, from his native Country, in which time he
suffered great hardship, with much patience and constancy; which may be a
sufficient restimony of his piety and integrity.

All which we leave to your Excellencies most pious and serious consideration,
desiring he may be encouraged and looked upon accordingly; being convinced in
our judgments, that he M. Shaw was so impudent, as to affirm before the
General, that the cause of Mr. Canne's opposing him, was to get away from him
the Charter House. An untruth for which he has no color or pretense.
intends and seeks nothing, but that all injustice and oppression may be
removed, and that righteousness may take place.

This we took our selves bound to certify on his behalf, as Christian duty
becoming us, and not out of any other relation which we have to him. We shall
no further presume upon your Excellency, but subscribe our selves

Your Excellencies humble servants, Robert Luddington, Robert Overton, Edward
Atkinson, Tim. Lumm, Robert Leppington, John Pecket, Lawrence Scortreth, George
Kitchen, John Eethel, Edward Andrews senior, John Daffurn, Boaz Britain, Thomas
Kent, Ralph Casse, Elckar Pots, George Hill, George Norwood, Michael Hogg,
Joshua March, Anthony Dickon, Edward Andrews jun.



Concerning that scandalous Pamphlet which the Officers of the Garrison and the
Church mention in their Petitions, it is necessary that something be added, to
the end the matter may be the better understood.

1. As it was published, so it was no other then a scandalous Libel, there
being no man's hand or name put to it; only said subscribed by abundance of
godly and honest men, etc. but it seems he that put forth the thing, was
careful not to have their names known, for so their godliness and honesty would
have been called into question.

But 2. Though their names be concealed, yet (ex ungue leonem) it is easy to
ghess the condition of the men, by their reflecting upon his Excellency and
Council of Officers, as the Church does very well observe. Their own words show
what they are: As for these three eminent and He that drew up that Petition,
might rather be called Dr. Simple then otherwise: for who but a fool or worse
would so basely have slattered first his Excellency, and then the Speaker,
with one breath, their actions being so contrary, as light is to darkness.
faithful Pasriots (note Reader the men) the Speaker of the late Parliament,
Baron Thorp, and Sir Henry Vane, whom be unworthily taxes, etc. their
untainted Honors may justly require satisfaction, etc. And a little after,
refer Mr. Shaw to the testimony of these men, being well known to their Honors.
Do not these show themselves to be well-affected to the present power? But I
shall not wring this filthy sore too hard.

3. What little honesty, and less godliness, these men have, may easily appear
by their own words. For thus they say: Whose inveterate wrath to the very
calling of the Ministry in England, is known to be such, that even the
consideration of that Ordinance of God, is enough at any time to put him into a
A Doctor like expression, and worded bravely. But suppose the Dr. seeing his
ignorance and vanity thus discovered, should run himself into a fury, the
quest. then would be, whether any other Doctor had skill to make him cither
witty or sober after. I leave this to Dr. Primrose his judgment.
fury. If the Author of that Petition, and the subscribers to it, had not been
stark blind, and grossly ignorant of a Gospel-Ministery, and of the glorious
light which shines now through the nation, they would never have made themselves
so contemptible and and ridiculous to the world. For who but a company of
blind people, Popish and superstitious, will now durst appear in the behalf of
the earthly and carnal Ministry of England, as knowing that it is not Mr.
Canne's opinion alone, but it is generally held and professed by the people of
God everywhere, that the same, viz. their National Ministry (as derived from
the Pope and Prelates) is unlawful and Antichristian, a wicked plant, and
shortly to be plucked up by the root? He that touches the week of a candle,
betters and mends the light, but burns and blacks his own fingers: so these
men, whereas they thought to have dishonored Mr. Can, they have added much
to his reputation and credit, and rendered themselves to the world, as a
company of ignorant, superstitious, and blind people: For what man that is
spiritual, reading their words, but must needs conclude thus, or to this
purpose: The Doctor that drew this, was very simple, and may for his work sake
be fitly styled Dr. SIMPLE. And the subscribers to it, as ignorant and blind as
the Doctor. All of them still in Babylon, under the yoke of Antichrist and deep
superstition.

4. Though we find not their names to the printed Painphlet, yet we may easily
ghess who the persons are, by this expression; Mr. Shaw has been a pious and
painful labourer in the Ministry among us. For his piety, I leave that to the
Testimony and witness here asserted: But that he is a painful labourer, those
that hear him, know the contrary, as his matter to be merely formal, legal,
liveless, not in the demonstration of the Spirit and power of God. Besides, it
is not unknown, that the stories, and low things which he has, is still one
and the same; changes often his Text, but not the matter; Like a scarecrow in
a Garden or field to fright Birds: because it moves not, the Birds are not
afraid of it: so his matter being colworts often sod, nothing new but what they
have heard him deliver Ask Robert Wilson how often he has heard him to preach
one and the same thing over and over,
10. 20. 100. times before; its rather a burden to the people then any way
profitable. If the subscribers had not been either some ignorant people as do
not know what a painful labourer in the Ministry is, or some that are basely by
assed by a corrupt faction in the Town, they would not have set their hands to
a thing so known untrue. For he has not to this day opened the great secrets
and mysteries of the Gospel, but rather been an enemy thereunto, and to such as
do believe and embrace the same. But to proceed to further testimony.

In the sixth Article before, there is mention made of Mr. Shaw his beating a
blind man, and proffering to forswear the same. As this is a remarkable thing,
and a business of high concernment; so it is necesiary that it be plainly and
truly related.

When Mr. Shaw was before his Exceilencie, in the presence of Major * He laid
his hand on Major General Harrisons shoulder, to show what he did, as only a
bare touching of him, and professed be did no more to the blind man, then be
did to him.
General Harrison, and Colonel Tomlinson: so again afterward to Colonel Lassels
and Mr. St. Nicholas, he made most dreadful imprecations; as taking God to
witness, and wishing that he might not see the face of God, or go out of the
room, if he did beat the man, push him, or throw him down, but only laying his
hand softly on his shoulders, desired, or bid him depart: this he protested and
took God to witness was all that he did. Mr. Can told him at the same time
that he trembled to hear him, as knowing that he forswore himself, and what he
said was against his own knowledge and conscience, a sinning presumptuously,
and with a high hand. And that this is so, to wit, that Mr. Shaw in all his
protestations, imprecations, execrations, has spoken falsely, we shall make it
evident by the testimonies and proofs following. The form of the Indictment
which was found by the Note, howsoever those of the Jury were Mr. Shaws
chiefest friends, yet could not but find him guilty, the proof being so full
and clear.
Jury against Mr. Shaw is thus.

AT the General Sessions of the Public peace holden at Kingston upon Kingston
upon Hull.
Hull, upon Thursday the one and twentieth day of April, in the year of our
Lord One thousand six hundred fifty three, in the Guild Hall of the said Town,
before John Rogers Mayor of the Town of Kingston upon Hull, William Lister
Esquire, Recorder of the same Town, Thomas Raikes, Henry Barnard, Nicholas
Denman, Joseph Blaids, William Popple, William Peck, William Dobson, Francis
Dewick, John Raye, Richard Wood, and Lancelot Roper, Aldermen of the same
Town, Keepers of the public peace, and also Justices by the Keepers of the
Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament, to hear and determine diverse
Felonies, Trespasses, and other misdemeanors committed within the Town and
County of Kingston upon Hull aforesaid: Amongst other things it was then
presented Quere, How those men of the Jury upon Oath could find this
Indictment against M. Shaw, and yet say in their Petition to his Excellency,
that they have not known him guilty of any scandalous actions which might
deserve justice to pass against him. The General is too wise to be deceived by
such men.
upon the Oath of Robert Pease, William Ramsden, Richard Wilson, John Crowther,
Robert Moor, Augustine Jenkinson, Marmaduke Pattison, Martial Ripley, Samuel
Lightfoot, James Nettleton, Thomas Dewicke, John Harris, Richard Wood,
Marmaduke Thompson, and Robert Winter, lawful and honest men of the said Town
of Kingston upon Hull, That John Shaw of the Hospital called
Gods-House-Hospital, near Kingston upon Hull, in the County of Kingston upon
Hull Clerk, upon the Seventh day of February, in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred fifty and two, at the Gods-house-Hospital in the County of
Kingston upon Hull aforesaid, by force of Arms, to wit, with hands, clubs,
stones, and knives, in and upon Ellerker Potts of Kingston upon Hull in the
County of Kingston upon Hull aforesaid, Baker, did make an assault, and him
beat, wound, and evil entreat, and other enormities offered, against the
public peace, etc.

Witnesses sworn: Ellerker Potts, Joshua March, Will: Wakeley, Reynold Starr,
Examined by Char. Vaux, Clerk of the Peace.


What these men swore, as to the fact, and the manner how it was in the
particulars, is faithfully reported in a Letter sent to his Excellency by an
honest man, and one of the Jury. The Letter is thus, word for word.

May it please your Excellency,
I Find a great lothness upon my spirit to disturb your Excellency in your
more public and weighty Transactions, by the interposure of any particular
concernments; yet for the great love I bear to Righteousness and Truth, I
cannot be silent when at any time I behold (in my weak apprehension) any stain
or blot thereupon. And moreover, that which emboldens me at this time to
trouble your Excellency with the ensuing discourse, is, That I understood by
Mr. Can that of late there has been some debates (before your Excellency)
betwixt Mr. Can and Mr. Shaw, concerning the blind men, and their Trial in
this Court; and that at that time Mr. Shaw did Many horrible lies he then told
and no marvel if some there present did (at least in part) believe them
considering how often he called God to witness, and with what impudence and
boldness he averred those untruths which he spoke.
calumniate Mr. Can thereabouts, (which is very probable) for it is generally
reported here, that Mr. Can did ask Mr. Shaw forgiveness before your
Excellency, for his defamation of him; which is thought to come from Mr. Shaw,
but does much rejoice and lift up Mr. Shaw's friends, and astonish Mr. Canne's,
it comes forth with such confidence. Now Providence so ordered, that when Mr.
Shaw and the blind man had their Trial in our Court, viz. the 21 of April
last, that I was called to be of the Jury, and am thereupon desired to declare
the truth of the carriage of the whole business that was in Court that day, to
your Excellency; which (by Gods assistance) I shall do, so far as I remember,
or do call to mind, in every particular: viz.

The day abovesaid, one Elleker Potts prefers an Indictment against Mr. John
Shaw Clerk, for that he the 7 of February 1652. did assault and beat the said
Ellerker Potts, etc. which to make good, the said Ellerker, with three more,
were sworn, two whereof were blind men, but gave in evidence what they heard
severally; which was, That the day abovesaid being at the Charter House or
Gods-house, and there discoursing with Mr. Shaw concerning their privileges
there, Mr. Shaw fell into a great passion and rage against Ellerker Potts, and,
as they supposed, cast him violently often to the ground, thrice at the least;
and they heard a woman's voice say, Husband, what do you mean to kill the man?
(which woman they believe was Mistress Shaw;) and likewiss that they heard
Ellerker Potts son cry aloud, Oh woe is me (or to that purpose) Mr. Shaw will
kill my father. These two being heard and withdrawn, we called in the seeing
man, one There was another took his Oath before the Governor of Hull, that he
saw Mr. Shaw to throw him down.
William Wakely, who was that day employed by Mr. Shaw; whose testimony was the
same with them before, viz. that at the time aforesaid he was present, and did
This testimony will rise up in judgment against him.
see Mr. Shaw take Ellerker Potts by the shoulders, and throw him violently on
the ground; and as he got up, cast him down again three times: and that
Mistress Shaw came and took Mr. Shaw by the arm, and said, Fie, husband, do you
mean to kill the man? and also the boy, as before recited. Whereupon, the
Indicement was found. I shall not further trouble your Excellency at present,
then humbly to crave leave to subscribe my self,

Your Excellencies humble servant, and cordial well-wisher. Robert Winter.


You shall have a Blacksmith that is used to the frequent and daily handling
of Iron, hold a hot fire-coal in his hand and laugh, whilst another would roar
out: So tender are some men, that their hearts will smite them for a little:
but this man has so accustomed himself to lying, he is so hardened in it, that
his protestations, imprecations, execrations, though never so false, are not
(as it seems by this) so much as felt or apprehended by him.

And here it may not be forgotten, as to demonstrate how Another notorious lie
of his (which he fathered on Mr. Moor) was this viz. That the three blind men
should come to Mr. Moor, and there confess that they had extremely wronged Mr.
Shaw; and desired him that he would stand their friend to regain Mr. Shaws
favor: for otherwise they thought he would take away their pay, in that they
had so highly offended him: this he affirmed to the General; and that Mr. Moor
would justify it.
accustomed he is to lying: when he protested to Colonel Lassels and Mr. St.
Nicholas, that he did not beat the blind-man, push him, nor thrust him down;
he affirmed withal, that he had a Letter from Mr. Luddingtons people, which
was to clear him of the said fact, and blaming the blind-man, for his
proceeding against him: and to make this good, he took a Letter out of his
pocket, and showed it. Mr. Can asked whose hands were to it: he answered, he
would not tell him; but there was the Letter. Now how falsely he spoke in this,
let all men judge, by this which follows.

Sir,
Whereas we have seen in a Letter of yours to the Governor, dated the 7. of
July these words, viz. That Mr. John Shaw affirmed that he had under the hands
of Mr. Luddingtons people, that they did condemn the blind man and clear him;
We do hereby certify that he never had anything under the hands of the Church
(which we suppose he calls Mr. Luddingtons people) nor from any particular
member thereof. But we further affirm, that we did, and we do judge the blind
men to be wronged, as appeared in open Court.

Robert Luddington, Robert Overton, John Pecket, Ed. Atkinson, T. Lumm,
Lawrence Scortreth, George Kitchen, John Bethel, John Dafforn, Boaz Britain,
John Bess, Ant. Dikson, Richard Newton, Edw. Andrew sen. Ralf Cass, John Mudie,
George Norwood, Michael Hogg.



The thing here is not only denied, and Mr. Shaw proved a false speaker; but
withal, the whole Church witnesses against him: and for the blind men, whose
testimony I am sure will be received and credited before Mr. Shaw and his
party, who endeavor to countenance and bear him out in lying, oppression, and
other sinful practices.

One thing more I must here give a hint of, concerning a writing which Mr. Shaw
reports that Colonel Lassels and Mr. St. Nicholas gave him under their hands,
the which writing he h^^h He gave out copies of it at Stilton in his way home,
and so has done all the Country over. M. Can not knowing of any writing he
he had, till afterward.
made a great improvement of, to the public disgrace of Mr. Can everywhere.
Now I shall not meddle with the Gentlemen at all; they best know what they did,
and why. This only I testify in the behalf of Mr. Can, that in the presence
of Mr. Dove, Mr. James Nelthrop, and Colonel Gill, Mr. Can affirmed to
Colonel Lassels, that when Mr. Shaw and he were with him, he offered to prove
whatsoever he had written against Mr. Shaw, and did not deny or decline any
thing that he had published, but stood firm to the justification of all, and
every whit that was in the Book.

This Mr. Can affirmed at first, to Colonel Lassels and Mr. S. Nicholas, and
to Colonel Lassels in the hearing of the three Gentlemen named before: and
howsoever he leaves the prosecution of the business against Mr. Shaw to others
more concerned in it, yet he has seen and known, since the publishing of that
book, so much lying, for swearing, and other ungodly actions done by Mr. Shaw,
as he thinks him to be a man far worse and more corrupt then he did before,
and is persuaded that his sins are now full and ripe, and that God will
speedily lead him forth with the workers of Iniquity. And in this he is the
more confirmed by that saying of Solomon, Though hand join in hands, the wicked
shall not be unpunished; but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered,
Prove. 11. 21.

Moreover, not only is the thing thus past against him by witnesses sworn, and
the Indictment found in Court; But his own conscience (though his mouth
forsweares it) has since openly declared him guilty. And this appears as
clear as the Sun at noonday: for why else has he removed the business, from
Hull to Westminster, but in hope that the men whom he has wronged, being
blind, and so not fit to travel, and poor, and so not in a capacity to follow
the suit so far against him, he shall by this device escape the lash of Justice?

Without doubt, had he not been conscious to the evil of the fact, he would
never have removed it from that town, where he has so many friends to act for
him, as would acquit him right or wrong if they could. But he and his partakers
there see the fact to be so notorious, as that place is not for their turn, but
somewhere else (a great way off) must be chosen, where the truth may not be so
openly known and manifested against him.

Howsoever I question not, but as the Lord hitherto all Thus the untruths which
he spoke to his Excellency, his publishing a scandalous, paper against Mr. Can,
his insultations and boasting in Town and Country, of a victory which he bad
gotten, and cleared of all things laid to his charge, is by the just hand of
God, matter of shame and infamy to him.
along, has turned all his crafty and evil designs upon his own head, and
brought him to shame by his own doings, according to that in the Poet:

-- Non est lex justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
He will do the like in this. For I know Judge Rolls to be a man of so much
justice, conscience, and experience, as Mr. Shaw will not find him to be such
a man as he has formerly found some of his old Masters, viz. as corrupt and
rotten as himself; but will send him back, and the business likewise, to its
proper place, where things may be fully examined, the truth known, and the
offender receive his due and condign punishment.

There are several other complaints in my hand, as charges of high and great
misdeanours against Mr. Shaw; which I might have published, the witnesses being
ready upon oath to make good the same, viz. His This Edward Andrews will
testify.
oppression, M. Shepherd by woeful experience knows this to be true and others
too.
extortion, Mr. Ramsdel can speak out to this, whom Mr. Shaw dissuaded from
taking the Engagement.
underhand tampering with men to alienate and disaffect them from the present
Government, and causing faction and divisions among the Magistrates, and
disturbing the peace of the whole Town: but I shall forbear here to mention
them, because it is expected, that those who are in authority, for the love
which they bear to truth and righteousness, and a holy zeal to suppress
incendiaries and deceitful men, will grant a commission to some in that
Country, men of known integrity and honesty, not engaged to carry on his
design, to examine these particulars, that the truth may be known, and the man
no longer suffered in his insolences, and born out as he has been, to abuse
the best and truest friends of the State, of his Excellency, the Army, and
people of God.

And for this end, I understand there are some here, in the behalf of the
Garrison, the Church, and the honest and good people of the Town, as
endeavoring to procure such a Commission, as knowing well, if the same shall
be granted, the man will be proved worse then they have yet declared, either to
his Excellency or any other against him.

I shall conclude this discourse, with a story suitable to the subject. When
King Richard had taken in a skirmish, Philip Bishop of Bevois, a deadly enemy
of his, he caused him to be clapped up in prison, casting Iron bolts upon his
heel. Being complained of to the Pope, he writ to the King not to detain his
dear son, an ecclesiastical person, a shepherd of the Lords; but to send him
back to his flock: Hereupon the King sent his Ambassadors to the Pope, wishing
them to use the words of the Patriarch to their Father Jacob, when they had
sold their brother Joseph, and dyed his party coloured-coat in the blood of
beasts, saying, Hanc invenemus vide utrum tunica filii tui sit an non? This we
have found (and showing the Armor with which he was taken) see whether it be
the Coat of thy Son or no? No (replied the Pope) its not the Coat of my Son;
nor of my brother, but some Imp of Mars; let him procure his own freedom if he
can. The application I leave to the Reader.

FINIS.

