The Petition, and Narrative of Geo. Wither Esquire; concerning his many grievances
and long sufferings; with a Preceding Address made to the Honorable Members
of Parliament in their single Capacities, to incline them to a speedy
consideration of his Case in Parliament.
Hodie Nobis, Cras Vobis.
WE are not few that suffer; and that may
To morrow, be your Case, that is our to day
(As now the Cards are shuffl'd, Cut, and laid,
And, as the Game shall well, or ill be played.)
Give Loosers leave to speak, and, me for one,
Who make at this time my Address alone,
Without your doors, within which, I, as yet
Can, for my Prayers, no admittance get.
Of seven times ten, to spend years ten and seven
In asking for mine own, I have been driven,
And no result obtained, but, instead
Of Fish, a Scorpion, and hard Stones for Bread,
Which filled me full of thoughts, that getting vent
Orecharge the Papers, which I would present.
Yet, muse not, if my Narrative it strain
To an unusual length, and shall speak plain:
Wide wounds, must have large Plasters; When a wrong
Lasts many years, Bills of Complaint, are long,
And, sharp words, may from him, be born withal,
Whose Drink and Food are Vinegar and Gall.
I, have but one Life, and that is almost spent;
Let me not wait a time equivalent
To three men's lives, or till the Cure I crave
Comes, Physick-like, to him that is in his grave.
Nor let, by you, my Reason, at this time
Despised be, although you slight my Rhyme;
For, who ere sleights a suffrer in his sorrow,
Mine, or a worse, may be his Case to morrow,
Or, ere the storms, now threatened, are past through.
I use not to make friends; for I suppose
In Parliament, men have nor friends nor foes,
But as the Case deserves; at least, I know
That if it be not thus, it should be so;
And, wish he may with shame requited be,
Who wilfully wrongs others, though for me.
All, which within your doors, I Will ask of you
Is no more, then I freely would allow
Even to my greatest foe, and be afraid
Of what might follow, if it were delaid.
All my Requests, without your doors have been
But that some one of you would carry in
My sad Petitions; which I did in vain
Entreat for, whilst four Parliaments did reign;
For, evermore, the Commonwealths Affairs,
Or, private men's more acceptable prayers
Kept my Petitions out, though I attended
From their first sittings, till five Sessions ended.
Though, many seemed me, and my Cause to own
With good respect, and few men are more known.
Some still, pretended to be pre-ingag'd
To others: some, against me were enraged
For personal respects: some did profess
They feared their own Inacceptablenesse
Might wrong my Cause: some, never were at leisure
To do for any honest man, a pleasure.
Some, very often, promised fair, and much;
But, their, or my ill hap, was ever such
That, some cross intervening accident,
My hopes, and their performance did prevent:
And, one (as if I had been of a Nation
Without your Pale) said, he knew no Relation
'Twixt him and me, obliging him unto
That favor I requested him to do:
Which answer, I, the less was pleased withal,
Because, he is a Major General;
And, one of those, who (being raised, by
Pretending to the Common-liberty,)
Seemed bound to have performed what I sought
In Courtesy, or Conscience, as I thought.
But, I, such sleightings very often smother,
And make good use of them, one time, or other.
This favor, I, yet want: This to obtain
By an Expedient, (once tried, not in vain)
I, once more now assay: For, though I hear
My Foes, do both my Rimes and Reasons jeer,
(And, that they are but laughed at, make their boast)
They have not gained their ends, nor are mine lost.
By these Outbreathings, I, refresh my heart;
They please my friends; sad musings, they divert;
They will commemorate my honest Cause
When all their grinning teeth, rot from their jaws:
And, I, at them, who my deriders be
Laugh, with as much scorn as they laugh at me,
Because, I know, their hearts, in secret, fear
The Events of that, whereat their Tongues do jeer;
And, that, at length, Time will a means provide,
Both to befool their wits, and shame their pride
By things which they contemn. I Will therefore try
How, Charms of my despised Poetry
Will work on you; with hope, that they shall find
Such acceptance, in the generous mind
Of some Heroic persons, that I may
Acquire, what I have failed of to this day,
By having my Oppressions, and Afflictions
(Which are without Hyperbolies, or Fictions
To you declared) there, speedily now read
Where, they shall justly be determined.
For, now the time is come, in which I, either
Must be repaired, or ruined altogether,
If he, from whom, Repairs I, often have got
(When I was nigh destroyed) repair me not.
Grant me, but that, which you would ask to have,
Were my Case, your; And I, no more will crave.
Your servant, Geo. Wither.

To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament
Assembled.
The humble Petition of George Wither, Esquire;
THe said Petitioner has suffered so much and so long, by trusting to the
Public faith of this Nation, and their Securities given by Act of Parliament,
that it has much impaired his Estate and Credit, and so multiplied his
troubles and grievances pertinent to your Cognizance in order to his Relief,
that, he dares not offer them in this Petition, lest it prove so large, that at
first view it may infringe your patience. Therefore, he is constrained to make
way by this Previous Address, adjoining thereto an humble Narrative of some
part of his sad sufferings, with a Series of his Cause, as briefly Epitomized
as above 16 years Oppressions would permit; which Narrative he prays your
Honors (as you desire GOD should be propitious to you, and those whom you
represent) to take into speedy consideration, lest Redress either come too
late, or may cost twice so much as will relieve him at this present: For, it
will be no Injustice to take Cognizance of those Causes out of Course, that
will else become remediless, or so hazardous by delay, as this Petitioners
will be if deferred, whom perhaps, GOD has permitted to be so encumbered and
ensnared, as well for some ends relating to the Public, or to his own Glory,
as for the said Petitioners correction

Justice and Mercy are the chief supports and Ornaments of Kingdoms and
Republics; and the great Body, which your Honors represent, consists of
Individuals, whose preservation being neglected One by One, the Whole will be
at last consumed. Otherwhiles also Justice neglected, or Injustice done to
private men, occasions Plagues to be inflicted on States and Public persons;
and it may be it has so succeeded within our knowledge: For the five last
Parliaments did shut private Complaints so long out of this House, to the
remediless destruction of many, that those Parliaments were at last shut out
of it, and destroyed. Peradventure likewise, that GOD, who alone can make men
to be of One mind in a House, will not repair our breaches, until failings be
expiated by more acceptable oblations then such cheap and easy Sacrifices, as
formal fastings: Even by some signal Acts of Justice and Mercy, seasonably, and
impartially performed for relief of persons extremely and notoriously
oppressed; among whom, if there be any whose present condition deserves more
compassion then this Petitioners, he is contented they should be first relieved.

Your Honors will not wholly loose your time, or labor, in hearing the
annexed Narrative, or the proofs of the Petitioners Allegations which he shall
produce: For, his sufferings being well weighed with the advantages which he
has had in several respects, more then many other oppressed men to vindicate
his Cause, and that he has notwithstanding been hitherto without relief; your
Wisdoms may thereby observe, the sad constitution of these times, and
conjecture the miserable condition whereto many thousands of the faithful
servants of this Commonwealth have been exposed, who had less means to make
known their Oppressions; and thence also may collect what is likely to be the
sequel.

Therefore, he again beseeches your Honors (notwithstanding the length
thereof) to take the said Narrative into speedy consideration, and to grant the
several Requests thereto subjoyned, as in Justice, Equity, or Compassion you
shall find cause; that GOD, who shows Mercy to the Merciful, may free you
from your Encumbrances, and so prosper your consultations, that all future
Generations may call you BLESSED; to which end this Petitioner will continue
his prayers.

Geo. Wither.

The Narrative, and Series of the Grievances, offered by the forenamed
Petitioner, in relation to the preceding Petition; with his humble Requests
thereunto subjoyned.
THe said Petitioner (who has in his place, according to his Talent, been
faithful to the Supreme power, in all changes, in order to an advance of the
public Interest, peace, and safety, ever since the beginning of the late Wars)
was the first (being thereto called) that in those parts where he then lived,
freely contributed to that Cause, which seemed prosecuted both for the King and
Parliament; the first, who there adventured his life as a Commander; the first,
who was there plundered of so considerable an estate; and one of the first, to
whom the said Parliament had made so fair a show of performing their promises
and Engagements to those, who should suffer in their service: yet he is likely
(if ever) to be one of the last, who shall be repaired: For, all their blossoms
have not only been hitherto unfruitful, but three times more vexatious and
destructive also, then the plunderings, and malice of the common Enemy, as will
appear by what follows.

It being proved to the Parliament, by an Inventory of the Petitioners losses,
attested by many witnesses, that he was plundered in their service to his
damage in above 2000. l. it was in Parliament ordered Febr. 9. 1642. (above
16. years now past) that he should have 2000. l. toward his repair out of the
Estates of John Denham Esquire; and other Delinquents; which Order, this Petitioner
not being in a capacity to prosecute effectually, without neglect of his duty,
(he being then in actual service) no more was by virtue thereof, by him
received then 204. l. 17. s. 4 d. or thereabout, above the charges in
prosecution; as appeared by a Report made to the Parliament, Feb 18. 1646. by
the Committee of Accounts for the Kingdom; before which time, there was due to
the Petitioner in principal money, besides what was formerly received and
respited upon account (and beside 1795. l. 2. s. 8. d. the remainder of the
said 2000. l.) the sum of 1681. l. 15. s. 8. d. by Account (fully stated;)
and, that sum was made forthwith payable to the Petitioner by several
Warrants of the Lord Genesis Essex, and the Committee of Safety, about fifteen
years now past; a great part whereof the Petitioner had borrowed to pay his
Troup, and has paid Interest for it to this day.

After many years consumed, in tedious and chargeable solicitations concerning
the premises, the said Petitioners demands were by Order of Parliament
referred to the Committee of the Navy, October 20. 1647. who examining them in
every particular, found 3438. l. 18 s. 4. d. to be then due to this Petitioner
(beside some demands respited) and ordered it should be so reported to the
Parliament by Col. Thompson, and that they thought fit it should be paid out of
the Excise.

That Report (to this Petitioners great damage) was not made until about six
months after; by which delay, about half a Million (as the Petitioner is
informed) was charged upon the said Excise in Course, before any part of the
Petitioners debt: The 22 of March 1647. the sum of 1681 1. l. 15. s. 8. d.
part of the foresaid 3438. l. 18 s. 4. d. was by Ordinance of Parl. charged
upon (...) Course. without mentioning Interest for any portion thereof; though
all of it had been made immediately payable by warrants many years before:
Though, likewise, they who had served with the Petitioner at the same times, in
the same places, under the same Commanders, had either payment in ready money,
or Interest allowed until they were paid: Yea, (which was a greater
partiality) though 700. l. of that debt was engaged for, and lent by the
Petitioner as aforesaid: But, this being signified to the Parliament, it was
afterward ordered, December 25. 1648. that 300. l. more then was formerly
granted, should be paid to the Petitioner out of the Excise, with Interest of
8. l. per Cent. every six months, both for the said 300. l. and for the said
700. l. part of the said 1681. l. 15. s. 8. d. until the said 300. l. and 700.
l. were paid.

The residue of the said 3438. l. 18. s. 4. d. was made payable out of
Discoveries at Haberdashers Hall, by an Order of the 15. of March 1647. but
without effect; because the Petitioner could find no discovery, without
putting himself to more cost and trouble then it would be worth. The Security
likewise which was given to the Petitioner for the said 300. l. and for the
Interest thereof, together with Interest for the said 700. l. out of the
Excise, proved of no force; because the Commons, who granted an Order, as
aforesaid, for payment thereof, (having added thereto a desire of the Lords
concurrence therein) took away the House of Lords, within so few days after,
that their concurrence could not be gotten. And the Petitioner being then put
into some hope, that payment might have been in some part had out of
Compositions made under value, the said Commons ordered again, the 26 of April
1649. that the said 300. l. and Interest for the said 700. l. should be paid
unto this Petitioner out of Discoveries at Haberdashers Hall, and out of
Compositions as aforesaid made under value at Goldsmiths Hall; by which Order
this Petitioner caused 430. l. to be brought into that Treasury; and about
seven years after, when it had cost him near as much, he procured payment of
361. l. 6. s. 8. d. thereof, by a Privy Seal out of the Exchequer.

The said Securities being so ineffectual, This Petitioner renewed his suite to
the Parliament, which (by means of some not then his friends) referred the
whole Cause once again, (as if no former references had been made) to a Select
Committee of Parliament, authorized to report how this Petitioner should be
paid what they found to be due unto him.) And that Committee reviewing all
Demands and Receipts from the beginning, found 3958. l. 15. s. 8. d. to be then
due to the Petitioner, with the Interest, which would be due in March then next
following, over and above what he had received, which they thought fit should
be thus paid, (viz) that the said 1681. l. 15. s. 8. d. should stand charged
upon the Excise, with an allowance of Interest of 8. l. per Cent. to be paid
every six months from the 22. of September then last past, until the said
1681. l. 15. s. 8. d. should be fully paid. For the reminder of the said 3958.
l. 15. s. 8. d. (as also in recompense of the Petitioner's long forbearance,
and great expense in about seven years attendance) they thought fit, that the
Manor of Little-Hocksly, (alias) Horsly Hall in Essex, and Wiston Mills in
Suffolk, with the Appurtenances, part of the estate of the foresaid John
Denham, should be settled upon this Petitioner and his Heirs, the said estate
being valued in the Sequestrators books at 240. l. per annum This Report Mr.
Dove was desired to make to the Parliament: and this Petitioner is persuaded,
that if after so many References and strict examinations in the like, or a
less considerable Cause, such a Report had been brought in behalf of any
Member of that Parliament, or of any one of his Relations, a settlement would
forthwith have been made accordingly.

But, so ill was this Petitioner, at that time befriended (for what cause he
knows not, except for declaring those truths which some were not pleased to
hear of) nothing was done upon that Report, until the second of January 1650.
and then it was Ordered that the said 1681. l. 15. s. 8. d. should stand
charged upon the Excise as before, but without mentioning my Interest for the
same, though probably intended by the Parliament for the just reasons before
expressed; and in regard it was not for the honor thereof to recede from what
they had formerly granted without cause. Neither was more then 150. l. per ann.
ordered to be settled upon the Petitioner and his Heirs out of Mr. Denhams
estate, to satisfy the rest of the said debt: which allowance (all things
considered) was after the rate of making him pay above twenty years purchase in
ready money, for such Land as he might have bought for much sesse then half
that value. To make good in show, this allowance, a Proviso was added to the
first Act for sale of Delinquents Estates; And though neither of the foresaid
payments, were according to equity (as this Petitioner and many other,
conceived) nor amounted to half that, which their own Committee had judged
reasonable, and was granted by former Order of Parliament: This Petitioner
thankfully accepted thereof, considering the great debts and necessities of the
Commonwealth, and how difficultly Justice was obtained in those times; hoping
the like strictness would have been practiced toward themselves, and their
Relations (it being about the time of passing their self-denying Vote) which
Course would have saved the Commonwealth, many Millions, as he believes. But,
the Petitioner was deceived in that hope; And the security which they then gave
him for the said 3958. l. 15. s. 8. d. at so low a rate, did not only prove no
security at all, but became an occasion also of damnifying him, in more then
twice that sum; Insomuch, that, if he had remitted all his debts fifteen
years ago, he had been probably at more quiet, and at least 4000. l. better in
his Estate at this day, and out of those hazzards which he is in, of utterly
consuming the remainder of his Estate, and loosing his credit by depending upon
Parliamentary securities, as will appear by what follows.

For, the said 1681. l. 15. s. 8. d. part of the said 3958. l. 15. s. 8. d.
has been due as aforesaid above fifteen years; which considered, with the
damages by expenses in so long time soliciting for it; The Interests forborne
during that time, with the hindrances which he has had, and the advantages
thereby lost (beside so much precious time at the later end of his life) the
Petitioner shall loose more then twice that debt, though he might receive the
principal sum to morrow: and it being payable without Interest but in Course,
which Course has been stopped five years already, and may so continue ad
Graecas Calendas, or till the 30th. of February, no man knows to what damage
it will amount. As for the residue of the said 3958 l. 15. s. 8. d. being 2278.
l. the Petitioner is likely to have worse payment: For no more is given to
satisfy for it, but 150. l. per annum out of a Delinquents Estate, which is a
Title so slighted, that few, or none will lend a years value upon a mortgage of
the whole; yet, the said 2278. l. which the Petitioner acquitted for it,
considered, with about sixteen years forbearance, heretofore, and other
expenses and damages occasioned since the Petitioner bought it, will amount to
above forty years purchase in ready money; nay, his bargain is far worse then
so bad; and instead of Land, or Rent for his money, the Petitioner has nothing
but troubles and suites, to the consuming of that Land and money, which he had
before; and has been damnified no less then as much more in his Credit, and
in hindering the preferment of his Children, when they should, and might have
been bestowed in marriage.

For, in pursuance of an Act of Parliament, (whose Securities and Consessions
he thought to be the best tenure in the world) the Petitioner took a Conveyance
of the 150. l. per annum out of the Manor of Little Horksly aforesaid, part
of the said Mr. Denhams Estate, above seven years now past; he therewith bought
by the same Deed Enrolled the remainder of the said Manor for 1645. l. which
he paid according to his Contract; his said purchase was completed according
to every Rule in the Act for sale of such Estates; The premises were warranted
unto him by a Particular to be in the present possession of the Commonwealth;
There was no Claim then allowed thereupon; the time limited for allowing of
Claims, was elapsed above two months before he contracted, and his Purchase
was completed above four months, before any Claim upon the premises was
allowed; he was put into peaceable possession, then settled his Family upon part
thereof, and demised the rest: yet, after all this, was so interrupted whilst
he held the same, that he never made profit thereof to the clear value of a
penny; and has been now about five years ejected, both out of that which was
allowed for his said debt, and out of that remainder also which he bought,
without any recompense for the one or the other; to the indangering of ruining
his Family, in regard he has spent by inavoydable suits and molestations 500.
l. more then he made of the said purchase whilst he was in possession; and
cannot yet be freed from further suites, expenses, and troubles thereby
occasioned, though he be outed of all; and instead of restitution, is jecred
(even by some of those, who have put upon him that hard bargain) with Caveat
Emptor, and such like scoffing Cautions; which lessons he should not have
needed, if satisfaction might have been at the Petitioners own Election, or if
he had thought them in whom he consided to have been either Beggars, or
Cheaters, who care not what become of other men when they have served their own
ends upon them. But it was not in the Petitioners power to prevent this defect;
nor is it now in the power of any under Heaven to relieve him, but a Parliament.

For, an Act of Parliament (whereof the Petitioner could not presage) was made
long since the said purchase, to allow of Claims formerly entered, without
providing any saving of their Estates, who had purchased according to a former
Act; and there being a Dormant Claim entered for a Lease of the premises
pretended to be made by the said Mr. Denham, to one Thomas Offly Esquire; (which
Lease is probably forged, to the defrauding of the Commonwealth of between
three and 4000. l.) the Commissioners for allowing of Claims (having no
Cognizance of the said probable fraud) did allow satisfaction to be made to the
said Offly, out of the said Mr. Denhams Estate; and thereupon the same
Trustees, who had formerly sold the premises to the Petitioner, for so
over-valuable a consideration as aforesaid, (though there was no negative, or
affirmative Clause in either of the said Acts, to vacate their first sale, or
re-invest them with the premises) did nevertheless sell them again to John
Feilder Esquire; (then, and now a Member of Parliament) who had compounded for the
said Offlies pretended Interest, at a great under-value, if it be real. They
likewise conveyed it unto him in Fee; and continued therewith unto him, or to
his Assigns, the said Lease to be kept on foot, whereby the said Mr. Feilder
does knowingly defraud the State, both of the Tithes payable by the Freeholders
and Customary Tenants of the said Manor, and also of a Reversional Estate in
the said Manor; though the said Lease be not fraudulent: For, the premises
were intayl'd, which disabled him to demise the premises for longer time then
during his life: That tail is docked by Act of Parliament, for the benefit of
the Commonwealth; and the Evidence which proves the said Interest of the
Commonwealth, is a Counterpart of the said deed of Intail; which the said Mr.
Feilder having gotten into his hands, to make the easier composition with the
said Offly, once produced it to justify a Claim against the Commonwealth, and
now concealeth it, to deprive the Commonwealth of the said Reversion.

By these, and the like proceedings, this Petitioner has not only been wholly
dispossessed of the premises as aforesaid, and ever since disquieted with
vexatious suites by the said Mr. Feilder and his Agents, but the said Mr.
Feilder threatens him with other Actions, and still continues one in the name
of Thomas Tedeway commenced against this Petitioner, and for his further
vexation, against this Petitioners son also, who has no Interest in the
premises, but (being under age,) was only in the Petitioners then dwelling
house upon the premises, when a Lease of Ejectment was there sealed, and was
upon that occasion imprisoned in the Upper Bench Prison, to the Petitioners,
and his sons great cost and trouble. Upon the same Action the said Mr. Feilder,
or his Leasee, by help of an Ignorant Jury, (if not worse) has lately procured
a Verdict for about 300. l. against the Petitioner and his said son for the
mean profits of the premises for three quarters of a year, whereas the whole
Manor is worth no more by the year, and was never worth any thing to the
Petitioner, or his son. That sum, or thereabout, this Petitioner is in danger
to have added to his former damages, though proofs were offered to the said
Jury, that what the said Mr. Feilder, or some for him has received of that
years profits for which he commenceth his suit, in money, and in what ought to
be abated for Taxes, and an Annuity paid out of it to an Hospital by the
Petitioner, amounts to almost as much as is given by the said Verdict, and
about as much more for the preceding year, the profits whereof were payable to
the Petitioner.

These things added together, and considered, with what may probably follow
before he shall have relief, do evidence that this Petitioner is damnified and
endangered, at least twice so much as in likelihood he should have been as
aforesaid, if he had wholly remitted the said debts at the first: For, it has,
bona fide, endangered the ruin of his Estate and Family; exposed him to
extreme wants and scorns, rendered his life wearisome, made his honesty
questionable, by disabling him to perform his Engagements; and nigh destroyed
his Credit, which is more dear to him then life. Other Grievances very
considerable he might justly complain of; but they, who were heretofore most
obliged, and most able to relieve him, have been so deaf, or dead rather, to
his greatest sufferings when he exhibited his complaints, that he is weary of
complaining, and will not mention smaller oppressions; moreover, he observes
public wants, and other private men's necessities to be so much, that he cannot
in conscience expect a total redress; and he shall acknowledge it to the
honor of your Justice and Clemency, if at this time he may have but that
competent Redress of his Grievances, which may discharge his engagements to
others, for prevention of their wrong, without selling away from his Wife and
Children that Estate which is yet left; and that he may not have cause to
repent his confiding in a Parliaments concessions and securities, which have
hitherto only increased his damages and troubles, with disgace to his most
sincere endeavors, by making him seem richer then he was; and thereby causing
many to think him the less honest, because they saw he discharged not those
Engagements, which his trusting to this Commonwealths securities have encumbered
him withal, to the damage as well of other men, and of his dearest relations,
as of himself. To which end, if this prevails not, he intends in this cause
never from henceforth to Petition any, but God only, whatsoever he suffers:
for he is confident it will be in vain, because he shall then perceive that
what he thinks to be right, or wrong, is nor so, nor so, in the judgment of
other men.

In consideration of the premises (whose reality will appear in the main, by
the Copies of such Warrants, Orders, and other authentic proofs, and
Parliamentary concessions, and securities as this Petitioner will produce, if
need be) the said Petitioner humbly prays your Honors, that the said 1681. l.
15. s. 8. d. (whereof about 300. l. is due to some of his Officers and
Troupers, and to others of the Towns of Guildford, and Farnham in Surrey, for
their quarters) may be forthwith paid unto him; or at least the said 300. l and
700. l. with Interest for the same, and the residue hereafter. Or, that some
other provision may be made to relieve his present wants, and preserve his
credit. That, also, he may be restored to his said purchase, with reasonable
repair of his damages unjustly sustained. That the badges of the fraudulency of
the said Mr. Denhams pretended Lease of the premises before mentioned to Mr.
Offly, (which this Petitioner is ready to offer,) may be taken into
consideration, in regard it may possibly recover between three or 4000. l. to
the Commonwealth, or a considerable part of those sums. That the said Mr.
Feilder may be ordered to produce the foresaid Counterpart of a Deed of Intaile
made of the Manor of Little Horsly aforesaid, and other Lands, by concealment
whereof this Commonwealth is defrauded of that right, which it has to a
Reversion of the said Manor, and other Lands. And lastly, it is prayed, that
all Actions and proceedings at Law against the Petitioner and his son,
concerning the said Manor, may be stayed, as also all other Actions, whereby
the Petitioners prosecution of this Cause may be obstructed, until it shall be
heard, and determined in Parliament; with whose final Sentence as touching any
part of the premises, this Petitioner will rest satisfied, and continue his
prayers for your Honors.

G. W.


