Prosopopoeia Britannica: Britans Genius, OR, Good-ANGEL, personated; Reasoning
and advising, touching the Games now playing, and the Adventures now at Hazard
in these Islands; and presaging, also, some future things, not unlikely to come
to pass.

Discovered, by TERRAE-FILIUS (a well-knowne Lover of the Publike-Peace) when
the begetting of Nationall-Quarrell was first feared.

Expressed in two Lections, or Readings.

For every thing, which is below the Sun,
There is a Time; For some things, more then One:
And, if this be well timed, the Game is done.
To all men, GOD, in Mercy, Once does come:
Calls twice, or thrice; yea^, many times, on some:
And they who slight his Grace, must feel his doom,
Since, then, for once abusing Love, some fall;
Let it be, seriously, well-weigh'd, of all,
What may betide those, who, still, slight it shall.
LONDON, Printed by Robert Austin. 1648.

To the meek ingenuous Reader.
THough much contempt is cast on Poesy,
The Meek, and men of Ingenuity,
Still, entertain her with respective ears,
When, on her proper Errand, she appears.
For, Sacred-things, and Things most pertinent
To Man's well being, by that Instrument,
Have been conveyed, even in every Nation,
(Yea, and almost, in every Generation)
Some Poets have proved Prophets, to foretell,
Things Future, many years ere they befell:
And sure, the Latins, to imply the same,
To Poets, and to Prophets, gave one Name.
To You, therefore, this Poem will not seem
Unusefull, or unworthy of esteem;
Nor shall, to you, the matter be in vain,
Nor want that End, whereto it may pertain;
But, stir up those Affections, and that Care
Which may awake you, timely, to prepare
Against the sad, and Evil day, wherein
The Scorners must have payment for their sin,
For, This, will pass by Them, as does a Blast,
Whereof, but few take heed, till it be past,
And, leaves Effects behind it, which may show
What Blast it was, and whence that wind did blow.
To you, therefore, the Author recommends
These musings, as to them, among his Friends,
Who, shall possess the Earth, when those who flour,
At wholesome Counsel, shall be rooted out.
He to your Doom Appeals: And if but Three,
Who, zealous of the Public safety be;
Or, but two Wisemen; Or, but One, who loves
The Peace of GOD, these Raptures well approves;
He, shall be honored, by such Approbations,
More, then by all the Fools of these three Nations.
To the scornfully Censorious.
WHat have we here? says pride-puft-ignorance
More Poetry? yes fool; more, too, perchance
Then thou will like; and, more, for thee to jeere,
Till foaming at thy mouth, thy Brains appear
Through witless Choler, when thy soul shall dread,
What, thou with scornful disrespect, have read.
But, (says a second) this, eight months ago
Appeared in Manuscript: well, grant it so;
What is inferred? The Author, do not blame,
That, until now, you have not, seen the same;
For, Truth gets License hardly; and, the Press
Was, then, at your disposure, not at his.
Who. (says a third) is he, that, in this wise,
Our Genius personates? A fourth, replies,
The matter, and the Phrase, their Author show:
SIRS, if ye guess right, much good do it you.
If you, be therewith pleased, so, is he;
If not, he, therewith troubled will not be:
For, he regards not, so much, how to please,
As, how to cure the general disease.
That, is his chiefest aim: to that intent,
Himself, and fortunes, he has freely spent,
As well as time and words; which, when he dies,
Will gain him, what your malice, yet, denies.
If, you, hereby, shall reap no benefit,
The maine obstruction, will be want of wit;
Or, in the wanting, rather, of his grace;
Whose love, you slighted, when it offered was.
Read, if ye list; But, who composed the same,
Inquire not; for, (although to show his Name
He never was afraid) it suits not now,
With his design, that he should tell it you;
Nor, can it be material, so you heed,
And prudently consider what ye read:
For, whom, or whatsoere, he may appear,
That, will be true, which he expresses here.
PROSOPOPOEIA BRITANNICA.
The Contents of the first Lection
THe POET poetizeth, here,
Great Britans GENIUS to appear;
Expostulating ( first of all)
Some Slips, and Faults in general.
And, tells what of that GAME, he spoke,
In which, the public, lies at Stake.
Next, shows, how He does move the King,
Himself into his Orb to bring;
What, will, assuredly, succeed,
Unless, he shall return with speed;
How, and by whom, and likewise, why
He has been hindered to comply;
And, that, the Men, and Hopes, which he
Depends on, will his ruin be.
Then, are declared, some debates
Of Prelates temporal estates;
What ought to be believed, by Him,
As touching their old Claims, and Them;
How much, a Prince obliged stands,
To keep up, such like Deodands;
Pleads, in what case, a State, or King,
May sell a Dedicated-Thing;
And, makes you, by plain reason, see
How false the claims of Tyrants be.
Then, having took some Blocks away,
Which stop the Kings repentance may;
Provokes thereto; and ( though the root
Seems bitter) warrants pleasant fruit.
When, in his might, the Dogstar reigned, here,
And, when our City, and our Armies, were
Made jealous of each other, by their wiles,
Who, sought to nourish Discord in these Hes;
Filled full of Thoughts, and sad, and sleeplesse lying
Upon my Couch, there, silently, surveying
With contemplations eyes, the sick estate
Of these three Kingdoms, and, their likely Fate;
My rambling Fancy (which was newly come,
From whence I know not) brought into the room,
A reverend Person, who, upon him wore,
A Seagreen mantle, which was wrought all over
With silver wavings (well resembling those
Which curle the Ocean, when a strong gale blows)
And, had a Verge, or bordering imbost
Of Rock-work, like the cliffs, that guard our cost.
Raised with white Saphirs, looking over a strand,
Bestrow'd with orient Pearls, and golden sand.
In his left hand, he seemed to bring with him
A threefold, but a broken Diadem,
Each third whereof contained counterfeits,
Of many differing shaped Coronets,
(Which had adorned it) most part of which
Seemed also, broken, or defaced much;
And, not improperly, an emblem were
Of something, which this Emperie may fear.
With an heroic look, a Princely pace,
And awefull presence, entered he the place:
But, so, that look, and pace, and presence, had
A shaddowing drawn over them, which made
Appearance, of a heart displeased, and sorry;
Yet, gave it, rather, excellence and glory
To his demeanure, then diminishment,
Of what, beseem'd a Person excellent.
Not heeding me; nor seeming much to care
Who, then, was present, or, who was not there,
A turn or two, he walked; raised to the skies,
(As one admiring) his majestic eyes;
And, with hands elevated, and displayed,
Thus, like a much displeased Friend, he said,
SEE, SEE! how MISCHIEF, like the Lernean Snake,
Renewesher heads, and still new life does take!
The fire of WAR within our feilds did flame,
A while ago, and, GODS hand quenched the same.
The match and powder, were together laid
In our chief City; and, he, also staid
Those probable effects, which would have shook
These Islands, if the project, then, had took.
As soon as that was past, another Train
Was closely laid, to blow up all again;
And, make these Nations, like the clod-borne brood
Of Cadmus, broachers of each others blood.
Is there no end of madness? but, by fits,
Must they, who should be wisest, loose their wits?
And, still be forging new Designs and Gins,
To plague themselves, and others, for their sins?
Will not, the blind, selfe-seeking parties, leave,
Snares for themselves, with their own hands to weave?
Will not the Serpent cease to bruise their heels,
Whom he pursues, though broken heads he feels?
Nor will the harmless Doves, become so wise
To know the Birds of prey, through their disguise,
Till they are all beguiled with fair shows,
And, quite devoured, by Buzzard, Kites and Crows?
Shall wholesome counsel, always, be withstood?
And, will you reinvolve your selves in blood,
What ever your best friends endeavor can,
And, as it were, in spite of GOD and man?
O GOD! what dullness has possessed these Nations?
When shall the Spirit of Infatuations,
Be dispossessed, ye Britans? when shall peace
Unite your hearts? when shall dissension cease,
And, we behold again within my Coast,
Those blessings, which they wilfully have lost,
Who, slighted counsel, when it was in season;
And, yet, resolve not, to be ruled by Reason?
How long! oh LORD! how long shall they neglect
The Teachers of a better intellect,
And, in those courses frowardly persist,
Whereby, they must arrive at had I wist!
How long! shall that contagious Cloud of lies
Which through the streets, almost each morning flies
On paper wings, with slanders, poison some?
To others, instruments of death, become?
Corrupt weak judgments? Interupt the choice,
Of good things? drown the Pacifying-voice
Which, to their great advantage, they might hear,
Unless deaf Adder-like, they stopped their care?
Or, listened to those falsehoods, which delude
The Wisest, and enrage the multitude?
How long! shall men persever to delight
In cursed words, and actions of despite?
In studying reciprocal disgraces?
In flinging dirt, into each others faces?
And, as it were, in striving, who best may
The Devils part, upon each other play.
How long! will you in an unhappy course,
Run from one bad extreme, into a worse?
How long! will you pretend, protest, and vow,
To be reformed, yet, nothing better grow?
How long! will you condemn what others do,
Yet, tread their paths, yea go beyond them, too,
And think it shall enough your selves commend,
To publish, wherein others do offend?
Or punish them, whose crimes but venial be,
When Capitall-Transgressors may go free?
How long! will you observe the scorners Fate,
Yet, never mend, before it be too late?
How long! shall GOD forbear? how long! for you
Befoole the wise, yet fools no wiser grow?
How long! shall he keep off a Foreign power,
While you, at home, each other do devour,
And seek, by every new Deliverance,
Your own Designs, and profits to advance?
As if the public Mercics, which GOD sends,
Were all vouchsafed for your private ends?
How long! will you lie underneath the stroke,
Yet, his displeasure every day provoke?
Or being frighted from what was misdone,
Commit the same fault, when the fear is gone?
How long! shall prudence preach a safer way,
Yet, you renew your dangers, day by day?
And, though you, still are told what will succeed,
Still, careless be, of taking, timely, heed?
How long! will you good principles with-stand,
And fortisfie with pebble stones and sand?
Or paper works, and stubble-structures frame,
When, round about you, all is in a flame?
And, at the givers of good counsel, jeere,
That others, may be fooled as you are?
How long! will ye, whilst your blind-Harpers play
Divisions, Jigs, and fancies, dance the Hay,
And, break each others heads, and shins, and faces,
At Blind-man-Buffe, (as well to your disgraces
As to your loss and smart) whilst most about you,
Both for your madness, and your follies, flout you?
And whilst thereby your adversaries gain
That, which they could not otherways obtain?
How long! will you permit, Ambition, Pride,
Self-Love or Avarice to be your guide?
And persevere to trust, and to commit
Your being, unto some who have nor wit,
Nor grace, nor modesty? as if ye had
Forsworn good counsel, and a Covenant made
With your Oppressors, to resign all power
To them, who seek to prey on what is your?
And, still to prostitute your free Elections
To strenghthen private ends, and nourish Factions?
How long will they, on whom your Trust is placed
Put off, what should be first, until the last?
How long with they irresolute appear
Whereto they should undoubtedly adhere;
And, thereby, keep, from knitting fast together,
Divided parts, till there be strength in neither
To reunite? Or, till all tear asunder,
Like Clouds dispersed, by their own inbred Thunder?
How long shall Knave be Trump? and all the Cards
Be pack't, to give unmerited rewards?
Or, deal forth undeservedly, to those
Who are best friends, the portion of your Foes?
And, O! how long shall such men play your Game,
Who have betrayed, who will betray the same,
And, still promote (though better be professed)
A Private, or, a Foreign Interest?
Hear, O ye Islands! harken, and believe
Your Genius, who, does see your ways, and greeve.
If you shall act, much longer, as ye do,
Your City, Army, Priest, and People too;
Your King, your chosen Commons, and your Peers,
Your Independents, and your Presbyters,
The worst disposed, and the best affected;
The faithful, and the man of fraud detected;
The Friend, the Foe, the Fool, and he that is wise;
The Rich, and he who at his threshold lies;
English, Scot, Welsh, and Kerne, shall all together
So jumbled be, so juggle with each other,
So stagger from their Principles, and Friends,
Through foolish hopes, false fears, or private ends;
The most shall be deceived, and, undone,
To make a winning-Game for Lookers-on.
For, these have eyes upon you; and expect,
From your increasing Discords, an effect
To their advantage: These, rejoice to see
How senseless of your own true peace, you be;
How frowardly you act to your own cost,
And, play for them, that Game which they had lost.
With serious, if slight things I may compare,
Ye, Britans are now playing (as it were)
A Game at Cards: For, there are many faces,
Among you, like Kings, Queens, Knaves, Tens and Aces,
Beside the Vulgar pack; and much strange dealing,
Strange shuffling, and strange cutting, (worth revealing)
Is viewed, whereby the public has had wrong,
(And many private persons) overlong.
Some, by the Players; others by the Foxes,
Who have obtained the keeping of your Boxes;
Some, by their want of skill; and some by betting
Upon both sides; by violence, or cheating,
Are like to share at last, what you to lose;
Then, laugh to scorn, your Folly in the close;
Because, you good advantages did slight,
And, played your Game no better, when ye might.
How have ye lost, what lately you had got?
When all men saw, you had the better lot?
Of Hearts and Diamonds, you, a while ago,
As fair Games had, as any hand could show:
But, some bystanders, who, your cards can view,
Are much afraid, that now ye have but few.
Of Spades and Clubs, yet (if well played) ye have
Enough at least, whereby your stakes to save.
Ye had, but of one Queen, a diffidence;
And, she was played away, a good while since:
The Knaves are shared so by either side,
That, little odds betwixt you is espied;
And, they, who yet seem Newters, (out of play)
At last, may serve to count upon, some way.
One King, alone, you have; and what to do
With him, a friend of yours could tell you too,
But that he is no Player, and he has spoke,
Already, more, then many have well took.
Yet this, I Will say; you cannot make your Game,
By all the Kings, or Court-Cards, you could name,
As by well-playing him. As you dispose
Of him, so, you are like to win, or lose:
So, ye shall either gain or miss, your ends;
So, you shall multiply your Foes or Friends:
GOD, give you grace to take the safest way;
Which, (if vain hopes delude not) yet, ye may.
And, GOD, direct him, and incline him too,
So prudently to suffer, and to doc,
That, he pursue no more sinister ends:
For, at this present, upon him depends
The Fortune of his House: And, therewithal
Shall many other, either stand, or fall,
Whose Fates are yet, by very few discerned
To be in his well-doing much concerned:
Yea, thereupon, depends greater things,
Then are the Risings, and the Falls of Kings.
My Spirit, therefore, groans within my breast,
And, is with violent desires oppressed,
That, he, and they, who seem yet stupifi'd
Might wake out of their Dreamings, to provide,
Against those many mischiefs, which, of late,
Have menaced the ruin of this State:
And, seeing, by a near relation, I
Am more obliged then any Stander-by,
To seek your welfare, and prevent your woe,
I Will give such hints of what you ought to do,
As are permitted; O! take therefore heed,
Of what, ye now shall either hear, or read:
For, without Riddles, I will plainly tell,
What courses ye may follow, and do well.
First, let your erring, and deluded King,
Himself, his Crowns, and Scepters humbly bring,
And, lay them at his feet, to whom, alone,
Belongs the supreme Glory of each Throne.
For, GOD, will not be mocked: (though for a space
He winks at many, who neglect his Grace)
But, will on every one, avengement take
Who, in his wickedness, does progress make.
Let him acknowledge that Supremacy,
And falling down, before that Majesty,
Which is offended, ask to be forgiven
For his offense against both earth and heaven.
And, that he may obtain it, let him weigh
What Common Fame unto his charge does lay;
What just occasion he has given, why
Things are suspected, which he may deny;
And, what his heart may justly smite him for;
Till, all his errors he does so abhor,
That GOD may pardon them; and men may see,
His Grace is greater, then their sins can be.
That this be truly done, let him not spare
To make his Failings, truly, what they are,
By, seecretly, anatomizing them,
In every circumstance, 'twixt GOD and him;
For, in the world, it has not yet been known,
That any King was cast out of his Throne,
Without a crying-sinne; Or, that God shook
A Kingdom; or, a Nation ever struck;
Or humbled any man, for his offense,
And re-advanced, without Penitence:
Except, when he, in wrath did them restore,
To make their sufferings, and their shame the more.
Which, that He may prevent; let him delay
No longer, from a penitential way:
But, make return, before he run so far,
As to become a prisoner at the Insula Vectis.
BAR.
Or, let him take good heed, when he is there,
Lest other men's designs, and his own fear,
Or, such vain hopes, as he has had too long,
Occasion him to fall (by stearing wrong)
On Scylla, or Charybdis: Or, lest, they
Who, seek their own advantage, him betray
By practice underhand: For, such as these
Will but prolong their own, and his Disease,
With harm to others; and exasperate
Those humors, which will hasten on the Fate,
That may be feared. Thus, therefore, let him do,
Yea, do it quickly, and sincerely too.
Let him, a while, withdraw himself, apart,
(Even to the secret closet of his heart)
Excluding company; but, chiefly, them
Who, from his Duties, long have hindered him,
By wicked counsels; or, by flattery,
Caused him to dote upon a Majesty
Which is not real; and have thereby, turned
His glory into shame, and made him scorned.
Let him, shut out all those, who show unto him,
Those pictures of himself, which may undo him,
And, make him, like Narcissus, on a Babble
To dote, till he be fooled into a Fable.
For, some, with so much Piety, besaint him;
With such feigned Excellencies they bepaint him;
Yea, they so impudently magnify him,
And, with so much Divinity belly him,
As if, to deifie him they professed;
Or, else, to canonize him, at the least.
And, but, that thousands know him; and, know too,
How much, men flatter Kings, (and what they do
Who Idolize them) some would half believe
He were, not only, blameless, but conceive
That, seldom such a King, or such a man,
Had reigned, or lived, since first the world began;
And, that these Kingdoms, have afflicted been,
Without his fault; yea, for the peoples sin
Against his Godhead, only: And, this course
Has made him nothing better; but, much worse;
For, Pharoah-like, it him, still more obdures,
And, every day, new sins, new plagues procures.
Let him, with prudent anger, therefore throw
Such cheating Glasses from him; and, those too,
Which multiply the faults by others done;
And, represent offenses, where are none,
In hope to make themselves the fairer seem,
By casting blurs, on other men's esteem:
For these Impostors cheat him, with false shows,
That, he to save their Stakes, himself may lose.
Let him take heed of their Compliances,
Who are declined from those Principles,
Whereby, they in mere conscience, and true zeal,
Appeared active for the Commonweal,
Against his Interest; and, in show are won
A counter course, in their Designs, to run,
In aid of his desires, with hope of those
Rewards, or Honors, which he shall propose:
For, on such giddy Turne-coats, all his cost,
Time, promises, and favors, will be lost,
Both to himself and them; Because those flashes,
Are but a smoke, raised out of Dust, and Ashes,
And shaped unto a Cloud; which, being filled
With noisome Air, and, thereby, vainly swelled,
Up to a show of something, shall, at last,
Vanish to nothing, by a sudden Blast.
Let him consider, what sad desolations
His wilfulness has brought upon three Nations;
Upon himself, and Children; what great fears
And sorrows he has heaped, now, many years,
On others too, as well as upon them,
Whose peace, and weal, he ought not to contemn:
Let him take notice, with how little sense,
Of their Afflictions, and of their expense
In Blood and Treasure, he has passed over
Those losses which he never can recover.
And let him ponder what may more befall,
Unless the power of God, prevent it shall.
Let him observe, to what despised things,
Below the honor, not alone, of Kings,
But, of Inferior Persons, he is brought,
By seeking that, which he in vain has sought;
By listening to bad Counsel; and, by still
Pursuing those beinnings which were ill.
Let him impartially resolve in mind,
To what conditions it has him confined;
What heights of Glory it has cast him from;
To what a depth of Troubles, he is come;
What meanly-qualified Grooms, of late,
He has been feign, disguised, to personate;
What trivial Fellows he is forced to feed,
Ride, and converse with: yea, let him take heed,
From what slight Jockies, and what Scatter-wits,
He seeks aid, and thereby nothing gets,
To further his Designs; nor ought, but Lies,
Rodomantadoes, and such Vanities.
Nay, let him mark it once, and then again,
What beggarly Companions he is feign
To fawn upon; to humor, bribe, and woe,
With promises of wealth, and honor too,
To serve his ends, when thereto they can add
No more, then from a Porter may be had;
Except it, peradventure, be Returns
Of ruin on themselves, and, on him scorns.
Let him examine, by himself, alone,
What he committed has, or left undone,
For which this Change befalls him; And not dream
That, these afflictions have pursued him
For other men's transgressions, altogether.
And let him seriously consider, whether
There can be hearty penitence, or no,
For wrongs, without some satisfaction too.
Let him examine, if a sacrifice
Of words, and protestations, may suffice
For bloodsheds, and those many robberies,
Which on his Person, and his Party lies:
Or, whether he; and his Prerogatives
Were ever worth so many thousand lives,
As they have cost: or, whether, when to make
His last account, he comes, GOD will take
So trivial an answer, as to say;
His will, and pleasure, they would not obey:
But rebels were, who did that power resist,
Which he does claim, of doing what he list
As his Vicegerent, and, as he was taught
By those, whom he, to be true Prophets thought.
Let him consider, what best guards a Throne,
And, keeps him safest, who does sit thereon;
By whom, Kings reign; why they at first were made;
And, for whose sakes, authority they had:
That, he may not suppose GOD, did provide
His Kingdom, only, to advance his pride;
Or, to inflict an heavy curse, upon
Whole Nations, by inslaving all to one.
Let him consider, in what infamies
A Tyrant lives, in what ancertainties,
Fears, doubts, and dangers: and with what esteem,
Content and peace, he wears his Diadem,
Who reigns, as knowing, that he had his Crown
More, for his peoples sake, then for his own:
And, let him kick away those Parasites,
Whose Counsel to Oppression, him invites;
Or, foolishly persuades him, to improve
Power, wealth, or pleasure, by the loss of love.
And, thereby, makes him labor to enjoy
That power, which will at last himself destroy.
Let him consider, soberly, if he
In honor, or in conscience, bound may be
Himself, for those, to hazard, who, pretended
His Honor, and his Rights, to have befriended;
Whereas, it may, (by many a circumstance)
Be made appear, that, at their own advance,
They chiefly aimed; or, to preserve the Lot,
Which, they had by his Grace, already got.
For, to prevent approaching Beggary,
Some strengh'ned him in acts of Tyranny;
Some, to disturb the waters, that, in them,
They might be thriving Fishers, under him.
And very few (what e're they counterfeit)
To him, adhered, but, to save, or get.
Or, though their love engaged them; yet, none
Is bound to more, then can by him be done:
Nor is it just, that, he, himself should lose,
Because, he wants power, to save all those
Who stood with him engaged: Nor, would they
Desire it, if they loved him, as they say.
Let him not trust to those fanatic things,
Who, dote upon the Accidents of Kings,
And slight their Essence: For, as, hitherto
These, by their aid, did but themselves undo
Without his benefit; so shall it be
Hereaftet, till their error they can see.
There is no help in humane policy,
Nor any way, but downright honesty
To his security; or to redeem
Their happiness who have assisted him:
For every course, and politic design
That, shall be drawn out, by a crooked line,
Will but beget new mischiefs, and enforce
New projects, whose effects will still be worse;
Till spite of power, and fraud, long swords, and daggers,
He stand enrowl'd among the Royall-Beggers;
Or, with those Kings, who, from their honor fell,
Because, they slighted those, who wished them well.
Let, him not fancy, that their seeming love,
Who Court, him, yet, will worth regarding prove,
Though, daily, more and more they shall repair
To kiss his hand; or, fill the empty air
With acclamations; or, although they may
Upon his birth, or Coronation day,
Make Bonefires, ring the Bells, drink healths unto him,
And such like trivial, and rude honors do him;
For, herein, these, act but a sensual part,
Delightful to themselves, without a heart:
Some, to express their present discontent,
And dis-affection to the Parliament:
Some, for self ends; some out of levity;
And, many other, they well know not why,
Seem zealous of his honor, who would soon,
Repent what, they now covet should be done,
Were he restored unto them, with that mind
VVhereto, as yet, he feemes to be inclined;
And, they who do this day Hosanna cry,
Would say, perhaps, to morrow, Crucify.
The common People, rather live by sense,
Then reason; and so quickly take offense
At present sufferings, that they often are pleased
To cut their own throats, that they may be eased,
And, when it shall distaste their Fantasies,
Will tread on what they did Idolatrize.
If, therefore, he would in their love confide,
And gain from them, Affections which will bide;
He must, protect them from receiving wrong,
In things, which to their Freedoms do belong:
Of their proprieties, he must take care;
And, that their Persons and their purse he spare,
Till he shall need them; and until they see
How for his honor, and their good 'twill be.
For they will then, be forwarder to give,
Then he shall be to ask, or to receive;
And, when just cause the same occasion may,
Fling, for his sake, both goods, and lives away.
Let this be then his aim, and his intent,
When God shall join him with his Parliament;
With Justice, let him round impale his Throne,
And, set before it, like King Solomon,
A guard of Lions, that, may keep away
Those Apes, Baboons, and Foxes, which assay
Thereon to make intrusions; or, devise
How to invade him, with such flatteries,
As may delude him; and, divert him from
Those Duties, which his Dignity become.
All his Prerogatives, likewise, let him
So mix with equity; so, circle them
With pious Charms; and, so confine, and awe
His Vassalls, by Example, and by Law,
That, in all times to come, nor he, nor they
Who shall succeed him, find occasions may
To dim his glory, or his power to shake;
Or, on the Subjects right, a breach to make.
So, shall the people their just claims enjoy,
So, you, who do each other now destroy,
Shall in each others happiness delight,
And, raise your Mountain to a glorious height.
What, can he more desire, then to excel
Among those people, with whom all is well?
Whither can he aspire, but to possess
On earth, the chiefest earthly happiness?
And, what can he have less, then he now gains
By seeking more, then to a King pertaines?
But, lest, what his good Genius would advise,
He may, by means of their deceits despise,
Who have the Jannes and the Jambres been,
By whose enchantments, he continues in
Obdurateness: Let him, take special care
Of those false Priests, and Prophets to beware,
Who sooth him up with lies; and, make him dream,
That, by endangering his Crown for them
He should preserve it; and, that, to provide
Large means to feed their gluttony and pride,
Is to promote GODS glory; let him not
Believe those truthlesse vanities, a jot.
Though some good men, have heretofore been fed
With Babels portions, and unforfeited,
Preserved their innocence, (with much ado)
Yet, now, those dainties, have corrupted so
This Generation; that, there is cause to doubt
Their Charms. And, therefore, let him shut them out
From heart, and ear, (what ever formal show
Of Sanctity, they make in outward view)
Believing, that their chief intentions here,
Are to repair their breaches; or, endeare,
And sweeten, to the ruin of this Nation,
Those Philters, and that cup of Fornication,
Whereby, their Scarlet Mistress, giddifies
All those, who listen to her Witcheries.
Let him, above all others, take good heed
Of these deceivers; add this to his Creed
Concerning them; even this, that they are not
Gods Prophets; that, GOD owns not for his lot,
What they so call; and, that, though him they raise
Above the Moon, with attributes of praise;
It is, but for the service of the Dragon,
Their Lust, their great Diana, or their Dagon,
That, they so Court him: yea, though they adore
The seat he sits on, as divine (or more)
And, canonize him (as it were) for one,
Who, all his Predecessors had out-gone
In piety, (because, he stourly stands
To keep them with full guts, and idle hands)
Let him him not be deceived; nor think so glorious,
So honorable, or, so meritorious,
What he would do for them, (if he were able)
For, Jesabel did feed, at her own table,
Eight hundred Prophets; and, appeared, no doubt,
In her own way, as bounteously devout,
As he would be: yet, did her superstition,
With other sins, occasion her perdition:
And they were but false prophets, whom she fed,
Who, shortly after, likewise perished.
Hypocrisy, and superstition, may
Be sooner flattered by such as they,
Into stupendions-bounties, then you see
The best men can, by true devotion be:
And, this, the Sacrifices, Altars, Groves,
Shrines, Idols, Temples, and that Bounty proves,
Which has been dedicated unto men,
To Angels, and to Devils, now and then.
Then, let him, nor their Praises prize; nor fear,
Against their claims, that covenant to swear,
Which is established by his Parliament,
Their mischievous encrochments to prevent:
For, though they have made captive his esteem:
Not only to their callings, but to them;
Nor they, nor that (once theirs) now, sold and bought,
Are so divine, as they would have them thought.
Yea, though these call it sacrilege, in those
Who, to discharge the public debts, dispose
What was of late, employed, but to feed
Bell and the Dragon; and, would scruples breed
Within his conscience, making him believe,
That GOD, is robbed, if others do receive
What, lately they possessed (and have too long
Usurped already, to the public wrong.)
Let neither King, nor people, be afraid
Or what by these Impostors, has been said,
To save their Kitchenstuffe; and, that their back
Hereafter, may not their soft raiment lack.
Let them not fearful be to sell, or buy
Those portions, in their great necessity,
Unless they sell, or buy them, with a mind,
To prey on others rights; or, are inclined
To have them, though they think it may be sin;
And whether right, or wrong be done therein:
For, such a man himself does guilty make
Of Sacrilege, though but his own he take.
A true Disciple, doubtless, may enjoy
Things carnal; and whilst them he does employ
As he is bound, none ever grudges him
Their use; nor does him, in their use, condemn:
But, when, his own false interest to advance,
He shall mis-name it, Christ's Inheritance,
Or otherwise shall mis-imploy the same
Against Truths Friends, and honor of GOD's name;
He forfeits what he had. Moreover, know,
That Christ, whose service they pretend unto,
Bequeathed them no such Lordships, as they claim:
Nor Salaries, like those, at which they aim:
But giving them Commission (whom he sent
His work to do) enjoined them content
With his allowance; strictly charged them,
To trust to none, for wages, but to Him:
And, to expect their Labors hire from none,
(Or any where) but, where the work is done.
But, see, how great a difference now appears
Betwixt these Priests, and Christ's Commissioners:
So impudently they do now presume
The Titles, and the Wages to assume,
Which were forbid; so largely, they provide,
Not necessaries only, but for pride,
For luxury, and for magnificence,
Beyond the limits of a modest Prince;
So loose are their deportments, and so vain;
Such Ruffians and Buffoones they entertain:
Of common faults, and of each crying sin,
So manifestly guilty, some have been;
So peevish are they, so uncharitable;
Amid their plenty, so inhospitable;
So ignorant, they have been otherwhile,
And their Apostleships do so defile;
That, to suppose, CHRIST'S Officers were such
As they appear, were in effect, as much
As to profess, his Kingdom were become
Terrestrial, and his Court, indeed, at Rome;
And, he who shall receive these, in the name
Of CHRIST'S Disciples, will receive but shame.
It Is pity, that their Bounty, who were Nurses
To piety, at first; and, who, their purses
So prodigally empti'd, to endow
The needy Saints, should so perverted grow;
And, that, men were so graceless in their use
Of Blessings, as to lose them by abuse.
Yet, just it was, that they who did suppose
GODS bounty, not enough; their own, should lose.
And, that, gifts which he gave not; and, which may
Pervert his purpose, should be took away;
(At least) when their possessors do begin,
To turn, what flowed from virtue, into sin.
And, how could you employ their vast wealth better,
Then, to discharge that, wherein you were debtor
By their default, who, sought to have destroyed
Your Birthrights, by that wealth which they enjoyed?
Since, Offerings made to GOD, (and, which to own,
He does accept) may be on men bestowne,
In times of need, when mercy, justly cries
To be preferred, before a Sacrifice.
Thus, did, without reproof, the Jewish Kings
Buy, otherwhile, with Dedicated things,
Their Kingdoms peace; and, purchased uncontrold,
Their Liberties, with sanctified Gold;
So, with their wealth; by whom your wars begun
To pay the Soldier, you have justly done.
But, that your King more plainly may espy
His disobligement, to the Prelacy;
(Which comprehends those Boutefeu's, by whom
He, and his people, are almost become
The ruin of each other) Be it known;
These, were, at first, no creatures of his own,
Or, of his Predecessors; though, they gained
A legal Oath, by them to be maintained,
As part of holy Church; and, though a while,
They sat among the Peerage of this Isle.
But, they were first created, to promote
The Kingdom of the BEAST, and, to devote
Their services to him, in raising high,
In making strong, and large, his Emperie;
Or, in debasing Kings; and, how, they did
Perform that service, you in Stories read.
Now, when for bloody tyranny, from hence,
That Tyrant was expelled, by Providence,
These also, (if they had not been befriended)
Had into banishment, their Chief, attended.
But, they pretending to a Reformation,
(Perhaps, to keep possession in this Nation,
For their grand Signior; and, to bring to pass
What, now of late almost effected was,)
Obtained grace: And, proving to be fit
For their ambition, who aspire to get
An arbitrary power, they did arise
Almost to all their former dignities;
And grew so active, and, so wise became
In praying of the Kings, and their own game,
That, here, (as plainly as in France) we see
There Is no such Tyrants, as where Prelates be.
And, he, perhaps, did mean the self-same thing,
Who used to say, no Bishops, and no King.
They were advanced, like Jeroboams Priests,
But to preserve usurped Interests
Upon the people; and to help increase
Those claims, which Tyrants covet to possess,
By falsifying Charters and Commissions,
From Sacred Writ, to justify oppressions:
And Jurisdictions, to that end, they had,
To force, when wit they wanted, to persuade.
Then, to oblige the more, and, that they might
Be like to Jereboams Priests, outright;
They, from the poorest, and the basest sort
Of people, rose, to highest place in Court.
This is their Jus Divinum, whatsoever
Their friends, or they, would make themselves appear:
Which, by clear demonstration, I make good,
And, not by tales of Tubs, and Robin-Hood.
Thus, what they were; and, what they had to do,
And, what at best their pride has brought them to,
I have declared; that, your King no more
May cheated be by them, as heretofore:
Or, think, that Law, or Conscience, him obliges,
To keep up their usurped Privileges,
But, thereby know, that, if he shall delight
In that, which is indeed the Royall-right;
He, their vain services, no more, will need,
And, joy, that from such Flatt'rers he is freed.
If any shall object, that, he has took
An Oath on their behalf; that might be spoke
As Well of Kings, perhaps, who took away
Old Idol-Priesthoods: For, it is likely, they
Vowed their protection, when the policy
Of Jereboam raised his Hi'rarchy
To six the Kingdom. But, no Oaths oblige,
Which in unlawful actions would engage:
And, his Oath is not broke by him, who took it,
When, that, which made it lawful, does revoke it.
If it be said, those things to God were given,
Which they possessed. What then? in earth, and heaven,
God, is the sole possessor of all things;
And, (whatsoever any takes, or brings)
Has neither more nor less; nor does allow
That any place on earth, or portion, now,
Of things mere earthly, should be made appear
More holy, or more his, then others are;
For, man intitling GOD, to men's estates,
Is, but a Priest-cheat, which he greatly hates.
When, you give more to GOD, then he commands,
His Thanks is; Who required it at your hands?
Nor does he those Oblations ever prize,
Which from a superstitious ground arise;
Nor counts, a charitable deed made void,
When gifts abused, better are employed.
Oh! let not then his hazzards to preserve
Their temp'rall claims, be more then they deserve.
Let him not tire himself to change a boot,
Which he may wear with ease, on either foot.
Let him not, by his undue care of these
Which were the chiefest cause of his disease,
Against his own just Interest make him err,
By seeking their advancements to prefer
Before his own well-being. Let him not
Permit their formal wisdom to besot
His understanding so, that he shall scorn
This Counsel; or, continue to adjourne
Compliance with his people in those things
Which are the Cement betwixt them and Kings;
And, will be so approved, maugre that
Which, to deceive him, they both print, and prate.
Let him not trust to their enchanting Spells,
Nor to the brain of their Achitophells;
For, if faint, or false-heartednesse in those
Who, for the Public, his attempts oppose,
Shall not for private, or, by-interest
Betray the cause and trust they have professed;
GOD, at this present time, will lower bring
The tyrannizing power of Priest, and King.
Nor King-craft, Priestcraft, nor the policies
Of all, who preach or fight up tyrannies,
Shall long prevail, though, to support each other
All Europes Tyrants should unite together:
But, GOD, when they suppose to reach the tops
Of their designs, will frustrate all their hopes;
And, cause them to perceive, that he intends
To prosper that, whereto they are no friends.
Before that day, from all equivocations,
From all close ends, and mental Reservations,
Let Charles, begin a resolute retreat;
Else (MARK this) when sev'n years he shall complete
Among the Beasts, with Nebuchadnezar,
The Event of his demurrers will appear:
And, he, who, yet a Leadstar, might become,
Of just Dominion, to all Christendom,
Shall miss the best advantage offered, yet,
To any, King, who on his Throne did sit.
Though clouds rise in the South, and in the North;
There is, a Doome-conditionall, gone forth
To be reverst, or stand, as he shall, now,
His want of prudence, or, his wisdom show,
As when the Sun ascends, to run his race,
From his ecclipsed honor, and disgrace,
He, now, may rise; whereas, if he pass by
The present offered opportunity,
He may perhaps, begin the fatal dance,
Which every King must foot, who does advance
Himself above his bound. He, may, now, make
Their expectations frustrate, who, yet, take
An old prediction, in that sense, which he
Would be unwilling, so fulfilled should be.
For, through these Islands this Tradition goes,
That He, who made the English Damask Rose,
Or, else some other, being curious grown,
To know the future fortune of his Throne,
Received, in hieroglyphick-wise expressed,
Their Portraitures, who, when he was at rest,
Should in his Kingdom, after him succeed;
With words, in Latin Verse, thus Englished:
A Man, a Child, a Furious One;
A Maid, a Fox, a Lion, None.
Vir, Puer, etc.
I would not, any much should trust, or fear
Such Prophecies; yet, when events appear
To answer unto that which was foretold,
Wise men should make what use of them they could:
Seek how they might extract, even from the Devils
Deceits, an antidote, against his evils;
And, so direct their actions, that his Charms
And cheating riddles, may not do them harms.
Lo, that prediction, is this day fulfild;
Six, as it was fore-typifi'd, have held
The Scepter of that King; and, now there is none,
Who either wears the Crown, or fills the Throne;
Nor, any thing to furnish-out the same
Belonging to that race, except a Name:
And, here shall end that Prophecy, unless
It further be fulfild through wilfulness.
If he, who ownes that name, shall harken to
Their counsel, who will tell him what to do;
That name, at last, much like that stump, may be
Which was preserved, when the Royall-tree,
Once, representing Nebuchadnezzar,
Was felled down. And, as he did appear
In former Glory, when he had confessed
His failings, and the living God professed;
So, shall it be with Charles, if he repent;
God, will the ruin of his House prevent;
Restore him to his Throne, and make his fame
To grow the fairer, through his present shame.
But, if he shall defer, till it is too late,
Let him prepare for King Belshazzars fate,
And, let all those, who shall to him adhere,
Expect, in his sad dooms, to have a share.
As Samuel did for Saul, till God did sling
That Tyrant off, and chose another King;
So, shall I pray for him (with mourning too)
Till I perceive what GOD, and he will do.
And, therefore, touching him, I will (before
I speak to others) utter somewhat more.
By no external symptoms, can I find
That, he does yet, begin to change his mind;
But, so, in his first march proceeds on,
As if, he wrongs received, but, none had done.
And, whereas GOD, for penitence does call,
Does seem to think, there needs none at all;
But, rather, that his people (if not heaven)
Should supplicate, to be of him forgiven,
For suffering, such an Innocent as he,
So scandalized, and so wronged to be.
Yea, and the people (as it is their guize)
When some offender at the gallows dies,
Whom they themselves brought thither (do begin,
To look more on the straight that he is in,
Then, on the reason of it. And as when
A Township, having seized guilty men,
Who had much wronged their servants, stole their goods,
Devoured their cattle, sometime shed their bloods,
And, threatened their destruction; in a rage
They force them to the stocks, or to the cage,
Or to the Justice, and, are like to tear
The Rogues in pieces, too, ere they come there:
But, when they are examined; and when they
Must, at their Parish charges them convey
Unto the Goal; be bound to prosecute;
Take pains, and spend some money in the suit,
That Justice may be done (the Land to free
From such a plague as those were like to be)
Then, if the Rascals whine (as they will do)
And make their moan, they fain would let them go.
Thus, fares it with the people; they complained
Against the King, of wrongs by him sustained,
And, of worse like to come. They saw, he drew
The Sword upon them, therewith to pursue
His Usurpations; and, they were compelled,
To arm, and to oppose him in the field;
Where, GOD, the victory bestowed on them;
And, in their own defense, they conquered him.
Then, finding, that this Conquest drew on charge,
And, that it further would their cost enlarge
To keep what they have got, (lest all the cost
And blood already wasted, should be lost,
And worse things follow,) they impatient grow,
And, are discouraged, and besotted so,
That, they begin to pity his estate
More then themselves; to scandalize, and hate
Even their Deliverers; to underprize
GOD'S mercies, their own safety to despise;
And, to behave themselves, as if they had
An inclination in them to be mad
About next Moon in June: Or, had their Doom
In spite of their Defenders, to become
Perpetual slaves: And, this base Generation,
(Foes to themselves, and to their own salvation)
Have so confirmed the Kings obduracy,
By their imprudence, and apostasy,
That, he, perhaps, persuades himself, there needs
No penitence for any of his deeds
Against the public Rights; and that his ends
To compass, this vain Rout will yield him friends.
Now, therefore, all excuses to prevent,
Though I have showed, whereof he should repent;
Informed how; and in some part, of what;
Yet, here I Will touch a little more of that,
That He, and they who think him without blame,
May somewhat now consider of the same.
Deserves it no repentance, to invade
Those privileges which his people had?
And those proprieties, which they enjoyed
In their estates, unjustly, to make void,
Or, from their ancient freedoms, them to thrust?
Or, from their due possessions for his lust?
Or, maintenance for luxury and pride,
By other men's undoings, to provide?
And, then by Proclamation, to pretend
Some necessary, and some public end,
Which, could be manifest to no man's view,
And, which, was generally known untrue?
Was it no sin, by base Monopoles,
To raise the price of most commodities?
To take away free Trades and occupations;
To vex men with perpetual Molestations,
By Courts and Officers, devised for naught
But, that men into bondage might be brought
To his Prerogatives? and by degrees
By new exactions, Services, and Fees,
Be screwed up, (through demands, appearing small)
Till he has got a seeming-right in all?
For, if that be his due, which was received;
So, is the rest, if Priests may be believed.
Was it no fault, deserving penitence,
To take away the means of their defense,
From his most faithful Subjects? to ingrosse
And, raise the price of powder, to their loss,
And their apparent danger? to disarme
Their persons, who intended him no harm?
To put them under the Command of those
Who are their known Oppressors and their Foes?
To make them lend what he never meant to pay?
To make them buy what he should give away?
To make them give, who had no list thereto;
To make men sell, what they would not forgo?
To act, what may of all their dues deprive them,
And to deny them that, which should relieve them?
Deserves it not a sigh, that in his Court
Profaneness, and Oppressions, were but sport?
That, Judges were compelled to wrest the Laws?
Divines the Scriptures, to maintain a Cause
Which GOD abhorres; that all oppressions should
Be there upheld, and sin be uncontrold?
That, Schoole-boyes not arrived at years of reason,
Should suffer death, as culpable of Treason,
For childish words; as if Kings grew afraid
Through guiltiness, of what young Infants said?
Deserves it not bewailing, to repair
By fines, unjustly raised, the House of Prai'r?
To punish, men of merit, with disgraces,
Dismembrings, Stigmatizing of their faces,
Imprisonments, exiles, and separations
From friends, wives, children, yea, from all relations,
For things not capital; or, deemed crimes,
By Law; or, blamable in better times?
Was nothing done, whereof he might repent,
When even the speaking of a Parliament,
Was made a crime? when Members were confined,
For doing what by duty was enjoined;
When all their Privileges were so broke,
That, some should violently have been took,
Even from their Sanctuary; which, of old
To violate, no Tyrant was so bold:
And for which act, alone, this freeborn Nation,
Would quite have ruined all his Generation,
In former times; if, they had ere obtained
So great advantages, as now are gained?
Deserves it no repentance, to bestow
Those honors, which to virtue he does owe,
On vicious men? Or, such as had no worth
But, wealth and arrogance, to set them forth?
Or, could be instruments to help undo
Their honest neighbors, and the Kingdom too?
Is it no wrong, to set such Rascals, over
Their well known betters, that they may uncover,
And rise, and bow, before them; who, are fitter
To lacky by their horse, Caroch, or Litter?
Or, rather to be baffled, kicked and scorned,
Then, with a Coronet to be adorned?
Was nothing purposed, fit to be repented,
When that Design was first of all invented,
Which, to promote, (and, thereby to enforce)
He sent, both for Commanders, and for Horse,
To Germany? And, was there nothing plotted,
When on our Seas that Spanish Navy sloted,
Which anchored in the Downs? Is there no tear,
Or sign due, for those things which acted were
Concerning Rochell; whereof, to this day,
The Protestants of France complain, and say,
It cannot be, but, that both GOD, and Man
Will vengeance bring, for what they suffered then?
Is there no need of penitential prayers,
For innovating of the Scotch-affaires?
For doing, and undoing? For complying,
And failing off? For granting, and denying?
For all those falsifyings which fore-went
The first, the second, and this Parliament?
For all those injuries, which have been since?
For all the acts of fraud, and violence,
Committed in these Islands, since this War,
By him, and those, which of his party are?
For all these, is there no compunction due,
Which, he before the world, is bound to show?
No cause, can he discover of contrition,
For that Idolatry, and Superstition,
Which daily multiplied in these Lands
By his connivance, or by his commands?
And, by the vain hopes, fear, or fraud of those
Whose piety consists in mimick shows?
And, since there is a Statute, in this Isle
Which treasonable makes, to reconcile
This people unto Rome; did it appear
No fault, to tolerate an Agent here,
Or Nuntio from the Pope, to innovate
In matters of Religion, and the State?
Is there not cause enough he should repent
(Though no cause else were found) that, he has spent
So many years before he does begin
That penitence, which brings forgiveness in?
That he adventured so many falls,
Neglected and with-stood so many calls?
Made outward shows, of sorrow and remorse,
Yet, was no whit the better, if not worse?
That, in his heart, he still prepares for War,
When all his words for peace, and Treaties are?
That, GODS long sufferings, and the indulgencies
Of his wronged people, he does still despise?
And, that, although he now is in a chain,
His former hopes, and purposes remain?
If he repent not, may he not at last,
Be made repent it, when the time is past?
That, he is so unwise, as to provoke
Those men so far, by whom his power is broke,
As by apparent signs, to let them see
His aims to compass their destruction be?
And, how, for that intent still means are tried,
All parties, from each other to divide,
And from themselves? Moreover, may he not
Find reason to repent, what, by the Scot
He has endeavored to effect his ends?
What by the City, Army, and his Friends
In either House? yea by the people too,
That, he may make all Parties help undo
Themselves, and him, whose fall till he repent,
No power, shall be so powerful to prevent.
For, though they thrived a while, both he, and they
Whom he corrupts, shall descend one way;
And, GOD this Kingdom shall in order set,
By, men and means, not thought upon, as yet.
More might be said; much more, to let him see
What causes, of repentance there may be;
Which I had rather he himself should find,
(And, seriously consider in his mind)
Then hear them from another; and, but that
The Common-Voice, these faults enumerate,
I, had not mentioned them: nor, shall these prove
A blemish to him, if all this may move
His heart to Penitence: For, then I Will say
Enough, to take all guiltiness away;
And make him cleaner, then he was that morn,
In which it was first said, that he was borne.
And, GOD, so bless my hopes, as I intend
All this, to bring his troubles to an end;
And in this manner do it, that past evils,
Nor future sins, nor spite of men, or Devils,
May power obtain, to stop him, or to fling him
From that estate, whereto, I wish to bring him.
The way, by me designed (I confess)
To be a path, full of uneasinesse
To flesh and blood; and, not without much terror,
At first to those, who lived in ways of error.
It is not so with violets bestrow'd,
With pinks and roses, as the path way showed
By his deluding Prelates; but, I Will say,
This, confidently, it is the safest way,
And easiest I could find, for one who had
Such long and obstinate by-wand'rings made;
And, I unwilling am, he should begin
A course, which he might lose his labor in;
As those do, who close up a fest'ring wound
With healing salves, whilst filth in them is found.
My course may harsh appear, and full of dangers,
To them, who to such practices are strangers;
Yet, I dare warrantize, (for I can tell)
It leads to heaven, although it lies by hell:
And that it will at last, be well approved,
Of those, who him for his own sake have loved.
But, lest, the Maxims, which Court-breeding gives
To Kings, and zeal to their Prerogatives,
May steell his conscience; and, still, make him dream
That, all his Kingdoms, and all things in them,
Are his by right: And, that, if it be so,
All those endeavourings conducing to
The keeping of that Right, may, then be done:
And, lest he thence infer, he wrongeth none,
On whom, he makes war, with an intent,
Encroachments on his Kingship, to prevent;
But, that, they, rather, who have him with-stood,
Have down upon their own heads, drawn their blood.
To take the frothie vanity of that
Conceit away; thus, I expostulate:
If Kings have such a right; how, was it gained?
From whom, was that Prerogative obtained?
For, sure, what ever Parasites may please
To feign; Kings are not Ab Origines;
But had beginnings, like to other men,
Who rise, and fall; are borne, and die again;
And, came to their preferments, either by
GOD's gift, or man's, or else by Victory.
'Twere blasphemy, to say, that God bestowed
That power upon them, which to be allowed
They now contend: and, they from hell did fetch
Their text, or comment, who such doctrine preach.
It cannot be, that God, who, is Perfection;
Goodness it self; the Essence of Affection;
And, Fountain, out of which free mercy goes,
Throughout the whole creation, and or'e-flowes:
It cannot be, that from among those creatures,
(Which are in all things, of the self same natures)
He should not only, one or two, advance
Above the rest, but by his Ordinance
Declare it, likewise, to be right and just,
In them (even merely to fulfill their lust)
To take from others, when it pleases them,
Child, honor, goods, life, liberty and limb;
Or, practice cruelties upon them: No,
It neither can be, neither is it so:
For, in his Word he tells, what Kings should do;
There makes description of such Tyrants too,
As those, for which their suit his People made,
When, in his wrath, a King bestowed he had;
Because, they longed for that vain Gallantry,
Which they among the Nations, did epsy.
He, sharply threatens Kings, who tyrannize,
Or use their power, in an insulting wise;
And says, he gave them their Prerogatives,
That, men should under them, lead quiet lives;
That Swords they have, to execute the Law;
Defend the just; ungodly men to awe;
And, so to reign, that no good man might fear
The port they carry, or the Sword they bear.
Whence then, obtained they that exhorbitant
Dominion, whereof, now so much they vaunt?
Did first the people, give them such a power
And set them up, of purpose to devour,
Vex, and inslave them? That were to conceive
A madness, which no wise men will believe;
Nor many fools, their folly so betray,
As thus to think; much less, the same to say:
And, doubtless hitherto, no Nation had
So little reason, as to grow so mad.
Did they then raise themselves, unto their height?
Where got they power, to conquer such a right?
If others helped them, whither did they run,
To keep themselves free, when that deed was done?
It seems likely, they would stay to share,
Their portions, where they so victorious were;
And did not sure, intend to set up one,
By whom, they would themselves be trod upon.
Nor, could those valiant men, become so base,
To leave behind them, an inslaved-race,
By taking such conditions, as are now,
Imposed on many Kingdoms, which you know.
Or, if a Nation, might be fooled so much,
Who knows, this Peoples lot, to have been such?
What ancient History, or what record
Thereof, a testimonial does afford?
If none, how do your British Tyrants claim
What they usurp; and that whereat they aim?
If, they obtained it by deceiving trust,
Which is most true (then, make amends they must)
And if spontaneously they do the same,
They lose with honor, what they got with blame.
If they prescription plead, from times of yore;
Time, makes not wrongs, to be the less, but more.
By Conquest, will they claim it; know ye, then,
The Conquerours are conquered again;
And, what time, and the sword away have tore,
Time, and the sword, does righteously restore:
And, that, time is no bar to rightful things;
Is for the people, true, as well as Kings;
But how, their Peoples freedoms, goods and lives
Shall Kings protect, if their Prerogatives,
Should be infringed, or lost? there is indeed
A just Prerogative, that he may need
In some Immergencies, which both by reason,
And, by the law of nature is in season,
When things which for the Public safety are,
Require them; and, when no known laws declare
What may be done. In such necessities
No Commonwealth, no prudent man, denies
An arbitrary Power, to private men;
Much less, to Magistrates, and Princes, then.
No Nation is so foolish to restrain
That just Prerogative, and so make vain
Their own security: they will and may
Be Judge of those necessities; for they
Are most concerned in them; and if he
Whom they to guard them chose, deprived shall be
Of means to do his duty; they must bear
The blame of what ensues: for, he is clear.
Thus, I could answer to all other things,
Which are objected by usurping Kings,
If need required; and bring them light to see,
How they by hypocrites, abused be;
And, say enough, were he thereto inclined,
To make your present King, to change his mind.
But, GOD, that only turns the hearts of Kings,
And to himself reserves such glorious things,
As their conversions; will I hope, in time,
Produce that miracle of grace in him:
For, if I guess right, he would now be glad
To know, where wholesome counsel might be had;
And knows what it is, to want, in his distress,
Such men as dare the truth to him profess,
Without regarding carnal hopes, or fear;
Or, who displeased, or well pleased are.
There are some Prayers left upon record,
That, plead yet, strongly for him, to the Lord;
And, which, by his forgot Remembrancer,
Were offered up, for him, in his first year,
When that, which now is truly come to pass,
By him foreseen, and justly feared was.
It may be at this present time, those Prayers
Then sent up, for this King, and his affairs,
Begin to take effect; for, who does know
What mercies from the Fount of Grace may slow?
Or, what for him, those, offerings might prepare
Which made, by Faith, in Fiery Trialls were?
Oh, if they take effect, and if he find,
Such motions (as are wished for) in his mind,
To spring up; let a blessed deaw from heaven,
Descend, that growth unto them, may be given.
With true humility, let him begin,
To meet them kindly, and to welcome in
Those guests, with such respect into his heart,
As may there fix them, never to depart.
Let not a shame, to be repented of,
Or, their derisions, who perhaps will scoff
At such a change, deter from persevering;
Or, by their threats, beget in him a fearing
Of what may follow: for, it glad shall make,
And cheer his Soul, when all their hearts will ache.
Let him not entertain the least suspect,
His Penitence will want a due effect,
If it be true; or, that a guard or wall,
From being manifest, restrain it shall,
When once it works: Nor let his people fear
To trust him, when he proves therein sincere:
For, hearty Penitence, is of a strain
Not like to that, which hypocrites do feign;
But, moving, unresistable, and clear,
When, and in whomsoere, it shall appear.
Yea, thereunto, so great a power is given,
That, hearts, alone, it breaks not open, but heaven,
And, makes way to reconcile again,
The greatest sinners, both to GOD and Men.
For, whosoere is truly penitent,
Merely with tongue and eyes, does not repent,
With vows, with protestations, and with tears;
Or, with such formal complements, as theirs
Who keep an out-side-fast, or cloth the back
With vestments, and with long cloakes, died black;
Or, who make faces, or look for a while,
So sad, as if it were a mortal sin, to smile:
But, wheresoere true penitence you see,
Like rising up from death to life will be.
It wholly changes, and new moulds, new makes
That man, within whose heart, it rooting takes.
As well within, it cleanses as without:
And, that the truth of it, ye may not doubt,
The sinner from ill habits, it estranges;
His words, his thoughts, his company it changes:
His works, his ways, his plots, and his designs;
Of good intentions, gives certain signs;
He daily grows more fruitful, takes more care,
To be indeed reformed, then to appear:
Regards not, what of others, he is thought,
So, he, unto perfection, may be brought;
Fears nothing more, shuns nothing more then sin,
And, that abhorred course which he was in.
Forgiveth every one, that was his foe;
Gives unto all men, that which he does owe;
Shames, neither to bewail, or to confess
To GOD or men, his former wickedness;
Nor any good advice, will disesteem,
How mean soere the counselor shall seem:
And, when the King, thus changed shall return,
Who, would desire his coming to adjourn?
When, thus a true repentance does inprove him,
Who would not then, forgive, and trust, and love him?
For, when you find a metamorphosis,
In him, so supernatural as this,
Naught formerly by him, mis-said, mis-done
Or, misconceived, shall be thought upon
To future disadvantage, though the sin,
Has black, or, of a scarlet tincture bin.
Though, by an over-good conceit of him,
Who stood suspected, he restrained them,
Who sought to bring his fathers death to trial,
And, gave offense, by giving a denial
To Justice, in that cause, to take her course;
And, raised suspicions, too, of somewhat worse:
Yea, though he were a sinner, twice as bad
As he (by those, who love him least) is made;
And, had, beside the blood his Party spilt,
More sin upon him, then the double guilt
Of King Mannasseh; he, as pure should grow
By such repentance, as the Mountain snow.
And, when to this repentance he is brought,
Who can object? or, how can it be thought,
That, in fullfilling of the covenant
(As touching him) you shall one title want,
Of that Branch, which, expresses your intent
To bring delinquents, to due punishment?
For, if you can conceive, what it is to bring
The lofty heart, and spirit of a King,
To stoop so much, as to descend unto
What, he that is truly penitent must do;
Or, if you could believe what selfe-denialls,
What inward torments, and what fiery trialls
Are undergone, and must be passed through
By those, who truly penitential grow,
You would confess, that, nor restraint, nor chains,
Nor death it self, had in them fears or pains,
So terrible, so full of grief and smart,
As those, which exercise a contrite heart;
And, you would say (when forth this fruit he brings)
No sinners; no such Penitents as Kings.
Oh what a blessed, what a glorious thing
It were Great Britan, to behold thy King
Come back thus changed; nd with a mind to do,
That, which thy Genius has advised him to!
And, that, which his own conscience cannot choose
But tell him, it were madness, to refuse!
How, would his drooping Subjects, then rejoice,
To bid him welcome, both with heart and voice!
How, would his friends triumph, how would his foes,
Their aims, and wicked expectations lose?
How would those hypocrites among you tremble,
Who did with him and all the world dissemble!
How, would their souls be comforted, who were
To him, and to the Common good sincere!
And by both sides oppressed, for abiding
In their first principles; and, for not siding
With this, or, with that faction, to make strong,
Themselves and other men, in doing wrong!
What hopes thereby would other Nations take,
That his example would some changes make
In their oppressors? How, would they be struck
With terrors, who have Tyranny mistook
For Kingship; and, by strained Monarchy
Themselves infected with Lycanthropie!
How, would your noisome Grasshoppers, and Flies,
Frogs, Lice, and Caterpillars, which arise
From their corruptions (fearing to delay,
Their lingering here) hop, fly, and crawl away!
How, would the BEAST then rage; the Scarlet Whore,
Then, curse and rail; the Devils howl and roar;
As fearing, they their heights were falling from,
And, that the Kingdom, which they hate, were come!
But, his conversion, would not long adjourne
Their miseries, to whom he should return,
Unless they take more care, and, more delight
To make their conversations more upright,
Then heretofore; unless to meet him too,
They better shall prepare, then yet they do;
Unless they more unite; more wise appear,
In resolutions; and then, more adhere
To that which is resolved; unless more jealous
They grow of Public honor, and more zealous
Of Public Faith; more clear in their intent;
More diligent, more studious to prevent
Supplanting wiles, more sensible of wrong,
Sustained by them, who to their side belong,
More careful, that their Friends, may firm abide;
And, that all others may be satisfied
According to just hopes; and plainly see
The common-good, their chiefest aim to be.
For, sure, the Kings repentance will avail
But little to their comfort, who shall fail
In such like duties; or in meeting him
With such affections, as he brings to them.
But, when all other sinners grace receive,
They shall with Hypocrites, their portion have;
And, to their shame and great vexation, then,
See those, whom they thought worst, the better men.
The British Genius, as, if he had in
Some secret Musing, or Devotion been,
Here made a pause; and, therefore, here will we
Take breath, a little, if you pleased be.
The Contents of the second Lection.
THe Genius, here, declares to them
Who exercise the Power-supreme,
How, they, much mischief might prevent:
How, they, the people may content:
How, keep their Power, and Cause upright,
With honor, in their Foes despite;
And tenders, that, this may be done,
Much to be duly thought upon.
Tells, what the people ought to do,
To give assistance, thereunto;
Persuades, the Nations to agree,
Lest by themselves, they ruined be;
The Factious-parties does advise,
To lay aside their vanities;
And, interweaveth, here and there,
What, others, may with profit hear.
Shows LONDON, where her wealth does lie;
Speaks reason, to the Soulderie;
Minds, to what sort of Irish, you
Some share of mercy, should allow:
To Preachers, preaches ways of peace,
To further Truth with Righteousness:
Then drawing toward his conclusion,
Presageth Order, from confusion:
Informs, from what Pedigree
Good Government derived will be;
And, when that is told you, ye shall hear
What Is whispered, in the Authors ear.
THE GENIUS, (whom observe I pray, with heed)
With raised eyes, did thus, again, proceed:
How feign would I find words and exhortations,
Which, might not now, be lost upon these Nations?
But, cause them to consider, and discern
Those things, which their well-being may concern?
That, all well meant endeavors for their good,
Might not be still neglected, or withstood;
And, future ages, wonders, what dire Fate,
This Generation did infatuate?
My breath, has hitherto, been chiefly spent,
The Kings approaching ruin to prevent:
By skrewing thoughts into him which may wake him
From slumber; and, for peace, industrious make him.
Now, I will also, somewhat, say to them,
Who stand, in prime relation, unto him;
That, if his heart GOD change not, neither he
May them destroy, nor they destructive be
Unto themselves. And, what, to that good end,
I shall advise, is this: Dear friends, atttend.
Let those high Courts, by whom the Pow'r-supreme,
Is exercised in the name of him
Who now is laid aside; let those adventer
No longer, to wheel round, without a Center:
But, six on somewhat, whereon to be steddie,
Before all catch the Staggers, and grow giddie.
Let that be rectified, which now, disturbs
Their nat'r all motions, in their several Orbs;
Lest if the Nations clash, they thereby crack
The wheels of Government, and make them break
Against each other, when there will be here,
To mend them, no well-skill'd State-Ingineere.
Reduce your wandering lights; let every star
Within your Firmament keep his own sphere;
Lest, if above their Circles they aspire,
Like Phaeton, they set the world on fire;
Or aid those Comets, which, already glare
Prodigiously, to breed combustions here,
VVose mischievous effects, you may in vain
Attempt, perhaps, hereafter, to restrain.
Till to the snuff they blaze; or, till they shall
To quench their thirstings, all your blood exhale.
This mischief to prevent, let every wit,
And every Power subordinate, submit
To that, which is supreme; even unto that,
Which for the present, is predominate,
For public safety: And let that abide
On Principles, whic neither may divide
Or, wound it self; lest on it self, it draw
Contempt, from them, who, thereof stood in awe;
And, that contempt so weaken them at length,
That they, with loss of honor, lose their strength:
For, you have felt, (as well as heard it told)
What of Divisions, has been said of old.
Your present postures give occasion may
To some, of doubting, whom they should obey;
How far forth, their obedience must extend;
How long they shall uncertainely attend,
The hatching of that Government, which must
Continue fixed; and, whereto they may trust.
Which questionings, and doubtings (though good reason
Has made them in these Islands, now, in season)
Enfeeble much your Power; and do beget,
(Though seemingly the people do submit)
Ill consequences, which will still be worse,
Until you settle on some certain course:
Especially, if they suspect that power,
Intends not their benefit, but your.
Delay not, therefore, that which they expect:
And, till a settlement may take effect,
(Or, till they better know, what does pertain
To your new cunb, and also to your reine)
With kindness manage them, and condescend
To what, may for their satisfaction tend
In all just seeming Rights; till they may see,
That, by your power, their peace preserved shall be.
And then, if your Authority to own,
They shall refuse; so make your courage known,
That, none may dare blaspheme, or scandalize,
Those needful Powers, and lawful Dignities,
Which are above their Censures; least you farther
Their Plots, who have no hope, but in disorder;
Since, better it becomes, Wise Men to dye
In Order, then, to live in Mutiny.
Mark, those among you, who, whilst they pretend
Your Power, and your Proceedings, to befriend,
Impair them, underhand, by driving on
Designs, destructive to what should be done.
So many Marks, upon them do appear,
Declaring to what Party they adhere,
That, well they may be known: And, they to whom
These are discovered, find, what will become
Of You, and your Affairs, unless, you shall
With speed (and wisely) them, in question call.
Your greatest Foes, and, they who most may wrong you,
Are some, who, daily Counsel take among you.
Your Adversaries, as the Prophet said,
Are men of your own Houses, who have played
The parts of Seeming Friends. Of these, therefore,
Take heed, and seek to cast them out of door
Before they cast out you; Which, were they stronger,
Deferred would not be, one minute longer.
When you have purged your Houses (till which day
All will be spoke in vain, that I shall say)
Take my advice (for it is genuine,
And, that, whereto your Genins does incline)
First, to Debate, and, then, to Question, bring
The Government, and what concerns the King;
Which, being prudently resolved upon,
Will save you twenty labors, in that One:
And, make, (if you perform, as is professed)
An easy passing thorough all the rest.
In your Debates, discover not that spleen
Or Virulency, wherein, may be seen,
A purpose, nor to give, nor take content;
But, so contest, that, when ye shall assent,
There may, on you, be seen the fewer scars
Of your unhappy and uncivil Wars;
And, that it may appear, your strife has bin,
Not, that your Will, but, that the Truth may win.
Yet, lest, whilst you are forced to contest,
You may destroy the noblest Interest
By dull Indifferency, or want of zeal;
Look to the safety of the Commonweal,
As to your chief Alligance: For, a King
Who makes a claim although the claimed thing.
Be due) yet, if he so exacteth it,
As, that, it public danger may beget,
Becomes a Traitor to the Royal Trust,
In him reposed; and, merits to be thrust
Besides the Throne, if, therein, he persist,
To prosecute his private Interest.
When, ye are certain, what should be preferred,
From prosecuting it, be not detered;
Or, from a stout engagement, in that Cause,
Whereto, you are obliged by the Laws
Of GOD, and Nature: For, a work begun
With Courage, is as good, as halfway done.
Let not the foolish fears, or superstition
Of earebor'd slaves (the Foot-stools of Ambition)
Who Idolize, and deifie their Kings,
As more then mortal, and unbounded things;
Let not these fright: But, well examine you
What, to the People; what, to them, is due,
That, so, your Friends, who see your prudency,
May be preserved from Apostasy.
Consider, wisely, how with him, you deal,
Who, of these Vessels, was esteemed, erew hile
Both Master, and Chief owner; that, nor he
Nor you, may ruined, or dishonored be,
By any practice, which may not befit
Your Wisdom, or your Justice, to permit.
Force not each other into such a Straight,
As, that, there may from thence, be no retreit;
Or, means left, for the one Party to prevent
The others fall, although he should repent.
But, as, indeed, you hitherto have done,
Him, as the Public Father look upon.
And, though his Parasites, have him enraged
By causeless Jelousies, and far engaged
Against your Lives, and Freedoms; yet, assay
To show him, all the Mercy, that you may.
Ulysses did spontaneously assent
To be inchained, that, he might prevent
The Sirens Charms; and, you, without just blame
Have done, (and may, yet do to him) the same
Who has already, been by their enchanting
So charmed, that, very little now is wanting
Of his, and your destruction. By his own,
And others faults, distempered he was grown;
And thereby has endangered, no less
His own Safe-being, then the Common-Peace;
And, while destructive Courses he shall take,
You, are obliged to stop, and pull him back;
Though, his Seducers, grow enraged thereby,
And, term you Traytons, for your loyalty.
Yea, you may still restrain him, and thereto
Add more, if need require it should be so;
Till GOD, by his especial grace, has brought him,
To shun the Course, which, evil Counsel taught him;
Or, left him so, that, wilfully he shall
Without your fault, by his own Projects, fall.
I will not counsel, that, ought less you do
Then Salus Populi, constrains you to;
For, though the Sheepish Ront, more think upon
Things present, then, on what is past and gone;
And, seem to have, already, so forgot
Late grievances, as if they thought it not
So great a plague, to be enslaved for aye,
As present weights to bear, though but one day,
Yea, though the most part, of the Common rabble,
So sottish, are, and so irrationable,
That, out of fear, lest others should enslave them,
They would inslave themselves, and those that save them:
Yet, must not those, on whom the Land relies,
Benumbed grow, with such stupidities:
For, it is a Symptom, of a Sottish Nation,
To grow respectless, of Self-preservation;
Or, fear to practice, what agrees with Reason,
Because, it has been falsely called Treason,
By Parasites, and Priests; who, that a King
Might make them something, made him, any thing,
Which he desired to be; and, hence did rise
Abominable Court-Idolatries.
Yea, hence, it was, that, men first grew afraid
To think (until of late) what may be said,
And must be resolutely done, before
GOD, will, these Isles, to their lost Peace restore.
A Realm, that fears to call her Trustee, to
Account, for ought mis-done, or left to do;
Is like those Children, who do fear the shows,
Which, they themselves set up to scar the Crows:
And, they, who think you have no rightful power
To curb his fury, who, might you devour;
May think, as well, they should not put a clog,
Or hang a chain, upon a shepherds dog,
Although, he daily bites, and kills the sheep,
Which he was, only, bred, and ^ed, to keep.
In warlike manner, with his Standard reared,
The King, against you, in the Field appeared;
And, gave you (as it were) a Summons thither,
That, he, and you, might plead you Rights together,
By way of Combat; which, your Common-Laws
Allow of, for the trial of that Cause,
Whereof there is doubtful proof; And, wherein, none
Knows how, to judge aright, but, GOD, alone.
This Trial, both did stand to: By this Trial,
The King, was overcome, without denial;
And did submit. What, had you then to do?
But, what you would your selves, be done unto,
When your Desires, were made a Rule, whereby
Another, might, square out his Charity?
Men, do not use to hunt a Beast of prey,
To take him, and, then, let him go away.
They, who have caught a Lion, you would blame
If they dis-mist him (though he seemed tame)
Unchain'd, and without keepers; since, that Creature
Is known, of so untamable a Nature,
That, he will ravine, as he did before,
If, to himself, you leave him any more.
Kings, who without control, the Scepter sward,
As tameless are, as Lions, that have preyd:
Which, howsoever, you shall use, or feed them,
Will soon grow dangerous, unless you beed them;
You, therefore, must not give them leave to seize,
On ought, at will; no, not so much as Flo^s,
Lest, some Prerogative, they thereon found:
But, you must circle them within a Bound;
And, Laws, and Counselors provide, whereby
You may their Wills, and Judgments, rectify:
And, then, when they by general consents,
So furnished, be, they may be Instruments
Of Honor, Peace, and Plenty. And, take this
From me, who know best, what, most fitting is
For this Isles constitution; That the increase
Of Wealth, and Honor; Settlement of Peace,
And Freedom from Oppressions, (whatsoever
Some dream) shall never be enjoyed here,
In any Government, so perfectly,
As, by a regulated Monarchy.
Shall I advise you to a Treaty, than?
No: It Is not now, as when the War began.
Before the Trial, your Trustees, did well
To treat for Peace; because, they could not tell
What might succeed; and, thought it safer, far,
To take some wrong, then seek redress by War.
But, now, for them to Treat, were to admit
That, GOD, had past no Trial for them, yet.
And, those, who thereto would persuade them, now,
I shall not for their wisest Friends allow,
If Friends: For, that, not only of their prizes
Defeats the Conquerors, but, equalizes
Them, likewise, with the Conquered; and, makes void,
What, should by right of Conquest, be injoyd.
When he, whose ancient Birthright was quite lost,
Has by expense of labor, time, and cost,
A lawful repossession of it sought,
And, at the Law, his suit to Trial brought;
Obtained a Verdict, Judgment, Execution,
And, full possession, without Diminution,
What, for a Friend, I pray were such a one?
Who should persuade this man, when all were done,
To wave his lawful right, so dearly bought,
To treat with him, who his undoing sought?
And, uncompel'd, refer unto debate,
What, he should leave, or take, of that Estate?
And, what were that man, but, a Groll, at best,
Who, re-adventur'd, thus, his Interest?
Nor honester, nor wiser, much, are they
Who, now, into a Treaty would betray
The Parliament. For, what has yet been done,
If they must Treat, again, for what is won?
Why, did they make good meaning men to fight
And lose their lives, to win for them, a Right,
Which they must get by Treaty? Why, is he
A Prisoner, if a King as yet, he be
That Is capable of Treating? Or, of more
Then you shall seem obliged to restore,
In mere humanity? Or, by that band,
Whereby, as Christians, you obliged stand,
Upon his true Repentance? And, upon
Security, like fault, shall not be done?
But, if no Treaty, be allowed, how then
Shall you, and he, be reconciled again?
By such a Course, as will be generous;
And, for our Genius to advise; Even thus:
Like honorable Victors, offer him
Terms honorable, if he merit them,
By true Repentance (For, it will be more
Then can be justly offered him before)
Lest, you, at last, may be requited ill,
If Power he get, before he change his Will.
When, you perceive, that, GOD in him has wrought
That mind, whereto you wish he should be brought,
Give him Conditions, freely, such, as may
Full well become a King, whom, to obey,
Acknowledge, and submit to, 'twil beseem
Those Nations, who, a good repute esteem.
Give him, that Kingly-Liberty, which will
Confine him, from all power of doing ill;
And, him enable, too, for every thing,
Pertaining to the Office of a King:
Which, to declare; and, to consider how
It shall secured be, I, leave to you;
Whom they concern, and, who know how, to make
Your own Conditions, if, good heed you take.
But, many are supposed, to be inclined
To some new Government, by them designed,
In whose erection, and establishment,
They could receive a great deal more content
Then in well regulating, what they had:
And, some of these, it may be are so mad,
(And so uncharitable) as, in heart
To pray, that GOD would rather, quite, depart
Both from this King, and all his Generation,
Then, frustrate them, or, their vain Expectation.
If, there be any such, far, be you from
Their evil mind; Let not their secret come
Into your Souls: And, though GOD should permit
His wilfulness, a little longer, yet;
Pronounce your Judgments, warily, on him,
Lest, in his Person, you, your selves condemn.
And, since, it is possible, that, from your sin,
His Faylings, and your Plagues, might first begin,
(As, once did, from the Peoples, an offense
In David, which brought on a pestilence)
Consider, 'twil make easy your own Doom,
If, toward him, affected you become,
As Children ought to be, whose Father has
Attempted their destruction, in his wrath.
Yea, careful be, you do not so employ
Your power, to cure the Head, that, you destroy
Both Head and Body; and, to ease the pains
Of Headache, that, you knock not out your Brains.
That, Limb, which, may be cured, cut not away:
Those Vessels, which with water, cleanse ye may
Purge not with Fire; For, GOD, shall give an end
By his own Power, to what, you cannot mend;
And, neither he, nor you, shall rise to stand,
But, by advancing Justice, in the Land.
Excuse me, if ('twixt what concerns the King,
And these Republikes) with some staggering,
I seem to Counsel you; One while persuading,
That, you oppose with stoutness, his invading
Your Freedoms, and Proprieties; Then, straight
Plead (as it were) that, Grace obtain he might;
Herein, I say, excuse me: For, it fares
With me, as with King David, in his Wars,
With Absalom; Against whom, to prevail,
He was content; yet, did his death bewail.
Loath was he, by a Foc, to be out-braved;
Grieved was he, that, a Son might not be saved;
And, him, whom he had sent to overthrow him,
He did beseech, that, Mercy, he would show him.
The same I do for him: Oh, let him have it
If he be qualified to receive it:
But, if he still persist, as he begun,
Then, do, as GOD shall move you; I, have done.
Done, as concerning him: But, much I find
Concerning, you, and others, yet, behind;
Which must be spoken, for the Reformation,
And, Welfare, of this present Generation:
Or, else, (if otherwise it shall succeed)
That, Future-Ages may take better heed.
For, know, unless ye speedily begin
To change the present Posture, you are in;
That, you, who, at this day have Power to give
Conditions, to your King; shall, to receive
Conditions, very glad, ere long, become:
Yea, and to buy them, also, with a sum.
That, this may be prevented, break the snare,
Wherewith, at this time, you ensnarled are.
When, you have any thing to act, which may
Increase the Public suffrance, by delay;
Consume not precious howrs, like those who dally,
In their Affairs, with Can We? May we? Shall we?
Till they, whom you obliged, are to cherish;
Through want of Justice, and Subsistence, perish.
Or, else, till they, who, yet, are knit together
So fall away, from you, and from each other;
That, what you might effect, this present day,
Hereafter, you nor can, nor shall, nor may.
For, think not, that, the Generality,
Can long continue in prosperity,
Whilst, you neglect particulars: Or, that
You can accomplish, what is aimed at,
If you, leave off, to act by rules of Reason,
Or, linger out, your works beyond their season.
Take, likewise, heed, that, when ye shall propose
The way of Peace, lest, there may be of those,
Amongst you, who, desire, that course should find,
Obstructions, whereunto, you seem inclinde:
Or, who, for secret ends, occasions give,
That, their demands, denial may receive;
For, GOD, so hates double heartedness,
That, he will favor no such practices.
Then, be as heedfull, if you shall exceed
Set-bounds, by some inevitable need,
Compelling it; that, when the straight is past,
Your selves into a Legal Course, you cast:
For, while a Town is burning, that, you see
May, then, be done; which, after, may not be.
Do, as you would be done to: Give not those
Who are your Friends, occasion to be Foes:
As you would be Forgiven, those forgive,
In whom, a true Repentance you perceive:
Not all Offenders; For, sure, no offense
Is pardonable without penitence,
Since, Mercy deigned to Impenitents
Is cruelty, to wronged Innocents.
Reward, as well as punish: For, by that
You cherish Virtue; Fortify the State,
And, shall gain more, then by the pence you spare,
Though, many, of this Thrift, unheedfull are.
Against all Enemies, make your defense
By prudence, joined with Dove-like Innocence,
Keep firm to your first principles; For, he
That stands fixed; though weak he seems to be
Gets strength; and will by standing still, outgo
That man, who always wanders too, and fro.
Be constant then; Affect vain hopes no more:
Do Justice, and show mercy to the poor.
Respect not Persons; but, judge every cause
According to right Conscience, and the Laws;
Remembering, GOD, all that, to judgment brings,
Whether, they sit with Commoners, or Kings.
Know, he marks all men's walkings; and, believe
Such measure, as ye mere ye shall receive;
So, as ye answer, poor men's prayers, now,
So, GOD will answer, and so prosper you.
Make good, the Gifts and Favors you bestow;
As well, in deed, be righteous, as in show:
Break not, your promises to any one
(Especially, to men, for you undone)
And, do not let your left hand, them deprive,
Of that, which, with your right hand, you did give:
Nor them repay with scandals, or neglect
Who have deserved, not your least, respect:
For, privy to such practices, I am
Both, to the grief of many, and your shame.
When, any one of those free Commoners,
Whom you do represent, traduced appears,
Within your Houses, where, he cannot make
Reply thereto: (And, whereof he must take
No notice, when thereof he shall be told)
Let his Traducers sharply be controld.
Or, called upon, to prove what they have said:
That, Innocence may not be betrayed,
By Impudent Detractors; yea, and do
That, wrong, as privileged thereunto.
For, what is more Injurious, then disgrace
Inflicted, in so eminent a place?
In presence of the Kingdom, as it were,
And, whereby, ere a man can be aware,
He may be wronged, and wounded mortally,
And, never know, by whom, or how, or why.
Let none aspire, to be a Grandee, thought,
Till he his Greatness, worthily has bought
By prudent Honesty; Tried Faithfulness,
And such like Grandour; nay, let none possess
Repute by these, one minute longer, then,
The Publike-Rights, and those of private-men,
Are, thereby, not infringed: For, it is a wrong
To all men, unto whom there does belong
Equality, to bring in such a Cheat
Among you, as, a Lesser, and a Great,
Or, make Estates, or Titles pass for more
Then Ciphers do, within the Counsel-dore.
And, doubtless, he unworthily, there, sits
Whom, false opinion of his Fellows wits
Inslaves in Judgment: and, whose Ignorance
Deceived, by a smooth-tongu'd Arrogance,
Them, does advance, to an undue esteem;
And (which the more absurd does make it seem)
Superiority, ascribes unto them
For that, in which, at home, their wives outdo them.
It is a shame, to hear it should be said,
(yet, said it is, and done, as well as said)
That, if this man, or that; If He, or He,
To make the Motion, can procured be;
Or, in the Cause, to speak: Or, but to heed
The same with favor, it will surely speed:
And, that, if it concerns, or may displease
But, any one, that is a Friend to these
Great Hogen Mogens; then, the Suitor loses
His cost, and labor, what means er'e he uses.
Yea, though he has two hundred friends, among
Your Members, who, cry shame upon the wrong.
Nay, be not angry that I tell you so,
For, he that speaks it, speaks what he does know,
It is this Islands Genius (who does see,
What all your works, and inclinations be)
Who says it: And, for him, your Conscience too,
Shall witness, true, what he has said you do.
And, I beseech you, to consider, whether
This, were the end, of calling you together.
The Shiers, and Buroughs, by whom, they were chose
For Deputies, did verily suppose,
By their great words at home, their clothes, and faces,
That, these, much better, would have filled their places;
And, not have proved such, of whom, they may
(As you abusively of Tailors, say)
Aver, that nine of them, makes but One man:
For, twice so many, hardly, make way can
By one Grandee, sometimes, and not be thrust
From executing, faithfully, his trust:
And, therefore, you must speedily provide
That, this abuse, be fully rectified.
I know, there be among you, those, who burn
With zeal to Justice; and who truly mourn,
For those who suffer, (and, that, GOD will keep
These safe; and make them sing, when others weep.)
I know, with what Compassion, they pass by
Their daily Suitors, who upon them cry:
And with what yearning bowels, they bewail,
That they for due relief, cannot prevail:
I know, with what vexations, they are pained,
When Public Prayers, cannot be obtained:
I know their Love, their Patience, and their care
With what great strivings, exerciz'd they are:
What Diligence they practice, in their Calling,
To keep the House, which they are in, from falling,
Whilst, many seeming-Labourers among them,
By false-work, or by Undermining, wrong them,
And, GOD, I know, will them reward at last
Though for a while, a bitter cup they taste.
But, there ae others, slyly shuffled in
Among you, who both shame and grief have been
To you, and to your friends: Therefore, lest these
By sitting near you, bring you that disease
Which has polluted them; And, lest thereby
They bring, not only, lasting infamy
Upon this Parliament, but likewise break it;
And, by that Rupture, an occasion make it
Of Ruins (without hope of Reparation)
To all, the rights and Freedoms, of this Nation:
And, that, if these things happen, you that are
Excusable, the better may prepare,
Against the Mischiefs, threatened; I am bold
To tell you, what misdoings I behold,
What dangers I may fear, what scandals grow,
By former failings; and, what wise men know
Will surely follow: whereof since, it is but need,
That more be said, therewith, I thus proceed.
With grief; I speak it, (and, I speak the same
Not to asperse, but to prevent the blame
And mischief, that may follow) you, have lost
Your power, your honor, and your selves almost;
And (though, undoubtedly, you do perceive it)
Proceed, as if you meant not to believe it;
Or, were asleep: But, I intend to wake you;
Or, speak those words, which will to pieces shake you.
Oh hear, hear, hear! and, let not wholesome words
Be spent in vain: Nay, let not fire and Swords,
Dearth, Pestilence, and Blood, speak, every day,
In dreadful Dialects, that rouse they may
Your sleepie Spirits; yet, seem, still, unheard,
Or passed over, without due regard,
Till, you be trod to dirt, in your own Gore;
Or, in the Grave, where you can hear no more.
For Love, for Shame, for Fear; for some respect,
Awake, in time, out of your dull neglect
Of Public Safety; and, from dreaming on,
In private projects, till you are undone.
Hark! how, the Beams of your own Houses cry
Against you! hark! hark! how the souls that lie
In those Oppressions, which you should redress
Roar out, and groan for sorrow, in distress;
Hark: how your Consciences (though, you contemn,
Their clamours, and in secret smother them)
Call out, to tell you, what sad dooms attend
Your present being, or your latter end,
If you awak not, quickly, to prevent
The shames and mischiefs which are Imminent.
Now, I perceive you are awake: for, Lo,
You angry seem, that I have rubbed you so.
But, ere you show your wrath, a little, pause;
About you look: see, if there be not cause
Of this my seeming boldness. Come, arise,
Wipe out the Rheum, and spedom, from your eyes.
Walk forth into the Hall at Westminster;
Take special notice, what, is talked there.
Walk to the City, then, and these you meet
At Church, or on the Change, or in the Street,
Or at the Tavern, and in all those places,
Mark well; and, what is said to your disgraces.
Mark, how they slight you, and, how few there are
Who, can with patience, either speak or hear
A word in your defense: And, having weighed
What you shall find, excuse, what I have said.
Whence, do their many Imprecations come,
And many Cursed Speakings? Flow, they from
No cause at all? No question, if they do,
Their Curses, and their Imprecations, too,
Will fall upon themselves. If, from just cause
They do proceed; Look, lest, it vengeance draws.
For, GOD, will Judge between you. If, both give
Occasion of offense, both shall receive
The recompense deserved; and, you, and they,
If you repent not, shall be swept away.
To Error, therefore, do not Fury add:
With him, that seeks to cure you, be not mad:
But, in your selves, examine patiently
What is amiss, and, then, what remedy
You may apply. And, I will seek to charm
The People, that, mean while, they do no harm.
Consider, what vast sums have bin brought in;
How, issued out, and wasted, they have bin:
How partially, your payments, have been made;
How little, this man; how much, that man had;
How, you to some, make full, and speedy pay,
When others, who, deserve as well as they,
Must turn Informers, ere they can be paid;
And, peradventure, when, they long have played
That hateful part, with loss of time, and cost,
Shall add more damages, to what they lost,
By losing former Friends, and getting Foes:
Which, all their lifetime, they shall never lose.
Herewith, sometime, let it be thought upon,
How many of your Friends, have been undone
By Votes, and Orders, made for their relief,
Which did but more increase their cost and grief,
By making them, from year to year, attend,
For, that, which in one week, might have an end;
By suffering, your own Warrants, to be slighted:
Your own Authority, to be despited;
And, to the loss of labor, time, and cost,
One Order, by another to be crossed,
And, that, to be, by Ordinance made void,
Which, by your Gift, they seized, possessed, enjoyed.
Yea, and, not without recompense, alone,
But, without seeming sense, that wrong was done:
As if it were no mattet, so you made
A show of recompense, though none they had:
Or, as if whatsoere you pleased to do,
Must pass for Justice, though it be not so.
GODS WILL, essential Justice is indeed:
But, that yours is so, it is not my creed.
When others have transgrest, do not injoyne
The guiltless Commonwealth, to pay a Fine,
To recompense those Parties, which were grieved;
For, that will hardly, Justice be believed.
When hungry suitors, ask for fish, or bread,
With stones, or scorpions, let them not be fed;
Nor make them wait, ere you an answer give,
As if each Person, had three lives, to live;
Or, had been borne, no other thing to do,
But, wait on you, and loose their labor too.
Draw not more suitors, to you in one year,
Then you are able, in twice six, to hear;
Lest, you displease them, whom ye may content,
And cause a mischeife, which ye might prevent.
But take wise Jethro's Counsel, for the ease,
Both of your selves, and those whom you should please.
Yea, tire not out your selves, and others too,
By taking on you more then you can do.
Lest, when attendance, much expense and trouble,
Has made the loss, and suffrance more then double,
They grow impatient; and you come to taste
The fruit of their impatiency at last.
Give Order, how to cure those imperfections,
Which have been, heretofore, in your Elections,
Lest, Members may among you be emploid,
By whom the Publike-Body, be destroid.
Let not the Father, there beget the son,
Though, this in Bodies Natural, be done.
Let none among you, be admitted in,
By Marriage, or, being near of kin:
Or, (to the Kingdames just dissatisfaction)
For being of this Sect, or of that Faction;
As, if among you, some to purchase, meant
Inheritances in the Parliament:
And, others aimed by Parties, to endeavor
The keeping up Divisions, there, forever.
Let it be so no more, if you can Order,
That, such an injury proceed no further;
But, let the Buroughs, and the Shires be free
To make their choice, (as they inclined shall be)
According to their customs, till it may
Be better done, by some new lawful way:
That, when for Trust-breach, any blamed are,
Their chusers, in that blame, a part may bear,
If they hereafter, for their private ends,
For fear, or love, shall choose their Foes, or Friends;
Their Landlords, Kinsmen, Lawyers; or, whom ever
They shall not think, will faithfully endeavor,
To serve his GOD, the People, and the King,
With single heart, in every lawful thing.
Consider, how in giving a reward,
The person, more then merit, you regard.
How often that has been for private ends,
Procured; and, with relation unto friends.
How Offices, and Places are bestowne;
How, some have two or three; and others, none,
Who, better merit four, if there were any
Who could be capable of half so many:
And, would ye well observed, that this is done,
As if ye feared, as if ye cared for none;
Nor, how, the people, who upon you cry
For bread, observe your partiality,
In giving that to one, who has no need,
Which would a thousand Starvelings, cloth and feed.
Refuse no just complaints; that, men may see
You sensible of their oppressions be:
Yet, to your selves assume not any cause,
Which is determinable by the Laws,
In other Courts; unless they prove corrupt;
Or, till some difficulty interrupt
The course of Justice there: And, so provide,
To try in course, what is before you tried,
That you undo not, e're their cause have end,
Those, who with Proofs, and Counsel, must attend.
The sad Petition, which the poor man brings,
Slight not, nor make them but mere pocketings,
Till they are quite worn out, or quite forgot,
Unless perchance your store supplies you not
With tinder for Tobacco; and, so brings
To memory again, such trivial things.
More mind your promises, of doing right
To grieved men, when you thereto have might,
And, let them see, that your devoiur you do,
As far, as God enables you thereto.
Consider, how you Legacies bestow
Before you pay those debts, which yet ye owe;
Even debts, for which the Publike-Faith does lie
At Pawn; and, is dishonored thereby:
Debts, for which, your poor Creditors have lain
In prison, till, their Freedoms to obtain,
They sold their Freeholds, when they had no more
To live on; and, had sold their goods before.
Debts, which they lent you in your greatest fear;
And borrowed for you, when distressed you were.
Yea, Debts, which they who sent, then lent you too
Their lives, the public services to do;
And, could have lost them, with more joy them they
Now live to see, by seeing of this day.
How easily, to some do you afford,
Belief to their avail, on their bare word!
When, in the selfsame case you are not moved,
To do the like for others, who have proved
What they aver'd by vouchers; no, not when
It has been proved, by Oaths of honest men.
Consider, how, to some you do allow
Their dues with interest, who well enough
May respite it; and, yet the same deny
To him, who felt extreme necessity
By loosing part; by lending of the rest;
By borrowing more, for you, on interest,
Now four years due; and, which before he shall
In likelihood, be paid; will eat up all.
And, let it be considered, if it may,
What it is, to take his liberty away,
To fine him; to permit that through the land,
He, for conspiracy, defamed should stand;
And, suffer much more by their impudence
Who misinformed you, of his innocence,
And all for naught, but, for informing you
What, he was told; what, he believed was true;
What, he produced his author for, with proof
Of Part, and circumstances too enough,
To make all probable; yea, more, for what
His Covenant, obliged him to relate;
And, what his sirst Relator did aver,
And will do, still, in each particular.
Should I propose, here, as considerable,
So many things, to you as I were able,
I should as tedious in the same become,
As, many times, Committees, are to some.
I Will therefore sum up all, in wishing you
Of those things which you know, to make reveiw,
And see, if these come short, in any thing,
Of those, who heretofore misled the King;
Or, if their falsehoods, or misinformations,
Were greater causes, of his abberrations;
Or, more dishonor to his Government;
Then, these have been unto this Parliament,
Whose Pride, Ambition, Malice, Arrogance,
Whose Avarice, Self-love, and Ignorance,
Whose Insolence, or Cowardice, of late,
Have caused so many to abhominate
Them, and their courses; and nigh turned all,
Even all things, both Divine, and Temporal,
Into a Chaos. It Is not, as is deemed,
(And, as perhaps, it has to many seemed)
It Is not the City, which has lately made
Those tumults, and those uproars you have had.
It Is not the Army, whence your mutinies,
New plots, and new divisions, do arise;
And, whereby, mischiefs daily do increase
To cause a new adjournment of your Peace;
The Parl'aments dishonor; separations
Between the late united British Nations;
And, (if it may be possible) to bring
The people of both Kingdoms, and the King,
Into a further hatred, of each other.
It is not your Dissenting-parties: neither,
Those whom ye call Malignants; who were able
So weak to make you; so dishonorable;
And, in so bad a plight, as you are in,
If your own Members, had not faulty been:
Nor had your City, or the Army moved,
In any course, which might not be approved,
If they had felt no influence upon them,
From higher Powers, which thereunto had won them,
Nor had so many men, right well-affected,
(And by whose purse, and power, you were protected)
Been drawn into misactings, and mistakings,
(Which falsely are misconstrued forsakings
Of their first love) but, that the policies
Of some among you, drew before their eyes
Those mists; and practiced those juggling sleights,
Which kept the safest course, out of their sights.
And, what that was, or what that yet, may be,
Few, have discovered, by ought I can see;
But, were it known, you could not rectify
Those things among you, which are now awry,
Till you reform your selves; for, well ye know,
Foul springs above, make filthy streams below.
But, why should I complain of you so much?
Alas! you were at first, begotten such;
The Fathers of your being, in this Nation,
Were an unsound, corrupted Generation;
And, did beget a Representative,
As like themselves, as ever, man alive
Begot a child: with members, crooked, lame,
Blind, deaf, and dumb, into the world you came,
And, such, they have continued ever since:
Theirs therefore, is the Fault; theirs the offense.
You, that are lawful Members, have enough:
Been plagued, and troubled with such rotten stuff:
And, rather should be pitied and aided,
In helping you, to purge them, then upbraibed,
With their defects. I therefore, have appeared,
That, you, of those obstructions, may be cleared
Which interrupt; and, that, whilst there is time,
You may regaine your honor, lost by them:
That, I might likewise, help bring back unto you
The peoples hearts, and make them firm unto you,
By showing them their errors, and, how, they
To late lost happiness, may find their way:
And, having found it, how they may persever
By GOD's assistance, in good ways, for ever.
My purpose therefore, in what follows now,
Is jointly, to prefer to them and you,
Some things considerable, that may lend
Assistance unto that, which I intend.
If, good effects this takes, your cares, and fears,
Are likely to be shortened many years:
For, know, GOD, promises, and threats, are all
Contingencies, and but conditional:
If you continue mad, the plagues will last:
If you repent, they quickly will be past:
Let envy one contribute thereunto
A true endeavor, his own part to do:
In what I Am borne for, I will do my best:
And, when that is done, GOD, shall perform the rest.
The restoration of this Parliament,
To their due reputation; to prevent
The bondage of the People; and to bring
All things to right, betwixt you, and your King,
Is that, wherein, I have with good intention,
Imploid, long time, the best of my invention;
Yet, there appears no likelihood to me,
Of saving any one, of all the three,
From hazard, or from plagues, that linger shall,
But, by a reconciling of them all.
And, I conceive it will deserve more thank;
To play the Artist, then the Mountebank;
Who leaves the course, that is natural, and sure;
To raise his credit, by a desperate cure.
He, that, by way of Chemistry would act,
And, her Three Principles, hope to compact
Into one Body; ere he compass shall
His end, must first, prepare each Mineral
Secundum Artem, taking that away,
Which hinder their incorporation may;
And, adding that, which does unite their natures:
So, he that would this Trinity of creatures
Make up again, in one, must do the same,
And, now, about that royal work I am;
Which, if I keep a rightly tempred fire,
Will bring forth that production I desire.
With Salt of true sincerity, and reason,
Your hearts, and understandings, I would season;
With Sulphur of true Magnanimity,
Or Courage; with the perfect Mercury
Of Christian Prudence, I would temperate,
And, so essentially incorporate
These, throughout all your Faculties, that none
Should hinder that, which I am driving on;
And, therefore, have prejected a conclusion
Wherein, I Will first begin with an Infusion;
Oh, lend me but some water from your eyes,
Wherewith to make it; and it shall suffice.
Lament, Lament your errors, and begin
To see, what great distractions you are in.
Of those Precipitations, take more heed,
Whereto you now are hasting on with speed;
Observe how busily in selfe-destroying,
And, raising works, against a free enjoying
Of your own Peace you are. Consider on
Your purposes; and that which you have done;
And mark, if either those things you pursue,
Or, yet intend, are like to profit you,
Whilst every man, (though better be professed)
Aims, but at his own single interest.
By most among you, that is least intended,
Which he in outward seeming, has befriended.
By making show, of things that should be done,
For public profit, you so carry on,
Your private interest, that very few
The general advantages pursue:
Yea, King, Priest, People, Commoner and Peer,
So wilfully, to their own claims adhere,
That, they will much endanger all together;
And, prove like fire, and fuel to each other,
If, GOD, prevent not, by a selfe-denying;
And, by a more considerate complying.
Give heed to those Predictions, which foretold
Upon good grounds, what, now, ye do behold
To be fullfil'd; and, which, behold ye may
To be fullfilling on you, every day;
And, think not, though you them, or him disdain
Who spoke them, that, they were foretold in vain.
Mark how all Parties, and all Factions, run
Those courses, wherein, others were undone,
Whom they impeached, and condemned, too,
But some few mouths before, for doing so,
Remember, and consider, since this War
Did first begin, how many changes are
To be observed: How inconsiderable
The means, and Persons were, who did enable
Your weakened Parties; and often gave them life
When they were stooping, almost, past releef;
And, think it possible, there may befall
Another change, when you seem sure of all;
Because, you neither credit what is told;
Nor heedfull are, of that which you behold.
Remember and consider, what fair hopes
(When an assurance, almost, crowned their tops,)
Have unto nothing vanished: what brave shows
Of Martial fortitude, against your foes;
Of zealous faithfulness unto the State,
And piety to GOD, have failed of late;
And left benighted, an ascending Fame
Before 'twas noone, within a Cloud of shame.
And think how possible, it may be, yet,
To see new storms, before the sun be set:
For, that which has been, you again may see,
As long, as in the selfsame round, you be.
Remember, and consider, in what fear,
You have been in: what things then vowed were;
What Holiness, you seemed to pretend;
What cause, you then protested to befriend;
What Warnings, and what caveats have been given,
By judgments, mercies; yea, by men, and heaven:
What private, and what public fasting days,
What times of giving solemn thanks, and praise,
Have celebrated been, without that fruit
Which either with Humility, may suit,
Or, with true Gratitude: and when you see
How full of filthnesse, your best works be,
Think, what your worst may prove; and, what event
Will follow them, unless you shall repent.
When, these things you have thought upon, then mind
Whereto, your promises, have you designed,
What fearful Imprecations, you have made;
What wonderful protections, you have had;
What witnesses there are, of what you do;
What foreign foes; what foes domestic too,
Expect advantage: And, such things, as these
When you have thought on, with due seriousness,
Think, also, what may thereupon redouud,
If, falsehood in your hearts, be likewise found;
And, when you have provoked GOD, and men,
What plagues, and horrors, will surprise you, then.
Remember, and consider, with what lyings,
What perjuries, what falsehoods and complyings
With wicked men and means, you have assaid
To perfect those Designs, which you have laid;
How, every Faction, takes delight to jeer
At their own shame, and, to relate and hear
With merriment, each others wickedness,
And, what the scurrill Pamphleters express,
To their reproach, when they should rather mourn,
Then impudently laugh themselves to scorn.
Believe it, till Authority prescribes
A mulct for liers (chiefly lying Scribes)
And takes more notice of that slighted sin,
Which one prime cause of all your strifes have bin,
Peace will not settle; for, when one warr's done,
Another, by a lie, may be begun.
Weigh, and consider, of what Tyrannies,
Of what profaneness, of what blasphemies,
Of how much malice, and of what black crimes,
You have been guilty, (even in these sad times)
On either side. And, when you well have thought
On these things; think likewise, how much you ought
To grieve, and to repent, that, GOD might spare
Those threatened judgments, which deserved are;
For, it is mere madness, to expect his grace,
Or look for Peace, so long, as in the face
Of men, and Angels, you persist in evils,
As if you thought, there were nor GOD, nor Devils.
Think, and consider, with a serious thought,
To what a giddie posture all is brought:
In what confusion, your affairs you see,
In what amazements, now, the wisest be;
In what a fear, the valiant, and the strong,
Now are, or will be, ere it shall be long;
How manifold, your sub-divisions are;
What symptoms of destruction do appear;
How impudently still, you palliate
The falsehoods of those Members of the State,
And, of those Agents, who abuse their trust;
How all things, out of order, they do thrust,
Through want of Justice; how, they daily sad
Men's hearts; and how, when they have made them mad,
They punish them, because, they could not use
Those wits, which their oppressions made them lose.
Mark, and consider, with what shamelessness,
Your Holy Flatt'rers, do bepaint and dress
Their Patrons in the Prliament, as tho
It were not possible, they should misdo:
How others, make the Army, at the least,
S. Michael, and his Angels; how, the rest,
So impudently do extol the King,
As if he were a Saint, in every thing,
And, needed no repentance, for ought done,
In former time, or since this War begun:
And, while such danbings are, consider you,
If penitence be likely to ensue,
Or wilfulness; and, therewith mind I pray,
Which of the two are Traitors, either they
Who, mind a misled King, or Parl'ament,
Of those things which destruction may prevent;
Or, they, who fawn, and flatter them to hell,
By calling evil doings, doing well:
They, who by Justice would uphold the Throne;
Or, they, who praise men for what pulls it down.
When these things are considered, then to mend
What is amiss, your best endeavors bend.
Let all those carnal policies, by which
The world your understandings does bewitch,
Be laid aside: Let those Designs, wherein
It Is evidently seen, that you have been
Without success; be quite by you abjured:
Yea, since experience often has assured
That, those effects, which you have had thereby,
Did still exasperate, and multiply
Your fears, and griefs; mind, what experience shows,
And, trust no more, such broken reeds as those.
To no Dissenting-party be unjust;
Nor falsify so much, the Common-trust,
As by your private mutual promises,
To barter for your own advantages;
Or, in your Treaties, at the public cost,
To seek your selves, till you, and all is lost:
But, still in your proceedings, let pure Truth
Preserved be, both in your heart, and mouth;
So, GOD, who marketh what you act and say,
Will help to guide you, out of your dark way;
Advance that Kingdom, whereto you pretend;
And, make your greatest enemy, your friend:
Yea, make among you, Truth, and Peace prevail
Though King and Parliament, your hopes may fail.
Eschew Hypocrisy; take heed of Pride,
And, of what thing soever may divide
The people, the Army, or the Parliament;
And them into those new Divisions rent,
Which at this present are of many feared;
And, for which, Engines are in secret reared.
But, chiefly at this time, think not in vain,
On that State-Principle, Divide, and Reign.
For, at this Juncture, thereupon depends
Your welfare; and your Adversaries ends.
Whatever, therefore, shall be now advised
By others, let not this note be despised;
Take heed of an Adjournment, till you see
The Kingdoms in a better posture be;
Lest, when you are divided from each other,
You lose the means to meet again together,
By some contrivance; and, by somewhat done,
Which at this present day you think not on.
Though all are much to blame, let all provide
Their best expedients, to amend, or hide
Those failings in each other, which will spread
No further, by their being covered.
Forgive, (as much as may be) one another;
That love may knit your scattered force together:
Lest, on a sudden, some prevailing power,
Not yet appearing, all at once devour.
Let neither Parliament, nor People spare
To keep themselves in arms, as yet they are:
For, though the burden, grievous may be thought,
Your safety will not be so dearly bought,
As your destruction may. Let now, likewise
All Powers, all Counsels, and Authorities,
Use every prudent way, and means, whereby
The people may not fear a Tyranny;
Nor feel a present weight, which may appear
A greater Burden, then the thing they fear.
But, use all cautions, to impose it so,
That, such as lay it, may help bear it too;
So, shall the people know, it is laid on them,
For their own safety; and, but for a time.
And, that, the threefold Cable be not broke,
Which holds your Anchor; let all care be took,
That, City, Shires, and Army, yield and give
(As to their Bulworke, and Preservative,
Next under GOD) unto this Parl'ament
Respect, obedience, and each complement
Of duty, which may re-enable them,
To vindicate their honor, and esteem,
From those obliquities, now thereon thrown
By others, and some Members of it own:
Yea, though some part thereof, has been to blame,
(As all Terrestrialls are) know; that, their shame
And sufferings, will be yours; know, that the fault
Is your, that many of their Members halt:
Know, that, their Foes, who seek to aggravate
Their crimes to you, have done it out of hate
To them, and you; and, not with an intent,
That, you should less be grieved, or they repent:
But, that, you should be mad, and make them room,
Into their places back again to come,
And double your Oppressions; which, the while
With tears they pity, like the Crocodile
Yea, know; that, if you in this storm, forsake
This Vessel, (though it bruized be, and leake)
Your Fortunes, will be therewith shipwrackt found,
If that sink, you shall certainly be drowned.
For, in this torn, and ancient Vessel, lies
That, which must free you from the slaveries
You have been in; and, keep you likewise, free
From those, in which, you are afraid to be.
Herein, are all your stores, for war and peace,
Of safety, honor; and, of Trades increase:
And, therefore join with courage; use your powers,
Wit, wealth, and, every faculty of yours,
To stop the leakes, which it has lately sprung,
To keep it tite, and make it fair and strong.
Oh, all you, who have therein fraught, or share,
Whether, ye Masters, Captains, Pilots are,
Cape-Masters, Soldiers, Sailers, Passengers,
Or, (as all some way are) Adventurers;
Consider, I beseech you, what a loss
There would befall, if some new storm should toss
This Vessel on the Rocks: Or, if there should
Some Traitors, in her Cabines, or her hold,
Lie closely, unsuspected, or unseen,
And blow up all her Decks, and Magazeene,
By some concealed train; or, spring a Leake
About the keel, whilst you unwisely seek,
(With quarrelling) for vailes, or private shares,
Amongst the desperatest Mutineers.
The slaves, your prisoners, and among the rest,
Your Malcontents, it may be, will suggest
That, your Commanders, and your Pilots may
Make prizes of you; and, take all away
By Abitrary Power: For, there are some
Who (hoping, if you jealous would become,
It would effect their ends) have whisperings,
Among their other mischiefe-breeding things,
To this effect; that, if you make them strong,
They will improve that strength, unto your wrong,
And, fail your trust, But, dream not; think not so,
Nor, err you, from your duties, though they do.
What change in them soever, might be wrought;
What e're they do, yet do you what you ought.
Keep to your Principles, though they may range;
Sail by the same Card; though the winds do change;
And, that you may not fear what will ensue,
Look back, a little, and things past review.
When, lately, by an Arbitrary might
You were oppressed, and in so great a straight,
That you perceived no means your selves to free,
From your oppressions; nor ought like to be,
Whereby, to escape from thrall you should be able;
(Without attempts, then deemed treasonable)
Lo then, even at that time; and, when your King
A double Chain on you, assayed to bring,
And thought, together in one teame to yoke,
His Oxen, and his Asses; then GOD broke
The Royal snare: and, wonderfully wrought.
For your deliverance, to pass he brought
By what was never called to that intent;
By that, which never more to call he meant;
Even by a Parliament: to which he gave
A power to be, whilst being it would have;
With Privileges, which by Pow'r-divine,
Were made destructive, to his own design:
For, lawful power it got, and just occasion,
To arm against a tyrannous invasion;
And, your estates, and freedoms were defended
By that, which for a mischief, was intended.
So, if this Parl'ament degenerate
From what it should be, and from what of late,
You thought it was; and, shall employ that power
Which was from you received; and which is your,
To raise themselves, upon a public wrong;
GOD, them will break, when they appear most strong;
Cause those, whom they depend on, to deceive them;
Of all their expectations, quite bereave them;
And by some lawful way, which yet appears
To no man's eye, preserve you from your fears.
For, every tyrannizing power shall clash
Against each other, and to pieces dash,
All those, and their designs, who shall comply
With any instruments of Tyranny;
That passage may be made, to raise up that
Which, is the strength and honor of a State.
If yet, your former doubtings be not past,
But that the aspersions, which on them are cast,
Whom GOD for your deliverers has chose,
Has shook you from your confidence in those;
Or if defects, which may be found in them,
Do either urge, or tempt you to contemn
Such instruments; and in your hearts to say,
Can these men save us? Mindful be, I pray,
What persons, to your aid, GOD, first did call;
By what slight means, he has effected all
Your conquests. Yea, by what contrary things:
His works, he, often to perfection brings.
Consider, how this Army was despised
And scorned, when it first was modelliz'd:
How, likely, were they, whom you first did gather
To be your guard, to be your ruin, rather
Then to defend you? how, did they protest,
And rage, when they against their wills were pressed?
With how much weakness was that work begun?
And, yet, thereby what wonders has GOD done?
How, has he added unto your prevailings,
By them, though they their errors had, and failings?
How, has he humbled you by their great pride,
Whose seeming virtues, you have glorified?
That, you may see a power so excellent,
Knows how to work with any instrument:
That, you may find there are some things despised.
Which have deserved, better to be prized;
That you may learn, in weak means, not to fear;
Nor trust too much, in those that mighty are;
That, you may know, if your own ways be straight,
You may be safe, though others go not right;
And, though you will not know it; they who live
By faith, the truth of these things do perceive;
And, would in GOD, find out a place to dwell,
Though, there were neither heaven, earth, nor hell.
Then credit must be kept, their power obeyed,
On whom your Trust, and Guandianship is laid;
And, from that duty, none can be excused,
Though some among them, have that trust abused:
For, as he is a man, that has a soul,
Although his body, be with Ulcers foul,
Maimed, blind and deaf; and, may from you thereby,
Claim all the duties of your charity:
So, though the Body Representative,
May wounds, and many blemishes receive;
Yet, therein, is the soul of Government:
And, therefore, all you whom they represent,
Obedience owe thereto, in every thing;
Excepting an obedience that may bring
Those public hazzards, which are so apparent,
That in themselves, they bring a sealed Warrant
Of disobligement: And, in those things too,
So must you then proceed, in what ye do,
That, your own consciences may truly say,
Obedience, only, made you disobey:
And, that, the world may see, by your proceed,
That GOD, and justice, have approved the deed.
Though cracked, your Bulwork be, and faulty grown;
This is no time, to slight, or pull it down:
But, to repair it rather, lest you leave
Your selves unguarded, and a blow receive.
This is no time to shake the Reputation
Of those, who are your only preservation;
But, rather, to uphold it, by removing
The scandalous; by cherishing, approving,
And, strengthening those, among them, by whose wit,
And honesty, they have a being yet.
Inform them better, who are much abused,
(By false opinions, into them infused)
And, thereupon your Supreme Court defame;
As doing, arbitrarily, the same,
Which, was denied lawful in the King:
For, they should know, that even the selfsame thing
May be both just, and unjust: He, does take
Unlawfully, your goods, a prize to make,
To satisfy his lust, or, to destroy
Those Freedoms, and those Rights, you should enjoy:
They, take a portion, from you, orderly,
(And thereto forced by necessity)
To save your privileges; and, prevent
The loss of all, by that, which they have spent.
Their actions, are not bounded, in that Law,
Whereby, men out of Parl'ament, should draw
The Line of their proceedings; But, by that
Which is the first foundation of a State:
By that Supreme Law, whereby power they had,
To make or change the Laws, already made;
And, for the Publike-safety, to provide:
By that Law, they must act; and, are not ti'd
To any other, when, necessity
Shall, for the weal of your Community,
The contrary require: For, otherwise,
They meet in vain, about those remedies,
Which are desired; and, do but time employ
To mar the benefit, they would enjoy;
And, strengthen Tyrants, in their usurpations
Upon the Rights and Freedoms, of the Nations.
Let no men therefore say, when they shall vary
From former Laws, their Acts are arbitrary,
Injuriously; since, your experience sees,
That strong necessity, at sometimes frees,
Even private persons from adhering to,
The Letter of the Law, in what they do,
The mannaging of Public Interests,
In the Agents reputation, much consists.
It Is Reputation, makes a Kingdom strong,
And rich; and keeps it from affronts, and wrong.
It Is that which makes Laws: For, neither wit
Nor humane Power, are able to forget
That Privilege; because, if Power should make them
A greater Power, by right of Power, would break them.
If Wit, and Reason, would a Law devise,
There are so many, seeming to be wise,
That they would make such overlong debates,
And work so variously, in several pates,
That, if to make a Law, some should agree,
By others, it would straight repealed be.
And, if more Settlement, were not obtained,
By Reputation, then, there can be gained
By Power, and Wit, or Reason; you, would never
Agree; but, fight, or else, debate for ever.
Take therefore, of their good repute, a care,
On whose repute, your Safeties builded are:
For, when that once is lost, it proves not
A Jewel, which may easily be got;
Nor, is there any precious stone, yet known
That gives a fairer luster to a Crown.
With Reputation, may a single man
Do more sometime, then twenty thousands can.
A Cities uproars, sooner it restraines,
Then all their Scarlet Gowns, and Golden Chains:
And dares make stand, the peoples rage to stay,
When Wit, and Wealth, and Titles run away:
Yea, calmes them sooner; and scapes better too,
Then honesty, and innocence do.
I know not any thing that can so soon,
Bring universal Discords into tune:
Nor, know I ought, that is in it self, so vain,
And empty, which does so much power obtain
In humane actions; and, there is not now,
A Nation, whom it more concerns then you,
(Consid'ring, what your present postures are)
To keep your Senates reputation clear.
For, should I show your postures in a glass,
No Puppet-play, that ere devised was,
Came near it; neither did you ever see
An Antic, like that show, which there would be:
Such fruit less hopes, such fears, such mimick actions,
Such turnings, windings, sidings, such distractions,
Were never represented, on the Stage
Of any Commonwealth, in any Age.
There you should view a thousand contradictions,
A thousand fancies, fooleries, and fictions,
Repeated, personated, sworn, believed;
And, men, accordingly, made glad or greeved;
And, acting that in their false joy, and sorrow,
Which they must backward act again tomorrow.
From Ireland, this man brings heavy news;
From Scotland, that man little better shows;
One tells what Plots, are in the City laid:
Another, of the Army, what is said.
A third, with an affrighted look, does bring
A tale of some designement, with the King,
By Scots, and by Malignants; and, then stands
As if he had new purchased Bishops Lands.
A fourth is much dismayed by some tales
Of risings in the Counties, and in Wales;
As if he feared a sudden separation
From somewhat, which he holds by Sequestration.
A fifth has heard from Holland, or from France,
He knows not what, yet falls into a trance,
As if his conscience knew of somewhat done,
Which he then wished, had never been begun.
Another shows, another way, his folly,
And looks as sadly, and as melancholy,
As if he were surprised with a dread
Of losing some great place, or, of his head.
And, at the turning of the wind or tide,
Upon some pleasing news on the other side,
Starts up, as they do, when a Piper plays,
Who, have been bitten by Tarantula's.
You, would not, thus, with every novell noise
Be filled with Panick fears, and gannick joys;
Or, moved be, with ought, which others did,
If you, your own affairs, would better heed.
This, would not be, were men imploid about
Internal things, as on those things without;
Nor, would they be so giddily affrighted,
With things abroad, if things at home be righted.
He, that his way, with soberness does go,
Dreads not the furious marching of a foe.
He, who takes care to keep his conscience clear,
Shakes not, when evil tidings he does hear.
He, that endeavors warrantable things,
Fears not the power of Senators or Kings;
Nor, should you ever need to fear a jot
What by the Welsh, or Irish, French, or Scot
Could be designed or done; or, what the King
With all his party, to effect could bring;
Nor, what an open, or a secret foe,
By power, or by his policy, could do,
Either within these Islands, or abroad,
If you repose true confidence in GOD;
And, give him, but sincere, and contrite hearts
To join, with him, in acting of your parts:
No, though your slips, and Ignorances were
As many, and as great, as now they are.
Let all the several Nations of these Isles,
Who, lived in love, and Amity, ere whiles,
Unite again, and seek each others peace;
That, their increasing strifes, and plauges may cease.
Let, our Welch-Britans, (who their actions square
By those things, which they but suspect, or hear)
Recover, so much, of their humane reason,
As teaches them, a difference 'twixt Treason,
And Laws of Nature; that it may make place,
To bring them nearer; to the law of Grace.
That, so, they may not, still, believe, and do,
Both by implicit Faith, and reason, too:
For, when they truly know what does belong
Unto themselves, and, their own right and wrong,
They, will the sooner, be informed, then,
What duties do belong to other men;
And, grow more wise, by this Epitomie
Of Laws divine, and true morality;
Do, as ye would be done to, then, all they
Who pore upon their Law books, every day;
And, would be thought experienced, in all
Laws Cannon, Civil, and Municipall.
If this advice they follow, they shall dwell
In safety on their hills, and live as well
Among their valleys and their Glins, in Wales,
As on the fruitful'st Southern Downs, and Dales:
Then let them practice it; and not call to them,
A wasting desolation, to undo them.
Let them not woo, uncivil civil wars,
To clime up to their Mountains, Rocks and skars:
For, if they find them rich, they will leave them poor;
If needy, they will make them need the more;
They bring, the worst, into a worse estate;
And crash the Bones, where they can suck no fat.
Let your Scotch-Britans, so insist upon
Their interest, that, nothing may be done,
Against their Brethrens rights; and, so preserve
Their Leauges, that wilfully, they do not swerve
From any Branch thereof; and, let them so
Observe the Covenant, as men that know
The letter of it, or, a circumstance,
Is not to be pursued to th'advance,
Or any sense or practice, which may lame
The essence, and intentions of the same.
For, if they make the letter to extend
Beyond the true intention, and the end
Of what was covenanted; and, so weaken
That Interest for which the same was taken;
They are deceivers, and worse hypocrites
Then were of old, the cunning Gibeonites.
Let, therefore, that stout Nation well advise
Among themselves, wherein the difference lies
Betwixt the Kingdoms; lest, perhaps, it draws
A mischief on both Nations, without cause;
And, bring on those engagements, which may lose
The love, the peace, the honor, and those dues
Which now are claimed; and, make them lose their blood,
And Country too, as far as it is good.
Let them not think, that their accommodation,
The profit, or advantage of one Nation,
Preferred should be, in any thing at all,
Before these Islands weal, in general.
Let them seek nothing, but what Justice may
Allow them; lest she take both that away,
On which they seized; and, therewith, all the rest,
Which, formerly, was lawfully possessed.
For, Justice more secures, and more enriches
Then policy, although that more bewitches:
And, neither wealth, nor honor, can be lost,
By honesty; though sometime she be crossed.
That Nation have done well, to think upon
The bringing of the King back to his Throne;
If from right Principles the motion came:
But, on them it would bring perpetual shame,
If they recalled him, without penitence
Of those faults, for which they first drove him thence.
For, that they quarreled with him first, none doubt;
And, they were with the last, who pulled him out.
That people is too wise; to call him home,
Ere he shall truly penitent become;
And by some satisfying expiations,
Has perfectly secured both the Nations:
For, if he bring the same heart back, they know,
He will, as soon as he shall able grow,
Avenge himself on them, as upon those,
Who were the first, from whom his troubles rose.
Let them not give their friends just cause to lay
That to their charge, which Foes of them do say,
Their Brethrens portion, let them not envy,
Or, look upon it with an evil eye;
Nor, let our English haughtily, despise
Their Northern Brethrens kind compliances;
Or, slight their friendship; or, (puffed up with pride)
Their want of superfluities, deride:
But, by how much more GOD, has seemed to bless,
Their Clymate, with a greater fruitfulness,
So much the more, respectively, let them
Be careful, that they no way do contemn
Their Lot; lest GOD, for that in gratitude,
Justly permit some other to incrude
On their inheritance; and, make them glad
To seek worse habitations, then they had.
Yea, let both Nations strive with all their mights,
To fortify each other in their Rights;
And be assured, that which of them soever
Shall first to break their late sworn League endeavor,
Shall both be ruined; and, if both make void
Their solemn Vows, then both shall be destroyed.
Let both remember well, that Covenant,
Which they have sworn; and, how much yet they want
Of perfecting their Vows to God, and Man;
That they may keep them better, if they can.
Know; you have entered into leauge together,
Not to ensnare, but, to secure each other:
And, that your Treaties, were not to get more
From one or the other, then they had before,
But, that, thereby, they stronger might be made,
Against him, who, did all their rights invade.
Know, that your Covenant was not contrived,
That Christian liberty should be deprived:
Or, make that for a Jus divinum go,
Which neither was, nor can be proved so.
Or, to compel men to renounce, admit;
Or, to accord, as those, or these, thought fit;
(Or, as the best reformed Churches had it)
Ought further then GGDS word authentic made it.
It is not possible that any Nation
Should make a vow, upon consideration,
To pin their Faith upon another sleeve;
Things to profess, which they cannot believe;
To practice, what their consciences abhor,
And what they find, no lawful warrant for;
But, sure their meaning was, men should assay
To get the truths perfection if they may,
Till otherwise, they find it; to adhere
To those as truths, which truths to them appear;
That, from compulsion, all men should be free,
Where doubtings are, till they decided be;
And, that, their vow enjoined none to do,
More, then their power, and place, obliged him too.
Let both remember, that, they vowed have
The Person of the King, from harm to save;
His honor to preserve (and what belongs
To him, of right) from violence, and wrongs:
But, this remember, too, that, when you made
This vow, you likewise, resolutions had,
That, therein, his protection should extend.
No further, then you thereby might defend
The Kingdoms priveledges, and maintain
Those rights, which to the people appertain:
For, else, you shall betray your greatest trust,
And, prove but hypocritically just.
Remember, you have vowed to endeavor
To bring to public trial, whomsoever
You shall discover, either to divide
The Kingdoms, or, to make the people side
In factions; and, that, you have vowed to strive
(As you are able) that, they may receive
Due punishment: And, mark, if you have bin
As faithful, as you promised therein.
Halt not 'twixt two opinions, as ye do;
If Baal be to be served, let it be so.
Either, you have a power, or you have none:
If none; why act ye, still, as ye have done?
Either your King, or you, deserves blame:
If you have traitors been, repent the same;
Acknowledge it; submit, implore for grace;
And let him take again, his power and place.
If he, as much demerit, as you say;
Do not your trust, and your own lives betray;
But, quit your selves like men, and do your best
To vindicate their cause, who are oppressed.
If both be faulty, then, let both amend;
Lest, both be quite destoyed in the end.
If, you have drove the nail unto the head,
There clinch it; let no more be done, or said:
For, why should this brave Island be destroid,
That in the mean time, some should be imploid
Thereby to raise themselves? and, to prepare
Well-feather'd nests, perhaps, some otherwhere?
Those evil Counselors, which late appeared
To be about the King, may now be feared
To be among your selves; and, they of whom
The King, was made most fearful to become,
Have now compli'd with him; and, justly may
King, People, Scotch, and English, if they weigh
What has been done, shake hands, and well agree;
For, they are all, as like, as like can be.
Come, come, repent together, and forgive;
For there is no other means, in peace to live;
And, when you are forgiving, let all share
A part of Mercy, who repentant are.
Let, our seduced Irish, who, among
The rest, are yet involved in the throng.
Of murderous Rebels; but have guiltless bin
Of their inhumane, and loud crying sin,
Find some Gate open, whereby they might gain
An entrance, your forgivness to obtain;
(Upon repentance, and on evidence,
Produced, differencing their offense:)
For, some of them assisted, to their might,
Their brethren, in their terrified flight,
Against destroiers; and in secret stood
Betwixt them, and the seekers of their blood.
Some of them, then, so far forth as they durst,
Releev'd them in their hunger, and their thirst;
Covered their nakedness; and them convei'd
(From those, by whom they should have been betrayed)
To Towns, and Ports, wherein they might avoid
That rage, whereby they had been else destroid.
If these, withdraw themselves, and back recede
From them, whose hands in blood were deeply di'd,
Receive them unto mercy; that, you may
By justice, therewith mixed, take away
That Kingdoms guilt; and, put a difference
Betwixt the smaller, and the great offense,
That, they, whom other men did hurry on,
Against their wills, to be with them, undone,
May find a passage, out of that distress,
Which they are in, by others wickedness;
And, that repentance, may not be without
A comfortable hope of some good fruit,
To every sinner, when he shall endeavor
A reformation, at what time soever.
By this course, you shall make the freer pass,
For your own selves, unto the Throne of grace:
By this course, you shall greatly weaken those
Who, are your wilful unrepentant foes;
And, strengthen much their hands, who have been true
To GOD, unto their Country, and to you.
It may be, too, fullfil'd shall be, thereby,
That ancient well known Irish Prophecy,
By which, unto that Nation, 'twas foretold,
That, there would come a time, wherein they should
Weep ore your English Graves: For some, no doubt,
Already, tears of pity have pow'rd out;
Even when they saw the cruel butcheries
Of guiltless Englishmen, before their eyes?
And, now, shall ore their Graves, for their offense
Shed tears again, through hearty penitence.
Let those dissenting Parties, and those Factions
Which, long have multiplied your Distractions,
Leave of those many names of separations,
Of scorn, and disesteem, which in these Nations
Do now abound; and wherewith you provoke
Each other; and, whereby the peace is broke,
And malice nourished: for they prolong
Your discords, by a still-renewing wrong.
Let, not all those, who termed, of late, have been
Malignants, find that name, still set between
Themselves, and others, when they have assaid
To make amends, and their redemption paid.
For, by that Bar, you keep the Breach unclosed
'Twixt them, whose quarrels might else be composed.
For such of them, as only were misled
In judgment, have not thereby forfeited
Their honesty; as all those men have done
Who wilfully, and knowingly went on.
Nor, half so much as those, who have compli'd
With both sides; or, been false to either side.
Yet, trust them not with power, till you have tried
Their truth; and, till your Peace is fortified.
Let Innocents, defend their reputations,
As freely, as Knaves make their accusations.
Good turns vouchsafe, to honest men sometime,
As willingly, as you do mischieve them:
For, to undo a man, you soon give ear;
Have tongues to speak, and leisure time to hear,
Within an hours warning; but, before
You hear him for his good, a year, and more,
Yea, sometimes three, four, five, consumed be,
Yet, neither end, nor hope of end, has he.
Let those who for your service, fit are known,
Both by abilities, and courage shown;
Those, who for you, their lives have hazarded;
Contributed, and lent their childrens bread;
For your sakes, brought themselves, and families
From plenty, to extreme necessities,
(Through want of that respect, which you should show them,
Till you have means to pay them what you owe them.
Let those, not like old shoes, be hurled by,
As if they were not worth your memory,
Or fit for nothing; when malignant Jacks,
Who laugh, and jeer at you behind your backs,
Can fill so many places; and grow rich,
Whilst better men, lie starving in a ditch.
If spent your Treasure be, then let them share
In your Employments, till you abler are
To pay them what is due; So, you shall ease them:
So, you, with hope of better, shall well please them:
So, you, in life, and health, may them sustain,
Till you have need of honest men again:
For, when their Country wants help, these, are they
Who will not fail her, though them fail she may.
Take these last words among you, where they fall;
And, as occasion, make them useful shall:
For, your confusion so confounds me,
That want of method, may excused be,
Where all is well intended; and, where naught
Is more, then may be profitably taught,
Let those among you, who desire to plead
For Christian Liberty, take serious heed
They make not passages, which may let in
Licentiousness, and Liberty of sin.
Let them not seek to rarifie Devotion,
To nothing, but an incorporall notion;
Lest, if no place for shadows, they allow,
They never come their substances to know:
Lest, if too far away, from Forms they fly,
They fall into some foul deformity;
Or, lest, when they think purest light to see,
They blinded by an overweening be.
And, you, who think, that by a Law-Divine,
There is, one outward form of Discipline,
To be observed of all men; and, but one
That can be lawful; which, by you alone,
Is now in practice: somewhat bear I pray,
With such, as cannnot yet, approve your way
To be infallible; or, give consent
To make essential, what is indifferent.
When you possess the Wheat, brawl not for Darnell,
Fight not for shells, when you enjoy the Kernel.
If to the true Foundation they adhere,
Against their buildings, be not too severe;
For, if the Structures they erect thereon,
Be Gold, and Silver, they have wisely done:
If Straw, and Stubble, theirs will be the loss;
The Fiery-triall, will consume the dross;
And, they themselves, (though from perdition free)
Will in themselves, enough afflicted be.
With love and kindness, seek to bring them in,
Who, by misse-teaching, have deluded been:
With patience, and long-suffring, wait upon
Your Brethren, as on you, your GOD has done;
And, if their errors be but imperfections,
And not of malice, let your good affections
Be exercised thereby; and, then perchance
Your Charity, shall cure their ignorance,
And, sooner win them, then your indignation,
Severitie, or bitter provocation.
Compulsion often forms an Hypocrite,
But never makes the will, or heart upright:
And he, that would not vain conclusions try,
The consciences of men to rectify,
Must act, by somewhat which is more divine,
Then torments, or a Formal Discipline.
Speak not in Tempests, when vou would reform;
GOD, oftener comes in Calmes, then in a Storm.
Ill words, corrupt good manners; and, there flows
From jeerings, brawlings, from your brawlings, blows;
And, many times, the woundings of your swords,
Break not the peace, so much as bitter words.
Provide therefore, as wisely as you may
To take provoking speeches quite away;
Especially among those, who pretend
The Cause of GOD, and goodness to befriend:
For, they, who cannot their sharp tongues restrain,
Profess, and talk of Piety, in vain.
Yea, they, who are Truths Champions with their (tongues,
And want true love, have done the greatest wrongs.
Let not your Supreme City over-swell
That Mediocrity, which heeded well,
Would more secure her safety, more enlarge
Her honor, and diminish more her charge.
Though she be great, let her not seek to awe
Those, who, to her, and all the rest give law.
Though she be rich, let her not trust unto
Her riches; lest at last, they her undo.
Though she be strong, let her not boast therein;
For, some, by their own strength, have ruined bin.
Though she be wise, let her not think to fool
Her Tutors, and to set them new to school:
But, let her motions, be in her own sphere,
According as her own occasions are;
Let her advance her tradings, without wrong
To privileges, which to all belong:
Endeavor, by continual watchfulness,
Both how, she may prevent, and how suppress
Sedition, routs, and tumults: for these be
The bane of Cities: and I do foresee,
(Unless, prevented, by good taking heed)
That thence a mischief, may to you proceed,
Whereby, you more may suffer, in one hour,
Then in an whole year, by a Martial power.
Return to your first love, and be not jealous
Of those, who mean you well, nor over-zealous
In prosecuting, or believing, all,
Which your pretended Lovers counsel shall.
Contribute that proportion of due aid,
For, public safety, which on you is laid,
According to the Portion of the blessing,
Which is thereby; preserved, in your possessing,
With prayers, and obedience, them assist,
Who stand up for the common Interest,
And take good heed, lest those who shall pretend
Your benefit, may drive some other end;
And, overthrow the common peace, and you,
By those proceedings, which they now pursue.
You have done well, and bravely; loose not then
Your thanks, and your deserved praise, again.
Your, of the Soldiery; Men of the Sword,
Receive you Orders too, and take a word
Of good advice: for much it will concern
The public weal, that you your duties learn.
Neglect not discipline, thereto adhere;
And, therein, always rather be severe
Then too remiss: for, when an Army shall
Into disorder and confusion fall;
Destruction to it self, it will become:
And, of all enemies, most perilsome
To public safety. And, it is better far
(Whether it be in time of peace, or war)
To suffer, by obedience to good order;
Then due redress, by mutiny, to further.
Remember, that, you were not armed or paid,
To do your own work, but for public aid:
And, that, you to your Officers are bound,
No further, then while faithful they are found
To those, who have entrusted them; and, that
If they oppress, there is means to regulate
What is amiss; and, power that may restrain
Their insolences, if you shall complain.
Think not your selves their creatures, as some name you:
For such an attribute does much defame you.
There is in them no power of creation,
By dignity, by place, or by Relation,
Whereby they any creatures can produce,
But sons, and daughters, or fleas, worms, and lice;
And these, are (properly) but generated,
Or, else, by their corruption propagated.
Delay not public peace, by private hate;
Each others noble actions emulate;
Outvie, but them envy not; neither cross
Each other, to your countries further loss.
Upon your foes, there is honor to be got
Sufficient, with your friends then, quarrel not.
Seek not, to be avenged, for that offense,
Upon the public, which your innocence
By private hands has suffered; measure not
Your merit, by the conquests, you have got;
But, by that worth, which truly is your own,
And, in your heart lies, to the world unknown
Judge not of worth, by actions, and events,
(Which fame, it may be, falsely represents)
But, by those Principles, and real worth
Whereby the heart is roused and carried forth
To noble undertakings: Fame that is won
By having gained the lot of leading on
Your English Mastives, (on whose side befell
A victory, whose author none can tell)
Is but of small esteem; for, when confusion
Has brought their skirmishes unto conclusion,
He, many times, who merited but shame,
Of all that victory, shall bear the name;
And, then, opinion every day does add
Advantages, till he at last is made
So arrogant, that he begins to dream
Himself to be, what, some have fancied him;
And, so to act, that they whom he deceived;
Shall soon find, what of him should be believed.
Be none of these, for, you have lately seen,
How, such false fires extinguished have been;
And, when with glory, to ascend they think,
How, quickly, they descend, in smoke, and stink.
Fall not from that, which you have well begun;
But, persevere, until the work be done.
An instrument, you are, but, nor the tongue,
Nor eye, to whom, direction does belong:
Therefore assume it not; but keep them free
By true obedience, who your keepers be.
And, be assured, that, if you shall comply
With any, to advance a tyranny
Of any kind; or, up to raise, thereby,
Licentiousness, instead of Liberty:
GOD shall let loose a spirit; which will soon
Un-nerve your Powers; make it night at noone;
Destroy you with a fillip, all together;
Puff you away, like th'atoms of a feather.
And you, who (if you arrogate it not
Unworthily) are Stewards, for the Lot
Of GOD's Anointed; hear a word or two,
To mind ye, what ye know ye ought to do.
You see, to what confusion all is brought
By those men, who themselves have only sought:
And, what destruction will succeed thereon,
If in divided paths you still go on.
You know, what means, and what advantages
You have, to keep out, or to fetch in peace:
And, I acknowledge, some of you have walked
The way of peace, as well as thereof talked:
And, trumpet-like, have raised your voices high,
To wake these Nations from their Lethargy.
Let all do so; and jointly undertake
To help repair the Breach they help to make;
And not contend for that which neither was,
Nor is, nor ever can be brought to pass.
Make not those things infallible to be,
In which so many millions disagree:
Make not those things Essentialls to appear,
Which in themselves but Circumstantialls are:
And, bear with them (since they the woe must bide)
Who give offenses, that you may be tried.
Your Temporalities, claim by your Law,
To be your due; and labor not to draw
Conclusions for your selves, from inferences,
Which make not warrantable your pretenses:
For, all your claims, by Ceremonial dues,
Or Customs, appertaining to the Jews,
Avail you nothing; but enfeeble rather,
Those Arguments, which from their Rights you gather.
You may as well reduce them back again
To sacrifices, and to entertain
All other services, now obsolete,
As, get some things, which you have hope to get;
And, whereto you the People would injoyne
By humane Law, as due by Law divine:
Which, what they are; and how from doubts to clear them,
You shall be told, when you are fit to hear them.
From bitter words, and sharp invectives cease;
Invoke for grace, and then provoke to peace.
From all your Pulpits banish all partaking
In Factions; and in weak'ning or strong making
This or that Party: and, pull not in, all
Those things, which into controversy fall,
(Or into question) within cognizance
Of your own jurisdiction, to advance
Your interest: For, all things which can be thought,
May, by that rule, within your power be brought:
And, by that means, you may recover more
Then has been, here usurped heretofore.
Preach Faith, Repentance, Charity, and what
May true belief, and good life propagate.
Be humble, keep more closely to your charge;
And ramble not about so much at large,
To fetch in fleeces, out of others flocks,
But, be contented with your proper stocks;
Lest, as befell of late, and heretofore,
Instead of greater gain, your loss be more.
I more might add; but, you already know it,
Oh therefore, in your practice, also, show it.
You, hear, what I have said, ye British Nations,
To further the desired reparations
Of these distracted Kingdoms; and to bring
Your King to you, and you unto your King,
If you, and he, the curing will abide;
And, for that Blessing, now grow qualified:
Or, if not both, that one of you, at least
With Peace and safety may again be blessed:
And live to praise GOD, that you forth are brought
From that snare, wherewith wilfulness is caught.
I have not here deceived you with fair shows
From old Records, whose credit no man knows.
From temporary Acts, worme-eaten found;
(Of which, none knows the reason, or the ground)
I bring not Presidents, that do belong
To things in Fact, which whether right or wrong,
Were thereby done, there is no certainty.
You see, I use no kind of Sophistry;
Nor do attempt, conclusions here to draw
From cheating quirks, or quiddities of Law:
From abstruse Principles, Authorities,
Unknown; or, wherein little credit lies:
From ought, too Magisteriall for the season;
From fraudfull, or adulterated reason;
But merely, from such grounds, and such positions,
As yield results, without all just suspicions.
From nature, common practice, and those things,
Whose clear light means of apprehension brings
To most capacities; and, (which may best
Improve them) they, in language are expressed
So plainly; that all those throughout the Land,
(Even Children) that can read, may understand.
And since, men wandering in a wood by night,
When they shall through a Glade, behold some light,
Take thereby courage, to walk chearly on,
In hope, their fears, and toils, are nearly gone;
I Will from a Cloud, flash out a little gleame
Of Lightning; and, disclose a little beam,
Whereby on you a glimmering, shall be cast,
Of what you may attain to, at the last:
For, I will show you, by what Pedigree
That Government, to you derived shall be
Which will, at last, these British Islands bless
With inward Peace, and outward happiness.
It was of late, a brief Presage of his,
Who, often, has truth foretold: And, it is this.
When, here, a Scot shall think his Throne to set,
Above the Circle of a British King;
He shall a datelesse Parliament beget,
From whence a dreadful Armed brood shall spring.
That offspring shall beget a wild confusion;
Confusion, shall an Anarchy beget;
That Anarchy shall bring forth in conclusion,
A Creature, which you have no name for, yet:
That Creature, shall conceive a sickly State,
Which will an Aristocracie produce:
The many headed Beast, not liking that,
To raise Democracie, shall rather choose.
And, then Democracies production shall
A Moone-calfe be; which some a Mole do call.
A false Conception of imperfect nature,
And, of a shapelesse, and a brutish feature.
All these Descents, shall live, and reign together;
So acting for a while, that few shall know
Which of them gets the Sov'raigntie; or whether
There be among them, a Supreme, or no.
When they with jarres and janglings have defaced
Your triple-building, and themselves nigh worn,
Into contempt; they, of one cup shall taste;
And, into their first elements return:
Five of them, shall subdue the other five;
And, then those five, shall by a doubtful strife,
Each others death so happily centrive,
That, they shall die, to live a better life:
And, out of their corruption, rise there shall
A true Supreme, acknowledged by all.
In which the power of all the five shall be
With Unity made visible in three.
Prince, People, Parl'ament, with Priests and Peers,
Shall be, a while, your emulous Grandees;
Make a confused Pentarchie, some years,
And, leave off their distinct claims, by degrees:
And, then, shall Righteousness ascend the Throne;
Then, love, and truth, and peace re-enter shall:
Then, faith, and reason, shall agree in one;
And, all the Virtues to their counsel call.
Then, timely out of all these shall arise,
That Kingdom, and that happy Government,
Which is the scope of all those Prophecies,
That future Truths obscurely represent:
But how this will be done, few men shall see;
For, wrought in clouds and darkness, it will be,
And, ere it comes to pass, in public view,
Most of these following signs will first ensue.
A King, shall willingly himself unking;
And, thereby grow far greater then before.
The Priests, their Priesthood, to contempt shall bring.
And Piety shall thereby thrive the more.
A Parliament, it self shall overthrow;
And thereby, shall a better being gain;
The Peers, by setting of themselves below,
A more innobling honor shall obtain:
The people for a time shall be enslaved;
And, that shall make them for the future free.
By private loss, the public shall be saved;
An Army shall by yielding Victor be:
The Cities wealth, her poverty shall cause:
The Laws corruption, shall reform the Laws:
And, Bullocks, of the largest Northern breed,
Shall fatted be, where now scarce sheep can feed.
You may perhaps, deride what is here recited,
As, heretofore you other Truths have slighted.
But, part of this Presage you have beheld,
Already in obscurity, fulfilled:
The rest shall in the time appointed come;
And, sooner, then will pleasing be to some.
The last nine signs, or symptoms, of the ten,
Which must precede it, shall appear to men
Of all conditions: But, our Author says,
The first, is but in hope, not yet in Faith;
And may be, or not be; for, so, or so,
That King shall have his lot, as he shall do.
If all his sins, he heartily repent,
God, will remit, even all his punishment;
And, him, unto his Kingdoms, back restore,
With greater honor, then he had before.
If he remain impenitent, like Saul,
God, from the Throne, shall cast both him, and all
His whole Descent; and, leave him not a man
To sill it, though he had a Jonathan.
If Ahab-like, his mourning has respects
To temporary losses and effects;
Like Ahabs, then, it therewithal shall carry,
Some benefit, which is but temporary.
A real penitence, though somewhat late,
The rigor of his doom may much abate;
By leaving him a part of what he had,
When he a forfeiture of all has made:
Or else, by rooting out those, who in sin
With him, have actually partakers been;
And, planting in their steads, a Branch of his,
Whose Innocence no way questioned is.
For, this has often, with good success been done]
In Ages past; not, in this Isle alone,
But, in most other Kingdoms: And, if you
Will in GOD's Chronicles, but take a view,
Of his proceedings; you, in them will see,
For what it is, that Princes changed be:
Why some lose but a part; why some lose all;
Why, for a time; why, some for ever fall:
Why, some shall but for three descents remain;
And, how they might have had a longer reign:
When war, when pestilence, when dearth, will come
Upon a land; when GOD will take it from
That land again; and, how, they may foreknow,
When, he will bring a total overthrow.
They, who have learned to contemplate aright
Those old records, may gain a true foresight
Of many things, whereby to regulate
Enormities, both in the Church, and State;
Things to themselves pertaining; to their friends,
Their Foes, their Policies, their Fates, their ends:
And, if this were not so; what, are to you,
The stories of the Kingdoms of the Jew,
Or of their friends, and foes, more useful than
Those, which concern the realms of Powhatan?
Or, so available, as those relations,
Which memorize the deeds of your own nations?
But all this is but words; there must be deeds,
Ere to perfection any thing proceeds:
You must not everlastingly be stating
The Question; or, be seven years more debating:
For, ere that time, things will too late be done;
Which many fear, will come to pass too soon.
Expect you, some third persons, should between
The King and you, at this time intervene
To make atonement? Pray, who should they be?
Who, wishes you so well? who, does not see,
That, all, 'twixt whom, and you, there be relations,
Them qualifying for such mediations,
May get more, by your woe, then by your weal?
Who knows not, how with Friends most Friends now deal?
And, who perceives not, that those Mediators
Have interests, and, many weighty matters,
Pertaining to themselves, which they will begin
On such a fair occasion, to hedge in?
And, whereby paradventure they may bring
Great disadvantages, upon the King,
Or, on the Kingdoms: and perhaps on both,
Which to endanger, wisemen would be loath?
What then can be effected? or by whom,
May your desires, now feiseable become?
Since, there is no way open for access,
Nor any means admitted for address?
The Parliament, conceives it self abused,
In that, their offers have been often refused;
And, seems resolved, that they will never more
Send Messages in vain, as heretofore:
And though the King, were now as penitent,
As David and Manasseh, with intent,
Unfainedly to satisfy, and do
What ever justice does oblige him to;
What ever, you in reason could require,
To answer, at the full your own desire;
Or, whatsoever affections mortified,
A contrite heart, or conscience rectified,
Should urge him to: yet, now, there is no way,
Whereby, this, may be manifest, you say.
Despair not friends: mind what I said before;
True penitence, will find, or make a door:
Though, it be treason voted, now to bring
Or, carry Message, to or from the King:
Although his person be retained in ward;
Attended always, with an armed Guard:
Although strong walls, have round enclosed him:
Though rocks, far stronger, have surrounded them;
Yea, though the rageing, and the roaring seas,
Have also, like a mote, incircled these:
Through all these difficulties, I could find
Conveyances, if thereto he had mind,
To publish his repentance; and prevail,
If to perform his part, he should not fail.
Yea, find him means, without an obligation
To any party, or to any Nation,
Or any, but himself; to make his peace,
With honor: and his Kingdoms to possess.
Now, let him neither heed, nor harken to
What other men do say, or what they do;
For, whatsoever they shall act, or prattle,
(Will be to him, but, fruitless tittle tattle)
But, let him sit down, by himself alone;
And, set down (as, he reads, it has been done
By King Manasseh) most unfain'd confessions
Of all his known offenses, and transgressions;
Acknowledge GOD's just dealing in afflicting;
His Providence, and mercy, in correcting
So like a Father; and, for his attending
So long time, for repentance and amending.
Let him express a resolute intent,
To leave to GOD's dispose, the government
Which he has managed ill; and to resign
Himself, and his, to providence divine,
With full assurance, of obtaining place,
In his free love, and alsufficient grace.
This done; let him, subscribe the same, and spread it,
Before the LORD; let him with such tears read it,
As may declare, it was his act and deed:
Then, seal it, with a Heart, which much does bleed;
And, with a Lion rampant, so reverst,
That, none may fear, his rage or bloody thirst.
Upon which acts, by means of your relation,
And, by that spirit of communication,
Whereby, most secret actions, are made known,
(When to good purposes they may be shown)
Even at that point of time, they, who have bin
His opposites, will feel, some creeping in,
First, hopes; then Good opinions; and, at last,
That which will blot out all Offenses past;
And make them kill their fat calfe; dance and sing;
That they, have found again their long lost King.
Oh, that I could behold that happy day
Of penitence; and, that behold I may
Both Parliament, and People meet therein
So truly; that, their unrepentant sin
May not, when God has re-inthroned him,
Prolong their woes, or bring new plagues on them.
But, who am I, that, either you, or he,
Should on my word rely, or take from me
Those things which I have said? know, I am that
Which is your GENIUS called. If, you ask what
A GENIUS is, I will define the same,
According to the nature, and the name.
So called it is, because, it does incline
With an affection truly Genuine,
To draw to good, and to withdraw from ill,
Those Persons, both in action and in will,
To whom it does relate; and from disgraces,
And spoil, to keep such Persons, and such places.
A GENIUS, is an incorporeall creature,
Consisting of an intellectual nature;
Which at the selfsame time, a being had,
With that, for whose well being it was made.
And, may be called, that Angel, which designeth,
Advises, moves, draws, and inclines
To happiness; and, naturally restrains
From harm, that creature, whereto it pertains:
And, this am I to you. Then, have a care,
My counsels now, with good respect to hear:
For, they, to whom their GENIUS represents,
That, which to saftey tends, and harm prevents;
If, then, they shall his good advice neglect,
And, pass it by, with wilful disrespect;
They shall deservedly, be left to those
Ill Angels, whose direction, they have chose:
And, what will then succeed, they shall perceive
When it is too late, their evil choice to leave.
Then looking back, he fixed his eyes on me,
And, said; my Secretary thou shall be
To Register, and publish to these Nations,
What counsels, warnings, and what exhortations
God has vouchsafed them; that what ere betide,
His Grace, or Justice may be glorified.
This being said, my FANCY rose, and drew
A Curtain; wherewith, quite beyond my view,
This apparition vanished. And, I took
My pen, to put in writing, what was spoke,
And publish it to others, that it may
Prevent (if possible) your evil day:
For, till amendment, or destruction come,
The Beasts would preach, should men continue dumb:
Yea, what their Genius, now to them does speak,
If they should slight it, stones would silence break,
To rouse them from their slumbers; or, to tell
Succeeding-Ages, how and why they fell.
When all was vanished; and, I left alone,
Intending, what was willed to be done,
A fear surpised me; and, a shuddring took me,
Which with a long continuing trembling struck me;
And my weak heart began to be afraid,
To do what I resolved; and, thus it said.
Observ'st thou not the madness of this Nation,
The rage and fury of this Generation?
And, how like Swine, before whom Pearls are thrown,
They tread the givers of good counsel down,
And, tear them into pieces, by their scorns;
Because, they then expected Barley-cornes?
For, ten to one, even some in whose defense,
These truths are spoke, will want intelligence
To understand them so; and foolishly
Charge thee, with standring that Authority
Which thou do honor; and, which (as this day
Things go) can saved be no other way.
Have thou, nigh forty years been vexed and greoved,
By this dull Generation, unreleeved?
And having for it, ventured thy life,
Undone thy little children, and thy wife,
Left them nor house, nor lands, nor clothes, nor bread,
Nor ought wherewith they may be comforted,
(In that contagious sickness, which this day,
Has driven all thy comforters away)
Yea, spent all in their service; and, will thou
Having obtained words and paper now,
Which promise restoration, hazard all
Those hopes, by that, which hereby may befall?
Have thou full five years ^oyl'd and tired been
To struggle from the mischiefs thou were in;
With much-much difficulty, got at last,
Acknowledgements, of what forborne thou have?
And, probability, that thou perchance
May get one half, by giving, for advance
The other moiety? And, meanest thou
To lose it all again, by doing now
What this Illusion does entice thee to?
And everlastingly thy self undo?
For nothing spoken for the public good,
Will to thy benefit be understood,
By such as hate thee: And, thou well do know
That thou may more be mischiev'd by one Foe
( Who to the public faithfulness pretends)
Then benefited by a hundred friends.
Take heed of this temptation; thou have done
Thy share this way. Now, let the world alone:
Provide for thine own safety and thine ease:
As others do, write those things that may please:
And thou shall then be freed from those disgraces,
That thou have suffered: there will then, be places
For thee, as well as others: and thou then
Shall favored be, as much as other men.
Thy peace is made already; not a tongue
Does move against thee; And, thou shall ere long
Of all thy dues be fully repossest,
If thou will let the world do what she list.
When thus, my own corruptions from within me,
Had spoke, from my good purposes to win me;
Another Voice, as coming from behind me,
Thus whispered: SON of EARTH, give ear and mind me.
Resist thou that suggestion; let it be
But as a Serpent on a stone, to thee,
Which finds no entrance: For, it is the seed
Of that old Serpent, whereof to take heed
Thou have good cause; since, if his head prevail
To enter, he will slip in to the tail.
And, thou a poor flea-biting to avoid,
May with the stings of Vipers be destroyed.
Fear not those Bug-beares wherewith fools are frighted;
Nor prize those toys wherewith such are delighted;
Fear not the cruel Tyrants of the times;
Nor taste their dainties, lest thou act their crimes.
Fear not thy Family shall be unfed;
For, he that gave them mouths, will give them bread.
He that already has five years maintained thee,
( Since thou had naught left likely to maintain thee
Five months) and kept thee all that while aflaot
In storms, though thou had neither Oar nor boat;
He can as well preserve thee now, as then,
With nothing: therefore, seek to him again.
Think not thy self alone, or without friends;
For, thousands favor what thy Muse intends:
The well-affected Members of each House,
Yea, all among them, who are generous,
Will favor thy endeavors; and, be glad,
That, in these times, an Englishman they had,
Whom neither hopes, nor fears, could make afraid
To speak, what he thought pertinently said
For public safety; whatsoere he lost:
Or, whose design soere was thereby crossed.
He, that in times past, did secure thee from
Thy foes; will do the same in time to come:
For, that thou may believe he will do so,
Already five successions, in a row
He has destroyed; who, causlessely had sought
Thy ruin. Some, of them, (who, lately brought
A mischief on themselves) now rooted be
From dwelling, where they persecuted thee:
The sixth is also ripening to be sent
To follow them, unless they shall repent.
They, whom thou fear, if thou shall constant be
In good resolves, will be afraid of thee;
For, GOD shall put the fear of thee on those
Who to thy principles, and ways, are Foes;
Or else, at least, they shall still slumber on;
And, let thee speak in vain, as they have done.
Discourage not thy self, as if thy pain
In these endeavors would be quite in vain;
For, GOD will make thy weary Pilgrimage
Bring some advantage to this present age,
Or to the next. To this work thou were borne;
And, when thou to thy Fathers do return,
It shall not grieve thee, that thou have bestowne,
More time for public good, then for thine own.
Thy Faculties were not conferred on thee
For no Employment; nor imployd to be
In flattering fools: nor, as at first it was,
To praise the fading beauties of a face:
Or, play with those affections, which infuse
The vain expressions, that pollute a Muse;
But, to provoke to virtue: to deter
From vice, all chaste affections to prefer;
GODS Judgments to declare; his righteousness
To magnify; his mercies to confess:
And, whilst thou to this purpose art employed,
Fear not to be undone, or be destroyed:
For, by undoing, thou shall be new-made;
By thy destruction, safety shall be had:
And, if this Generation shall pursue
Thy love with hatred; or withold thy due;
It shall be one addition to their doom,
To be the scorn of every Age to come.
This reconfirm'd my Spirit; and I found
My heart with fearlesse courage, to abound.
With resolutions, I was fortified;
And, throwing all my own affairs aside,
Which most concerned me; I, to write begun
What I had heard: and, now, the work is done,
My Conscience is discharged; my heart is eased;
And, therein come what will, I shall be pleased.
Terrae Filius.

To the Parliaments.
IT is not fear, in me; nor it is shame,
Which makes me, at this time, conceal my name:
But, humble modesty, and consciousnesse,
Of that known frailty, and unworthiness,
Wherewith my Person, outwardly is clothed,
Often, makes my self, even of my self so loathed,
That (not without good reason) I suspect
My purposes, may find the less effect,
If, ere you taste the fruit, I let you know,
In whose poor Garden, GOD, has made it grow.
For, many times, the best wine pleases not,
Unless, we like the Drawer, and the Pot.
A homebred Simples virtue, few will own;
A Doctor seems best skilled, that is unknown:
Yea, miracles, by Christ, were seldom done,
Where, he reputed was, but Joseph's son.
How ere it please, or may be understood,
I dare aver, my purposes were good;
And, that, hereby, you have advantages
To do your selves an honor, if you please.
Therewith, you profit, likewise, may receive,
If, thereunto, but those respects you give,
Which are, in equity, to those things due,
That will both profit, and much honor you.
GODS will be done: and, if your will agree
With his, then, let your will be done on me.
Aliquid ex improviso.
THe Author will not, now, this Poem send
Unto the King; because it may offend.
But, if to give it, he had lawful way,
He down would kneel; and, thus would humbly say.
Dear Sir, be pleased to peruse this Book,
With undistempred heart, and gracious look;
And, though some Passages, may harsh appear,
Read out with patience, what is written here:
For, as with you, and your affairs it stands,
My due allegiance, strictly me commands,
That, I should plainly deal, and boldly do,
What, my well meaning heart did prompt me to
And I have hope, you shall receive by me,
A wholesome Pill, although it bitter be.
I could not flatter, when you were at height:
Nor would I to your sufferings, add the weight
Of half a grain, (to purchase my own health,
Though I were sick) for all your former wealth.
So tender am I, and so much afraid,
To lay on more, where GOD enough has laid;
Till I may be assured, that you contemn
His mercies; and proceed, in spite of him.
And, I, had now been pleased, with words more calm,
To have expressed my mind; and with soft balm,
To have anointed you; but that thereby,
Some (who, it may be, have an evil eye)
Might find occasion to obstruct that cure,
Which, by this course, may speedy be, and sure.
Your wisdom finds my meaning, if your heart
Has any sympathizing with my art;
And, I shall soon perceive it, when I know
What countenance you hereupon bestow.
If I discover not an operation,
According to my honest expectation,
I shall desist. But, if respect you give
To my intent, in this sharp Corrosive;
I shall endeavor, to provide a dos,
That may close up your wounds, repair your loss;
And, give you good assurance, in the end,
That, he who seemed your foe, has been your friend:
Yea dares be so; if you dare be your own,
Though, ten times more affliction, pressed you down;
And act for you, as far as he is able,
His part, of Mouse and Lion, in the Fable;
Though both his foes, and yours stood looking on him,
And, threatened all the spite that could be done him:
For, with a Thief, that Penitent shall be,
A Crucifying, undergo would he,
Much rather, then enjoy his preservation,
With Barabbas, by public acclamation.
Quae nocent, docent; BUT, Ex nihilo nihil fit.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
SOme faults, have been committed by the Printer;
Some, have escaped the Author, peradventure:
The first, correct your selves, as you shall find them;
The last, pass by, as if you did not mind them,
Forgiving, as of him, you are forgiven;
So, we shall all be friends, and reck'nings even.
Errata.
Page 49. lin. 12. read Square out. lin. 32. r. furnished be. p. 52. l. 2. read
could receive, l. 8. read them of, p. 53. l. 8. read grieved, p. 54. l. 12.
read, they seem. p. 55. l. 9. read all men, p. 57. l. 3. read It Is I, (this. l.
27. read yerning p. 59. l. 24. read those, p. 61. l. 6. read it is not, p. 67.
5. let every. p. 68. l. 7. projected, p. 80. l. 6. read beget. p. 84. l. 3. of
any sense.


