The Protector. A POEM Briefly illustrating the Supereminency of that Dignity;
AND, Rationally demonstrating, that the Title of PROTECTOR, providentially
conferred upon the Supreme Governor of the British Republike, is the most
Honorable of all Titles, and, that, which, probably, promises most
Propitiousness to these Nations; if our Sins and Divisions prevent it not.

Composed by George Wither, Esquire;

Take these Hints at the Threshold.

The use of most things, which GOD frames,
He stamps upon them, by their Names.
The truest Honor, always, lies
In that, which Worldlings, most despise.
The greatest Power, not kept upright,
Soon swerves, and falls, by its own Weight.
The best Effects, Mankind enjoys,
By that, which their own work, destroys.
The gladdest Tidings, have been brought,
By means, and persons, set at Naught.
And saddest Danger, those attends,
Who court their Foes, and slight their Friends.
LONDON, Printed by J.C. and are to be sold at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard.
1655.

To the High and Mighty, OLIVER, By the grace of God, of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, with the Isles and Dominions thereof,
Imperial PROTECTOR; as also, Catholic Defender of the oppressed Saints,
throughout the World: GEO. WITHER humbly offers, this Illustration of that
supereminent TITLE.
I Know, that Malice will impute to me
The guilt of Flattery in a high degree:
Yet, with a conscience blameless of that sin,
Thus, in despite of Envy, I begin:
LORD, of the noblest of all Sovereign Styles,
Of BRITAN 's Empire, Provinces, and Isles:
Bright Load-star of the North; who (for Director
As well, through future times, as for PROTECTOR
Of us who now survive) have raised bin
By Providence, that Great Work to begin,
Which has been long in hope; and which, hence forth
Shall spread such Influences from the North
Throughout the earth, as will their souls amaze,
Who, on thy late Ascension, stand at gaze:
Descend a little, and cast down thine eyes
On this, which at thy feet displayed lies;
And, let thy great Humility, dispense
With what, may seem in me a Confidence
Above my Sphere: for, to the highest things,
The lowest, otherwhiles, additions brings,
If not obstructed by those dire Aspects,
Which menace, now, malevolent Effects.
Some days, before that PARLIAMENT was past,
Which, may, yet, called be, your first, and last;
This Poem, (and the Lines which next ensue,
To usher it) was fitted for your view,
And, their perusal; who, might then have bin
(As I supposed) much concerned therein.
But, somewhat intervening, which did seem
To make it out of season, at that time,
It was six months delayed, to wait upon
That subsequence which would ensue thereon;
And, now, a better Opportunity
Appearing, This, in all humility,
Moves toward you again, in every thing
The same it was, except this prefacing,
Which here concludes. Let the Contents be weighed,
As they deserve: for, this, was that I said.
I Find among the best Antiquities,
That, they who ruled the worlds chief Monarchies
Gave those, whom they most favored, some New name:
And, GOD himself, has sometime done the same
To his choice Favorites, when he begun
Great Changes, and when signal acts were done,
In order to a seas'nable proceed,
With what, had been eternally decreed.
Now, in like manner, for the same intent,
He, by a New name, makes thee eminent,
Above all other Princes, to bring on
That Kingdom, which he promised long agon.
And, to that end, YOU, (of whom no man thought
In that way) from Obscurity are brought,
To show the world, That, he, even to this day,
Proceeds, with his own works, in his own way;
Neither, her Powers, in his Designments needing,
Nor those great Persons, or that means, much heeding
Which humane prudence, thinks, conducing to
That, which eternal Wisdom means to do.
And, he, perhaps, has called me, from among
The Vulgar, and most despicable Throng,
To help rough-hew their hearts, who by dissentions,
Are Foes to their own Peace, and his intentions:
As also, to illustrate so to you,
And, unto them, the Name conferred now;
That, by observing it, both You, and They
(Before it be too late) consider may
How You, and They, are thereby priviledg'd;
Whereto, you, jointly, seem to be obliged;
Whereto, apart; what, will succeed upon
That, which shall well, or wickedly be done:
And, that the time is come, or near at hand,
Which offers us, the means, to fall or stand.
At least, I do believe, that I was born
To act this Part; and will, till I return
To him that sent me; leaving the success
To Providence, which gets advantages
By disadvantage; and, often, makes our gains
Then greatest, when most think, we lose our pains.
I was about to tell you, what I hear;
What, some suspect; what, many seem to fear;
And, what most men repine at: But, your Sun
Wants not my Candle, nor needs this be done:
For, you have ev'rywhere, both Ears, and Eyes,
To find where Danger, or Advantage lies;
And, I can bring you, but a Gloworms light,
Which rarely shines, except to them, whose Night
Affliction darkens: And, it seems, even then,
An Ignis Fatuus, to some Prudent men.
Till therefore, I shall find my self more able,
In your Concernments to be serviceable,
I will in humble silence, wait upon
What shall, by GOD, by You, and Those, be done
Who represent these Nations; and, who be
Objects of Contemplation now, to me,
Whereby, I Calculate what may succeed,
When, joined together, I your Actings read:
For, Truths, to me, your Trine-aspect more clears,
Then all the Constellations of the Spears:
Yea, those Three show me, what things will be done,
Better, then all the Stars, the Moon, and Sun.
There are some Clouds which trouble so my sight,
That I discern not things, which else I might:
But this I plainly view, that, much is left
Unto Contingencis, to be berest,
Or else enjoyed, according as you prove
Who, in the two Inferior Orbs, do move:
And, if I know you, or, by what proceeds
Either from Circumstances, Words, or Deeds,
May know, what you unfeignedly desire,
(And whereunto you chiefly do aspire)
You aim at nothing more, then, to possess
A Throne established by Righteousness:
And that those Hesitations, and that Doubt,
In which you let these Nations ravel out
So many Months, is, neither ill Design,
Nor Evidence, that you from them decline:
But, an Expedient, which, your wisdom tries
To work by, in your late Emergencies.
Unless, I be deceived (which, God forbid)
In what you do, and what you lately did,
You, take no pleasure in delays, or troubles,
Which needlessly, their cost or labor doubles;
But, only, leave it to themselves, to state
Their Questions, and, their heats to moderate,
By their own Prudence, (without interposing
Your judgment, or their purposes opposing)
That, by a free debate, they fully may
Know their own temper; and, you find the way
To such Resolvings, as may best assure
A settlement of Peace, which will endure;
And, that, when you, by their Contests have found
Which Members rotten be, and which are sound;
Who gives good counsel, who bad things infuses;
Who speaks his Conscience, who his Trust abuses;
Who strives to build up Truth, who pulls it down;
Who neither stoops to smiles, nor fears a frown:
Who merits to be stripped of his power,
Who seeks his own ends, by pretending your;
Who flatters, who is fickle, who is stout;
Who fittest for the Work you are about;
With other such discov'ries, that, from thence
You may extract Results of Consequence
For Common benefit: I do presume
You will, at last, to that Conclusion come,
Which all Good-men expect: and, act, what best
Conduces to the Public Interest,
Much better, then you either could have done,
By interrupting, what seemed carried on;
Or, by possessing them with hopes, to have
Whatever, they should pleased be, to crave:
For, Full-fed Steeds grow wanton, if their Guiders
Neglect the Rein; and, spoil themselves, and Riders.
These are the thoughts, to which my heart inclines,
Without a dictate of your own Designs
From any hand: which thoughts, if you approve,
I have, at this time, nothing more to move,
But, that you will be pleased to peruse
What of your Sovereign Title now ensues;
That, it may mind you of his love who gave it;
Show, on what terms, to what intent you have it;
And keep you careful, that it be not changed;
Lest, somewhat, from you, therewith be estranged,
Which you are loath to lose, and, must forgo,
When you grow disaffected thereunto:
For, you will find it so, when 't is too late
To seek the effects, which may be aimed at,
By such an Innovation; and, will see
Ill Consequences, which, yet hidden be,
If (as I think you are not) I should find
Your Highness, to be mutably inclinde.
I aim at nothing, but to make you strong
For that Work, whereto seems to belong
This, your advancement; and shall not desist
Therein, although my private Interest
You should neglect; or, value me no more
Then they, who have oppressed me heretofore.
Believe this, SIR: for, from a heart it came,
Which prompts no guile: and, be assured, I am
(As unto him, who bears next under GOD
Our Staff Protecting, or Correcting ROD)
To your Highness, both faithfully, and conscientiously devoted, GEO. WITHER,

To the Readers.
THe Subject of my Muse, is now a TITLE;
Which, though yet known unto the World but little;
May much concern it: but, abov the rest,
(And in the first place) Britain's Interest;
If we destroy not, by a wilful sinning,
The glory of it, in the first beginning.
'T is not my Principle, to take away,
Or, to resist the Power I should obey,
Or, question that, which Providence approves,
Or sets up, when another it removes;
Confirming visibly, what it advances,
With all the Supplements and Circumstances
Which make a Power: and therefore, when at first,
Power was dis-joynted, and I seemed enforced
To take one Part of what was then divided;
I clave to that, wherewith, I thought resided
Most Equity, adhering to the same
With Constancy; and, I think, without blame
Justly imputed: for, with an intent
To serve as well the King, as Parliament,
I put on Arms; and, as sincerely sought
His good, as theirs, beneath whose Flag I fought,
Till, I, betwixt them nigh destroyed became;
And, then, perceiving they were both to blame,
Left off the Quarrel, unto Him, that knew
Which best deserved, and, what to both was due.
Yet, firm continued, to this Commonweal,
When, by the Sword, GOD, answered her Appeal,
According to our Laws, (which, in such case,
Combat allows, when no proof else, takes place.)
Yea, to the Peoples Representative,
I, did (though thereby wronged) obedience give;
Contributing, what I was able, then,
With my Estate, and also by my Pen:
Which, (though despised) somewhat did effect
Producing more Advantage, then respect:
For, they, who were not pleased it should be known
To come from me, made my Designs their own;
And left me to the mischief of their hate,
Who, malic'd my Affection, to the State.
When their Power subdivided, I adhered
To that, in which most Righteousness appeared:
And, though I suffered still, without regard,
(Aiming at nobler Guerdon, and reward,
Then they could give me) did the best I could,
Their Peace, and crazie Honor, to uphold
By secret Cautions, and, by publishing
What I much feared their course would on them bring:
But, Selfness, Pride, and Avarice, made void
All good endeavors, till they were destroyed;
And, some among them, who deserved well,
Were wrapped up, in the Mischiefs which befell,
Blamed, and unpiti'd; yea, and most of all
By them, whose wickedness, drew on their fall.
How, it so came to pass, I, could not mark;
For, in a Cloud 't was done, and in the dark,
(As in respect of me) till, GOD revealed
That Mystery, which was at first concealed:
And then, from late Corruptions, forth did peep
(As Eve from Adam, whilst he was asleep)
Appearances; which, when they were reduced
To their perfection, visibly produced
The present GOVERNMENT, ere well I knew
What men were doing, or, what would ensue.
But, when it showed it self, I, plainly saw
A Creature formed, clothed with such Power, and awe,
That, none but GOD himself, could Author be
Of that, which I did then produced see:
Consid'ring, what Confusions we were in;
What, might, much rather, have expected bin;
And, how, to wonderment, he had asswag'd
Their Fury, who, were Envious, and enraged.
Therefore, although, before that time, I had
Some Overtures, within my own heart made;
And, some Expedients fancied, how to lay
Foundations of our Peace, another way;
And, to rebuild the Structure late overthrown,
By gathering out, from what was pulled down,
The Good, from Bad, (and that, which proved sound,
From Rubbish, which therewith, was mixed found.)
I threw by my own thoughts; and, thenceforth, sought
To work on, in that Work, which GOD had wrought;
And am resolved, with all the strength I have,
(And, every Faculty which I receive)
To fortify that Power, which raised I see,
Till God himself removes it; though to me
It proved less favorable, yea, and more
Destructive, then the Power, which reigned before:
And (without other purpose) to that end,
These Musings, on this Title did intend,
Which here ensues; that, you away may cast
Your own Designs, as I did mine, at last,
And join together, in advancing that
New Power, and Title, which, GOD, did create;
Rather, then by a foolish wilfulness,
Oppose his will, and ruin your own Peace.
Which Mischief, that you timely may prevent,
(And, not destructive Discord still foment)
I have contrived this Engine, to prepare
Their hearts for Concord, who divided are;
And show them, what Advantages may rise
By that, which they through Ignorance despise.
Consider therefore, duly, what it may
Concern you, to take heed, of what I say;
And, that sometime a Title, or a Word,
(Scarce thought worth heed) occasion may afford
Of furth'ring matters of great Consequence,
And of removing things which gave offense.
Consider what is offered to your view:
Remember, that some things, and not a few,
Which were foretold (even many years before
They came to pass) were carelessly passed ore,
And what befell. Remember, that, to you
I have naught tendered, yet, which proved untrue,
(If rightly understood) when 't was professed
Delib'rately, and, seriously expressed:
And, let me find respect, as I intend
Your weal, by that, which new I recommend.
Your ancient Remembrancer, Geo. Wither.

The Protector.
A POEM Briefly illustrating the Supereminency of that Dignity.
WIse Providence, which, leaves unheeded, neither
she falling hair, or wagging of a feather,
Induces me, sometimes, with serious eyes,
To view, and Muse on that, which most despise:
And, now, amidst a world of Things, I am
Thereby inclined, to Contemplate a Name;
For which, perhaps, I shall be thought as wise,
As he, who tells Straws, or hunteth Flies:
But, think men as they list, my Thinkings, too,
Shall be as free; and, what I please I Will do:
For, now, of boundless Freedoms many dream;
And, I may prove as wise, as one of them.
A Factious Rout, because I much decline
Their Principles, pretend, I fall from mine;
And, falsely, say, that, I have taught my Rimes
To soothe the Innovations of these Times:
As if, a zeal to Public good, none had,
Until it made him, in some measure, mad,
And partner in seditious ways, with those,
Who, to the Present Power, are always Foes.
A Fawning Crew, because I bars provide
Against their growing Vanities, and Pride,
Have published, by Fame, (which is the Liar)
That, my last Lines, were voted to the fire:
As if, Wise men, a blameful act would do,
Because, mis-jugding Fools, would have it so:
But, I much value not, how I displease
Such vain, and partial Censurers as these:
For, having learned, that Knaves and Fools, are those
Who, to my Musings, are still greatest Foes,
I, now again adventure, maugre them,
To descant on another Casual-Theame
That Is offered by the New Sprung Sovereign Style,
Which lately was indeniz'd in this Isle:
And, having sound what Providence will do,
There, where that Honor 's, I will honor too;
Not heeding, neither greatly taking care,
Who thinks I temp'rize, or who angry are:
This, was my temper known, when I was younger;
And, (as I older grow) it grows stronger.
Our needless Novelties, approve I not;
Nor on Antiquities, did ever dote,
Which are not useful; nor, is 't my intent
To cavil, about things indifferent;
But would have every Soul, preserved as free,
As I my self, desirous am to be:
And, therefore, when I have declared my mind,
Let all men Censure, as they stand inclinde.
Some, mis-advis'd, or, some deluded friends,
(And, some, concealing mis-directed ends
With fair Pretendings) would have laid aside
This Title; and, his Highness digniside,
With what the Jews, imprudently, once, chose;
Or, what the Germans, on their CHIEF impose:
Not heeding, peadventure, what Offense
It had occasioned, against Providence;
Nor, of what Benefits, it may deprive
Both Him, and Us, if their Design should thrive.
Therefore, I offer up this Vindication,
Of what seems yet approved of by this Nation:
Which, (though it may a Vanity appear,
To those, who know not, what things proper are,
Nor what is useful) shall, by what succeeds,
Show, how much, this Age these Expressions needs;
And, have effects, which may to others be
Of much advantage; though, of none to me.
Did I not ghess at what our Eagle flies,
And to what Heights, I must advance mine eyes,
To heed in what transcendent Sphere he goes;
I might have sought him among Kites and Crows;
And called them by his Name; or, else, to Him,
Communicated, what belongs to them,
As others would have done; and, lost the view
Of things that are, and, things that will ensue.
Knew I not, also, that, to new Creations,
There do belong peculiar Appellations,
To keep things from Confusion; I, perchance,
(Deluded by Self-love, or Ignorance,
Yet blinding others) might have prized more
Those Attributes, thought glorious heretofore;
And been as violent, to have restored
Those Titles, which the Vulgar have adored:
For, I envy not, that men should bestow
The highest Titles, where most Worth, they know.
But, I heed, that, when Things and Names agree,
And, that, when joined by Providence they be,
There 's somewhat in it, of more Consequence
Then all men, at first sight, collect from thence:
Especially, when old Names, may obstruct
The effects, which changing of a Name product,
As in this present case; which, some, that have
More Wit then Grace, do well enough perceive.
Why, then, should we desire again that Thing,
Which, formerly, these Nations called a King?
Or, so much as the Name of that retain,
To which, we long in bondage did remain?
As if it had bewitched us, still, to bear
Some mark of that, whereby inthral'd we were?
And, which did by relapse (do what we could)
Corrupt, still, into what it was of Old?
Why should we court it now? whilst on us lies
The heavy burdens, which their Tyrannies
Occasioned? and, before the wounds are cured,
Which, we, in casting off those Chains, endured?
Or, why on him who has our Sovereign Power,
Should we bestow the Style of Emperor?
A drooping Title, shuffled off and on,
Till it has scarcely Place to rest upon,
Or Person, which at this day owns the same,
According to the Grandeur of that Name?
If, they, who gave him first his Style and Power,
That now protecteth, were his friends, and our,
And, meant thereby to honor Us, and Him;
Why, now should we their Noble Gift contemn?
Why by the name of King, should we now call him,
Which is below the Honors, that befall him;
And makes him to be rather less then greater,
(As in himself) and rather worse then better
As to his People? For, it renders void
The Dignity conferred; and, now enjo'd.
At best, it mixeth with it, but as Clay
With Iron, which, both takes the strength away,
And value of it: adding thereunto,
Nothing, but what that structure may undo.
It cracks the Instrument, which does invest
Him in his Power; and lames his Interest:
Yea, and disables him, to prosecute
That Duty, whereto, it did him depute.
It crosses the designs of Providence.
It will deprive him even of that Defense
Which seems intended; and, will him expose
To all the purposed Cavils of his Foes.
It wooes him from that Principle, whereon
His Safety stands, to lean and rest upon
A Pinaclc, which totters under all,
Who do ascend it; and, portends a Fall.
In brief, it many ways, exposes him
To Dangers, which my sight (though somewhat dim)
Better, it may be, can foresee, then some
Who do supply a more perspicuous Room.
It gives shells for kernels; and, the shade
Of that which he, before, in essence had.
And, if by others flatt'ries, or, by ought,
Which may to that end rise from his own thought,
He waves this Title, for the best of those
The World admires; he, therewithal has chose
His Portion in the world; and will, at last,
Prove like to them, with whom his lot is cast.
Some of the Long-robe, to advance their Trade,
And others, that, an Inlet might be made
To what they hope for (and, perhaps contrive
In secret) our Old Title would revive;
Because, from Kingship they have hope to draw
Advantage by the letter of our Law,
To all his Substitutes, who govern by
That Name, sufficient to indempnify
Them, both in their Estates, and Persons, from
Those hazards, which might else upon them come;
If, He, the Supreme Power should repossess
Whom GOD removed. But, neither more, nor less,
Will they be privileged, whether he
King, or Protector, shall instiled be.
Nor can a Name of novel Institution,
Which in it self implies no diminution
Of real Power (but rather a supply)
Diminish ought of his Authority
That Rules in Chief; since, to him pertinent
(Even of due right) is all enablement
That 's necessary to effect those ends,
Which Government, essentially intends.
For, our PROTECTOR is not such a one,
As that, whereby we did support the Throne,
In Nonage of a King, (as some conceive)
But, that, which to his Highness does derive,
As absolute, and as Supreme a Power
As that of Kingship, or of Emperor,
Which arrogates no more, then may subsist,
With GOD's, and with his People's Interest.
And, be it known, (though some think otherwise)
(Whose Judgment, we in many matters prize)
That by a King, our Laws mean not alone,
That Name, but, also that, which fills the Throne,
Be it a King, a Queen, or Parliament,
Or, whatsoever else, does represent
The Supreme Power: And, that, each Attribute
Or Privilege, which Statute-laws impute
To Powers in being, when they first were made,
Is (in each Change) with every force it had,
Transferred thither, and, to that, wherein
The Supreme Power essentially is seen
To act and to reside: (though in the Name,
Or other Accidents, we change the same.)
For, to those Laws, although some violence
Seemed to be offered, in the lit'ral sense,
When here a Woman reigned; no wiseman thought
The essence of the Laws transgressed in ought,
Because she was no King: nor will, of that,
The Title of Protector ought abate.
And, they, who may by nice distinguishings,
Or Terms, imposed indiff'rently on Things,
Or Persons, be unwisely tempted from
Realities; will much deceived become
In what they hope for: and, when thought they are
Most safe, be taken in an unseen snare.
When once a Supreme Power is constituted,
Submitted to, and shall be such reputed,
Without resistance, or a Protestation
Against it made in Public, by that Nation
Whom it concerns, (or by some part at least,
Considerable, claiming Interest,
Or share therein, having enablement
Likewise to guard those, who thereto assent)
Such Constitution, (and the Being, what
It seems to be) gives it not only that,
But every other Right, which does invest
With real Power; whether, it be expressed
By Law, or not; and virtually makes void
All Laws, whereby such Power may be destroyed;
Until another Power, that is more able,
Removes it: And, then, as warrantable
That, thenceforth grows, as long, as it does reign,
And, actually, a Being does retain.
Provided, that such Powers do neither swerve
From Justice, nor destroy, what to preserve
They were ordained; nor leave a private wrong
Unrecompensed quite (or overlong)
When they are forced to endamage some,
That, many, may not to destruction come.
And, all they, who to such a Power submit,
(Or, for the Common Peace, act under it)
Whilst it continues, merit no just blame,
However, that Power, to be a Power became;
So they, at first, conspired not with those
By whose unrighteous actings, it arose:
For, GOD himself, commands us to obey
The Powers that are; not questioning what way
They were acquired. His Son, whilst here on earth,
He did reside, (although true King by birth)
Paid Tribute to the Usurper, that, he might
Advance GODS work, by waving his own right.
His Followers, taught this doctrine; yea, did teach
By Practice, that which they by word did preach.
And did submit for Conscience sake, even when
The Sovereign Power was grasped by worst of men,
And got by basest means; which, to this day,
Became a Guide, to many in that way,
Which, else, had doubtful been: And, had we not
This Rule to walk by, through GODS mercy got,
Mankind would be destroyed: for, by our siding,
With this, or with that Faction; by dividing,
And subdividing Powers, as Malice, Love.
Pride, Envy, or Self-interest may move,
All would be torn in pieces; and no Peace,
Be settled, till Mankind, to be, should cease.
Why then should any so imprudent grow?
Or rather, why so mad? (for they are so)
Who, when they might unblamefully possess
Their lives and portions, in safe Quietness,
Will, unconstrained, lose their sweet enjoying
Of what they have, and venture the destroying
Of all that 's dear unto them, to pull down
A fixed Power? and, set up one unknown?
That will be, or that may (at least) be worse?
And, both on them, and others, bring the Curse
Of All-devouring War? yea, and perchance,
A Family, or Person, here advance,
Who, either will not heed their services,
Or else forget them, when they get their Prize?
Or (which is worse) requite at last, with ill
Their cost, their pains, their hazards, and Good Will?
And leave them to the spights and scorns of those
Whom they, for their sakes, did at first oppose?
For such things I have seen; even Traitors made
Their Favorites, whom they would have betrayed;
And, those cast out of Favor, without Reason,
Whose faithfulness, preserved them from their treason.
Why then should we permit Discretions eyes
To be deceived with Cheating Fallacies?
Why then should we of Scarcrows be afraid?
Or on Foundations, by GODS own hand laid,
Rebuild again old Babylon? or fix
To Sion's firm stones, her untemper'd bricks?
Why, when the work of God is both in Name,
And in the Thing, of one Piece, and the same,
Should Humane Policy presume to add
Her Trimmings? as if he mistaken had
His purpose? Or, as if he had forgot
What Title, best became the Power and lot
Which was conferred on him, to whom, of late,
The Supreme Seat, it pleased him to translate,
From those who had abused it? For, that Change
(Although irregular it seemed, and strange)
Is not of Man, but GOD; though men have bin
Dull, and imperfect Instruments therein:
And, 't will established be; if he that bears
The Scepter shuns ungodly Counselors;
Makes not a wilful stand in sinners ways,
Nor to the Scorners Throne, himself shall raise.
But if this Title merely did depend
On humane prudence, we should much offend
Against her Principles, by vary'ng from
That Resolution whereto we are come.
Why then should we, if now we Freemen are,
(And by the world without, reputed were
A world within our selves) be bound up to
Their Customs, who have naught with us to do?
Since, 't will be thereby tacitly confessed,
We are not Masters of that Interest
Which we do claim; nor can of right create
(As well as any other Supreme State)
New Dignities; or make new Presidents,
When Time brings forth occasioned Events.
For, this inferred, we granted, or believed,
That, we our chief Ennoblements received
From other States; and, are obliged become
Those Rags of Honor, only, to assume,
Which they have worn, though soyled and disgraced
By those, on whom they were unjustly placed.
A Title gives no essential Fame;
It is the Man, that dignifies the Name.
Tyrant, was thought an honorable Style,
Until, Oppressors did the same defile.
By lustful Insolence, in Tarquin's race,
Kingship, at Rome, first fell into disgrace,
And, 't was from thence exploded with such hate,
That, though the King of Romans, is of late,
Made Titular; no Roman, to this day,
Submits thereto, nor in Rome bears it sway.
The Basis, of true Supreme honor stands
Not upon absolute, but, Just Commands.
A Prince, does his Pre-eminence receive,
From Virtue, not from his Appellative;
And Righteousness, adds more to his renown,
Then Conquest, Title, Scepter, and a Crown.
As quickly will appear, when he shall want
That Dignity, and grows exorbitant.
An honorable Title is confessed
To be a fair Engagement, or at best,
An useful Pledge, and some Memento too,
Of what the Owner is obliged to do:
But, of it self, on him that fills the place
Of Power, it does confer, nor Worth, nor Grace.
It is an Ornament, that prized should be,
And, also, that which may, in some degree
Illustrate him that wears it; if he frame
His Actions answerable to the same,
According to the purposes of those,
Who did on him, the Sov'raignty impose.
And, that, which on our Chief has been of late
Conferred, (and is confirmed now by our State)
Is more significant, to that intent,
Then All, whereof there is any President,
Throughout the Universe; unless it be
In some far Climate, yet unknown to me.
To him, who has obtained a Supreme Power,
Whether Duke, Prince, a King, or Emperor,
Sophy, Grand Seignior, Pope, (or what Style else
We place on him, who, other men excels)
He by the greatest of them, is possessed
Of no more Sov'raignty, then by the least.
For, all their Titles are equivalent
According to their Seigniories extent;
Because, he that depends upon none,
Is made as absolute, by any One
Of those, or other Titles, as by all;
Which will appear, when I discover shall
How much, or little, each of them contains,
Of that, which to Supremacy pertains;
And, when it is considered what they are
Who, as chief Sovereigns, these Titles, wear.
A Duke, is but a Leader; supreme Prince,
Is one who claims the chief Pre-eminence;
A King, is he, who has a Ruling Power;
Command, denominates an Emperor;
Sophie (the Persian Title) signifies
A Person, who, in governing is wise;
Grand Seignior (which the Turks ambitiousness
Now arrogates) does Power in Chief express;
The style of Pope, implies a Fatherhood,
And more relates to a Peoples good,
Then any of the former, though as little
He does conform his Actings to his Title:
But, all those Titles want that which compleats
A person meriting, the Supreme Seats,
Except this last, whose Claimers (swerving from
What their high Style implies) are become
Stepfathers unto those, whom they pretend
To father, foster, cherish, and defend;
And, GOD as well for their Deliverance,
As our, shall this Protectors power advance,
(Or his Successors) till it quite sets free
All Nations, who, to them enslaved be;
Avenging all the blood which they have shed;
(The blood of Saints whom they have massacred
Of late, or heretofore:) yea, look how far
The Powers of GOG, and MAGOG, stretched are;
And wheresoe'er those Catholic pretenders
Oppress; these shall be Catholic Defenders
Of men oppressed; and, GOD, to that end,
Shall universally this Power extend.
It has already (as that Angel did,
Of whom John wrote) to that intent, bestrid
A great part of the world; and one foot stands
upon the Seas, the other on the Lands.
But, whither, do my Contemplations fly?
I may, perchance, unseal a Mystery
Before the time; my Muse, therefore, descend,
And, prosecute the Subject I intend;
Thereby, to further that, which I conceive
Is drawing near, and few will yet believe.
None, of the other Titles, bring to mind
All Duties, whereto Princes, are enjoined;
And, such as owe them, frequently are cast,
Among the vile, and infamous, at last;
Because, they nor essential retain
Within themselves, the Power, those Titles fain,
Nor any of those Virtues, which assure
The Dignity, they formally procure.
But, if, that any Title under heaven,
Has in times past, or, in this age been given,
That, truly magnifies; and, may conduce
To bring those Virtues, unto mind and use,
Which dignifie the Persons; it is that
Which Providence conferred has of late,
Upon our Governor. For, though it seem
Through Novelty, not grown up to esteem,
Yet, (if, unhappily, there be not wanting,
Concomitances, useful to its planting)
It will be reverenced, in farthest Climes,
And, honorable through all future times,
(Beyond compare;) when, Kings and Emperors
Have lost their Names, their Kingdoms, and their Powers:
And, until here, that King of kings does reign,
Whose Glory, heaven and earth, cannot contain.
This glorious Title, has in it expressed,
No stamp of Self-relation, like the rest;
But, marks forth One, (as if from heaven sent down)
Who seeks his Peoples weal, more then his own.
It is the chiefest of GOD's Attributes
Which he to those men, whom he here deputes
Communicates; and ought, therefore, by none
To be assumed, but God-like men, alone,
Who in their hearts, have purposed, to be
(At least, by Imitation) such as He:
And, ready, to contribute in his stead,
Due succors to all Suppliants in their Need.
It is a Name of mercy and affection,
Which, not alone engages to Protection,
But, likewise to a strenuous Opposition
Of Tyrants, Tyrannies, and all Oppression.
For, to be called a Nation to protect,
Implies (at least, in some degree) the effect
Of every Means, which may be helpful to
Those Works which GOD provided Him to do;
And nobler is, in that respect, then those
Loud-sounding Titles, which our Fathers chose:
Because, we therein comprehended find
More Notions, then in all those Titles joined,
Which are throughout the whole world, owned by them,
Who do enjoy a Sovereign Diadem.
Conduct, Pre-eminence, Rule, and Command,
Policy, Grandeur, (both by Sea and Land)
And, that Paternity, which they possess
To whom is mis-imputed Holiness,
Are but a Part, and that part very little
Of what is intimated by this Title.
For (being well considered) it implies
That he, who owns it, should be truly wise,
As well as politic; a foe to Vice;
A friend to Virtue; free from Avarice.
Awful of GOD; affectionate to Man,
His Welfare seeking, by all means he can;
Stout, and yet humble, in his Exaltation;
Just, and his Justice, sweetning by Compassion;
Due recompense to well- deservers giving;
Pard'ning the Penitent, the Oppressed relieving;
Watchful for all Occasions how he may
Advance his Peoples welfare, every way:
As also, by what means he may prevent
The Common, and each private Detriment;
A hearty Zelot of the Public Faith;
By Deeds confirming, what in Words he says;
And, readyer for his Flocks, his life to stake,
Then, of their Flesh, or Fleece, a prey to make:
Nor to his own alone, does he extend
His Goodness; but even to the worlds far end,
Will stretch it also; as acknowledging
All men for Subjects of that Heavenly King,
Whom, he but represents; and, unto whom
He must account, when Audit-day is come.
And, of necessity, to all, he must
Be righteous, who will to his own be just;
Since, universal Justice, must make strong
His Arm, who would defend his own from wrong;
And, he who to this Virtue, is inclinde,
Becomes, as well, a friend to all Mankind
As to his Native People, when they need
Protection, and from Tyrants to be freed.
This, is a true PROTECTOR; such a one
As I desire, should ever fill the Throne
Of these three Nations: And, if he prove such
Who governs now, I Will never think it much
To sacrifice my life, and all I have,
His Person, Power, and Dignity to save
From his Maligners: whereas, if that he
Who ruled the whole world, were so kind to me,
As to advance me to the second place
Within his Government; and when he was
Removed by death, could, and would set me there
Where he had sat; yet, if I certain were
His heart stood not unfeignedly inclinde
To do (as he enablement should find)
The duty of his place; I could not prize
His Favors, nor his Greatness idolize,
Nor truly love him: yet, would still be true
Unto his Power, and give him all his due.
This, a PROTECTOR is, according to
The meaning of his Name. Thus, should he do.
This, is that supereminent Degree,
Whereto I strive, that he advanced should be
Whom I inaugurate; and would hereby
Transmit, to pass through all Posterity
Among the Heroes, (whose wide-spreading Fames
Make vulgar Appellations, and New-Names
Grow honorable;) that, both far and near,
This Title, high exalted may appear;
Until it has attained an esteem
Beyond all Attributes in former time.
Room, therefore; and henceforth let Names of Power,
Such, as of Duke, King, Prince, or Emperor,
Sophie, Grand Seignior; and that, which they own
Who, claim the wearing of a Triple Crown,
Descend; that in their place I may enthrone
The Title of PROTECTOR, which in One
Contains all, which, their Attributes afford;
Yea, all the worlds grand Titles in one word:
And, shall, by what it intimates, direct
Till He, who these Dominions does protect,
Has by example, taught, how to reduce
All Governments to their intended use;
Or, broke them into pieces, who, persist
To tyrannize, and rant it, as they list.
This, a PROTECTOR is, or ought to be;
And, such a one as this, I hope, is He
Who now reigns over us; although, as yet
(To exercise our faith) GOD does permit
Some doubtings, and some few dissatisfactions;
Because, we know not of his several Actions,
The Grounds and Reasons: which, were they so known
To us, as those Designs, that are our own,
Would make, perhaps, these Nations to believe
They should that great Deliverance receive
Which they expect; and, by his means, receive it,
(If they could be persuaded to believe it.)
At least, so far forth, as they justly can
Expect so great a Blessing, by a Man
Subject to Frailties; and, who did on him
Assume that heavy Burden, at that time
Wherein, all things were to Confusion brought;
And, wherein, Contrarieties were sought
With so much violence, that, few, or none
Knew what to crave, or what might best be done:
When, for this Thing, one Faction madly bawled;
When, for much differing things, another called;
A third, for somewhat, which would quite destroy
What both the former, craved to enjoy.
When some drew back; when, others on did hurry
To their Designments, with a headstrong fury:
When, most, each others purpose did mistake,
Or, of best Meanings, worst Construction make,
Through weakness, or by being prepossest
With Pride, O'erweening, or Self-interest:
And, when those Straights, and those Necessities,
Which from the Powers preceding, did arise,
Did him to Arbitrary Acts enforce,
That, things grown much amiss, might not grow worse.
For, these things, make it difficult to know
What, really he is; what he would do;
Or, what he can do, whilst our sins and passions
Foment our Strife; or, whilst Mis-applications,
Mis-representings, or suchlike, obstruct
That Blessing, which GOD's mercy would product.
If, likewise, we considered herewithal,
That, when to this great Charge, he had this Call,
It was, when our Unsetledness, had made it
So hazardous, that none else would have had it;
But such, as, probably, had, ere this day,
Thereby, both to their own Designs made way,
And, to our total Ruin: And, when, some
Who did project, what now to pass is come,
Did not, perhaps, intend so much, thereby,
To raise him to a Supreme Dignity,
As to ensnare him; and, to mount him to
That eminence, in hope thereby to do
His Adversaries work; and, him at length
To weaken, by re-burth'ning him with strength.
Were this considered; and, therewith, if we
Well weighed, how great, yet, out Distempers be;
And, what Necessity, and Prudence may
Constrain him to, in that untrodden way,
Wherein he marches; that, the Work begun,
May not, dishonourably, now be done,
Through want of Power; and, bring a sad return
Of Mischief, with an everlasting Scorn:
We would believe, his Actions did produce,
What, rather, praise required, then excuse.
Yea, by this Observation, and by what
We know well done, we would not judge of that
We know not yet; and, (by what we discern,
Without suspect) as perfectly might learn,
How, by his Foot, a harmless Lamb to draw,
As to describe a Lion, by his Paw.
But, who can us assure, that for our sin,
Mis-understandings have not raised bin
'Twixt him and us; whereby, GOD's wrath may bring
Those Mischiefs back, we suffered by a King?
And, make our Surgeon, put us to more pain,
Then those late wounds, whereof we did complain?
What Peace, can we expect, if for such Times
He was prepared, in which loud-crying Crimes
(Still unrepented of) will not afford,
A milder way of Curing, then the Sword?
Or what reproof deserves that Instrument,
Who, then, acts that, for which, he forth was sent?
If I, should here, those sins enumerate,
Which are revived in this Land of late;
Yea, and improved, much beyond the Crimes
Which I took heed of in my younger times:
(And am perhaps preserved to be old,
That, I, to some good purpose, might behold
The works of GOD and Men; and, to this Nation
Be serviceable in my Generation,
For Future times:) It, plainly would appear,
What, future Judgments, we might justly fear;
And, that, it will be to my Maker's praise
Hereafter, (although slighted in these days)
To have it testified on record,
How righteous he is still, in deed and word;
How merciful, he to these Lands has been;
Even when, we, him correcting us have seen:
And, how, in Love, he still proceeds on,
Though, still, we do as ill, as we have done.
Should I, illustrate those Prevarications,
Those Vanities, and those Abominations,
Which are increased, since here we did pretend
A Reformation; and, how some offend
By gross Extravagances, whose false Zeal
To GOD, to Justice, and this Commonweal
Has made them rich and great: how they could preach,
And pray, till by pretendings, they did catch
What they had preached and prayed for; and, how mute
They are become, since they have reaped the fruit
Of their Designs: Should I, illustrate, how
They counter-act their former actings, now,
And fained Principles: with how much have
They follow them, whom their hands forth have cast,
To all excess; and, how imprudently
They do redintegrate, piece, and comply
With those, that would destroy them; you, would dread,
That, we deserved to be punished,
More then our Predecessors; and, that He,
Who should deliver us, our Scourge must be.
Cursed be their Comments, who shall this apply
To Him, or Them, who in sincerity
Did preach, or pray, or act, in order to
What Providence instructed them to do,
And was well done: But let this be applide,
Only to those, who swerved are aside
From pious Principles, and sunk below
Those Virtues, whereof, they had but the show.
For, such there be; and, their Apostacies
May, probably, prolong our Miseries.
And, us, of that great happiness deprive,
Which, we, by our PROTECTOR might receive.
Should it prove so, how just soever he were,
His Righteousness, would not to us appear;
Nor is there possibility of Peace
That will endure, till Wickedness decrease;
Till Justice more be prized; more care be took
Of Public Faith; men's private faith, less broke;
Oppressed men more pitied; succors prayed,
Not so much, and so needlessly, delayed;
Burdens, sustained for the preservation
Of Public weal, apportion'd in the Nation
More equally; and, till men grow more wise,
To see wherein the Common safety lies.
For, till these things be done, what Humane power
Can save us from the Plagues which will devour?
Who shall secure us? or, to what effect,
Have we set up one Person to Protect,
Or else to govern, or deliver us,
From swift destruction, if it still be thus?
What shall I say? what have we then to do,
Save humbly to submit our selves unto
Some Course, that may reform what is amiss;
Whilst means thereof, and time afforded is;
And seek, by true Contrition, to revoke
The Doom, that GOD, may supersede the stroke.
The thought of this, has brought me to a Pause,
And, my Inspirer, now, from me withdraws
That Influence, whereby I should proceed,
On my first Text. For, here, there may be need
Of some Digression, to another strain;
That; what is spoken, be not said in vain.
Yea, here, (as in such Themes, it is my fashion)
A few words more, of Use and Exhortation,
Precaution, and Precation, I will add;
And, leave it unto those, for whom it is made;
That, by the worst Events, which can befall,
We may have Peace; and, God, the Praise of all.
Let us be pleased his Pleasure should be done;
And, for the time to come, let every one
Be rather careful, his own ways to heed,
Then fearful, how Another will proceed.
Enough, we now our Brethren have oppressed,
Let us, henceforth, afford them, ease and rest;
That, GOD, may give us Peace, and save us from
That Bondage, which will, else, upon us come.
Let those, who have occasioned the Cries
Of men oppressed, seek by a Sacrifice
Of Righteousness, and both by Restitution
Of Spoils, and willing Contribution,
To take that Curse off, which on us is brought
Through breach of Public faith (nigh set at naught.)
For, till that be endeavored, GOD will blast
Our Counsels, and aside our Prayers cast;
As we do theirs, who, grov'l at our feet,
And, with sad Exclamations, fill the street.
'T is not the cheap Oblations of Thanksgivings,
With much Hypocrisy, and Mis-believings
Profaned; nor Formal Fastings, nor a Zeal
Of settling this distracted Commonweal,
For our own safety; which, will serve, alone,
To expiate those Evils we have done:
No, nor the fervor, wherewith we express
Our Care of that Religion we profess;
And, to explode all other, that will make
Atonement for us, whilst the Rules we break
Of Moral honesty: or, whilst we want
That Love, which ought to be concomitant
Therewith; and are not truly purged from that
Which our Devotion, does contaminate:
For, undefiled Religion, does consist
In succouring the Widow, the Oppressed
And Fatherless; of which, until we take
More care, we, of our Faith, false boastings make:
And, that Religion, which our Wits we strain
To settle, will professed be in vain.
Let us so labor, therefore, to enjoy
Religious Truth, that, neither we destroy
The Civil peace; nor, barb'rously neglect
Morality; whose wilful dis-respect
Destruction brings. To him, let us submit,
Whom, GOD, has raised up, on the Throne to sit.
Let us conform, unto that Power, which IS;
Because, all Powers that are, be only His
To whom all Thrones belong; whether he has
In love, vouch safed it, or, in his wrath.
For, unto whomsoever he commits
That Power; or, whoever, full dominion gets,
They will be inexcusable, who shall
Reject, whom GOD, investeth therewithal;
Since, if they bring us Peace, we are too blame,
If we, with them, comply not in the same,
Or, help not to improve it; though, it more
Should cost, then would have bought it heretofore.
Though, with a Sword they come, let us obey,
Till he who sent it, takes the same away;
Who, as he raised them, ere we were aware,
Will cast them down, when we least able are,
If they transgress their bounds, and shall forget
To what intent, they on their Thrones were set.
Yea, when to us, no likelihood appears
Of Freedom, or Deliverance from our Fears,
GOD, will (even when for us too strong they grow)
By their own Power, effect their overthrow.
As upon those, who having heretofore
Abused their Power, are to be seen no more.
And, no Good man, shall need, his hand to rear
Against them: for, enough there always were,
And are, and will be; whom, Revenge, Despite,
Self-interests, or Envy, will incite
To execute GOD's wrath: and, in their sin,
When Tyrants rage, and hardened are therein,
As Pharaoh. was; such things as they despise
(Even Frogs and Caterpillars, Lice and Flies)
Will waste them: yea, their own vain Wit and Will
Should ruin them, though all things else stood still;
And, they themselves, Traitors enough would raise,
(Complying with them, in their evil ways)
To root them out: the Mag gots which were bred
By their rank Lusts, and by their Carrion sed,
Shall eat them up. And, these signs will fore-run
That Destiny, when their sad fall draws on.
Projectors, Flatt'rers, and Buffoons, will then
Find more esteem, then good and sober men:
Prudent advice, and timely-spoken Truth,
Shall be despised: Rash unexperienced youth,
Like Rehoboam's Counsel, shall be heard,
And grave advice obtain but small regard:
The Temporizer, who, himself inclines
To humor and to further their Designs,
Shall find most favor; they, who saithful are
To Public Interest, they, more shall fear
Then their known Foes; and, them out of their way
Remove, or else destroy them, if they may.
And (mark this well) when that 's done, next of all,
And quickly too, will follow their own fall.
Be therefore, wise, ye Princes; Rulers, learn
What, may your weal and honor, most concern.
Be careful, that, you sin not against Him,
Who, raised you, to a Sovereign Diadom.
As it becomes his Viceroys, govern so,
That, to the world, his Justice you may show,
For propagation of that Kingdom, here,
Which we expect; and, will ere long appear.
And Thou, whose Title, here I celebrate;
Thou, who, have opportunity of that
Which may to GOD and Men, most pleasing be;
(And, have the means thereof, conferred on thee,
First, and above all others;) lose thou not
Those great advantages, which thou have got,
For all the proffers, which this world can make.
To Sodom, or to Egypt, look not back,
Lest, thou be made a Monument of Salt
To keep those, who come after, from thy fault;
Or, leave thy bones, obscured, by desolation,
Within the Wilderness of thy Probation.
Thou, who art now, the worlds new Northern Star,
Let, in thine Orb, no Course irregular
( Oblique or Retrograde) divert thee from
Those motions, which, thy Circle best become;
Lest, from that Heaven, in which thou now do shine,
Down to the Earth, thou back again decline.
And, like the Star called Wormwood, bitter make
Those waters, whence, we now refreshments take.
Since, there are Constellations of some might,
Whose motions, to thy Course, are opposite;
Give no occasion of the sad effects,
Which are portended, by their cross Aspects.
Since, they, who love thee best, find in thy way,
Great Dangers; Fear much, for thee; watch and pray:
Oh! be not too secure; trust not upon
What, may by humane Power, or Wit be done:
But, cleave to him, who raised thee to this hight;
Yea, keeps thee on the Throne, in their despite:
And, think thou have great Cause, good heed to take,
When, like a Man, thou hear'st an Ass to speak.
If we expect a Blessing, let us, too,
Without Hypocrisy, our duties do,
To those in Power: To him, partic'larly,
That, over us, has now the Sov'raignty;
With true obedience, not in show, or word,
Ascribing, what our hearts do not afford:
Nor let us seek, in secret, to deprive him,
Of that, which openly we seem to give him:
For, Falsehood, shall be falsely dealt withal;
And, Sand and Pebbles make as firm a wall
In our defense, as either word, or deed,
Which, from dissimulation, does proceed.
Let us not grudge at, what must make him able
To do his Office, in an honorable
And powerful way; lest, that, which fails thereby,
On our account, to our own loss, may lie.
If, to that end, he seeks accommodations,
He seeks them, for the honor of these Nations,
As well as for his own; and, more, perchance,
The Public, then his private, to advance.
And, what, too little, or too much will be
To that end; he, may better know then we.
If, in this late Establishment, he aims
At Safety; 't is no more then Nature claims;
And, to accept of less, then may, in reason
Thereto suffice, were by misprision treason
Against the Dignity, on him bestown,
And, may betray our Safety, with his own.
We, whose abodes, are on the Globe below,
Some motions of the Stars above, may know:
But, 't is impossible, that we should learn
All things, which may their influence concern:
And, it is not easy, for our eyes to heed
What, they may be constrained to, in their need,
Whose hands must tune so many differing strings,
And have, in charge, so many thousand things.
Though, such as mark not, that Emergencies
Often happen; and, that, perils may arise
(Unthought upon) which, will necessitate
The Supreme Officer, of every State
To act some things, which are not warrantable
By their known Laws: yet, wisemen (who are able
To see how far, they justly, then, may go
Beyond Set Rules) do rationally know,
That, Arbitrary Power, in some degree,
(And in some cases) must allowed be
As if by Law expressed; or, that, all
Earths Governments, would into pieces fall.
And, this, is but that Power, whereby we arm
Each Private person, when a Common harm
Is menaced: for, when a City burns,
To save it, he pulls down, and overturns
What, he thinks fit; and, takes away their right,
From Some, that All, may not be rum'd quite.
No less, should be his Power, if need require,
Who, may have otherwhile, a General Fire
To stop, or quench; by which, not only, one,
But, many Cities, may be quite undone:
Yea, three great Nations; for whose good, I trust,
He will improve it, and, appear as just
As I believe him; and, bring all, at last,
Into a right Course, when the danger's past.
Whatever he proves; whether by his will
Or Law he Rules; or, comes, for good or ill;
Let all of us, over whom GOD gives him power,
Make conscience, that the fault be none of our.
For, though that this PROTECTOR, is not he
Whom long we looked for; this was sent to be
His Ways preparer; and, is, (though not that
Supreme Protector) one, subordinate
To him; and substituted for Probation,
Both of himself, and of this Generation,
In order to Christ's Empire; to break down
Both our Self-confidences, and his own,
As well as their, who have been mischievous
Unto that Kingdom, which lies hid in us.
Whereof, take heed, lest when you shall resist
His Power, you take a part with Antichrist;
And, in the stead of settling Common peace,
Our Public Jars, and private Woes, increase.
Heed, also, this; that, those Events, which shall
Thereon succeed, are but conditional,
To fail, or be effected, as, thereto
Both Parties, shall conform, omit, or do:
And, that this Title, likely to be made
The most renowned, that ever Mortal had,
May, by Prevarications, fall below
The vilest Names, that Malice can bestow;
And, that, what, we to build up have presumed,
May, by a fiery trial, be consumed.
Should it so prove, then, therewith mindful be,
That, our works only, would be lost; not we:
And, that, we need not to despair or fear,
(If, to a Right Foundation, we adhere)
Whatever follows: for, best speed we shall,
When, we are Nothing; and, GOD's All in All.
But, should our North-star be removed from hence,
Or, we deprived of his Influence
By Counter-working Powers, (which, to suspect
I am not prone) I fear, that sad effect
Will come to pass by some default of our;
As, by our Envy, murmuring at his Power;
Or, else, by some way, him provoking so,
That, GOD may leave him, his own will, to do,
For our just punishment; and, therewithal
Permit him, through some Oversights, to fall
Into such errors, or such negligences,
As, on himself, may bring sad Consequences.
Moses, the best and meekest of all men
In his time living, and, perhaps, since then;
By being, thus exasperated, lost
The honor, to be Leader of GOD's Host
Into their promised land; and, after all
His glory, in the wilderness did fall:
Thus, for like Provocations, GOD often has
Set over Nations, RULERS, in his wrath;
And, for some oversights, makes Kings, to share
In those Corrections, wherewith scourged they are.
Thus, heretofore, for Isr'els wickedness,
King David, was permitted to transgress;
And, thus, we, and our Chief, for what is ill,
In us, may be joynt-suff'rers; yet, he, still
Continue in Uprightness, as to that
Which does concern him, in his best Estate.
For, though Detraction, raised by his Foes,
(And, no less, by the Levity, of those
Who, owe him love and duty) strives to vail
His Worth; by showing, wherein he does fail
Their expectations: yet, (for ought I see)
His Actions hitherto, not only be
Unblameable, but also ought, at least
By an acknowledgement, to be expressed
(All things considered) with high applause,
As bringing welsare as the Public cause.
And, therefore, though the nature of my Theme,
Does not invite me now, to speak of him,
But, of his Title only; And, though none
Should give their Plaudits, till the Play be done;
(Or, crown men, till the Coronation-day,
Which is their last) yet, somewhat I will say
To hint, in brief, what, more at large, I might
Express, should I, a Panegyric write:
Yea, in despite of Envy, (though by him,
I should no more be favored, then by them
Who hate me) I Will with confidence aver,
And, maugre Malice, make it to appear,
That, if he had not often, great things done,
Beyond mere humane hope, and far outgone
All presidents of Senators, or Sages,
Princes, or Captains, in preceding Ages,
And all those, who had lately Supreme Power,
We had not been a Nation, at this hour,
Enabled to subsist, within our doors;
Or, from Invasion, to have kept our shores.
Whereas, we now, are by the Sword of GOD,
In this Protector's hand, bowed to, abroad;
In Peace at home; enabled to assist
Our friends; emboldened, where we list,
To spread our Sayls: The Envy grown, of those
Who slighted us; made dreadful to our Foes;
And, in so short time, that, the work was done
Almost, as suddenly as 'twas begun.
Nay, more then this, (if more then this, can be
Achieved for our advantage) it is He
Who, was that happy Instrument, whereby
GOD, saved us from a barbarous Anarchie;
And, from a Tyranny, which had, perhaps,
Appeared ere thy, in many several shapes;
And, may, yet, seize us, if Sin should deprive
This Commonwealth, of her Preservative.
This, is so evident, that I believe,
His Enemies, my witness will receive;
And, that a feigned Poem, in his praise,
We need not, by Hyperboles, to raise;
Or, by strained Metaphors, which, make him, more
Envied then honored: And, the Cause wherefore
I wave those Strains, is, lest, in stead of wat'ring
Virtues, with modest Praises; I, by flattering
Might hap to drown them; and, destroy that end,
Whereto, my rational endeavors tend.
That, therefore, those good aims may be effected,
Whereto, they are intentionally directed,
Let us, with humble and true Self-denial,
Submit to tarry out our days of trial;
And, if some yet, among us, doubtful are
Whether, by GOD, or men advanced he were,
Let them, (as wise Gamaliel did advise)
Wait, without offering force, what from success
May be resolved: For, sure more dangers will
Rise from resistance, then from sitting still.
Jointly let us assent, in carry'ng on
That work, which GOD, appoints to be done;
And, not deprive our selves of real good,
To settle an uncertain Likelihood:
If there were Likelihood of any thing
Which, we by other means, to pass might bring,
Conducing more unto our happiness,
Then, what the Course in act, yet promises.
Let us recall, with due considerations,
What, has been long time suffered by these Nations,
Through those destructive Discords, lately bred
Betwixt the Peoples Trustees, and their Head;
As also, 'twixt themselves: Let it be weighed,
What Burdens were, thereby upon us laid,
And, yet, lie heavy: Let the mournful cries,
Of Families undone; the weeping eyes
Of Childless mothers, and, the dying groans
Of many Fathers, slaughtered with their Sons,
(And, Friends imbrued in each others gore
By Civil Wars) make us consider more
What, may again befall; and, by regard
To what has been, prevent, what afterward
May follow, if that Quarrel should renew
In which, our Swords, unhappily we drew;
And, which, would now, upon a worse Account,
Revive; and, to a worse result amount.
Oh! think of these things with a serious thought,
Before Repentance be too dearly bought:
And, suffer not, our former countless cost,
In treasure, blood, and labor, to be lost;
But, rather with due thankfulness to heaven,
Enjoy in Peace, what, GOD has left, or given.
Let, for the future, none of us repine
At that, which has by Providence divine
Effected been; but, patiently attend
Till, he, who has begun, shall make an end:
For, whether to our weal, or we it prove,
His ways are just, and all his works are love.
Let us not change that Title which is given
(For ought we know of) by decree from heaven:
Nor, let a looking backward, on those things
Which time, and ripeness, to their Period brings,
Obstruct our looking forward; as if naught
For our avail, could possibly be wrought
Save by that Power, which once we idolized,
Until it grew to be as much despised,
As honored heretofore; and mischievous
Both to its own self-being, and to us.
For, GOD, will have it known, that an Extent
Is set to every State or Government;
And, that there is no Kingdom, Power, or Glory,
But, His, alone, which is not transitory.
We have dim Revelations, of some things
By, and through whose imperfect glimmerings,
We grope, and stumble onward, toward that
Which we by faith and hope have aimed at;
Slipping, sometimes, beside the safest path,
Or, on each other falling foul, in wrath;
Because, we, but in part, see, whereunto
Our Courses tend, or what we ought to do.
Yet, we are bound, according, to that Light
To make our Progresses, with all our might;
And, not distrust the affection of our Guide,
How weak a means soever he provide:
For, when we find our selves, quite in the dark,
And, where Light-real, casts forth, no spark,
We must stand still; and, totally resign
Our selves, unto that Providence divine,
Which governs all; lest, such false lights appear
As those, wherewith, all men deluded are,
Who, in such Streights, are tempted to despair;
To murmur; or, their losses to repair,
By wicked means; And, so, in hope to shun
A Hazard, unto Deaths assured run.
As our Affairs now stand, we seem, like those
Whom, on both sides, high mountains did enclose
Not to be climbed; whose fore-right march was barred
By Seas, through which, no hope of pass, appeared:
Who had behind their backs a powerful Host
By whose swift coming on, all means was lost
Of safe Retreats: They could not downward dive;
Nor knew they, how to get to heaven alive:
But, they a Moses, and an A'ron had,
Who, lately, for them, had a passage made
Through no less difficulties: yea, their GOD
Did manifest among them his abode
Even in that Straight, and, forward, made them go,
With safety, and triumphant honor too.
Observe the Parallel: Divisions, here,
Have raised Factions, which, like Mountains are
On each hand straightning us: before our eyes,
Much People, like the Red Sea, raging lies,
And, murmuring, as if a Pass were sought,
Whereby, their Liberties, would come to naught:
That Pharaoh, and his servants, from whose yoke,
We are escaped; encouragement have took
To follow after us (as if, they thought
Not Providence, but Chance, our freedom brought:)
And, even this Earth and Air, gives food and breath
To those, that have with them conspired our death.
Yet, we have still a Moses in our Camp;
And, those, on whom, there does appear the stamp
Of A'rons sanctity; and, (which is more)
God, still, with us, abides as heretofore.
Why, should we then desist to trust upon
His kindness, who so much for us has done?
Can we suspect, that he, whose mercy gave us
A man impow'r'd, and qualisi'd to save us
From our Oppressors; did intend that he
Should make us presently his slaves to be?
Did any grudge at Moses, whom he sent
For their Deliverer; but such as went
Down quick to hell? or, those whom he did slay
With fire from heaven, or, from earth took away
By his immediate hand? Nay, when King Saul
He in his wrath, up to the Throne did call,
Were any then displeased therewithal,
But wicked men, and sons of Belial?
Oh! take good heed, whose Justice, you accuse;
Whose Goodness, and whose Mercy you abuse.
Be not, still faithless; but, on him depend,
Whose loving kindness, has nor change, nor end.
Learn, but so well to know him, as you may,
And, by that knowledge, you will find the way
To love him so, that you from thenceforth, shall
With your estates, your bodies, souls, and all,
Entrust him; and, admit of no suspect
That, his Designs, can have an ill effect,
Concerning you; or, that, the Power, or failing,
Of others, can obstruct your hopes prevailing.
But, if you cannot, upon him rely,
What, will you do? To whose help, would you fly?
Affairs, will not succeed, as many dream.
We are at such a loss, that things which seem
To some, most likely, will not be effected,
According to the mode they have projected.
We see our old Foundations broken down;
We see the Powers we had, quite overthrown;
We find, that our own wisdom, is unable
To counsel us; and, so unprofitable
(Through Contradictions) that, it does but add
New fears, or jealoufies, to those we had;
And menace dangers, likely to be more
Destructive, then our Troubles heretosore.
The present time, is almost wholly spent
A general Destruction, to prevent;
And those men, by whose private Interest,
The Public strength, and safety does subsist,
Are without remedy exposed the while,
To sure, and irrecoverable spoil:
Which, when this Commonwealth restored appears,
Will leave them, in their triumphs, little shares.
Would you return again, unto the Power
First laid aside? That, rather will devour
Then bring us help: All, that this Island has
Will not suffice to satisfy his wrath,
With their Ambition, Avarice, and Lust,
Who, in, upon your Rights, with him, will thrust:
Yea, many, who, now hope, they shall acquire
Great things thereby, will perish in that fire;
And, none of those, who think most safe to be
Shall from the common mischief, then, be free.
Would you resume the Power abolished, next?
(Whereby you were so many ways perplexed?)
Let it appear a Power; and, we will, then,
If it be Righteous, give it place again.
But it has now no being: nor, was able
To save it self, or to be profitable
To others, whilst it reigned. We, have, now,
An Image of it raised; but, who knows how
It will comply with that, which raised it?
And, if it shall not, what will then befit
A prudent People? but, close to adhere
To that, wherein, GOD's Power shall most appear?
What reason is there, we should dote so much
On our Old Staff, new pieced with a Crutch,
That, if it shall be forced out of our hand,
We will, thenceforward, neither go, nor stand?
But, Childlike, (who, if he a toy desire,
Throws all his other play-games into fire
When that 's denied him) all our good destroy,
Because, we may not somewhat more enjoy?
Oh! heed this folly; and, be rather taught
By Fools, then be Fools, and bring all to naught:
For, GOD, by men and means, that most despise,
Effects things, which the Prudence of the Wise,
Does but retard; and, where the means has been
Most weak; there, was his Power and Love, most seen.
Make not, unjust suspicions of a failing
In others; to obstruct, your own prevailing.
He, upon whom, GOD's Providence bestows
The Supreme Power, without all doubting, knows,
Or may know, (yea, and shall know, late or soon,
By some things past, or some things to be done)
That, on his Good-behaviour, it is daign'd;
And, could not possibly, be long sustained,
If, He, should leave him, from whom, he derives
His strength, his honor, and preservatives.
He, has observed, (if my information
Be true) that an inherent inclination
To Tyranny, is found in every one,
That is advanced to a Sovereign Throne,
Which will corrupt him wholly, by degrees,
Unless by Grace, that danger he foresees,
With watchfulness; still, laboring to possess
His Spirit, in perpetual h^mblexess,
And, 'twixt his people, and himself, to make
No difference, but, for his Callings sake.
His wisdom, shows him what unstableness
There is, in all, that he does, yet possess:
He, finds by this time, what it is to take
The weight of three great Kingdoms on his back,
What ha^ards he is in, as well by those
Who, seem to be his friends, as by his foes:
Yea, well enough he sees, what hardship stands,
Before him, and what downfals at both hands;
And, will not therefore, doubtless, be so mad
(When an assured safety may be had)
To live in danger; or, to blot the Story
Which, has so much recorded to his glory;
By acting, or intending, what may turn
His far-spread honor, to his future scorn.
To trust him, therefore, why should we refuse
Whom we did trust? and when we cannot choose?
Nay, when, by cur distrust, we cannot snun
Those Rocks, on which, we likely are to run?
Or, what, adventures either He, or We
(Since, in an equal hazard, both yet be)
So both be safe; and, he has power to do
That Work, which GOD has called him unto,
If, both, submit unto the frugal cost,
Of yielding Part, that, All may not be lost?
And, give unto each other, that, whereby
Both may be strong, against an Enemy
Which threatens both? and, who, may else destroy
Both Parties, and possess what both enjoy?
For, your Maligners, do the world surround;
Have Snares above, and Engines underground;
A Party, both abroad, and here at home;
As well in London, as in France and Rome:
Spies, in your houses, watching what ye do;
Yea, in your Chambers, and your Bosoms too:
Nay more; they hope, if their close Plots do fail,
That, they, by your mis-actings, may prevail,
Through, their infusing that, into your breasts
Whereby they may advance their Interests;
And, when their Power, is quite infeebled grown,
Cause you, to be destroyed by your own.
Hear, and believe me, (who have often foretold,
What, some found true, though few regard it would)
This, is designed: yet, you may, ne'ertheless
In safety be, if, by your wilfulness
You let not Oportunities pass by,
Which, now, are in your hand, and in your eye:
An entrance into Rest, GOD, would now give,
If, you, will in humility believe.
Believe then: and, although you do not heed
GOD's promises; believe, what he by deed
Has warranted, (with many gracious Pledges
Thereof, vouchsafed in our Pilgrimages;)
And has, with signal wonders ratifide
That, diffidence, withdraw us not aside.
Those mercies passed, which fore-tokens were
Of more to come, consider, as they are
To be considered; lest, they aggravate
Our sins, and, bring us to that sad estate
Which we were in; and, wheel us back again
To Egypt, there, for ever, to remain.
And, know this; (for, I nothing dare conceal,
Which, now, my heart inclines me to reveal)
That, they, who for Self-interest, enforce
A final breach; (and, of so great a Curse;
Needless occasions, wilfully do give)
With Hypocrites, their Portion shall receive;
Who, are the worst of sinners; and whose doom
Is, to possess in Hell, the lowest room.
Yea, know, if we unite not in the day
Wherein, GOD offers Peace, (and, whilst we may)
The time, will be but short, betwixt the Power
That, does Protect; and, that, which will devour.
But, LORD, prevent what is threatened; and suppress
That wicked Spirit of Contentiousness,
Which now does reign: and, though we merit not
This Grace; yea, though, we have almost forgot
What Bondage we were in; what Rest we want;
And, whereto, we are bound by Covenant;
Save us! Oh, save us, in this present Crisis
Of Good, and Ill, and, from our own Devices.
Assist us, in performing our Conditions,
That, thou may have the Praise of our fruitious,
And, we, the Comfort; who, are at this day,
Upon the verge of being cast away,
Or of admission to that blessed Rest,
In which consists, our noblest Interest.
Let not th'enjoyment of a glorious Blessing,
Now offered; (and, not far from our possessing)
Be vacated by us, who, are to share
The greatest part, in what thou will confer
If thankfully received: Let not that
High Title, wherewithal thou have of late
Thy servant honored, work effects on him
Like those, which usually are found in them,
Who, seek themselves: nor, let Initiations,
So far beyond our hopes, our expectations,
And, former Presidents, be like the blaze
Of Comets, which, a while amuse, amaze,
Or some way cheer beholders in the night
Of their Afflictions, and, then, vanish quite.
But, let them grow and rise, until they are
Improved, into a glorious fixed Star.
Let not my much unworthiness, by whom
This Suit is made, a bar thereto become;
Nor cause those, with the less effect to heed
Those Cautions, which, I give them, now, to read.
For, through an earthen trunk though it is expressed,
(Or, by a Rams-horn-trumpet, at the best)
Thy Spirit lent the breath, which gives the sound,
And, will not let it be quite useless found;
But make it pertinent unto their shame,
Or to their honor, who shall hear the same.
It tunes, a well-known Note; here is nothing spoke,
In Riddles, which may doubtfully be took,
As heretofore, when I was so inspired
To speak, as our Condition, then, required.
These Counsels, though, a man unwise may give them,
A wise man, without blushing, may receive them;
And, he that sits in the highest place
May heed them with more honor, then disgrace,
If, he as well consider shall, from whom
They may be sent, as by whose hand, they come.
This, is a Piping, which the Babes who play
Within the Marketplace, soon practice may
To dance unto; and, 'twill be well for them,
If, now, their Fathers, do not so contemn
This Music, that hereafter, they begin
In stead thereof, a bloody Matachin.
For, though, these Warnings, come in that disguise
Which Ignorance, and flouting Wits despise:
And, is a kind of Preaching, which these times
Esteems no better, then of scurrile Rimes:
This, will appear, one of those many ways,
Whereby, GOD, speaks unto these later days;
And, which, if slighted, will be scor'd among
Those Warnings, that, have been contemned, too long.
A RECALL to the Reader.
MY POEM'S done; yet, prithee READER stay:
I have another word or two, to say,
Wherewith, before thou hence depart, I will
These following leaves of empty paper fill:
That, if it shall be possible, I might
Once in my life, to thy advantage write,
And, of my labor, view some fruit, before
I, there am laid, where, I shall speak no more;
And, that, those Truths, which I have often, in vain,
Spoke mildly, be not echoed forth again
With dreadful Repetitions, unto those
Who, to my Charms, their Adders ears now close;
Or, scorn, and slight them, as fantastic dreams,
Or, needless descants, upon trivial Theams.
Having perused this, what art thou the better?
Unless, thou find arising from the Letter,
That Spirit, which begot these words in me,
The Soul of them, infusing into thee?
With credit of their Truth, and with a sense
Of that, eternal Love's, sweet influence,
Which, for thy welfare, did my heart incline
To pour forth my Affections, into thine?
That, thou might, timely, take from hence occasion
Of due resolvings, for thy preservation:
For, on this fatal juncture of Affairs,
Either thy Ruin, or else, thy Repairs
Do now depend; and, will have an effect,
According, as thy Course, thou shall direct.
What, will thou profit by it, if thou, still,
Retainest a Perverseness in thy Will?
How ill do thou requite me, if, my Love
No change in thy affections, hereby move?
Since, I, desire no other recompense,
But, that, thou may have benefit from hence?
And, I, that small share, which a single one
Has in that good, which is to many done?
And, with, how little comfort, shall I speak
Another time, if, no effect, this take?
What, had I thereby lost, if unexprest,
These things, had still remained in my breast?
Since, I had been, whilst they continued there,
The same I am, now they divulged are?
Or, what, by setting thus my heart at large,
Gain I, except, my Consciences discharge,
With some weak hopes, that, thou, and others, may
Be benefited, by the words I say?
Sure, none: Then, grudge me not that small effect,
Which, from this Friendly service, I, expect
By thy improvement; in which profit, thine
Will be a Portion, far exceeding mine.
If, for my sole Advantage, thou believe
I, publish this; thy thinkings, thee deceive;
Nor, Profit, or Protection, peace or praise
Do I obtain, or look for, in these days
By such Expressions; or, by Services
Which are so little cared for, as these.
Whilst many, sad Confusions on us lies;
Whilst, most men, their own safety do despise;
And, when, few, any Cautions much regard,
Save those, whereby, vain ends may be preser'd;
I shall, to this intent, prevail no more
Then if I should endeavor, to out-rore
The Winds and Seas. I have, now, year, by year,
And almost day by day, attended there
Full twice six years; where, was within one wall
A perfect Representative of all
Within this Isle, both at the best and worst;
And I so well observed it, from the first,
Even to the last; and, by that Model, see
So truly, what of those may judged be
Whom they did represent, that I presume
Gods providence constrained me to consume
So many hours, to wait on them in vain,
That, by such loss, I, better things might gain.
What can be got by words? where sighs, and groans,
And tears, and cries, move men no more then stones?
When five, or ten, or twelve whole years delay
Shall be no more considered then a day?
And, when nor wants, nor justness of the Cause,
Nor Importunity, compassion draws;
Or, where few Suits are brought to wished end
But by a Bribe, or some corrupted friend?
What, can be got by words, desired by none?
When deeds, which, for the Public weal were done,
And, begged for, with a vowed Retribution,
Have neither good respect, nor restitution?
Where, setious Protestations, are forgot?
Where promises, seem things intended not?
And, when most men, resolved seem, to cherish
Their wilfulness, although thereby, they perish?
If, for my words, receive again, I may
Respective words, I take it for large pay,
And, 'twill enough content me, if my will
To do thee good, be not repaid with ill;
Or, if I may but know, ere 't is too late,
My hope, of what is justly aimed at,
Shall be denied, with loss of no more cost,
Or, time, then is thereon, already lost:
For, such a mercy, many had prserv'd,
Whom fruitless hopes have beggered, yea, and starved.
If, thou suppose, I, gain, by what I write;
Consider it, and thou such thoughts wilt slight.
What profit is it, which, thence raise he may
Who writes, and prints, and freely gives away
At his own charge? and, does expect no more,
But, good acceptance, and the reading over?
What gain I, else, for time and labor spent,
But, to my face, perhaps, a Complement?
And, sometimes, when my back is turned about,
A secret slight, or, else, an open flout?
What Patronage, have I, yet thereby gained
Through which, my cause, or person, is sustained?
What favors, am I likely to obtain,
Who flatter not the proud, nor sooth the vain?
But, rather, venture Freedom, and Estate,
Then, not to speak truth home; or, speak too late
So, need require it; so, my free expression
Wrongs not the Common Peace, nor sound discretion
Nor Innocents; nor, those, who guilty are,
Arraigneth anywhere, save at the Bar
Of their own Consciences, by Writs, that come
In general terms, and to I know not whom?
If, thou conceive, that, I ambitious am
Of Praise hereby; Thou, therein art too blame.
What praise, from POETRY, can I expect,
Which, finds an Epidemical neglect?
Chiefly, from such as mine, upon such Theams
As I often choose? and, when both winds and streams
Against me are? and, also, in a time,
When Poetry it self is thought a crime?
When, they, who would reputed be, most holy,
Look on it, as Profaneness, or mere folly?
When, they, you call the WITS, all strains disgust
That, sooth not vanity, or stir up lust?
Or, are not, with forced metaphors, and words
(Whose juncture, neither perfect sense affords,
Nor any useful matter) sent abroad
Dressed, and trimmed up, in their affected mode?
And, when the most part, are so ignorant,
That, they, sufficient understanding want
To read a Verse? and, put no difference
'Twixt best Composers, and that base nonsense
Which, Pedlers, up and down the Country bring,
And, Rogues and Whores about the City sing?
Nor, is my Peace, or safety to be got
Thereby; and, doubtless, if I know it not,
I am a fool: for, I, have often lost
My Freedom by it, with no little cost.
He, that their Courses, constantly gainsays,
Who, Ahab-like, are wilful in their ways,
From them, gets nothing, by his contradiction,
But, Micah's bread and water of affliction.
And, what on my Remembrancer, ensued,
(Which, thousands in my time, fulfilled have viewed)
Informs me fully, what retaliation
I, am to look for, from this Generation.
Who, then can think, that, he, who does expose
His thoughts, as I have done, to friends and foes,
Amidst so many Factions? (when, but one
He well can please, and, peradventure none?)
Who then, I say, can think, that outward rest
Was his chief aim? or, his own Interest
The mark he shot at? or, that he shall ever
Find Peace external, whilst, he does persever
In such a Course? until, a change, GOD brings,
As well in Manners, as in other things?
Such, only, hitherto, has been my lot,
That, I, in sixty six years have scarce got
Six months together of that common Rest,
Which is by many, all their life possessed;
And, now of late, unto what Side soever,
Or, Principle, I truly did adhere:
Some men of all Sides; even of That, whose Cause
Has had my suffrages, pen, purse, applause,
And faithful'st aid, has brought as sad effects
On me, by their despights, or disrespects,
As have all they, whose more deserved hate,
My Pen, for their sakes, did exasperate.
Nay; would it were no worse: By some of those,
I suffer more, then, by our common Foes.
Which, here, I mention, only to prevent
A false surmise; and, not in discontent:
For, I, embrace my Portion, with thanksgiving,
And, would not change it, with the best man living!
To sum up all, and give thee my best pledge
For my good meaning, in what I allege;
I hereby call to witness, Him, that knows
What, in my heart, I secretly propose,
That, my chief purpose in divulging this,
Is, to reform, those things which are amiss
Both, in my self, and others: to make strong
His hand, to whom this Title does belong:
And, to preserve that Peace, which, being lost,
More then our lives, and our estates may cost.
I look for nothing, but to be abused
And, some way to be wrongfully accused
By those whom this distastes, that, it may seem
The less worth hearing, by my disesteem:
And if his Virtue, who must break the blow
Defend me not, I Am sure it will be so.
I nothing seek on me to be bestown
Save only that, which is by right mine own;
To disengage me from the world; wherein
(And wherewith) I, unwarily have bin
Too far, of late, engaged; and, from whom
I cannot fairly disobliged become,
Without a Retribution, of such things
Which she has lent; yea, which her promisings
Emboldened me to take; (and, which, she knows
That, more then twice told, she unto me ows,
Upon a just Account.) But, were I free,
I hope she should not re-intangle me
In ought, save what will visibly pertain
More to the Public, then my private gain.
For, my ambition, is to live and die
Henceforth, unheeded; and, retired to lie
Where, I a little while, without annoy,
My self, with my relations, may enjoy:
And, then, resign my place, to him, that must
Supply it, when I slumber in the dust.
But if this be too great an earthly bliss,
For my enjoyment; yet I Am sure of this,
That, I shall there be laid, ere it be long,
Where, I shall have no sense of right or wrong;
And, though I nothing have, rest quiet, there,
Where, I shall also, neither want, nor care.
This Postscript, READER, is on thee bestown,
To rouse thy Spirit, and hold up mine own;
(Who, have enough to do, to keep my mind
Close to that work, for which I was designed,
Amid those great temptations, and desertions
Which set before me manifold diversions:)
And, if, thou make me, now, no recompense,
For this my Pains, by drawing profit hence
Unto thy self; thou, wholly, wilt destroy,
That, which I hereby hoped to enjoy,
And, do me wrong. To thee, thus much, to tell
I had a mind: which being done, Farewell.
Henceforth, say, or or gainsay; do, what ye will;
(Let him, that is filthy, so continue still.)
I Have done my part, to make clean what was foul;
I, to my power, have here discharged my Soul,
Of what it had in charge; and, on this string
Will strike no more: But for the future sing
To GOD, and to my self, till they appear
Who come with eyes to see, and ears to hear.
FINIS.

