AN OWL AT ATHENS: OR, A true Relation of the Entrance of the EARL of
PEMBROKE INTO OXFORD, April xi. 1648.

April 29 Printed in the Year, 1648.

AN OWL AT ATHENS, OR A true Relation of the Entrance of of Earl of PEMBROKE
into OXFORD, April 11. MDCLXVIII.
NAy, Black-Coates, now look to'r; you must away:
Zownes, Men, my Lord is come to Town to day:
Think not to stand out longer by your wit;
My Lord has sworn [By God] you shall submit.
But, 'cause you would not see the pomp, (no doubt
A fault enough to make him kick you out.
I Will tell you that perhaps will make you grin,
How the wise Lord, and's wiser Horse came in.
The Heavens, least that my Lord should dirt his Boot,
Did wash the streets; alas! none else would do it.
Each side the way stood Soldiers, like the hair
Of his good Lordships Beard, one here, one there.
The first came in was Harris; Harris.
'twas no worse;
But most mistook him for a Sumpture Horse;
And when they saw his Beard, cried without doubt
'Twas one of my Lords Periwigs hung out.
The next was Rabbi Rogers that came in,
Laden all over with Aches, Rogeres
Beard and Sin;
Usher to's own Wives School; can only Preach
An hour or two over a Wenches breech;
Says Grace before each lash, and gives her in
Precepts like Clisters, backwards for her sin:
Whom the House has given to my Lord (forsooth)
A squeeking Ela to his Gamut Oath.
The next thing was Langley's Nose that came in sight, Langley.

(Pox take it I lost half the Show; that stood in the light)
Mistress of Pembroke College, that can tell
Only to Curt'sie, wind his Watch up well,
To his Commission he would ha'th' House annex
A Visitation of the Female sex.
For, why? (says he) if they like my Joane be.
It Is they will rule the University.
And how will they abuse us with their Greek.
When she so plagues me, can but English speak?
He Is added to the rest o'th Visitors rank,
But as Jack Capon to a Mountebank.
Midst these, Dr. Wilkinson.
old Zabarella trotting came;
Yet one, that never knew Zabarel but by name:
One whom old Age and Tissick have made spet
Out all his Gummes; but h'as his Sweet Tooth yet.
One that is good for nothing but's Wife's trade,
T'eate naught but Sugar, and shite Marmalade.
Next rode a Mouth wide as his preaching Binn.
The Cobbler, Chaplain, Butler of New-Inne: Gelliman.

One with plurality of Gifts; it is he
Must help to clip the University:
And when occasions do call him to it,
Can either Preach, or mend his Lordships Boot.
Then came a Tailor, Langley.
one of great renown
Both for his Name sake and his allied crown,
A Member not without necessity
Sent hither, since the University
By drinking the Kings Health so often (quoth he)
Has surely worn its Breeches out at knee.
Next came a Tribe of Hebrews on full speed, The Seekers

As if they would make this place Sion indeed;
Zachary, Joel, Eleazar, Ben,
Obadiah, Daniel, all Guifted men:
And 'twas disputed deeply as they came
If Philip too were not an Hebrew Name?
At which my Lord being moved began to belch,
And swore (by God) 'twas better, for it was Welsh
But Michael Holdsworth reconciled their Tales,
And said the Hebrew Tongue came all from Wales.
After this came my Lord (God bless his Grace)
With the Map of all his country in his Face; My Lord.

Sure had the Commons often looked it 'ore,
Their Privies would have raised 'um long before.
His Bristles thin stood, and for want of growth
Like Toad-stooles raised by the Thunder of his Mouth;
His Nose was notcht like Country Garden Pales,
His Brow and Chin more Mountainous than Wales.
And who would better fit Appollo's place
Then he that bears Parnassus in his Face?
His Mouth is Hippocrene; but yet it is thought
The Horse that struck't had the Fashions in his Foot.
His Nagge ashamed of's burden hung the head;
Yet for's last Race shall be a Doctor sped.
Three foure-wheeled Carts came last; Merton College. Cheynell.
these he did scorn;
Hereafter one with two may serve his Turn;
In The first there rid his Lordships Footmans Cloak:
In The second his own son (as Some have spoke)
In The third a Lady sat clad all in Red;
The House allow him one to warm his Bed.
Thus, thus they triumphed down to the College gate,
Where stood a man of length alone, in state;
Who on a sudden when the silence brake
Frighted my Lord, who swore a May Pole spoke.
But when the Speech began, he would not hear,
Lest't should be Latin; 'lasse! there was no fear;
He made a Leg, then hemmed; and called him there
My Lord, as often as he does God in's Prayer.
Then gave a Bible, which his Lordship took;
Yet told him he could swear without a Book;
This Yea-and-Nay welcome made my Lord coy;
But when the Canons cursed, he leapt for joy.
He Is come: though plays are down we care not for it,
We have one now will make far better Sport.
TO morrow morn is to be shown
The Commons Ape, (protect the Town!)
In The the house of Convocation.
Yea, and a Puppet-play to that,
In which the chiefest are Sir Not.
The courteous Knight of the bald pate.
Pro-vice-cancellarius
Sine CROSS^ the Visitors new Proctor his Speech in i^ the Convocation-house.
insigniis insignissimus,
Cum non-procuratoribus.
They walk about, and talk like men,
And speak some Latin now and then;
For pence a piece you may come in.
Here the Creation's to be seen,
Chaos, the Witches, George of Green,
And Hocus Pochusses Nineteen.
Without a Key can shut and open,
And rob you to your face; we hope
Ere long too they will dance oth' Rope.
FINIS.

