VVithers REMEMBRANCER: OR, EXTRACTS Out of Master WITHERS his Book, CALLED,
Britains Remembrancer.

Worthy of the review and consideration of himself, and all other men.

LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1643.

TO THE READER.
THere fly abroad cetaine Pamphlets in the world, being Extracts of a Poem
written by Mr George Withers, called Britains Remembrancer: As if there were
something in them to tell the world, from the prophetical provisions of the
Author, of such things as are now to befall it. It were yet some happiness
unto us, if that Author, on whom the severer sort of men look with some
admiration, might with his book be brought forth to let us see the just and
true measure of our condition at this time, which he has there as
prophetically as any thing else set down, with such remedies and advices as he
thinks necessary for our recovery; this were to give us some hopes yet to
outlive our misery. But since we cannot for the present command him, (being in
a posture of war above our power) we shall however become master of his
book; out of which some material passages are extracted, That tanquam ex
ungue Leonem, we may discover the sense of so popularly Magistrall an Author.
With me I must confess they prevail, etc.

Withers his Remembrancer, OR, Extracts out of Mr WITHERS his Book, called
BRITAINS REMEMBRANCER.
WIth me I must confess they prevail the more, because I have had a great
opinion of the piety and spiritual irradications of the man; (otherwise to
me unknown) and especially of that work of which this is part: and in which
he seems to be warranted by a special calling to speak boldly of great
matters, and to censure where none else dares give any judgment. What therefore
he says, is not to be contemned; or else we must, as the Scripture commands
us, try the spirit whether it be of God. Now since it is known, that for a
long time Master George Withers has command of a Troop of Horse in the
service of the Parliament, and been quartered at Maid-stone in Kent, (an act
in the first motion and progress of it without the commands of the King, and
expressly against his Proclamations since:) and has executed some things in the
County, beyond the sense of his book at least, and needing the omnipotency of
Peter's chair, to make, not barbarous words, but actions good; and to reconcile
what has been there done and here written: It is not only convenient, but
necessary (for the advantage of the cause, and other Christian respects) that
Master George Withers, who has given to many weak ones public offense and
scandal, do as publicly, and as becomes a man of such a sanctified and
religious profession, inform the world upon what grounds of conscience or
reason he first undertook such a charge. And I have warrant to press this
upon him, not only from mine own scruples, but his own invitation, expressed
in the latter end of his Premonition to his book. If you find ought else that
may be doubted of, or for which I may seem reproveable or needing advice; Let
me christianly and charitably receive intelligence thereof: And if I make not
a reasonable defense, I will humbly acknowledge, and give the best satisfaction
for my errors that I am able. When this shall be done, I shall be either
converted or confirmed: In either of which I shall adhere to truth; in whose
defense if I perish, it shall be to me a victory.

In Page 195. 196. etc. He is so large in reprehending of the seditious and
schismatic ways of separation; and commends so justly the heretofore happy
government of the Church by Bishops, that the Reader is to be referred thither
for M. Withers opinion therein. The reproves he bestows on London, p. 207.
208. etc. Are likewise too large t^ be here insisted, I desire the Londoners to
have recourse to his book.
The Church revenues for the present need 218. a. b.

Sequestered are (to stand a while instead
Of Temp'ralties:) And some themselves persuade
That they will now be lay-possessions made.
But God forbid: for he that shall bereave
The Church of her inheritance, does leave
A curse upon his children, which shall stay
Until his whole descent be worn away.
In Page 219. a. He has a proper Elogie of the virtues of that illustrious
Princess and her issue, the Queen of Bohemia.
-- That illustrious Dame
(To whom I owe, even more then all, I am:)
Whether then, is it fit the Parliament should trust him with a Troop of Horse?
lest if Prince Rupert should come into Kent, he might be as good as his word.
225. a:
-- Neither art thou solely [He speaks of the Nation.]
Despised and dishonored by thy folly:
But in those mischiefs which thy sin procure
Thy Prince a disadvantage does endure:
His virtues are repulsed from that height
Of Honor, whereunto assured thy might,
Were thou less wicked! He whom as our eyes
We seemed as but yesterday to prize;
He for whose absence we so much In Spain.
complained,
And wep't, and prayed, and vowed, whilst he remained
Divided from us: and at whose return,
We did so many piles to ashes burn.
Even he has not received that content
From us, which he expected, and we meant.
Some spirit of dissension loosed has bin,
Some sparks of discord have bin hurled in
And blown among us: so that he and we
Not so well pleased in each other be
As both desire: And should this flame increase
God knows how much it would offend our Peace.
My Prince and Country, 226. a. b.
though perhaps I be
Not much to them, are both most dear to me:
And may I perish, if to safe my life
I would betwixt that couple nourish strife:
Or if for one of them, I that would say
Which might from others due take ought away.
-- to have power and aim
226. b.
To touch the Lords anointed I disclaim:
I have no warrant; neither know I ought
To reprehend him, for although I might.
For as my Princes faults I may not blaze,
So, I am also bound (as there is cause)
To justify what virtues I do hear
To be in him: and see in him appear.
The General faults of others mine own eyes
Have seen; and that is enough to warrantize
A general reproof: but never yet
In him beheld I what did not befit,
His person or his place: much have I seen
That rather has an honor to him been.
And whatsoever shall muttered be of some,
There reigns not any King in Christendom
Of whom there was divulged a better fame,
Dr, whom a royal Throne so well became:
And what is lately done to blot the story
Of his deserts, or to deface his glory?
Or wherewithal can any tongue traduce
His actions which admits no excuse?
What if the people have expected more
(From hopes by them conceived heretofore)
Then yet succeeds? What can from thence redound
To prove his virtues and his ways unsound?
Why may not this effect arise from them
That so suspect much rather then from him:
As God long since unto the Jews did say
(Who judged him unequal in his way)
So say I; England; Is thy Sovereigns path
Unequal? or is it rather thine which has
Such indirectnesse? wherefore may not all
Which is amiss by thine own fault befall?
228. a.
Let every one examine well his way,
And for himself and for all others pray:
For this is far more likely to redress
The present mischiefs, then our forwardness.
The party that has innocence shall
Be sure to stand; though all about him fall:
And, if we all perversely wicked prove,
We shall have all one judgment from above.
If in thy King, O Britain, ought amiss
Appears to be 'twixt God and him it is.
Of him he shall be judged: what to thee
Pertains it his censurer to be?
If thou shall suffer with him thine offense
Deserved it, and naught else but penitence
Becomes thy practice; neither shall there ought
That Is wrong, by other means to right be brought.
228. b.
Why may it not be possible that thou
Demandest what he might not well allow,
Without dishonor? Or, if all were right
Which thou required'st, yet the manner might
Distaste him? or, who certain is but some
(Pretending public grievances) might come
With private spleen and malice to pursue
Those faults in others, which their conscience knew
Themselves are guilty of --
If so it be, I do admire the less
That thy Petitions had an ill success.
229. a.
Of Reformation thou do show great Zeal,
But some corruption may thou not conceal
That marres the blessing? art thou sure thou have
No just occasion given to distaste
Thy King? Do thy complainings all intend
The public welfare, without private end?
And in preferring them do thou commit
No errors? or no deceits forget?
I will not say thou did; but I do fear
That they who wisest are, in some things err.
There also were --
Unwise and undiscreet ones, 232. a.
mixed among
Our Parliaments, who did those meetings wrong,
232. b.
By controverting of Religion there,
And moving questions that improper are
To that assembly. For there is provided
A Synod, wherein ought to be decided
Such matters: and what they determine shall
The Parliament may ratify --
But we may blush to see how much amiss
Some stretch the Parliamentall power in this.
He would not be mistaken, as if he would not have Parliaments look after the
exercises of Religion.
But my desire is also that they further
The Church affairs in their own place and order.
-- though some threaten fearful things to those
Who dare a Parliamentall power enclose
Within a bound: yea though, some talking things
Prate as if they might make, and unmake Kings.
Coin new Religions --
234. b.
What their forefathers unto them did leave
Let them not suffer any to bereave
Their children of. For they may that deny
Even to their King; provided legally
They do it, in resisting his demands
By legal pleadings, not by force of hands.
Let them therefore their ancient rights retain
By all just means; and let them yield again
The Royal dues: 235. a.
for those things prosper not
Which are amiss from God or Caesar got.
All wrongs shall be revenged, but none brings
Such vengeance, as the wrong to God, or Kings.
If but in word alone (nay but in thought)
We have against our Prince committed ought
Which is disloyal, hid it shall not lie,
But be revealed by a winged spy.
Nor let us as we do in corners prate,
As if the sovereign power, or the State
Encroacht injuriously; and so defame
The Government; disgrace the royal name;
And nourish by degrees an evil spirit,
That us of all our peace will dis-inherit.
-- Bring not when ye come to plead with Kings
Against their claims, some bare conjecturings:
For what thou have no utter evidence
To be the right, the right is in thy Prince;
It is a Royalty to Monarchs due --
-- Let pure humility
True piety, 235. b.
due love, and charity
Be brought along: and when all these ye bring
Then go with loyalty and meet your King,
In his and your affairs without mistrust,
And then (as certainly as God is just)
In every due respect ye shall prevail,
Or gain some great advantage if ye fail.
Go cast your selves before him with submission;
Present him with Petition on Petition
With one accord, and with a fearful face
Inform him how much hinderance and disgrace,
236. a.
Or danger to the land there may accrue,
If he your loyal Counsel shall eschew.
For God, because his laws we disobey,
Us at our Sovereigns feet does mean to lay
To humble us a while. If we repent
To all our loyal suites he will assent;
If otherwise, God will give up this land,
Our lives and fortunes, all into his hand.
Go offer, while to offer you are free;
And what you give him, shall peace offerings be:
If that which for atonement you provide
With love and patience be sanctified.
Speaking of our own inheritable rights and freeholds.
269. b.
Those dues we should preserve with all our might
By pleading of our just and ancient right
In humble wise; if so the sovereign state
Our freedom shall attempt to violate.
But when by peaceful means we cannot save it,
We to the pleasure of the King must leave it,
And unto God our judge: For all the power
In us consists, in saying, This is our.
This therefore is my rule; 266.
That Government.
(What ere it be) in which to me God lent
My birth and breeding; that until my end,
I will obey and to my power defend.
Yea though it tyrannize, I will denay
No more obedience, then by Law I may;
Even by those Laws and customs that do stand
In force, and unrepealed in that Land.
-- If any faction shall constrain
That I one fact must take, I will maintain
What bore the Soveraigntie when I came thither,
And I and that will stand and fall together.
To close up all, as in a fit place let us here insert some more of Mr Withers
his own lines; which will serve for a reason too of the Title to these few
Extracts.
Let all those Observations I have had
Of others errors be occasions made
To mind me of my own: Cant. 8. pa. 282.
and lest I err,
Let every man be my Remembrancer.
With so much charity, as I have sought
To bring their duty more in thought.
And, if in any sin I linger long
Without repentance: Lord, let every tongue
That names me check me for it: and to me
Become what I to others feign would be.
Amen
FINIS.

