The Complete HISTORY OF THE WARS IN SCOTLAND Under the Conduct of the
Illustrious and truly-valiant JAMES Marquess OF MONTROSE, General for his
Majesty CHARLES 1st. in that Kingdom, TOGETHER With a brief Character of Him,
AS ALSO A True Relation of his Foreign Negotiations, Landing, Defeat,
Apprehension, Trial, and deplorable Death in the time of CHARLES 2d.

Now newly Corrected and Enlarged by an Eyewitness of all the forementioned
passages.

Printed in the Year: 1660.

portrait of Jaques Marquis deMontrose Jacques Marquis deMontrose, Count de
Kingcairne Seigneir de Graeme, Baron du Mount dieus etc: A Paris
P: Pontius sculpsit


To the Reader.
THere are a few things of which I would not have them ignorant who shall
chance to peruse this short History; whereof some concern the Lord Marquess of
Montrose, whose Actions in his Country for two years space are here published;
and others have relation to the Author of this work. And first of all I desire
thee to take notice, that Montrose is the Chief of that ancient and famous
Family of the Grahams, and is called in old Scottish Graham-more, the great
Graham. He derives his Pedigree from that famous Graham, in the Histories of
Scotland, who was Son-in-law to Fergus the second King of the Scots; and was
the first (that with the assistance of his Father-in law) cast down that Trench
which Severus had made, and set out for the utmost limit of the Roman Empire,
between the Scottish Frith and the River of Cluid, at such a place where Great
Britain was narrowest; and by that means cut the power of the Romans shorter.
Whence it happens, that some evident remains of that Trench retain his name
amongst the Inhabitants to this day, who call it Gremesdike. The same Graham,
from whom this noble Family took its rise, surviving his Father-in-law Fergus,
and being a man as able for Civil as Military employment, was made Protector
unto his Nephew, and Regent of the Kingdom; and after he had fetched back the
Doctors of the Christian Faith, who had been banished by the late Wars, and
settled as well the Church as State with excellent Laws, freely resigned the
Government into the hands of his Nephew when he came to age. He flourished in
the time of the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius, about the year of our Lord
CCCC. From whom has descended in a fair and straight line, a long and noble
row of Posterity, who, imitating the virtue of their Ancestors, have been
famous in the succeeding generations. Amongst whom that valiant Graham was
eminent, who with the help of Dumbarre, so seasonably rescued his Country from
the Danes who were then Masters of England; and had frequently, but with little
success, invaded Scotland with mighty Armies. And in after times that noble
John Graham came nothing behind his Ancestors in virtue and honor, who after
the death of Alexander the Third, in that vacation of the Kingdom, while Bruce
and Bailiol disputed their Titles, was (with that renowned Viceroy William
Walley) a stout maintainer of his Countries Liberty against the unjust
oppression and tyranny of Edward King of England, and after many heroical
exploits, fighting valiantly for his Nation, dyed in the bed of Honor. His
Tomb is yet to be seen in a Chapel which has the name of Falkirk, from the
aforesaid Gremesdike by which it stands. Adjoining unto which the Marquess of
Montrose has large and plentiful possessions, descended by inheritance unto
him from that first Graham.

But lest I should seem to derive the Nobility of so illustrious a Worthies
extraction only out of the rubbish of dusty and obscure Antiquity; I must not
omit that his Grandfather, the Earl of Montrose, was advanced unto places of
the greatest honor in that Kingdom, and discharged them most happily. For,
being Lord Chancellor of Scotland at such time as King James the Sixth of
blessed memory came to the Crown of England, he was created by him Viceroy of
Scotland, and enjoyed that highest Honor which a Subject is capable of, with
the love and good affection both of King and People to the day of his, death.
And his Father was a man of singular endowments both of body and mind, and so
known to be both in foreign Countries and at home: who after he had performed
many most honorable Embassages for King James, was called to be Lord President
of the Session by King Charles; and being snatched away from his Country and
all good men by an untimely death, was extremely lamented and missed. And what
we may think or hope of the Grand child, I leave unto thee to judge by what he
has done already, seeing he is yet (now a year and a half after his employment
in his Country) scarce entered upon the 36. year of his age.

One thing more I must add, three Periods already have been very dangerous and
almost fatal to the Kingdom of Scotland: the first by the oppression of the
Romans, whose yoke our Ancestors cast off by the Conduct of that first Graham
descended of the noble British Family of the Fulgentii. The second by the
Danes, the repulse of whom is owing especially to the prowess of the second
Graham aforesaid. And the third by the English and Normans, whom the third
Graham twice expelled. out of Scotland, and gave them many and great defeats.
So that (as it was of old spoken of the Scipioes in Africa) it seems the name
of Graham is something fatal to their enemies, and lucky to their Country at a
dead lift; and that it was not without the special provideuce of God Almighty,
that in these worst times One stood up who did his best endeavors to maintain
the Kings just Rights and Authority, the Peace, Safety, and Liberty of the
Subjects, and the Honor and ancient splendour of his House. And this is all I
thought good at this time to premise concerning the Lord Marquess of Montrose.

For the Author of the Book, take it briefly thus. He professes himself to
have been but little conversant in these sort of studies, and expects neither
credit or commendation for the strength of his wit (which he acknowledges to
be little or none) nor reward or profit for his pains; which two things are the
chiefest incentives to most to wet their pen; but that he undertook the
business merely out of a desire to propagate the truth to other Nations, and
to posterity. For he saw by late and lamentable experience, in such a cause as
this, that prosperous Villainy can find more Advocates than down-cast Truth and
Goodness. For when the same Confederates in both Kingdoms had by their own
arts (that is, by lying and slandering) ruined the Church, to fill their bags
with its Revenews so sacrilegiously purloyned, and enrich their posterity with
plentiful Anathemaes and accursed things; there wanted no store of men that
extolled them for it to the skies, as men deserving highly from their Country,
from the Church it self, and from all mankind: and reviled with all sort of
reproaches and contumelies the most religious servants of God, holy Martyrs and
Confessors, for withstanding them. And therefore he might well imagine, that
these men, who by the same devises labored to render his Majesty himself
odious, and so to destroy Him, to enjoy his Honors and Revenues so
traitorously and perfidiously purloyned, would easily find men who should out
of the like railing humor bespatter as much as in them lay this most excellent
man, and all his honorable atchievments; and (as it is said of wasps) poison
with their tongues or pens the juice of most sweet and wholesome flowers, and
leave the less knowing, or less wary, to suck it up. He was therefore pleased
to offer this short and faithful Narrative, as a seasonable antidote against
that evil, to all that loved truth and plain de aling: of which he would needs
be so obstinate a maintainre, that although he saw well enough how much envy
and hatred it would derive upon himself, he resolved he would neither basely
flatter any one, nor lap up that truth which they would not like to bear in
obscure and doubtful. Expressions. For he professes, that as he is a Freeman
born and bred, so he will never part with his Freedom till with his life. And
although he be ambitious of no other commendable quality of a good Historian,
neither of wit, nor art, nor eloquence, yet he seems to challenge in his own
right the honor of sincere and exact truth: for the defense and propagation
whereof he has set at naught all that was dear in this world, having been
thrice plundered of all that he had, thrice imprisoned in a nasty and filthy
Fail, and now the third time lives in banishment for the Truths sake. Yet he is
merry and cheerful, that being conscious to himself of no wrong as toward
men, he is counted worthy of the Lord to suffer these things for Truths and
Righteousness sake. And thou (good Reader) make much of him at least for his
truths sake; excuse him for other things, and Farewell.

ON THE Death of the Noble and Valiant Marquess of Montross.
NOr shall He sleep; nor can His valor lie
Raked in His ashes to Eternity:
His glories shall out-blaze each puny plot
Of the accursed Rebel, and the perjured Scot;
That Slavish Kirk, too late, now wish indeed
Their guilt washed off, with their high-swelling Tweed;
Too late alas! that generous blood shall be
A brand on their despised Posterity.
Brave Soul! whose learned sword's point could strain
Rare lines upon thy murdered Sovereign;
Thy self have engraved thine Epitaph, beyond
The impressions of a pointed Diamond.
Thy prowess, and Thy Loyalty shall burn
In pure bright flames from Thy renowned Um,
Clear as the beams of Heaven: Thy cruel Fare,
Scaffold, and Gibbet shall Thy Fame dilate;
That when in after ages Death shall bid
A man go home and die upon his Bed:
He shall reply to Death [I scorn't, be gone;
"Meet me at the Place of Execution;
"There Is glory in the Scandal of the Cross,
"Let me be Hanged; for so fell stout MOMTROSS.
T. F
The affairs of the King in SCOTLAND, under the Conduct of the most Honorable
James, Marquess of Montrose, Earl of Kinkardin, etc. And General Governor for
His Majesty in that Kingdom,
In the Years 1644, 1645, and 1646.
SOmetime James Marquess of Montrose sided with the Covenanters in Scotland,
and very forwardly bestowed his unhappily happy endeavors in their behoof.
They pretended to nothing then, less than the preservation of Religion, the
Honor and Dignity of the King, the Laws of the Land, and the freedom of that
ancient Realm, so happily, so valiantly defended in time of yore from such
powerful enemies, as the Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, by the sweat and
blood, with the lives and estates of their Ancestors. And the tales they made,
they never wanted fitting instruments to tell and spread among the people. It
was given out, that there was nothing more in the aim of the Court of England,
than that that free people being reduced to a kind of Province, should be
eternally enflaved under the power of their old enemies. Yet all this while
they engaged themselves by their public attestations, and even a solemn Oath,
that they would never go to work by force and arms, nor solicit the King any
other way than by Petition, That he would be pleased graciously to accept the
supplications of his humblest Subjects, and to take order that his dearest
Country should suffer nothing in matter of Religion or the Liberty of the
Subject.

But at last in the year 1639. Montrose found out that these fair tales were
coined of purpose to steal the hearts of the silly and superstitious multitude,
and to alienate them from the King, as an enemy to Religion and Liberty. For
the Covenanters did not dissemble to him, but spoke out, that Scotland had been
too long governed by Kings, nor could it ever be well with them as long as one
Stuart (that is the surname of the Kings family in Scotland) was alive: and in
the extirpation of them, they were first to strike at the head: so that
Montrose easily perceived the Kings Majesty and Person was levelled at.
Therefore vehemently detesting so horrible a crime, he resolved to desert the
Conspirators side, to frustrate their counsels, to impoverish their store, to
weaken their strength, and with all his might to preserve His Majesty and His
Authority entire and inviolate. But because between force and craft the
Covenanters had drawn in almost all the Kingdom to their side, he saw himself
alone too weak to check their power, and therefore thought not good to open
himself too suddenly or rashly. Amongst them he had many friends, men very
considerable, as well in regard of their numerous retinues and clients, as of
their wealth and authority: these he had a mind to draw off from them, and
bring them with him to the King; and by this means conceived he should be able
to gather no small power, which would conduce much both to the Kings safety and
his own.

Mean time the Covenanters raise a strong Army against the King, and in a
solemn Convention at Duns, they determine to invade England: Montrose was
absent then. Which resolution of theirs, the chief of the Covenanters had taken
up in their cabinet counsels more than six weeks before; and to that purpose
had been busy in divulging through all Great Britain their Apologetical
Pamphlets, whereby they labored to set a good gloss upon the reasons of their
Expedition. This resolution of theirs, Montrose being returned, seeing he could
not binder, would not seem to disapprove: Montrose commanded in this Army two
thousand foot and five hundred horse, his friends (who were most obliged unto
him, and had religiously promised their best endeavors in the Kings service)
had the command of five thousand more. And truly if a great part of them had
not been worse than their words, they had either brought the whole Army along
with them to the King, or at least had broken the neck of the Covenanters
designs. When the Army came to the river of Tweed (which is the border of the
two Kingdoms) dice were cast amongst the Noblemen and Commanders, and it was
Montrose's chance to pass first over the river; which he cheerfully performed
on his feet, his own foot Soldiers following him, that he might more easily
conceal his own resolution, and take off all occasion of suspicion. For as well
his authority in the Army, as the integrity of his noble spirit began to be
looked on with a jealous eye by the guiltyconscienced Rebels, so that they
diligently observed all his behavior, words and deeds.

After this, marching over the river of Tine four miles above Newcastle, by the
treachery of the English Commanders who had retreated to York with a potent
Army of the Kings, the Scots possess themselves of that Town: and thereupon,
Commissioners being appointed on either side to treat of a Peace, a Truce was
presently made. In the time of this Truce, Montrose had sent Letters unto the
King, professing his fidelity, and most dutiful, and ready obedience to his
Majesty; Nor did the Letters contain any thing else. These being stolen away in
the night, and coppied out by the Kings own Bed-chambermen, men most endeared
to the King of all the world, were sent back by them to the Covenanters at
Newcastle: and it was the fashion with those very men to communicate unto the
Covenanters from day to day the Kings most secret counsels, of which they
themselves only were either authors or partakers. And some of the forwarder
sort of the Rebels were not ashamed to tax Montrose bitterly enough with those
Letters; and although they durst not make an open quarrel of it, or call him
publicly to account, because he was so powerful and well-beloved in the
Army, yet they loaded him with backbitings and slanders among the people. For
they had obliged unto themselves most of the Preachers throughout the Kingdom,
whose mercenary tongues they made use of to wind and turn the minds of the
people which way they would. Nor did they promote their Rebellion more
effectually any other way, nor do yet, than this, to have those doughty Orators
in their popular preachments to rail bittorly against the King and all his
Loyal Subjects, as the enemies of Christ (as they love to speak) being
themselves the while the very shame and scandal of Christianity.

Montrose returning into Scotland, and thinking of nothing but how to preserve
his Majesty from that storm of Rebellion hanging over his head, at last
resolved of this course. He joins many of the prime men for Nobility and Power,
in a League with himself, in which they vowed to defend the Kings Majesty, and
all his royal privileges, and ancient and lawful Prerogatives, with the hazard
of their lives and estates, against all his enemies, as well homebred, as
foreign, unto the last breath in their bodies. And truly it came to that pass,
that there had been an open division in the Army (which was his aim) had not
some for fear, levity, or cowardice (which are bad keepers of counsel) betrayed
the whole business to the Covenanters. Hence arose no, small stirs and brauls,
but were pacified again in a while; for neither yet durst they offer any open
violence to Montrose. But afterward the confederates having given a new oath,
made sure the Army at their devotion; and joining themselves to the Parliament
of England in a strict Covenant, although they saw themselves secure enough
from the subtilest designs of any private man, yet they seriously consult how
they should take Montrose out of the way, whose heroic spirit, being fixed on
high and honorable (howsoever difficult) achievements, they could not endure.

To make their way therefore unto so villainous an act, by the assistance of
some Courtiers whom with gifts and promises they had corrupted, they understood
that the King had written Letters to Montrose, and that they were quilted in
the saddle of the bearer, one Stuart, belonging to the Earl of Traquair. The
bearer was scarce entered the borders of Scotland, but they apprehended him,
rip his saddle, and find the Letters. There was nothing at all written in them,
which did not become the best of Kings to command the best of Subjects to obey.
Nevertheless those most exact crafts-masters in the arts of Lying and
Slandering, sent about horrible and tragical reports by their apt Ministers,
that at last all the Kings plots with Montrose, for the overthrow of Religion,
and the ruin of the Kingdom were found out and discovered. Nor yet neither
durst they afford him a public trial, but on a sudden when he suspected
nothing, thrust him (with Napier Lord of Marthiststen, and Sir Sterling Keir
Knight, two both of his near kindred and intimate familars) into the castle of
Edinburgh.

At length a Pacification being made between the people of both Kingdoms,
(between whom there had been no War, only they laid their heads together
against their most just and gracious King) a Parliament was called at
Edinburgh, where the King in person was present. Montrose desires most
earnestly to be tried before the King and that solemn Assembly; but to no
purpose, for the Covenanters being conscious enough of his innocence and their
own guilt, applied their special endeavors to detain the Gentleman in prison
unheard, until such time as the King was got out of Scotland, and they had
concluded all things with the King in Parliament according to their hearts
desire. And certainly they were much afraid, lest by his wisdom, and courage,
and the esteem he was in, as well with his Peers of the Nobility as with the
people, he should have fetched off the greatest number of either sort to his
own resolution for the preservation of his Majesty's Power and Authority. At
last the King returning into England, Montrose and his friends are set at
liberty: and because it was ordered in Parliament that he should not come into
conference with the King, he sat still a while at his own house. This was
toward the end of the year 1641.

CHAP. II.
IN the year 1642. the Covenanters of both Kingdoms began to unmask
themselves, and let us see more plainly what they meant to do. The Rebels in
England began to vex the King with unjust, unreasonable, unseasonable Petitions
and Complaints, bespatter him with malicious slanders, profane his sacred Name
in scurrilous Songs and Ballads, vilify him in infamous Libels, Pasquils, or
Pamphlets, raise Tumults, arm great numbers of the scum and rascally sort of
the people, and engage them upon the Kings palace; in a word, threaten all
extremity to him and his: whom although he might have justly punished himself,
yet he chose rather to refer them to the Parliament, that he might the more
oblige it unto himself. But it was to no end for so gracious a King to gratify
that and many things more, to so ungracious, so ungrateful men, who were the
very Authors and Abettors of these villainies. For he had already granted more
and greater Graces to his Subjects, for the case of their grievances (which
they pretended) and the security of their persons and estates, than all his
Ancestors the Kings of England together, from William the Conqueror downward.
Therefore at last, that he might withdraw himself and his family from present
danger, he is forced sore against his mind to depart London: He sends the Queen
out of the way into Holland for the safety of her life, and betakes himself to
York. The States of Parliament (as they call themselves) forthwith, and before
the King, take up arms, and divert those very Forces which the King had
appointed for Ireland, which were then in a readiness, and whose Officers had
been of the Parliaments choosing, hoping by them to overthrow the King himself.

The Rebels in Scotland, who knew well enough the King would have strength
sufficient to deal with the English Rebels, resolved upon no terms to be
wanting to their confederates in so apparent danger as they were. And although
our most gracious King had given them satisfaction (as much as ever they could
desire) in that Parliament at Edinburgh aforesaid, which also they have
recorded among their public Acts, nevertheless they provide themselves for a
march into England.

Now that they might the better secure their affairs at home, they labor tooth
and nail to draw Montrose (of whom almost only they were afraid) again to their
side. They offer him of their own accord the office of Lieutenant General in
the Army, and what ever else he could desire, and they bestow. He seeing a
mighty storm hovering over the Kings head, that he might give him an account of
it, whereby it might be timely prevented, undertakes a journey into England,
taking the Lord Ogilby into his counsel and company.

At Newcastle he receives news that the Queen being newly returned out of
Holland was landed at Birdlington in Yorkshire: thither he makes haste, and
relates unto the Queen all things in order. She, having had a rough passage,
and being not well recovered from the distempers at Sea, told him she would
advise further with him about that business after they came to York. Thither
being come, the Queen of her own accord calls for Montrose, he opens the whole
story over again, and makes it appear, that there was no less danger from the
Scotch than from the English Covenanters, if they were not timely suppressed.
And being asked his opinion what was best to be done, answered, To resist force
with force; told her, the King wanted not Subjects in Scotland, faithful men,
and stout; nor did they want hearts, or wealth, or power to oppose against the
Covenanters if they durst enterprise any thing against the King: all that they
wanted was the Kings Commission, without which they durst do nothing, with
which any thing; and all the danger that was, was in delay: That the
Covenanters, when they had once got their Army on foot would be able to grind
any one to pieces that should offer to stir; therefore the beginnings of so
great an evil were to be withstood, and the cockatrice bruised in the egg;
that Physic being too late that comes when the disease has overran the whole
body.

Wholesome counsel it was, and seasonable, which doubtless the most prudent
Queen had approved of. But while things were going on in so good a posture, all
things were quashed by the coming of the Duke Hamilton out of Scotland, upon
pretense of kissing the Queens hand, and gratulating her happy return, but in
very deed that he might overthrow Montrose his counsels; for he had posted
thither with the knowledge and consent of the Covenanters. Nor did he himself
dissemble that there was some danger from the Scottish Covenanters, but he
labored to extenuate it; and condemned the Counsel of Montrose as rash,
unadvised, and unseasonable. That stout and Warlike Nation was not to be
reduced with force and arms, but with gentleness and courtesies: War,
especially Civil War, should be the last remedy, and used many times to be
repented of even by the Conquerours. The fortune of War was uncertain; if the
King should get the best, it would be but a sorry triumph he could enjoy over
his own Subjects; but if he had the worst on it, he must expect what his soul
(good man) abhorred to speak. All means were to be tried to preserve peace with
that Nation, nor were things yet come to that pass, that the King should
despair of amity and reconciliation with them: He would be ready to take the
whole business upon himself, if the King pleased to commit it to his pains and
trust, and to authorize him sussiciently thereunto. Montrose replied, Nothing
would come of that but the delay of time, until the Traitors having raised an
Army should prevent the King of any means to deliver himself and his party from
their tyranny. The sad event proved all this to be too true; but in this debate
Montrose was fain to suffer himself to be overborn, being not so great a
Courtier as the other; nor were those virtues which the world now admires,
discovered then unto the Queen. Hamilton returning into Scotland seemed to be
as Active for the King as was possible.

The Covenanters mean while by their own authority (contrary to the known Laws
of the Kingdom) summon a Parliament at Edinburgh; which all understanding men
that wished well unto the King foresaw would be of very dangerous consequence
to his affairs, and therefore abhorred it so much, that they intended not to
honor it with their presence. But Hamilton interposing the name and authority
of the King, invited them by his Letters that they would not fail to be all
there; and that they should not doubt but they would be able to out-vote the
Covenanters, if at this time they were not wanting to the Kings cause. And if
it should happen otherwise, he would be ready with his friends, to protest
against the Covenanters, and immediately to leave them. Abundance of the
Nobility incited by the name of the King, and those hopes, were present at that
Parliament, only Montrose and a few of his adherents staid away. And with
Montrose too the Duke had dealt by his friends, that as he loved and honored
the King he would join himself unto them. But he (who had reason to suspect all
motions that came that way) answered, That he was ready to grapple with any
difficulty, especially under his command who had so great an honor as to be
the Kings supreme Commissioner; only on this condition, that the Duke should
engage his honor, that if they could not bring up that Parliament to righteous
things, he would endeavor to enforce them by the dint of the sword. He
answered, He would protest, he would not fight. Which passage considered,
Montrose to preserve his integrity, expecting the issue, betook himself to his
own home.

In that Parliament, the Covenanters out-voted the Loyal party by seventy
voices or thereabouts, trampled upon the Royal authority, arrogated unto
themselves the power of calling of Parliaments, pressing Soldiers, sending
Ambassadors, and other things hitherto unattempted, without the Kings
knowledge or consent. And to make up the measure of their presumption and
treason, ordain that a powerful Army shall be raised against the King, and in
the aid of their confederates of England. To which purpose they tax the people
with new Subsidies and Levies, much heavier, than if all the Impositions which
upon never so much necessity for two thousand years space by one hundred and
nine Kings have been charged upon them, were put together.

Montrose therefore, who saw the King was like to be ruined by his own
authority, and saw too that he was too weak to oppose himself both against the
strength of the Covenanters and the Kings abused Commission, in a melancholy
mood made as if he took no notice of any thing. And the Covenanters, supposing
he had received some distaste from the King, by reason of the affront he
received at York, and Hamiltons over-powring him, they set upon him yet again,
privately and by friends, to see if by entreaty or interest they could draw him
to their side; offering him Authority and wealth, even the greatest honor
Civil and Military. Which offers he did not seem much to slight, that by that
means he might have an easier way to dive into their counsels. The Covenanters,
that this growing friendship might be the better cemented and sanctified (God
bless us) send unto him that great Apostle of their Covenant, Alexander
Henderson, who should give him full satisfaction in all his scruples. Montrose
heartily desired to speak with that fellow, out of whom he doubted not to pump
all the secrets of the Covenanters: and lest a private meeting with such a man
should give a scandal to the Kings friends, he took the Lords Napier and
Ogilby, and Sir Sterling Keer to be witnesses of the discourse, and on the bank
of the river Forth, not far from Sterling, they met.

Montrose made as though he accounted himself very happy, and much honored in
the visit of so worthy a man, upon whose faith, honesty, and judgment, he so
much relied. Told him, That to give the ill opinion of his Enemies leave to
breath it self after some late mistakes, he was content to stay at home; that
he knew nothing of what was done in Parliament; that he was almost at a loss
how to behave himself in that ticklish condition the Commonwealth stood; and
therefore beseeched him for old acquaintance sake to let him freely knew what
they intended. Henderson taking it for granted by these expressions, that he
was wheeling about toward the Covenanters, that he might the more oblige the
Marquess unto him, answered him flatly and without more ado, That it was
resolved to send as strong an Army as they could raise, in aid of their
brethren of England against the Kings forces; that the Covenanters of both
Kingdoms had unanimously agreed upon this, either to dye or bring the King to
their lure; that nothing could fall out more happily, than that he should renew
his friendship with his Peers of the Nobility, and the rest of the Kingdom;
that so doing he would give great content to all men, besides the honor and
profit that would redound to himself; that by his example others (if others
there were that idolized the empty shadow of the Kings name) would join
themselves unto the Covenanters; and for his own part he would give most hearty
thanks unto his Lord God, that he had vouchsafed to make use of him as the
Minister and ever Mediator of so great a work; and at last entreated him to
speak out his mind, and commit all such things to his care and industry as he
should desire from the Parliament, either in relation to his honor or profit;
assuring him he should be satisfied to his hearts desire.

Montrose having gotten out the knowledge of those things which he eagerly
sought for, now bethought himself how he should keep Henderson and his party in
suspense a while, that they should not get within him. For what answer could he
give them? If he should profess himself to be against their courses, that
would do the King no good, and might bring a great deal of danger upon
himself: and on the other side, to put them in greater hopes of him, by
promising those things he never meant to perform, he scorned, as being a stain
unto his honor. Therefore he takes this course; there was present at that
conference with Henderson one Sir James Rollock, Chief of a very ancient and
flourishing family: his former wife had been Montrose his Sister, after whose
death he married the Sister of the Marquess of Argyle, the ringleader of the
Covenanters in Scotland: thus being allied unto them both, he seemed to be a
very fit mediator of friendship between them. Montrose asks him whether those
things which had passed between them proceeded from the direction of the
Parliament, or out of their own good wills? He answered, He conceived that
Master Henderson had received Commission from the Parliament to that purpose;
But Henderson said no; but he made no question but the Parliament would make
good any thing that he promised. Montrose told them, he could resolve upon
nothing except he had the Public faith to build upon, especially the
messengers disagreeing between themselves. Whereupon (as the fashion is on such
occasions) one of them lays the blame upon the other, when both of them ought
rather to have condemned their own carelessness and negligence. The conference
being thus ended, Montrose having obtained his ends, and they being no wiser
than they came thither, every own went his own way.

CHAP. III
Montrose being returned from this Conference, related all things as they had
passed unto some select friends whom he could safely trust; and withal
entreated them, that (for the greater confirmation of the business) they would
all go along with him to the King; that his Majesty receiving a full account of
all things, might lend his ear to sound counsel, and (yet if it was possible)
provide a remedy against so threatening evils. Most of them were of opinion,
That the King and his authority were utterly ruined and irrecoverable; that it
was a thing passing the power of man to reduce that Kingdom to obediance that
for their parts they had acquitted themselves before God, and the World, and
their own consciences; (...) with the disgrace of their persons, the loss of
their estates, and the hazard of their lives they had continued in their
allegiance; hereafter they would be only brokers on, and Petitioners unto
Almighty God for better times. Montrose who could by no means be removed from
so honest a resolution, communicating his counsel to the Lord Ogilby, (whom of
all men he especially loved) goes straight to Oxford. The King was absent
thence, being gone to the siege of Gloucester, he imparts unto the Queen what
designs the Scottish Covenanters had against his Majesty; but he had as good
have said nothing, for she had determined not to believe a word, by reason of
the far greater confidence she reposed in Hamilton and his brother.

Montrose, seeing no good was to be done with the Queen, goes to Gloucester, and
declares all things to the King himself: How there was a powerful Army to be
raised in Scotland, and a day appointed on which it should be brought into
England; how their counsels were manifestly known unto him, and how to fetch
him over to their side, they had offered him very honorable commands in the
Army; but that he heartily detesting so horrid an employment had sled to his
Majesty; that he having notice thereof, if he were not able to provide so
timely and powerful a remedy as could be wished, at least might cast some
blocks and rubs in their way, until such time as he had settled his affairs in
England; that the Traitors of either Kingdom might be easily dealt withal by
themselves, but if they came once to join their forces, they would be hardly
suppressed; that there were very many in Scotland who would sacrifice themselves
and all that they had for their dearest King, whose good will would be of no
use unto his Majesty after the Covenanters had raised their Army, but
destructive unto themselves; that the haughty spirits of the Traitors were to
be sneap't in time, and their strength broken before it grew too big, lest the
beginnings being neglected, repentance should prove the only opposition that
could be made afterward. These things, and to this effect, did Montrose
continually press unto the King, but in vain, for he had not only the strong
and deeply-rooted confidence his Majesty had of the Hamiltons to struggle with,
but the devices of a set of desperate Courtiers beside, who daily buzzed in the
Kings ears Montrose's youth, his rashness, his ambition, the envy and hatred
he bare unto the Hamiltons, and what not; and on the other side, the Hamiltons
fidelity, their honesty, their discretion, their power. Thus Monrose nothing
prevails, and the King returns to his winter quarters at Oxford. And although
his Majesty saw very well (reports coming thick and threefold of the Scottish
Army) that all was true that Montrose had told him, yet the most religious King
determined upon no terms to give any occasion of quarrel to the Scots till
first they entered England; resolving, that he for his part would perfectly
observe the articles of Pacification he had made with them, which if they
should violate, he doubted not but they should highly answer it both to God and
him. While these things were discussed at Oxford, the Covenanters in Scotland
bring their business about according to their desires, no one opposing them.
They raise as big an Army as they can, which consisted of eighteen thousand
Foot and two thousand Horse; and at last when they had marched unto the very
borders, the Hamiltons were not ashamed to give the King notice by Letters of
the approach of that formidable Army; making this their excuse, that according
to their engagement, they had prevented an invasion the summer before, but now
that winter was come on, they were able to keep them out no longer, but they
would come in immediately with a powerful Army. The King, when he saw himself
thus grossly abused, sends for Montrose, shows him the Hamiltons Letters, and at
last (when it was even too late) asks his advice what was best to be done.

Montrose tells him, that his Majestry might now see, that what he had before
given him notice of, had neither proceeded from ambition, nor malice, nor any
self ends, but from his bounden duty and allegiance; that for above a
twelvemonth he had been continually pressing both their Majesty's to prevent
this; that he accounted himself very unhappy, that all that while so faithful
a servant could not be credited by so good a Master; that the case seemed now
desperate, but if the King had a mind he might trust them again who by pretense
of his authority had bound some of his friends hands that they could not assist
him, and drawn in others, who intended nothing less, under color of Loyalty
to fight against him, and given up unto the Rebels, now that they had got an
Army, all that they had, without striking a stroke. The King complaining that
he was most abominably betrayed by them with whom he had entrusted his Crown,
his Honor, his Secrets, his Life, earnestly demanded his advice. He repeating
again the lamentablenesse of the condition in which things now stood,
nevertheless offered, that if his Majesty so thought good, he would either
lose his life, which if he did, he would be sure it should seem rather sold
then lost, or else (which he did only not despair) he would reduce his
Countrymen, and bring the Rebels there into subjection. The King being no
little pleased with the confidence, undauntednesse, and gallantry of the man,
that he might more advisedly contrive his design, desired him to take two or
three days to consider of it, and so dismissed him.

Montrose returning at the time appointed, shows his Majesty how desperate an
adventure he was undertaking; that all Scotland was under the Covenanters
command, that they had Garrisoned all places of strength, that they were
plentifully provided both of men, and money, and arms, and ammunition, and
victual, and all things necessary for a War; that the English Rebels were
joined with them in a most strict Covenant to defend one another against all
the world. But for his own part he had nothing to set up with, neither men nor
arms, or pay; yet he would not distrust Gods Assistance in a righteous cause,
and if the King would lay his Commands upon him, he would undertake to do his
best. The King should be in no worse case than he was, He himself would take
what malice, envy, or danger should fail, upon himself, so that his Majesty
were graciously pleased to condescend to a few reasonable requests. And first,
that the business might go on more successively, it seemed to him very
necessary, that the King should send some Soldiers out of Ireland into the
West of Scotland. Next, that he should give order to the Marquess of Newcastle
(who was the General of the Kings forces toward Scotland) that he should
assist Montrose with a party of horse to enter the South of Scotland, by which
means he might convey himself into the heart of the Kingdom. Then, that he
should deal with the King of Denmark for some troops of German horse. And
lastly, that his Majesty should take some course to procure and transport some
arms out of some foreign country into Scotland: nothing needed more but humane
industry, the success was Gods part, and to be referred to his providence. The
King commending his counsel, and giving him thanks that he apprehended some
life in the business, encourages him to fit himself cheerfully for so great a
work, and wished him to leave the care of those things he had requested, unto
him.

And truly, for the matter of aid out of Ireland, the King sends for the Earl
of Antrim, and acquaints him with Montrose's design. This Antrim is of Scottish
extraction, descended of the noble and ancient Family of the Mac-Donalds, a man
of great estate and power in Ireland, and allied to the prime Nobility of
England, by matching with the Duchess of Buckingham. He being driven out of
his own country lived at Oxford, and cheerfu^ly undertook the negotiation with
the Irish upon himself, and engaged himself also voluntarily unto Montrose,
that he would be in Argyle (a part of Scotland bordering upon Ireland) with ten
thousand men by the first of April 1644. this passed in December 1643. And as
for foreign aids and arms, the King sent Sir John Cockeram his Ambassador about
it with his Commission and Instructions. And directions unto the Marquess of
Newcastle were carried by some of Montrose's own company. Who receiving the
Kings Letters and Commission to be Governor of Scotland, and General of the
Army there, made himself ready for his journey. In the interim news came on a
sudden that Duke Hamilton with his brother the Earl of Lannerick were posting
up to Oxford. They, that they might make their access easier to the King, who
had hitherto given ear unto their counsels, and to continue or recover the good
opinion the King had of them, gave out all the way as they came, especially
unto Governors of Shires and Towns, and Commanders of the Army, that they were
banished their Country, that they had been plundered of their estates by the
Covenanters for their loyalty to the King, and that for safety of their lives,
with which they had hardly escaped, they fled to Oxford. But Montrose and those
of his mind saw plainly that these were but tales of their own making, of
purpose to wipe off the suspicion of this new guilt; and that by this means,
they in confidence of that esteem they had lately with the King, and of a
strong faction they drove at Court, doubted not but they should stand as fair
in his opinion as ever, if they were but once admitted into the Kings presence;
and that the only business they had thither, was by defeating Montrose again,
clearly to extinguish that little spark of Loyalty that was not yet quite out
in Scotland. And Montrose delivered himself freely, that for his part he would
never stand by to be witness of so great an oversight: and therefore humbly
besought the King, that he would give him leave to seek his fortune in some
foreign Country, if these men that had deceived him so often should be received
again into favor, not that he desired any severity should be used against
them, only he wished the King might have a care that they should do him no more
harm. The King was drawn with much ado that they should be forbidden the
Court, yet for all that he suffered the Earl of Lannerick to live in the City.
But he (by whose instigations I cannot tell) betakes himself from Oxford to
London to the Parliament of England, and not long after to the Scotch Army,
which had now entered England, and never since has failed to do them the best
service he could. The escape of his brother so much moved the King, that he saw
it high time to secure the Duke himself.

There were several Scots in the Kings Court and Army who were suspected (and
perhaps not without reason) to favor the Covenanters too much, and to give
intelligence unto them of the Kings Counsels. Montrose, that he might put these
to the touch, took this course; He got a protestation to be drawn up by the
Kings authority, unto which all Scots who would have the reputation of honest
men were to set their hands: Wherein they professed themselves heartily to
detest the courses of the Covenanters, condemned especially the bringing in of
an Army into England against the King and the Laws of the Land as an Act of
high treason, promised and vowed to acquit themselves of that scandal, and to
the utmost of their power, with the hazard of their lives and fortunes, to
oppose those that were guilty of that crime. This Protestation all men of
honor and honesty readily took; but there were two, in whom the King trusted
most of all Scotch-men next to the Hamiltons, to wit, the Earl of Trequaire,
and Master William Murray of the Bedchamber, who were difficulty brought unto
it at last, with much reluctance and fear of being discovered traitors: yet
even they engaged themselves by a solemn Oath at a certain day to be aiding and
assisting unto Montrose in Scotland; which Oath of theirs afterward they most
unworthily violated.

This being done; and Montrose on his journey from Oxford toward Scotland,
those that were the Hamiltons creatures; and other false-hearted Courtiers
began to blast the Honor of Montrose, to call him a vain and ambitious man,
who had attempted an impossible thing: to extol above measure the power of the
Covenanters, and that they might deterr every one from engaging himself in so
noble an exploit, gave out every where most maliciously, that no good was ever
to be expected from Montrose.

He being little troubled with the calumnies of unworthy men, came forward to
York, and so to Durham: where he sees that the Kings Instructions be sent to
the Marquess of Newcastle, and the next day they met and conferred. Newcastle
discoursed of nothing but the distresses and necessities of his Army; how the
Rebel Scots breaking in in the midst of winter, had spoiled his Recruits, and
that now in far greater numbers than he, they quartered within five miles of
him; that he could not possibly spare any Horse without a manifest hazard to
the whole Atmy. Montrose urged on the other side, that nothing could do
Newcastle more service than to let him have a party of Horse (in which he was
very strong) with him into Scotland, that so he might either divert, or at
least divide the enemy, and by kindling a fire in their own houses, fetch them
home again to defend themselves. Newcastle courteously replied, that as soon as
he had wound himself out of that present danger, he would not be wanting in any
service to Montrose: which promise, there is no doubt but a person of so much
Honor and Loyalty would most surely have performed, had he continued any
while in the Command of those parts. In the mean time, all that he could do for
the present was; to afford him about one hundred Horse, but lean ones, and ill
accourred, (which was not the Generals fault, but some men's private spleen)
with two brass Fieldpieces.

Moreover he sent his Orders unto the Kings Officers and Commanders in
Cumberland and Westmerland, that they should give Montrose all the succor and
assistance they could make for his journey into Scotland. Montrose going
toward Carlisle was accordingly met by the Cumberland and Westmerland men,
consisting of eight hundred Foot, and three troops of Horse; who according to
the Marquess of Newcastles Command, were to wait upon him into Scotland.
Montrose himself brought with him two hundred Horse, most of them Noblemen and
Gentlemen, and such as had been Captains either in Germany, France, or England.
With which small forces (not over-trusty neither) he entered Scotland on the 13
of April; for he made the more haste, lest he should have been absent at the
time appointed by the Earl of Antrim.

CHAP. IV.
MOntrose having entered Scotland, had come to the river of Anan, when upon a
mutiny among the English, occasioned by Richard Grahams Soldiers, almost all
of them fly their Colors, and in all haste run back to England.
Notwithstanding he with his own men came to Dunfrise, and took the Town into
protection upon surrender: and there he staid a while, that he might be ready
to entertain Antrim and his Irish; but the day appointed being already passed,
there came not so much as a Messenger from them, nor the least report of them
into Scotland. And the Covenanters gathering themselves together on every side,
there was no staying there any longer for Montrose, without being suprised;
therefore he returns safe to Carlisle with his men. And seeing he could neither
procure any aid from the English, nor expected any Foreiners suddenly, nor had
scarce any hopes of good from Ireland, and found that the Earl of Calendar had
raised a new Army in Scotland to second General Lesley, who had by this time
together with the English Covenanters besieged York, he resolved, lest he
should spend his time idly, to engage himself among the Kings Forces in
Northumberland and the Bishopric; nor was that resolution either unprofitable
to them, or dishonorable to himself.

For having ferreted a Garrison of the Covnanters out of the town of Morpet, he
took in the Castle, permitted all the pillage unto the English, and taking an
Oath of them that had held it, that they should never more fight against the
King, he sent them away without any greater punishment. He took a Fort at the
mouth of the river of Tine from the Covenanters, (who had not long before
turned out an English Garrison from thence) and dismissed the prisoners upon the
same terms with those of Morpet. He plentifully victualled Newcastle with corn
brought from Alnwick, and other places thereabouts. When this was done, he was
sent for by Letters from Prince Rupert Count Palatine of Rhine, who was then
coming to raise the siege of York. And although he made all the haste he
could, yet he met not the Prince till he was upon his retreat the day after
that unfortunate battle. And truly the Prince freely offered Montrose a
thousand Horse to take along with him into Scotland, but some that were too
powerful with him, dealt so with the good Prince, that the next day after that
promise was made, there was not one horse to be had.

All things thus failing Montrose, from which he expected any assistance, yet
his spirit never sailed him: therefore returning to Carlisle with those few but
faithful and gallant men that stuck close to him, he sends away the Lord
Ogilby and Sir William Rollock into the heart of Scotland in mean disguise,
lest they should be discovered by the enemy. Within a fortnight they returned,
and brought word that all things in Scotland were desperate; all Passes,
Castles, Towns, possessed with Garrisons of the Covenanters, nor could they
find any one so hardy as to dare to speak reverently or affectionately of the
King. Most of those who had adhered to Montrose all this while, being cast down
with this sad news, bethought themselves of bending their courses some other
way, especially when they were tampered with by that honest man the Earl of
Traquair to desert the service: who forgetting all his vows and imprecations
he had made before the King, undertook in the name of the Covenanters, not only
for Indemnity to all that should fall off unto them, but rewards and
preferments too; as if he had been all this while an Agent for the Rebels, and
not for the King, as he pretended. And yet this man was greater in the Kings
favor, and more confided in, than any one except the Hamiltons.

Montrose calling his friends to counsel, desires them to deliver their
opinions what they conceived was fittest to be done in this sad face of things.
Some advise him to repair to the King at Oxford, and certify him that his
Scotch Affairs were past recovery; that Antrim came not with his Irish forces,
nor was there any appearance of them; that little or no assistance had been
obtained from the English; and as for Arms or aid from Foreign parts, he had
not so much as heard a word of them; so that it was none of his fault that his
service had no better success. Others were of opinion, that it was better for
him to excuse himself by Letters unto the King, and to send up his Commission
along with them, and that he himself should step a while aside into some other
Country, till such time as it should please God to send better opportunities.
But all agreed in this, that nothing more was to be attempted or thought of in
Scotland. But he himself only entertained far other thoughts in his high and
undaunted spirit: He conceived himself bound never to forsake his dearest Lord
the King though in extremest hazards, and that it was an unworthiness to
despair of so good a cause; and if he should attempt some greater matter than
came within the reach or apprehension of common men, he conjectured it might
prove much to his own Honor, and something perhaps to the Kings good too. For
as it was dubious whether it might please God in his mercy to look upon the
King with a more favorable eye, and to turn his adversity into prosperity; so
it was most certain, that if he should not be able to go thorough with it, but
perish in the enterprise, he should die with Honor, and his fall should be
much lamented. So resolved, and commending himself and his success to the
disposal and protection of Almighty God, he performed such Adventures without
men, without money, without arms, as were not only to the astonishment of us
that were present, and were eye and ear witnesses of them, but also the example
and envy both of all great Commanders hereafter. What those were we shall
declare by and by.

Montrose delivers those few Gentlemen that had been constant unto him to the
Lord Ogilby, to be conducted unto the King, (for as he had communicated all his
former designs unto him, so he did this also) and conjureth him withal to deal
earnestly with his Majesty for hastening of some aid, if not of Men yet of Arms
at least, from beyond Seas; So he accompanying them two days on their journey,
and leaving with them his Horses, his Servants, and his Carriages, conveyed
himself privily away from them, and with what speed he could, came back to
Carlisle. The company suspecting nothing of his departure, because Ogilby and
other his dearest friends were still with them, marched on straight toward
Oxford; but thither they never reached, for most of them (of whom were the Lord
Ogilby himself, Sir John Innes, and Colonel Henry Graham his brother, a most
hopeful young Gentleman, James, John, and Alexander Ogilbyes, Patrick Melvin,
and other gallant men, and highly esteemed by Montrose) fell into the enemies
hands, and endured a long and nasty imprisonment, until they were set at
liberty by Montrose himself the next year, after which they did him most
faithful service. He returning to Carlisle imparts his design to the Earl of
Aboine, lest he should have any occasion to cavil afterward, that a matter of
that consequence was done without his knowledge or advice, who might have
proved able to give a great stroke to the advancing of it. But when he found
something too much sicklenesse in that young man, he was not over earnest to
engage him to adventure with him in so perilous a journey; and therefore
easily persuaded him to reside at Carlisle till he heard further news out of
Scotland, by which time it might be more seasonable for him to return into his
Country.

And now being prepared for his journey, he selected only two men for his
companions and guides; one was Sir William Rollock, a Gentleman of most known
honesty, and an able man both of his head and hands. The other was one Sibbald,
whom for the report of his valor and gallantry, Montrose did equally love and
honor: but the latter afterward deserted him in his greatest need. Montrose
passing as Sibbalds man, and being disguised in the habit of a Groom, rode
along upon a lean jade, and led another horse in his hand. And so he came to
the borders, where he found all ordinary and safe passes guarded by the enemy.
There was a chance happened which put them in a greater fright than all that,
and it was this; not far from the borders they hit by chance upon a servant of
Sir Richard Grahams, who taking them for Covenanters, and to be of Lesley's
Army who used to range about those parts, told them freely and confidently that
his Master had made his peace with the Covenanters, and had undertaken (as if
he were their Sentinel) to discover unto them all such as came that way whom he
suspected to favor the King. An unworthy act it was of a shameless villain,
of whom not only Montrose had a very high esteem, but his Majesty also, whose
mistaken bounty had raised him out of the dunghill (to say no worse) unto the
honor of Knighthood, and an estate even to the envy of his neighbors.

Having not passed much further, they met a Soldier, a Scotchman but one that
had served under the Marquess of Newcastle in England, who taking no notice of
the other two Gentlemen, came to Montrose, and saluted him by his name:
Montrose giving no heed unto him, as if he were no such man, the too officious
soldier would not be so put off, but with a voice and countenance full of
humility and duty began to cry out, What? Do not I know my Lord Marquess of
Montrose well enough? Go your way, and God be with you whithersoever you go.
When he saw it was in vain to conceal himself from the man, he gave him a few
crowns, and sent him away, nor did he discover him afterward. But Montrose
conceiving himself much concerned in these speeches, thought it the best course
to make all the haste he could, and to run faster than the news of him could
fly: nor did he spare any horseflesh, or scarce draw a bridle till after four
days travel he came to the house of his cosen Patrick Graham of Innisbrake,
not far from the river of Tay, on that side of the Sherifdome of Perth which is
next the Mountains. This Patrick being descended of the Noble family of
Montrose, and not unworthy of so noble parentage, was deservedly in very great
esteem with the Marquess; who sojourned besides him for a little while in the
day time in a mean cottage, and passed the nights alone in the neighboring
mountains. For he had sent away his companions unto his friends, that they
might inform themselves exactly of the whole state of the Kingdom, and bring
him word in what condition they found it.

After a few days, having examined the matter with all the industry they could
use, they return with nothing but sad and tragical news: That all the Subjects
that were honest and loyal, lay under the tyranny of the Rebels; and of such
as had been so hardy as to endeavor to recover their freedom with their
swords, some were put to death, others fined, others being yet in prison, daily
expected the worst their enemies could do: That the Marquess of Huntley had
laid down the arms which too unadvisedly he had taken up, at the first summons
of the enemy; that indeed he had had no contemptible number of men, but the men
wanted a good Commander; that his friends and dependents were exposed to the
implacable malice and revenge of their enemies, and that he himself had fled to
the utmost corner of the Island, and sculked upon another man's land. Montrose
was very much troubled (as he had reason) at this news, especially at Huntley's
error, and the ruin of the Gordons, who were men of singular loyalty and
valor, and expert soldiers, therefore much lamented by him, that for no fault
of theirs, they should come to so great misfortune. And now he began to cast
about how he might draw them to himself, that they might try again the fortune
of War under another General in the behalf of his most excellent Majesty.

CHAP. V.
IN the mean time there were some uncertain reports spread abroad among the
Shepherds who kept their flocks in the Mountains, of certain Irish who were
landed in the North of Scotland, and canged about the Mountains. Montrose
conceived it not unlikely that these might be part of those Auxiliaries which
the Earl of Antrim had promised should have been there four months before: but
he had no certainty what they were, till at last some Letters came from some
intimate friends of his, Highlanders, and from Alexander Mac-donald, a
Scotchman also, to whom Antrim had given the Command in chief of those few
Irish, directed to Montrose. These they had taken care to send to a certain
friend of his, a sure man, that he might convey them if it were possible to
Carlisle, where Montrose was believed still to remain. He, who never dreamed of
Montrose's return into Scotland, though he sojourned by him, by chance
acquainted Master Patrick Graham with the business, he promises to take
charge of them, and undertaketh to see them safely dilivered to Montrose,
though be made a journey as far as Carlisle a purpose; and so by the good
providence of God they came into his hands much sooner than could be expected.
And he writes back, as from Carlisle, that they should be of good comfort, for
they should not stay long either for sufficient assistance to join with them,
or a General to command them; and withal requires them forthwith to come down
into Athole.

The people of Athole were engaged unto Montrose by many obligations, men whom
he valued most of all the Highlanders, both for their Loyalty, Piety,
Constancy, and singular Valor; and truly they made good his opinion of them to
the very end of the War. The Irish, with a very few Highlanders who were almost
all of Badenoth, receiving Montrose's commands, marched straight into Athole.
He, who was not above twenty miles from them, comes to them immediately, and
ere ever they looked for him, on foot, in the habit of a Mountainer, without
any man along with him save the abovesaid Patrick Graham his guide and
companion. And indeed the Irish would hardly be persuaded that that was
Montrose; but when they saw him so salured, and only not adored like some great
Deity, by the men of Athole and others that knew him well, they were over ver
joyed: for his coming to them was in exceeding good time, they being then in
extreme danger to be cut off. For Argyle was in their rear with a strong and
well ordered Army, the champain Country were ready in Arms before them,
expecting if they should make down into the Plain, to trample them to dirt with
their horses hoofs; the vessels that brought them over were burnt by Argyle,
that they might have no way to retreat; nor would the Arthole men or any other
that favored the King venture any hazard with them, because they were
strangers, and came not by the Kings open and known Authority; nor had they any
Commander of ancient Nobility, a thing by the Highlanders much set by, who
would not fight under the command of Alexander Mac-donald, a man of no account
with them; lastly their number was inconsiderable, being not above a eleven
hundred, though ten thousand had been promised.

The next day, the Arthole men to the number of eight hundred put themselves in
arms, and offered their service most cheerfully to Montrose, who having got
this handful of men, and earnestly commending his most righteous Cause to the
protection of Almighty God, now desired nothing more than to be among the
thickest of the enemy. Impatient therefore of further delay, that very day he
marches through the Plains of Athole toward Ern; as well to make way for his
friends and assistants easier access unto him (if any should rise upon the
news) as that he might fall upon and amaze the Rebels, unlooked for, before
they should be able to join together who lay at distance. Therefore passing by
Weem, a castle of the Menizies, seeing they handled a Trumpetter whom he sent
friendly unto them unworthily, and fell hotly upon the rear of his Army, he
wastes their fields, and causes all their houses and corn to be fired; this was
at the very first onset of the War, to strike terror into the enemy. The same
night he passed over Tay, the greatest river in Scotland, with part of his
Forces; the rest follow him very early the next day. When they were ready to
march on, he gave Patrick Graham (of whom I shall have often to speak, and
never without honor) at their earnest request the Command of the Athole men,
and sent him with the nimblest of them he could pick out amongst them to scout
before. He brings word he saw some Soldiers drawn up on the top of an hill at
Buckinch: toward them Montrose makes straight. These proved to be commanded by
the Lord Kilpont son to the Earl of Taith, a man of ancient Nobility, and
descended of the Grahams; and Sir John Drummond, Son to the Earl of Perth, a
kinsman also of Montrose; who were both of them summoned by the Covenanters to
join against the Irish as the Common enemy, and had with them five hundred Foot
and no more; nor had they heard any certainty at all of Montrose's being in
those parts. He resolves with all speed to surprise them, and either to win
them to his side, or to crush them to pieces. But they as soon as they heard
that Montrose was General of those Forces, send unto him some of their chiefest
friends to understand from him what he intended to do. He tells them he had
the Kings Authority for what he did, and was resolved to assert that Authority
to the utmost of his power, against a most horrid Rebellion, conjuring them by
all the obligations that were between them, that they would not think much to
do their best endeavors for the best of Kings. Which as it was much
becoming their high birth, and would be very acceptable service to the King,
so it would be beneficial unto them for the present, and much to their honor
with posterity and stranger, if they of all others should be the first that put
to their helping hands to hold up a tottering Crown. They most readily without
any delay came in unto him, for both of them, though underhand, favored the
King exceedingly.

From them Montrose understood that the Covenanters were thick in arms at a
Rendevouz at Perth (the second City to Edinburgh) and there waited for their
enemies falling down from Athole. He knowing also that Argyle with his Army was
upon his back, lest he should be hemmed in on both sides, determins to go
forward to Perth, that there he might either force the enemy to fight, or
reduce the Town to the Kings obedience. Marching therefore three miles from
Buckinch, and allowing the Soldiers but a short time of refreshment, at the
break of day he draws out his men. Nor was he above three miles more from the
City, when the enemy was in view in a large and open Plain (called Tippermore)
providing to fight. They were commanded by the Lord Elchoe, one that was taken
for no great soldier: there were with him the Earl of Tullibardin, and the
Lord Drummond, but this latter (as was conceived) against his will, for he and
his fathers whole family favored the King in their hearts: Knights he had with
him good store, among whom Sir James Scot (who heretofore had done good service
under the State of Venice) was the most noted soldier. They had six thousand
Foot and seven hundred Horse, and in confidence of their numbers, they had even
devoured their enemies before they saw them. It was on Sunday the first of
September, and it was given in charge to their Ministers, that in set speeches
they should encourage the people to fight, not forgetting to mind them of their
most holy Covenant forsooth. And to give them their due, they plied their lungs
stoutly in the performance of that work; they most freely promised them in the
name of Almighty God an easy and unbloudy victory; my, there was one Frederick
Carmichael, one very much cried up for learning and holiness by the silly
people, who was not afraid to deliver this passage in his Sermon, If ever God
spoke word of truth out of my mouth, I promise you in his name assured victory
this day.

Gods service being thus finely performed as they thought, they put their men
in Battalia. Elchoe himself commanded the right flank, Sir James Scot the left,
and the Earl of Tullibardin the battle. To the right and left flanks were added
wings of horse, with which they made no doubt on so fair a Plain to hem in the
enemy. Montrose perceiving the great body of the enemy, and especially their
strength in Horse, (for he had not so much as one Horseman, nor more than
three lean horses) and being careful (as it concerned him) lest being
encompassed with so great a number, they should fall upon him in the Front,
Rear, and Flank, he caused his Army to be drawn out to as open order as could
be possible, and makes his files only three deep. He commands the Ranks all to
discharge at once, those in the first Rank kneeling, in the second stooping,
and in the hindmost, where he placed the tallest men, upright: he charge them
also to have a care of mis-pending their powder, of which they had so small
store, and that they should not so much as make a shot till they came to the
very teeth of their enemies; and as soon as they had discharged their muskets
once a piece, immedidiately to break in upon the enemy with their swords and
musket ends; which if they did, he was very confident the enemy would never
endure the charge. Montrose undertakes the Command of the right Flank over
against Sir James Scot, appoints the left to the Lord Kilpont, and the main
Battle to Mac-Donald with his Irish: which was very providently ordered, lest
the Irish who were neither used to fight with long Pikes, nor were furnished
with swords, if they had been placed on either flank, should have been exposed
to the fury of the Scotch-Horse.

Montrose had sent unto the Commanders of the enemy, Drummond Son and Heir to
the Lord Maderty, a noble Gentleman, and accomplished with ^, That Montrose, as
well as the Kings Majesty from whom he had received his Commission, was most
lender of shedding his Countries blood, and had nothing more in his devotions,
than that his victories might be written without a red Letter. And such a
victory they might obtain as well as he, if they should please but to have the
honor to conquer themselves, and before a stroke were struck to return unto
their Allegiance. That for his part he was covetous of no man's wealth,
ambitious of no man's honor, envious of no man's preferment, thirsty, after no
man's blood; all that he desired was, that in the name of God they would at
length give ear to sound counsel, and submit themselves and what belonged unto
them unto the grace and protection of so good a King: who as he had hitherto
condescended unto all things (either for matter of Religion or any thing else)
which they thought good to ask, though to the exceeding great prejudice of his
Prerogatives; so still they might find him like an indulgent Father ready to
embrace his penitent children in his arms, although he had been provoked with
unspeakable injuries. But if they should continue still obstinate in their
Rebellion, he called God to witness, that it was their own stubbornness that
forced him to the present encounter. The Commanders of the enemies answered
nothing at all to all this, but against the Law of Nations sent the Messenger
(who out of mere love to his Country had undertaken the employment) prisoner
with a company of rude Soldiers unto Perth, vowing as soon as they had got the
victory, to cut off his head. But God was more merciful to him, and provided
otherwise than they intended, for the safety of that gallant man.

They were come within musket shot, when the enemies under the Command of the
Lord Drummand sent out a forlorn hope to provoke Montrose to a light skirmish:
he sends a few to meet them, who at first onset disorder and rout them, sending
them back to their main body in no small fright. Montrose thought now was his
opportunity, and that nothing could conduce more either to the encouragement of
his own soldiers, or the terror of the enemy, than immediately to fall upon
them as they were disordred and astonished with that fresh blow, nor would he
give them time to rally or recover courage: therefore setting up a great shout
he lets loose his whole Army upon them. The enemy first at distance discharge
their Ordnance, which made more noise than they did harm, afterward marching
forward, their Horse labor to break in upon Montroses Soldiers; those, when
their powder was spent, and many of them had neither Pikes nor scarce Swords,
they stoutly entertain with such weapons as the place would afford, good
stones; of which they poured in such numbers amongst them, with so
greatstrength and courage, that they forced them to retreat, and to trouble
them no more. For the Irish and Highlanders striving bravely whether should
outvie the other in valor, bore up so eagerly when they gave ground, that at
last they betook themselves to the nimblenesse of their Horses heels. There was
something more to do a little while longer in the right Flank. Sir James Scot
disputed some time for the higher ground, but Montroses men being stronger
bodied, and especially swifter footmen, obtained the Hill; from thence the
Athole men rushed down with their drawn swords upon the enemy, and making
little account of the musketeers, who sent their bullets amongst them as thick
as hail, closing with them (as they liked best to fight) they slashed and beat
them down. At last the enemy not able to abide their fury, fairly ran away.
Most of the Horse made so good speed as to save themselves; but there was a
great slaughter of the Foot, whom they pursued for six or seven miles. There
were conceived to be two thousand of the Covenanters slain, and more were taken
prisoners: of whom some taking a Military Oath, took up arms again with the
Conqueror; but perfidiously, for almost all forsook him afterward. The rest
taking a Solemn Protestation that they would never after bear arms against the
King, he set at liberty. He took in Perth the same day, without doing the least
harm unto the City, although most of the Citizens had fought against him in
this battle; thinking by so great clemency to turn the hearts of the people
toward their King, which was the only end to which he directed all his defigns.

CHAP. VI.
HE staid three days at Perth, for there he exected many in those parts to
come in with their friends and clients armed, who upon the noise of the late
victory professed themselves most faithful to the King; but none came but the
Earl of Kinowl with a few gentlemen of Gowry, nor did they continue very
constant unto him neither. And by this time Argyle was at haud with a great
Army of Foot of his own, and supplies of Horse were joined with him out of the
South parts; therefore Montrose passing over the Tay took up his Quarters in
the field (for other quarters he seldom had) near Couper a little village in
Angus, where a famous Monastery once stood, but now lies on the ground. Here a
brave young gentleman Sir Thomas Ogilby Son to the Earl of Airley, with others
of the Gentry of Angus, met him, and readily offered him their service; whom he
courteously entertained, and sent them a way with thanks, they pretending they
only went to fit themselves for a march, nevertheless few of them returned
besides the Ogilbies.

Next morning by break of-day before the Revellier was beat, there was a great
tumult in the Camp, the Soldiers ran to their arms, and sell to be wild and
raging; Montrose guessing that it was some falling out between the Highlanders
and the Irish, thrust himself amongst the thickest of them: there he finds a
horrible murder newly committed, for the noble Lord Kilpont lay there basely
slain. The murderer was a retainer of his own, one Stuart, whom he had treated
with much friendship and familiarity, in so much that that same night they lay
both in a bed. It is reported that the base slave bad a plot to dispatch
Montrose, and in regard of the great power he had with Kilpontin, he conceived
he might draw him in to be accessory to the villainy, therefore taking him aside
into a private place, he had discovered unto him his intentions; which the
Nobleman highly detested, as was meet; whereupon the murderer fearing he would
discover him, assaulted him unawares, and stabbed him with many wounds, who
little suspected any harm from his friend and creature. The treacherous
assassine by killing a Sentinel escaped, none being able to pursue him, it
being so dark that they could scarce see the ends of their Pikes. Some say the
traitor was hired by the Covenanters to do this, others only that he was
promised a reward if he did it. Howsoever it was, this is most certain, that he
is very high in their favor unto this very day, and that Argyle immediately
advanced him (though he was no soldier) to great commands in his Army.
Montrose was very much troubled with the loss of this Nobleman, his dear
friend, and one that had deserved very well both from the King and himself, a
man famous for Arts and arms, and honesty; being a good Philosopher, a good
Divine, a good Lawyer, a good Soldier, a good Subject, and a good man: And
embracing the breathless body again and again with sighs and tears, he
delivers it to his sorrowful friends and servants to be carried to his parents
to receive its funeral Obsequies as became the splendour of that honorable
Family.

With the rest of his Forces Montrose marches to Dundee: the Town being proud
of the number of its inhabitants, and having a Garrison out of Eife beside,
refused to submit. And he, thinking it no wisdom to hazard the honor he had
gotten by his late victory upon the doubtful success of a siege, turns away
toward Esk; for he hoped that many of his friends and kindred, being men of
greatest note in those parts, and who used to talk as highly what they would do
for the King as any others, would be ready to join with him. But they having
news of his approach withdrew themselves: only the Lord Ogilby Earl of Airley,
a man of threescore years old, (with his two Sons, Sir Thomas, and Sir David,
and some of his friends and clients, men of experienced resolutions) joined
himself unto him: and with admirable constancy he went along with him through
all fortunes unto the very end of the War; being in that almost universal
defection, the other honor and ornament of the Nobility of Scotland besides
Montrose.

While Montrose was hereabouts, he receives intelligence, that some
Commissioners from the Covenanters (of whom the Lord Burghly was the principal)
lay at Aberdene with an Army, and labored to assure unto themselves the
Northern parts, upon which Montrose especially relied, either by fair means or
foul. He determines to fight these immediately before Argyle could come up to
them, therefore with long marches he hies thither: and possessing himself of
the bridge upon the river of Dee, and drawing near the City, he found the enemy
drawn up close beside it. Burghley commanded two thousand Foot, and five
hundred Horse, whom he placed in wings; and having chosen his ground, and
planted his great Guns before his men, he expected battle. Montrose had fifteen
hundred Foot (for the Lord Kilponts soldiers were gone to convey their Lords
dead body to his parents, and most of the Athole-men after the victory of Perth
were gone home, from whence they were not far, laden with spoil) and just four
and forty Horse, of whom he made two divisions, and mixing amongst them the
best fire-men and Archers that he had (who in nimblenesse and swiftness of
body were almost as good as Horsemen) placed them on either wing, to prevent
the falling of the enemies horse upon his rear; which they performed most
gallantly beyond the opinion or perhaps the belief of many. He gave the command
of the right flank to James Hay and Nathaniel Gordon, and of the left to Sir
William Rollock, all valiant men. The left wing of the enemy was commanded by
Lewis Gordon, Son to the Marquess of Huntley, a bold young man and hot
spirited, but hair brained, and one that had forced out his fathers friends and
clients to fight with Montrose against their wills. He having gotten the plain
and most commodious ground for fighting on horseback, charged Montrose's right
flank: which when he perceived, he commanded Rollock with his twenty Horse to
their aid; and they, being backed with the gallantry of their Commanders, and
the activity and stoutnesse of the Foot amongst them, received the charge with
so much hardiness, that they four and forty, beat back full three hundred of
the enemy, routing all and killing very many. But because they were so few they
durst not follow the chase which was forborne by the great prudence of the
Commanders, and proved to be of great consequence toward the obtaining of the
victory: for the enemy charged Montrose's left Flank (which had no Horse) with
their right Wing of Horse. Montrose therefore in a trice (now that Lewis Gordon
and his men were fled) conveighs the same Horse to the left Flank; who seeing
they were not able to draw themselves into a Body like the enemies, fetched a
compass about, and so escaped their first charge; then neatly wheeling about
they fell upon the Flank of the enemy, and with their naked swords, beat, and
cut, and vanquished, and put them to flight. They took prisoners one Forbes of
Kragevar a Knight of great esteem with the enemy, and another Forbes of
Boindle. Those that retreated got safe away, because that so few could not
safely pursue them. They that commanded the enemies Horse were not so much
frighted with their loss, as vexed with the disgrace of a double repulse,
therefore imputing their defeat to those light firelocks that were mixed with
Montroses Horse, they themselves call for Footmen out of their main Body,
intending to return with greater courage. Montrose suspected that, and was
loath to engage those few gallant men again, (whose Horses were spent already
in two sharp services,) with the enemy who was reinforced with fresh Foot.
Therefore observing the enemies Horse not yet rallied since their new rout, and
standing at a sufficient distance from their Foot; he rode about among his own
Foot, (who had been sore galled already with the enemies Ordnance) and bespeaks
them to this effect: We do no good my (fellow soldiers) while we dispute the
matter at thus much distance, except we cloze up with them how shall we know an
able man from a weak, a valiant man from a coward? If ye would assail these
timorous and brawnelesse shrimps with handy-blows, they will never be able to
stand you. Go to therefore, fall about them with your swords and but-ends of
your muskets, beat them down, drive them back, and make them pay what is justly
due for their treason and rebellion. It was no sooner said, than they fall to
work, break in upon the enemy, defeat them, rout them. Their Horse who expected
Foot to come and line them, seeing them all run away, ran faster than they:
whom the Conquerours were not able to follow, much less to overtake, so they
escaped scot-free; but the Foot paid for all, few of which escaped the Victors
hands. For having no other place to fly unto but into the City, Montrose's men
came in thronging amongst them through the gates and posterns, and laid them on
heaps all over the streets. They fought four hours upon such equal terms, that
it was an even lay whether had the odds. At this Battle Montrose had some
great Guns, but they were unserviceable, because all advantages of ground were
possessed by the enemy; but, the enemies Guns made no small havoc of his men.
Among others, there was an Irishman that had his leg shot off with a Cannon
bullet, only it hung by a little skin; he seeing his fellow soldiers something
sad at his mischance, with a loud and cheerful voice cries out, Come on, my
Comrades, this is but the fortune of War, and neither you nor I have reason to
be sorry for it. Do you stand to it as becomes you, and as for me, I am sure my
Lord Marquess, seeing I can no longer serve on foot, will mount me on
horseback: So drawing out his knife, being nothing altered nor troubled, he
cut asunder the skin with his own hand, and gave his leg to one of his fellow
soldiers to bury. And truly, when he was well again, and made a Trooper, he
often did very faithful and gallant service. This battle was fought at
Aberdeen on the twelfth day of September, 1644. Then Montrose calling his
soldiers back to their Colors entered the City, and allowed them two days
rest.

CHAP. VII.
IN the mean time news was brought that Argyle was hard by with much greater
forces than those they dealt with last, the Earl of Lothian accompanying him
with fifteen hundred Horse. Therefore Montrose removes from Aberdeen to Kintor
a Village ten miles off, that he might make an easier access unto him for the
Gordons (the friends and dependents of the Marquess of Huntley) and others
that were supposed much to favor the Kings cause. From thence he sends Sir
William Rollock to Oxford, to acquaint his Majesty with the good success he
had hitherto obtained, and to desire supplies out of England, or some place
else. That he had fought twice indeed very prosperously, but it could not be
expected, that seeing he was so beset on all sides, with great and numerous
Armies, he should be able to hold out always without timely relief. Still
nothing troubled Montrose more, than that none of the Gordons, of whom he
conceived great hopes, came in unto him. And there wanted not some of them, who
testified their great affection to the service, but that Huntley the chief of
the Family, being a back-friend to Montrose, had withheld them all, either by
his own example, or private directions; and that himself being forced to sculk
in the utmost border of the Kingdom, envied that honor to another of which he
had missed himself, and had forbidden, even with threats, all those with whom
he had any power, to have any thing to do with Montrose, or to assist him
either with their power or counsel. Which when he understood, he resolved to
withdraw his Forces into the Mountains and Fastnesses, where he knew the
enemies horse (wherein their great strength consisted) could do them little
service; and of their Foot (if they were never so many) relying upon the
justice of his cause, and the valor of his soldiers, he made but little
reckoning. Therefore he hid his Ordnance in a bogg, and quitted all his
troublesome and heavy carriages; And coming to the side of the river Spey, not
far from an old castle called Rothmurk, he encamped there: with an Army, if
one respect the number, but very small, but it was an expert and cheerful one,
and now also something accquainted with victory.

On the other side of the Spey, he finds the men of Cathnes, and Suderland, and
Rosse, and Murray, and others to the number of five thousand up in arms to
hinder his passage over the swiftest River in all Scotland, till such time as
Argyle who marched after him was upon his back. Being oppressed, and as it were
besieged with so many enemies on every side, that at least he might save
himself from their Horse, the turned into Badenoth, a rocky and mountainous
Country, and scarce passable for Horse. There, for certain days he was very
sick, which occasioned so immoderate joy to the Covenanters, that they doubted
not to give out he was quite dead, and to ordain a day of public
Thankesgiving to Almighty God for that great deliverance. Nor were their
Levites you may be sure backward in that employment in their Pulpits; for as if
they had been of counsel at the Decree, and stood by at the execution, they
assured the people, that it was as true as Gospel, that the Lord of Hosts had
slain Montrose with his own hands. But this joy did not last them long, for he
recovered in a short space; and as if he had been risen from the dead, he
frighted his enemies much more than he had done before. For as soon as his
disease would give him leave, he returned into Athole, and sent away Mac-donald
with a party unto the Highlanders, to invite them to take up arms with him; and
if they would not be invited, to force them. He himself goes into Angus, hoping
it might happen that he should either force Argyle with his tired Horse unto
his Winter quarters, or at least leave him far enough behind him. For Argyle
had pursued him slowly, and at such distance, that it was apparent he thought
of nothing less than of giving him battle. Therefore going through Angus, and
getting over the Grainsbain (which going along with a continued ridge from East
to West, divides Scotland into two equal parts) he returned into the North of
the Kingdom. And now that he had left Argyle so far behind him, that he might
safely take some time to recruit, he went to Strathbogy, that he might meet
with the Gordons, and persuade them to engage with him. But he lost his labor,
for they were forestalled by Huntley, and after his example played least in
sight. For such as were generous and daring spirits, though they were loath to
provoke the indignation of their Chief, yet they could not but be ashamed, that
at a time when there might be so much use of them, they did nothing. Besides,
the Lord Gordon, Huntley's eldest Son (a man of singular worth and
accomplishment) was detained by Argyle his Uncle by the Mothers side: the Earl
of Alboin the second Son was enclosed within the siege of Carlisle; and Lewis
another Son was of the enemies side; so that there was no one of Huntley's
family under whose authority they should take up Arms.

Notwithstanding Montrose quartered there a great while; in which time almost
every other night marching, seven, or eight, or ten miles with a party of light
Foot (for Horse he had few or none) he used to give alarms to the enemy, beat
up their quarters put them to flight, and frequently to bring home horse and
men prisoners. And because he always brought his men safe off, it was strange
to see how cheerful and daring his soldiers were; so that though their number
was not great, there was nothing that he would lead them on unto, that seemed
great to them. At last when he despaired of any good to be done with the
Gordons, at the end of October he removed from Strathbogy, and came to Faivy
Castle and possessed it. There he was like to have been utterly undone by the bad
and false intelligence his Scouts, in whom he put great confidence, brought
unto him concerning the enemy: for those whom they persuaded him were scarce
got over Grainsbain, were on a sudden encamped within two miles of him. Argyle
and Lothian had there two thousand five hundred Foot, and twelve hundred Horse:
Montrose, now when Mac-donald was absent with a party, had fifteen hundred Foot
and about fifty Horse. If he should have descended into the Plain with so small
strength, it had been madness; and to keep a Castle (and no strong one
neither) he thought dishonorable and derogatory to the credit of his late
victories. Therefore he bethought himself of another course, he draws his men
up unto a higher hill which overlooked the Castle. The soil of the hill was
rough, and there were hedges also and ditches cast up there by the Husbandmen
for the fences of their fields, which were almost as useful as Brestworks. But
before he had appointed every one his ground to draw up in, those few of
Huntley's dependents which accompanied Montrose from Strathbogy, in the sight
of all people fairly betook them to their heels. And on the other side, the
enemy driving fiercely up the hill, made themselves masters of no small part of
it; which if they had been able to maintain with the same vigor that they had
obtained it, Montrose had been a lost man: whose Soldiers, discouraged both by
the timorous flight of some of their own, and the multitude of their enemies
forces, were well near ready to turn their backs; them Montrose presently put
life and courage into by his own example and presence, by putting them in mind
of their former achievements, and their own sense of their wonted prowess.
Moreover, he thus bespake a young Irish Gentleman, one Colonel O Kyan, Go thy
way, O Kyan, with such men as thou have at hand, and drive me those fellows out
of yonder ditches, that we may no more be troubled with them. The gallantry of
O Kyan Montrose had often seen and commended, nor did that truly valiant man
deceive the Generals opinion of him, for he quickly firretted the enemy out of
the ditches, though they much out-numbred his men, and were seconded with a
party of Horse. And not only so, but gained some baggs of powder which the
enemy had left behind them for haste, a very seasonable prey, of which they had
great need. Nor does a notable example of the forwardness of the Soldiers
seem to me unworthy in this place to be remembered; for one of them looking upon
the baggs of powder, What (says he) have they given us no bullets? Marry but
we must fetch bullets too from those sparing distributors of Ammunition. As if
it had been altogether the enemies duty to provide them necessaries for the
War.

In the mean time his Horse (which were but fifty) being disposed in a place of
danger, he timely secured them by lining them with musketeers. For Lothian
charged them with five whole troops, who before they had crossed over half a
field that lay between them, being scared with our shot, wheeled about, and
returned to the place from whence they came. Montrose's men being encouraged
with these two successes, could hardly be kept off from falling on with a shout
upon the whole body of the enemy: whom Montrose refrains rather with a kind of
commendation of them (as was meet) than reproof, only bids every one know his
own duty, and wait his commands. Toward night, Argyle having done nothing to
any purpose, retreats two miles off, and slept not that night. But the next
day, when he was told that Montrose's soldiers had great scarcity of powder
and bullet, drawing his men into the same ground again, he made as though he
would have charged up the Hill, and beaten Montrose out of his hold. But when
his heart failed him in that enterprise, besides some skirmishes between small
parties while the main bodies kept their ground, there was nothing done that
day neither. All this while Montrose sends for all dishes, and flaggons, and
chamberpots, and what other pewter vessels could be had, and caused them to be
melted into bullet; yet when that was done the soldiers had not enough. With
which great inconvenience the soldiers were so little troubled, that one as
often as he made a shot (which he presumed never missed) he would say merrily
to his Comerades, As sure as can be I have broken one Traitors face with a
chamber pot. Nor will any one wonder if Montrose's men were often in want of
powder and other necessaries for War, when he considers they had no other way
to supply themselves with them, but out of their enemies stock. And now the
second day being almost spent, Argyle withdraws his men over the river, the way
that they came, three Scotch miles (which make one Dutch mile) off. The time
was thus spent at Faivy for several days, Argyle carrying nothing away with
that great Army, but disgrace among his friends, and contempt among his
enemies; for it was wholly imputed to his cowardice that there he had not made
an absolute conquest.

At last Montrose (lest by marching away in the day time he might have some of
his Rear cut off by the enemies Horse) takes the advantage of the night to
return to Strathbogy: where he intended to make some stay, both because the
cragginesse of the Country was a good security to his Soldiers against the
incursions of the enemies Horse; and because it was near those places from
whence he daily expected Mac-donald, with what Highlanders he could raise. The
next day the enemy pursues him with an intention to force him to fight with
them in the open field: and truly as soon as they came in sight of them, drawing
up their men they made ready to battle, as if they would have fallen on with
all their power. But a forlorn hope of Highlanders was sent before by Argyle to
engage Montrose in a light skirmish, who were manfully entertained and
repulsed. Then Montrose having possessed himself of the highest ground, Argyle
alters his resolution, and thinks upon that which was more safe and less
honorable. He desires a Cessation, proposes that engagements may be given on
both sides for a Conference and Treaty; yet at the same time, he did not only
tempt the Soldiers to forsake Montrose, by promising them indemnity and
rewards to boot; but (which is a shame to say even of an enemy) set a great
price upon Montrose's head, to be paid unto any assassine or murderer that
should bring it in. Of which, when Montrose was well assured, (who well knew
the disposition of the man to be more bent to overreach and betray, than to
fight with his enemy) he thought nothing concerned him more, than with all
speed to bring off those small Forces he had, as far as he could, both from
Argyle's Horse and knavery.

Therefore calling a council of War, he declares his opinion; they all approve
his wisdom, and promise to continue their fidelity and their best endeavors
to serve him. Therefore he resolves upon a long march the next night, as far
as Badenoth; and that the Soldiers might be lighter for so great a journey, he
sent the Carriages before with a guard, and bid the Soldiers make themselves
ready against the next day, as if they were to fight. And now the Carriages
were on the way, when on a sudden news came that Forbes of Craigevar, a
prisoner, (to whom upon the engagement of his Honor for his true imprisonment
Montrose had given the liberty of the Camp) and that Sibbalds, who besides
Rollock was only of his counsel and company when he came out of England, and
some others, had made an escape and run away to the enemy. He was troubled at
the perfidiousnesse of the men, and justly suspected that they, to ingratiate
themselves with the enemy, would betray his counsels. Therefore he straight
called back the Convoy with the Carriages, and seemed as if he had wholly
altered his resolutions. But indeed he altered them not, but thought it fit to
delay them for a time, that the intelligence which the enemy received from his
fugitives might appear unto them idle and uncertain. But after four days he
sent the Carriages away again before him, and making fires through all the
Camp, he placed all the Horse he had within view of the enemy, as if they kept
their guard there, till such time as the Foot were marched far enough from
danger, and then brought the Horse also safe off, and all by break of day came
to Balveny. And now being safe from having their quarters beaten up by the
enemies Horse, and they no further pursuing, it being also the very deep of
winter, he allowed a few days unto the refreshment of his Soldiers. And at
this time especially Argyle began to appear in his own colors, and his
subtilties were manifested. For most of the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and prime
Soldiers that were with Montrose (who setting aside Irish men and Highlanders,
had more Commanders than private Soldiers in his army) deserted him, and fell
off to Argyle. Some of them pretended sickness, others disability to make such
long marches in winter time over mountains uninhabited; unpassable, full of
nothing but stones and briars, for the most part deep in snow, and never
traveled over by any man alive. And therefore sore against their wills, as
they said, and being compelled to depart by an extreme necessity, they desired
his Pass: which he denied to none that asked; but yet looked upon them rather
with a kind of indignation and scorn, than approbation or compassion. Nor can
one easily say how much the example of such men weakened his Forces, and how
much it disheartened many that intended to have listed themselves under his
Command. But the old Lord Ogilby the Earl of Airley, a man of threescore years
old, and not very healthy neither, together with two of his Sons most worthy of
such a Father, Sir Thomas and Sir David, could never be persuaded, even in the
extremest hazard of their lives, to depart from him.

CHAP. VIII.
MOntrose returning from Balveny to Badenoth net a very faithful intelligencer,
who gave him notice that Argyle with his Foot (for his Horse were gone to their
winter quarters) lay at Dunkeldon, and that from thence he used all his
industry to persuade the Athole men to revolt. He, although he was assured of
their loyalty, nevertheless with incredible haste goes down into Athole. For
in one night he marched with his Forces four and twenty miles, through ways
untrodden, untilled, full of snow, waste, and never inhabited by mortal man, to
the intent he might fall upon Argyle, whiles he had not his Horse about him.
But he being frighted with the report of his coming, when Montrose was yet
sixteen miles off, bid his men shift for themselves, and he himself fled as
fast as he could into Perth, wherein the Covenanters had a strong garrison.
Mac-donald was by this time returned, and brought along with him the Chief of
the Mac-renalds with his men to the number of five hundred: and Montrose
himself added to that number Patrick Graham with some choice men of Athole.
Being recruited with these, he marches to the lake out of which the river of
Tay breaks forth, to pass from thence through Bredalbin into the Country of
Argyle; for he thought an enemy could never be so happily overthrown as in his
own Country. And truly he had many strong reasons for that resolution. In the
first place Argyle' s power and authority amongst the Highlanders rendered him
formidable to his Peers and Neighbors, and so conduced much both to raise and
foment the whole Rebellion; For as soon as any one adventured to oppose the
Covenanters, or dispute their Command, presently Argyle gathering a tumultuous
army of five or six thousand Highlanders (who for all that served him against
their wills) crushed him in pieces; and therefore he had all the reason in the
world to bring down the power of so seditious, and covetous, and cruel a man.
Moreover, those Highlanders who did not only favor the Kings cause, but hated
Argyle heartily, as having had a sufficient experience of his Tyranny, durst
not appear as they would, till he was first subdued. And lastly the Low-lands
of the Kingdom were maintained by the Covenanters with strong Garrisons, and
great bodies of Horse: so that except he had a mind utterly to undo his
friends, he had no other place to winter his Soldiers in but that. And being
pressed with these reasons, with long and foul journeys, and incredible speed,
he comes into Argyle.

The Earl at that time was listing soldiers in his Country, and had appointed
the day and place for a Rendezvous, He lived securely in the castle of
Inncrare, supposing no enemy to be within a hundred miles of him. For he could
never before be brought to believe that an Army could get into Argyle on foot
in the midst of summer, and many times heretofore he has been heard to brag,
that he had rather lose a hundred thousand Crowns, than any mortal man should
know the way by which an Army could enter into his Country. When he therefore
suspected nothing less, the trembling Cow-herds came down from the hills, and
told him the enemy was within two miles. He not knowing what to do, and almost
besides himself for fear, at last commits himself to a fisher-boat, and flies
away; leaving his friends, and servants, and the whole Country to their
fortunes, and the mercy of an enemy. It is a rough and mountainous country,
barren of corn, for little or none is sown there, but very commodious for
pasture, the chief riches of the inhabitants consisting in cattle. Montrose
divides his Army into three Brigades, and sends them about the country; one
Brigade was commanded by the chief of the Mac-renalds, another by Mac-donald,
and the third by himself. They range about all the country, and lay it waste;
as many as they find in arms going to the Rendezvous appointed by their Lord,
they slay, and spare no man that was fit for War: nor do they give over till
they had driven all serviceable men out of that Territory, or at least into
holes known to none but themselves. Then they fire the villages and Cottes, and
lay them level with the ground: in that retaliating Arygle with the same
measure he had meted unto others, who was the first in all the Kingdom that
prosecuted his Countrymen with fire and sword. Lastly, they drive their
cattle. Nor did they deal more gently with others who lived in Lorn, and the
neighbor parts, that acknowledged Argyle's power. These things lasted from the
13. of December 1644. to the 28. or 29. of January following.

And indeed, he used never more to acknowledge the singular providence and
fatherly mercy of Almighty God, than in bringing him and his men safe out of
those places; for if but two hundred Soldiers had handsomely kept those Passes,
they might easily either have cut off, or at least driven back all his Forces.
Beside, if the Cow-herds had but driven away their cattle (which they might
easily have done) in those barren places, he must have starved for hunger. Or
thirdly if it had been a sharp and stormy winter, (and it seldom chances to be
otherwise there) they had either been drowned in snowdrifts, or starved and
benumbed with cold. But merciful God took away both courage from the enemy, and
its ordinary temper from the air; and supplied their want of bread with great
abundance of flesh. At length departing out of Argyle, and passing through
Lorn, Glencow, and Logh-Aber, he came to Logh-Nesse. And now he expected that
all the Highlanders, being either frighted with the example of Argyle, or freed
from the fear of him, should be ready to assist the Kings most righteous cause,
and vindicate it with their arms against the Rebels.

But now lest Montrose's heroical spirit should ever want matter to work upon,
he is advertised that the Earl of Seaforth, a very powerful man in those parts
(and one of whom he had entertained a better opinion) with the Garrison of
Innernesse which were old soldiers, and the whole strength of Murray, Rosse,
Sutherland, Cathnes, and the sept of the Frasers, were ready to meet him with a
desperate army of five thousand Horse and Foot. Montrose had only fifteen
hundred, for those of Clanrenald, and most of the Athole-men, suspecting no
such need of them, and being laden with the spoils of Argyle, had got leave to
go home, on condition they should return when they were sent for. But for all
that Montrose was not afraid to give battle to that disorderly Army: for
although he knew those of the Garrison to be old soldiers, yet he accounted of
the rest of the multitude (which were newly raised out of Husbandmen,
Cow-herds, Pedees, Tavernboyes, and Kitchin-boyes) to be altogether raw and
unserviceable.

And now while he thought of nothing but fighting these, a trusty Messenger
overtakes him, and informs him, that Argyle having gathered forces out of the
lower parts of the Kingdom, and joined unto them such Highlanders as yet
adhered unto him, had come down into Logh-Aber with three thousand Foot, and
staid at an old Castle called Innerlogh, upon the bank of Logh-Aber. Montrose
who well understood the crafty and cowardly disposition of Argyle, by that had
a good guess at his design; which was to follow after him at a good distance,
that he might be first engaged with those Northern-men, and then to make his
own advantage of the event of that battle; but by no means to fight himself,
if he could help it. Therefore Montrose considered that it would be a matter of
greater concernment, and of less danger, to let men see that Argyle was not
invincible, even in the Highlands, where he was adored by the simple people
like some great-little god: and as for the Northern Army, he conceived that
upon the report of a Victory obtained against Argyle, it would moulder away,
and easily be brought into order. Montrose was thirty miles absent from
Innerlogh, neither would he go the high way thither (though he placed guards in
it, lest the enemy should have any intelligence of his moving) but straight
over Logh-Aber hills, in untroden paths, and only known to Cowherds and
Hunts-men, (for in those mountains there are great herds of Deer) by a way that
never man led an Army before; and killing their Scouts, was upon the back of
the enemy ere he was aware. They being but little affrighted with so unexpected
an accident, run to their arms, and immediately prepare themselves for battle.
When Montrose perceived them to be in a posture so quickly, he stood still a
little while till his Rear being tired with so hard a march could come up unto
his Front. It was night, but the Moon shone so clearly that it was almost as
light as day; all night they stood to their arms, and making frequent sallies
and skirmishes one with another, neither gave the other leave to rest or
retreat. All others earnestly expected day, only Argyle being more advised than
the rest conveyed himself away at dead of the night; and this second time
taking boat saved himself from the peril of battle, as if he intended to be
Umpire between the two Armies, and being himself out of gunshot stand
spectatour of other men's valor, and well too. At the break of day, Montrose
ordered his men as he intended to fight, and the enemy were as forward to do
the like. For they did not yet think that Montrose was there (as some prisoners
afterward confessed) but some Colonel or Captain of his with a party only of
his forces.

When the Sun was up, on the second of February (which is Candelmass day) a
trumpet sounding struck no small terror into the enemy. For besides that
attumpet showed they had Horse with them, and therefore was a sound with which
those parts were little acquainted, it discovered also that Montrose himself
was there Nevertheless the prime of the Campbells (that is the surname of
Argyle's family) being gallant men and stout, and deserving to fight under a
better Chieftain in a better cause, cheerfully begin the battle. But their
soldiers that were in the Front having only once discharged their muskets, and
Montrose's men pressing on fiercely to come to the dint of sword, began to run.
Whom they, raising a great shout, so eagerly pursued, that as it were at one
assault they routed them all; and had the killing of them with a most horrible
slaughter for nine miles together. Of the enemy were slain fifteen hundred,
among whom were very many Gentlemen of the Campbells, who were chief men of the
family, and of good account in their country, who fighting but too valiantly
for their Chieftain, had deaths answerable to their names, and fell in
Campobelli, in the Field of War, (I cannot say the bed of Honor.) Their
fortune Montrose extremely lamented, and saved as many of them as he was able,
taking them into his protection; whiles Argyle himself being gotten into a
boat, and rowed a little way off the shore, securely looked on whiles his
kindred and soldiers were knocked on the head. Some Colonels and Captains that
Argyle had brought thither out of the Lowlands fled into the Castle; whom when
the Castle was surrendered, and quarter was given unto them, Montrose used
courteously; and after he had done them several good offices of humanity and
charity, freely, let them depart. In this fight Montrose had many wounded, but
none slain saving three private soldiers: but the joy of this great victory
was much abated by the wounds of that truly honorable Sir Thomas Ogilby, Son
to the Earl of Airley, of which after a few days he dyed. He was one of
Montrose's dearest friends; one who had done very good service for the King in
England under the Command of his Father-in-law the Lord Ruthien Earl of Forth
and Branceforde, (a man known all the world over for his noble archievements.)
Nor was he less a scholar than a soldier, being a new ornament to the family
of the Ogilbies, whose honorable deathswounds for his King and Country had no
small influence upon that days victory. Montrose being very much afflicted with
the loss of him, causes his body to be carried into Athole, where he was
interred with as sumptuous a funeral as that place and those times could
afford. But the power of the Campbells in the Highlands, which for these many
ages past has been formidable to their neighbors was by this overthrow
clearly broken to pieces; and by it also a way opened unto Montrose to do his
business the more easily thence forward. For the Highlanders being warlike
men, and let loose from the hated tyranny of Argyle, now began to offer
themselves willingly unto the Kings service.

CHAP. IX.
THe soldier who was almost spent with this sore travel, having refreshed
himself for a few days, Montrose measuring over again Logh-Aber hills,
returns to Logh-Nesse. And from thence viewing by the way the coasts of
Harrick, Arne, and Narne, came to the river of Spey. Here he is told, that
there was no small party of the enemy at Elgin, (which is the chief town of
Murray, a Country beyond the Spey.) Montrose hies toward these, either to draw
them to his side, or to suppress them: but the very report of his advancing
blew away that cloud, for they in great amazement shifted for themselves every
one whither he could. Montrose nevertheless goes on his march, and takes in
Elgin by surrender on the fourteenth day of February. At which time the Lord
Gordon, eldest Son to the Marquess of Huntley, (a man who can never be
sufficiently commended for his excellent endowments) came off openly to the
Kings side (from his Uncle by whom he had been detained against his will) and,
with not many but very choice friends and clients, voluntarily did his duty,
and offered his service to Montrose as the Kings Deputy and Vicegerent.
Montrose first welcomed him with all civility, and gave him many thanks,
afterward, when he came to understand him more inwardly, joined him unto
himself in the entirest bonds of friendship and affection. Now because the
inhabitants of Murray were extremely addicted to the Covenanters, they hid
themselves in their lurking places, nor were any supplies to be expected from
men so maliciously disposed; Therefore he drew his Forces to this side the Spey,
to raise the Countries of Bamph and Abordeen by the presence, example, and
authority of the Lord Gordon. So having got together what forces he could in
those places, with two thousand Foot and two hundred Horse, passing the river
of Dee he came into Marne, and encamped not far from Fethercarne.

At Breichin some seven miles from thence, Sir John Hurrey a stout man and an
active, and famous also in foreign parts for Military exploits, being General of
the Horse for the Covenanters, had the Command over the whole Forces there. He
came out with six hundred Horse to discover the strength of Montrose: he
conceived Montrose had but very few Foot and no Horse, and if he should but
descend into the plain, he made account to make short work with him; and
howsoever it should happen, he made no question but to secure himself. Montrose
to draw him on, hid the rest of his men in a bottom, and made show only of his
two hundred Horse, but lined them (as he used) with his nimblest Musketeers.
Which Horse when Hurrey saw, and observed they were so few, he drew up his men
and charged. But when he perceived (too late) the Foot that ran close after
Montrose's Horse, he sounded a retreat, and Hurrey himself turning his men
before him behaved himself stoutly in the rear. When they turned their backs
Montrose's soldiers drive on, let fly, and lay about them, until being got
over the river of Eske, the enemy scarce safe under the protection of Night,
betook themselves to shelter: nor did they think themselves secure till after a
race of four and twenty miles long they came to Dundee. Then they that had
pursued them so far returned to Fethercarne, and thence the next day to
Breichin. Here Montrose understood, that Baily a Commander of great account had
been fetched out of England, to be General of the enemies Forces; that Hurrey
with his Horse was joined unto him, and that they had in their Army many old
soldiers brought back out of England and Ireland; so that now the Covenanters
going about their business in so great sadness, Montrose must expect not only
other kind of soldiers, but also most expert Commanders to deal with.

Therefore, lest he should chance to be hemmed in with their Horse (in which
their chief strength lay) he chooses his most convenient way by the foot of
Grainsbaine toward the river of Tay intending also if it were possible to get
over the Forth, where he believed the King could not want assistance. Which
design of his was not unknown to the enemy: therefore they send these
Commanders against him with a powerful Army; who no sooner came in sight than
Montrose offered them battle. But they intended nothing less than to try it
out with him that way, nor would adventure so much as but to fall upon the rear
of Montrose as he marched off. So he went to the Castle of Innerwharity, and
the next day to a village called Eliot. And here again leaving the mountains
behind him, he descends into the plain, and by a Trumpet sends a challenge unto
Baily to fight. Between their two Armies ran the river I Will, which neither could
safely pass over without the others consent. Montrose therefore desires Baily
to give him leave safely to come over to that side, which motion if Baily
should not like of, he offered him a safe and free passage, on condition, that
he would engage his honor to fight without further delay. Baily answered, he
would look to his own business himself, and would not have other men teach him
when to fight. Thus the two armies faced one another many days, neither the
enemy endeavoring to pass their Forces over the river against Montrose, nor
he hoping to make good his pass unto them by reason of his scarcity of Horse.
Marching therefore to Dunkel, he thought to pass the Tay, at which time by a
sudden and unexpected mischief he was almost utterly ruined. It was thus, Lewis
Gordon Son to Marquess Huntley, who had born arms against Montrose in the
battle of Aberdeen, by the mediation of his noble Brother the Lord Gordon had
been received into favor. He either by true or counterfeit letters from the
old fox in the hole; his father, tempted and carried away with him almost all
the Gordons, without the knowledge of his Brother; and basely deserted Montrose
and him, when they were ready to be engaged with the enemy. And truly it is
hard to say to whether of both he bore less good will.

Montrose being sore afflicted with this unexpected revolt, although he was of
necessity to return into the North to gather new Forces, yet made as if
nevertheless he went straight toward the Forth; and his scouts came all with
full cry, that all the enemy were got over the Tay, that by taking the fords of
the Forth they might hinder his passage. He, lest he should seem all this while
to have done nothing, thought it well worth his labor, if by the way he could
take in Dundee, a most seditious town, for that being the securest haunt and
receptacle of the Rebels in those parts; and a place that had contributed as
much as any other toward the Rebellion, was kept by no other garrison but of
the Townsmen. He therefore commanded the weakest and worst armed men to go
along by the bottom of the hills and to meet him at Breichin: and he taking
with him what Horse he had (which were but one hundred and fifty in all) and
six hundred nimble musketeers, departing from Dunkel about twelve of the clock
in the night, made so great haste, that he came to Dundee by ten of the clock
in the morning on the fourth day of April. He summons the Townsmen to deliver
the Town to the King, which was the only way to preserve their own lives and
its safety; if they would not, they must expect fire and sword. They began to
make delays, and first to give no answer at all, afterward to commit the
Trumpet to prison. Which affront provoked Montrose so highly, that he stormed
the Town in three places at once: The Townsmen stood out a while and mantained
their works, but they had as good have done nothing, for the Irish and
Highlanders would take no repulse, but with a resolute assault some beat them
out of their sconces, and possessing themselves of their Ordnance turned it
against the Town; others beat open the gates, and possess themselves of the
Church and Marketplace, and others set the Town on fire in several places. And
indeed had not the common soldiers by an unseasonable avarice and intemperance
addicted themselves to pillage, that rich Town had been immediately all on
fire. But as it happened, it was better both for the conquerours and the
conquered that it was not, for all the intelligence that the Scouts had brought
in concerning the enemies coming over the Tay was absolutely false: it may be
they saw a few Troops (and many they did not see) pass over it, which they
believed to have been the whole body of the enemy, and by that means were like
to have undone both themselves and the whole party.

Montrose stood upon the top of a hill close unto Dundee, looking upon this
onslaught, when his almost breathless Scouts brought him news that Baily and
Hurrey with three thousand Foot and eight hundred Horse were scarce a mile off.
He immediately calls his men out of the Town, which he had much to do to
persuade them; for the soldiers counting themselves secure of the victory, and
thinking they had done a good days work already, and besides being a little
heated in drink and much taken with so rich a booty, could hardly be brought to
leave the Town they had so newly taken. And truly before they could be beaten
off from the spoil, the enemy was come within musket shot of them. And now (as
it uses to happen in great dangers) Montrose's counsel of War were of
different opinions; some persuaded that Montrose should shift for himself with
the Horse he had, because they conceived it not possible that he should be able
to bring off the Foot, who had been wearied with a march of above twenty miles
in the morning, after that, were spent in a hot fight at noon, and now were
over-loaden either with drink or prey; especially seeing he was to march twenty
or perhaps thirty miles from Dundee before they could rest in safety. That this
was the fortune of War, and to be patiently under-gone, especially since he had
given oft-times far greater overthrows to the enemy than this could be to him.
That there was no doubt, but that as long as he was safe, his Forces might be
easily recruited; and on the other side, if he miscarried, the case was
desperate, and they were utterly undone. Others cried out, that all was lost
already, and there was nothing left them but to die with honor; and therefore
if charging courageously they should break in amongst the thickest of the
enemy, no one could say but that they fell gallantly. Montrose concurred with
neither of these; for he could never be brought to forsake so good men as he
had in the extremest danger, and preferred an honorable death among his
soldiers, before dishonorable safety. But for all that, for men that were so
much out-numbred by them, to run desperately upon the enemy, and as it were to
dash out their own brains against the stones, was the very last refuge, and not
hastily to be made use of; therefore as we ought not to tempt Almighty God by
our own wretchlesnesse and negligence, so neither ought any valiant man or good
Christian despair of his assistance in a just cause. Lastly, he exhorts every
one to do his own part, and refer the success to God, and other things to
his own care and industry.

Immediately he sends out four hundred Foot before him, and commands them, that
as much as they possibly could without breaking their ranks they should make
all speed. Then he appoints two hundred of the activest men he had to follow
them; and he with his Horse brings up the Rear. The Horse trooped on in so open
order, that if occasion were they might have room enough to receive light
musketeers. He believed the enemies Foot were not able to overtake them; and
if their Horse only should charge them (which they would hardly adventure to
do) he conceived it was no matter of extreme difficulty to make their part good
against them: besides the Sun was ready to set, and the darkness of the night
would be commodious for their retreat. The enemy understanding the number of
them that went away first by some prisoners they had taken, and after that by
their own view, as soon as they saw they were disposed rather for a journey than
a battle, divide their Forces into two parts, and so pursue them. Wherein
their intention was not only to fall upon the Rear and the Flank at once, but
also to secure against them all passages up to the Highlands: And their
Commanders the more to encourage their Soldiers to a hot pursuit, proposed
twenty thousand Crowns to any one that could bring in Montrose's head. And now
the Van of the enemies Horse began to cloze up unto the retreaters, whereupon
those good musketeers that lined Montrose's Horse welcomed one, and another,
and another of the forwardest of them with bullets in their sides; with whose
mischance the rest becoming more wary, abated of the eagerness of their
pursuit. And Montrose's soldiers when they saw they had been too hard for the
enemies Foot at a march, and had got before them, taking heart and courage they
skirmished stoutly with their Horse, until the night parted the quarrel. And
to rid themselves some way of the enemy, took their way Eastward many miles by
the seacoast. However that was not their way, but to go Northward toward
Grainsbain, and so to deliver themselves from their mischievous Horse. But
Baily had laid the greatest part of his Army between them and Grainsbain, that
there might be no place for them to retreat unto.

Therefore at the dead of the night when they were not far from Aberbroth,
Montrose commands his men to make a stand a while. And long they stood not,
before he considering with himself that all ways and passages straight into
the Mountains might be laid by the enemies Horse (and he was not mistaken,)
commands them to face about, and march South-west. And by this art (though with
intolerable pains) he beguiled the Pursuers, whom that same night he passed by;
and then turning Northward, by the next morning at Sunrising passed over
South-Eske at a place not far from Careston Castle: and from thence sent to
Breichin to fetch those men which he had there with the Carriages. But that had
not needed, for they upon the report of this expedition had provided for
themselves better and more timely, and had taken the Mountains. VVhiles he
staid at Careston, the Scouts brought him word on a sudden that the enemies
Horse were in sight, and their Foot being refresht with victuals and sleep
marched after them apace. Montrose himself being now within three miles of the
Mountains was not much afraid of them, but his soldiers who had not slept for
three days and two nights, but had all that while been either on their march,
or in fight, were overcome with so dead sleep, that they could hardly be raised
without pricks and wounds. The enemy being at last entertained with a light
skirmish suffered Montrose to possess himself of the bottom of the Mountains,
and having done nothing to the purpose retreated from their vain pursuit. So he
and his men came to Gleneske.

And this was that so much talk'd-of Expedition of Dundee, infamous indeed for
the mistake of the Scouts, but as renowned as any for the valor, constancy,
and undaunted resolution of the General: and even admirable for the hardiness
of the Soldier in encountering all extremities with patience; for threescore
miles together they had been often in fight, always upon their march, without
either meat, or sleep, or the least refreshment. Which whether foreign Nations
or after times will believe, I cannot tell, but I am sure I deliver nothing but
what is most certain of mine own knowledge. And truly amongst expert Soldiers,
and those of eminent note both in England, Germany, and France, I have not
seldom heard this Expedition of his preferred before Montrose's greatest
victories.

CHAP. X.
ANd now being safe beyond expectation, Montrose bids the soldiers take their
rest, whiles he determines thus of the whole affair of the War. He sends the
Lord Gordon, together with those that had continued loyal and dutiful after
the revolt of his brother Lewis, into their own Country, both that they might
recall those whom his Brother had seduced away, and recruit themselves by
levying new forces. Which he cheerfully and courageously performed, and though
he spared none, yet he was most severe with those that had been authors or
accessaries to his Brothers defection: and he was the more active in that
business, that he might acquit himself of any suspicion. Nor indeed did
Montrose himself or any other more detest that villainy of Lewis Gordon, than
that noble Lord his Brother. As for Montrose, he with a small party (for he
kept but five hundred Foot and fifty Horse with him) marches through Angus into
Perthshire, that he might distract the enemy till such time as he had made up
his Army with recrutes from every side. Neither was he out in his aim, for the
Covenanters had sent Hurrey the Lieutenant General of the Horse, with a Command
into the North, of a party of six hundred old Foot, and two hundred Horse; that
he might strengthen their own-side, and suppress the Lord Gordon. And Baily
himself staid with an Army at Perth, as in the very heart of the Kingdom, ready
to wait upon all motions. Montrose was twelve miles off at a village called
Kreif, where Baily understood he quartered securely with a very small party:
who being diligent upon all occasions, set out from Beth at the beginning of
the night with all his Army, that by a speedy march he might at break of day
fall unexpected into Montrose's quarters. But he found Montrose careful enough
of his business, and his Foot ready in arms either to march or fight; but he
with his Horse came up toward the enemy to discover their number and strength.
And when he found them to be two thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, he
commanded his men to march speedily away, and following the course of the river
Erne to make good the fords thereof: he with the few Horse that he had was
their Rear-guard, lest they should have been trodden in pieces by the enemies
Cavalry. And truly he so valiantly repulsed the fierce assault of the enemy,
that by killing some, and routing others, he forced them to retreat, till at
last his Foot after six miles march had made themselves Masters of the passes
of Erne. So the enemy retreated with the loss of their labor, and Montrose
that same night being the eighteenth of April, quartered at Logh-Erne, and came
the next day to Balwider, where the Earl of Alboine met him, who with some few
more had escaped out of Carlisle, and hearing tidings of Montrose's good
success, had at last returned into his Country.

Leaving Balwidir they advanced to Logh-Catrinet, where they receive
intelligence that Hurrey had raised great forces in the North, and was ready to
engage with the Lord Gordon; and therefore there was danger that he being an
active Soldier and a good Commander should be able to over-master that gallant
young Gentleman. Therefore Montrose thought it necessary to oppose. Hurrey
as soon as was possible, as well to secure so dear a friend from imminent
danger, as to be nibbling at the enemies Forces as he found them asunder, and
to cut off that power by peece-meal, which he well knew if it were all in a
body would be above his match. Therefore by long and continued journeys passing
by Balwidir, and a Lake of four and twenty miles long, out of which the river
of Tay breaks forth, through Athole and Angus, and over Grainsbain, through a
vale called Glenmuck, he came to the midst of Mar. There he joined with the
Lord Gordon, who had now a thousand Foot, and two Hundred Horse, and marching
straight to the Spey, labored to find out and engage with the enemy. Nor was
he above six miles off when Hurrey thought he had not yet got over Grainsbain:
^for with unwearied labor and incredible speed he had overrun the very report
of himself. Hurrey lest a battle should be forced upon him whether he would or
no, before he had received an addition of numerous Auxiliaries, in all haste
passes over the Spey. And because he had appointed the Rendezvous of all his
friends at Innernesse, hyeth to Elgin; nor did Montrose pursue him lazily to
Elgin. Thence with all speed he passes to Forresse, nor did Montrose make
less haste to follow and overtake him too at Forresse, and sat so close on his
skirts for fourteen miles together, that notwithstanding he had the advantage
of the night, he had much ado to reach Innernesse.

The next day Montrose encamped at a village called Alderne: and Hurrey
according to his hopes found the Earls of Seaforth and Suherland, the whole
sept of the Frasers, and most of Murray and Cathnesse, and the neighboring
parts, to have assembled themselves to Innernesse well appointed. To these
Hurrey ads some old soldiers of the Garrison of that Town, and so draws up
against Montrose. He now commanded three thousand and five hundred Foot, and
four hundred Horse; but Montrose (who had no more but fifteen hundred Foot and
two hundred Horse) had a great mind to retire. But not only Hurrey pressed so
vehemently upon him, that it was scarce possible for him to retreat, But Baily
also with a Southern Army much stronger than Hurrey's (especially in Horse) was
now got already a great way on that side Gransbaine, and marched in great haste
toward the Spey. What should Montrose do in this condition? He must of
necessity either give Hurrey battle, or undergo a far greater hazard of being
hemmed in between two Armies. Therefore he resolves to try the fortune of War
without delay, to commit the success unto God, and choosing the best advantage
of ground he could find, there to expect the assault of the enemy. There was a
little Town that stood upon the height which shadowed the neighboring valley;
and some little hills that were higher than the Town behind it, that hindered
the discovery of any one till they were just upon him. In this valley he draws
up his Forces out of the view of the enemy. Before the Town he places a few but
expert and choice Foot with his Ordnance, who were sheltered with such ditches
as they found there. The right wing he commits to Alexander Mac-donald with
four hundred Foot, and lodged them in places fortified to their hand with banks
and ditches, with shrubs also and great stones: and commands him to preserve
himself entire that he might be a reserve upon all occasions, and not to depart
from his station which had so good a natural fence, that they might lie there
safe enough not only from the enemies Horse but Foot also. And with the same
good advice he committed to his charge that notable Standard of the Kings,
which only he was wont to carry before him; expecting that the enemy upon the
sight of that would order the best of their Forces against that wing, which by
reason of the disadvantage of the place would be rendered wholly unusefull unto
them, till such time as he on the flank should take his best advantage against
them. And to that end drawing the rest of his Forces to the other side, he
commends the Horse to the Lord Gordon, and takes charge of the Foot himself.
Those few that stood before the Town under the shelter and convert of the banks
and ditches seemed as if they were his main battle, whereas indeed he had none.
And for Reserves in that scarcity of men they were not to be thought of.

The enemy (as Montrose most wisely foresaw) as soon as they saw the Kings
Standard, ordered the most part of their Horse and old Soldiers (wherein their
chief strength consisted) against that. And by this time the Van of the enemy
began to dispute it with those before the Town, and on the right flank, and
still as their Soldiers were spent, drew up fresh men; which Montrose because
his number was but few could not so easily do: therefore he resolved with all
his men that he had on the left flank to make a violent assault upon the enemy
at once. And whiles he was thinking so to do, there comes unto him one whom he
knew to be trusty and discreet, and whispers him in the ear, that Mac-donald
with his men on the right flank were put to flight. He being a man of a quick
spirit, thought it was best to fore-stall the Soldiers, lest their hearts
should fail them upon bad news, and cries aloud to the Lord Gordon, My Lord,
what do we do? Mac-donald upon the right hand having routed and discomfited the
enemy is upon the execution; shall we stand by as idle spectatours, whiles he
carries away the honor of the day? And with that he commands them to charge.
Hurrey's Horse had no mind long to endure the shock of the Gordons, but
wheeling about and beginning to run, left their flanks (which they were to
maintain) open to their enemies. Their Foot, although thus deserted by their
Horse, being both more in number and better armed than Montrose's men, stood
out very stoutly as long as his men kept aloof; but as soon as he came to fall
upon them hand to hand, he drove them to throw away their arms, and to seek
though, to little purpose, to save themselves by their heels. But Montrose
himself, not forgetting what was signified unto him by so faithful a
messenger, drew off with a few of his readiest men unto the right flank, where
he found things in a far other condition than they were left.

For Mac-donald being a valiant man, but better at his hands then head, (being
overhasty in battle, and bold even to rashness) disdaining to shelter himself
behind hedges and shrubs whiles the enemy vapoured and provoked him with ill
language, contrary to orders, upon his own head advances toward the enemy,
out of that most defensible fastness and station wherein he was placed. And he
did it to his cost, for the enemy over-powring him both in Horse and Foot, and
having many old soldiers amongst them, routed and repulsed his men. And
certainly if he had not timely drawn them off into a close hard by, they had
every one of them together with the Kings Standard been lost. But he made a
mends for that rash mistake, in his admirable courage in bringing off his men,
for he was the last man that came off, and covering his body with a great
target which he carried in his left hand, defended himself against the thickest
of his enemies. Those that came closest up unto him were Pike-men, who with
many a blow had struck their spear-heads into his target, which he cut off by
three or four at once with his sword, which he managed with his right hand.
And those that made him any opposition in the close, seeing Montrose come in to
his aid, and their own men on the other side put to flight, such as were Horse
spurred away, and the Foot (most of which were old Soldiers out of Ireland)
fighting desperately, were almost all of them slain upon the ground. The
Conquerors pursued them that fled for some miles; so that there were slain
about three thousand Foot of the enemy, amongst whom their old soldiers fought
most stoutly; but almost all their Horse escaped by a more timely than
honorable flight.

Nor had Hurrey himself with some of their best men which went last off the
field escaped the hands of the pursuers, had not the Earl of Aboine, by I know
not what want of heed, displayed some Ensigns and Standards that had been
taken from the enemy; and himself not following the chase but turning toward
his own party, seemed to have been the enemy, and to threaten a new battle.
With which mistake they were so long deluded, until the enemies Horse, though
much disordered, had shifted themselves away into such bypath as they knew or
could light upon: only a few of them came with Hurrey before next morning to
Innernesse. Of such of the enemy as were slain, the most notable were Cambell
Laver a Colonel of old Soldiers, Sir John and Sir Gideon Murray Knights, and
other stout men, and perhaps not unworthy to be lamented, had they not stained
their otherwise commendable valor with the horrid crime of Rebellion; nor in
that did they so much follow their own judgments as the humor of the times,
or the ambition, or a varice of their Chiefs. Montrose of those that served
with him on the left flank missed only one man, and him a private Soldier; and
on that side where Mac-donald commanded, there were missing fourteen private
Soldiers also. But he had many more wounded, the curing and securing of whom
was especially provided for by Montrose. Afterward entertaining the prisoners
with sweetness and courtesy, he promised all such as repented of their
error, liberty or employment, and was as good as his word, and such as were
obstinate in their rebellion he disposed of into several prisons. In this
battle at Alderne the valor of young Napier did very much discover it self;
who being the Son of the Lord Napier of Marchiston, and Montrose's nephew by
his sister, had but a little before, without the knowledge of his Father, or
Wife, stolen away from Edinburgh to his Uncle, and did at this time give an
excellent assay of his valor, and laid down most firm principles of a most
noble disposition. Whereupon the chief of the Covenanters took his Father, a
man almost threescore and ten years old (and as good a man as ever Scotland
bred in this age,) and his wife, the daughter of the Earl of Mar, Sir
Sterling Keer his brother-in-law (an excellent man also, chief of his family,
and one that had suffered very much for his Loyalty) together with his two
sisters, the one Sir Sterlings most virtuous Lady, the other a virgin, and cast
them all into the dungeon; from whence afterward they were to be delivered by
Napier himself with the assistance of his Uncle.

This battle was fought at Alderne on the 4. of May, 1645.

CHAP. XI.
MOntrose allowing a few days of refreshment to his Soldiers, marched to
Elgin, which is the chief Town of the Province; where for the sake of those
that were wounded, he made some longer stay, because they had there the
accommodation of good Surgeons and medicines, which are some times scarce to
be had in the field. Afterward passing over the Spey he came to Keith, from
thence to Frendrackt, and so to Strathbogy. Here Baily meets him (unto whom
Hurrey with those that remained of his broken Troops at Alderne was joined) and
provokes him to battle. Montrose kept back his men, who were spent with great
travail, and were far fewer both in Horse and Foot, though very eager to fight,
till such time as he had raised new forces, and recruited them. Therefore
thinking it enough to maintain the ground which he had chosen, as commodiously
as he could for himself until night, passes to Balveny, whither also the
enemy follovveth him: but he passing by Strath-Done, and Sprath-Spey, went up
to Badenoth. The enemy getting to the other side of the water provokes him
again to fight; but in vain, for he was very wary of giving them a set battle,
but nevertheless by frequent skirmishes, and especially beating up quarters in
the night, did so much weaken their power and courage, that they that were so
haughtily daring but a while ago, as well Commanders as Soldiers, hastily and
disorderly betook themselves by night to Innernesse when none pursued them.
Montrose was not much displeased that he was so rid of his enemy, especially
for this reason; the Earl of Lindsey, the prime ringleader of the Covenanters
next unto Argyle, and his rival too (as being brother-in-law to Duke Hamilton)
used to give out, that Argyle wanted either care or courage; and howsoever it
came to pass, was still unfortunate. And therefore he took upon himself the
command of that Army which was newly raised, as if he would assay to manage the
business with better conduct. And now he had passed over with his forces into
Angus, intending to be a Reserve unto Baily; and if any thing should happen
othewise than well, at the worst he was ready to hinder Montrose's passage over
Forth. For they were always very jealous lest Montrose should remove the sent
of War to this side the Forth, and nearer Edinburgh. Therefore he resolved
with all speed to quell Lindsey (who lay yet in Angus at a Castle called
Newtill) both because the General was no soldier, and the soldiers raw, and
unacquainted with the hardship of War.

In pursuit of which design, departing from Badenoth, he marches through the
plains of Mar over Gransbain, and came by long and painful journies unto the
coast of the river of Airley, intending to surprise the enemy on a sudden:
which was easy to be done, for he had made such haste, that the news of his
approach was not so swift as himself. And now Lindsey was not above seven miles
from him, and all things were ready for an assault, when (upon what occasion it
is uncertain) almost all the Northern men privately ran away from their colors,
and going back the way that they came, return into their Country. The Lord
Gordon was in the Camp, and there was none there that detested that villainy
with greater indignation than he, in so much that Montrose had much ado to
withold him from putting such of the fugitives to death as had any dependence
upon him. Some stick not to say, that these men were inveigled away by the
private directions of his father the Marquess of Huntley to the Earl of
Aboine, who by reason of his sickness was absent. For it vexed Huntley, a
haughty and envious man, to hear of the success of Montrose; nor could he
endure that inward friendship which was between his eldest son and him. However
it was, Montrose being cast down with this unexpected misfortune, was forced to
put off that Expedition against Lindsey, and to suffer patiently so great and
easy a victory to be taken out of his hands.

Therefore taking up new resolutions, he follows after Colonel Nathaniel
Gordon, a valiant man and a trusty, and welbeloved in his Country, whom he had
sent before. And by this time Baily and Hurrey had returned from Innernesse,
and quartered in lower Mar by the side of Dee. And Montrose came by the
coasts of Eske, and the plains of Mar into the heart of that Country,
commonly called Cromarre. And whiles he passed through those plains aforesaid,
he dispatched Mac-donald with a party into the furthest part of the Highlands,
to conduct such Forces as were there raised, with all speed unto the Army.
Afterward he sent away the Lord Gordon himself, to hasten and promote that levy
of men which Nathaniel Gordon was listing, by all the power and interests he
had in those parts. Which he most diligently performed, and amongst others,
brought his Brother the Earl of Aboine back with him. Whilst these things
passed in Cromarre, Lindsey joins his Forces with Baily in lower Mar, with
whom Montrose finding himself unable to deal, (the most part of his Forces
being gone along with the Lord Gordon and Mac-donald) he stepped aside to the
ruinated Castle of Kargarf, lest the enemy should overlay him on the champain
grounds with their multitudes both of Horse and Foot; but when he was close
unto the Mountains he feared them not. From hence Aboine falling sick again
betook himself to Strathbogy; and upon pretense of a guard, carried along with
him a considerable number of Horse, whom his Brother the Lord Gordon had much
ado afterward to draw back to their colors. In the mean time Lindsey took a
thousand old Soldiers from Baily, and gave him as many raw and new raised men
for them; and as if he intended to do some famous exploit, returning through
Merne into Angus, with all the pains he took he did only this, he ranged with
his Army up and down Athole, and after he had robbed and spoiled all the
Country, he set it on fire. In this imitating Argyle, who was the first that in
this age introduced that cruel and dreadful president of destroying houses and
corn (...) being better at fire than sword, when they came into empty fields
and towns unmann'd.

Baily at that time went to Bogy, to besiege the fairest castle that belonged
to the Marquess of Huntley, and indeed of all the North; and in case he failed
to take it in, to waste and fire all the Country of the Gordons there-abouts.
Montrose (although Mac-donald was absent with a great party) thought it
necessary to relieve Huntley and his friends, whom he labored to assure unto
himself by all good offices, and hied thither. Where having notice that Baily's
soldiers, though not all, yet a great part, were new raised men (for he had
parted with so many old soldiers to Lindsey) desired nothing more than without
delay to fight him, and marches straight toward him. He had not gone above
three miles before he discovered the enemies Scouts: He therefore sent, before
some of his readiest men that knew the ways, to view the strength, the
rendezvous, and the order of the enemy. They immediately bring word that the
Foot stood on the top of a hill some two miles off; and the Horse had possessed
themselves of a narrow and troublesome pass which lay almost in the middle
between the two Armies, and were come on this side it. Against them Montrose
sent such Horse as he had in a readiness, with some nimble Firelocks, whom
they first entertained with light skirmishes afar off, and after retreated
behind the pass, which they had strongly manned with Musketeers. Montrose
sends for the Foot, that if it were possible they might dislodge the enemy from
thence; but it could not be done, for they were parted by the fall of the
night, which both sides passed over, waking and in their arms. The next day
Montrose sends a Trumpet to offer a set battle, but Baily answers, he would
not receive order to fight from an enemy. He therefore seeing he could not
drive the enemy from those passes without manifest loss and danger, that he
might draw him out thence in some time, marches off to Pitlurge, and from
thence to a Castle of the Lord Forbeses called Druminore, where he staid two
days. And at last he understands the enemy had quitted the passes, and was
marching toward Strathbogy; so he at break of day sets forth toward a village
called Alford. But Baily when he had gotten certain notice that Mac-donald,
with a considerable part of those Forces, was absent in the Highlands, he
voluntarily pursues Montrose, conceiving him to be stealing away, and about
noon began to face him. Montrose determines to wait for the enemy (who as
seemed to him came toward him) upon the higher ground: but Baily turning aside
some three miles to the left hand, Montrose holds on his intended march to
Alford, where he staid that night, the enemy lying about four miles off.

The next day after, Montrose commands his men very early in the morning to
stand to their arms, and make ready to battle, and placed them on a hill that
stands over Alford. And as he with a Troop of Horse was observing the motion
and order of the enemy, and viewing the fords of the Done, a river which runs
by Alford, it was told him, that the enemy, Horse and Foot, were making unto a
ford which lay a mile from Alford, to the intent that they might cut off the
Rear of their flying enemy; for so those excellent Diviners prophesied to their
own destruction. Montrose leaving that Troop of Horse not far from the Ford,
together with some select and understanding men, who should give him perfect
intelligence of all things, he returns alone to order the battle. And above
all things he possesses himself of Alford hill, where he might receive the
charge of the enemy if they fell on desperately. Behind him was a moorish place
full of ditches and pits, which would prevent Horse falling upon his Rear:
befote him was a steep hill, which kept his men from the enemies view, so that
they could hardly perceive the foremost ranks. He had scarce given order for the
right managing of all things, when those Horse, whom he had left at the Ford,
returned with a full cariere, and bring word that the enemy had passed the
River. And now it was no more safe for either of them to retreat without the
apparent ruin of their party. It is reported, that Baily like a skilful and
wary Commander, was sore against his will drawn unto this battle; nor had
engaged, had he not been necessitated unto it by the rashness of the Lord
Balcarise, a Colonel of Horse; who precipitated himself and the Horse under
his command into that danger, whether Baily would or no, as that he could not
be brought off without the hazard of the whole Army.

Montrose gave the command of his right wing (on which side the enemies Horse
were most strong) unto the Lord Gordon; and appointed Nathaniel Gordon, an old
Commander to his assistance. The command of the left wing was given to the Earl
of Aboine, to whom also was joined Sir William Rollock: And of the main battle
to two valiant men, Glengar, and Drumond of Ball the younger, unto whom he
added George Graham Master of the Camp, an expert Soldier also. The Reserve,
which was altogether hid behind the hill, was commanded by his Nephew Napier.
And for a while, Montrose kept himself upon the height, and the enemy in the
valley being fortified with pits and ditches; for it was neither safe for the
latter to charge up the hill, nor for the former to fall upon them that were
surrounded with marshes and pooles. The numbers of the Foot were in a manner
even, either side had about two thousand: but Baily was much stronger in Horse,
for he had six hundred, and Montrose but two hundred and fifty. Only Montrose
had this advantage, that the enemy were for the most part hirelings raised from
dunghils, but those that served the King, Gentlemen, who fought for a good
Cause and Honor, gratis, and not for gain; and such as esteemed it more
becoming to die than to be overcome. Besides, Montrose knew that the greatest
part of the old Soldiers were gone with Lindsey, and the new ones would be so
frighted with the shouts of the Armies, and the noise of Trumpets, that they
would scarce stand the first charge. Therefore in confidence of so just a
cause, and so valiant assertors of it, he first drew down his men, and
immediately the Lord Gordon giving a smart charge upon them, was courageously
received by the enemy, who trusted to the multitude of their Horse: and now
being closed, and come to handy-blows, no one could advance a foot but over his
vanquished enemy; nor retreat by reason of the pressing on of those in the
Rear. The first that made way for themselves and their men by a great slaughter
of their enemies were the two Gordons, the Lord, and the Colonel; and Colonel
Nathaniel called out unto those expert Firelocks who now lined the Horse as
they were wont, Come on, my fellow soldiers, throw down your now useless guns,
draw your swords, and sheath them in the Rebels Horse, or hamstring them. They
instantly took the word of command, and at the same time Montrose draws up
Napier with his Reserve, which lay out of sight on the other side of the hill;
at whose sudden and unexpected coming, the enemy affrighted betook himself to
his heels. Aboine with the left wing kept off, nor did he attempt the enemy but
by light skirmishes in small parties: who when they saw their own men on their
left wing routed and put to flight, made their retreat with little loss. There
Foot being deserted by their Horse, after they had desperately stood out a
while, and re^used quarter, were almost all cut off. The fall of the Lord
Gordon was no little advantage to the escape of their Horse, who after the
battle was won, rushing fiercely into the thickest of them, received a shot
through his body by the conquered and flying enemy, and fell down dead. Whom
also Aboine did not hotly pursue, being much troubled with the loss of his
brother.

In this battle, Montrose did not lose so much as one common Soldier, and of
Gentlemen, one Culchol, and one Melton; whose names and families I should most
willingly have inserted, had I been so happy as to have knowledge of them,
because they died gallantly in the bed of Honor; fighting for their King,
their Liberty, and the Laws. Nor are some Pedees, as well Scotch as Irish, to
be forgotten, boys scarce fourteen years of age apiece, who throwing down
their Masters luggage, and mounting upon their Nags and Sumpter-horses, did not
only make a fair appearance of a body of Horse, but (as if they had been
Corrivals in valor with their Masters) beyond what might be expected from
their years and strength, fell in among the thickest of their enemies. Of whom
some, but very few, were slain; nor did they sell their lives for nothing; and
by that they gave an ample testimony of their towardness, and of so manly a
spirit in children as might prescribe to riper years. But the loss of the Lord
Gordon had so deep an impression upon all men's affections, that they had the
face rather of a defeated than victorious Army. The first scene of their sorrow
was acted in a dull silence; in the next, the floud-gates were broke open, and
the Army was full of sighs, and sobs, and wailing, and lamentation; and then
with bedewed cheeks, as soon as their grief could get a tongue, they blamed
Heaven, and Earth, and Fortune, and every thing, for depriving the King, the
Kingdom, the Age, themselves, and their posterity of such a man. Thus
forgetting their victory, and the spoil, they fixed their eyes upon the lifeless
body, kissed his face, and hands, commended the singular beauty of the Corpse,
compared the Nobility of his descent, and the plentifulnesse of his fortune,
with the hopefulnesse of his parts; and counted that an unfortunate victory
that had stood them in so much. And truly, it was like to have happened, that
their excessive sorrow for the loss of this noble Gentleman had conquered the
Conquerors, had they not comforted themselves with the presence and safety of
Montrose. Nor could he himself refrain himself from bewailing with salt tears
the sad and bitter fate of his most dear and only friend, but lamented much
that the honor of his Nation, the ornament of the Scottish Nobility, the ablest
assertor of the Royal Authority in the North, and so intimate a friend unto
himself, should be thus cut off in the flower of his age. In the mean time,
hoping that reason and time between them would assuage that grief, he commands
Physicians to embalm his noble Corpse, which afterward being removed to
Aberdeen, he saw brought forth with a sumptuous and Souldier-like F^^eral, and
interred in the Monument of his Ancestors in the Cathedral Church. This battle
was fought at Alford on the 2. of July, 1645.

CHAP. XII.
MOntrose that same afternoon that he had got this victory at Alford, marching
to Clunie Castle, allowed only two or three hours to his Soldiers for their
refreshment. And going from thence to the bank of the river Dee, sent away the
Earl of Aboine, who succeeded his deceased Brother, into Buchanshire, and the
places adjacent for recruits; for many of them who were at the fight being
Highlanders, and not far from their own habitations, had dropped home with
their pillage. And because Mac-donald was not yet returned, he kept his
quarters at Cragston, expecting both him and Aboine. But when he perceived
those Auxiliaries were dispatched unto him with less speed than he hoped, and
finding his expectation deluded, impatient of so long and disadvantageous
delay; after he had got over the Dee and Gransbaine, fell down into Merne, and
lay at Fordon Chapel, once famous for the Sea and Sepulcher of St. Palladius.
Thence he sends to the Earl of Aboine (who was now come to Aberdeen) to hasten
unto him into Merne with such Forces as he heard he had raised, Alboine came
indeed, but brought no great store of Forces along with him; therefore he sends
him back into the North to raise as many men as he could possibly, and bring
them with all speed unto the Camp. He himself going through Angus met his Cosen
Patrick Graham with his Athole-men ready to live and die under his command, and
Mac-donald with a great power of Highlanders: with him was Macklen the chief of
his sept, a valiant man, and singularly loyal, who brought some seven hundred
choice Foot of his Friends and Clients. Also the chief of the Mac-renolds a
great man in the Highlands, and one that entirely loved the King, who had above
five hundred men at his heels. The Mac-gregors also, and the Macknab^, men
inferior to none in valor and hardness, after the fashion of the Country
followed their Commanders and Chiefs of their Families, whose certain number I
cannot easily assign. And Glengar, a man never sufficiently to be commended
for his valor, and loyalty to the King, and serviceableness and affection to
Montrose, (seeing he in person almost from the Expedition into Argyle had never
departed from him) by his Uncles and others whom he employed brought in about
five hundred more. Besides out of the plains of Mar came a great number of
the Fercharsons, gallant men, and of approved valor. And some too out of
Badenoth, not many indeed, but stout and able men of their hands.

Montrose being reinforced with such an Army, resolves to make way into the
heart of the Kingdom; as well to spoil the enemies levying of men in
Fifeshire, and the Country on this side the Forth, as also to break up the
Parliament which the Covenanters had not without solemnity and ostentation
summoned at Saint Johns-town. Nor did any thing hinder him but want of Horse,
of which always he had such scarcity, that it was never o^ very seldom safe
for him to fall down into the plain Country. But because he daily expected
Aboine and Airley to come unto him with a considerable party of Horse, he
passed over the Tay at Dunkel, and lying near Amunde, struck no small terror
into the enemy who held Saint Johns-town; and from thence approaching nearer
unto them, he encamped in Methfyn Forest.

The enemies Foot (all but the Garrison Soldiers in the Town) lay on the South
of the River Erne. The Horse which were designed for the guard of the Town and
Parliament, as soon as they discovered Montrose's Scouts, bring in a hot alarm
that he was there, and come already close to the gates, and no question but he
meant presently to scale the walls, and make an assault upon the Town:
therefore they were earnest with the Nobility and the whole Parliament to
secure themselves by a speedy flight: when all this while Montrose had scarce a
hundred Horse, and they were four hundred. But he the next day the more to
increase their terror, drew near unto the Town with those Horse he had, and
about the same number of ready Firelocks whom he mounted upon pack-horses; and
set out his men in their view so much to his advantage, that they appeared a
considerable body of Horse. And because the enemy kept themselves within the
gates, forthwith turning toward Duplin, he diligently viewed this side of the
River Erne and all that coast, as if he had Horse enough to keep all that
Country in subjection. And truly thus much he got by it, that the enemy took
him to be exceeding strong as well in Horse as Foot. Therefore they draw
together as many Forces from all sides as they could make, whom they intended
to fight with Montrose if he should offer to pass over the Forth. But he
finding it not safe for himself neither to descend into the Champain Country,
they both kept their stations for many days, the enemy expecting Auxiliaries
out of Fife, and the Country on this side of the Forth, and out of the West;
and Montrose looking for the like out of the North; And waiting impatiently for
Aboine, who was too slow with his men, he sent some to hasten him, lest they
should lose the opportunity of doing their business. He also complained, but
in a soft and gentle manner, as before a faithful friend, that Aboine's
lingering and delay was in the fault, that a brave victory, by which he
conceived the Rebels might have been utterly subdued had slipped out of his
hands; which misfortune no man doubted but his speed and diligence might have
prevented.

The enemy when they understood that he only cheated them with a false Muster
of Horse, having gotten aid from all parts, and by this time overnumbring him
even in Foot, labored not only to provoke, but even compel him to-fight.
Whereupon he concluded to step aside a little into the neighboring Mountains,
whither he knew either the enemy would not advance, or if they did, it would be
to their loss. Therefore the enemy drawing near with all their Army to
Methfyn, he gives a private command for the Carriages to drive fast up the
hills, whiles he, as if he intended to fight, orders the battle, makes good
the passes with strong guards, and draws up the Horse into the Front. Nor did
the enemy expect any other than to try it out by battle, which he made as if
he would give, till such time as the Carriages were got so far before, that he
conceived them out of danger: and then he commands the Army in one body at
their close order to march away apace: He gave charge unto such Horse as he
had, and his ablest Firelocks to bring up the Rear, and to secure them from
the enemies Horse. The enemy providing for a present charge, as they expected,
when they saw Montrose retreating, first pursued eagerly, though to no purpose;
for he making good all passes as he went, easily repulsed them, and without
loss of so much as one private Soldier, came cheerfully off into the heights
and steep places that were unaccessible unto the enemies Horse, and for their
Foot they feared no assault from them. It is remarkable, that when Montrose's
Horse were come up into the passes, and the enemy knew very well they were not
able to pursue any further; lest with all that pains they should seem to have
done nothing at all, they sent out three hundred of their ablest and readiest
Horse to follow after them with a great shout and base language; whom when
Montrose saw, he called for only twenty active bodied men of the Highlanders
that were used to hunting, and very good marksmen, and commanded them to check
their insolence; and they first of all creeping hither and thither, and hiding
their Guns, took their aims so well, that they knocked down some of the
forwardest of those men; who being men of the better sort, by their example
made the rest more wary, so that they were all contented to retreat. But those
good huntsmen being encouraged with their good success, as soon as they saw
their enemies disordered, came into the open plain, and resolutely charged
their Horse: who, in as much fear as Bucks or Does chased by the Hunters, set
spurs to their Horses and fled back to their main body as if the Devil were in
them.

The enemy upon their retreat chose that place for their Rendezvous from whence
Montrose departed Methfyns Forest: after they had done nothing worthy to be
remembered in all that expedition, but that when they found themselves unable to
cope with men, they exercised their cruelry upon women: for all the wives of
the Irish and Highlanders that they light of (who followed the Camp for the
love of their Husbans) most basely and shamelesly they hewed in pieces.
Montrose kept his quarters at little Dunkel, both because the place was
cumbersome and unpassable for Horse, and lay very conveniently for receiving
such aids as he daily expected with Aboine out of the North. All which time the
two spleenative Armies lying close together, rather stood upon their guards
than offered any affront one to the other.

And now at length Aboine and Colonel Nathaniel Gordon brought up their men
out of the North to Dunkel; men for their number indeed fewer than was
expected, but for their stournesse and true valor far above their number.
The Horse they brought were only two hundred, and some sixscore Firelocks whom
they had mounted and made Dragoons: other Foot they brought none. Along with
them came tht Earl of Airley and Sir David his Son with fourscore Horse, most
of them of the noble family of the Ogilbies; amongst whom Alexander Son and
heir of Sir John Ogilby of Innarwharatie was most eminent, not only for the
rare accomplishments of his person, and the splendour of his Ancestors, but for
the honor of his valiant and happy achievements, much above what his age
could promise. Montrose being thus well recruited, thought it not good to lose
anytime, but marched straight toward the enemy. But as soon as he came to
Amonde, he thought it best to see in what condition the enemy was, and to find
out whether that was true which he had received a flying report of; that was,
that very many of their Auxiliaries had deserted their colors and run home.
Therefore leaving his Foot to take their rest, a little before night he faced
the enemy with his Horse; with which sight being something affrighted, they
kept within their trenches. And next morning early Montrose riding about to
discover, was informed that they had stolen away at the dead of the night to
Methfyn, and in disorder had got over a Bridge upon the Erne. He instantly
causes his men to march, and passing the river at a stone bridge about six
miles off, lay that night in Strath-Erne.

CHAP. XIII.
FIfe is the most populous, the most rich, the thickest Country Towns and
Villages in all Scotland. Its Inhabitants are little martial, consisting most
of Merchants, Shopkeepers, Mariners, and Husbandmen: But so newfangled in
their Religion, and so bewitched both by the example and authority of the
Nobility, and by the Sermons of their seditious Ministers, that all of them
upon the matter were extremely addicted to the Covenanters. The Country it self
is almost an Island, being environed toward the South with the Scottish Fyrth,
on the North with the Tay, which carries ships of great burden all along; on
the East with the main Sea. No entrance thither by land but on the West, in the
straights of which both Armies lay. The whole Country was in a distraction,
some (especially their much admired Preachers) that thundered nothing but
Excommunications, inciting and compelling all of every estate and age to take
up arms; others flocking in great numbers unto them, others running hither and
thither to hide themselves, as every one was led by his own superstition,
confidence, or fear. Montrose was very desirous to assault the enemy, and try
the fortune of a b^ttel with them before they increased their Forces with
addition of the Fife-men; but it would not be. For they had so fortified
themselves by the advantage of the ground, and the narrowness of the passages,
that he could by no means either make his way unto them, or draw them out into
plainer ground. Having therefore made them several fruitless offers of
battle, he resolved to march into the heart of the Country, and came to
Kinrosse, as well to hinder the rising of that Country, as to train the enemy
at last out of their fastness to come in unto the aid of their distressed
friends. They not so much as daring to fall upon his Rear, turned another way,
and keeping close to the bank, first of the Erne, afterward of the Tay, made
speed toward the East Side of the Country. As Montrose passed along, he sent
Colonel Nathaniel Gordon, and Sir William Rollock before him with a small
party. These sending the rest of their party up and down to scout, kept only
ten men in their company; on a sudden they happened upon two hundred of the
enemy, who were raising men in those parts, and being not able to retreat, they
twelve encountered the two hundred, put them to flight, killed some, and took
other some prisoners.

Montrose that night came to Kinrosse, not doubtting but they of Fife, who were
exceedingly out of love with the King, most firm to the Covenanters, and wholly
given to the new superstition, were generally up in arms. Therefore thinking
it not safe rashly to engage with so great a multitude of Horse and Foot, he
determined to pass over the Forth; and that upon this ground, that he having
wearied out the Fife-men (whom he believed would not be easily persuaded to
follow the Army further than their own borders) with long marches, might
vanquish them without a blow. For he accounted that most of them being born or
brought up in shops, or ships, or taverns, and not acquainted with the hardship
of Soldiers, would presently give out and be weary. Besides, such of the
Nobility as were in rebellion (after they saw with sorrow that the seat of the
War was drawn so near them as the Forth) were raising men with more eagerness
than ever before upon the Borders, and in the West; of whom the chief were the
Earls of Lanerick, Cassils, and Eglington. Whose levies Montrose labored
either to hinder, or draw themselves to his side before they came up to Baily
and the Fife-men; therefore he marched from Kinrosse toward Sterling, and lay
that night some three miles from the City. The next day sending the Foot
before, he followed softly after with the Horse, because he suspected that the
enemy pursued him in the Rear.

Nor was he deceived in that suspicion, for some Espyals whom he left behind
him, brought word that Baily was hard by with the greatest Army that ever he
had. And immediately the enemies Scouts came within view, one of whom, having
been too forward, was brought prisoner to Montrose by some of his Horse. He
being examined, told them free and confidently, that he believed Baily and his
party were resolved to march all that night to engage him to fight as soon as
was possible, before they dismissed the Fife-men, who being already tired, he
hardly believed would be drawn over the Forth; accounting their, work at an end
as soon as the enemy was gone out of their own Country. Therefore Montrose,
that he might get speedily over the Forth, bids his men march apace, and going
on the other side of Sterling (a good Town, and one of the Kings strongest
Castles, in which the enemy had now a great Garrison) that same night passed
over the river at a Ford about four miles above the Town. And at break of day
next morning made a halt a while about six miles from Sterling: where he had
intelligence, that the enemy the night before had not come over the Forth, but
quartered three miles from Sterling on the other side of the river. Therefore
Montrose holding on his intended journey, encamped himself in that fatal place,
the Field of Kilsythe. He bids the Soldiers to refresh themselves, but however
to be in a readiness either to fight or march, as occasion should serve. The
enemy the mean while by an easier and shorter cut got over the Forth at
Sterling-bridge, and encamped at night some three miles from Kilsythe.

In the interim, the Earl of Lanerick Duke Hamilton's brother had raised a
thousand Foot and five hundred Horse of the friends and clients of the
Hamiltons, in Cluidsdale and the places adjacent, and was not at present above
twelve miles from Kilsythe. And the Earls of Cassils, Eglington, and Glencarne,
with others of the Covenanting Nobility, were engaging the West unto the same
impious Militia; who were so much the readier to take up arms, by how much
they had less felt the miseries of War. Which things being well considered,
Montrose thought it best to fight with those Forces which Baily had at present.
For although they were more numerous than his own, yet the danger was like to
be greater of his side, if he should be put to engage with them when Lanericks
and other parties were come up. But moreover he was either obliged to take this
course, or do nothing, and return back into the Highlands with the blemish of
that Honor which by so many victories he had achieved. The enemy on the other
side being arrogant, and confiding in the multitude of their men, believed that
Montrose had but made a running march the days before, and had passed the
Forth more out of fear than design, so that they counted it nothing to assault
him in that ground and entrenchment which he had chosen to his best advantage.
And above all, their proud hopes were most careful of this, to block up all
ways of his escape, and to prevent his return into the Mountains. But there
are some that say, Baily himself thought it not best to give him battle, but
was over-sway'd by the authority and votes of the Earl of Lindsey especially,
and some other of the Nobility that were present in the Army, which forced him
much against stomach to draw up his men, and order the battle as be could.
However it was, early in the morning they led their men straight upon Montrose:
which when he saw, he told the standers by, that that was happened which he
most desired, for now he could supply his want of men by the advantage of the
ground; and therefore he made haste to possess himself of the fastnesses
before them. Moreover he commands all his men, as well Horse as Foot, to throw
off their doublets, and to affront the enemy all in white, being naked unto the
waste all but their shirts: which when they had cheerfully performed, they
stood there provided and ready to fight, resolved certainly either to conquer
or die.

In the field where they intended to fight there were some Cottages and
Country-gardens, where Montrose had conveniently lodged some few men; and the
first design of the enemy was to dislodge them. But it took not; for making a
fierce assault, and being as stoutly received, as soon as they were observed to
cool something of their first heat, those that manned the places beat them off,
drove them away, and slew them without resistance. The Highlanders being
animated with this happy success, those that were next those places, not
expecting the word of Command, ran rashly up the hill, which lay open to the
whole strength of the enemy. Montrose, although he was something troubled at
the unseasonable boldness of his men, yet thought it not good to leave them
engaged, nor was it easy to say, whether the quickness of his relief, or the
cowardliness of the enemy, conduced more to their safety. Montrose had in all
four thousand four hundred Foot, and five hundred Horse; a thousand of his Foot
or more had now by their own fault so engaged themselves with the enemy, that
they could not come off, for the enemy encountered them with six thousand Foot,
and eight hundred Horse. But the enemies Rear came up but slowly, and while the
Van made a stand, expecting their advance, Montrose had opportunity to bring
timely aid to his engaged men. But at last they send out three troops of Horse,
and after them two thousand Foot, against those rash and almost lost men of
Montrose. Which when Montrose saw (after others had too dishonourably shifted
off that service) he thus bespeaks the Earl of Airley, You see (my noble Loid)
how yonder men of ours by their unadvisedness have brought themselves into a
most desperate hazard, and will presently be trampled to dirt by the enemies
Horse, except we relieve them with all speed. Now all men's eyes and hearts are
fixed upon your Lordship, they think you only worthy so great an honor, as to
repel the enemy, and bring off our fellow Soldiers. Besides, it seems most
proper for you, that the error which has been committed by the fool
hardiness of youth, may be corrected by your Lordships grave and discreet
valor. And he undertook the service (as dangerous as it was) with all his
heart, and being guarded with a troop of Horse, (in which rode John Ogilby of
Baldeby, who had formerly been a Colonel in Swethland, a stout man, and a
skillful soldier) led them on straight upon the enemy. And they giving the
charge upon the Ogilbies, disputed it sharply with them for a while, but at
last being no longer able to withstand their courage, faced about: whom the
Ogilbies pursued so hotly, that they made them fall foul upon their own Foot;
and (charging them furiously through and through) routed them, and trod them
under foot. By this gallant example of Airley and the Ogilbies, Montrose's
Soldiers, being enraged more and more, could no longer be kept back from
raising a great shout (as if they had already got the day) and falling on upon
the enemy. Nor would the Rebels Horse long abide their charge, but deserting
their Foot, fell a running as ^ast as ever they could: Nor did their Foot after
they were so deserted stand it out long, but throwing down their arms sought to
save their lives by flight. Which proved unserviceable, for the victorious
pursuers had the killing of them for fourteen miles: So that of all the enemies
Foot that were present at that battle, it is thought there did not an hundred
come off. Nor did their Horse escape very well, of whom some were killed, some
taken, the rest dispersed. Their Ordnance, their Arms, their Spoils, came
clearly to the Conquerours, who lost only six of their side; whereof three were
Ogilbies, valiant Gentlemen, who fighting like themselves, sealed the victory
with their own blood. The rebellious sort of the Nobility (of whom many were in
the fight) some of them by their timous running, and swiftness of their Horses,
got to the Town and strong Castle of Sterling; others escaping to the Scottish
Fyrth shipped themselves in some vessels that lay at anchor near the shore,
amongst whom Argyle (having now this third time been fortunate to a boat)
escaped into a ship; and thought himself scarce safe enough so, till weighing
anchor he got into the main. Or prisoners, the chief were, Sir William Murray
of Blebo, James Arnot brother to the Lord Burghley, one Colonel Diee, and
Colonel Wallace, besides many more, whom Montrose after quarter given used
courteously, and upon the engagement of their Honors set at liberry. And this
is that famous victory of Kilsythe, obtained on the 15 day of September 1645.
in which it is believed no fewer then six thousand Rebels were slain.

CHAP. XIV.
THere was a great alteration all the Kingdom over after this battle at
Kilsythe; those of the Rebell-Nobility were all of them sore affrighted, some
of them fled to Baywick, some to Carlisle, some to Newcastle, others into
Ireland. And such as before only privately wished well unto the King, now did no
longer fear to show themselves to express their loyalty, to pray openly for
his prosperity, and to offer their service. But those that before had sided
with the Covenanters began to ask forgiveness, to plead they were constrained
to take up Arms by the violence and tyranny of the Rebels, to submit their
persons and estates to the Conqueror, humbly to beseech his protection, and to
implore his wonted clemency. And Cities and Countries that were furthest off
began to dispatch their Commissioners to profess in their names their
Allegiance to their King, their duty and service to his Vicegerent, and freely
to offer him Men, Arms, Provision, and other necessaries of War. The Nobility
of the Realm and the Chiefs of Septs came in thick unto the Lord Governor,
welcomed him, tendered their service unto him, extolled his high and honorable
achievements, and thanked him for them. All whom he pardoned for what was
past, received them with liberty and indemnity into his protection, and
encouraged them to be of good cheer. Nor did he lay any greater burden upon
them, than to change that covetous and cruel slavery which they were manacled
with by the Rebels, for the sweet and gentle government and protection of a
most gracious Prince; and by laying aside all former grudges and fewds,
hereafter more religiously to observe their duty and loyalty to the good King;
and thence forward never more to have to do with the counsels of seditious
men, who by endeavoring to satisfy their own ^usts, had engaged King, and
Subject, one against the other, and upon the matter ruined both. For his part
he never had any other intention, than to restore their Religion, their King,
their Liberty, his Peers and Countrymen, by Arms (when no other means was left)
out of the tyranny of Rebels, unto their ancient peace, happiness, and glory.
Which if he should effect, he would give Almighty God the author of all good
things, everlasting praise; but if he failed, however he should by these his
honest endeavors acquit himself before God, and Gods Vicegerent his Majesty,
before all good men, and his posterity, his honor and his conscience.

At this time the whole Kingdom sounded nothing but Montrose's praise. Men of
all sorts every where extolling the ingenuity of his disposition in which he
out-went all his Equals; the gallantry of his person in War, his patience in
travells, his evennesse of spirit in dangers, his wisdom in counsels, his
faithfulness to such as submitted, his quickness in dispatches, his courtesy
to such as he took prisoners, in a word, his truly heroic virtue in all
things, and toward all men. And this honor most men gave him in good earnest,
and out of a sincere affection, but some in craft and dissimulation; and as
every one had wit or skill they set forth his Encomiums or Panegyricks in Verse
or Prose. Yea such is the volubility of humane things, and the inconstancy of
the whirling multitude, that they were not afraid openly to curse and rail at
the ringleaders and prime men of the Covenanters Faction, such as Argyle,
Lindsey, Loudon, and others, (whom a while ago they honored and adored for
Saints) as authors of all the mischiefs that had befaln them.

All things going on thus happily, the Northern parts of the Kingdom being
secured on his back, the way being opened unto him into the South, the power of
the Rebels every where quashed, their chief leaders (who in conscience of
their guilt despaired of mercy) driven out of the Kingdom, and no considerable
party remaining in arms; yet in the West their were some stirrs. For the Earls
of Cassils and Eglington, and some other promoters of the Covenanters Cause
labored to engage the Countries in a new War, and were said to have raised in
a tumultuary way the number of four thousand men. Therefore Montrose the next
day after the Battle of Kilsythe, drew his men into Cluidsdale, from whence
the Earl of Lanerick, being struck with the news of their late overthrow,
disbanding those men that he had raised, was fled. Montrose chose that quarter
as lying most commodiously for his affairs in the South and West, and marched
to Glascow, which is the principal City of that Country. He received the Town
into his protection, and entering into it with the joyful acclamations of the
people, first of all he restrained his Soldiers from plunder, and then being
severe against the delinquents, for the terror of others, he put some of the
chiefest incendiaries of them to death. After that, in favor of the Citizens,
the next day after he came, he departed the Town, and quartered at Bothwell.
Where because it was but six miles from the City, lest the Citizens should be
prejudiced by the insolence of the Soldiers, he gave them leave to stand upon
their guard, and defend the City with a Garrison of the inhabitants. Hoping
with such acts of clemency to engage not only the men of Glascow unto himself,
but the inhabitants of other Cities also, by good offices more than by force
and Arms.

At Bothwell he staid many days, where he received the personal addresses of
some of the Nobility, and of others by their Trustees, Friends, and Messengers;
and settled the peace of Towns and Countries thereabouts, who all willingly
submitted themselves. The chief of the inhabitants of those parts who came to
welcome him, and offer their service were, the Marquess of Douglasse, a man of
most noble family and chief of the Douglasses, the Earl of Lithgow, Anandale,
and Hartfield; the Lord Barons of Seton, Drummond, Fleming, Maderty, Carnegy,
and Jonston; Hamilton of Orbeston, Charter of Hemps-field, Toures of
Innerleith, a most deserving man (who afterward lost his life gallantly in
battle) Stuart of Resyth, Dalyel a brother of the Earl of Carnwarth, Knights:
and many more whose names I can either not rightly call to mind, or else think
fit to forbear at present, lest by giving them an unseasonable and thanklesse
commendation now whiles they lie under intolerable tyranny, I should do them
more harm than honor.

After the victory of Kilsythe no thoughts had higher place in Montrose's noble
breast, than the enlargement of such Prisoners as for no other fault but the
sin of Loyalty had been most basely used, and still expected death, in the
grievous and filthy Gaol of Edinburgh Therefore he sends his Nephew Napier with
Colonel Nathaniel Gordon and a commanded party of Horse to Edinburgh, to
summon the City, and receive it upon surrender, to set the Prisoners at
liberty, and to settle the Town in peace and loyalty; but in case they stood
out and refused to submit, to threaten them with fire and sword. They, as soon
as they came within four miles of the Town, made a stand, (and intended to come
no nearer, unless they chanced to be forced unto it by the obstinacy of the
Citizens,) as well that at that distance they might the more easily restrain
the unrulinesse of the Soldiers, lest they should wrong the poor inhabitants,
and in their fury reduce that cursed City, which had been the cause and
fomenter of all the Rebellion, into ashes, which Montrose gave them especially
in charge by all cleans to prevent; as also to preserve the Army safe from the
plague, which was hot in the City and places adjacent, and whereof very many
dyed every day. As Soon as ever the news of their approach was brought unto the
Town, they all began to tremble, and despair of their lives; and to raise a cry
as if the swords were already at their throats, or their houses in a flame. Not
a few of them being pricked in their guilty consciences, freely and openly
accused themselves for the most ungrateful, traitorous, sacrilegious and
perjured persons in the world, and unworthy of any mercy. Then applying
themselves unto the Prisoners they had, both calling unto them a far off, and
sending private messengers, they implored their assistance; and besought them
in compassion of the poor silly people, who were almost wasted with a great
mortality, to pacify the anger of the Conquerours, whom they had most justly
incensed: told them, all their hopes lay in them, and they were utterly undone
without their help. Protested moreover, that if they found mercy but that one
time, they would redeem their former revolt with more religious fidelity, and
constant Allegiance ever after. The Prisoners (whom but the other day the
basest of the people bitterly abused and reviled, cursing and bequeathing them
to the gallows and worse) forgetting all injuries received, and more troubled
with the sense than revenge of their sufferings, first rendered hearty thanks to
Almighty God, who of his mercy showed unto them that liberty and safety which
they little expected; and then turning unto their deadly enemies, bade them be
of good cheer, for the most gracious King (and his Lieutenant Montrose) desired
the safety and happiness of his repenting Subjects, and not their extirpation
and ruin. Therefore they advised them immediately to send some Delegates to
Montrose, humbly to beg his pardon; for nothing could better appease the rage
of a Conqueror than a speedy submission. For their parts they would not be
backward to mediate with him for their safety, and doubted not but his high and
noble spirit, which could not be vanquished with their arms, would yet suffer
it self to be overcome with the prayers and lamentations of men in misery.

The Edinburgians being comforted with these hopes, and assisted with this good
advice, immediately call a Hall to consult of sending Delegates. There were
among the prisoners of those that were most high in birth, and favor with
Montrose, Lodowick Earl of Crawford, Chief of the most ancient and noble family
of the Lindseys, a man famous for Military service in foreign Nations, amongst
the Swedes, Imperialists and Spaniards. This man by the power and cunning of
his cosen the Earl of Lindsey (who because he was greedy of the honor and
title of the Earl of Crawford, was greedy also of his life) was designed by the
Covenanters to be put to death. Nor was it for any other crime but for being a
Soldier, and an expert man, and one that had done faithful service for his
Master the King, and it was feared he would do so again if he should be
suffered to live. There was also James Lord Ogilby, Son to the Earl of Airley,
one singularly beloved by Montrose, who was formidable both for his Fathers and
his own virtue and authority. He also being an enemy to Argyle, both upon old
fewds and some fresher wrongs, was just as deep in sin and danger as Crawford.
These therefore the Common Council of Edinburgh chose out of the rest of the
prisoners, and immediately setting them at liberty, they earnestly pray and
beseech them to assist their Delegates to the uttermost of the power they had
with the Lord Governor, and to labor to hold his hands off that miserable
City, upon which the hand of God himself lay so heavy already. And they curse
themselves and their posterity to the pit of Hell, if they should ever prove
unmindful of so great a favor, or unthankful to them that did it. They were
not backward to undertake a business which was so universally desired, but
taking the Delegates along with them went forth to Napier. He having by the way
delivered his dear Father, his Wife, his Brother-in-law Sir Sterling Keer, and
his Sisters out of the prison at Limnuch, whither the Covenanters had removed
them from Edinburgh Castle, marched back unto his Uncle with his Forces, and
those prisoners now at liberty, and the Delegates of the City, as having done
his business. Montrose embracing Crawford and Ogilby, his dearest friend, whom
he had long longed for, and rejoicing to see them safe and sound, used them
with all honor and accommodation after their long restraint, and they on the
other side magnified their deliverer and avenger with high praises and thanks,
(as became them to do,) on both sides affording a spectacle of great joy to the
beholders.

Afterward the Delegates of Edinburgh were admitted to audience, and delivered
their Message from the Provost and City. The sum was, They would freely
surrender the Town unto the Governor, humbly desired his pardon, promised to
be more dutiful and loyal for the time to come; committed themselves and all
that they had to his patronage and protection, for which they earnestly
besought him. Moreover they undertook forthwith to set the rest of the
prisoners at liberty, according to his appointment, and to do any thing else
that he should enjoin them. And although the City was so wasted with a grievous
contagion that no men could be raised of it, yet they were ready as far as
their share came, to pay contribution to such as should be raised in other
places. And above all things they humbly begged at his hands, that he would
labor to mitigate the anger of their most gracious Lord the King, that he
might not be too severe with that City, which by the cunning, authority, and
example of a seditious and prevailing party had been engaged in Rebellion.
Montrose bade them be confident of the rest, and required no more at their
hands, than to be hereafter more observant of their loyalty to the King, and
faithfully to renounce all correspondence with the Rebels in arms against him,
either without or within the Kingdom; To restore the Castle of Edinburgh
(which it was evident was in their custody at that time) unto the King and his
Officers. Lastly, as soon as the Delegates came home, to set the Prisoners at
liberty, and send them to him. And truly as for the Prisoners they sent them
away upon their return: but as to other Articles they were perfidious, and
perjured; and if they do not repent, must one day give an account unto God the
assertor of truth and justice, for their high ingratitude, and reiterated
disloyalty.

Whiles these things passed concerning Edinburgh, Montrose sent away Alexander
Mac-donald (to whom he joined John Drummond of Ball, a stout Gentleman) into
the Western coasts to allay the tumults there, and to spoil the designs of
Cassils and Eglington. But they receiving the alarm of Mac-donalds approach,
were immediately dispersed in a great fright. Some of the Earls and other Nobles
made straight into Ireland, others played least in sight, in I know not what
lurking places. All the Western Countries, the Towns of Air, Irwin and others
strove which should first submit, freely offering their fidelity and service.
Neither (which was more than he expected) did Montrose ever find men better
affected to the King than in those Western parts: For most of the Gentry,
Knights, and Chiefs of Families, and some also of the prime Nobility, came off
cheerfully to his side. Whose names, which otherwise ought to have been
registered with honor, at the present I shall pass by (if not in an acceptable
perhaps, yet certainly in an advantageous silence,) for I should be loath so
honest and loyal souls should be questioned by their cruel enemies, for their
good affections, upon my information.

CHAP. XV.
MOntrose had now taken into his thoughts the settling of the South-borders, and
sent unto the Earls of Hume, Rosburough, and Trequair to invite them to
associate with him for matter of Peace and War, and all things that were to be
done in the name and by the authority of the King. These wete not only the
powerfullest men in those parts, by reason of the multitude of their friends,
and their great retinue, but also made as though they were most cordial
assertors of the Kings authority. For besides the bond of Allegiance, which was
common to them with others, they were engaged unto him by extraordinary
benefits. Not were they only advanced unto great Honors by him, as being
raised from the order of Knighthood, to a high pitch of Nobility, but were made
Governors of the most gainful Countries, and by that means being enriched
above their equals and their own condition, heaped up wealth indeed unto
themselves, but envy and hatred upon the King. They again dispatch some of
their friends of the best quality, to assure him, That they were ready to
undergo any hazard under his conduct and command in the behalf of their most
bountiful King, They promise moreover to raise a world of men, and nothing
hindered their coming up unto the Camp, if he would but be pleased to draw
that way with never so small a party of his forces. And so it would come to
pass, that not only their friends and clients, but the whole Country being
animated with his presence and authority, would cheerfully take up arms as one
man; and if they stood out, they might be compelled, or a course taken with
them. Therefore they earnestly besought him to afford them his assistance in
this, and in all the rest he should find them his most faithful and ready
servants. These were fair words, and at first hearing, seemed to carry an
honest meaning along with them; but were promised with that kind of faith that
the Creatures and Favorites of the too indulgent King are used to keep. And
perhaps upon that score the Earl of Lanerick (Duke Hamiltons Brother) is more
to be commended, whom Montrose having earnestly solicited by friends to come
off to the Kings side, although that way he might very likely expect his pardon
for what was past, and the releasement of his Brother, yet without any
dissimulation he gave this peremptory answer, That he would have nothing to do
with that side, and that he would never pretend that friendship which he
intended not to preserve. And I would to God all they on whom the good King has
too much relied, had delivered themselves with the same candor and plain
dealing ever since the beginning of these troubles.

About the same time Montrose sent the Marquess of Douglasse and the Lord
Ogilby over into Anandale and Niddisdale, that there with the assistance of the
Earls of Anandale and Hartfield, they might list as many Soldiers, Horse
especially, as they could. And gives them orders withal to march with such as
they should so raise, toward Trequaire, Roxborough, and Hume; that they might
engage them without any further put-offs in an association with them: For
Montrose understood a little what Courtholy-water meant, and therefore was
something suspicious of the delays which they framed, the rather, having had
some experience of their cunning and slipperynesse, especially of Trequaires.
And truly Douglasse by the cheerful endeavors of the Earls of Anandale and
Hartfield, had quickly raised a considerable party, if one count them by the
head; but they were new men, taken from their plows and flocks, and but raw
Soldiers: forward enough at the first charge, but by and by their hearts fail
them, and they can by no means be kept to their colors. When Douglasse and the
rest of the Commanders considered this, they write again and again to Montrose,
that he would make haste after them with his old Soldiers toward Tweed; for
by his presence and authority, and the company and example of the old
Soldiers, they might be brought either willingly, or whether they would or no,
to know their duties. In the mean time according to his command they go on to
Strathgale, freely offering an opportunity, and their service if it needed to
Roxborough and Trequair, to draw out their men more easily and timely. But they
(good men) who well enough understood the secretest counsels of the
Covenanters, and knew that all their Horse would be there immediately out of
England under the command of David Lesley, intended nothing more than to
overreach the King with their old tricks, and to deliver Montrose (whose glory
they envied) into the hands of his enemies, though not by arms (for that they
could not) yet by treachery. To that end they insinuate again and again, not
only unto Douglasse and his party, but to Montrose himself by their friends and
frequent messengers, that for their parts they were ready to expose their
persons to the utmost hazard, but they could never be able to draw together
their friends, clients, and Trained bands, except they were animated and
encouraged with Montrose his presence. And that they might be the better
believed, they curse themselves to the pit of Hell if they did not stand stiffly
and unalterably to their promise. Montrose notwithstanding was not taken with
all this, but staid still at Bothwell, conceiving, that if there were any truth
or honesty in their words, Douglasse and his party who still lay in the
Country adjacent, would be sufficient for the rasing and encouraging of their
friends and dependents.

At length when Montrose had quartered a great while at Bothwell, most of the
Highlanders being laden with spoil ran privily away from their colors and
returned home. Presently after their very Commanders desired Furloghs for a
little while, pretending that the enemy had not an Army in the field within the
borders of that Kingdom, and therefore their service for the present might
well be spared; besides, they complained that their Houses and Corn, in and
with which their parents, wives, children, were to be sustained that winter,
were fired by the enemy, and no provision made for them, so that they humbly
desired to be excused for a few weeks, in which they might take care to secure
their families from hunger and cold. Also they solemnly and voluntarily engaged
their words, that they would return many more than they went, and much
refreshed, within forty days. These Montrose, seeing he could not hold them,
as being Volunteers, and fighting without pay, that he might the more engage
them, thought fit to dismiss them, not only with Licenses but Commissions. And
giving public commendations to the Soldiers, and thanks in his Majesty's name
to the Commanders, exhorting them to follow their business closely and
vigorously, he appoints Alexander Mac-donald, their Countryman and Kinsman (who
was but too ambitious of that employment) to be their Companion and Guide, who
should bring them back to the Camp by the day appointed. Who in a set speech
gave thanks in all their names to the Lord Governor for his so noble favor,
and as if he had been their Bail or Surety, with a solemn Oath undertook for
their sudden return: yet he never saw Montrose after. Nor was he contented to
carry away with him the whole Forces of the Highlanders, (who were more than
three thousand stout men) but he privily drew away sixscore of the best Irish,
as if (forsooth) he had picked them out for his Lifeguard.

About this very time many messengers came several ways to Bothwell from the
King at Oxford. Amongst whom one was Andrew Sandilands, a Scotch-man, but bred
in England, and entered into holy Orders there, a very upright man, faithful to
the King, and much respected by Montrose, who continued constantly with him
unto the end of the War. Another was Sir Robert Spotswood, once the most
deserving President of the highest Court in Scotland, and now his Majesty's
Secretary for that Kingdom, who passed from Oxford through Wales into Anglesey,
and thence getting a passage into Loghaber, came into Athole, and was conducted
by the men of Athole unto Montrose. Almost all the Agents that came brought
this Instruction amongst the rest, That it was his Majesty's pleasure, that he
should join unto himself the Earls of Roxburgh and Trequaire, and confide in
their advice and endeavors; of whose fidelity and industry no question was to
be made. Moreover, that he should make haste toward the Tweed, where he should
meet a party of Horse which the King would instantly dispatch out of England to
be commanded by him, with whom he might safely give battle to David Lesley, if
(as was suspected) he marched that way with the Covenanters Horse. All this the
respective bearers unanimously delivered, and his most excellent Majesty being
over-credulous signified by his Expresses. And Montrose being now overborn
with the Kings absolute Commands, takes up his resolution to march to the side
of Tweed. But the day before he went, the Soldiers being drawn up to a
Rendezvous, (before that Mac-donald and the Highlanders were gone) Sir Robert
spotswood making an humble obeisance under the Kings Standard, delivered his
Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal unto Montrose, which he again gave
unto Archibald Primrose Clerk of the Supreme Council to be read aloud. That
being ended, in a short but stately Oration, he commended the valor and
Loyalty of the Soldiers, and the great affection he bore them. And for
Mac-donald, he not only extolled his gallantry in the head of the Army, but by
virtue of, that authority that he had received from the King, gave him the
honor of Knighthood. For not only Montrose but all the Kings friends were
confident of the integrity of the man; whose good opinion he deceived, not only
to the undoing of the Kings cause, but the utter ruin of himself and his
friend.

Montrose following his intended journey, came the second night to Calder
Castle; at which time the Earl of Aboine (whether the Lord Governor would or
no) carried away with him not only his own men, but all the rest of the
Northern Forces, whom he had inveighled to desert the service. Nor would he be
persuaded either by reason, or the entreaty of his friends (who heartily
detested that shameful act) to stay but so much as one week, and then he might
depart, not only with the Generals license, but with honor, and the good
esteem of honest men. Seeing it would be no better, Montrose passing by
Edinburgh, led his small Army through Lothianshire, and in Strathgale joined
with Douglasse and the other Commanders, whose Forces being much diminished,
were daily mouldring more and more. In that coast Traquaire himself came unto
him, more cheerful and merry than he used to be; who pretended himself to be a
most faithful Servant, not only to his Majesty, but also to Montrose, and the
next day sent him his Son the Lord Linton, with a gallant party of Horse, as if
they were to be under his command, that by so likely a pledge he might make
Montrose more secure, and so more easily ruin him. For this was not the first
time that Traquaire played the Covenanters Scout-Master: that ungratefullest
piece of mankind intending to betray unto them Montrose, and in him the King
himself.

Now when he was not above twelve miles from the Lords Hume and Roxburgh, and
they sent not so much as a Messenger to him, nor offered him the smallest
courtesy, Montrose being much troubled at it, resolved to march into their
Territories, and to bring them in either by fair means or foul. But they
prevented him by a singular device; They sent unto David Lesley, whom they well
knew by that time was come to Berwick with all the Scotch Horse, and many
English Volunteers (for they were privy to all their counsels) and entreated
him to send a party and carry them away in the condition of prisoners; which he
did the day before Montrose came thither. For by this means that crafty old fox
Roxburgh (who had Hume under his girdle) conceived that they might both
ingratiate themselves with the Covenanters, as freely committing themselves
into their Protection, and yet keep in the Kings favor, whiles they made as if
they fell into Lesley's hands sore against their wills. And this being Lesley's
first noble exploit, he passed over Tweed, and marched into the East Side of
Lothian. Montrose as soon as he perceived the King and himself betrayed by these
men, and saw no hopes of that party of Horse which was come from the King, and
that the too powerful enemy would block up his passage into the North and
Highlands, resolved to march with those few men he had into Niddisdale and
Anandale, and the Country of Air, that he might there raise what Horse he
could. For although he had no certain intelligence concerning the strength of
the enemy, yet he conjectured that it consisted especially in Horse.

CHAP. XVI.
MOntrose arising from Kelsoe marched to Jedburgh, and so to Selkirk; where he
quartered his Horse in a Village, and his Foot in a wood close by. For he was
resolved to make sure of all advantages of ground, lest he should be forced to
fight with an enemy, of whose strength he knew nothing, upon uneven terms. Then
he commands the Captains of Horse to set out good store of faithful and active
Scouts, and to place Horse-guards in convenient places on every side, and look
well to their watch. All which he in person (as he used to do) could not see
done at present, because that night he was dispatching letters to the King, and
to send away a trusty messenger that he had light upon, before break of day:
therefore he was earrest with them to have the more care, lest the enemy, who
were very strong in Horse, should surprise them unawares. And the Commanders
promising all care and diligence, he was so taken up with writing of Letters,
that he slept not all that night. And sending ever and anon to the Captains of
Guards (men that were skilful Soldiers, and so known to be in Foreign
Countries) such uncertain noises as were brought unto him of the enemies
approach, they being deceived either by the negligence of their Scouts or their
own misfortune, very confidently sent him back word there was no enemy in those
parts, nor in the Country thereabouts. At the break of day some of the best
Horse, and most accquainted with the Country, were sent out again to Scout;
they also brought word they had been ten miles about, and diligently examined
all by-ways, and rashly wished damnation to themselves if they could find an
enemy in arms within ten miles. But afterward it appeared when it was too late,
that the enemy with all their Forces were then scarce four miles from Selkirk,
and had lain there all that night in their arms.

Lesley that day that Montrose departed from Jedburgh, mustered his men upon
Gladesmore a plain in Lothianshire; where holding a council of War with the
chief of the Covenanters, the result was, that he should march to Edinburgh,
and so to the Forth, that he might hinder Montrose's retreat into the North,
and force him to fight, whether he would or no, before he joined with his
Highlanders. But Lesley, contrary to that resolution, gives order on a sudden
to his whole Forces to wheel to the left hand, and to march away apace; every
one wondering that knew not the mystery of the business, what should be the
meaning of that change of his resolution, and his intention in that sudden
expedition, for they marched straight to Strathgale. But the matter was, (as
they afterward gathered from the enemies themselves) he had received letters, by
which he had perfect notice, that Montrose being attended only with five
hundred Foot, and those Irish, and a very weak party of new-raised Horse, might
very easily be surprised on the borders of Tweed, if Lesley would make use of
that opportunity was offered him to do his business. Therefore Lesley upon
this intelligence made haste thither, and (as I said) lodged within four miles
of Selkirk. That Traquaire sent those letters unto Lesley, although it was the
general report, I cannot certainly affirm; but it cannot be denied that that
same night he sent his Commands to his son the Lord Linton, that he should
immediately withdraw himself from the Royal party, which with much jo^lity he
did. This was like themselves, being the ungratefullest of all men, deserting
their King of whom none had better deserved, and staining their posterity. And
truly, that morning being very misty gave no small advantage to the treachery
of the enemy; whom at last Montrose's frighted Scouts discovered to march
toward him in a full body, at such time as they were not above half a mile off.

Montrose mounting the first Horse he could light on, gallops into the field
appointed for the Rendezvous that morning; where he finds a great deal of
noise, but no order. The Cavalry being little acquainted with their duty, and
lying already dispersed in their quarters, where they dreamed more of bairing
their horses than maintaining their lives and honors, upon the first alarm
which they received from the enemies Trumpet, ran disorderly up and down they
knew not whither, but never came in the fight. Yet there were a few, and those
were for the most part Noble men or Knights, who made all speed thither, and
gallantly undertook to make good the right wing: and they were not above six
scored ^n all. Nor did the Foot (who were about five hundred) make a good
appearance, for many of them looking about their private businesses among the
Carriages, by that unseasonable care of saving; lost themselves and all they
had* And, which spoiled the matter which was bad enough before, most of the
Commanders were absent, and never came in the field. Besides, the enemy coming
on speedily left them no time for deliberation. The enemy therefore who were
six thousand (whereof most were Horse out of England) furiously charging
Montrose's right wing were twice gallantly received and repulsed with no small
loss; Nor could they make that noble Troop give any ground, or break through
it, until at last laying along those few foot that withstood them they broke
in upon the left flank where there was no horse. By this, two thousand Horse
whom the enemy had sent over to the other side of the river, were gotten on the
Rear of those noble Gentlemen, who, lest being hemmed in on every side, and
galled with the enemies shot at distance, they should fall for nothing, and
unrevenged, withdrew themselves every one the best way he could. But the Foot,
who could have little security by flight, fighting a good while stoutly and
resolutely, at last upon quarter asked and given for their lives, threw down
their arms, and yielded themselves prisoners. Every one of whom being naked and
unarmed without any regard to quarter given, Lesley caused to be most
unhumanely butchered. The stain of which perfidious cruelty (by which he has
so filthily blurred his honor, if eany he got in foreign service) he shall
never be abl to wipe away. As for those that escaped out of the battle, the
enemy pursued them no further, being busy in plundring the Carriages, where
they made a lamentable slaughter of Women, Pedees, and Cook-boys: no pity was
shown to sex nor age, they went to the pot all together. The number of the
slain is not easy to be given, almost no Horse, and very few Foot (besides
those that yielded themselves and had quarter) fell in that battle: which may
appear by this, that they were no more then five hundred in all, and before the
next day two hundred and fifty of them came safe to Montrose, all of them with
their swords by their sides, so that there could not be as many more missing:
and very few were taken prisoners, and not until their horses being tired, and
themselves ignorant of the way, they became a prey to the country people. Whom
they, forgetting all the benefits and protection they had but newly received
from Montrose, to do the Covenanters a favor, delivered up unto their cruel
enemies, to be made by them acceptable sacrifices to Baal-Berith, the god of
the Covenant.

For all that, the Rebel conquerours missed of the Kings Standards. The one of
them (which was carried before the Foot) was preserved by an Irish soldier, a
stout man, and of a present spirit, when others were almost beside themselves;
who when he saw that the enemy had got the day, stripped it off the staff, and
wrapped it about his body: and being oherwise naked, made his way with his
drawn sword through the thickest of the enemy, and brought it to Montrose at
night. Whom he received into his Lifeguard, and gave it him to carry in token
of his valor and loyalty. And the other of them William Hie brother to the
Earl of Kinoule, a hopeful young Gentleman (who succeeded his Uncle by the
mothers side, Douglasse Son to the Earl of Morton, who having received many and
grievous wounds at the battle of Alford, was rendered unable for that burden)
stripped from off the staff too, and carried it away with him. And conveighing
himself into the borders of England, skulked there a while, till the coast was
a little clearer about Tweed, and then through by-ways and night-journeys for
the most part (being accompanied and conducted by his faithful friend Robert
Toures, a stout man and a good soldier, who had been a Captain in France a
good while ago) returned in the North, and presented that same Royal Standard
unto the General.

And now at last Montrose when he saw his men totally routed and put to flight
(which he never saw before) thought of nothing more for a good space than to
die honorably, and not unrevenged; therefore rallying about thirty Horse whom
he had gathered up in that confusion, he resolved by fair and honorable death
to prevent his falling alive into the enemies hands. And seeing he was not able
to break through the enemies Troops (who stood thick round about him) he galled
them on the Front, and Rear, and Flanks, and of such as were so hardy as to
adventure out of their ranks, many he slew, others he beat back. But when all
that he could do would not do his business, as God would have it, this
consideration possessed his resolute and noble spirit; That the loss of that
day was but small and easily regained, because but an inconsiderable part of
his Forces were there. That the Highlanders were the very Nerves and sinews of
the Kingdom, and all the North was sound and untouched. That many of the prime
Nobility and men of power, many Knights too and Chiefs of their Septs had
entered into an association with him; who if he should miscarry would be
suddenly ruined or corrupted, and by that means the Kings party in Scotland
utterly subdued. Therefore he thought himself bound never to despair of a good
cause, and the rather, lest the King his Master should apprehend the loss of
him to be greater than the loss of the battle. And while these thoughts were
in his head, by good hap came in the Marquess Douglasse and Sir John Dal^ell,
with some other friends (not many but faithful and gallant men) who with tears
in their eyes (out of the abundance of their affection) beseech, entreat,
implore him for the honor of his former achievements, for his friends sakes,
for his Ancestors, for his sweet wife and childrens sakes, nay for his Kings,
his Countries, and the Churches peace and safeties sake, that he would look to
the preservation of his person; considering that all their hopes depended on
him alone under God, and that their lives were so bound up with his, that they
must all live or die together. At last Montrose overcome with their entreaties,
charging through the enemy (who were by this time more taken up with ransacking
the Carriages than following the chase) made his escape; of those that were so
hardy to pursue him, some he slew, others (among whom was one Bruce a Captain
of Horse, and two Cornets with their Standards) he carried away prisoners. Whom
he entertained courteously, and after a few days dismissed them upon their
Parole, that they should exchange as many Officers of his of the like quality,
which Parole they did not over-punctually perform.

Montrose was gotten scarce three miles from Selkirk when he having overtaken a
great number of his own men that went that way, he made a pretty considerable
party, so that being now secure from being fallen upon by the Country people,
he marched away by leisure. And as he went by the Earl of Traquaires Castle (by
whose dishonesty he did not yet know that he had been betrayed) he sent one
before him to call forth him and his Son, that he might speak with them, but
his servants bring word that they were both from home. Notwithstanding there
are Gentlemen of credit that testify, that they were both within; nor did that
gallant Courtier only bid the Rebels joy of their victory, but was not ashamed
to tell abroad (not without profuse and ill becoming laughter) that Montrose
and the Kings forces in Scotland were at last totally routed; his own daughter
the Countess of Queensbrig, as far as modestly she might, blaming him for it.
Montrose after he had made a holt a while near a Town called Plebis, until the
soldiers had refreshed themselves and were fit to march, many flocking to them
from every side, at Sun set they all stoutly entered the Town; and by break of
day next morning (by the conduct of Sir John Dalyel especially) passed over
Cluid at a ford. Where the Earls of Crawford and Airley having escaped another
way met with him, making nothing of the loss of the battle as soon as they saw
him out of danger. Nor was he less joyful at the safety of his friends, than
that he had saved and picked up by the way almost two hundred Horse. But
although he was already secure enough from the pursuit of the enemy,
nevertheless he resolved to make what haste he could into Athole; that taking
his rise there, he might draw what forces he could raise of the Highlanders,
and other friends into the North. Therefore passing first over the Forth, and
then the Ern, having marched through the Sherifdome of Perth by the foot of the
Mountains, he came thither. As he was on his way, he had sent before him
Douglasse and Airley with a party of Horse into Angus, and the Lord Areskin
into Mar, that they might speedily raise their friends and dependents in
those parts; and had also sent Sir John Dalyel unto the Lord Carnegy (with whom
he had lately contracted affinity) with Commissions to that purpose. Moreover
he sent Letters to Mac-donald, to require him according to his promise to
return with the Highlanders by the day appointed. But above all he solicited
Aboine both by Letters and special messengers, that he would bring back his
friends and clients, who were willing enough of themselves, and wanted no other
encouragement than his authority and example.

CHAP. XVII.
IT was toward the latter end of Harvest, nor was he corn reaped in that cold
Country, nor their houses and cottages, which the enemy had butnt, repaired
against the approaching winter (which is for the most part very sharp
thereabouts) which made the Athole men to abate something of their wonted
forwardness. Yet Montrose prevailed so far with them, that they furnished him
with four hundred good Foot, to wait upon him into the North, where there was
less danger; and faithfully promised him upon his return, when he was to march
Southward, he should command the whole power of the Country.

Mean time frequent expresses came from Aboine, that he would wait upon him
immediately with his Forces; and Mac-donald promised no less for himself and
some other Highlanders. Areskin signified also unto him that his men were in
readiness, and waited for nothing but either Aboines company (who was not far
off) or Montrose's commands. About this time there were very hot but uncertain
reports of a strong party of Horse that were sent him from the King, whom many
conceived not to be far from the South borders. But other news they had which
was too certain, to wit, that there was a most cruel butchery of what prisoners
the Rebels had, without any distinction of sex or age: some falling into the
hands of the Country people, were basely murdered by them; others who escaped
them (and found some pity in them that had so little) being gathered together,
were by order from the Rebel Lords thrown headlong from off a high bridge, and
the men, together with their wives and sucking children, drowned in the River
beneath; and if any chanced to swim toward the side, they were beaten off with
pikes and staves, and thrust down again into the water. The Noblemen and
Knights were kept up in nasty prisons, to be exposed to the scorn of the
vulgar, and certainly doomed at last to lose their heads. Montrose was never so
much troubled, as at this sad news.

Therefore to the end he might some way relieve his distressed friends, being
impatient of all delay, with wonderful speed he climbs over Gransbaine, and
passing through the plains of Mar and Strathdone, makes unto the Lord of
Aboine, that he might encourage him by his presence to make more haste into the
South. For his design was, as soon as he had joined his forces with Areskins
and Airleys, and sent for Mac-donald and other Highlanders, and taken up the
Athole-men by the way, to march in a great body straight over the Forth, and so
both to meet the Kings Horse, and to fright the enemy, upon their apprehension
of an imminent danger to themselves, from putting the prisoners to death. For
he conceived they dnrst not be so bold as to execute their malice upon men of
Nobility and Eminency, as long as they had an enemy in the Field, and the
victory was uncertain. And truly, they being doubtful and solicitous what
might be the success of so great warlike preparations as they knew were in
providing, did defer the execution of the prisoners. Montrose upon his
journey found the Lord Areskin very sick, but his clients (whose fidelity and
valor he had sundry experiences of, even in the absence of their Lord) all in
a readiness if Aboine did but do his part; for they depended much upon his
example and authority. And now the Marquess of Huntley, after he had played
least in sight for a year and some months, (it is hard to say, whether awakened
with the news of so many victories obtained by Montrose, and the reducing of
the Kingdom, or by the deceitful influence of some bad starr) was returned
home. An unfortunate man and unadvised, who howsoever he would seem most
affectionate unto the Kings Cause (and perhaps was so) yet he endeavored by a
close and dishonorable envy, rather to extenuate Montrose's glory than outvie
it. Which seeing it was not for his credit openly to profess even before his
own men (who were sufficient witnesses of Montrose's admirable virtues) lest by
that he should discover some symptoms of a heart alienated from the King: yet
he gave out that for the time to come he would take upon himself the conduct of
the War against the Rebels; therefore he commanded his Tenants, and advised
his friends and neighbors, scarce without threats, to fight under no command
but his own. And then they replied, What shall we then answer to the Commands
of the Marquess of Montrose, whom the King has declared General Governor of
the Kingdom, and General of the Army? He made answer, That he himself would
not be wanting to the Kings service; but however, it concerned much both his
and their honor, that the King and all his men should know what assistance
they had given him, which could not otherwise be done than by serving in a body
by themselves. Moreover he fell to magnify his own power, and to undervalue
Montrose's; to extol unto the skies the noble Acts of his Ancestors, (men
indeed worthy of all honor) to tell them, That the Gordons power had been
formidable to their neighbors for many ages bygone, and was so yet; That it
was most unjust that the achievements gotten with their blood and prowess,
should be accounted upon another man's (meaning Montrose's) score: but for the
future he would take a course, that neither the King should be defrauded of the
service of the Gordons, nor the Gordons of their deserved honor, favor, and
reward.

All these things the simpler sort took to be spoken upon all the grounds of
equity and honor in the world; but as many as were understanding men, and knew
better the disposition of the person, saw through those expressions a mind too
rancorous and altogether indisposed toward Montrose, and that his aim was to
fetch off as many as he could from him, not only to the utter ruin of the King
and Kingdom, but even to his own destruction: which God knows) the sad event
made too manifest. Nor were there wanting amongst them desperate men, and of
good foresight, who condemned this counsel of his as unwise, unseasonable,
and pernicious even to himself. For they considered with themselves, that he
never had any design that did not miscarry either by bad play, or bad luck.
That businesses were better carried by Montrose, and it was ill to make a
faction upon the poor pretense of his carrying away the honor of it. For if
Huntley joined his Forces, and communicated his counsels unto Montrose, he
should not be only able to defend himself, but subdue his enemies, and gain
unto himself the everlasting honor of being one of the Kings Champions; but if
he should make a breach in that manner, it would prove not only dishonorable
but destructive unto him. That Montrose (it could not be denied) had got many
and eminent victories with the assistance of the Huntleys, but they had done
nothing of note without him. Therefore they earnestly desired him, constantly
to adhere unto the Kings Lieutenant, which as it would be both acceptable and
advantageous to the King, so it would be well taken with good men, and
honorable to himself. Nor did some of them fear to profess openly, that they
would yield their duty and service to Montrose, if Huntley should stand out in
his humor; and they were as good as their words. But he refusing the advice of
his friends, resolved, what ever came on it, to run counter to Montrose; nor did
Montrose ever propose any thing, though never so just, or honorable, or
advantageous, which he would not cross or reject. And if at any time Montrose
condescended to his opinion (which he did often and of purpose) he would
presently turn his mind; seeming to comply with him sometimes before his face,
but always averse unto him behind his back, and indeed scarce well agreeing
with his own self.

For all this, Aboine being at that time solicited by many expresses from
Montrose, and the importunity of his own friends (that he might be some way as
good as his word) met him with a considerable party at D^^minore, a Castle of
the Lord Forbeses. He brought with him fifteen hundred Foot and three hundred
Horse, all cheerfulI and ready to undergo any hazard under the command of
Montrose. And truly as soon as ever they met, Aboine freely protested he would
carry those men that he had whithersoever the Lord Governor should lead him;
but there were many more behind (which for his scantnesse of time he had not
got together) which his brother Lewis would bring him. Montrose extolling
highly his fidelity and pains, turned back again almost the same way he came;
that taking up the Lord Areskins, and the Mar Forces by the way, and climbing
over Grainsbaine, he might fall down into Athole and Angus, not doubting within
a fortnight to be able to pass over the Forth with a great Army. The first
days journey Aboine and his men marched with a good will, but the next night
his brother Lewis (whom Montrose had placed under the command of the Earl of
Crawford) conveyed himself homewards with a strong party of Horse, making as
if he meant to encounter some Troops of the enemy, and carried along with him
as many soldiers as he could get, upon pretense of a guard. Crawford returning
brought word that Lewis was gone home, but would be back again next day, for so
he had made him believe, though he intended nothing less than to come back, a
Youth liable to censure for more feats than that. But when upon the third day
they came to Alford, it was observed that Aboines men were slow to stand to
their colors, that they loytered in their march, that their ranks were thin
and disordered, and that they ran away by whole companies almost every night:
and at last their Commander Aboine himself was not ashamed to desire to be
excused, and to have leave to depart. When all men wondered, and desired to
know what might be the reason of that sudden alteration of his resolution, he
pleaded his fathers Commands, which he was oblig'din no case to disobey; and
that his father had not sent him such directions without just occasion, for the
enemies Forces lay in lower Mar, and would be presently upon their backs, if
they were deprived of the protection of their own men: and that it was
unexcusable folly for him to carry his men another way, when his own Country
was in so much danger. Montrose replied, That it was most certain, that only a
few Troops of Horse kept within Aberdeen, that they had no Foot at all, and
those few Horse nor durst nor could do the Country any harm; and there was no
doubt but upon the first alarm of his approach, their Commanders would send for
those also to secure the Low-lands. Besides, that it would be much more to the
Marquess of Huntleys advantage, if the seat of War were removed into the
enemies Country, than be kept up in his own: and upon that score there was more
need to make haste into the South, that they might save the North from the
burden of the Armies. He added moreover, That he daily expected aids out of
England, which could by no means join with them except they met them on the
South Side the Forth. And at last, with much resentment he represented unto him
the condition of the prisoners (who were many of them Huntley's own kindred,
allies, or friends) who would all be unhumanly murdered except they timely
prevented it. To all this when Aboine had nothing to answer he desired his
father might be acquainted with the whole matter, and 'twas granted. Such were
made choice of to treat with Huntley, as were conceived to be highest in his
favor, to wit, Donald Lord Rese, in whose Country he had sojourned, and
Alexander Irwin the younger of Drum, who had but the other day married
Huntleys daughter: and both of them were also much obliged to Montrose for
their newly recovered liberties. Rese being ashamed of receiving the repulse,
had not the confidence to return; and Irwin (a Noble young Gentleman and a
stout, who stuck to Montrose to the last) brought no answer but his
father-in-laws ambiguous Letters, of which no hold could be taken. Being
desired to deliver what he conceived his father-in-laws resolution was, he
professed ingenuously, he knew not what to make of him, he could get no certain
answer but doubted he was obstinate in his fond conceit. Ahoine, first
declaring how sore against his will it was to part from Montrose, urged how
necessary it was for him to please his dear Father, who was sickly too; and
therefore more earnestly desired the Lord Governor to dispense with him for a
few days, till he could pacify his Father: and made an absolute promise, that
within a fortnight he would follow him with much stronger Forces. And when he
had often and freely engaged his honor to do as he said, he extorted with much
ado a Furlogh from Montrose, sore against his Stomach, to be absent for the
time aforesaid.

Aboine being returned home, Montrose marched over the plains of Mar and
Scharschioch, and came down into Athole; and thence (having a little increased
his Army) into the Sherifdom of Perth, where receiving an express out of the
North, he is put into new hopes, Aboine having sent him word he would be with
him with his men before the day appointed. At the same time came unto him by
several ways Captain Thomas Ogilby of Pourie the younger, and Captain Robert
Nesbit, both of them sent unto him from His Majesty, with Commands, that if he
could possibly, he should make all speed toward the Borders, to meet the Lord
George Digby Son to the Earl of Bristol, who was sent unto him with a party of
Horse. The same Bearers Montrose dispatcheth to Huntley and Aboine, to
communicate unto them those Instructions from the King, hoping by that means,
being quickened with His Majesty's authority, and the approach of aid, they
would make more haste with their Forces, in the vain expectation of whom, he
had trifled away too much time in Strath-Erne.

About this time the Lord Napier of Marchiston departed this life in Athole, a
man of a most innocent life, and happy parts, a truly Noble Gentleman, and
Chief of an Ancient Family; one who equalled his Father and Grandfather Napiers
(Philosophers and Mathematicians famous through all the world) in other things,
but far exceeded them in his dexterity in civil business; a man as faithful
unto, as highly esteemed by King James and King Charles: sometime he was Lord
Treasurer, and was deservedly advanced into the rank of the higher Nobility;
and since these times had expressed so much loyalty and love to the King, that
he was a large partaker of the rewards which Rebels bestow upon Virtue, often
Imprisonment, Sequestration, and Plunder. This man Montrose when he was a Boy,
looked upon as a more tender Father; when he was a youth, as a most Sage
Admonitor; when he was Man, as a most faithful Friend; and now that he died,
was no otherwise affected with his death, than as if it had been his Fathers.
Whose most elaborate Discourses Of the Right of Kings, and Of the original of
the turmoils of Great Britain, I heartily wish may some time come to light.

CHAP. XVIII.
MOntrose, when he had waited for Aboine with his forces out of the North now
three weeks, either on his march, or in Strath-Erne, and perceived that the
Rebels began to grow more out rageous toward the prisoners, being impatient of
further delay crosses over the Forth, and came into Leven; and he encamped
upon the land of Sir John Buchanan the Ringleader of the Covenanters in those
parts, expecting that by that means, lying so near Glascow, he might fright the
Rebels (who then kept a Convention of Estates there) from the murder of the
prisoners. To which end facing the City every day with his horse, he wasted the
enemies Country without any resistance: although at that time for the guard of
the Estates and City, they had three thousand Horse in their quarters, and he
not full three hundred, and twelve hundred foot. Notwithstanding before his
coming down into Leven, the Covenanters as soon as they understood that Huntley
and Montrose agreed not, and that Aboine and his men had deserted him in upper
Mar, as a Prologue to the ensuing Tragedy, had beheaded three stout and
gallant Gentlemen.

The first was Sir William Rollock, one of whom we have had often occasion to
make honorable mention; a valiant and expert man, dear unto Montrose from a
Child, and faithful unto him to his last breath. The chief of his Crimes was,
That he would not pollute his hands with a most abominable murder. For being
sent from Montrose with an express to the King after the battle of Aberdeen, he
was taken prisoner by the Enemy, and was condemned unto death, which he had not
escaped, except for fear of death he had harkened unto Argyle (who most
unworthily set a price upon Montroses head, and promised great rewards,
honors, and preferments to whomsoever should bring it in) and had taken upon
himself to commit that Treason, which he abhorred with all his soul. By which
shift having his life and liberty given him, he returned straight to Montrose,
and discovered all unto him, beseeching him to be more careful of himself, for
not he only who heartily detested so high a villainy) but many more, had been
offered great matters, most of whom would use their best endeavors to dispatch
him.

The next was Alexander Ogilby, of whom we also spoke before, eldest Son to Sir
John Ogilby of Innerwharite, descended of an ancient Family, and much renowned
in the Scottish Chronicles. He was but yet a youth (scarce twenty) but valiant
above his age, and of a present and daring spirit. Nor can I hear, or so much
as conjecture what they had to lay to his charge, but that new and unheard of
Treason, to wit, his bounden duty and loyalty to his King. But there was no
help for it, but Argyle must needs sacrifice that hopeful youth, if it had been
for nothing but his names sake; for he bare an implacable fewd to the Ogilbies.
The third was Sir Philip Nesbit, of on ancient Family also, and chief of it
next his Father; who had done honorable service in the Kings Army in England,
and had the command of a Regiment there. Nor can I discover any reason they had
to put him to death neither (besides that which is used when they have nothing
else to say, that mad charge of the new High Treason) except it was, that their
guilty consciences suggested unto them, that that courageous and vigilant man
might take occasion some time hereafter to be even with them, for the horrid
injuries they had done his Father and his Family. However, these men suffered a
Noble death with patience and constancy, as became honest men and good
Christians. And unto these there are two brave Irish Gentlemen that deserve to
be joined, Colonel O-Chaen, and Colonel Laghlin, odious unto the Rebels only
for this impardonable crime, that they had had many experiments of their
courage and gallantry. These Irish Gentlemen were murdered indeed at
Edinbourgh, but many more were doomed to the like execution at Glascow, had not
Montrose's unexpected approach within a few miles of the City had so much
influence, that it reprieved them till another time. The Lord Governor was very
much perplexed with the news of these men's death, and it was a question whether
he was more vexed at the cruelty of the Rebels, or the negligence, if not
treachery of his friends. For besides Huntley, whose Forces he had so long in
vain expected to come with his Son Aboine, Mac-donald also himself (of whom he
entertained an exceeding good opinion) being often sent unto, and invited also
by the nearness of the place, although the time appointed by himself was
already past and gone, made no appearance of his approach. Six weeks had now
passed since Aboine had engaged himself for the Northern Forces, and the Winter
(than which our age never saw sharper) was already deeply entered. Besides, the
aids that the King had sent under the Command of the Lord Digby were defeated:
all which might easily have been salved, and the Kingdom reduced again, if
those great Professors of Loyalty had not played fast and loose in that good
Cause. Therefore at last on the 20. of November, Montrose de^arting from Levin,
and passing over the Mountains of Taich, now covered with deep snow, through
woods and loghes, whose names I do not at this time well remember, crossing
also through Strath-Erne and over the Tay, returned into Athole. There he met
Captain Ogilby and Captain Nesbit, whom he had formerly sent with the Kings
instructions unto Huntley. And they bring word the man was obstinate and
inflexible, who would believe nothing that they said; and when they unfolded
unto him the Kings Commands, answered scornfully, That he understood all the
Kings business better than they, or the Governor himself; and neither he nor
any of his children should have any thing to do with him. Moreover, he sharply
and threatningly reproved his friends and clients, who had willingly assisted
Montrose, and dealt worse with them than with Rebels. Nevertheless, the Lord
Governor thought best to take no notice of any of these things, but bear with
them; and whiles he treats with the Athole-men for the settling of the Militia
of that Country, he sends again unto Huntley by Sir John Dalyel, as a more fit
Mediator of friendship; Who was to inform him of the danger the King and
Kingdom was in, and so of the present misery that hung over his, and all
faithful Subjects heads; and to make it appear unto him, that it was no ones
but his and his sons fault, both that they had not brought in the supplies into
Scotland which the King had sent, and that the prisoners who were gallant and
faithful men, had been so cruelly butchered; and that yet there were many more
remaining that had near relations to Huntley himself, and some also of the
prime Nobility, whom the Rebels would cut off after the same fashion, unless
they were now at last relieved. And lastly, to pray and beseech him that at
least he would grant the Kings Governor the favor of a friendly conference,
promising he would give him abundant satisfaction.

Huntley, although he answered Dalyel in all things according to his wonted
peevishness, yet he was most of all averse to a Conference; as fearing (seeing
he should have nothing to answer to his Arguments and Reasons) the Presence,
the Confidence, and the Wisdom of so excellent a Man. But Montrose, as soon as
things were settled in Athole, that he might leave nothing unattempted that
might possibly bring him to better thoughts, resolved, dissembling all
injuries, and obliging him by all good offices, to surprise him, and be friends
with him whether he would or no; and to treat with him concerning all things
that concerned His Majesty's service. Therefore in the month of December he
forced his way very hardly through Rivers and Brooks that were frozen indeed,
but not so hard as to bear men's weight, over the tops of Hills and craggy
Rocks, in a deep Snow: and passing through Angus, and over Gransbaine, drew his
Forces into the North; and almost before he was, discovered marched with a few
men into Strathbogy, where Huntley then lived: But he being struck with his
unexpected approach, upon the first news he heard of him, lest he should be
forced to a Conference against his will, immediately fled to Bogie, a Castle of
his, situate upon the mouth of the Spey, as if he intended to ferry over the
River, and to wage war against the Rebels in Murray.

And now it comes into my mind briefly to enquire what might be the reason why
Huntley bore such a spleen against Montrose, who had never given him any
distaste, but had obliged him with courtesies many times undeserved. Nor could I
ever hear, nor so much as guess at any other cause but a weak and impotent
(emulation I cannot call it, but) envy of his surpassing worth and honor. For
I should be loath to say that his mind was ever alienated from the King, but
only averse unto Montrose; with the unjust hatred of whom he was so possessed,
that he precipitated himself into many unexcusable mistakes; insomuch as he
desired rather all things were lost, than that Montrose should have the honor
of saving them. And now being already puffed up with an unbeseeming conceit of
himself, he was the more exceedingly enraged against him upon the remembrance
of those injuries and disgraces he had heretofore thrown upon him; and that was
the chief reason (as I take it) that he so often avoided the sight of him. For
besides what we have occasionally delivered, both the father and the sons had
put neither few nor small affronts upno the Kings Vicegerent; some few of which
it will not be out of our way to relate.

The great guns which we told you Montrose had hid in the ground the last year,
they digging them up without his knowledge, carried away in a kind of triumph,
and disposed of them in their own Castles, as if they had been spoils taken
from the enemy, and would not restore them upon demand. But those Montrose had
got in the fights at Saint Johns-town and at Aberdeen; in the former of which
there was never a man present of that Family, and in the other Lewis Gordon and
his men fought on the enemies side. Besides, they so converted unto their own
use the Gunpowder, and Arms, and other necessaries of War, which were gained
from the enemy, and only deposited in their Castles as in safe and convenient
storehouses, that they would never make any restitution of the least part of
them when they were desired. Moreover, Aboine upon his return home after the
victory of Kilsythe, set at liberty the Earl of Keith Lord Marshal of Scotland,
the Lord Viscount Arbuthnot, and other men of quality of the enemies side who
were within his custody, without acquainting the Governor of the Kingdom: and
his brother-in-law young Drum (who by chance was present) earnestly declaring
his dislike of it. Upon what terms he did it, it is uncertain, but this is
evident, that (besides the affront done to the Lord Governor, and the loss of
Dunotter Castle, which was of great strength and concernment in that War, and
other Military advantages they got by it) the Rebels would never have had the
boldness to fall so cruelly upon the Prisoners, if he had but kept them in
safe custody. Yet more, by his own private authority, he exacted tributes, and
Customs and Taxes, (which the Governor himself had never done) upon pretense
indeed of maintaining the War, but in truth to far other use, and to the
grievous prejudice of the Kings Cause. Last of al^ (which is most to be
lamented) either at the entreat^^ of the enemy, or for small sums of money,
they had enlarged the Prisoners that had been taken in the former battles in
the North, and committed to custody in their Castles. Nor would they permit
them to Montrose's disposal, though being Prisoners of War he had reserved
them for that only purpose, by exchanging them to save the lives of gallant and
deserving men. Huntley being pricked in his conscience about all these things,
was always as afraid of Montrose's presence as of a Pesthouse.

But Monrrose for all that, passing by injuries, and laying aside all other
matters, bestowed his whole endeavors in promoting of the Kings service. And
to that end he was resolved to intrude himself into his company though never so
unwelcome, to insinuate into his friendship upon any conditions, to yield unto
him in all things, and to deny nothing, so that he might qualify Huntley's
imbittered spirit. Therefore leaving his Forces in their quarters, he posted
early in the morning with a few Horse unto Bogie, and by his undream'd of
approach prevented Huntley of any opportunity of flying or hiding himself.
As Soon as they met, Montrose so getting all that was past, invited him in
smooth and gentle language to associate with him in the War for the safety of
the King and Kingdom: and gave him so full satisfaction in all things, that
being at last overcome he seemed to give him his hand, and promised, that not
only all his men, but he himself would come in person in the head of them, and
be with him with all possible speed. Afterward they laid their heads together
concerning the manner of managing the War, and agreed, that Huntley wafting
over the Spey, should make his way on the right hand by the seacoast of
Murrey, and Montrose was to go round about on the left hand through
Strath-Spey, which was at that time of the year, a very tedious and difficult
march; and so the design was to besiege Innernesse, a Garrison of the enemies,
on both sides: and in the mean time to draw the Earl of Seaford either by fair
means or foul to their side. That Garrison, however it might appear to be
otherwise strong and well fortified, yet was very ill provided for victual and
other requisites, which in that sharp Winter and tempestuous Sea could hardly
be had. And so now they seemed to be agreed in all things, so that Aboine and
his brother Lewis wished damnation to themselves if they did not continue
constant in their fidelity and service to Montrose to their utmost breath. And
the rest of the Gordons, the Marquesses friends, were surprised with incredible
joy, and made as much of their Lord and Chief, as if he had been returned from
the dead.

CHAP. XIX.
MOntrose supposing Huntley's spirit at last pacified, and seriously inclined
to join with him in the prosecution of the War, marched with his Forces
through Strath-Spey toward Innernesse. And the more to amuse the enemy on
every side, he sent his cozen Patrick Graham (of whose worth I have had often
occasion to speak) and John Drummond of Ball the younger (a gentleman of
approved trust and valor, who had often done excellent service) with authority
and Commissions unto the Athole-men, that if any should offer to stir in
those parts, they should neglect no opportunity to suppress them. The
Athole-men being encouraged by their authority and example, showed themselves
very ready and cheerful: And they wanted not long an occasion to show it, for
the remainder of the Argylian party (either by reason of a general scarcity of
all things in their own Country, or being driven out of their Country for fear
of Mac-donald, who was very strong, and threatened their ruin) fell upon the
Mac-gregories and Macnabies who sided with Montrose. And afterward joining unto
themselves the Stuarts which inhabit Balwidder, and the Menises, and other
Highlanders who still followed Argyles fortune, were reported to make up some
fifteen hundred men; and were ready to invade At hole unless timely opposed.
And truly they had already fired an Island in Logh-Torchet after they had taken
it by force and pillaged it, and had besieged Ample Castle which lies on the
side of the river of that name. Which as soon as they had intelligence of, the
Athole-men, being only seven hundred in all, under the Command of the aforesaid
Graham and Drummond, thought best to oppose them before they brake in into
their Country. They upon the alarm of the advance of the Athole-men raised the
siege of Ample, and retreated toward Taich. The Athole-men pursued them hotly,
and find them in battell-arry not far from Kalandar a Castle of Taich, For they
had possessed a ford, and manned the bank on the other side (which was
fortified with a steep hill) with a number of Musketeers. Which when the
Athole-men saw, and perceived that their Forces were not so strong as was
reported (for they had not above twelve hundred men) although they themselves
were scarce seven hundred strong, yet being heartned by the gallantry and
encouragement of their Commanders, they were resolved not to stay to receive
the enemies charge, but to charge them. Therefore they place a hundred good
soldiers over against the enemy, as it were to make good the Ford on the other
side, and the rest marched away unto another Ford near the Castle, that they
might get over the river there. The Argylians, when they perceived the Athole
men so resolute, retreat straight toward Sterling. Then first of all those
Athole-men that were left below at the Ford, possess themselves of the bank
which the enemy had quit, after that they fall upon the Rear of the retreaters,
cut off some, scatter others, drive others forward; and the rest of the
Athole-men following hard after, put them all to flight. Fourscore of them were
slain, the rest escaped by flight: who fared the better, because that same
morning the Athole-men had had a foul and tedious march of ten miles long, and
had no Horse at all to help themselves. So they having come off with credit
returned home.

At that time the Rebels held their Convention of Estates at Saint Andrews,
which they polluted with the Innocent, and I fear crying blood of men, never
sufficiently to be commended. They had amongst their prisoners some very
eminent men, as appeared by the hatred the Rebels bare them, (for they scarce
sought the blood of any but the best of men, but for others of whom they were
not so much afraid, they satisfied themselves only with their Sequestration
and Plunder) amonst whom were the Lord Ogilby, Sir William Spotswood, William
Murray a noble young Gentleman, and Andrew Guthery a stout Gentleman and
active, whom they determined to put to death in that City, to appease the
Ghosts of the men of that Province with their blood, of whom it is reported
above five thousand had been slain in several battles. Now, because they
intended not to proceed against them by Law, but according to their own lusts,
they have recourse to their old shifts, and make Religion draw the curtain over
their cruelty. To which purpose they set up their Prophets Kant and Blair, and
others that were possessed with the same spirit, who roared out their Pulpits
bloody O^^^^es before the people; That God required the blood of those men, nor
could the sins of the Nation be otherwise expiated, or the revenge of heaven
diverted. And by this art especially they provoked the hearts of the people
(otherwise inclined to pity) to think upon them as accursed things, and owned
and devoted to destruction; persuading them, that they ought to have no
protection of humane Laws, nor any Advocate to plead for them, whom God himself
indicted and accused. Nor did those excellent interpreters and deciders of Gods
secret will, make any scruple to sentence the souls, and bodies, and all of so
great Delinquents unto hell and damnation. And having by this means blinded the
people, it was easy for them who were their acusers and judges both, to
condemn the innocent men who were destitute of all Patronage and protection.

But Ogilby, who was not only the most eminent of them for Nobility and power,
but also was a Hamilton by his mothers side, and cozen-german to Lindsey,
pretending himself sick, with much ado got so much favor as to have his
mother, wife, and sisters suffered to visit him in prison. Which when he had
obtained, whilst the Keepers in reverence to the honorable Ladies, withdrew
out of his chamber, he immediately puts on his sisters gown which she had put
off, and was dressed in all her attire. She also put on his cap in which he
used to lie sick in bed, and lay down instead of her brother. At last many
salutations and some tears passing on both sides, at eight of the clock in the
night, in the habit and likeness of his sister he deceived his Keepers, who
lighted him out with candles and torches. And immediately departing the City,
he took horse (which he had laid for him) with two of his followers, and before
morning was got out of danger. But when the next day his observant Keepers had
found out their mistake, Argyle was so unable to contain his wrath and revenge,
that he would needs have the noble Ladies (and the more noble for this their
compassion and adventure) brought in question for it. But he could not effect
it, for by reason of the equity of their cause, they found much stronger
friends than he could, of the Hamiltons and Lindsey; by whose connivence it is
conceived by many that all this Comedy was acted; but in a thing that is
uncertain, I shall determine nothing.

This cleanly conveighance of Ogilby out of their hands vexed the Rebels
exceedingly, and made them almost wild, whence it happened that they made a
quick dispatch of the rest. And the first that suffered was Colonel Nathaniel
Gordon, a man of excellent endowments both of body and mind. Who being near
unto his death, bitterly lamented with many tears, that the carriage of his
youth had been much otherwise than it ought to have been. And when being ready
to die, they offered him an Instrument to sign, wherein he was to testify his
repentance, he subsctibed it without any more ado; and withal called God, and
his Angels, and the men there present to witness, that if any thing was
contained in that paper which was contrary to the King, his Crown or Authority,
he utterly disavowed it. Then being absolved from the sentence of
Excommunication under which he lay for Adultery long since committed, to the
great grief of the beholders, he laid down his neck upon the block. A man
subject indeed to that fault, but famous for his valor and souldiership, both
in foreign Countries and at home.

The next that was brought upon the Scaffold, yet reeking with the blood of
Colonel Gordon, was a man worthy of everlasting memory, Sir Robert Spotswood,
one raised by the favor of King James and King Charles unto great honors, as
his singular virtues did merit. King James made him a Knight, and a privy
Counselor: King Charles advanced him to be Lord President of the Session, and
now but of late Principal Secretary of Scotland. This excellent man (although
his very enemies had nothing to lay to his charge through all his life) they
found guilty of high Treason; which is yet the more to be lamented, because he
never bore arms against them; for his eminency lay in the way of peace, not
knowing what belonged to drawing of a sword. This was therefore the only charge
that they laid against him; That by the Kings command he brought his Letters
Patents unto Montrose, whereby he was made Viceroy of the Kingdom, and General
of the Army. Nevertheless he proved at large, that he had done nothing in that,
but according to the custom of their Ancestors, and the Laws of the Land. And
truly he seemed in his most elegant Defense to have given satisfaction to all
men except his Judges (whom the Rebels had picked out from amongst his most
malicious enemies that sought his death) so that questionless they would never
have pronounced that doleful sentence, if they had but the least tincture of
justice or honesty. But to speak the truth, a more powerful envy than his
innocence was able to struggle with, undid the good man; for the Earl of
Lanerick having been heretofore Principal Secretary of the Kingdom of Scotland,
by his revolt unto the Rebels, forced the most gracious and bountiful King to
the whole Family of the Hamiltons, to take that Office from so unthankful a
man, and bestow it on another: nor was there any one found more worthy than
Spotswood to be advanced to so high an honor. And hence happened that great
weight of envy and revenge to be thrown upon him, which seeing he was not able
to bear out, he was forced to fall under.

And now Spotswood being about to die, abating nothing of his wonted constancy
and gravity, according to the custom of the Country, made a Speech unto the
people: But that Sacrilegious thief Blair, who stood by him upon the Scaffold
against his will fearing the eloquence and undauntedness of so gallant a man,
lest the mysteries of Rebellion should be discovered (by one of his gravity and
authority) unto the people, (who use most attentively to hear, and tenaciously
to remember the words of dying men) procured the Provost of the City (who had
been once a servant to Spotswoods Father) to stop his mouth. Which insolent,
and more than ordinary discourtesie, he took no notice of; but letting his
speech unto the people alone, he wholly bestowed himself in devotions and
prayers to Almighty God. Being interrupted again, and that very importunately,
by that busy and troublesome fellow Blair, and asked, Whether he would not
have him and the people to pray for the salvation of his soul? He made answer,
That he desired the Prayers of the people, but for his impious Prayers, which
were abominable unto God, he desired not to trouble him. And added moreover,
That of all the Plagues with which the offended Majesty of God had scourged
that Nation, this was much the greatest (greater than the Sword, or Fire, or
Pestilence) that for the sins of the people, God has sent a lying spirit into
the mouth of the Prophets. With which free and undeniable saying, Blair finding
himself galled, grew so extremely in passion, that he could not hold from
scurrilous and contumelious language against his Father, who had been long
dead, and against himself who was now a dying; approving himself a fine
Preacher of Christian Patience and Longanimity the while. But all these things
Spotswood having his mind fixed upon higher matters, passed by with silence and
unmoved. At last being undaunted, and showing no alteration, neither in his
voice nor countenance, when he laid down his neck to the fatal stroke, these
were his last words, Merciful Jesu, gather my soul unto thy Saints and Martyrs
who have run before me in this race. And certainly seeing Martyrdom may be
undergone, not only for the Confession of our Faith, but for any virtue by
which holy Men make their Faith Manifest, there is no doubt but he has
received that Crown.

And this was the end (a doleful end indeed, in regard of us, but a joyful and
honorable one in him;) of a man admirable for his knowledge of things Divine
and Humane; for his skill in the tongues, Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic,
besides the Western Languages; for his knowledge in History, Law, and
Politiques; the Honor and Ornament of his Country and our Age for the
integrity of his life, for his Fidelity, for his Justice, for his Constancy; a
man of an even temper, and ever agreeing with himself; whose youth had no need
to be ashamed of his childhood, nor his riper years of his youth; a severe
observer of the old-fashioned piety with all his soul, and yet one that was no
vain and superstitious Professor of it before others; a man easy to be made a
friend, and very hard to be made an enemy; and who being now dead, was
exceedingly lamented, even by many Covenanters. His breathless body Hugh
Scrimiger once his Fathers servant, took care to bring forth, as the times
would permit, with a private funeral. Nor was he long able to bear so great a
sorrow and loss, for after a few days espying that bloody Scaffold not yet
removed out of the place, immediately he fell into a swoond, and being carried
home by his servants and neighbors, died at his very door.

Lastly, they give unto Spotswood another companion in death, Andrew Gutherey,
Son unto the most des^^^ing Bishop of Murray, and hated the more by the Rebels
for that. A youth, as well valiant in battle, as constant in suffering and
contemning death. He also was threatened and railed at by the same Elaire, but
answered. That no greater honor could have been done him, than to be put to an
honest death in the behalf of so good a King, and so just a Cause; which those
that were present should see he embraced without fear, and perhaps another
generation would not report without praise. For his sins he humbly begged mercy
and forgiveness at the hands of his most gracious Lord God; but for that which
he stood there condemned he was not much troubled. After this manner died with
constancy and courage a man who if Almighty god had so thought fit had been
worthy of a longer life.

And that now they might put the last Scene to a Tragedy of which most part was
acted, after two days breathing they brought forth William Murray, brother to
the Earl of Tullibardin, a young Gentleman, to the same place. And truly every
man much admired, that his brother being in great favor and esteem amongst the
Covenanters, had not interceded for the life and safety of his own only
brother. Some imputed it to his sloth, others to his covetousness as gaping
after his brothers estate, others to his stupid and superstitious zeal to the
Cause; but even all, the very Covenanters themselves, condemned his silence in
such a case as dishonorable, and mis-becoming a Noble spirit. But the Youth
himself, being not above nineteen years old, purchased unto himself everlasting
renown with posterity for so honest and honorable an end. Amongst those few
things which he spoke to the people, those that heard him told me these words,
which he spoke with a higher voice than the rest; Account (O my Countrymen)
that a new and high addition of honor is this day achieved to the house of
Tullibardin and the whole Nation of the Murrays, that a young man descended of
that ancient stock, willingly and cheerfully delivered up his innocent soul (as
unto men) in the vsry flower of his youth, for his King, the Father of his
Country, and the most munificent Patron of our Family. Nor let my most honored
mother, my dear sisters, my kindred, or any of my friends be sorry for the
shortness of my life which is abundantly recompensed with the honourablenesse
of my death. Pray for my soul, and God be with you.

CHAP. XX.
THe death of his friends rroubled Montrose exceedingly, as it had reason; but
yet it was not able to break or shake his firm and settled resolution. Nor did
his noble and more than ordinarily elevated spirit ever give greater evidences
of it self than now. For there were many who being enraged with the unworthy
murder of their friends, egged him on, being already sufficiently
discontented, to a present revenge. And whiles they too much savoured their
grief (although it was just) and seemed to desire nothing but what was fit, to
wit, to render them like for like, they wearied out the General with their
many, and troublesome, and unseasonable complaints. For they must needs be
argry, that their companions, their friends, their kindred, noble and gallant
Gentlemen, well deserving of their King, their Country, and the General
himself, should be murdered contrary to their faith promised them, the custom
of War, the Law of the Land, of Nations, and of Nature, and all unrevenged: and
on the other side, such Rebels as had been taken by him to be kept rather as
in their friends houses than in prisons, to rejoice, to triumph, to laugh at
their sorrow: And therefore they humbly desired such prisoners might be tried
as Malefactors; nor would the enemy be otherwise frighted from their unheard of
cruelty, nor the minds of his own men othermise satisfied and raised up. Whom
he entertained with a courteous Speech, commended them for the love they bare
their friends, and told them, That the blood of those honorable and innocent
Subjects ought to be revenged indeed, by such a way as became honest and
valiant men, not by baseness and mischief, as the Rebels do, but by true
valor, in a souldier-like way. It concerned them so to tame, as not to imitate
the wickedness of their enemies. Nor, if they considered matters well, was it
conscience, that those that were prisoners with them, and so could not be
accessory unto the murder of their friends, should suffer for those sins of
which they were innocent. The faith that they had passed unto them was a most
sacred thing, and to be kept inviolate even by enemies. Why should they make
themselves guilty of that which they so much abhorred in their enemies? The
time would come when they must give a severe account of it unto the most
righteous God, and to his Vicegerent the King. In the mean time (says he) let
them set a price upon our heads, let them hire Assassines, let them serd in
their Instruments amongst us to murder us, let them make promises and break
them, yet they shall never effect, that we shall contend with them in an
emulation which shall be worse, or any otherwise than upon honorable and
virtuous terms.

Now Huntley, who intended nothing less than what he promised Montrose before
his face, having passed over the Spey, and entered into Murray, trifled away
his time, and wasted his strength without either honor or profit, a good way
off Innernesse. For giving his mind too much to prey and spoil, after he had
wasted the Country, he heard a flying report that the inhabitants had hid their
gold and silver, and the best of their stuff, in certain turrets and obscure
Castles. Which whiles he assaults in vain, and could neither by commands nor
entreaties be taken off from his resolution, the enemy sending in provision on
that side which he had undertaken to block up, relieved Innernesse with all
things that they wanted. Which if he had hindered, as he undertook unto
Montrose, the Garrison would have been shortly forced to yield. And Montrose
having now received intelligence that Major General Middleton was come with six
hundred Horse and eight hundred Foot as far as Aberdeen, and was like to lay
waste Huntleys and the Gordons Country, sent Colonel William Stuart unto
Huntley, to entreat him to return again unto the siege of Innernesse according
to his engagement: Or if he did not approve so well of that, because the enemy
was advanced so near his Territories, he should persuade him to join his Forces
with his, and to march immediately toward the enemy, whom the doubted not with
an easy hazard to overthrow. To which he answered scornfully, that he would
look to his own business himself, nor did he need the help and assistance of
Montrose to drive the enemy out of his borders. At last, after ten weeks spent
in the siege of a small inconsiderable Castle, and the loss of all the
forwardest of his men, he was forced with dishonor to raife the siege, when he
was never the nearer. And in contempt, not so much of Montrose, as of the Kings
Majesty, he retreated to the Spey without the consent or Knowledge of the
Viceroy: giving thereby a very bad example to all men, who began to come in
thick and threefold with great eagerness unto the Kings party.

Amongst whom the chiefest for wealth and power, and multitudes of followers
and dependents, were the Earl of Seafoth, the Lord Rese, and from the furthest
Islands Sir James Mac-donald, Chief of a most powerful and ancient family in
the Highlands; Macklen also and Glengar the Captain of the Mac-renalds, (and
many more) who were some of them already in Montrose's. Army with their Forces,
others had sent for theirs. And by this means before the end of March, Montrose
might have fallen down into the Low-lands with a far greater Army than ever the
Scots produced in the memory of man. But the unexpected revolt of so great a
personage did not less encourage the Rebels to persevere in their course,
than scandalize and discourage honest and loyal hearts. Whence it happened,
that those whose men were already come up to the Army, began to draw off, and
steal away privately, and others to make excuses for their delay. All which put
together made Montrose to cast about another way. For he resolved (seeing he
could do no good with vain, light, wavering and inconstant men by gentleness
and good Offices) to reduce them to his obedience by his authority, backed with
the strength of arms and severe penalties; and to that end to force all the
Highlanders and North-country-men, to take up arms, by marching in amongst them
with a confiding party of good soldiers. For he well knew that many Governors
and leading men in their respective Countries, and Chiefs of Septs were on his
side, unto whom this course would be very acceptable. Nor did he question but
the chief and most powerful of the Gordons being weary of their Lords
miscarriage, would do him the best service they could if need was, though it
ran counter unto Huntleys design. However he was resolved to use all fair
means, if that would do, before he would put them to the cost of that last and
sharpest remedy.

But because Innernesse was the most considerable garrison of all the North, and
the haven there most commodious for entertaining foreign Forces, he desired
nothing more than to reduce that: therefore he surrounded it with the Forces he
had. For the enemies Army under the Command of Middleton was above sourscore
miles off, and Huntley and the Gordons lay half way between them in a body.
Therefore Montrose dealt again with Huntley to persuade him not to lose his
time, but (as they had agreed) to join with him in the siege of Innernesse; or
at least to hover about the Spey, over which the enemy was to pass, and to
hinder their passage if they advanced to raise the fiege; and if they chanced
to get over to join their Forces together and fight them. To all which he
answered so disdainfully, that the Viceroy thought it high time to despair of
any good from him, and conceived himself engaged to look better to himself,
lest at last he should betray him. So that putting no confidence in Huntley, he
sent back three Troops of Horse to lie at the Fords of the Spey, to observe the
motion of the enemy: and if they came to send him often and certain
intelligence. And they, quartering themselves in the most advantageous places
for scouting, were careful enough to observe his commands; until Lewis
Gordon, Huntleys son, who then commanded the Castle of Rothes, played a more
shameful prank than any he ever did before. He assured those Captains of Horse
whom Montrose had sent to guard the Fords of the Spey, that the enemy lay very
far off, and intended nothing less than to pass that river and raise the
siege; and therefore he persuaded them (who took him for a most faithful
friend) to let alone their needless guards (to which they had been appointed)
and to come to his Castle to refresh themselves, and with many complements
invited them to a feast which he had provided for them: and they had no more
wit than to trust him, and go. He entertained them with a huge deal of
courtesy, and besides very dainty cheer, plied them with good store of wine and
strong waters. And with a great deal of jollity and ceremonious courtesy,
detained them so long till Middleton with a great Army of Horse and Foot had
got over the Spey, and had gotten footing in Murray. Which as soon as he had
notice of he at length dismissed them, and that with these jeering terms; Go now
to your General Montrose, who will have a sharper bout now than he had at
Selkirk. Mean time the enemy marched straight and eagerly toward Montrose, and
those Horse getting past them with much ado, came not much before them to
Innernesse, insomuch as they seemed to be but the Van of the enemy, and
Middletons whole Army followed within Cannon-shor. But, as the providence of
God would have it, Montrose had notice of their approach another way, and
having drawn off his Forces a little way from the Town, had got them all into a
body. And when he perceived the enemy to be much too strong for him in Horse,
avoiding the plain, he retreated with his men beyond the Nesse. The enemy
falling upon his Rear, and being handsomely repulsed, kept themselves also close.
The loss on both sides was very little, and almost equal. Montrose passed by
Bewly into Rosse, whither the enemy pursued him, that taking him in the
champain ground which was disadvantageous to him, they might compel him to
fight whether he would or no. But besides that the enemy was much stronger than
he, the Country people being faithless and rotten, and Seafoths new raised men
running away by companies from their colors, moved him with all the speed he
could to save himself from the enemies Horse. Therefore passing by Logh-Nesse,
and through Strath-Glasse, and Harrage, he advanced unto the bank of the Spey.

Montrose was resolved to proceed against Huntley as a public enemy, unless
he repented, but would try all fair means first, to see whether it was possible
to bring him into a better mind. To which end, taking with him only one Troop
of Horse for his lifeguard, in all speed he rid twenty miles unto him to his
Castle at Bogy. And as he was on his way, he sent one before to give him notice
of his approach; and to tell him, that he came thither alone, and without his
Forces, to no other end than to kiss his hand, and to be advised by him
concerning such things as concerned the Kings service, and he was the more
earnest to speak with him, because he had newly received Letters from the King
from Oxford, which he would let him see. But Huntley being affrighted with the
first news of Montrose's approach, was so averse from the presence of so
gallant a man, that in a trice he leapt on Horseback, and with one man along
with him, ran away any way he cared not whither; nor vouchsafed the Kings
Viceroy the favor of a conference or entertainment. Which as soon as Montrose
understood, he returned back those twenty miles the same day, being the 27. of
May; and was as careful as he could possibly to conceal this frowardness and
unrulinesse of Huntleys, lest it should be a bad president. But all would not
do, for the Gordons themselves, and others of Huntleys friends, being most of
them very honest men, and complete Gentlemen, told all with a great deal of
indignation, and detestation of Huntley; that by that means they might accquit
themselves from the aspersion of so unworthy an act.

Nor can one easily say how great influence that man's example had upon other
Northern men: The Earl of Seaforth, who had been but lately, and with much ado
reconciled to the Kings side, was conceived to begin to falter; and some say,
that being still unsettled, he had then underhand dealings for the making of his
peace with the Covenanters, which truly I can hardly believe. And Alexander
Mac-donald himself, pretending I know not what, although he had had often and
serious invitations, made nothing but sleevelesse excuses and put-offs from day
to day. Which carriage of his gave occasion of strange reports of him, as if
he, although he was a bitter enemy to Argyle, yet had great correspondence with
and relations unto the Hamiltons; and therefore staid at home, and looked only
upon the preservation of the Mac-donalds, not meddling with public affairs.
Which when Montrose considered, he resolved without further delay to make his
progress over all the North-country and Highlands with a considerable party,
to list soldiers, to encourage the well-disposed, to reduce those that were
refractory, by the severity of the Laws and condign punishment, and to deal
with them as men use to do with sick children, make them take physic whether
they will or no. And he wanted not fiting instruments to promote this desigh,
who had earnestly labored with him to take that course.

While these things passed at Innernesse, Huntley, lest he should be thought
never to have done any thing by his own conduct without the assistance of
Montrose, besieged and took in Aberdeen, (which Middleton kept with five
hundred men) but with more loss to Huntley himself than to the enemy. For
besides the loss of many valiant soldiers, he gave his Highlanders leave to
pillage the City. But what fault those poor innocent Aberdeen-men had made
either against the King or Huntley, let them judge, who know that almost all of
them were eminent and observed for their loyalty. But for the enemy whom he
took in Arms, who were both many and of very good account amongst their own
party, he dismissed them freely without any conditions, and looked fawningly
upon them, rather like a Petitioner than a Conqueror. Nor when he had many
Colonels, Knights, and others of quality (who by chance were found in
Aberdeen) in his hands, did he so much as think of exchanging any one of his
own friends for them, many of whom were prisoners either in Scotland or
England. But this was his humor, being always more ready to do good for his
enemies than his friends.

CHAP. XXI.
MOntrose being busy about his design, on the last of May there came unto him
a Herald with Commands from the King, (who by I know not what misfortune had
cast himself upon the Scotch Covenanters Army at Newcastle) whereby he was
required forthwith to lay down his arms and disband, and to depart into France,
and there to wait his Majesty's further pleasure. He being astonished with this
unexpected message, bitterly bewailed the sad condition of the King, that had
forced him to cast himself upon the mercy of his most deadly enemies. And
doubted not but that that command which was given him for disbanding, was
extorted from him by the craft, or force, or threats of the Rebels into whose
hands he had fallen. But what should he do in that case? If he obeyed, he must
give over the estates of his friends to plunder, and their lives to death; and
if he stood in arms against the Kings command, he should be guilty of that
crime he undertook to scourge in others, Rebellion. And especially he was
afraid lest the Rebels should put his actions upon the Kings account, and use
him the worse for them, seeing they had him in their power: of which the King
had given him a fair hint in his Letter.

Therefore Montrose resolved to call together all the Noblemen, and Chiefs of
Septs, and Knights, and others of quality that were of his side; that a matter
of that consequence, which concerned them all, might be discust by general
consent. To which end, after he had received so many injuries from him, he
dispatcheth Sir John Hurrey, and Sir John Innes, being men of greatest account
in his Army, and (as he conceived) most in Huntleys favor, unto him, to desire
him to be present at that so serious Consultation, and deferred unto him the
appointment of the time and place. And to tell him moreover, that Montrose was
willing to come to his Castle if he thought fit. Huntley answered, That the
King had sent him Letters also to the same effect, which he was resolved to
obey; that the Kings commands were of that nature as not to admit of second
thoughts, and after them nothing was left for consultation. When they replied,
that that likely was Montroses opinion too, and that he was as ready as any
other to give obedience to the Kings Commands, if they were not forced; however
it concerned them all to provide in time for the safety of them and theirs. And
that the credit and authority of what they resolved upon would be greater, even
in the opinion of the enemies themselves, if they made a joint and unanimous
resolution. He made no other answer, than that he had resolved for himself, and
would have nothing to do with any body else.

Montrose therefore sends his answer to the King by Letters, wherein he was very
inquisitive of the condition he was in amongst the Covenanters, and whether he
conceived himself safe in their hands? and also whether his service could be
beneficial unto him any further? And, if he was fully determined to have that
Army disbanded which fought for him (whiles the enemy in both Kingdoms were in
a military posture, and crow'd over them more and more) what course should be
taken for the security of the lives and fortunes of his most gallant and
faithful Subjects, who had spent their blood, and all that was dear unto them,
for his sake? For it was a lamentable case if so excellnet men should be left
to the mercy of them that had none, not only to be undone, but to be murdered.
To this he received no open answer, besides some Articles which the messenger
brought, which were signed by the Rebels, with which Montrose was to be
content. But he in great anger rejected those conditions which the enemy had
made, being so unconscionable as they were; and not vouchsafing so much as to
treat with the enemy, sent back the bearer to the King, professing, that as he
had not taken arms up but by the King Commission, so he would have no condition
prescribed him to lay them down by any mortal man but the Kings himself.
Therefore he humbly besought the King (if he thought it fit that he should
disband his Army) that he would not think much to make and sign the conditions
himself; to which, though they proved perhaps very harsh, he promised
absolutely to submit, but he scorned the commands of any one else whosoever
they were.

The messenger returning, at last brought with him Articles signed by the Kings
hand, with Injunctions now the third time, wherein he was required to disband
without further delay; and the same messenger charged him in the Kings name,
under pain of high Treason, to give obedience forthwith to the Kings Command.
And besides his Majesty's pleasure, there was another thing which hastened him,
which was, that those that had engaged with him had most of them privately and
by their friends labored to make their peace with the Rebels, which was
evidently known by good tokens of the Earl of Seaforth and others. As for
Huntley and Aboine they did not only profess themselves open enemies to
Montrose, but also threatened to fall upon him by force of arms, if he did not
immediately submit to the Kings authority. And Antrim being newly arrived out
of Ireland in the Highlands, without either men or arms, busied himself to draw
away all the Highlanders, as his kindred and allies, to himself from Montrose's
Army, whom in scorn he called the Governor of the Low-lands, making by this
means an unseasonable fraction, and a pernicious one to his friends in those
parts. All which Montrose having well considered, he was forced according to
the Kings command to disband his Army.

And truly that was a most sad day, in which having sollemnly praised and
encouraged his soldiers (as well as the occasion permitted) he took his leave
of them. For althuogh he bid them to be of good comfort however, and told them
he saw some daylight of a blessed peace, and that he did as much service to
the King by his present submission, as he had done before by his Martial
achievements; Yet notwithstanding they all conceived that that was the last
day of the Kings authority in Scotland, and all of them believed for certain,
that those Commands from the King were wrested from him upon the apprehension
of greater dangers to his person if he had not given them. And although some
provision had been made by Articles in writing for their Indemnity, yet they
had raher have undergone the worst that could fall, than survive idle and
unserviceable spectators of the miserable dition of their dearest King. And it
was no little vexconation to those generous spirits, to think what an unworthy
opinion foreign Nations and their own posterity must needs have of them, as if
the Scottish Nation had been unanimously guilty of Rebellion and desertion of so
good a King. Besides, their sorrow was much augmented with the consideration
that their General, who was most valiant, most successful, and therefore most
beloved, should be taken off so unhappily from the King, from his Country, from
themselves, and all good men. So that his soldiers falling down at his feet,
entreated him with tears in their eyes, that seeing the safety of the Kings
person depended so much upon it, and he must of necessity depart the Kingdom,
he would be pleased to take them along with him into what part of the world
soever he went. Professing their readiness to live and fight any where under
his command, and (if God would have it so) to die too. And truly many of them
were resolved, though to the certain hazard of their lives and estates, to
follow him even against his will and knowledge, and to offer him that service
in an unknown land, that they were able to afford him no longer in their
miserable Country.

By the Articles to which the King had consented according to the desires of
the Covenanters, it was especially provided, that Montrose should depart
Scotland before the first of September, and that they should find him shipping,
with provision and all things necessary when he went. These things were
transacted the first of August, and a Port in Angus designed for Monrose,
whither they were to send shipping from whence (...) was to imbark. And
Montrose to prevent and remove all occasions of exception or suspicion, being
accompanied only with his own servants and a very few friends, betook himself
thither, and waited for the shipping. About this time his most implacable
enemies set abroad crafty and feigned reports by their fit instruments, wherein
they confidently averted, that the States of the Kingdom (as they called
themselves) would by no means suffer that so gallant a Subject should be
banished the Country: For they knew not how great need they might have of a man
of his worth, especially if the King who had cast himself freely upon the
affections of the Scots could not get any right of the English, but should be
put to seek it by force and arms; and if it came to that, no age had afforded a
better General than Montrose. And truly, that was the earnest desire and
expectation of most men, who were not able to dive into the bottom of the
Rebels plots: but they had far other designs in hand, and another game to
play. For what their thoughts were toward the King, the sad event made too
manifest; and for Montrose, they laid very unconscionable and unworthy traps to
catch him. For they did this, that if they could flatter him up with such vain
hopes, and entice him to stay in the Kingdom beyond his time appointed, they
might take hold of him upon the Articles, and cut him off with more credit.

August was almost spent, and no news at all was to be had about the shipping
or safe conduct: therefore Montrose, (although he was resolved to be gone by the
day the King had limited) that he might more fully grope the intentions of the
Covenanters, gave leave to some of his friends to deal with them for further
time. But when they brought him naught but uncertain and doubtful answers, he
had reason to think they intended nothing but to delude and entrap him. Besides
(which made his suspicion so much the greater) there came a ship upon the very
last day allowed for his stay (to wit, on the last of August) into the haven of
Montrose. The master of it was not only a stranger to him, but a most rude and
violent abettor of the Rebels; the Seamen and Soldiers men of the same
temper, malicious, dogged, and ill-condition'd, the ship it self neither
victualled, not fit to go to Sea. So that when Montrose showed himself ready to
depart, and bad them hoise their sails as soon as they could, the Master of the
ship told him, that he must have some days allowed him to pitch and rigge his
ship, before he durst adventure himself to the wind and waves. And then making
great brags of himself and his ship, he drew forth a Commission which the
Covenanters had given him, wherein he was required to transport the passengers
to certain places assigned by themselves, and to carry no body else. Moreover
there lay great English ships and men of War every day in sight about the mouth
of the river Eske (which makes the haven of Montrose) attending there in favor
of the Rebels for their much-desired booty, that by no means he might escape
their hands

But Montrose had sufficient notice of their treacheries, and wanted not some
friends of the Covenanters themselves, who informed him by frequent messages
that the Sea was sore pestered with the English Navy, and he could not escape
safely either into France or the Low-Conntries; that the haven was upon the
matter blocked up, in which he was to take shipping, and therefore it was very
perilous for him to go to Sea; that his enemies looked for nothing else, than
that either by making too long stay in his own Country he should sall into the
hands of the Scottish Covenanters, or by going should be surprised unarmed and
unawares by the English Rebels. Montrose's friends that were with him were of
opinion, that it was best for him in so apparent a danger to return into the
Highlands, and draw his men together again, conceiving that he had better trust
the fortune of War than so perfidious a peace. But he forbore to take that
course, especially because of his most ardent affection to the King: For he was
assured, if the War brake forth again it would be laid upon the King though
undeservedly, and so he should bring his Person into present danger, perhaps as
much as his life was worth. Therefore being straightned on every side, one way
with treachery plotted against his own, another against the Kings anointed
head, he determined with an unalterable resolution to bear all the burden upon
his own shoulders. And therefore he withdrew himself, not out of rashness as
if he despaired of safety at the worst, but out of sage and discreet
deliberation.

For when he had smelt out the plots of the Rebels beforehand, he had sent
some a good while ago to search diligently the havens in the North, and if they
chanced to find any outlandish vessel, to agree with the Master for the
fraught, and to appoint him to be ready to put to sea at such a day, and to
transport the passengers (which should be ready with him) by the help of God
into Norway. By good fortune there was found in the haven of Stanhyve a small
bark of Bergen in Norway, and the Master was soon agreed with for he was very
glad of the opportunity, having hopes of getting. Thithet Montrose sent away
Sir John Hurrey, John Drummond of Ball, Henery Graham his brother, John
Spotswood nephew to that great Sir Robert, John Lilly a Captain of approved
skill and coruage, Patrick Melvin such another, George Wise heart Doctor, of
Divinity, David Gutherey a stout young Gentleman, Pardus Lasound a Frenchman,
once a servant to the noble Lord Gordon, afterward entertained for his Masters
sake by Montrose himself, one Rodolph a German, an honest and trusty young man;
and a few servants more. And these he had picked out to carry along with him
whithersoever he went, for this reason especially, because he knew the Rebels
to be so maliciously bent against most of them, that they could not be safe for
never so little a while in that Country. And they on the third of September
having a good wind put forth to Sea for Norway; and the same evening Montrose
himself, accompanied only with one James Wood a worthy Preacher, by a small
cock-boat got into a bark which lay at anchor without the haven of Montrose;
and being clad in a coarse suit, the Lord and Patron passed for his Chaplains
servant. This was in the year of our Lord 1646. and the 34. year of his age.

FINIS.
The Continuation of Montrose's History
IT is not our purpose in this addition to the History of the famous
Marquess, to deliver his several Negotiations with foreign Princes further than
in the general. For howsoever they were in order to the Cause he had in hand,
and did add a great deal of luster and splendor to his worth, in the eyes of
strangers, who were indifferent in the case; As likewise it must be confessed,
that no subject of that Kingdom ever received higher favors abroad, or
procured greater respect to the addresses made in his Masters name; Yet these
things being but obscurely known in the Tenor of them, except only to those
that were employed and indeed not so proper for our intention in this brief
narration, which is to satisfy the curiosity of all, in the manner of his last
entry, his defeat, death, and burial, if (it may be so called) Things for
ought I know as yet, set down in no certain relation: We shall therefore
setting aside his Foreign endeavors, bring him upon the same stage where his
Tragedy had both its beginning and ending. Only that you may have a more
lively representation of his personal virtues, we shall give you to understand
in what high estimation the Marquess was with Foreign Princes, as well as with
those of England, and Scotland; and point at those honors which did seem to
court his magnanimity beyond Seas. In France, with the general consent of the
Princes of the blood, and the rest of the Nobility, he was designed Chaptain
General of all the strangers in that Kingdom; A trust (which those know that
are acquainted with the Wars of France) of very high consequence, for in them
consists the whole strength of the Kingdom. But this advancement of the
Marquesses, was by Cardinal Mazarine crossed or delayed, (who was always a
professed enemy to Scots in that Kingdom.) From thence he took his journey to
Holland, where the Prince then was, in pursuit of his former intentions; but
there he met with as great crosses and impediments as he had done in the bowels
of his own Country. Duke Hamilton who was his irreconcilable enemy was now his
competitor, and being then at the Hague labored by all means possible to
undermine or prevent the Marquesses designs. With him were the Earl of
Lautherdale, and the Earl of Calender, men both of eminent parts, whom the Duke
by several engagements had made firm to his purposes; They were both very
earnest for a Commission. The Duke having interest in the Prince by blood,
could not think that any in that trust, could justly be preferred before him;
alleging likewise that he might be more able to perform any design in that
Kingdom, his kindred and allies, and those of his Name being very powerful,
and in the very heart of the kingdom. Whereas Montrose's soldiers, whom he
trusted most, and employed in his former action, were either killed or
dispersed; And those whom he had left, so terrified, and squeezed in their
estates, that they were utterly unable to help him. On the other part the
Marquesses fidelity pleaded much for him, his notable achievements, his poor
and slender beginnings, which made him so much the more capable for that
undertaking, it being requisite the Prince should employ such an instrument (as
the case then stood) being destitute of all means to help him. The Prince who
knew how needful it was to reconcile two such eminent Persons, who being
joined might draw the greatest part of that kingdom after them (failing of
which either of them was sure to oppose the other that should be employed,) made
it his main drift to unite them. Several meetings were appointed to this
purpose, but all in vain, neither could any industry prevail to make an
agreement, so inveterate was their malice each to other, so jealous were they
one of another proceedings. This variance made a long demur in that
expedition, which was far sooner intended. The causes of which were partly set
down in the beginning of the History, and partly hatched by the Duke himself,
who looking, as he was a man very ambitious of honor, upon all the Marquesses
actions with a squint eye, fretted much that there was any within the same
kingdom, who so far surpassed him in gallantrie and esteem: nor could he
brook that any one should possess the Kings ear so much as he, and for these
reasons he employed his utmost endeavors in defeating all Montrose's
enterprises. But his Brothers known disservices, and bad success, together
with his own neglect, or ill managing of business at Strivling bridge, much
retarded and obscured his claym to the Kings favor, in the particular he
sought for. And to speak impartially, the Marquesses worth and experience was
such, that it did easily sway the balance in an indifferent man's judgment,
even though the other two had been thrown in to make up the weight. The
Marquess having against his will spent a great deal of time in these disputes,
departed at last from Holland, and traveled up into Germany, and so to
Austria. The Emperor, who in his late wars against the Swede, has been very
unsuccessfull, hearing of his arrival, invited him to his Court, and amongst
many other honors conferred upon him, freely proferr'd him the Command of ten
thousand men; which should be a standing Army, constantly to be recruited; With
free power to engage at his own discretion, without receiving orders from any
but the Empero^r himself. Which charge the Marquess being willing to accept,
and about to receive, (yet rather that he might if it were possible advance
that cause which he had in hand, than for any desire of honor) he was
prevented by that happy peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and the Swedes,
which all who love the Common good of Christendom, wish to be lasting and
perpetual. Being from thence very honorably dismissed, he addresses himself to
the Dukes of Brandeburg and Holsteyn; from the last of which, he received those
ships which were kept a great while at Amsterdam to no purpose, being three or
four very fair vessels and well manned. Which Prince would have willingly
contributed more to that service, but that he perceived that which he had
before given, to be so misemployed; wherein both he and the Marquess were
grossly abused, as in the ensuing relation shall appear. Great were the
promises which had been made to the Marquess by many other Princes, but they
proved very slack in the performance, so that the assistance which was so
generally expected, proved nothing else but a mere formalitie and complement.
But the season of the year being now fit for action, he resolves with what
speed he can to call together those he could get, and to that purpose removes
to Hamburgh, from whence he might have a convenient passage to the Northern
Isles of Scotland. But ere we further proceed, it will not be imperrinent to
our purpose, to take a slender view of that kingdom, whither this expedition
was intended, and of the condition wherein it then was. Scotland was then in a
reasonable posture of quiet, for the old grudges by taking away the heads of
factions (whereof some had suffered after Philip Haugh, and others were detained
Prisoners in England) were tak'd up for a while. And a certain number of Horse
and Foot modeled into an Army, was mustered and disposed of in several places
of the Kingdom, to prevent any foreign invasion, or homebred insurrection which
might happen. These were commanded by David Lesley, Colonel Mountgomery,
Colonel Straughan, etc. being in all fifteen hundred Horse, and three thousand
Foot, commanded by Lieut. General Holborn. This handful did at that time
overawe and keep under the discontented party, though far more powerful. For
besides those which had been disbanded by the Earl of Lanerick, and Major
General Munroe, at the bridge of Striveling, there flocked daily out of England
great companies of those who had escaped out of prison; who finding their
estates Sequestered, and feiz'd upon, and withal most tyrannically proceeded
against by the hot-spirited Ministry, desired nothing more than an opportunity
of revenge. Besides these he had a considerable number of his own name and
faction in the North. The Gordons, the Athole-men, who (if he had not been
crushed at his first entry) would certainly have assisted him. This condition
of the Kingdom, made the Marquess appear like a prodigious Mereor hanging over
their heads, which awaked those who sat at the helm of the State (whom it did
indeed most concern) to endeavor the defeating of his attempts, both at home
and abroad. For this purpose was there a solemn Message dispatched to the
Prince, then Resident at the Hague, whom presently upon the news of his Fathers
death they proclaimed King, inviting him home upon certain conditions which were
published in this Kingdom, and need not therefore be inserted. In the mean time
the Marquess who had now gathered together a company of gallant Gentlemen as
well English as Scots, makes all possible haste dispatches Colonel John Ogilby
to Amsterdam, to entertain such strangers as might be for his purpose; But he
forgeting his Commission, bestowed both moneys and pains in entertaining
himself, suffering those, who upon any terms would have engaged, to shift for
themselves. There being a great number who had fled out of England, and more
who had lately deserted the French, or been cashiered from the Hollanders
service. Thus were these goodly Vessels sufficiently provided for service, lost
by his neglect, and a limb of the design broken. There happened about this time
another business, which did much retard the Marquesses affairs. Colonel Cochran
who had been dispatched Commissioner into Poland to the Scottish Merchants,
there to require their assistance, having procured very considerable sums of
money upon that score, and other provision for the furthering of that
expedition, disposed of the money for his own uses, made sale of the corn and
provision, together with the Vessel which was provided for the transportation
of it, and did himself turn tail to the quarrel. This was another
disappointment. General King likewise (whom the Marquess expected out of
Sweden, with a considerable party of Horse) either could not be ready so soon
as was expected, or else delayed the time of purpose. But the Marquess (as is
supposed) feating lest he should have an express command to desist from his
purpose, because the Treaty betwixt the Prince and the Scottish Commissioners
was now very near a conclusion, did precipitate himself, and those that were
with him, into a most inevitable ruin. Now all those great leavies, and aids;
Those mighty preparations for the invasion of a kingdom settled in a posture
of war, and well forwarn'd of his imentions, amounted not above the number of
six or seven hundred at the most, strangers and all. The Common soldiers which
adventured over with him, most of them Holsteyners or Hamburgers. He had sent
him by the Queen of Sweden, for the arming of such Gentlemen as should upon
his arrival betake themselves to his party, fifteen hundred arms, complete for
Horse, back, breast, headpiece, Carbines, Pistolls, and Swords, all which,
(after his defeat in Cathanes) were taken untouched. With this small
preparation it was a desperate action to attempt so mighty a business. And
although his touching first upon the Islands, did increase his number, and gave
him almost the beginning of an Army; Yet were those barbarous people so raw and
unacquainted with discipline, that they proved in a manner useless and
unserviceable. It Is true, the Inhabitants of those Isles, were a people in
former times, very fierce, and warlike, and have under their own Captains made
many great Impressions, into the very heart of the kingdom. But whether it was
the Policy of the late Kings, to leave them untrain'd, of purpose to break
then natural fierceness, or because their own Captains being quelled or cut
off, they cared not much to engage under any other, certain it is, That
kingdom for two hundred years last past, has not made less use of any they
had under their jurisdiction, nor have they at this present less opinion of
any Scots, for Military courage and valor. And this may be alleged, as a great
cause of their remissness and unwieldinesse whilst they were in the Marquesses
service. I told you a little before of Montrose's whole Strength, which did
accompany him from Germany, whereof two ships, with near upon a third part were
sent before, but by storm of weather (which is both frequent and dangerous)
amongst those Northern Islands, they were lost, with all the men and arms,
nothing saved. This was another check, and as it were a warning and a
forerunner of the sad event which followed. But the business being fatal, he
must needs contribute his own endeavors toward that destruction which his
cruel fortune had provided for him. For he nothing terrified with this
success, sends out a second party, which making a more prosperous voyage,
landed at Orkney, and entered the Island without any resistance. There being at
that time no Garrison or defense placed in any of those Islands, by the States
of Scotland; Together with these he sent several commissions for levying of
Horse and Foot. Immediately there were several dispatched to Scotland, and the
Islands adjacent for that purpose. The people of the Country being in no
condition to resist these officers, endeavored in hopes of favor as much as
they could to further the design. A od those who were not so earnest, were by
their own neighbors, favorers of the cause, and these violent Commissioners,
forced to take up Arms. Not long after landed the Marquess himself with the
rest of his company, together with those Gentlemen which were resolved to
partake of his fortune: Amongst whom were several persons of note. Colonel
Hurrey was there, a man who had engaged in all quarrels, but never prosper'd
in any. The Lord Frenderick, for his kinsman the Lord Napier, was left in
Holland. Colonel Johnson, a resolute man, and an old soldier, Colonel Gray, a
German soldier, Harry Graham, his own natural brother, Colonel James Hay of
Naughton, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgetie, George Drummond of Ballach. For he had
employed as was thought, Colonel Sibbalds his companion heretofore, as his
Agent in Scotland; But he was apprehended at Musselburgh, and did accompany his
General in death upon the same Scaffold. The Marquess continued a considerable
time in Orkney, raising of Forces, and strengthening himself with such recruits,
as the place would afford. Neither was there any preparation at all made in
Scotland, to dispossess him of these Islands, either because it might be
thought a difficult business to assail him within those places naturally
guarded with a rough and dangerous sea; Or because they knowing his strength,
expected a better opportunity of him, as they found indeed within the Country.

After this poor rabble of silly creatures was amazed, He resolves at last to
embarque, and to that purpose gathers all the boats he could find, ships his
men, and in a short space lands them all upon the point of Cathanes, which is
the farthest land to the North-west of Scotland. The people having some
experience of the carriage of his former souldierie, and now far more dreading
the name of Foreiners, partly by the terrible reports which were constantly
given out of him, fled away in heaps, many of them not stopping till they came
to the chief City Edinburgh, and there gave the terrible Alarm to the
Parliament then sitting. The Commanders were immediately summoned, and charged
with all possible haste, to get the standing Forces in readiness, and a
Rendezvous in order to the States command was hereupon presently enjoined at
Breithen Northward. Colonel Stranghan, who was then in high esteem with the
great ones for his valor lately expressed in the English service, and his zeal
to the Presbyterian cause much extolled at that time, had an ample, and a
particular. Commission granted to him by the Parliament, to command a choice
party of Horse, which should not be subject to David Lesleys orders, but might
engage and fight with the enemy at his best advantage. With these, being not
above three hundred, he advanced before the Army; David Lesley with the rest of
the Horse, and Holborn with the Foot marching after him. In the mean time the
Marquess advanced but very slowly, and that he might not be mistaken, (since
all the world was much astomished at this Invasion now whilst the King was upon
a Treaty) he published a Declaration; Wherein he labored to clear himself of
any aspersion of sinister ends. That his intention was only against some
particular persons, who had against the Laws of the Kingdom, raised and
maintained a war against the Kings Father, and did now by their subtle
practices endeavor to destroy the Son also. That he intended nothing against
the Generality of the Kingdom. Lastly, exhorting all subjects of that Nation
to endeavor to free themselves from the Tyranny of those who for the present
ruled the State, and the oppression of the Ministry. But the Country for
several causes did not come to second him as he expected. For the Earl of
Sunder and, a potent man in those parts, his lands being next to the place
where the Marquess then was, raised a great power of his tenants and friends,
and did his best to terrific and hinder all that were willing to join with him.
And though he found himself unable to deal with the Marquesses Forces, yet did
he stop all intercourse betwixt him and his friends. And those Gentlemen who
had heretofore followed him, and yet inclined to assist him, knowing the danger
of the enterprise, considering the fewness of his number, and that his
soldiers were much undisciplined, and unlike to the former with whom he had
done so great things, began to be averse, and have a suspicion of the event.
Yet have I heard some say, which knew well enough the situation of that
Country, that if he had not been oppressed in the nick, he might have gained
such strengths amongst the hills, as might have given him leisure enough to
have strengthened his own party, and tired out the enemy. Howsoever he was not
altogether unmindfull of a retreat; there is in that Country a Castle called
Dumbath, the Lord, or Lord thereof, is the head of a very ancient Family, but
no friend of the Marquesses. This Gentleman having left his house in the
keeping of his Lady and some servants, ^ed to Edinburgh. The Lady, though the
place were naturally fortified, yet upon summons delivered it to Colonel Hurry,
who was sent thither by the Marquess with a party of Foot to reduce it, upon
condition her goods and estate might be secured, and she with her servants
suffered to march away. Hurrey having placed a Governor, and a Garrison as he
thought sufficient for the defense of the place, returned to the Marquess, who
was now advanced to the place, or near it, where he was to lose at one throw
both his life and fortune. The Marquess hearing of the enemies approach, made
his whole Forces march at a great trot to recover a pass, which they were not
very far from, when he himself in the vanguard discovered the first party,
which was Straughans Forlorn hope, advancing very fast upon him. So that these
with their haste and the soldiers running, found them both out of breath and
order. The second Party was commanded by Straughan himself, and the Rear-guard,
as I remember, by Colonel Ker, for he had divided them in three bodies. But now
the first party being very near, there was a Forlorn hope of a hundred Foot
drawn out to meet them, who giving fire upon them, put them to a disorderly
retreat, but being immediately seconded by Straughans party, they made good
their charge, and so terrified the Islanders with that breach, that most of
them threw down their Arms, and called for quarter. Only the Dutch Companies,
after they had bestowed a volley or two amongst the Horse, retreated into some
shrubbs hard by, and there very valiantly defended themselves awhile, but were
all taken at last. There were killed in this business to the number of two
hundred, twelve hundred taken, very few escaped. For the whole Country being in
Arms, especially Sunderlands men (who came not to the fight, but to the
execution) they killed or took Prisoners all such as fled. In that skirmish was
taken the Standard which he had caused to be made of purpose to move the
affections of the people, with this Motto, Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord;
and the portraict of the late King beheaded, exactly well done. The
Standard Bearer, a very gallant young Gentleman, was killed, after he had
several times refused quarter. There was Colonel Hurrey taken, the Lord
Frenderick, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgetie, Colonel Hay of Naughton, Colonel Gray,
and most of the Officers, and two Ministers.

The Marquess, after he saw the day was absolutely lost, threw away his cloak,
which had the Star on it, (having received the order of the Garter a little
while before) his Sword was likewise found, and not very far off his horse
which he had forsaken. For so soon as he had got clear off that ground where
the skirmish was, he betook himself to foot, and lighting upon one of that
Country, or one of his own soldiers (I know not whether) took his Highland
apparel from him, and so in that habit conveyed himself away. But such narrow
search being made for him, he could not long escape, yet he continued in the
open fields three or four days without any notice gotten of him. At last the
Lord of Aston, being in arms with some of his Tenants, and aboard in that
search, happned on him. He had been one of his followers before. In that place
he had continued three or four days, without meat or drink, with one only man
in his company. The Marquess knowing him, and believing to find friendship at
his hands, willingly discovered himself. But Aston not daring to conceal him,
and being greedy of the reward which was promised to the apprehender by the
Council of State, seized upon him, and disarmed him; it is said he proffered
great sums for his liberty, which being in vain, he desired to dye by the
hands of those who took him, rather than be made an object of misery and shame
(as he knew very well he should) by his enraged enemies. But neither of his
desires was granted, but in place of them, a strong guard set over him, and so
conveyed to David Lesley. Sraughan having achieved his business with great
expedition, and freed the State from this much-fear'd danger, returned to
Edinburgh, leaving the rest of the business to Lesley and Holborn, where he
received great rewards and thanks for his eminent service; not without the
great heart-burning of David Lesley, who seeing a rival risen up to his
honor, and one whom he looked upon as an upstart soldier, have so great
success, fretted not a little. Howsoever forwards he moves to accomplish the
rest of the work, which was now of no great consequence, for there rested
nothing within the Country, but only the Castle of Dumbath, which being out of
all hopes of relief after the defeat, so soon as they were perfectly assured by
some Prisoners whom they knew, yielded the Garrison. The Governor was Prisoner
at mercy; The soldiers being Dutch, were upon terms to return homewards. There
was nothing else to be done save the reducing of the Islands, and the town of
Kirkwall in Orkney, where Colonel Johnson and Colonel Harry Graham were left,
when the Marquess passed over to Cathanes; but Montrose, either because he
could not spare any soldiers, or because he expected better success, had left
them almost naked; though there were several places in those Isles which might
have been made very renable. Colonel Johnson having understoost of the defeat,
with those that were with him, took shipping and returned from whence he came,
so did Harry Graham likewise, else both of them had casted of the same sauce,
which their General did. Thus Lesteys Forces entered without any resistance,
seized upon the Arms which Montrose had brought thither, together with two
pieces of Ordnance. The Queen of Sweden had given him a little Friggot of
sixteen Guns which lay in the Harbor, the Master of which being gone ashore
into one of the Islands, the Company seeing the event of the business,
revolted, and brought in that likewise. The victory being now complete, there
was a solemn day of thanksgiving appointed through the whole Kingdom,
Bonfires, shooting of Ordnance, and other testimonies of joy. But many of the
Gentry who had been under his command before, having now engaged with him
again, were no partakers in this joy. For some of his papers being taken, many
of them were afterward discovered, and suffered in their estates. The
Marquess being now in the Custody of his mortal enemies, from whom he could
not expect the least favor, Yet expressed a singular constancy, and in a manner
a carelesenesse of his own condition. Coming to his Father-in-laws house, the
Earl of Southesks, where two of his children were, he procured liberty from his
Guard to see them: but neither at meeting, or parting, could any change of his
former countenance be discerned, or the least expression heard, which was not
suitable to the greatness of his spirit, and the same of his former actions.
It Is memorable of the Town of Dundee, where he lodged one night, though it had
suffered more by his Army than any else within that kingdom, yet were they
amongst all the rest so far from insulting over him, that the whole Town
testified a great deal of sorrow for his woeful condition; and there was he
likewise furnished with clothes fairable to his birth and person. Being come to
Leith, he was received by the Magistrates of the City of Edinburgh, and staying
a while there to refresh himself, he was afterward led toward the City, by
that way which goes betwixt Leith, and the watergate of the Abbey. And with
him all the Prisoners of quality on foot, betwixt thirty and forty: but he
himself had the favor to be mounted on a cart-horse. Having ended this part of
his journey with as much state as in triumphs is accustomed to be, he was not
at the end of the Cannon-Gate by some other Officers, and the Executioner in
his Liverie Coat. Into whose hands he was delivered. There was framed for him a
high seat in fashion of a Chariot, upon each side of which were holes, through
which a cord being drawn, and crossing his breast and arms, bound him fast down
in the Chayr. The Executioner (being commanded so to do) took off the
Marquesses hat, put on his own b^nnet, and the Chariot being drawn by four
horses, he mounted one of the first, and very solemnly began to drive along
toward the Tol-booth. The people who were assembled in great multitudes, and
were many of them heretofore very desirous to see this spectacle, could not now
refrain from tears, and those who had heretofore wished him all misfortune,
began to be shaken with the first scene of his Tragedy. But the implacable
Ministry having him now at their mercy, could never be satisfied with his
calamities; They reviled him with all possible spite, objected frequently to
him his former condition, and his present misery, and pronounced heavy
judgments against him: being come to the Toll-booth, he was very closely shut
up, and strong guards set upon him, all access denied to him; no, not his
Father-in-law, or any of his friends suffered to come nigh him. There he was a
considerable time, all which the Ministers never ceased to exacerbate his
misery. Of whom one being asked why they could not otherwise be satisfied, but
by so ignominious handling of him? He answered, They knew no other way to
humble him, and bring him home to God.

Certain it was, that all these disgraces which were put upon him, were the
only inventions of the Assembly then sitting, to whose wisdoms the devising of
his punishment was referred by the Council of State. All this while the holy
Covenant was pressed upon him with much vehemency, which when he with much
reason and conviction to them refused, they had recourse to their ordinary way
of railing, and malediction, and one of them was so bold to tell him, he was a
faggot of hell, and he saw him burning there already. They urged also upon him
as the price of his releasment from excommunication, an open confession of his
faults, and an acknowledgment of the guilt of blood which had been shed the
years past in which he had been in arms; but all to no purpose. But more
particularly (because the battle of Kilsyth had been lost upon so great odds)
he was much solicited to discover the Conspiratours in the overthrow of that
Army, but that took no effect; nor is it yet (since he left it undiscovered)
known to any Scottish man alive, whether there were any connivance in it or no.
He was very frequent in his devotions, whilst he was in prison, and expressed
much more cheerfulness than he had done at any time before since his being
taken prisoner. After he had endured these private batteries and assaults, with
a great deal of constancy, he was at last brought before a public auditorie to
be sisted. The Parliament had a little while before been called, for proclaming
the King, and ordering the affairs of the Kingdom: whither he was brought, and
did appear with a very undismayd countenance, in a rich Mantle laid over with
massy lace. His chief adversaries were, the Marquess of Argyle, his known and
invetetate enemy; Earl of Lowdon, the Chancellor of Scotland, of the same name
and faction, Lowdon Ker, a violent and high spirited man; Cassells, another of
his adversaries, was gone in Commission to the King. These of the Nobility were
most against him; Of the Gentry, the Lord of Swinton, a potent man in that
Parliament: Sir James Stuart, Provost of the City of Edinburgh, a man likewise
in great esteem; the Lord Hopton, a Lord of the Session, and President of the
Committee for Examinations, and several others. But the whole Assembly was
violent against him, neither could he be admitted to any place there, that was
not publickely invective against him. But amongst them all the Ministers of
Edinburgh in this strife carried the honor, and of them Mr. Robert Trayle, and
Mr. Mungo Law, two such venomous Preachers, as no man that knows them can
mention their names without detest. The first of the two, had been Chaplain
before to the Marquess of Argyle, and was his companion in his flight from the
battle of Ennerlochie, and now Prisoner to the States of England. Many and
grievous were the accusatious laid to his charge. First, that he had by his
pernicious insinuation diverted the King from the Counsels of his well-wishing
Subjects. The introducing the Irish into the bowels of the Kingdom. The
murder of some particular persons, the utter spoil and devastation of the
Marquess of Argyles lands, and the killing and destroying of diverse
well-affected people, and that in cold blood. The cruel usage of some ministers
at his last landing. The Complainers were there present, but could allege
nothing, save only that he had restrained them from railing. His transacting
with foreign States for the invasion of his Native Country, and bringing in of
Foreiners now the second time, and that without any known Commission. His
obstinate persecution of all Covenanters, against his own oath and engagement,
and his Apostacy from his first principles. The Marquess knowing how much his
defenses would avail him, did not much labor to clear himself, but answered
all in general. For his Invasion they knew partly what authority he had, for
the rest he was sufficiently persuaded in his conscience, that he had done
nothing, which he might not be answerable to God for, as being in order to his
Masters Commands, and to men too, so he might have but an even and an
unprejudiced judicatory. Thus having been called once or twice before that high
Court of judgment, where he answered so vigorously as was admirable to all, he
did at last receive his doleful Sentence, which was accordingly executed upon
him two day after, with all the severity and bitterness that could he
devised. There was erected in the middle of the Marketplace a large Scaffold,
brest-high, in the midst of which, was planted a Gibbet of extraordinary
height. The Marquess having taken his rest very kindly that night, next
morning recommending himself unto God once or twice, took his breakfast very
cheerfully. The Bailiffs waited on him to the Scaffold, where the whole people
of the City attended his coming at least two hours before. He came uncovered
all the way betwixt the Scaffold and the Toll-booth, and in the same rich
Mantle he had worn before. Being come thither, he was much detayn'd with a
great many frivolous questions, of which, partly the Ministers, partly those
whom the States suffered to be about him, desired to be satisfied. He made a
short Speech, in which he was often interrupted, the Tenor of which was, that
he was satisfied in his conscience for ought he had done in relation to war.
That for his own particular sins (which were infinite) he had begged pardon
earnestly of God, and had an inward hope to obtain it; He freely forgave all
those who had sought his overthrow, and entreated the Charity of all the
people, to pray both for him and them. The Ministers, because he was under the
sentence of Excommunication, refused to pray for him, and even on the very
Scaffold, were very bitter against him. After he had about a quarter of an hour
prayed with his hat before his eyes, he was ready to go to his suffering, when
his Book and Declaration, and all other Papers which he had published in his
life, being tied in a string together, were hanged about his neck. He was very
earnest that he might have the liberty to keep on his hat, it was denied; he
requested he might have the privilege to keep his cloak about him, neither
could that be granted. Then with a most undaunted courage he went up to the top
of that prodigious gibbet, where having freely pardoned the Executioner, he
gave him three or four pieces of gold, and inquired of him how long he should
hang there, he told him three hours, then commanding him at the uplifting of
his hands, to tumble him over, he was accordingly thrust off by the weeping
Executioner. The whole people gave a general groan, and it was very observable,
that even those who at his first appearance had bitterly inveighed against him,
could not now abstain from tears. It Is said, that Argyles expressions had
something of grief in them, and did likewise weep at the rehearsal of his
death, (for he was not present at the Execution.) Howsoever they were by many
called Crocodiles tears, how worthily I leave to others Judgment. But I am
sure there did in his son, the Lord of Lorn, appear no such sign, who neither
had so much tenderness of heart to be sorry, nor so much paternal wit as to
dissemble; who entertaining his new Bride, (the Earl of Murrays Daughter) with
this spectacle, mocked and laughed in the midst of that weeping Assembly: And
staying afterward to see him hewn in pieces, triumphed at every stroke which
was bestowed upon his mangled body. Thus ended the life of the Renowned
Marquess, though not his punishment, (if that can propetly be called a
punishment which men's bodies suffer after death.) For being cut down, without
so much as any to receive his falling Corpse, his Head was smitten off, his arms
by the shoulders, and his legs by the knees, and so put into several boxes,
made for the purpose; the rest of his body was by three or four Porters,
carried out to the public place of Execution, called the Borrow moor,
answerable to that of Tyborn by London, but walled about, and there was it
thrown into a hole, where afterward it was dug up by night, and the linen
in which it was folded stolen away. His Head was fixed upon the Tollbooth, over
against the Earl of Gowries, with an Iron Cross over it, lest by any of his
friends it should have been taken down; the rest of his parts were dispatched
to the most eminent places of the Kingdom, to Sterling, Dundee, Glasgow,
Aberdeen, which were all taken down afterward by the English, or their
permission. But the Tragedy was not yet full, for Hurrie was the next in that
bloody roll, who pleading the benefit of quarter, and a great charge of
Children, thought to have tasted of the Parliaments mercy. But he was condemned
notwithstanding, to lose his head in the same place, Jealous they were of him
before, when he was engaged in their service against Montrose, but could not
produce any sufficient evidence. The chief accusations wherewith he was
charged, the last Invasion with the Marquess, and his former carrying Arms
against them under Prince Rupert at Marston Moor. With him suffered young
Spotswood of Daersie, a complete young Gentleman, and very worthy of pity, (if
any had been shown) being very young, but an excellent spirit, and a good
Scholar. The next couple was Sir Francis Hay of Dalgesie, and Colonel
Sibbalds: than which two the Nation could not afford two more accomplished for
person, and parts. The first being a Catholic, (and therefore not coming
under the Compass of the Ministers Prayers) without speaking a word to any
body, but throwing some Papers out of his pocket, took off his doublet, kissed
the fatal instrument, kneeled down, and received the blow. The other, with a
little more vigor, smiled a while, and talked to the disorderly rabble that
was about him: then with such an Heroic gesture marched to the block, as if he
had been to act a gallant in a Play. The end of the last man was somewhat
Comical, though the poor Gentleman lost his life. His name was Captain
Charters, of an honorable and ancient Family in that Kingdom. The Ministers
having dealt with him to acknowledge his fault publicly, and dehort all others
from it (which from no other of his Companions they could ever extort) he,
though resolute enough, and a good Scholar, yet partly by the persuasion of his
Friends, and partly by weakness which was occasioned by his wounds, agreed to
their desire, and was content to make a public Manifesto, in hopes his life
might be saved. With this conquest of Conscience, the Ministers (to produce
their great work to the Common people) came vaunting upon the Scaffold. He all
this while suspecting nothing less than death, made a long and tedious
Harangue to the people, wherein he acknowledged his Apostacy from the
Covenant, and other things which he had vented in auricular confession before
to the Ministers; which very energetically they had pend for him. In lieu of
granting his life which he expected, (lest he should fall off from his
principles which he had openly prosessed as some of their converts had done
before) fairly they cut off his Head, and sealed his confession with his blood.
The rest being for the most part strangers, or such as had spent most part of
their time in service abroad, were dismissed, after Bond given not to enter the
Kingdom again, in a hostile manner.

A true and perfect Relation, of all the passages concerning the Examination,
Trial and Death of the most Honorable James Marquess of Montrose, Earl of
Kincardin, Lord Graeme, Baron of Montdieu, etc. Knight of the most Honorable
order of St. George, Lieutenant Governor, and Captain General for his Majesty
in the Kingdom of Scotland.
THe Parliament of Scotland being informed that the Marquess of Montrose was
taken, and foreseeing that his countenance and carriage might gain him some
favor amongst the People, though fit to give out their sentence against him
before he should come to Edinburgh. And therefore upon the 17. of May anno
1650. in the morning, they appointed a Committee to prepare and give in their
opinions what was fittest to be done with him, where the same fore-noon they
gave in their report in writing to this effect: That so soon as he should come
to the Town, he should be met at the Gate by the Magistrates, and Hangman; That
he should be tied with cords upon a Cart bareheaded, and the Hangman to ride
upon the horse that drew the Cart, covered before him, and so to be brought
through the Town. That he should be hanged on a Gibbet at the Cross of
Edinburgh until he died, his History, and Declaration hanging about his neck,
and so hang three hours in public view of all the people: after which he
should be behended, and quartered. His head to be fixed upon the Prison house of
Edinburgh, and his legs and arms over the gates of the Cities of Sterling,
Glascow, Perth, alias Saint Johns-Town, and Aberdeen. And in case he repented,
(whereby the Sentence of Excommunication may be taken off by the Church); the
bulck of his body should be buried in the Gray-Fryers; if not, to be buried in
the Borrowmoor.

Upon the 18. day about four a clock in the afternoon, he was brought in at the
Watergate, and according to the Sentence, was met by the Magistrates, the
guards, and the Hangman of the City, the rest of the Prisoners being tied two
and two together, going bare-headed before him. So soon as he came within the
gate, the Magistrates showed him the Sentence, which when he had read, and
perceived the Cart, and the Hangman there ready, he said; He would willingly
obey, he was only sorry that through him, his Majesty whose person he
presented, should be so dishonored. Then going cheerfully into the Cart, he
being uncovered, was by the Hangman tied thereunto with ropes, and the Hangman
on the horse rid covered; thus was he carried to the Prison, and in all the
way, there appeared in him such a Majesty, Courage, and Modesty, no way
Daunted, That his very Enemies, nay common women, who as it was believed by
diverse, would have stoned him in the Cart as he passed, were upon the sight of
him so astonished, and moved, that their intended curses were turned into tears
and Prayers for him; Insomuch as the next day (being Sunday,) the Ministers
preached against them for not reviling and stoning of him as he passed along.

When he was taken from the Cart, he gave the Hangman gold, telling him, That
was a reward for driving the Cart. It was seven a clock at night before he was
entered into the Prison, and immediately the Parliament met, and sent some of
their Members, and some Ministers to examine him; but he refused to answer any
thing to them, until he was satisfied upon what terms they stood with the
King, his Royal Master; Which being reported unto the Parliament, they ceased
proceeding against him until Monday, and allowed their Commissioners to tell
him, that the King and they were agreed: He desired to be at rest, for he was
weary with a long journey, and he said, The Complement they had put upon him
that day was somewhat tedious.

The next day being Sunday, he was constantly attended by Ministers and
Parliament men, who still pursued him with threatenings, but they got no
advantage of him; he told them, they thought they had affronted him the day
before by carrying him in a Cart, but they were much mistaken; For he thought
it the most Honorable and joyfull'st journey that ever he made, God having all
the while most comfortably manifested his presence to him, and furnishing him
with resolution to overlook the reproaches of men, and to behold him, for whosE
cause he sufered.

Upon Monday in the forenoon, he was brought before the Parliament, and after
the delivery of a long penned discourse by the Chancellor, wherein he was
pleased to take notice of his miscariages againsT the first Covenant, the
League and Covenant, his Invasion, and joining with the Irish Rebels, and
bloodg^^^^iness; and that now, how God had brought him to just punishment: He
desired to know if he might be allowed to speak for himself, which being
granted, he said, Since you have declared unto me, that you have agreed with
the King, I look upon you, as if his Majesty were sitting amongst you; and in
that Relation I appear with this reverence, bare-headed: My care has been
always to walk as became a good Christian, and a loyal Subject; I engaged in
the first Covenant, and was faithful to it, until I perceived some private
persons under color of Religion intended to wring the Authority from the King,
and to seize on it for themselves; and when it was thought fit, for the
clearing of honest men, that a bond should be subscribed, wherein the security
of Religion was sufficiently provided for, I subscribed. For the League and
Covenant, I thank God I was never in it, and so could not break it; but how
far Religion has been advanced by it, and the sad consequences that have
followed on it, these poor distressed Kingdoms can witness; for when his late
Majesty had by the blessing of God almost subdued those enemies that rose
against him in England, and that a faction of this Kingdom went in to the
assistance of them; His Majesty gave Commission to me, to come into this
Kingdom, and to make a diversion of those forces that were going from hence
against Him. I acknowledged the command most just, and I conceived my self
bound in conscience and duty to obey it. What my carriage was in this Country,
many of you may bear witness; Disorders in any Army cannot be prevented, but
they were no sooner known, than punished; never was any blood spilt but in
battle, and even then many thousand lives have I preserved; and as I came in
upon his Majesty's Warrant, So upon his Letters did I lay aside all interest,
and retreated.

And for my coming in at this time, it was by his Majesty's command, in order
to the accelerating of the Treaty betwixt him and you; His Majesty knowing,
that when ever he had ended with you, I was ready to retire upon his call. I
may justly say, that never subject acted upon more Honorable grounds, nor by a
more lawful power, than I did in this service; and therefore I desire you to
lay aside prejudice, and consider me as a Christian in relation to the justice
of the quarrel; as a Subject in relation to my Royal Masters commands; and as
your Neighbor in relation to the many of your lives I have preserved in
battle; and be not too rash, but let me be judged by the Laws of God, the Laws
of Nature, and Nations, and the Laws of this Land; if you do otherwise, I do
hear appeal from you, to the Righteous judge of the world, who one day must be
both your judge and mine, and who always gives Righteous judgment.

This he delivered with such Gravity, and without Passion, as was much admired
even of his enemies. After which, the Chancellor commanded the Sentence to be
read, which he heard with a settled and an unmoved countenance, and desiring to
be further heard, was presently stopped by the Chancellor, who commanded he
should be presently removed back again to prison; where being no sooner come,
but the Ministers assault him afresh, aggravating the terror of the Sentence,
thereby to affright him. He acknowledged himself much beholding to the
Parliament for the Honor they put upon him, saying, He took it for a greater
honor to have his head stand upon the Prison Gate for this quarrel, than to
have his picture in the Kings Bedchamber. And (lest his Loyalty should be
forgotten) they had highly honored him, in designing lasting monuments to four
of the chiefest Cities, to bear up his memorial to all posterity; Wishing he
had had flesh enough, to have sent a piece to every City in Christendom, to
witness his loyalty to his King and Country.

His Friends were not suffered to come near him, but a guard was always in the
Chamber with him, insomuch as he had neither time, nor place for his private
devotions, but in their hearing.

The next day being the 21. Clothed in a Scarlet cloak richly laced with Gold
lace, he was brought to the Scaffold: He came along the Streets with so great
state, and there appeared in his countenance so much Beauty, Majesty and
Gravity, as amazed the beholders; and many even of his Enemies did acknowledge
him to be the gallantest subject in the World: but because all his Friends and
well-willers were debarred from coming near him, there was a boy designed for
that purpose on the Scaffold, who took his last Speech, Which was to this
effect.

I am sorry if this manner of my End be scandalous to any good Christian. Does
it not often happen to the righteous according to the ways of the wicked, and
to the wicked, according to the ways of the righteous? does not sometime a
just man perish in his righteousness, and a wicked man prosper in his malice?
They who know me, should not disesteem me for this; many greater than I have
been dealt with in this kind; yet I must not say, but that all Gods Judgments
are Just; For my private sins, I acknowledge this to be just with God, I submit
my self to him: but in regard of man, I may say, they are but instruments, God
forgive them, I forgive them, they have oppressed the poor, and violently
perverted Judgment and Justice, but he that is higher than they, will reward
them.

What I did in this Kingdom, was in obedience to the most just Commands of my
Sovereign, for his defense in the day of his distress, against those that rose
up against him. I acknowledge nothing, but fear God and Honor the King,
according to the commandments of God, and the Law of Nature, and Nations, and
I have not sinned against man, but against God, and with him there is Mercy,
which is the ground of my drawing near unto him.

It is objected against me by many, (even good People,) That I am under the
Censure of the Church; This is not my fault, since it is only for doing my
Duty, by obeying my Prince's most just Commands, for Religion, His Sacred
Person, and Authority. Yet I am sorry they did Excommunicate me, and in that
which is according to Gods Laws, without wronging my Conscience or Allegiance.
I desire to be relaxed; if they will not do it, I appeal to God who is the
righteous Judge of the world, and who must, and will, I hope, be my Judge and
Sviour.

It is spoken of me, that I should blame the King (God forbid,) For the late
King, he lived a Saint, and dyed a Martyr; I pray God, I may so end as He did;
If ever I should wish my Soul in another man's stead, it should be in his. For
his Majesty now living, never people I believe might be more happy in a King:
His Commands to me were most just; in nothing that he promises will he fail.
He deals justly with all men, I pray God he be so dealt withal, that he be not
betrayed under trust, as His Father was.

I desire not to be mistaken, as if my carriage at this time in Relation to
your ways were stubborn; I do but follow the light of my own Conscience, which
is seconded by the working of the good Spirit of God that is within me, I thank
him, I go to Heavens Throne with joy. If He enable me against the fear of
Death, and furnish me with courage, and considence to embrace it even in its
most ugly shape, Let God be glorified in my end, though it were in my
damnation. Yet I say not this out of any fear or distrust, but out of my duty
to God, and Love to his people.

I have no more to say, but that I desire your Charity and Prayers. I shall
pray for you all. I leave my Soul to God, my Service to my Prince, my Good will
to my Friends, and my Na^^e, and Charity to you all. And thus briefly I have
exonerated my Conscience.

Being desired to pray apart, He said, I have already powered out my Soul before
the Lord who knows my heart, and into whose hands I have commended my Spirit,
and he has been graciously pleased to return to me a full assurance of peace
in Jesus Christ my Redeemer, and therefore if you will not join with me in
prayer, my reiterating again will be both Scandalous to you, and me. So closing
his eyes, and holding up his hands, he stood a good space at his inward
devotions, being perceived to be inwardly moved all the while; When he had
done, he called for the Executioner, and gave him money. Then having brought
unto him (hanging in a cord) his Declaration, and History, he hanged them about
his neck, saying, Thongh it has pleased His Sacred Majesty that now is, to
make him one of the Knights of the most Honorable Order of the Garter, yet he
did not think himself more Honored by the Garter, than by that cord with the
Books, which he would embrace about his neck with as much joy and content, as
ever he did the Garter, or a chain of gold, and therefore desired them to be
tied unto him as they pleased.

When this was done, and his ams tied, he asked the Officers, If they had any
more Dishonor, as they conceived it, to put upon him, he was ready to accept
it. And so with an undaunted Courage and Gravitie suffered, according to the
Sentence past upon him.

THe death of the noble Marquess was not bewailed as a private loss, but
rather as a public calamity. The greatest Princes in Europe expressed no
small sorrow for his unhappy end. And indeed we have not had in this latter Age
a man of more eminent parts either of body or of mind. He was a man not very
tall, nor much exceeding a middle stature, but of exceeding strong composition
of body, and incredible force, with excellent proportion and feature; Dark
brown hayr'd, sanguine complexion, a swift and peircing gray eye, with a high
nose, somewhat like the ancient sign of the Persian Kings Magnamity. He was of
a most resolute and undaunted spirit, which began to appear in him, to the
wonder and expectation of all men, even in his childhood. Whom would it not
have startled to attempt as he did at his first entry into Scotland, a journey
wherein he could not almost escape discovery, all passes being so laid for him,
but even when he was known, and almost made public, he proceeded in his
intention? He was a man of a very Princely courage, and excellent addresses,
which made him for the most part be used by all Princes with extraordinary
familiarity; A complete Horseman, and had a singular grace in riding. Nor is it
less wonderful, how in so great scarcity of all things, when war in that
Country is but tedious with the greatest plenty it can afford, he could
patiently endure so much distress. Nor is it less to be wondered at, how he
could win so much upon those Irish, who had no tie to him either of Country,
Language or Religion, as he did. More especially when they wanted not all
manner of temptation, that either their own miseries and intolerable duty
could suggest, or the wit and sagacity of the enemy could invent to make them
leave him, and abandon the service. Besides, the many examples shown upon them,
and their continual want of Pay, either of which accidents in an Army is ground
enough, and has been many times the occasion of mutiny and desertion. Nor had
he only an excellent and mature judgment for providing and forecasting of
business, but a prompt and ready spirit likewise in matters of present danger
and sudden calamity, and these things which might have confused another another
man's understanding, as such sudden chances often do, were a whetting to his
wit. There are many stratagems in several Histories related, which in the heat
of action have been put in practice for the regaining of a day already lost, or
in danger to be so. As that of Jugurtha, a politic and valiant Prince, who in
the heat of a battle betwixt him and Marius the Roman Consul, rode up and down
in the head of the Army, showing his bloody sword, and affirming that he had
slain Marius with his own hand, which word did so encourage the Numidians, and
amaze the Romans, that had not Marius in time appeared, that day had been in
hazard. It is likewise reported of one of the Roman Captains, that he flung his
Standard amongst the middle of the enemy, that his own Soldiers by pressing
forward to rescue it, might break and disorder the enemy. Likewise of another
that took the bridles off the horse-heads, that every man might be a like
valiant, and charge, as we say, without fear or wit. But beyond all these, in
my opinion, was that device of the Marquesses, who at Alderne being in a great
straight, one wing of his Army being routed, and the other in a very staggering
condition, he did so incense that which was yet whole, with the feigned success
of the other, that they valiantly charged the enemy, and put the business
again into an even balance. And very like was it to that device of Tullus
Hostilius, who being deserted by Metius King of the Albans, told his soldiers
he had don't of purpose to try them, and by that means turned their fear into
indignation. He was exceeding constant and loving to those that did adhere to
him, and to those he knew, very affable, though his carriage, which indeed was
not ordinary, did make him seem proud; Nor can his enemies lay any greater
fault to his charge, than his insatiable desire of honor, which he did pursue
with as handsome and heroic actions as ever any did, and such as had neither
admixtion of avarice or self ends, though he was therewith by some most
unworthily branded. For these and the like virtues of which he was the rich
possessour, he was lamented all Christendom over, by all sorts of men, and
since his death too by those who had the greatest hand in it, though their
success at that time did animate their cruelty.

Nescia men's hominum fati sortisque futureae,
Et servare modum rebus sublata secundis.
The Speech of Colonel William Sybbald intended by him to have been spoken on
the Scaffold at the time of his Execution at Edinborough, Jan. 7. 1650. but
hearing that Liberty would not be given him to speak so freely, he gave a Copy
of it to a special friend.
GEntlemen, I am brought this day to this place, to pay a debt to Nature before
it be due; and by the malice and cruelty of my mercylesse enemies, I am
sentenced to dye as a Traitor to my Country, for endeavoring to do service for
my King, on whose happiness and welfare does depend the welfare of these
Kingdoms; and to whom I am bound both by the Law of God and man to perform all
faithful and loyal service: And as the cause for which I suffer proclames my
loyalty, so their Sentence does declare to all the world their disloyalty, and
their intentions against the King.

Their self-guiltinesse makes cowardly spirits cruel; and such was their
proceedings against me, as that I could not obtain an Advocate to plead for me,
nor any man skilful in the Laws, either to advise with me, or to write my
Defense, though they knew me to be ignorant of the Laws. Thus is my innocence
and integrity betrayed, partly by their malice, and my own ignorance.

The truth is, they did profer to do me any courtesy or favor, if I would
make an ingenuous confession; that is, accuse some Noblemen and Gentlemen of
keeping correspondency with his Majesty, or with the Marquess of Montrose;
which if I had done, I deserved to have been branded with perpetual infamy, for
I never knew any man in this Kingdom that did keep correspondency with them:
neither had I Commission from his Majesty, or the Marquess of Montrose to
treat with any, I did indeed speak with some Noblemen and Gentlemen, because I
was formerly obliged unto them for their love to me, and did expect from them
some small assistance to furnish, me in my journey; but I never spoke with them
concerning the public Affairs, no further than the weekly Gazets made known to
all the world; if these great Fish could have been taken in our Statesmens
Nets, it might have been that such a Minim as I, should have escaped the
Bailiff of the Fish-markets hand this day.

I have been from my youth a Soldier; and though that Calling in it self be
honorable, yet men in that Calling have greater occasions and provocations to
sin than in any private Calling. Besides naturally my youth led me to some
abominable sins, and custom in them did for many years detain me captive unto
them; so that I cannot but confess, that to me appertains shame and
confusion in this life, and damnation of soul and body eternally in Hell fire,
if God should deal with me according to my desert; my comfort is, that the
blood of my Savior cries louder in his ears for mercy, than my sins do for
vengeance; and that he who has promised a free pardon and remission unto all
penitent sinners through faith in Jesus Christ, will purge and cleanse my Soul
from all uncleanesse, and deliver me from all blood-guiltinesse by the blood of
his Son our Savior. The true sorrow that I find in my Soul for my former sins,
and that godly resolution and steadfast purpose I have to lead a new life if it
please God to continue it, together with the joy, the patience, and the courage
I have to suffer, gives me some assurance of this blessed hope, that through
faith in Christ Jesus my Savior, my penitent Soul though sinful shall be saved.

And as for my Religion, I die, as I lived, a true Protestant; this Religion, I
thank God, as it preserved me from Popish Superstition, so it kept me from
being seduced by the Novelties of the times, and from being deluded with the
wicked Doctrine which is now taught by the Reformers of the Kirk. It was this
Religion which did keep my hand from your Covenant: of which in the space of
some five years you gave two interpretations, quite contradictory; for in the
year 1639. the Assembly did affirm (as appears by our Acts of Parliament and
Assembly) that in all causes whatsoever you were to defend and maintain the
person and dignity of your King; but in the year 1644. you limit your obedience
to your King, to your Religion, Laws, and Liberty; and make your selves in all
differences between the King and you, both Judge and Party. The Religion in
which I was bred, taught me to give both to God, and my King their due; it
taught me to honor and worship God, and to expect Salvation through Christ;
and to live soberly, and to deal justly with all men. I ever hated that
Religion which made Saints or Angels sharers with God in his worship; or men
partakers with my Redeemer in the work of my Redemption, or that made our
Christian liberty a cloak of maliciousness; and though naturally I inclined to
evil, and wicked company drew me to most heinous and filthy sins; yet I thank
God I hated that Religion that taught impiety and wickedness, Rebellion,
Murder and Injustice, or that approved the killing of Kings and their loyal
Subjects for their loyalty, as having its original rather from the Devil, who
was a murderer from the beginning, than from God; and I did ever esteem it
more aggreable to man's sinful and corrupted nature, than to Gods holy Word. I
have heard a learned man say, that it were better to deny God to be, than to
believe him to be such an one who delights in the bloody sacrifices of men and
women, or to think that he is such an one who delights in cruelty and murder;
the God whom we serve and worship, is the Savior of the world, the peserver of
man, the Redeemer of Mankind, the avenger of his blood. I have been taught
from Gods word, that he has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil
dwell with him; undoubtedly such bloody Sacrifices cannot be pleasing or
acceptable to him, for they are repugnant to his nature, and contradictory to
the Justice and equity of his holy Law.

It is my greatest grief at this time, I did not walk according to the purity
of my Religion, and the holiness of God, who has called us to the knowledge
of his truth. Therefore let me entreat you to pray unto God with me, and for
me, that he would be pleased to pardon my many and great sins; that he would
purge my soul with the blood of his Son, from the guilt and pollution of all my
sins; that I may be presented unto my heavenly Father without spot or wrinkle,
holy, without blemish; that he would receive me through the merits of my
Savior into everlasting peace, and into the glorious estate of his chosen
Saints in heaven. O Lord into thy hands I commend my soul; Lord Jesu receive my
spirit; O merciful Father forgive my Enemies, and lay not this sin to their
charge, Amen.

FINIS.
Upon the Death of King Charles the First.
GReat! Good! and Just! could I but Rate
My Griefs, and Thy too Rigid fate,
I Would weep the world to such a strain,
As it should Deluge once again.
But Since Thy loud-tongu'd blood demands supplys,
More from Briareus Hands, than Argus eyes,
I Will sing Thy Obsequies with trumpet Sounds,
And write Thy Epitaph with Blood and Wounds.
MONTROSE,
Written with the point of his Sword.


