VATICINIVM CAVSVALE.

A RAPTURE Occasioned By the late Miraculous Deliverance OF HIS HIGHNESS THE
Lord Protector, From a Desperate Danger.

With, a NOVERINT UNIVERSI, in the Close.

By Geo: Wither, Esquire

Who so dwells in the Secret, of the MOST HIGH, shall abide in the shadow, of
the ALMIGHTY. LONDON, Printed for T. Ratcliffe, and E. Mottershed. 1655.

A RAPTURE Occasioned By the late Miraculous Deliverance OF HIS HIGHNESS THE
Lord Protector With, a Noverint Universi, in the Close.
I Will not let this, slip into the Dark,
Or keep the Light, without a special mark:
For, when GOD Acts, or speaks, each Word and Deed.
Should be observed, with some useful heed.
That, which has happened, cannot be undone,
Or ly concealed; For, many Lookers on,
And, (some, who love to trumpet forth Mischances,
With Descantings, on all their Circumstances)
Have publsh'd what befell. Thence, Rumor spreads;
Puts various Fancies, into Peoples heads;
And every one draws Uses, or, applies
As Malice fools him, or, Love makes him wise:
But, Providential favors, are expressed,
As well in worst, Events as in the best;
And, they who know not this, will never find
The Ports of Comfort, with an Adverse-winde,
When he that heeds this, steers through all Events,
Or, Censures, without fears, or Discontents:
Then, as a Secret, why should we disclose
From man to man, what every body knows?
And, put the Jealous Vulgar, in a fear
There Is somewhat done, not fit for them to hear?
Why, is it whispered, still, as if, to be
Surpised by those things, from which none are free,
Dishonor on his Highness could be thrown?
Or, as if him, it misbeseem'd to own
That Action, which occasioned an Event
Producing, some external Detriment?
Or, why it is conceived, as if, to Us,
Or, unto him, his fall were Ominous?
Is it not good, we should have, now and then,
Somewhat to mind us, that we are but men?
And, that our trust in Princes, gasping lies
In that short blast, which from their nostrils flies?
When he did Fall, was it not wondrous well,
That, from his seat, into GODS's Arms he fell*
And, that, He falling, fell not in such wise,
As they, who Rise, to fall; But, Fell, to Rise?
And to Arise with an improvement too,
By Thankfulness, for having escaped so?
As also, with that Mark, upon him set,
Of being GOD's especial Favorite?
If, what befell, must needs be understood
As Ominous; why, should it not of Good,
An Omen be? (as I believe it will,
Much rather, then prove Ominous for ill?
For, who can think, that, He was saved from
A Mischief, that, to Mischieves he might come?
Or, that, We, by his safty, from the Curse
Of Anarchy, are saved, for a worse?
Or, that, when Mercies GOD, is pleased to show,
They do portend some Evils to ensue?
What Inference more wicked, can be brought?
What, more profanely! what, more vilely thought!
Tired with continual Cares, (in hope, to find
Refreshments, by Diversions of the mind)
Er'e serious thoughts, were wholly laid aside,
He grasped those Raines, which, he had often tried
To manage heretofore, with good success,
When, Small things he more minded; Great things, less:
And, though he sped not, as in former time,
His Act, was not unseemely; nor a Crime,
As they suppose, whose Memory forgets,
What, others, or, what, best themselves befits.
For,'it was not judged an Unprincely Game,
To drive a Chariot, when the Olimpian Fame,
Was thirsted after; And, when on that Hill,
Kings, with their Equals, therein showed their skill,
And wrapped in Clouds, raised by their horses heels,
And, Thundrings, from their furious Charret wheels,
Were emulous, the high-priz'd Wreaths to wear
Belonging to the skilfull'st Charioteer.
And, what detraction, from the Reputation
Of Princes, is that Manly Recreation,
More now? or, then it was, when, Charles, of late,
For his disport, upon the Coach-box, sat?
(As many times he did) and not disdain
To let Inferiors, ride in Charles his Waine?
Or, what Dishonor is it, that, through one
Mishap, he failed, of what was, often, well done?
It was not want of skill, to use the Rain,
That stout, and chaste Hippolitus was slain:
But, an unlookt for, dreadful Apparition,
(Of purpose raised, to hasten his perdition)
Frighted his horses; which, with headstrong fury,
Their Driver, from the Beaten paths, did hurry
Among the Rocks: And, what, thereon befell,
(The Story is so known) I need not tell.
Yet, this I will observe, (to make the Fable,
To my Intention, further serviceable)
That, though asunder dragd, his Members were,
It magnifide his Wisdom, Love, and Care,
Who made him sound, more then it harmed him,
Who had that hurt: For, every scattered Lim,
Was reunited, without detriment
In any kind, by that dismemberment
Only, to Virbius, from Hippolitus,
His name was changed, as, it befalls us,
When, from our Selfnesse, we are rent and torn,
To be Regenerated, or Newborn.
And, so (I hope) when we have sum'd up all
Which, to his Highness happened, by his Fall,
His gains, will be much greater then his cost;
And, nothing, but self-confidence, be lost.
This, by the way: now I to that will come;
Which moved me, on this subject to presume.
A free Officiousness, does me employ
To be, this once, instead of Philips boy,
Who, every morning, called on him to mind
That, he was Mortal, and of humane kind:
For, though his sad disaster has of late,
In likelihood, remembered him, of that,
It will not be amiss, that, I engage
His Caution, further, by this surplusage;
Lest, though his Piety, shall him incline
To do his duty, I may fail of mine,
Who think my self obliged, when I shall see
Occasion, his Remembrancer to be,
As I have been to others; who, thereto
Gave less regard, then he (I hope) will do.
As GOD, has often shown, 'twas he, that, armed
His head in battle; and, preserved unharm'd
His Person, when the chance of War he tried,
And thousands slaughtered fell, on every side:
So, he now gives a new Experiment,
That, it is he alone, who does prevent,
The Danger of his Peace; and, that, there are
Perils enclosing him, when none appear.
It does inform him, with a sident tongue,
What wariness, does now to him belong
More then in former times; and, that there are
As Well in his Retirements, as in War,
Gards, Sentinels, and Watchings, necessary
With strictness to be kept; lest he miscarry.
Moreover, it informs, that, had he none
Maligning him; Even he Himself, alone,
Might be his own Destroyer; by forgetting
Due Care: Or, else, by acting, or omitting
Such things, as have a very nigh relation,
Either to Danger, or to Preservation.
It calls on him, to mind, how many ways,
And means there are, of cutting short his days
If GOD, prevent not: yea, it calls on him,
Both, to redeem, and husband well, his Time;
And, loudly calls; that, for the Mercy shown,
It may, in showing Mercy, be bestowne:
That, they, who of his Justice, well believe,
May bless him, for the Comforts, they receive;
That, they, who, in his ruin would have joy'd,
May rather wish, their own Designs destroyed;
And, that, the Blessing, may be carried on,
Which, his, and our PROTECTOR, has begun.
It likewise, calls upon us all, to heed
Both our own ways; and how, GOD, does proceed;
Chiefly, in what, of late, vouchsafed was
By his applying of preventing Grace,
For his Deliverance, in whose life consists
The likeliest Guard of public Interests;
And, which, includes, of Mercies, yet to come,
Another Pledge: and, as it were, the sum
Or, brief Epitome, of all things done
For our avail, since first the Wars begun.
My contemplating of his Dangers-past,
Makes them seem great: yet, it has made this last,
Exceed them all; and so great to have bin,
That, surely, had not, God himself, stepped in,
To bring him Succor, suddenly from heaven
No safety had been found; no Quarter given.
Thus have we seen, a tender Mother, run
(Or, rather fly) when her dear only Son
Was innocently playing in the street;
And snatch him, from among the horses feet
Indangering his Life: Thus, have we seen.
A Loving Bridegroom, throw himself between
Death, and his Bride; and bravely fetch her from
A Peril, which was desperate become.
To tell this Danger, were to tell you that,
Which I can better Fancy, then relate;
And, which (as I conceive it) cannot well
Be better shown, by any parallel,
Then when a brave Ship, on huge Billows tossed,
With Sails full-spread, Helm broke, and Ruther lost,
Is by a strong storm, in the darkest night,
Forced to a strange Coast, with a wind fore-right,
Upon the Rocks, which over-hanging, lie,
The foming Floods, a hundred fathomes high;
Where, every Wave, all cries for help, out roares;
Threating destruction, both from Seas and shoares:
Where, can be seen nor Earth, nor Heaven, nor Light,
But dark blind ways, to everlasting night;
And, where, no succor, find admittance can
By all the Power, and all the wit of man.
By this Description, you, perhaps, may guess
From what a depth of desperate dang'rousnesse
His Highness was repreev'd; and, who, alone
Must, then, be his Deliverer, or none.
Thence, you may likewise, gather, if you will,
(And not continue blind, and froward, still)
Who takes charge of him; Whom, they do oppose;
Who without cause, at this time are his Foes;
And, for what end, such aids vouchsafed be
In great immergencies; And, so may HE.
Oh! let us, therefore, better now, improve
The evidences of Eternal Love,
Then we have done: and, let his Highness, mind,
How bountiful, how gracious, and how kind,
Our GOD has been to him; that, so he may
Unto his People, part thereof repay,
In love to them: Let him remember, too,
Had he miscari'd, what had been to do:
What, likely to be suffered; not alone
By some of us; but, even by ever'y one,
Who breaths the British air; and, not despise
This Counsel, though the Giver seem unwise.
Yea, let it be considered, (to improve
A hastening, unto Unity in Love)
What sad Confusions, had anew been hurld.
Upon this much unsettled British world,
(And, upon others, whom we would respect)
If, what was almost done, had took effect.
Let this great Mercy, never be forgot;
Chiefly, of him, who has the largest Lot
In this Deliverance; Lest worse he speed,
When of a Helper, he shall stand in need.
And, let it make him, more to hasten on
That, which his Prudence prompteth should be done;
Lest, some such Humane Casualtie prevents
The manifesting of his good Intents,
And gives his Foes, occasions to believe
Their own vain thoughts; And makes his friends to grieve.
I doubt not, what I counsel* If I did,
It had with me, in mine own heart, lain hid.
But, He, who me emboldneth unto this,
Persuades me, that my aims, I shall not miss:
Gives me, for earnest of them, a presage,
Of healths Return, with future Tutulage:
Shows me, by what conditions, he may gain
The Eshablishment, he labors to obtain;
And (secret things considered) bids me, tell him,
'Twas Mercy, not a Mischief, that befell him:
That, also, there are greater Mercies, yet,
For him, reserved; if he shall not forget
This Favor; nor the Vows, and Protestations,
Made heretofore, to GOD, and to these Nations:
Assures me, that, on these Conditions lies,
The highest glory, whereto he can rise;
And, that, if he escape the stumbling stones,
Environing th'Ascent, to Earthly Thrones,
He, without fear of any harm, shall tread
On Vipers Aspes, and on the Dragons head:
That, Emperor to style him, should not better
His happy Lot, or make him ought the greater;
But, rather seem, a foolish over-lay
Of purest Ophir Gold, with common Clay.
Thus, otherwhile, Remembrances I scatter,
As, GOD, and Man's proceedings, offer matter;
Not without some discernable effect:
(Though neither they, nor I, gain much respect.)
For, on my Self, they have an operation
Not needless; yea, the less good acceptance,
They have with others, they, thereby, to me
The more effectual, sometimes rendered be;
And, teach me to be quiet, and to bear
What misbefals me, with more Joy, then Care.
Thus, when the Bows of Malice are full bent,
And, poys'ned shafts, made ready to be sent
Against the upright in heart; I, interpose
Minerva's shield, sometimes, unknown to those
Whom it secures; and, when, for what was done,
Others, with all the thanks, away have gone.
Long since, with suchlike Spells, and Charms as these,
I did assay, to cure the Kings disease;
But, either, he was over-deaf to hear,
Or else, not strong enough, my Charmings were.
Often, afterward, I sung unto the State,
Some Lessons, which, when 'twas a day too late,
Were called for; and frequently there fell
Much ill to me, for wishing others well.
Sometimes, I, to the Common People fidle
To still their madness; and, often fool, and riddle
To make them wiser: but, with little gains,
To them; and, loss of labor, for my pains.
And, now, to charm those, I endeav'ring am,
Who seek to turn his Glory, into shame,
Whom GOD, has honored; That, I might make less
(If possible) their sottish bruitishnesse,
Who wound themselves, through him; and scoff and jear
At Mercy, shown to their Deliverer,
In such a Danger, as could be, by none
Removed, but, by an Almighty-one.
Vain sons of men, how long, will ye despise
Good Counsel! and, still, follow after Lies!
Not knowing, or not heeding, that, GOD has
Maugre your Spite, your Envy, and your Wrath,
Made him to be your Lord, whom you contemn;
To Supreme honors height, advanced him;
Laughs you to scorn; Turns al your oppositions,
To his advantage and your own perditions:
Not heeding, GOD, has given all these Lands;
All these three Nations, up, into his hands;
And, him, on them bestowed; to make proof, whether
He, or else They; or, both of them, or neither,
Will hearken to his Voice: that, he may do,
What their proceedings will incline him to.
Fools! it is not as you dream: But, whatsoever
He Was, or Is, or, shall to you appear,
GOD, from among your selves, did him advance,
To guard his Flocks, and his Inheritance;
To be a friendly comforter of those,
Who are his Friends; A terror to his Foes:
And, what, you fret and storm at, was not done,
By man's designments; but, by GOD, alone.
Through all these Islands, be it therefore known;
And, to all persons, every where, which own,
Relation to this Empire; that by him,
Who has dispose of every Diadem,
( Of Scepters, Crowns, and Thrones) the change was made,
Which did remove the Government we had;
( When our great sins deserved to be bereft,
Of all those Privileges, which are left)
And, that, GOD, in mere mercy, did translate
The Power, which was in other men, of late,
To be with him entrusted, who is now
Styled, your PROTECTOR. Know, likewise, that, you
Are bound, by Law and Conscience, to obey;
And humbly at his Throne, your selves to lay
On those Conditions, only, whereon, he
Has your Protector, undertook to be.
Moreover, Be it known, that, if he shall
Perform his Part; and, you perversely fall
Into rebellious actings; or, not cease
From those, which may disturb the common-peace;
His Scepter, shall, perforce, your stif necks bend
To that, which he does Righteously intend;
And, either thereunto obedient make you,
Or, therewith, bruise; or, else, to pieces break you:
Lest, your perverseness, bring a Tirant hither,
To break us; never to be set together.
And, that, if prudently you do comply,
He may, at last, improve his Sov'raignty,
To make you far more happy, and more free,
Then else, you had been, or had means to be.
And, now great OLIVER, to thee, likewise,
Let this be known; and, do not thou despise
The Publisher; GOD, does expect to have
Honor from them, to whom he honor gave:
That, such, who have the rule over men, be just:
That, they their Vows infringe not, nor his trust:
That, they consider, he bestows large measure,
Of Power upon them, not to act their pleasure,
Or to fulfill their lust; but, does enlarge
His Bounty, that their Place, they may discharge
With Courage: That, he Riches does provide,
Lest Avarice, might draw their hearts aside;
Or, wants, to do injustice, them compel:
That, he gives honors, not to make them swell
Above their Brethren; but, them, to exempt
From what, may fall upon them, by contempt:
And, that, all these things, are on them bestown,
Much more, for others sakes, then for their own.
Know SIR, that, GOD, from persons in your place,
Expects all this; and thereto offers Grace,
And Power, for asking: That, (what ere some say)
He, none necessitates to go astray;
Nor leaves, nor hardens any (not the worst)
Till, Love to selfnesse, makes them, leave him first.
If, this, thou well considering, shall act
Accordingly; performing thy Contract,
With GOD, and with his People; he, shall then,
Give thee the Love, and Hearts, of all Good men:
Fix thee as firmly, as the Rocky shoares,
Which slight the Ocean, when it foames and roares:
And brighter make thy Fame, and spread it more,
Then any man's renowned heretofore:
For, in Fames Book, thou may enrolled be
The first, who, made a People truly free:
And firstborn, of those Viceroyes, who, shall take
Their Throns from HIM, whose Kingdom down will break,
All Monarchies of Tirants; with all those,
Who, help patch up, the Clay and Iron toes,
The Relics of that Image, which has bin
The prop of him, that is called, the man of sin.
All this may be: and, if thou strive to go
The way, that open lies; It shall be so.
Oh! lose not this advantage, for a Buble,
Which, in vain hope, begins, and ends with trouble.
And, lastly, Be it known, ( not by event
Which may be to thy future detriment,
But, by pre-caution) that, if fail thou shall
Without this Peoples obstinate default,
Of what they, justly may from thee expect,
Who art advanced their freedoms to protect;
Or shall abuse thy Power, them, to oppress;
Or, leave them unreliev'd, in their distress,
So, that, they must be forced to cry, and call,
To GOD, for help: GOD, hear, and help them shall:
Search what is done: And, though their former sin,
Has great, and full of provocations bin,
He, for the present time, will pass it by,
And on thy failings, only, cast an eye:
Avenge their Cause; call thee, account to give,
Of all those Favors, which thou did receive;
( Of that late Mercy, too, among the rest,
Which has occasioned, what, is here expressed)
And, with much indignation, cast thee down,
When, to its height, thy Confidence is grown.
Yea, they, who shall most flatter, and with whom
Thou, shall then, think most safe thou may become,
Will help destroy thee: And, this, shall to Thee
A sad presage, of thy destruction be,
Which, may be made a Prophecy Divine,
Of Everlasting Good, to Thee, and Thine.
But, to his Saints, GOD, gives a blessed close;
And, keeps his Vengeance, only, for his Foes.
Thus, I have shown, that, Mercy which produces
Contempt in Scorners, came for better uses:
Let it, by all, whom it concerns, be weighed;
And, when, I Have more to say, It shall be said.
Geo. Wither.
