Respublica Anglicana OR THE HISTORY OF THE PARLIAMENT In their late
PROCEEDINGS, WHEREIN The Parliament and Army are vindicated from the calumnies
cast upon them in that libellous History of Independency, and the falsehoods,
follies, raylings, impieties, and blasphemies, in that Libell detected. The
Necessity and lawfullnesse of secluding the Members, laying aside the King, and
House of Lords, is demonstrated. The Lawfullnesse of the present power is
proved, and the just and necessary grounds of the Armies march into Scotland
are represented. Published for public satisfaction. The Author G: W:

Lege, Perlege, and Judica. LONDON, Printed by F. Leach, for George Thompson,
dwelling at the sign of the White horse in Chancery Lane, 1650.

To the Reader,
OUr Ancestors would have rejoiced, might they have had but the liberty under
their Kings to have followed Truth at the heels, without danger of their teeth,
and have allowed a little Courtship in an History to the present Prince for
such a favor; but now there is a sort of men that nothing can content, unless
they may tread on truth's heels, and trample upon the present Governors; may
and this sort, should another but term such Kings Tyrants, will fly in his
face, whilst themselves will reproach the present Governors with Tyranny, and
what not, because they may not have license to abuse them, and Truth too, in
their scurrilous Pamphlets: yet such is the wisdom of our times, that such as
these are the only vendible and cried up writers, as if Liberty consisted in
crying up Tyranny, and defaming those that resist it

A second sort we have and they forsooth are all for the old way, all truths
with these are Puritanical, Brownisticall, Anabaptisticall and Schismatical,
which have not been entailed on by them their Grandsires: Religious and civil
Government, must be a Gentleman of 3. descents, like a Knight of Malta, or it
must not be admitted into their order, a right worshipful tenent for such who
arrogate solely to themselves the name Protestant. But say they, our
Forefathers were wiser than we, and we will follow them: we grant they were,
for they embraced the Truth, and would not be scared by the bugbear of Novelty;
had they cried out for the old way, how had these Youths ever have had any
title to the Protestant Religion? the Mass was as ancient then, as the
Common Prayer Book now, and Priors, Abbots, and Monks, as Prelates, Deanes,
and Prebends, yet at the first dawning of truth they chased away those Bats and
Owls, and the new light appearing, was embraced, not scorned; so that the dark
shadows of Ignorance and Superstition vanished, and the ferall Birds of Night
were put to flight. These were the worthy actions of our Protestant Ancestors,
whom these old-way-Men will needs imitate forsooth, by acting the quite
contrary.

A third sort, are those, who know not what they would have, they would have a
King and they would not; they would have the Parliament prevail, and yet the
Scotch and Irish designs must not be defeated; they will have the Privilege of
Subjects, yet not perform the duties of Subjects; and receive protection, yet
not return subjection: and is it not an hard case that their wishes and wills
are not accomplished, which being only contradictory may so easily be
reconciled; and a great persecution, that all men are not compelled to be of
their mind?

The last sort are a Rabble which think no man can be religious, who is not of
all Religions: with whom it is Antichristanisme not to deny Christ, infidelity
to believe the Scriptures, and he has not the Spirit who excludes not the Holy
Ghost, the Holy Trinity; with these it is sin to abstain sro^ sin, and he the
least, who is the grossest sinner: but I abhor to mention these Champions of
Hell, who war against Satan by being of his black Guard.

And now, since every one will have his humor, though never so ridiculous, and
wicked; I hope I may have the favor to enjoy my conscience, though I differ
from all or any of these crotchets.

Suppose I conceive I am bound to praise God, and be thankful to Authority,
that I may write truth, without fear of halter, pillory, or whip now, when I
can remember, as young as I am, that to call a Spade a Spade, was counted no
less than Treason; as also that I abhor to play the knave to please fools, or
to tickle their ears, by lies bite, and railings scratch, all that are wiser,
honester, and more generous than such dull animalls: must I therefore be
thought not worth the reading?

Suppose I conceive I am bound to prefer naked truth before error, though she
be brought in with the sound of English Organs, or Scotch Bag-pipes, arrayed in
a Surplice, Rochet, Cope and Miter, with tagg, ragge and bob-taile cringing and
bowing to her; As also to make the Scriptures rather my Guide, than men's
traditions and inventions, and to receive that as the good, and old way, which
the ancient of days commands me to walk in: must I therefore be no
Protestant, but a Novellist?

Suppose I conceive, that all powers that are are of God; that I ought to pray
for Magistrates, that I may live a godly and peaceable life under them; that I
am bound to give subjection in all lawful things, where I receive protection:
must I therefore be a Traitor and seditious person?

Supose I conceive I cannot keep the Covenant, wherein I vowed to defend
Religion and Liberty, by endeavoring to set up the Enemy of both, for my own
private Faction or Interest; to endeavor to bring all Delinquents to consligne
punishment, without respect of Persons, by respecting the person of any man; to
endeavor a Reformation according to the word of God, which is preach and
baptize, not perfecute and force; that I cannot see any Justice in hanging up
the Sword, and worshipping as Sacred the Murderer; that I cannot attain to
comprehend that mystery of maintaining Parliamentary privilege, by destroying,
or suffering to be destroyed, Parliamentary power for ever: of keeping the
Laws; by making them act contrary to their end, the general good; of crying
out of persecution, because I may not force others to be of my opinion, though
they equally detest with me all Heresy and Blasphemy: must I therefore be a
Covenant Breaker, a Sectary, a favourer of Heresy, and Blasphemy? Sure such
Language as this, will never appear true English, though interest may alter the
case in Scotch; but though it do I care not, for I am an English man, and
desire to appear so, both in my language and interest: the Liberty I engaged
for was that of my own Country, and in preserving that, I shall endeavor to
dash all Scotch and self interest in pieces, not that I abhor, or hate the
persons of the Scotch, but because it is my duty to love and serve my Country.

And truly so far am I from hating that Nation, that I wish our Sectaries (as
they term them) may be as diligent to instruct them in Liberty, as their
Presbyterians will seem forward in teaching us Religion: I would reward them
good for evil, and though they do strive to pull us in, yet let us endeavor
to help them out of slavery; it may be this also will be called Sectarian
doctrine, but I care not: for though it may seem contrary to Scotch
Declarations, yet it is consonant to Heavens Ordinances, and I had rather obey
God than men, than Scotch men, and shall account them no Christians, who shall
not judge it my duty to believe Him before a Scotch Committee of Estates or
Kirk.

To sum up all, I would have thee Reader know, That Fools and Knaves, whether
English or Scotch, shall never fright nor juggle me out of christianity and
humanity, but that, by the assistance of God, I shall endeavor, as a
Christian, to make the Word; as a Man, Reason; and as an Englishman, the
general good of this Nation, the ground of all my actions: and in thus doing I
value not thine, or any man's displeasure.

Farewell,
Respublica Anglicana, OR, The History of the Parliament in their late
proceedings, etc.
THe History of Independency, though it may appear to have been stiffled in the
Birth, the greatest part of the First Impression being suppressed by public
Authority, and together with it is Author prohibited a public walk; yet much of
it in parcels having been before vented (the crafty Enemy skirmishing in small
parties before he would bring on his main body, and by getting off without
personal loss growing more daring, but one subtiller than He owed Him a shame)
and many of the last escaping the seizure, which were secretly dispersed, and
covertly reprinted by the Booksellers, of whom too many are more then enough
prone to disserve the State, and these being greedily sought, and at high
prices bought, by that sort of men who, audax omnium perpeti ruit in vetitum
nefas, will hazard a Paradise to partake of forbidden fruit, it came in fine
into most hands; thus being divulged, and not to be thought altogether
inconsiderable, in regard of the politic composure, and crafty couching of
it is Calumnies, backed much by the repute of the Author, lately a Member of the
House, and before a seeming Zealot in the Parliamentary Cause, as his fiery
prosecution of Col. Nathaniel Fiennes, may persuade many; I conceived it would
be worth my labor, and not unbecomming my duty to discover the Imposture, and
vindicate the present Governors and Government from the false imputations cast
upon them by this, and other such invectives belched out by him and others his
accomplices, the Simeon and Levies Brethren in the Iniquity of this age. And
though I may seem an unequal Match for such a veterane, a Hoary Sophister; yet
being assured that Truth will the more gloriously triumph in my weakness, I
shall enter the Lists, and in confidence of my cause, not only combat him, but
dare the tallest of the Sons of Anak to the encounter, which shall endeavor to
hinder our possessing the promised Land, the Canaan of Liberty; and what indeed
should I fear, when the deepest wounds I can receive will be but scarres of
honor; and the worst come to the worst, I shall appear to have as real a
heart, though not so able a hand, as any, to the service of my Country? But to
leave off words and come to deeds, by which the controversy must be decided,
for a longer declining it may favor of fear. And now, though it be long ere I
could abide to touch him, my Genius abhorring a Scold, I will uncase the
Vrchin, that you may handle him without pricking your fingers.

Of all things passion and affection should not be discovered in an Historian,
who must appear impartial in the manner, or else the matter of his writing will
never gain belief: For Wise men discovering him to be a party, will not accept
of his evidence in his own cause; the Author therefore was very indiscreet to
show his Teeth so much, or if he could not bridle his passion, to style his
Book an History.

A Politician knows, that by slightly commending he shall more discredit his
Adversary, than by openly reviling him: for seeming a friend, Men are apt to
believe he adds when he diminishes, but appearing a foe, they suspect every
thing to be detraction, and calumny; Were I then but a Knave I would bate
railing.

Every one can stand on St. Georges guard, and ward a down right blow; and it
is the first step to safety to know ones enemy. Ioab speaks peaceably to Abner,
and pretends a kiss to Amasa, when he intends to smite them under the fifth
rib: Were I a Spider and sucked poison where the Be gathers Honey, were I an
Atheist, and believed not the Scriptures, yet could I have made more use of my
Bible, than many now a days, who would be thought Christians, and have learnt
so much craft, that when I intended to Murder, it were the only sure way under
the vizor of a friend to mask my design.

I must ingenuously confess that I have always smiled at the foolish
bitterness of the Malignant party, and wondered that men who pretended to all
the wit, to be the only learned and politic Statesmen, could never discover
their own folly, and discern how much their lying and railing disadvantag'd
themselves, by making them appear rather Bedlams than Politicians, much less
Christians: for who but will judge he wants reason and truth, who patches up his
discourse with railing and falsehood?

It seems by the help of Judge Ienkins, a notorious old scold, this quality of
railing (heretofore by all Sages judged a fee fimple, nay simplest) is turned
into a tail special, to a Malignant and his Heirs males, and so descends from
Aulicus by Pragmaticus, Elencticus, etc. to this Author, Theodorus Verax, in
English Clement Walker. The Latin was false, I am therefore forced to mend it
by truly construing it. I hope he will not take it as an injury that I name him,
for he that seems so resolute as to despise death, and what not, in his Cause,
cannot with any gallantry deny to own it, when indeed he must whither he will or
no.

This might seem strange, nay almost incredible, were he not a Malignant, That
Clement Walker, late a Member of the House of Commons, an ancient, and so one
might think a grave man, should not only transgress the Rules of History,
Modesty, Honesty and Piety, but so affect Levity, and gibing, that rather than
want He will steal thread bare scurrility of those beggarly Buffoons Prag. The
Moon calf, etc. to play with a man's Nose, nay such stuff that he might well
suppose would be very nauseous to any ingenuous stomach, having been so often
vomited out before: O there is no Fool to an old one, nor none so bitter an
Enemy to you, O Presbyters, as an old Malignant, who so detests you that he
abhorres to follow an Author that is Classical, for the very names sake.

Should I answer him at his own weapon, and fall foul upon his nose, it would
be but fair dealing, and he could not complain of hard or unjust usage should I
mete the same measure to him that he has done to others much more his betters;
and it may be he will be convinced of his own incivility to others, by seeing
how ill it would become me, should I accost him with such Complements.

Truly were there hopes of this, I could be drawn to deny my self to recover
him, and would stray to reduce this wanderer; as long as there is life there is
hope: I beseech you therefore to pardon if I shall a little digress in hope
that he is not incorrigible; and with your good leave, you shall see that if I
would, I can be even with him; as for example.

1. I could tell you how it has been observed that the Popes names and their
natures seldom suited, as Pope Clem. here (who has with Bell, Book, and Candle
anathematized the Parliament, Assembly, and Army, in this which may properly
enough be termed his Bull by it is bellowing and goring) may as well be termed
Boniface as Clement; yet should you call him so, all that ever saw him may
depose you abused him: for his face is as far from good as his Book, and both
sufficiently enough proclaim him no true lement, in which are so to the life
delineated an invective and spightful nature.

2. How he looks like the pourtraicture of Envy, or as the vulgar say, the
picture of ill Luck, Dame Nature having drawn as crooked Lines on his Front,
as he has on his Paper, and in both Volumes you may run and read an Ishmael,
whose hand is against every one, a venomous little Animal, that wastes it is own
Bowels to catch flies; for none elfe will be captivated.

3. How you might take him for a Reviver of the Sect of the Cynicks, a Diogenes
in a Satin Doublet, but for his barking so against Tubs, and being so
wretchedly infected with the itch of Covertousness, as appears by his
scratching now he dreams others have got more by sitting in the House than he
has done.

I could also give you a description of this little Chaos, this indigested
spot, wherein lay hid -- Discordia semina rerum, the seeds of Sedition, which
have brought forth a very full crop this year.

1. How Ingenuity is terraincognita, the unknown Land in the map of his face,
which you would think all Sea by it is Billows, and yet no where descry Mare
pacificum, the calm Sea, it is so rough with continual Tempests.

2. How that if he ever had any sign of modesty it is now swallowed up in the
Pits of his Cheeks, which like the Curtian Gulf could never be satisfied,
until they had devoured the best thing in this little Babel.

3. How that the Remnant of Blood taking the Alarm from the gnashing his Teeth,
escaped into the tip of his nose, which is turned a Red coat, and holds it
lawful in spite of his Teeth or Tongue either, to maintain a Civil War, on the
Ground of Selfe-preservation.

4. How the least read in Physiognomie may spell the storms of his mind out
of the Waves in his face, whose furrowed up and Downs make many a vacuum, that
his outside may be as unphilosophical as his inside, an equal transgressor
against God, and Nature.

5. How there is no more harmony without, than within him, and how had the
ancient Egyptians been to figure out such a Gypsy, the Bear and ragged staff
had been the Hieroglyphick of his raging soul and rough cast Body.

Thus you and he may see, that I could, if I would play upon him without Prags.
help; I desire not to meddle with his Person, as knowing natural defects are
not within a man's power to amend; yet it is a true saying, that we should
beware of those whom God marks, and as true also, that many times a ragged soul
wrinkles a smooth face: but it is needless to judge of his qualities by that,
which will be best read in his book, and if you will be pleased to make use of
my short perspective, it will show you as plainy the spots in this Man, as ever
Galilejes did in the Moon.

And to save your time and money, I shall briefly show you his open falsehoods,
his closer couched tales, with his contradictions, juglings, railings,
blasphemy and impiety, and then shall come and take off what he would by these
cast upon the Parliament cause, especially in relation to their late
proceedings.

First, He who has been pleased to affirm, That the Knaves (meaning some
eminent honest Men) lied like Saints, will neither speak truth as becomes a
Saint, or lie, we will use his own broad phrase, for it is probable he
understands his own Language best, like a Knave; for he tells such palpable
ones, that almost every one can contradict. I know not what design this Lord of
the Manor of Barley Broth could have in thus doing, unless he intended to
purchase another Hell; but let him take heed the pottage there be not too hot.

Or goes by that rule calumniare fortiter aliquid harebit, throw dirt by
shovels full on thy Adversary, and some will stick. It is I confess, and has
been the practice of all the Malignant Scriblers so to do, and yet we may thank
God that we have been little losers by it: for they have engaged against Heaven
by it, as well as against us, and have made God their enemy.

First in his Epistle he avers, That there were men on purpose mixed among the
Surry Petitioners to raife a whoop, and disorder them, that they might be taken
in a toil, and fallen upon with Horse and Foot; and that Gentlemen of as good
quality as the General had their Pockets, Cloakes, Hats, Swords, Horses, and
Doublets plundered.

Had he named one either in quality a Lord, or Lord General, it had not been
Gentlemen, and so had been false, yet he can never do that; but this is the
truth of the business, The Surrey men by the opportunity of so many Taverns,
Alehouses, and boon Companions, being gotten drunk, violently rushed into the
Hall, Lobby, etc. where they both abused the Members, affronted the Guard,
whooped and roared (being ecchoed by the Crew without, made up of all the scum
of that end the Town) in so hideous a manner, as if they desired rather to
deafen the House, than to have been heard by them; a great number of them being
gotten into the Court of Request, danced crossing and thwacking their cudgles,
the most perfect whoop Barnaby, the most absolute drunken Morisco, that you
ever saw, reeling a kind of Hay to the harsh music of their throats, and
rattling noise of their hob-nail'd shoes, as if the Bacchanals came to
celebrate the Dyonisian Orgies, or took the High Court for a May Pole, and so
came to play their old May-games about it: but as if it were not enough to have
given them this alarm, they boasted to beat up the Houses quarters, swearing,
they would have their Petition granted, or they would pluck the Members out by
the ears, and thus Pot-valiant began to throng to the door. The Guard being
unwilling to be pinioned in that drunken Crowd, where if need were, they should
not be able to use their arms, charged them to stand off, upon this they
crowded higher, and were answered by the Dunghils without, and presuming on
their numbers violently rushed on the Guard; but some Horse and Foot being in a
readiness, as having had good warning by their bragging, In vino veritas.
and supposing that being in drink, they meant as they said, came in the nick,
rescued the Guard, and totally routed them who were more than enough disordered
before.

This was done, and who can deny but fit to be done; and for what they lost
they may thank themselves for beginning a tumult, and their suburb Companions,
who were excellently dexterous to help unburthen them of Cloaks, Hats, etc. I
am confident that when they were sober, had they but known their own incivility
in affronting the Parliament and their Guard, they would have thanked God, and
those they abused, that they sped so well. Had this vindicative old Bedlam bin
Captain of the Guard, I might have related more than all he has done, and that
truly too, but God be thanked the cursed Cow has but short Horns, Lying and
Railing are his Bounds, thither he can go, and no further.

He affirms, Part 1. p. 86.87.
That when the Boys made the Tumult, April, 8 and 9. 1648. the Lord General
Cromwell followed the Soldiers in the Rear, animating them to shoot, and spit
them, and to spare neither Man, Woman nor Child, and crying out to them to fire
the City: That the Soldiers cut and wounded all they met. How false this is
will appear by the small number of hurt or killed, and those that were hurt,
being but a little slightly slashed to terrify and warn others, rather than
out of any desire to mischief them; besides I appeal to those thousands who
stood at their doors, windows, and in the street, and saw the business, yet
were never spoken to by the Soldiers, unless when they supposed there might
be danger, and then too, only to take heed to themselves, whether they did not
see the Soldiers shoot high on purpose, and where they struck once with the
edge strike twenty times with the flat of their Swords: but had the Soldiers
been Cabs, and Rupert, Goring, or the Great Chief at Leicester Himself in the
Rear, then I doubt not but Clem might have been in the Right. Alas poor Clem
what il luck thou had, that they were not the men.

He averres, Part 1. p. 97.
That the Lord Genesis Cromwell sold his Welsh Prisoners for 12d. a head to be
sent into barbarous Plantation. Had they not bin Cavaleers he would have put in
Horns and all I warrant you: but here he shows a little more wit in his anger,
he lays the scene a little farther off; yet though all London cannot give him
the Lie, all Wales can, which knows the Common Soldiers were sent to their
own homes, and the Officers were to quit England for a time, three or four
only excepted, of which only Poyer suffered; it may be some poor Scoundrels,
who either had no homes, or durst not go to a home if they had one, were
willing to go to our English Plantations, Virginia, the Barbados etc.
barbarous and Barbado begins indeed something alike, yet dare I affirm, that
all these Plantations he terms barbarous, cannot show so uncivil, so
barbarous, so impious a wretch as the Tower of London can.

He says Mr. Gurdon made a motion to have the Ladies Norwich, Capell, and her
Children, Part 1 p 101.
sent to the General to be set in the Front of the Army in storming
Colchester, and that he was seconded by many more. Had he had so little honesty
as to tell tales out of the House, yet he might have had so much modesty as not
to tell them so, that the whole House must contradict him; but suppose it were
true, and that Master Gourdon, and other Gentlemen did motion that those might
be sent to be set in the Front of our Army, when Norwich, Capell, Lucas, and
those should salley out with the Committee set in their Front, what great
business had this been to deter a barbarous Enemy from causing those
Gentlemen to be murdered, whom they had carried away contrary to all Articles
of War, being men in their own Country and not in Arms, and kept too by denying
to exchange them? But then He says That they never intended to use the
Committee so, then Mr. Gourdon never desired to have them used so, and to prove
this, he says, Rushworth reported they were well used, thank the General, who
sent them in their diet, and their scarcity within, who would never have
granted that, but to save their own provisions; also they were not set in the
Front, good reason, because the Common soldiers in Colchester mutined, and
would not sally out, which if they would have done, their great Commanders had
determined to do it, and had set the time too, and this has been affirmed by
the Committee themselves in my hearing, who were certainly informed of it by
the Cabs themselves, which was to have been on the Thursday before the Town was
yielded; but the Soldiers being ascertained that their Officers intended to
salley out, and if they could by their help break through, to run away being
well horst, and leave them to the fury of our Soldier, whom they knew would be
much enraged to have been made isntrumental in the deaths of the Committee so
basely murdered by their Officers, and themselves too, who permitted it,
mutined, and that so highly and unanimously, that their Officers had much ado
to pacify them; and thus you may see the verity and ingenuity of old Clem, who
knew all this as well as I, in telling the story.

He affirms, Part 1: p. 102.
That the Lord General Fairfax having gotten together the Trained Men of
Suffolk and Essex to assist him, put them in the forlorn hope in all his
stormings of Colchester, and drove them on with his Horse, using them as the
Turk does his Asaphi to dead the first fury and edge of the Enemy, that his
Ianisaries at the last may come on with the more safety, and carry the
business. A Barbarous falsehood, as the Militia of two Counties, and an Army
can witness; speak out you injured Gentlemen in both Counties, whom he has
made such tame Slaves and Cowards: but the gallant demeanor of the Lord
General and Army is so deeply rooted in the memories of those Suffolk and
Essex Troops and Companies, that such a calumny as this can never pluck it
up; it is needless to say more therefore to this.

He says, That M: Genesis Skippon has secured his personal Estate, P. 1. p. 120.
his Wife and Children beyond Sea, and thereby has withdrawn all pledges of
his fidelity, and is here but in the nature of a Soldier of Fortune. This is a
lie as visible as the Major Gen: Wife and Children are every day; but the Major
Gen: has spent as much blound in defense of his Country, as this wretch has
wasted Ink to destroy it.

He averrs, That there is not one Assembly-man, P. 1. p. 174.
but is illegally thrust into another man's benefice. We need not go far to
disprove this; speak thou O London for the rest, which have four Assembly men
who never had any sequestered Benefice, to wit, Doctor Gouge, Mr. Caryll, Mr.
Walker, Mr. Calamie, and contradict him.

He affirms, That the fight against the Scots, was little better than a
beating up of quarters for 20 miles together, for so far the Scotch Army lay
scattered in their Quarters, their Horse so far distant from their Foot they
could bring them no seasonable relief. A very broad Lie; for the very first day
they were drawn up into so large a body that 2. Regiments were left to hinder
their overwinging, and so enclosing our Army at such distance, that they had
little or no employment the first fight; Hamilton still shogging down with
Reserves, and bringing fresh hands to maintain the advantages of the Lanes and
pass he had against ours, and so not advancing in breadth, as it was supposed
he would.

But, suppose it had been so the first day; this was nothing to the second, or
third day, on which he confesses the fight continued, nay and rails at Lieut
Gen: Baylie, for delivering up the arms of the foot after at the pass at
Warrington, by which it appears he thought the first, second, and third days
loss, not so considerable, but that Baylie might have maintained that pass,
had he not been a Traitor; but this is all any man shall get by engaging for
the Cavaliers; with old Clems favor we may well return the Turk (he bestowed
before on the L. Gen:) to him and his gang, whose Bashaw's head must go for
their ill Fortune. You shall never hear an Aulicus, Pragmaticus, Clem, or any
inferior sucking Cab confess their side was beaten, but they lay it on the
treachery of one or other of their Commanders in chief; thus Rupert's health
must not be drunk, for his treachery in delivering up Bristoll, Col. Fielding
must be condemned for yielding Reading, and Windebank shot for losing a paltry
little House; and thus are the Scots rewarded with the names of Traitors, and
Cowards, for their good will to the Cabs, and making such a costly journey to
help them: one would think that if they had either sense or reason, they might
long ere this have been convinced, that it is no impossible thing for the Cabs
to be beaten, as at Marston Moor, the Battle of Namptwich, the fight near
Chester, where Poyntz commanded in chief, and near Stow of the old, where old
Ashly was taken with innumerable other places, where the most obstinate Cabs
commanded. But you may see what metal old Clem is made of, he is no Cavalier,
not he alas! he abhors them, lies and slanders, as the Devil does Holie-water.

These out of many hundreds I have set down to convince you, what a due respect
you ought to have to these following stories; for which he can show neither
sense or reason, and which are only mounted on the basis of Clems bare word.

He affirms, P. 2. p. 195.
That Col. Popham, when he had lost most of his Men at Kingsale, besides diverse
Ships, was commanded to conceal the evil news, and to tell the House, that he
had left Kingsale blocked up with ten ships, and the Seas secured.

That the Speaker bled in private (how came Clem to know it then? P. 2. p. 212
) 15000 l. toward the Irish Expedition, to have the Charge taken off against
him. I cannot think Clem was the Surgeon, yet it may be Clem going to bed in a
covetous humor, might dream he held the Basin he bled into.

That the Lord General Cromwell writ Letters to Col. Jones, how heartlesse his
Soldiers were, P. 2. p. 229
and that unless he did by some successful sallie lessen their terror, he
should not be able to get them on shipboard.

This Letter was intercepted by the Major that brought news that Dublin was
taken, in one of the Egg-shels which the great Mogul sent to transport the 3000
Lorrain Horse into Ireland, and so Clem saw it.

That the Lord Genesis Cromwell writ Letters to some of the Council of State by
Col. Monk himself, P. 2. p. 230
desiring them for satisfaction of the Soldiers and People, to treat with Col.
Monk to take the whole business upon himself, of his Treaty with Owen Roe
Oneale, and to justify this, he tells you, the L. President Bradshaw laughed
when he reproved Col. Monk for it. You see he was by, and saw all, will you not
believe this too?

He does not tell us where he heard the command given to Col. Popham, nor how or
where he saw these Letters; and it was well he did not, for it would but have
made a more circumstantiall tale, and have heaped up the measure of his lies
the more, and yet never a whit have advantaged him: For how can any think it
possible he could have heard or seen them, when all these men knew him too well
to trust him with such secrecy, and he himself tells us boastingly, that he was
always opposite to both Presbyterians and Independents, and could never be
drawn to any of their secret meetings, whilst he was in the House? and yet now
he can tell things which he himself relates to be carried with the greatest
secrecy; if we could but find the hearts to believe him we need never wonder
that he refused to go to their secret meetings; for what need he do that, who
we see can tell the most clandestine transaction without a being at it? but
formal Lies, and formal Prayers, are no wonders in an old Episcopal
Malignant; such an one is so for set forms, that he cannot serve the Devil out
of one, or bring out a lie or slander, but it must be in Pontificalibus.

And now you may judge, whether Theodorus Verax, or Clemens tam ficti, pravique
tenax, be the truest Latin, for the Author of this History of Independency.
For my part, I have thought that man conscious of an ill Title, who will be the
judge in his own cause, nay assured that any just and understanding Judge will
give sentence against him; and pray what think you off this here, can you
suppose that ever he had had the Title of Theodorus Verax, unless he had
bestowed it on himself; Honor est externum signum (...), Arist. l. 1. Rhet. c.
5. and l 4. Eth. c. 3. and l. 1. Eth: c. 5.
Et est in Honorante potius quam Honorato, but why should we talk of moral
Philosophy to him? And if he had desired the Honor to wear Truths livery, he
had better have writ himself Verax in his Book, than on the Title page, but I
suppose he did it to make the Title Page bear it is part, and that it might be
suitable to the rest of the Book for falsehood.

And now I come to his contradictions, and shall make his Book confute it self,
as I have made it confute his Title, and among many take these.

This Fellow who was chosen into the House, sat there, and professes to have
been on the Parliaments part, who cries out, Part 1 p 15
they have changed their Principles, and affirms, that he had served the
Parliament faithfully from the beginning; had taken as much pains, and run as
many hazards, as most men in their service, wherein he had lost his health and
above 7000 l. of his Estate, that he contented himself to serve his Country
gratis. Note here that he accounts the Parliament cause, the Cause of his
Country, and yet is he not ashamed to maintain, That the King neither ought
nor could part with his Negative Voice, and Militia.

And can any man hold this who has served the Parliament from the beginning,
and affirm he stands to his first Principles, when the Militia and Negative
Voice were the only two points in open Contest between the King and Parliament,
upon which the War was grounded? for the King, whatever he meant, yet promised
fair about Religion, and redress of grievances.

Or can Clem shake hands with Pryn, unless as Herod and Pilate once before did
to Crucify Christ again in his Members?

Thus he says a Phoenix arose out of his Majesty's Ashes, that excellent issue
of his Brain, P. 2. p. 138
entitled, The Portraicture of his Sacred Majesty, etc. a Book full fraught
with Wisdom Divine and Humane, yet the very first Page of that Book, and the
first Page of his so interfere that one gives the other the Lie. For his
affirms, that at last by providence, his Majesty was necessitated to call a
Parliament; That avers that he called it of his own choice and inclination, as
thinking the right way of Parliaments most safe for his Crown, and best
pleasing to his People. And for my part, had old Clem gone on as he here begun,
I would never have taxed him for falsehood.

Behold then, that unless lying be a piece of Wisdom Divine and Humane (which
yet by his practice one would be easily persuaded to believe Clem thinks) he
has not only contradicted himself, poor Knave, but his Great Masters young
Phoenix forsooth, unmannerly slave.

But if it be such a Phoenix, it arose out of some others ashes, for the King
was not burnt, neither as yet is crumbled to dust: and if it be such a Pallas,
yet it looks as more likely to have issued from the brain of a Mercury than a
love. Palladis Aves, birds dedicated to Pallas.
For my part if I should pass my judgment I must give for the latter, as the
more proper comparison, because the Idol's triumphant Chariot is drawn by Owls.

And now you may see Clems Logic is as bad as his Ethics, and that there is
no more truth than manners in his Propositions. For unless contradictories can
at once be both truth, Clem writes miserably false; but more of this will
appear in his subsequent juggling, which is notorious in the very first part of
his Hisiory, which he styles a Mystery of the two Iuntoe's Presbyterian and
Independent.

Here by the way, I would fain know which was the Parliament Clem served, since
the Presbyterians and Independents were two Iunto's? Prelatical fellows there
could not be then, unless perjured; for every Member had taken the Covenant.
If then the Presbyterians and Independents were two Iunto's, and there was a
Parliament, it must consist of Prelaticall perjured persons, or of such as
Clem, who were neither for any Religion, any Doctrine, or any discipline, and
so forsworn, yea Atheists to boot; and were there enough such in the House to
constitute a Parliament, indeed we may all rejoice that the Army secluded them,
and need never wonder at the tricks they played there; but we shall have
occasion to speak more of this hereafter.

Again, Behold how Clem, who would be thought a great assertor of Parliamentary
Privilege, and rayles at the Army for secluding the Members, here has outed
the major part, if not all the Parliament, and junto'd them: for I am certain
there was not one then in the House, but professed himself either a
Presbyterian, or Independent; though some in a more rigid, others in a more
moderate way.

In this Mystery he reckons up what he and his fellow Members did while in the
House together, with their good Lordships, Committees, Sequestrators,
Treasurers, and whole rabble of Receivers, Deceivers, etc. and all to bring an
odium upon the Parliament (for this part was written while Clem was in the
House) yea upon his full and free Parliament, as he is afterward many times
pleased to call it, when it may serve his turn.

But the Mystery of this was to give the alarm to the second War, and
exasperate the people to join with the Cabs to destroy the Parliment, and
re-inthrone his great Master, which was the only business Clem got into the
House for; yet read what he says of them, and though you cannot believe all,
yet you may find something true, and then tell me whether they deserved not to
be plucked out, whether they had not in the highest manner forfeited their
trust, and whether they were not as great Tyrants, as Him they had outed?

They sat taxing and polling, yet paid not their Forces; they sat Voting one
another money, yet paid neither the public, nor their own private debts, but
under the Privilege of Peers, and Parliament men protected themselves, and whom
they lifted from all due process of Law, and that they might be sure to sit
long enough, they neither went about to restore the old, or erect a new way of
Government; sed tempora mutantur, Clem, and his gang are unroosted, the Army is
constantly paid, Free Quarter taken off, the Navy trebled, and well paid too,
many public debts satisfied, a Lord, or a Parliament man must pay his too, or
may be sued and made to do it, the Rebels called to a strict account in
Ireland, the Parliament cause vindicated in England, Justice executed on the
Grand Delinquents in both, a Commonwealth established, and all honest
true-hearted Englishmen, if they will be secured from coming under the power
of an enraged Tyrant.

For that which he objects, That when ihe Parliament had 4 or 5. several
Armies, the Tax was but 52000 l. that now it is 90000 l. per mensem, Be pleased
to consider these things.

1. That London, and the best affected Counties paid as much then or more,
because diverse were under contribution to the Enemy. 2. That admit all were
reduced, yet Freequarter was still continued, and many other assessments. 3. We
may affirm, and that truly, That the Parliament has as many Soldiers now in
pay in England and Ireland, as they had then, though not under so many several
Commanders, and thrice as many Sea Forces. 4. That the greatest part of the
Delinquents fines which amounted to a very considerable sum came into their
Coffers then. 5. That the forces are now paid constantly, and Free Quarter
taken off, and the Tax now lessened to 60000 l. per mensem.
As for the Excise, Bishops, Deans and Chapters Lands, and the remaining Fines
of Delinquents, they are hardly sufficient to pay off debts charged in course,
and the Interest money the other had run into; as for the Customs, they are
not by far sufficient to defray the charge of the shipping: and thus you may
see the validity of this cavil, which may suffice to unfold one Mystery of this
Hocus Pocus, this Clem of no side, for he would puzzle a man that eyes him not
well to find out what he is.

He rayles against the Independent party and the Army, because they opposed the
disbanding the Army, saying their continuing in arms was a manifest act of
Treason and Rebellion; that a Schismatic Faction in the two Honses complied
with them, betraying and prostituting the very being, honor, and all the
fundamental rights and privileges of this, and future Parliaments, to an Army
of Rebels, who refuse to obey their Masters and disband. Note here the
Independent Members and the Army are to be rendered odious.

And yet he tells us, That beside the City to aw the adjacent South and east
Countries, to suppress the remoter, the Presbyterians kept up some inland
Garrisons, had the Scots, and Pointz supernumerary Forces for the, North, and
in the West ( under color of sending men for Ireland) they kept upon Free
quarter, and pay of the Country many supernumerary Rogiments and Troops, most
Cavaliers, at least five times as many as they really intended to transport,
these were always going, but never gone, something is and ever shall he
wanting, until Sir Thomas Fairfaix his Army be disbanded, and then it is
thought the disguise will fall off, and these supernumeraries appear a new
Modeled Army, these lewd supernumeraries, most of which swear they will not go
for Ireland, vowing they will cut the throats of the Roundheads, the Country
that is amazed fearing they are kept on Free Quarter by a Cavalierish party,
for some Cavalierish design.

Note here the Presbyterians are to be rayl'd at, and those that p. 33. are the
Houses, who for the ease of the people, Voted a disbanding of the Army, are
here a Presbyterian Iunto, who would disband this Army to model a new one,
whose Consciences shall not befoole their wits where matter of gain appears,
but be more pliable to their desires, and be one of the Cords wherewith the
Presbyterian Phaethous will drive their triumphant Chariot.

Note also the Lord Fairfax his Army, which even now were Rebels and Traitors,
who abominated nothing more than to return to their old trades again, is here
an Army excellently disciplined, having the visible mark of Gods favor upon
their actions, and that the Houses are questioned, nay termed a Iunto for
endeavoring to disband them.

Lastly, Note how old Clem would seem a great Enemy to Cavaliers, and very
fearful of a Cavalierish design, only to ingratiate with honest men; when
there is not a more desperate Malignant slave in all Europe, as his own Tenets
do evidence? as for example.

In his Exhortatory conclusion to the English Nation, he avers, That it is
evident King Charles from the beginning took up desersive arms to maintain
Religion, Laws, Libertyes, and the ancient fundamental being of Parliaments;
could a Digby or a Nicholas have said more? could an Aulicus or a Prag. have
railed at, and belyed the Parliament and Army more, or have writ more false
stories than this fellow has done? and yet, O he is afraid of the Cavaliers;
but this will appear more plainly in our subsequent discourse.

But I will first give you an History, that you may more easily discern the
mystery of this fellow.

This Clem, when Bristol was delivered up to Rupert by Col. Fienns upon
honorable terms (had they been kept by that perfidious plunderer) who so
zealous, who so active, at lest in show for the Parliament, cause, as this old
Clem, who accused the Governor of Cowardice and treachery, for not defending
that City to the uttermost extremity? then forsooth the King, who now has the
just cause from the beginning, was an Enemy to be fought against to the last
man, and what was the mystery of this but to set our party together by the
ears? He knew Colonel Fiennes had many great and noble friends, who had a
mighty influence on the Earl of Essex his Army; He knew that Sir William
Waller, and Sir Arthur Haflerigge were strongly fortified in the good opinion
of the multitude, and so hoped there would be some tugging.

But that Noble Gentleman Col. Fiennes, whose innocence the Parliament has
since vindicated, being contented to submit to the disgrace, as choosing rather
to fall alone, than endanger his Country, though in that act she might seem a
stepmother, frustrated the design in part, though the animosities then created
in the parties caused some fatal consequences, as the loss in Cornwall, the
exasperated Soldiery being contented to behold their Rivals cudgelled by the
Common enemy.

Behold therefore who were the Incendiaries, and what was the cause that
enforced the Parliament to new model their Army, it was Clem and such Blades,
though he would lay it on others.

You may see also the Mystery of Clems appearing for the Parliament, and what
his aim was in getting into the House: He did first appear an eager opposite to
the Cavaliers to get in among them, where he might sit and give aim, by
discovering their Counsels to his great Master. This Clem was one of the
Setters, who; besides all other mischiefs, were to betray those who faithfully
and freely discharged their Trusts to their Country, that when opportunity did
serve, CHARLES might call them to account, as he usually did at the end of
Parliaments, as the commitment of Members evidently shows, which was so
inseparable an attendant on Parliaments, that a man may conceive CHARLES
summoned Parliaments only to find out those who were not willing to be slaves,
that he might either cajole them, or if Court-proof ruin them.

Thus were Savill, Wentworth, Culpepper, and Digby, whose public Spirits
seemed Hobgoblings to tyrannical interest, conjured down by an Ave Marie, and
a little Court-holy-water; and thus were Elliot, Valentine, Pym, and Strode,
written in black Characters in CHARLES his Doomsday Book, and either to be
destroyed in Prison or perpetually immured, iron fetters being the Chains
wherewith the Champions for thy freedom were rewarded O England.

But Clem being frustrated in this design, He has now published their Speeches
to the Son, adding and forging what he lists, to render them obvious to the
rage of an Enemy nursed up in slaughter, his Fathers tyrannical Principles,
and no doubt Mothers Religion.

Thus has this fellow dared to violate that secrecy which should be sacred
among Members of the House, and to accuse Members for what they did in the
House, though he bawl against the Army for impeaching the 11. Members upon
actions in the House, and decryes it as the greatest breach of privilege, and
violation of the Covenant, and yet he averrs, He has adventured to vindicate
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties with his pen, in pursuance of the Covenant;
as if it were lawful for him to say, and do any thing; it is a breach of
Covenant in the Army, it is a pursuance of it in him.

Blush ye Heavens and tremble O Earth, at the dismal impudence of this Wretch,
who dares thus openly take that Covenant in his mouth, and profess to have
taken it, which he so horribly has broken, as may thus appear.

1. He every where cries up the most desperate Anti-covenanters, as Montrosse,
one whom the whole State and Kick of Scotland have sentenced, as the most
bloody Excommunicate Traitor and Rebel.

2. He admires, and praises Hamilton, who by a Malignant Faction and force
overswayed the Parliament of Scotland, exercising the highest tyrauny and
oppression over those Covenanters, who would not join with him in that horrid
violation of the Covenant, the Invasion of England, and conjunction with
Langdale, and his desperate crew of Anti-covenanters, yea and justifies that
action.

3. He averres it was a vain thing to desire the late King to take the
Covenant, who could not take it but he should profane Gods name, and ferswear
himself.

4. He professes himself opposite both to the Presbyterians and Independents,
as the common disturbers of the Church; railes against the Presbyterian
Ministers and the Assembly, calling them wicked Simons, that slander the godly
Onias, to out him of his Priests place.

5. He jeeres them and their Government; saying, The popish Clergy draw all
civil affairs, public and private, under their jurisdistion and cognizance,
quatenus there is peccatum in all humane actions, the Presbyterians quatenus
there is scandalum, what odds? peccatum is the Mother, scandalum is the
Daughter.

Thus he is not ashamed to abuse the most sacred tie a Solemn oath; what regard
then is to be given to his counterfeit pretense of making a conscience of
Oaths? all those positive and absolute articles which contein the main end of
the Covenant, are nothing with him, but that clause for preservation of the
Kings Person, though limited with a subordination to Religion and Liberty, is
so sacred, because for his turn, that it must be kept, though contrary to the
words as well as meaning, even in destruction of Religion and Liberty.

Thus having mocked God, he descends to abuse men, and those not of the
ordinary sort, but Members of Parliament, the High and Supreme Court; as in his
Century, which he styles A List of the names of the Members of the House,
observing which are Officers of the Army contrary to the self-denying
Ordinance, together with such sums of money, Offices, and Lands, as they have
given to themselves for service done and to be done against the King and
Kingdom.

This is a rare fellow to profess he has served the Parliament faithfully,
and that he has not changed his Principles: but should we admit it to be as he
says, may not the house dispense with one of their own Ordinances? but behold
the jugler.

For first there was not one Member continued in command but the now L. Gen:
Cromwell, and that upon the entreaty of the Army, yet he writes, as if they had
their commands still: The Ordinance did not say every one that had a Command
should leave the House, but that every one of the House should leave their
Commands, and so they did. Here is one juggle.

Then he musters a great many, who have been chosen into the House since the
Ordinance, and end of the first War, and had commands in their several
Counties, whose commands ceased of course, and where are these touched in the
Ordinance?

Others there are who being Officers of the Army, were admitted into the House
upon the late elections, and never questioned for their commands: but this
peremptory wrech who would seem to understand the Ordinance better than the
whole House that made it, yet knows well enough the reason of that Ordinance, as
having had a great hand in working the mischief, which that was made to prevent.

The emulations of our several Commanders had nigh ruined all; there was no
way better to remove the difference, and quench the flame, than by calling home
all from command; thus none could plead an injury, his Rival being in the same
capacity with himself: this was done, and it proved excellent physic, but the
cure being done, what need of the medicine? Sure this Fellow himself would
think that man mad, that should rail to see another that is recovered leave his
physic potions, especially with his Doctors License; and yet this this Bedlam
does.

For the Offices they were void, some by death, others by Delinquency; and is
it not more just, more beneficial for the public, yea, more like a Parliament
to bestow, than sell places: but the wretch bought his in the Exchequer, and
envies therefore at the good of his Neighbors who did not so.

And if it be fitter to bestow than sell public Offices, to whom could they
better give such, than to honest men; and whom could the Parliament be more
confident of, than such whose integrity and love to their Country was seen by
them every day, both in their Speeches within doors, and actions without? and
truly I am induced to think the better of their choice, because I find not
Clem in the Lift: For if we cannot say that no Knaves get Offices, yet we may
affirm that all Knaves did not; as for Example, old Clem's mouth is not stopped.

For money and Lands, was it not the highest justice to reward those Gentlemen
who had suffered, out of the Estates of such upon whom his great Master had
bestowed theirs? besides what thing so barbarous, so greedy, so envious, so
like old little tutchy Clem, would accuse a Parliament for rewarding their
Members for their valor and fidelity in defending their Conntryes liberty.

His great Master could make Rupert Duke of Cumberland, for murdering and
plundering in England, Montrosse a Marquess, for killing and and robbing in
Scotland; and Antrim a Marquess for joining with the Rebels in Ireland;
besides this beggarly fellow a Lord, that a Baronet, another a Knight, and
bestow honest Gentlemen's estates on them, yet we hear nothing of this, Clem
makes no Centuries of them.

Alas! Digby deserved to be Secretary for penning so many Declarations, wherein
God and man were mocked in Print, as much as in Clems book, and Nichols merited
as much for lying as fast as Clem for his great Master.

But the Parliament cannot bestow a reward on those, who have ventured their
lives and fortunes in their Countries defense, who have thought nothing too
dear to part with for Religion and Liberty, who with the hazard of their
private, have saved the public, but they must be branded by him with the Mark
of wasters and destroyers of the Public Treasure; it is reward enough he
thinks, for any who have served the Parliament, if they prosper and overcome,
to obtein the Title of Stubbornly stout, as he rewards the Lord General Essex,
or of Brutish valor, as the Lord General Fairfox. If they are overpowred, and
will be so prudent as to make a virtue of necessity, and do what they may, if
they cannot do what they would, with the Title of Coward and Traitor, as he did
Col. Fines.

See the irrational barbarity of this fellow, who when he pleases will have
every thing Cowardice and treachery under the degree of Desperateness; As in
Col. Nathaniell Fiennes Case.
and when he lists again, call the most sober valor Brutish and Stubborn
stoutnes, but one would think, one so implacable in punishing what he will
pretend a breach of trust, should in reason be ready to recompense a gallant
discharging of it: yet you see it is treachery and cowardice to deliver up a
Town to the late Kings forces, though not tenable, and upon honorable terms,
in one, and yet in others to beat them and withstand them is service done
against the King and Kingdom.

He tells us in this Century, That he might end as he began, that every Member
of the House of Commons, being in all 516. are by their own order allowed 4 l.
a week a man, which amounts to 110000 l. a year: This wretch knows they never
received it, unless some few, and that in the very heat of the War, whose
Estates were under the power of the Enemy, nay not 50. though he amplifies the
number to 516. and all this he does only to make the people believe the common
Treasure was wasted on themselves, you may see then the villainy of this
Impostour.

He sets also this * mark before their names who he terms, Recruiters illegally
elected by the new Great Seal, the power of the Army, and voices of the
Soldiery, and are unduly returned, and serve accordingly; yet when the
General Council of Officers in their answer say, That by the endeavors of
some old Malignants, and by practices used in new elections, there came in a
flood of Burgesses, that are either Malignants or Newers, then Clem is of
another mind, maintains their Elections, and cries out of breach of Privilege:
Of the truth of which, we may judge by Clem, who was one of that flood, and I
bleeve the top, the scumme for Malignancy: but if contradictons were wonders in
Clems Book, he had been a greater wonder worker than Simon Magus, Hocus Pocus,
or the whole gang of Sorcerers and Iuglers.

But let us grant him what he says, and he will mar all; for Clem, ^ryane,
and most of the secluded Members, who bawl at their outing, were Recruiters,
how durst they they sit in the House, or act as Members of Parliament; and what
had he or Pryn to do, to protest against the Army for secluding them, who were
but Milites, soldiers to guard the King and House of Lords, as Pryn excellently
of late has found out.

The Army only hindered Pryn from going to sit among the Commons, whom they
thought the Representative of the People, and upon his snarling and ranting
words detein'd him a while: If he would but have desired a Pike, and marched to
guard the door of the House of Lords, he might have had it, and leave to have
stood as long as he would. But to return to Clem, was it not rather a breach of
Privilege in Clem to offer to sit, who knew he ought not, than in the Army to
pull him out? thus you see he has destroyed the strongest Pillar in his whole
fabric, and removed the greatest block of offense, nay proved that here to be
the highest act of Justice, which he every where else rayls at, as the highest
breach of Privilege, for the Army, which was raised to defend the Parliament,
did only free it of a multitude of intruders, yea such a multitude, as
overpowring the rest, were Judges in their own cause, and so not to be voted
out by a fewer. And thus you may see the Armies innocence, the very bitterest
Enemy himself being Judge.

And now Gentlemen, that this Century might not be unlike the rest of the Book,
he adds lying to juggling, and sets his mark on Mr. Blackiston, one who was a
Member from the first, nay he gives himself the lie in the following scandal,
and confesses as much; saying, He got himself returned by the Scottish Garrison,
Which lay there when this Parliament was summoned; thus you see he piles them
three stories high, as if he were afraid he should want Room to lie in this
damnable aedifice. But now to leave this, and come to his railing.

And truly Gentlemen you will guess, that he took the opportunity of some fit
of the Gout, or Stone, that he might be mad enough to rage in the composure of
this Book, which is as very a compendium of snarling, without modesty, sense,
or reason, as ever was comprised within the bounds of a Calves-skin: but it
has always been observed, that those who want truth and reason, are
accustomed to bluster, in railing and false accusations. Thus did old Satan in
his dispute with Michael, thus the Heathen did aginst the Christians, the
Papists against the Protestants, the Cabs against the Parliament, and thus does
Clem deal with his betters. Gentlemen, read on, and you will never wonder that
House is called Hell, which has such a devilish Landlord.

Clem in his Epistle would fain cheat us into a belief, that he railes not
against the Body of the House or the Army, when he averres, That the late King
had the just cause from the beginning, calls them Rebels and Traitors, who
have overthrown Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the ancient fundamental being
of Parliaments, all which the King he says, took up defensive arms to
maintain. Note here, he not only gives the Parliament, but the late King too
the lie, who has in Print avowed the contrary.

The Parliament in the first war, he styles, two Juntoes, Presbyterian and
Independent, who couzened, pilled, and poled the people, consuming the public
Treasure on themselves, the Members are Iuntomen, Hocus Pocusses,
State-Mountebanks, the County Committees are Zanies, and Jack-puddings with
him, and all this when they were, as he is forced to confess, a full and free
PARLIAMENT.

The Members chosen in after the first War, he styles Recruiters, who were
illegally elected, unduly returned, and served accordingly, Clem was one of
these, and so measures their Corn by his own Bushel.

The present Parliament he calls Col. Prides Dray horses, Trayters, Tyrants,
Thieves, Col Prides Parliament, etc.

The Council of State he calls, A pack of forty Knaves; this for the general;
besides he has a bout with every Member almost in particular.

The Lord Genesis Essex, a man as mild as gallant, and whose only fault was, that
he was too easy to believe (as many honest and noble souls are) yet with Clem
forsooth, he was a man stubbornly stout; and why pray? because he would not
run away, or let the Cabs beat him; you see how Clem was for the Parliament;
can any man imagine that this Wretch did not accuse Colonel Fiennes out of
design, and draw his purblinde Brother in, merely to help to bark?

The Lord General Fairfax, a man whose Fame rings through all Europe, whose
matchless deeds will hardly be believed by posterity; a man who exceeded his
Enemies as far in fidelity and clemency, as in valor and fortune; whose
merciful granting, and inviolable keeping of Articles, begat admiration in the
foes, and repining in some harsher spirited friends; who commonly conquered the
Foe double, their bodies by his magnanimity, and their affections by his
clemency, and whose name sounded among the healths of the most inveterate
Cavaliers, finally, a man whose humility is as unparrallel'd as all the rest,
who is as far from being elevated by his success, as he was from being
dejected in the greatest distress; yet with this Fellow he is a man of a
Brutish valor, a Brutish General, a Brute, a Fool, etc. But to the name of
Fairfax shall be erected Trophies on the highest Pinacles of Fame, when this
brutish Fellows memory, shall stink in the nostrills of all honest men.

The Lord General Cromwell, a man whose virgin Fortune never yet was forced,
upon whose Conquering Ensigns plumed victory has always perched; a man as
prudent as valiant, and as pious as prudent, who in all his high successes ever
gives all the glory to God, attributing all to the prayers of Gods people,
nothing to the valout of his unconquered Troops, accounting it his highest
glory to be esteemed as the meanest instrument in the hand of God; in fine, a
man who has wholly devoted himself to the service of God, and his Country,
never refusing any peril or trouble, hazard or travail, which the defense of
Religion, and his Countries freedom calls him unto: yet is this man so
railed at by this Fellow, and such heaps of dirt thrown at him, that had I
impudence enough to defile my paper with them, yet I could not find room
enough in a narrow discourse to insert them, every page being bespotted with
the railings, and cursings of this Shimei, against that Worthy. But the deeds
of Cromwell praise him in the Gates; when he sits among the Elders of the
Land, England arises up, and calls him blessed, Ireland also and Scotland
praise him, unto whom God has made him an Instrument of Deliverance.

Sir Henry Vane senior, he styles, The Old Dog, judge O Reader, who barks and
snarles. Sir Henry Vane junior, A Whelp of the old curre; let him carry the
title who is the bawling Puppie. Mr. Gurdon, a fellow that spits venom as natu
ally as a Toad; what a venomous Beast is Clem then? Mr. Holland, originally a
Link Boy; a new pedigree indeed, a very piece of Nonsense. Sir Hexry Mildmay,
a Procuror, Pimpe, and Pander; He had deserved the Name, would he have Pimp't
for the lust of a King, or betrayed his Mother (his Country) to be abused by
him, as Clem has. Mr. Rowse, the illiterate Jew of Eaton College; had this
fellow been so much a Christian or Scholar, as that grave Gentleman, he would
never have played the Knave and Fool so in print. Indeed I believe he is not a
man of his reading, for I never found any thing stolen out of a Prag. or Man in
the Moon in his writings. Sir Hardresse Waller, the one-eyed Polyphemus of
Pastbord; Clem and his Gang, going to adjourn in truth dissolve the Parliament
that morning they were outed.
he could see to catch this Ulysses, when he was going to rob us of our
Palladium, and steal that, upon which depended the Fortune of Englands
Liberties. Sir Thomas Wroth, Jackpudd ng to Prideaux the Postmaster; There is
never a Iack-pudding to an Aulicus, if Clem be not, who has out-ly'd,
out-rail'd, and outslander'd him, and all the rest to boot, and so over-acted
them, that the other Hell can never show one may match him. Mr. Corbet,
Inquisitor General, The Prologue to the Hangman who looks more like a Hangman,
than the Hangman himself; but let those judge, who have seen both, which looks
more like a Hangman: sure Clem never saw his own face in a true Glass. All
this Clem has done, and yet this Brazen face dares to aver, that the
witness against him, for but saying, The Gentleman was a lean meager man, by
the incivility of his words was a man of no breeding, what shall we judge of
Clem then?

Of the Judges he says, That true men may go to the Gallows, Thieves must sit
upon the Bench; Clem will be before hand with them, because he fears they will
end with him: I say, Gallows claim thy due.

The City, even that generous City of London, which has expended so much blood
and treasure in defense of their Freedom, he calls, That Dull Beast: it would
not answer to Clems spur, but suffered the Army to unhorse him, and the rest
of his fellow rank Riders.

Of the Clergy in general he says, The Clergy in all times and places, ever
held with the mighty (I am sure he holds not with the Almighty) as the Iaccho
hunts with the Lion to partake of his prey. The Clergy nave ever had an itching
to be meddling with State Affairs, which shows how contemptible an opinion they
have of their own coat, that they can find no contentment in it, and yet they
would have the Laity to have a reverend opinion of it; but universal
experience teaches us, how miserable that Commonwealth is, where the
corruption of a Churchman, proves the generation of a Statesman; and so it did
the Army, how miserable ours was, where the corruption of a Parliament man,
proved the generation of a Cavalier, which caused Clems outing. But I will
leave these things to our Clergymen to answer, who I hope will confute him in
deed.

The Popish Clergy, he says, draw all public affairs under their
jurisdiction, quatenus there is peccatum; the Presbyterian, quatenus there is
scandalum, in all humane actions; and the Independents are a composition of
Christian, Jew, Turk, as Mahomets Alchoran was a Galli naufrey of Jew and
Christian: truly Clems is of Jew. Turk, and Heathen, and Clem, believe it, is
no Independent, for there is not one dram of Christian in his Composition.

But the Episcopal good Ontases, they (hold Clem did not our Magpies prey with
Eagles, nay and perch above them too, nay and in Norwich not many years ago,
was seen a Wren on the Metropolitan Magpies, and the Magpie on the Eagles back
soaring to an abominable lofty pitch) they meddle with nothing. Clem could be
drunk over night, rail, lie, slander, and grind his Neighbor, and yet have
the Sacrament next morning (stay, now I think on it, I dare say for love of Clem
his brother writ that learned piece with Marginall Notes to it, to prove the
Sacrament a converting Ordinance) nay and might dance about the May Pole, or be
drunk again in the afternoon; for a baudy Court or so, alas it was but paying a
monthly tax to it is Officers, and he could keep a VVench or two for all the
Churchwardens; (yet how does Clem pine at a monthly tax now, why Clem, Liberty
and Lechery, begin both with one Letter.) It may be a Bishop was a Lord Keeper
or Treasurer, and he being unmarried, would fell justice and places cheaper
than Laymen, which was a great ease to Clems tender Conscience: besides those
good Oniases, never disturbed Athiesticall profane fellows; Had old Clem
lived from Augustine the Monks time, to little Lands, I would have warranted
him from their courts (paying his tax abovecited I mean.) It was a Puritan, a
man who had some fear of God, delight in his Ordinances, and a little too much
Conscience than to become a Protestant at large, id est, a Papist Royal, one
who owed no duty to any, but slavery to his King of his outward, to the
Patriarck of Canterbury of his inward man, (and what was this to Clem?) who
stuck in the Prelates stomachs; yet Clem whilst your mind runs so on your good
Oniases, remember a little the Covenant, but what is an Oath to a Cavaleer,
especially an old one.

Of the Assembly, he says, The Houses abolish as superstitious, because
legal, the Convocation of Learned Divines (they are learned and Divines who
even now in all ages were Iaccho's in practice at least) regularly summoned by
the Kings Writ, and duly elected by the Clergy: and the House of Commons
nominates an Assembly of Gifted Divines (who would think an old fellow, who
has got so much money by an Office in the Exchequor, would think the worse of
gifted men) indeed Wicked Simons who slander the Godly Onias to out him of his
Priests place.

This old piece of Apocrypha railes at the Houses, though by his Confession a
full and free Parliament, and for whose service he ventured and spent so, yet
he neither lies, nor changes his Principles. Then at all the Assembly men, who
were the learned of all parties; and lastly knits up with a notorious lie,
that the House of Commons nominated, that is, only, when the Lords he knows
nominated proportionably to the Commons.

Again, They daub up all with the untempered Mortar of hypocrisy by their
Rabbis of the Assembly; This Jew may live long enough and write too, before he
will deserve the Title of Rabbi.

But his fury ceases not here, all Ministers that ever were for the Parliament,
must come under old Lashers whip: He calls them 'Pulpit-Devills, who
transformed themselves into Angels of Light; Pulpit Inceudiaries, with whom had
an Order been taken from the beginning, they had never kindled a War between
the King and Parliament, they cursed Meroz and neutrality so long, till they
brought Gods curse on the Land, and put both Church and Common wealth into a
flame. You Gentlemen have a care, you see if the Pretender should get in, upon
whom the Cabs will lay the Load, if you should pray or Plot him in, I believe
you will hardly have any singing days unless at the Gallows.

Nay his malice passes Tweed. The Kirk or General Assembly of Scotland, he
calls, a few ambitious pedanticall Churchmen; The Ministers (whom sometimes he
would seem to claw, yet his malice is so great he cannot hold now but he must
scratch) he calls Clergy-Impostors, Zealots, employed by Argyle, to asperse
those that did oppose him, as if they were fallen from their first love, turned
Enemies to the cause of Christ, had with Demas embraced this present World,
with many more jeers and revilings cast upon them, the Marque of Argyle, and
all the Presbyterian party, together with praises conferred on Hamilton,
Montrosse, etc. And this is all the Kirk will get, by dandling the Royal Babie
on her knees; to wit, to have her eyes scratched out by it and it is
play-fellows, when they are high enough to reach Her.

And now as if it were beneath him only to lie, say and un-say, slander and
revile, he adds blasphemy, and abusing of Sacred Writ, to fill up the measure
of his iniquity, Thus says this wretch; God bless all honest men from the
light of Olivers countenance. Again, At last, the Spirit of the Lord called up
Oliver Cromwell, who standing a good while, with lifted up eyes, as it were in
a Trance, and his neck a little enclining to one fide, as if he expected
Mahomets Dove to descend, and whisper in his Ear (foh! this smells of the
Character of a London Diurnall, what Clem do thou make no more conscience of
robbing the Cabs of this jests, than honest men of their good names?) and
sending forth abundantly the greans of the spirit (who can but groan to hear
this) spent an hour in Prayer. and an hour and an half in a Sermon; more time
than Clems Godly Oniases spent in those Duties in a year.

From thus abusing the Spirit, he falls upon the Saints, and this wretch who
calls the keeping a Guard in the lower part of Paul's (a place never employed in
any religious performance, and where the baudy, and such like Courts were kept)
a making the House of God, a Den of Thieves; here dares defile the living
Temples of the Holy Ghost, the Saints, endeavoring to render that glorious
title, wherewith God has honored his Elect, abominable in the eyes of the
people.

Thus he says: The Knaves lied like Saints; it is a particular privilege for
the Saints to lie without sin, or at least without imputation of sin; Alchimie
Saints, traiterous, tyrannous, theevish Saints, Reprobate Saints (beware
Horns, a Bull a Bull) Bloody cheating Saints, though this br Godly nnd
Saint-like dealing, yet this is not plain nor fair dealing. These are the acts
of the Godly, to make innocence it self seem nocent, if all should be
self-denying men, there would be few Godly men left in the house. The Godly
Gang, Godly cutthroats, Canniball Saints, with much more which I omit.

Now it can be no excuse for this wretch, to say he means such as only style
themselves Saints; For, suppose a crafty man should desire to cloth his black
deeds with that white raiment, therefore must he defile it? his Bible teaches
him not to rayl at, and abuse Angels of light, because the Devil sometimes
assumes their shape; or to worry sheep, because ravening woolves creep in their
clothing: But behold this wretch dares defy the very name of Saint, as if
holiness were a crime. Take heed, O Beelzebub, lest he get the Lordship of thy
Hell too, and be preferred to command in chief, as being the more daring Fiend.

In fine, he sums himself up, and gives an epitome of his vilanous tenants in
this ensuing piece, viz. I do hereby declare, and protest before that God that
made me a man, and not a beast (and therefore you will make your self one) a
freeman, and not a slave; That if any man whatsoever, that takes upon him the
reverend name and title of a Judge or Justice, shall give sentence upon this, or
any other act of this piece of a House of Commons, I will, and lawfully may,
the inslaving scar-crow doctrine of all time-serving, State-flattering Priests,
and Ministers notwithstanding follow the examples of Sampson, Judith, Iaell,
and Ehud, and by poniard, pistol, poison, or any other means whatsoever, secret
or open, prosecute to the death the said Judge, and ustice, and all their
principal abbettors: and I do hereby exvite, and exhort all generous freeborn
Englishmen to the like resolutions, and to enter into leagues defensive, and
offensive, and Sacramental associations, seven or eight, or as many as can
confide in one another, to defend and revenge mutually one another persons,
lives, lambs, and liberties as aforesaid, against this, and all other illegal,
and tyrannous usurpations.

Is this the voice of a man, a Christian, a Protestant? what spirit called up
Clem to preach this stuff? yet give me leave to repeat it.

1. His text is the late Act declaring what shall be Treason, which he wrests
horribly, and falsely glosses upon; endeavoring to make the world believe, That
there was never such a prodigious act, which makes our words and thoughts
Treason, which were free always under Monarchy. But Clem, where is there any
word in that Act, which lays hold on thought, for words, was there no speaking
Treason, nay and thinking too under Monarchy? what think you of this case in
Law, That a man for telling another, He dreamed he had killed the King, shall
be accounted a Traitor: nay, the reason of this Law confirms it more, for
beside that, it will be adjudged, that he might pretend a Dream, to feel the
other, and so draw him in; it is plainly affirmed, that the Law must suppose he
would not have dreamed so, unless his thoughts had run upon it awake. To omit
all other, take but two stories recorded in our Chronicles, which will show how
free words and thoughts were, under Monarchy. One Walker, which was Landlord of
the Crown in Cheap Side, as you are of Hell at Westminster, for but merrily
saying, when his Child was commended, That if he would be a good Boy, he should
be Heir to the crown one day, was condemned and suffered as a Traitor. And
Esquire Burdet of Arrow in Warwickshire, for saying, would the head were in his
belly, that persuaded the King to kill that White-Buck, was condemned, drawn
from the Tower to Tyborn, and beheaded; behold and blush then, if thou can
Clem, how free our words were under Monarchy.

His doctrine drawn from this, is That a man may, and he will, stab, etc. any
illegal tyrannous usurper, or his abbettors, that is, any man that he pleases
to style so. Is not this more devilish than the doctrines of the Assassinates,
or their followers, the Iesuitical Papists. By his, a private Rogue, that can
pretend nothing whereby any power is derived to him, may murder any man: by
theirs, the party to be murdered, must first have sentence past against him by
the Pope, or the superior, and then some one is appointed by them, who has a
dispensation, and an holy instrument consecrated to boot, to perform it.

3. He answers all objections, by reviling the objectors; calling all those
learned men, Protestants or Papists, who have opposed such murderous tenants,
and confuted them out of the word of God, law of nature and reason,
Time-serving, State-flattering Priests, etc.

4. His Scriptures to prove it, are the examples of Ehud, Jael, and Sampson,
all which have been so largely and learnedly answered by Learned men, both
Protestants and Papists, that it is neediesse to mention it here, had we room
for so large a controversy: yet observe, that Clem holds, That he or his Gang,
when they list to murder any man, have an immediate call from Heaven to do it;
who has the spirit of Jack of Leiden doubled upon him now?

For Judith, I could not find her act in my Bible, and so, I conceive she and
Clems Onias, were appochryphal Cozens, but searching, I found, Vengeance is
mine, I will repay says the Lord: and I humbly conceive, neither the Prophet
who writ it, nor the Apostle who quotes it, were time-serving, State flattering
Priests and Ministers.

5. His Application is to exhort and invite all English men to follow this his
Doctrine; and truly some Vilains, both English and Scots, have put it in
practice, as the murders of Doctor Dorislaus, and M. Ascham testify, which
though Clem may approve, yet I am consident no honest or gallant man but abhors.

6. And that they might do it effectually, he prescribes them means to do it,
to wit, by entering into leagues and sacramental associations: yet Clem forgot
to teach them where they might get a Father Garnet, a Priest to administer it,
for sure none but one in holy Order can be fit for a Cabb.

And now truly, seeing Clem has been so ready to help forward murders, by my
consent the Parliament should make him a means to prevent or deter his
Disciples, by hanging up according to their Act this great Doctor of the
Assassinates, the next assassination that is perpetrated; and so fare well to
him. --

For I shall now come to his design, having shown the manner of his carrying
it on, which is to render the parliament cause unjust, and them odious to the
world, and to perform this he

1. First enumerates many errors and miscarriages in them, in their carrying on
their Cause: but should we grant all he says, though more than is true
abundantly enough, yet cannot the miscarriage in the instrument, render the
Cause unjust, unless it be so in it self; which that it was not, he himself
confesses in this book, where he affirms The cavaliers fought for Regal
Tyranny, styles their opposers, the well-affected, tells us, The contest was
between the Kings Prerogative, and the Peoples Laws and Liberties; professes he
had served his Country faithfully in serving them, and accounts it his honor
so to have done: Now therefore all his stuff makes against himself, and for
the Army, justifying what the Army charged them with, to wit, Breach of Trust.

2. Another thing is, by urging the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and
Covenant; but for this read a short discourse, entitled A disengaged survey of
the Engagement, where this is so excellently handled, that nothing need be
added to covince him.

3. The other is The secluding the Members, and concerning this, because upon
this hinge the whole controversy turns, I shall endeavor your satisfaction.

This PARLIAMENT being sensible of the tyranny, oppression, and stubborn
resolutions to continue them in the late King, together with the encroachment
of Him, and some of His Predecessors, upon their Privileges and our Liberties,
were resolved to vindicate and revive both their own Authority and our
Freedoms. In order hereunto, they claim their right of the disposal of the
MILITIA, and disclaim the wrong usurpation of a NEGATIVE VOICE in him; and
this to render him unable to raise commotions, or hinder just and necessary
Laws; for they knew by often trial, of his breach of Trust, Promise and Oath,
that it would be impossible to have Him good, unless they made it impossible
for him to do mischief.

He on the other side was as busy, endeavoring by all the Clandestine Plots
and conspiracies He could to ruin them, and in them the Power of PARLIAMENTS,
and Freedom of the English Nation: but when He saw this would not do; but
that they grew daily deeper rooted in the peoples affection, He resolved to
cast the utmost chance, and by fine force to oppress them.

Hereupon fears and Tumults are pretended that He might withdraw, and being got
out of Town, with His eldest son, He hies to York, where nothing was left
undone, either by Declarations and Protestations in public, promises and
flatteries in private, to draw away the People, the Queen, and Crown Jewels
being packt into Holland, to provide money, arms, and ammunition.

Upon this, growing confident of His power, He proclaims the Parliament and
their adhaerents, Traitors and Rebels, sets up His Standard against them, and
then that He might seem to desire peace, sends a Message for a Treaty.

The PARLIAMENT Answer, That He had done that which never any evil Council
produced in former times, or any age seen; that he had declared a Parliaments
actions treasonable, and their persons Traitors, and thereupon had set up His
Standard against them, whereby He had put the Parliament, and in them the whole
Nation out of His protection; and that until His Standard was taken down, and
those Declarations and Proclamations were recalled, He had put them in such a
condition, that whilst they so remained, they could not, by the fundamental
Privileges of Parliament, the public trust reposed in them, or with the
general good, or safety of this Nation, give Him any other answer.

Thus to fighting they fall, and He, after he had murderd many thousands, and
robbed and plundered most parts, is beaten and taken Captive. The Parliament
upon a charitable conceit that He might be better, His evil Counselors being
removed, send Him Propositions again and again, which are still refused: The
Army also, whilst in their custody, dealt with Him by all persuasive means,
giving Him more liberty of converse, yet all to no purpose. Whereupon, The
PARLIAMENT finding Him the evil Counselor, a settled and obstinate Tyrant,
Vote No more addresses to Him, and Declare, They will settle the Nation without
Him.

But He having taken advantage of the Liberty allowed Him, had so sown His
tares, and scattered His Commissions, that there sprung up a second War on all
parts, in England and Wales, Scotland also by the consent of their Parliament,
under the conduct of Hamilton breaking in upon us, contrary to the large
Treaty, and their so pretendedly esteemed Covenant; hereupon many of the most
resolute Lords and Gentlemen, being abroad upon employment, the Parliament
being laid at by Petitions, which his favorers every where promoted, some for
fear, others for favor, and a third sort for envy, recalled their Vote, and
appoint another Treaty; their good Lordships all this while refusing to delare
Hamilton a Traitor, and his Army Enemies, whom the Kirk of Scotland had
sentenced as the violaters of the large Treaty and Covenant, the breach being
so apparent, and their party beside having not the managing of it in chief.

At length God having subdued the Enemy, by his blessing the endeavors of the
Army, which he owned every where in an especial manner, and the King refusing
this last time to grant the Propositions; The Army being sensible, as being
eyewitnesses of the miseries and slaughters brought upon their Country daily
for the Interest of one man, who had outlawed himself, and forfeited his
Crown, Petition the Parliament to stand to their former Vote, and settle the
Nation without Him; but finding that there was a great part, most, if not all
the Lords, and many Commons, who had not only betrayed their Trust, but would
also betray their Country, and deliver up all the honest party into the hands
of an enraged Enemy, they resolve to bring their assistance to them which stood
faithful to that cause, for which they were raised, and sworn to defend, and
so secluded some who were most active for Him.

And now I desire to know what breach of Privilege this could be to exclude the
House, such who (by the judgment of the parliament, As in the Answer August
1642 forecited, appears.
and that passed in the sight of God and men) had contrary to the fundamental
Privileges of Parliament, the public trust reposed in them, and the general
good and safety of the Nation, not only treated with, but voted his denial of
their Propositions a ground for Peace, who had his Standard up then in the
Revolted ships, and in Ireland against them, whereby they were Traitors and
Rebels in his thoughts and actions too, and in an incapacity to treat by their
own confession, could not oblige him to keep any thing had he granted it,
especially he being in duress under restraint, as he did imply in one of his
last messages?

But should you ask by what lawful authority the Army could call them to
account, who were their superiors, and how without breach of privilege,
exclude them?

I shall thus answer. In all actions the end is the chief, and most desirable,
but the means only as they tend to the attaining it are to be esteemed and
exercised: the end is the general good, which consists in the Liberties and
Freedom of the people; to attain this end Parliaments were instituted as the
most apt means by our wise Ancestors; and to preserve these means, and by
these the end, endued with many and high privileges, that so those high Courts
being inviolable, they might without fear discharge their high Trust. Now in
this cause we were (and all good men also ought in all times to be) engaged to
preserve this Parliament and it is Privileges, in order to the common good, and
when this could not be done but by our swords, we engaged to draw them: among
us were many rotten Members, which endeavored to destroy the public weal of
the body politic, to cut off these which were uncurable by any other remedy,
this Army was raised, according to that golden rule

-- Immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum est ne pars syncera trahatur;
and they lopt off many of the first and palpable infected ones, yet some
remaining they did infect others, and that so dangerously, that unless they
were cut off, the whole body was in apparent danger; now none could do this but
the Army, which were the Surgeons, and appointed for such actions; they did it
as they ought to do, it being their proper work: for the excluded Members
relying upon their number, did act contrary to their trust, our Liberties, and
the fundamental privileges of Parliament; how then can any superstructory
Privilege be pleaded by or for them, who had not only ruined the fundamental
ones, but were fully bent to destroy this Parliament, upon whose good or bad
success the very being of Parliaments did depend, as upon them the Liberties
and freedom of the people? for that morning they were excluded, they went with
a resolution to adjourn the Parliament for a long time, which act, in that
unsettled time, must have proved an utter dissolution, and of this the Army were
certainly and fully informed, and by Gods goodness had three days time to
consult what to do, which had the others not given them, they might in all
probability have brought that wicked design to pass before they could have
been informed or resolved. Let glory be given therefore to that God, who, and
who alone was able to turn the Council of those Achitophels into folly, yea
to their own destruction; and let wretches jeer at providence which has so often
confounded them.

And now what rational man but will smile to hear men plead Parliamentary
privilege, to protect them in destroying a Parliament? as if fences which were
made to keep Hogs out of Corn, ought to be used only in defending them from the
Mastives when gotten in, that so they might root up and destroy all? The Army
therefore (in my judgment) are so far from breach of Covenant, and duty in
this act, that I shall conclude, They had broke both had they not done it: for
they were bound by duty, and covenanted to maintain the Liberties and freedom
of the people, and the privileges of Parliament, and this they could never have
performed by suffering an apostate Faction in Parliament to destroy the
Parliament, upon which depended both Parliament privilege, and English freedom.
Let then all who are faithful to their Country and Covenant, echo out an
Enge to this act, though blind and purblind wretches have decryed it with an
Apage.

This for breach of Privilege, for the other, By what Law they did it? I
answer, by the same Law by which they were raised, and before continually
acted, even by Authority of Parliament, to defend our liberties, and in order
to them this Parliament, against all that should go about to overthrow them and
destroy this; for it being apparent that the Enemies had appealed to the Sword,
force was ordered to repress and subdue them: unless then the power of
Parliament be denied lawful, or it be proved that the Army had no such power
derived to them, which can never be done, the Generals Commission, and
Parliaments Ordinance evincing the contrary, it must be yielded That they had a
particular Law for what they did, besides the general of Common-safety.

But had they had none, yet you may consider Necessity has no Law, and that
there was no other gentler remedy left them, appears before, by which they
might hinder the dissolution of the Parliament, and destruction of that cause
they were bound to preserve, even with the death of all opposers.

Lastly, had all particular written Laws been against them, yet were these to
give place and bow, when common safety does enter and ascend the Throne, under
penalty of breaking natures and reasons high and just Oath of Supremacy,
confirmed also to Englishmen by many maxims of their written Laws; as

1. The General inconvenience is more to be regarded in Law, than a particular
mischief; if then any particular Law must give place with a mischief, to
prevent a general inconvenience, it will much more follow, that the same must
be done to prevent a general mischief, and what mischief could be greater or
more general than universal slavery, and remediless bondage? and it is the
greatest reason that particular Laws should be dispensed with on this ground;
for they subsist but in order to the general good, and are made by Men to that
end, which yet being but men can only provide for the present, but cannot
foreknow ensuing inconveniences.

2. Whatsoever written Law contradicts the Law of God, nature and reason, it
is ipso facto void. Now as all men are commanded to defend their Countries, and
their own freedom by all these, for unless they should they would sin
against their very Creation; so especially we Englishmen, who besides these
general ties, have the Oath of God (as some term it, who I fear make use of it
only for the God of this world their own gain) the Covenant, and other
engagements obliging us to this duty, but most of all the Army, who had a
particular call to this work out of the many thousands of our Israel.

And now I hope, I have given some satisfaction concerning this point, I shall
endeavor the same in answering other objections.

It may be objected, that we argue ex falso supposito, and falsely suppose that
they had forfeited their trust; and that the late King intended to destroy our
Liberties.

English, French, Scotch, and Irish Armies discovered, and confessed by his own
Instruments, and printed at large will show; yet now at last though he had the
pretense of duresse, restraint, and lying under a force to evade all, refused
all, he was so assured of his good vassals in both Houses: can any think that
he who (to omit his former tyrannies which require a volumne) dared to
proclaim a Parliament Traitors, set up a standard against them, spoil, rob,
and murder three Nations, and when beaten and captived deny their just
Propositions, had he had power durst not have done any thing?

For their forfeiture of trust their own words prove it, for they tteated with
him, though he had not taken down his Standard, nor recalled the Declarations,
wherein they, and in them the whole Nation were declared Traitors.

But then says one; had all the Parliament, yea the Army it self, forfeited
theirs, who did the same.



Thus you may see one party departed not from their right but only in
Courtesy made him a tender again of his Crown, considering He was but a man,
and that wilful and stubborn, and had been educated in such principles, that
he even sucked in Tyranny with his milk, and hoping that the judgment of God,
to whom he had appealed, by war given against him, and good Counselors,
about him, might have softened his Heart.

The other did, and would have the supreme Court and whole nation as strictly
bound, as if he had never cut the tie in sunder, making good what the Cavaliers
did but aim at, That a King was above Law, and accountable to none but God,
both which they before at least seemed to deny, and then pray what were they,
and all that took part with them less than Rebels and Traitors? and so we had
not only bin delivered into the hands of an exasperated enemy fleshd in blood,
but the power of Parliaments for ever destroyed, and William Pryns Book too for
ought I can see to the contrary might have been burnt under his nose, entitled
The Sovereign power of Parliaments.

That if these men, being the greatest number of the House, had forfeited their
trust, how comes it to pass we have a Parliament? for the major part stands
for the whole, and so the whole has forfeited.

Pryn has done, who maintains, That the minor part standing firm to their
trust are the Parliament, and the major doing the contrary a faction, and
brings the judgment of a Parliament, to confirm this, in the time of Richard
2. passed upon such a party, cajoled by that King and Bushie the Speaker, nor
to pass Tweed, and show you that it is the same case now in Scotland,
concerning the Hamiltonian faction in the late Invasion; I shall only instance
in this Parliament. The King, and Major part of Lords, besides the Bishops
themselves, were against the outing the Bishops: here were two Estates, then
having not forfeited their Trust, against the Commons, some of which too were
Episcoparians: yet the general good requiring their outing the nice puntilio's
of Privilege was laid aside, and that Bill pressed the fifth time by the Commons,
backed by the People, and had been the fiftieth time, had it not been passed:
for all they cried out that it was un-Parliamentarie, and a breach of Privilege
to offer the same Bill twice the same Session. In our case there was but a part
of the Commons acting against the general good, a part for it, and so great a
part as are declared enough to make a Parliament, being far above forty; and
for what reason could such a Law be made, but to provide in such a case, that
if all the rest should neglect or desert their duty, yet forty standing fast,
might save their Country?

by what Law the House of Lords could be laid aside by the Commons?

most good motions were spent and out of breath, before they could get up to
them, and then if perchance they had the good hap to meet with a thin House
(most of your Lords having other business to mind than the public) and so
pass; yet then they must pack to a King, whose Prerogative two to one, would
whip them down again, and thus, O you English men, Bills of public right and
interest were sent like Beggars from Constable to Constable, and at last
stripped, and whipped in a Bridewell for begging, that you might be eased and set
free; you and your Representatives being so hampered, that they were forced to
beat Hemp many times, whereby cords have been made to strangle your Liberties,
and bind your Arms.

Those Brave Earls and Barons, the quondam Protectors of your Liberties,
purchased their Honors by spending their Blood for their Countries good, not by
money gotten by oppressing their Country: they were engaged therefore to stand
for their Countries good, even to maintain their own honor, for no way better
to maintain it, than the same by which they gained it.

Those generous souls were a Terror and Curb to Tyrants, not their Creatures
and slavish instruments, as depending upon their own worth, and their Countries
Love, not Kings mere creations: their principles of education led them to
endeavor to be Lords over, not Apes unto the French, and he was counted the
bravest Lord, who conquered most of their Men, not the finest, that followed
most of their fashions; scarres were the Ornaments of a noble face, not black
patches; and hair powdered with dust, and dewed with sweat, and blood, not with
perfumed powders and Gesmin butter, was the dress wherein Englands Nobles
courted their Mistress, Heroic fame; they designed their Hawking and Hunting
to enable them in knowledge of passages and riding, not themselves to be
Faulconers and Huntsmen, whereby to learn to swear more readily, their Lands
were let at easy rates, with some services reserved, whereby their Tenants
being able men might not be broken spirited, and also might be obliged to
attend them, when their Countries service called them forth, hence came
Englands valiant Yeomanrie, and her bold Barons, who by frequent Parliaments
knew how to manage great Counsels, perform worthy actions, restrain and curb
Tyrannical Monarchs. These men were rather a Spur, than bridle to the
Commons in all good actions; proh dolor ni fuerunt at nunc spolia ampla
Tyranni, for a dissolute Court, neglect if not discountenancing of daring and
knowing men with preferring Muck-worms, and low souls captivated with gilded
follies, has choked those Seeds of virtue, and overspread the Garden with
weeds and thistles, and when a King will be a Tyrant, his Lords and Courtiers
must be slaves, or the design will never cotton, and it was easy to guess what
a brood of Snakes was like to be by the Suns shining on Dunghils.

But to omit others, there need be no argument brought to confirm this Act, but
that which 'Pryn has brought against it. For let us take for granted, what he
has lately in Print affirmed, That the King and Lords were the Parliament
heretofore, and so I hope by consequence had the power of the Sword and Purse
too, and it will make much for us. For if our Ancestors upon feeling the
inconvenience and mischief thereof, could take that power of taxing from them,
and bestow it on their own Representatives (for without doubt the major part of
them parted not with it of their own accord) then sure it will follow, that We
upon the sense of the like mischief may take away the rest, unless it can be
showed, that we only of all Englishmen, must not have that power which our
Ancestors had, and which is allowed to all Nations and People, by the Law of
Nature and Reason, both which are the Laws of God; and which never commanded
that a whole Nation should be oppressed, to maintain the lust and riot of a few
Drones. Solomon bids the sluggard go learn of the Ant, and why may not we of
the Be, which will not suffer a Drone in the Hive, that perfect Hieroglyphick,
natures own model of a Commonwealth?

Is it not a great scandal and stain to Religion, to cut off the King, it
being contrary to the doctrine of all Protestant Churches?



But if one who is not of that party, or at least has not been heretofore,
propound it, I shall thus reply. For a private person or persons to destroy and
murder their Kiing, or lawful Magistrate, on pretense of Religion, he being a
Papist, etc. is disclaimed by Protestants, and this to show their dissent from
the Iesuited Papists, who maintain it lawful, nay meritorious to kill a
Magistrate, who is an Heretic, that is no slave to Rome, but for a Parliament
and State to call a Tyrant to account, is not: This Doctor Willet, and Paraeus
upon that place in the Epistle to the Romans, be subject to the higher powers,
etc. hold lawful; and it is confirmed by a multitude of Protestant Divines,
and reasons, as you may see at large in a late treatise, entitled, The tenor
of Kings and Magistrates. This King James asserts, Buchanan maintains lawful,
and the Protestants in Scotland practiced against the late Kings Grandmother,
whom they not only deposed, but would have beheaded had she not fled, for
crimes which bore no proportion with her Grand-sons, who had not only broke his
Oath, and forfeited his Crown, but outlawed himself by appealing from the
Law, and the Judges of Law, the Supreme Court, to the Sword; For the most
perverse cannot deny it a full and free Parliament, when he first plotted, and
after raised Arms against it: What a ridiculous thing then is it in Pryn to
bring in his old mustie Records, and cases in Law, for defense of Him and his
title, nay what a deridiculous thing is it in Him, to go about to overthrow all
his former works, with that poor shift, that they were Popish Parliaments, but
what if they were? they had not that power as they were Popish, but as they
were Parliaments, yea English Parliaments, not as Papists, but as men, yea
English men; and sure our Parliament and we are so, for undoubtedly the
Protestant Religion, has not destroyed Gods image in us, and made us Brutes or
Slaves.

And now Gentlemen, I hope you will discern, that the Army has not only acted
according to those Principles, upon which they and we first engaged, to wit,
That the King was not above Law, That the Parliament was the supreme power, and
not only maker, but judge of Law, all declared by this Parliament, and
asserted by Pryn; but according to the principles of Reason, and that
universal, eternal, and unalterable Law of common-safety. That the present,
Parliament and Army have discharged their trust, vindicated the power of
Parliaments, the Nations liberty, and that cause wherein all the well-affected,
and religious were engaged; which had they not done, what a cry of innocent
blood had ascended up against them, how miserable had we been, and in what a
slavish condition?

Consider whether we had not been, had they don as the rest of the, secluded
Members, in the same condition our Ancestors were in the the time of Richard 2.
when in a Parliament 19th year of him, adjourned to Shrewsbury, the Major part
of Lords, wrought upon by the King, and of the Commons, by Bushie the Speaker,
looking only upon the Kings Interest, deserted the Commonweal, then followed
the blank Charters, and those other horrid extortions, which you may read and
weep over in the Chronicles, and then suffered those Lords and Gentlemen, who
had stood faithful to their Country.

Thus might we have seen those, and worse cruelties, not only acted against our
Civil Liberties, but our Religion also, and have lamented and wrung our hands
over the Graves of those Worthies, whom he had seen betrayed to the unmerciful
Sword of an enraged Tyrant, yea and cried out of and cursed both Parliament and
Armies treachery whose faithfulness now we so exclaim against.

And now having briefly run through these, give me leave to speak a word or
two to some scruples, cast into the balance to make this Commonwealth seem
wanting in its just weight.

That this is rather a Military Tyranny set up, and maintained by the Sword,
than a just and lawful power, and therefore in Conscience it cannot be obeyed,
though in things indifferent, nay lawful and necessary.



2. That in our case, it was impossible for any man to have expected any other,
for if either part prevailed, it must be by the Sword, that being once appealed
unto; especially if we consider the malice and treachery of the Enemy, which
would suffer no safety, longer than they could be kept at the Swords point: how
unhandsomely then can such an exception come from those, who with might and
maine called upon the people to come in to aid the Parliament; yea, and
engaged them by Covenant, to endeavor with their lives and fortunes, a
Reformation. Suppose the King had agreed to the Propositions, and been set up
to hawk, hunt, bowl, and play at Tennis, whilst the Parliament managed the
great and public affairs, had not this been by the Sword, which not only
captivated his Body, but forced his mind to yield to part with those things,
which he esteemed above the blood of so many thousands, yea his very own? what
would the power of the Militia have been in the Parliaments disposing, other
than a maintaining the Government by the Sword? surely then because that
interest is not set up, which these men would have, only causes this objection,
whose basis is founded upon impossibility, whereupon none can build, but such
as erect Castles in the air.

3. Again that it is the highest imprudency for any to surmise that the
Parliament, when they had beaten the Enemy in the field, should presently
cashiere their Forces, for besides the restlessenesse of the Enemy with their
parties in Ireland and Scotland, they were Natives, not driven out, but only
disarmed, who not only lived among us, and so at hand, but were so false, that
no tie could hold them from endeavoring our, and our causes ruin; how many
after compositions made, and oaths taken never to bear arms against the
Parliament, have broken both? unless therefore they would have an Enemy, first
be exasperated, and then us to lay our throats bare to their revengefull rage,
they must be ashamed of this objection, which the second war is enough to
confute, where the Parliament cause had been utterly destroyed, had it not been
for the Army.

Lastly, let one of these Objectors tell me, why a Reformation gained, and
maintained by the Sword in England, is so unlawful, which in other places is
so just and pious? These Objectors themselves would account that man a Papist,
or Popishly affected, who should thus reproach the Protestants in Bohemia,
Germany, Switzerland, France, the United Prrvinces, and Scotland, yet did these
maintain their Religion, and gain their Liberties by the Sword, by this the
Switzers cantoniz'd themselves, and the Dutch became a Free State; by this the
Protestant Religion was defended, and the Presbyterian Government first settled
in Scotland, their Queen being deposed, and forced to sue to save her Head, for
opposing it: and by this the Kirk now again repaired, when Episcopacy and
Popery had well near levelled Her: Lastly by this the Hamiltonian Parliament
was expelled, and the present Rulers set up in Scotland; For it was the Sword
of our Army set them in the Saddle, and the Sword of their Army that kept them
in it, which for this purpose has been so often purged and re-purged by the
Kirks importunity, to maintein her against all her Maligners; sure then though
the Sea may alter the case in the rest, yet methinkes a small River cannot make
such a difference, but that the same actions may be warranted by the same
reason.

And now having been bold to pass Tweed; I meet with another Objection.

That the sending the Army of England into Scotland, is a breach of the large
Treaty and Covenant; and against the rules of Christianity, to Invade our
Neighbors thus by an offensive War.

That Scotland had liberty to break, and England still to remain bound; and the
Parliaments and Armies Declarations, have not only showed the equity, but
necessity of thus doing, for this Commonwealths mere defense; yet for to stop
foul mouths, I shall add something.

1. The Parliament could not discharge their Trust to their Country, should
they sit still and look on until the Scots, strengthened with foreign aids, and
homebred conspiracies and insurrections, might break again in upon us,
robbing, spoiling, ravishing, and murdering according to their old wont. Our
Merchants in the mean while being robbed, our Agents assassinated, and the
Trade of England ruined by the Scots Kings instruments, which are boulstered
out by the Scots complying with him, and promising his restoration, many
foreiners winking at them, because doubtful of our success.

2. What thoughts could foreign Princes and States have of the Parliament,
should they see them maintaining a standing Army at a vast charge in England,
only to wait until the Scots please to come and invade us, which besides the
charge, to the undoing the so late Scot-plunderd Northern Counties, must weaken
their repute abroad, as not daring to look upon the Scots, until they shall
please to force them to it?

Nay would not they be accounted men of little courage, and less
understanding, to suffer the Scots to increase their strength, reputation, and
provisions from abroad, and not now endeavor to prevent them, when their
friends in France are not in a capacity to aid them, nor their Kings
Pyraticall Cozen, with his revolted robbers in a possibility to prey for them,
and when indeed the nipping this Scotch design in the bud, will be the only
means to persuade Portugal, and other Neighbors, to use us more civilly.

That the Scots intended us no hurt, and would be quiet, if so be we would let
them alone.

King of Great Britain, and Ireland; as if the Committee of Estates, and Kirk
of Scotland, had a power of making Kings over, and giving Laws to other Nations.

May not those they term Sectaries justly suspect them guilty of an
Antichristian spirit now, when they arrogate that power to themselves which none
but the Pope (by all Protestants agreed to be the Antichrist, the Man of Sin)
usurped, except the Devil, whose carriage to our Savior was not much unlike
theirs to their King, both showing the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the glory of
them, and saying, all these will we give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship us? yet let them take heed lest they be found liars, like him (Crowns
and Scepters being only in Gods disposing, who tells us, that it is he gives
Nations Kings in his wrath) though their King be not able to withstand the
Temptation, Montrosse and the Irish Rebels being defeated, and no apparent hope
of any supplies, from his most Blessed Father the Pope, whom he has by his
Agent, so dutifully asked blessing, as yet appearing.

But though these Reasons should be thought insufficient, yet now God has made
their intent manifest by Londonns Letters, by which it appears that they had
not only a design to invade us, but expectations, if not assurances of a party
here which would second them.

And now the Scots have thus done, and the premises considered, what shadow of
reason appears to the contrary, but that we for our own defense, may serve them
as they did us, and enter Scotland with our Army, as they did England with
theirs, a little before this Parliament begun? that they were invited in by any
in Authority, is false; it may be they had private well-wishers, and so no
doubt have we now of the Godly party among them, which when the cloud is past,
which now hangs over them, will appear.

But now before I conclude, I shall crave leave to speak a word or two, and
that:

1. First to the Scots, whose Committee of Estates and Kirk, I would entreat to
be so far Christians, as to pull the beam out of their own eyes before they
meddle with the mote in ours, and so much men as to act and speak rationally,
and not to call the same action in us an offensive War, which in them was a
defensive one. Lastly, to unriddle this Aenigma, How Montrosse could be a
Traitor for but acting according to their Kings Commission, and Command, and
yet their King none? it is a rule in reason quod efficit tale illud est magis
tale, that which makes a thing to be such, that is more such it self: and it
is affirmed in Scripture, That God is no respecter of persons, but that the
soul that sins shall dye; and should not the Gods on earth to whom the Sword
of Justice is committed, be so too? That maxim, That the Crown takes off all
Attainder, made by time-serving Lawyers, cannot be pleaded in this case: For
the Commission Montrosse acted by, was given him since their King was
Proclaimed at Edinburgh, and yet Montrosse was by them adjudged as a Traitor
and Enemy of his Country, which according to this he could not be, he doing
only as his and their King commanded, whose deeds are free from Attainter by
having the Crown: but if it should pass for Law here, yet I am sure it will
be no good plea at the high Tribunal of that just God, who respected not the
Crowns of the Canaanitish Kings, Agag, or of Israel, whom he commanded to be
cut off, and not a male of their Seed to live. There could be no peace to
Ioram, so long as the whoredoms of his Mother Jezabel and her witchcrafts were
so mady, and this command the Elders of Jezrell who durst stone Naboth, durst
not resist, when they perceived that evil from the Lord was gone out against
Ahabs House: and it is not so clear, but that it may be doubted, whether God
have not a controversy with their Kings family, against which, to omit the
Idolatries, and other gross sins, the innocent blood of so many Martyrs,
both for Religion and Liberty, cries for vengeance.

2. To the Presbyterian party in England, whom I desire to consider, That
though the present ruling power and Kirk in Scotland, should have no
by-defignes, yet how they may not be able to help to deliver them from the fury
of the Malignant party of Lords, and others, who have twice already
overreached them, in the late Invasion of England, and later in Ireland, where
after they had made use of the Presbyters to gain the Scots in Vlster to their
party, they abufed them, forced some to fly for their lives, and openly
proclaimed it death to any, who should but speak of having their King come in
upon terms. Let them beware of Insurrections at home, when it may be they may
at first be made use on to begin, as lately in Essex, but when the design came
to the height, be turned off, as those Gentlemen in Essex were by the Malignant
party, insomuch that Sir William Hixe a prime stickler and others, because they
had been for the Parliament were threatened to be stabbed, and forced to fly.

Thirdly and lastly, to you all who are Englishmen whom it much concerns; If
you will but consider what misery a Scotch Invasion, what slavery a Scotch
Conquest must beget. Inquire of the Scots demeanor in their late Invasion, nay
and when they came in with their brotherly assistance for your satisfaction in
the first; and call but to mind the insolency of the Scots, and Tyranny of
their Kings which came in by Consent: and it will be evident what must be
expected, should they come in by Conquest; their Iamie and they, shared then
only the Crown Lands and Treasure, with the richest public offices; but
their Babie Charles and they, will divide your private estates, and cast Lots
for your Inheritances: to conclude, call to mind your brave Ancestors, the
least drop of whose generous blood, remaining in your veins, will make you not
only abhor, but scorn a vassalage to that Nation, whose beggary, (to omit its
insolency, nastinesse, and lechery) all Englands so much already exhausted
Treasure, will not be able to releeve.

FINIS.

