The Case between Clement Walker, Esquire. and Humphrey Edwards, truly stated.
CLEMENT WALKER, Esquire. seized of the Office of Chief Usher of the Exchequer
(his ancient Inheritance) for Life, the Remainder to MARY his second Wife, and
the Heirs Males of their two Bodies: has constantly adhered to the Parliament
from the beginning; and acted for them: whereby he has lost above 10000l. of
his Estate, taken by the Kings Party: and has 3000l. owing to him laid out of
his Purse (for the most part) in the Public Service; and stands bound at
this time for about 5000l. taken up at Bristoll, for the Parliament Forces
(which never came into his fingring) for which he is daily threatened to be
Sued. Nor has he ever had any Compensation or Beneficial Employment under
them as other Men have had.

Yet one HUMPHREY EDWARDS (a Parliament Man upon an Undue Election, as has
been Voted at the Committee of Elections) greedy of an Office, after he had in
vain solicited the Committee of Sequestrations to Sequester the said CLEMENT
WALKER, and confer the said Office upon him) has (at last) prevailed with
the Committee of the Revenue (whereof he is a Member) to bestow the said Office
upon him, the said EDWARDS (in recompense of his good Service in attending the
KING to the House of Commons when He came to demand the Five Members) by their
Order, dated 10 Febr. 1649. in these words: Whereas Clement Walker, Esquire. Usher
of the Public Revenue, is now a Prisoner in the Tower, etc. and thereby not
in a Capacity to execute that Office hi^; It is therefore this day Ordered by
this Committee, etc. That Humphrey Edwards a Member of Parliament do execute
the said Office. etc. until the Parliament declare their Pleasure therein. And
that he shall have, receive, and enjoy all lawful and just Allowances,
Perquisites and Privileges belonging, in as full and ample manner as the said
Clement Walker had and enjoyed the same.

Upon which Order observe,

1. ^ ds is one of (...) stopped the (...) Arrears, pur^o necessitate ^ell
their De^o them a^gs in the (...) which ^ps, (...)
That for Master Walker's Imprisonment, he has been above twenty weeks in
Prison (to his great charge and loss after so many sufferings for the
Parliament) whereas Edwards never lost any thing for the Parliament, having
always been a half-faced Cavalier, changing his Party for his Profit) upon a
bare suspicion, and nothing legally proved against him, although two or three
Sessions and one Assize have intervened. And this by the solicitation and
underhand working of the said Edwards and his Party; as in due time shall be
proved by an Action of Conspiracy to be brought against them, For begging his
Estate before any Conviction or Forfeiture, and maliciously prosecuting Master
Walker in an unlawful way, and upon false suggestions.

2. Master Walker's Imprisonment does not disable him to execute the said
Office; he having an able Deputy therein, that has forty years executed the
Place: And the said Office has for the most part been executed by Deputies,
whereas the said Edwards understands not the Place.

3. To Order, [That Edwards shall Execute the Place, until the Parliament
declare their Pleasure therein] Is in effect to Order, That by the Practices of
Edwards and his Party, the said Clement Walker shall be perpetually imprisoned;
or until he starve in Prison: he having already lost so much of his Estate;
and being unduly despoyled of the rest.

4. To disseise Master Walker of his Freehold, only because he is so
imprisoned, as aforesaid, for a time: no Crime being proved against him; no
Abuser or neglect of the Place; and without any Legal proceedings (as if he
were a Conquered Slave) will ill agree with the Justice of a Parliament that
has used so much Severity against Tyranny: and has published such liberal
Promises as are contained in their two Declarations, 9 Febr. and 17 March,
1648. to keep the Fundamental Laws of this Land concerning the Preservation
of the Lives, Proprieties and Liberties of the People; however it may agree
with the Committee of the Revenue; Publicans and Sinners sitting at the Receipt
of Custom to enrich themselves. And here it is fit to remind all People of
Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, 30 Car. so much commended by this
Parliament.

5. The Committee of the Revenue have no Authority to disseise any Man of his
Freehold; for any time: and to dispose thereof amongst themselves. A practice
odious both to God and Man; directly contrary to all the known Laws of the
Land, and all the Declarations, etc. of this Parliament, and destructive to all
Forms of Civil Government whatsoever.

6. Whereas the said Clement Walker expected the said Edwards should have moved
the Parliament to confirm and ratify the said Order of the said Committee;
and had provided to make his defense. The said Edwards, audaciously, (without
the Privity of the Parliament) upon Thursday, 21 March, 1649. came to the House
belonging to the Office of the said Master Walker (wherein his Deputy, an old
sickly Man was with the doors shut upon him) where the said Edwards (with his
Sword by his side) knocking at the door of the said House, demanded Entrance:
and being denied, Cursed and Swore like a Madman; calling the said Deputy,
Rogue: and many other Opprobrious Terms; fit only for the mouth of such a
Fellow, whose Conversation with his own ^t stinks all the Town over: At last
the said Edwards threatened to bring a File of Musketeers to the House: the
terror whereof made the poor old Man open the doors to him. Thus Master
Walker was cast out of his quiet and ancient Possession.

7. The said Committee of the Revenue gave strict charge to their Clerks to
give forth no Copy of the said Order; but to conceal it: That the said Mr.
Walker might the better be surprised, and clandestinely robbed of his said
Inheritance.

Hereupon, the said Clement Walker, upon Wednesday, 27 March, 1650. sent one of
his Sons with directions and commands to Westminster to endeavor to recover
the Possession of his said House. Who lying in wait until the Fellow that
kept Possession for Edwards went forth; slipped into the said House quietly, and
snatched the Key out of his hands. Which Act the said Clement Walker does
hereby justify and avow to all the world, as being conformable to the known
Laws of the Land; and that he is thereby Legally restored to his ancient and
quiet Possession again.

CLEMENT WALKER.


