SPICILEGIVM: OR, A Glean of Mixtling.

By JOHN WINTER Minister of East Dearham in Norfolk.

JOH. 6.12. Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

Antoni, cupis Deo placere? ora: and dum orare non poteris, manibus la^ora; and
semper aliquid facito. Aug. ad Fratres in Eremo.

^erm. 17. Paulum sepultae distat inertiae
Celata virtus.
Hor. Car. l. 4. od. 9. LONDON, Printed by A. M. and are to be sold by Joseph
Cranford at the Sign of the Gun in St Paul's Churchyard. 1664.

TO THE READER.
NEither in hope of reward, nor expectation of thanks; but in respect of my own
duty, I freely present these few papers, to the pleasure of the casual Reader:
craving his pardon, lest happily for a moment, I may divert his eyes from better
employments; or trouble his thoughts with less pertinent notions.

Poetical license is on my side, Scribimus indocti, etc. I will go no further
with the verse; because in those two words. I am concluded.

I hold Socrates (by his favor) an Ethnick-haeretick, for his critical
resolution, not to write at all; because he could not write so well as he
would. Socr. Schol.
I rather comply with the Novatian Bishop Sisinnius (but not in his haeresie)
who being asked why he bathed himself twice in a day? answered, because I
cannot do it thrice. And I have endeavored this third time to do thus much;
because as yet I can do no more.

Whatsoever defects appear in the follong Discourse, this I dare give under my
hand; that the Author intended well to all parties: to the King, and subjects,
Church, and State. And I would to God, that every tongue and pen at this day
going within His Majesty's Dominions (the respective Excellencies of their
parts only excepted) were such as these of

East Dearham. Norff. October. 5. 1663. JOHN WINTER.

ORATION, FESTINATIO. Prayer is good speed.
O Most glorious GOD, and most gracious Father, assist these my endeavors, and
complete my labors. For thy own sake crown thy own gifts: for thy mercy sake
pardon my offenses. I cannot do the good I would; much less the good I should:
and the evil I would not; that do I. But thou art a God, who acceptest the
will for the deed; and grantest to thy servants, both to will and to do of thy
good pleasure.

O eternal Son and most blessed Savior, instruct and enable me the least of
thy Ministers, and the greatest of sinners; to do something relating to thy
glory, conducing to the good of thy Church, and the discharge of my own duty.
For not only my own heart by woeful experience, but thy sacred Word tells
me; that without thee thy best servants can do nothing.

O blessed Spirit, God of truth, and comforter of thy Church, strengthen me in
these my undertakings. For thou art the same from all eternity; and of old
time, holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God, prompt and
guide me, Sanctify me through thy truth: thy Word is truth. Thou bast put it
in my heart to be inditing of good matters: and now let me freely speak the
things, I have made unto my heavenly King. As thy servant David's tongue was
the pen of a ready Writer; so make my pen the tongue of a divine Orator: that
the meditations of my heart, the words of my mouth, and the works of my hands
may be ever acceptable in thy sight; O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

(...).
Man a little World.
THe Great GOD having made the Great World of other things, was pleased to draw
a Map of it in the dust: And so he formed Adam, and out of him Eve; the work of
the sixth day, and a compendium of the labors of the other five.

And now behold a petty walking World; the Celestial and Tertestriall Globes
united in a little creature, the line of whose life is but a span long. Here is
Heaven and Earth in a small volume; soul and body constitu^ing one individual
person: the spirit being like a noble Guest in a homely Cottage, a diamond
immured in clay, and a spark obscured in ashes. In this divine creature shines
this image of the Creator, a trinity in unity; understanding, will, and memory.
Praise thou the Lord O my soul; and forget not all his benefits.

Nor ought we to pass by the corporeal fabric without wonder. As we must not
admire the scabberd, and despise the blade: so we ought not to under value the
scabberd, which conteyns the blade. David made this reflection upon his bodily
structure; I am fearfully, Psalm. 139.13.
and wonderfully made. Os homini sublime dedit, etc.

The erected figure of Man's building, gives him a praeeminence above the
grovelling brutes; teaching him to look toward heaven, and to walk uprightly.
Howbeit, set him not insult too much upon his mother; nor forget whence the
visible part of him was taken, and whither it must return.

The four wrangling Brother-Elements in this mortal body, by a discording
concord hold out the slender third of our life; until ambitious praedominancy
(which spoileth all bodies natural and politic) confounds do proportion;
and by fatal distempers relapseth us into our ancient Chaos.

In the mean time (though but for a short time) Man is a new and old Exchange
of things. What do ye lack? Here is in this little pack of Wares all that ye
can ask or think of: treasures, pleasures, wisdom, prudence, folly, madness,
health, sickness, joy, grief, hope, despair, riches, poverty, honor, shame,
glory and misery. I need not speak of the outside ornaments, pride, and
bravery: for they show themselves. Thus the saying of the dying Emperor
Severus, Ael. Spar.
may now by many a person justly be taken up; Omnia fui, and nihil mihi
prodest, I have been all things, and nothing profits me.

And that Man is not called a little world in vain; the world of several and
antipathetick dispositions of men declare. One is aerie and pleasant as a Lark,
and has learned to sing as well falling, as rising; another is as chollerick
as a Dog; a third as meek as a Lamb; a fourth as fierce as a Tiger; a fifth as
idle as an Ape; and a sixth as filthy and sluggish as a Swine.

Old Israel's Jury of sons make good this verdict, in the variety of hierogly
phicall liveries, put upon them by their dying prophetic father. Reuben is
water, for his incontinency, Genesis 49.
and instability; Simeon and Levi fire and sword, instruments of cruelty; Judah
a Lion; Zabulon a haven for ships; Issachar (the picture of an English man in
the late times of war, or in the present diversity of opinions) a strong Ass
couching between two burdens; Dan a Judge, and a Serpent; (God bless us from
serpentine Judges any more in High Courts of Justice) Gad a troop, to overcome,
and to be overcome; (And the Lord deliver us from seeing any more of that.)
Asher (God continue it with his grace) bread and royal dainties; Napthali (as
wild as a Buck) a Hind let loose; Joseph a fruitful bough; and Benjamin (like
a younger brother) is designed to ravine as a Wolf.

Pl^to (though deserving better for his learned pains) for his supercilious
deportment, and lofty carriage, Brus.
was by Antisthenes dubbed a Horse: And Diogenes for his snarling humor (not
canonized) but canonized, and made a Dog by Patent.

The Prophet amazed at the cruelty and violence of the world, compared men to
the fishes in the sea; where the great make a pastime of devouring the small
Yea he likens the poor and helpless to silly fishes; and the Mighty and
rapacious partly to Anglers, Hab. 1.14.
and partly to men fishing with a drag-net: thereby showing, that there is a
Generation, which will still be catching, either by hook or crook, by fraud or
force; and that all is fish that comes into their net.

Such men as these the Psalmist frequently terms Lions; and the Lamb of God
who says false prophets are wolves in sheeps clothing, Mal. 7.15. Luke 13.32.
called Herod the tyrant a fox. Thus Man, who sometimes was in honor,
forfeiting his primitive innocent understanding is by serpentine craft become
like unto the beasts that perish.

And now may we say with David, Psalm. 8.
Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him? Lord what is man? Lord what is
he not? He is any thing but what thou once made him; and what he should be.
He is the mirror of frailty; times pride and spoil; fortunes laughing stock;
the picture of inconstancy; and the tennis-ball of envy and calamity. A worm,
he is and no man. Corruption is our father; and the worm our mother, Man is
like a thing of naught, his time passes away like a shadow. So Homer's heroic
Iliads are brought within the compass of a nutshell; the great world into the
little world, and the little world into nothing.

O then love not the world nor the things of the world. The world is a riddle,
which destroys them, who bend their minds to unfold it, or their hearts to
infold it. It is too great and yet too small for a man's affections; too great
for his head and his hands, too little for his heart: more than enough to
trouble a quiet soul; but nothing sufficient to quiet a troubled spirit. That
man alone reapeth content within it, who is content without it. 1 John 2.17.
The world passes away, and the lusts thereof; but he that does the will of
God abides for ever.

Mores sequuntur humores. Manners follow the Humors.
Phlegm.
I Have no quarrel with the work of God; God forbid, nor nor am I out of
humor with the humors: though (alternis vicibus) they often put me out of
humor.

I look upon phlegm as an allay to choler; and know that fire and water, as
well in the body natural, as in the body politic, are very good servants;
though bad masters. And as (...) it is on all hands confessed, that the blood
is the chariot of life: so it must be granted, that a modicum of phlegm is
instead of oil to make the wheels run merrily.

But, omne nimium vertitur in vitium, too much is always bad; and the old
world perished by a deluge. Where phlegm prevails above all the rest, there
is good ground made fenn and bogs; each thought is like a Pout, or muddy Eel;
the recovery beyond the reach of Dutch devices; and the improvement of such
bottomless parts enough to break mean undertakers. It is true, Art will do
much; but the water will have the course: And it is not worth the pains and
cost to make sluices to the sea; or to bray a fool in a mortar. Prove. 27.22.


This soft effeminate lazy humor is apt to invade men's spirits with
insensible approaches; and like the tide to environ them before they be aware:
And then over shoes, over boots. This humor may well take the gout and the
dropsy for companions; and it often does so: And, though it deserves not their
patronage, it has need of great persons to uphold it; otherwise it makes them
beggars. Yet a little sleep, Prove. 6.10.
a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. So shall thy poverty
come as one that that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man.

Whosoever is overcome with this disease is buried alive; unprofitable to others,
uncomfortable to himself. He is entombed in his house, as the dead in their
graves; so that a man may epitaph over his door, as the Philosopher did upon
Vacia's Lazines, Hic situs est, etc. Here lies the body of such a person: or
he may write as in pestilentiall places, Lord have mercy upon us. Lord let not
this waterflood of Sloth overwhelm us; neither let the deep of negligence
swallow us up.

Choler.
NEver was there so great a superfluity of water; but there has been, or may
be as great a drought. As the world once for sin was drenched: so once for all
it shall be scorched. In the mean time, the little world of Man is frequently
impaired by this domestic fire of choler: which when it is too little, does
not warm the house; when too great it consumes both the Inhabitant, and
hazard's the neighbors.

Igne quid utilius? Ovid. Tris.
si quis tamen urere tecta Caeperit; audaces instruit igne manus. What more
useful? and yet what more dangerous than fire? A drop of water cannot possibly
do any considerable harm to any: But one spark of fire neglected may do very
much to many. Choler and fire are like a false rumor and an evil report;
getting strength by every wind, and laying hold upon all that is near it.

A choleric breast is a tynderbox apt to catch any fire; having a happy use,
when it stands right under the sparks of grace, and is subservient to a holy
indignation: But is then unfortunate, when it is inflamed with balls of wild
fire, cast in by the grand Spirit of discord; or by the busy hands of
Malecontented spirits.

He had need be vigilant against his undermining Enemy, and against all
adventitious Incendiaries, who has such a Magazin of Gunpowder within his own
bosom. Ephesians. 4.26.
Be angry but sin not, is a most divine lesson; but a nice distinction for a
man's practice to hit on. And therefore the Author having sometimes been a
persecuter of the Church, gave this rule; that men should be zealously affected
always in a good thing. Gal. 4.18.


He is no good disputant, who transferreth his quarrel from things to persons;
and leave's the question to revile the opponent. And choler will quickly do
this, and more. That child deserves to smart and bleed, who spits in his
fathers or mothers face; because some of his brethren did him wrong.

And yet (God help us) nothing is at this day more common amongst us. Witness
those frequent, petulant, and pestilent oppositions against all Laws and
injunctions of the King and the Church: which oppositions at the first were but
the results of spleenfull animosities, taken up against the miscarriages of
some particular persons in place and office.

Sic nimium altercando veritas amittitur, Thus by too much strife truth is
lost. And now whereas Foreigners were wont to accuse English men of being too
phlegmatic; it must henceforth be acknowledged that they are too choleric:
And (which is worse) their anger is like a torch, kindling soon, and burning
long.

And very deplorable it is, that neither the reflection upon the water of our
own Baptism, nor the dews and showers of God's refreshing mercy after the
parching heat of our late affliction, nor yet the prayers and tears of the
Church can quench this civil fire.

And although most of them who first did blow the coals, and many who brought
fuel to the pile, are long since turned to dust and ashes: yet too many there
are, who thrust their fingers to rake in the embers, Suscitare hesternos ignes,
to renew our late mischiefs, and to revive our common miseries.

Surely the wrath of man can never work the righteousness of God. He that
says, He makes his ministers a flaming fire, Psalm. 104.4.
intended thereby the spiritual edification of men; and not their bodily
destruction. And he who surnamed two of his Apostles the sons of thunder, did
not approve their sudden flash and hasty bolt; Luke 9.54.
when they moved for fire to come down from heaven, to consume the Samaritans.

The Tyrants of Sicily invented no greater torment for others; than their own
corroding envy was to themselves. And as ambition is both the delight and the
rack of the ambitious: so a person overcome with choler is punishment and
misery enough to himself here, although he should meet with none hereafter. His
flesh (only wanting a good cause) is broyled like St Lawrence on a gridiron;
his bones are stewed in his wasting marrow; and his heart is boiled in his own
blood.

And now (as the Lord said to the Prophet Jonah) does any man think that he
does well to be angry? that he does well to be angry against others unto death?
then let him think upon him, who is ready to judge both the quick and dead; who
for our sins is justly displeased and in whose sight (without his mercy) no man
living shall be justified. And who may stand in his sight when he is angry.

Let the thought of that great day, which shall be revealed by fire, cool and
quench the rage of every man's choler; lest he be consumed in the flames
wherein he has delighted.

Melancholy.
ANd have thou found me O mine enemy? this needs must I say of thee, (as
Aristippus did of a wife) thou art parvum, pulchrum, magnum, malum; thou art to
my doting fancy in thy Visits, the fairest, and the blackest, the sweetest and
the bitterest, of my friends, of my foes, and of my intimate acquaintance.

I cannot but admire thee, as St. Bernard did Ambition, and say, Lib. 3. de
Consid.
Quemodo omnes torquens omnibus places! How do thou please all those whom
thou tormentest! And oh that I might ever have such a stock of charity, for all
my visible Enemies among the children of men; as I have for thee! I know thou
hurrest me; and yet I freely forgive thee; I hugg; I embrace; I cherish thee:
and the world can never cause me to forsake thee.

And yet to give this humor it is due; it is never so great an enemy, but it
may be as great a friend. What some have affirmed of Geniusses, how every man
from his birth has two waiting upon him; one for his good, the other for his
harm; may be expounded of Melancholy doing both offices: which is a weapon
both for offense, and defense, as it is used.

On the one side, it is a check to pride and self-love, a bar against
presumption, a threshold to humility, a door to patience, wings to divine
meditation, and an handmaid unto devotion. And whereas the jolly world count
such a man's life to be madness; the truth is, (as Cotys King of Thrace said of
his severity) this madness keep's men in their right wits.

On the other side (when it is exorbitant and indisposed) Melancholy is a
traitor to the Master, a foe to humanity, an Antagonist to reason, the
Cutthroat to hope and joy, a black cataract upon the eyes of the mind
preventing divine illumination, and finally a desperate sollicitour unto
perdition. Sic fit Melancholicus, aut Deus aut Demon. Thus a Melancholy
person is either a God, or a Devil.

And what shall I say of this humor? It is a kind of ubiquitary. When I take
the wings of the morning, and mount upon my prime meditations toward heaven;
then melancholy is there: And when in heavyness of spirit I go down toward
hell; it is there also. The light of the day cannot expel it; and the night
feed's it. I cannot flee from this haunting ghost; nor can I go from it is
presence. Though I change places, places change not me. I am like the young
man, who admiring why he was never the better for travel, was told by
Socrates, that the reason was, Laert.
because in all his travels he still carried himself about him. So carry I my
mortality, my misery, my imperfections, and therewithal my melancholy.

It is true, (I bless God for it) I look toward heaven; but it is at a great
distance, and through many clouds both of affliction, and of ignorance. I am no
more satisfied, (nor can be) with all that I have heard, or with all that the
world can tell me in this land of my pilgrimage, concerning the joys above,
and the glory of that eternal kingdom; 1 King 10.
than the Queen of Sheba was with the report which she heard in her own country
concerning Solomon's Court. Until her eyes saw, she was rather afflicted, than
affected; rather tormented, than contented.

She did not hear the one half: nor do I one thing of a thousand. Eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor has it entered into the heart of man. When I awake up at the last day, I
trust in God, I shall be satisfied. But how long Lord most holy and true? How
long? O when shall I come to appear before the presence of God?

Alas when I think to come nearest heaven in my soliloquies, and private
solaces; then this my bosome-companion crosses my purpose, and bring's me down
to the pits brink. My own heart condemns my heart of foolish presumption, for
my hasty desire to be made (...), like to the Angels of God in heaven; who am
become through sin even as a beast before God, and may be compared unto the
brute creatures that perish.

When I hear the holy man David putting the question, Psalm. 24.
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall rise up in his holy
place? and then find him answering himself, Even he that has clean hands and
a pure heart: I begin to despair within my self, Prove. 20.9.
and am almost ready to say, Then I am cut off from thy presence; my eyes shall
never see good. For who can say, I have made my heart clean? or I am pure from
my sin?

I cannot but hang my head, and walk with a dejected countenance, when I hear
so good a man, and so great a Prince say, My sins have taken such hold upon
me, that I am not able to look up. Horror capillos eriget, It makes my hair
stand upright. and I could even rent my flesh, at those words of his; My sins
are more in number than the hairs of my head: and my heart has failed me.
Psalm. 40.15.
Oh but who can reach the height, or sound the depth of that ejaculation,
(which for our sins proceeded from him who did no sin, neither was guile found
in his mouth) My God, Mat. 27.46.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? This is all our comfort; the sore has the
salve in it self: And he who taught me to cry out, Wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? taught me likewise to say, I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 7.24.


Thus are we brought to despair in our selves, that we may trust in the living
God; whose Promises are then most sure, when to us they seem most impossible.
It is no less than a damnable presumption in another, to account that sinner's
case desperate, who thinks himself so. What though his days be now black? Exodus
13. v. last.
and the visions of his nights be now terrible? the cloud and the fiery pillar
were of old the tokens of God's presence with his people. What though the poor
wretch through bitterness of spirit, sometimes cannot see which way he can be
saved? He may be in the way to Heaven, even then. Yea, let no man doubt it;
through God's grace he is so. For God's ways are not as our ways. When he
brought his people into Canaan; the way by which he led them was where there
was no way: through the wilderness, through the sea, and through the river
Jordan. He led them through fire and water, and so into a wealthy place. The
way to Heaven lies near to the gates of hell; through many tribulations;
fightings without, and terrors within: And none are saved, who pass not
through this purgatory. Why art thou then so heavy O my soul? Psalm. 43.
and why art thou so disquieted within me? O trust in God; for I will yet give
him thanks, who is the help of my countenance, and my God.

Sanguine.
OF all the Constitutions and complexions this is the golden mean. Blood is a
sacred fountain running through the Isle of man; the veins being so many
channels and rivulets, through which it is percolated and purified: whilst by
a continued revolution it serves all parts (as the water compasses the earth)
making glad the City of God, the heart of man, which is the tabernacle of the
Most High.

Chancer says (as I remember) that to dream of blood signifies gold. Out of
what mine he dug that conjecture, I know not; nor is it much material: for
Poets and Paynters may feign what they please. Perhaps it was grounded upon
this conceit, that men are as loath to part with money, as with drops of blood:
and often lose their best blood about it.

But, ab initio^, non fuit sic, from the beginning it was not so. Then gold was
held in less esteem, and blood in greater than now it is: men were not so
covetous of the first, nor so prodigal of the latter. And as now amongst us,
it is a capital crime to clip and deface the Kings Coin: so of old, by the
just judgment of the great Lawgiver, it was enacted and made a Statute for
ever, that who so should shed the blood of a man, who is the Image of God, Genesis
9.5.
should be guilty of high Treason against the King of Heaven.

And surely of the many sins, murder deserves no favor; because it is most
unnatural. By killing, blood touches blood; Hos. 4.2.
whose effusion is dreadful in this, that men appear thereby haters of
mankind; and destructive to their own principles. For as Adam said of Eve, this
is bone of my bones: so ought every man to think, that he is very nearly
concerned in the blood of his brother. God made all nations of men (says the
Apostle) (...), of one blood; (...), Acts 17.26.
to dwell together in peace and love upon all the face of the earth: And (...),
to seek the Lord; not to seek one another destruction. Ephesians. 5.29.
No man yet ever hated his own flesh, but loves it, and cherishes it. And
there is only an individual distinction between men; no specificall
difference of them, as of beasts. Let every man then practice that tenderness
of affection unto another, which he approves toward himself.

At nos virtutes ipsas invertimus, But we pervert and abuse all good things;
making arguments serve to maintain vice, which were properly designed to defend
virtue. For whereas our flesh and blood is of it self a motive to patience and
forbearance; we make it an incentive unto fury and madness: raging and saying,
flesh and blood cannot endure it.

Blood is the greatest polluter, Number. 35.33.
and the greatest cleanser; the greatest polluter, for it defiles a land: and
the greatest cleanser, for it washes a way the filth of the world. 1 John 2.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin.

The blood which runs through our mortal territories, may be compared to
the River Nilus; which when it rises to a due height and measure, signifies
health, plenty, and fertility: but when much higher or much lower, it portends
the quite contrary.

This humor is by right the lawful Reg no over the rest; howbeit, when it
become: an unbridled Tyrant, then (such is the corruption of the best things)
it proves a fatal enemy to man; both as to sacred and civil concernments. It
hazards the bodey with violent fevers and contagious diseases: and it endangers
both soul and body with carnal lusts, and beastly pleasures.

Otherwise, in a due proportion, it is of all the humors the most happy to the
subject in whom it does praedominate, and also to the neighbors. It is the
life of life natural and civil; the cement of society; wit's common wealth;
the moderatour of passions; a keeper of the peace; a lover of love; a promoter
of charity; a tender resenter of God's mercy, and man's misery; and a great
advancer of God's honor, praise, and glory.

Me thinks I see this Constitution clearly appear in every line of Joseph's
life, and of his history. I see it in his infancy, taking sober notes upon the
redeness of his elder brethren; and making a true presentment of them to his
Reverend father. And who could blame Jacob for doting upon such a promising
child? I see it in his dreams, so pleasant, so harmless, and so significant:
which he told as freely and confidently; without any fear or suspicion of his
brethrens envy.

I see it in his readiness to go at his father's word to visit his froward
brethren; who could not speak kindly to him, Genesis 37.
but plotted at first sight of him, to kill him for his pains. I see it in the
prison, in his cheerfullness and affability to his fellow prisoners. Wherefore
(said he) look ye so sadly to day? Genesis 40.
And who then there had more cause than he?

But I see it in him most apparently in the height of his dignity; he being
semper idem, always the same man, and always a good man, He could not see his
brethren troubled, but he was troubled to see it: neither could he hear them
confess their faults, and condemn themselves; but he was forced to turn away
and weep.

He overcame their evil with his goodness in every circumstance. They cast him
into a pit, to eat gravel and stones, and to drink his own tears, whilst they
sat down to their dinner with pleasure: But he caused them to sit down before
him, and to eat, drink, and be merry. They sold him for money: Genesis 45.
He sells them corn, and then gives them their money again. They stripped him
of his coat: But he sent them home with changes of raiment.

Me thinks I see this humor appear in David's red cheeks, and cheerful
countenance, when he took Saul asleep the second time, and none keeping guard
about him; when he took away the spear, and the cruse of water from his
boulster, 1 Samuel 26.
thereby showing that he could have taken away his life; and then calling
Abner, and upbraiding him, and his Soldiers for their negligence: by all which
Saul might know, how little cause he had to take him for his enemy; or to
pursue him as a traitor.

Posse and nolle nobile, To be able to revenge and to be unwilling, is the
noblest resolution in the world. Every Dog can grin and bite; every Wasp can
sting; and the most despicable brutes can show spite, and pursue revenge: but
he that can forbear is a man at least; whatsoever he is more.

And we need no other example hereunto than his, who expressed rich drops of
his sacred blood in prayer for us; Luke 22.44.
and afterward poured forth the main ocean of it upon the Cross: who going to
die had an eye upon the mourners; and seemed not to regard his own, in
commiseration to their condition. Daughters of Jerusalem (said he) Weep not for
me, but for your, selves, Luke 23.28
and for you children.

This resolution the holy Martyrs in intimation of their and our Master, have
always taken up; forgetting their own injuries; pitying those, who had no pity
on them; and praying for the salvation of their souls, who were the destruction
of their bodies, and estates.

Let us learn to be likeminded, Let us break off Enmity; and renew Friendship.
Let all men learn to record the Act of Oblivion in the Court of Conscience;
(and most chiefly those, who have most benefit by it) and then let them execute
it one toward another. Themistocles his resolution will fit in this case; Plut.
who being offered to be taught the art of memory, answered, he had rather be
taught the art of forgetfullness: for (said he) I can remember what I please;
but I cannot forget what I would.

I know not whether any have such a birdlim'd memory to remember what they
please; I believe there are many, and know there are some cannot forget what
they would: But I am sure, there are more will not forget what they should;
that is to say, their mischief, spite, revenge, wrath, malice and
uncharitableness.

There is none but the great Schoolmaster can teach men this lesson. And he
instructs us to it both by precept, and pattern; in assurance of whose lenity
and mercy, we are taught to pray, Psalm. 79.8.
O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us: And remember not Lord our
offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers.

Familiar, or civil Observations.
A treacherous memory.
OFten have I heard men of happy memories blame themselves for weakness of
memory; but seldom any person accuse himself for a weak judegment. Thus folly
loves to be praised; and sin to be excused,

But the defects and deformities of Creeples are most discerned in their
motions: and the greatest weakness of men appear when they stand up in defense
of their own imperfections. In both our civil and spiritual station, judgment,
and memory are our two legs: and commmonly when one fails, the other does us
but lame service. Had we not an erroneous judgment, and a perverse will; we
should not have a treacherous memory.

Omnia quae curant senes meminerunt, Ter.
old men remember what they have a mind to; to serve their own turn. Alas, we
love to hood-wink our intellectual parts; that we may pursue out brutish
passions, and vile affections. And this makes us forget our God, forget our
selves, forget our neighbors, and do the things that are unseemly.

A help at hand, or a remedy with a mischief.
LItera scripta manet, The written word is permanent. The invention of
Bibliography has well eased the narrow table of man's heart; and delivered his
gilded sheet of brain-paper from the tenters: allowing him recourse ((...) upon
all occasions) to the standing Records of learned Collectors.

But it had been good for many, that they had never attained to the use of this
invention. For then many mischiefs had happily died, and many injuries had been
honorably buried in oblivion; which are now kept above ground in black and
white, until they stink upon the face of the earth; being made everlasting by
pen, ink, and paper.

I have seen many men enter notes into their Almanacks (which the
Prognosticators neither foretold nor foresaw) of the trespasses their
neighbor, had done them; with the punctual time, place, and witnesses: that
they might have mischief by heart and vengeance ad unguem. But I never yet saw
men set down their own trespasses committed either against God or their
neighbors. They have not a panick fear but a panick faith. They are afraid to
forget other men's faults; loath to remember their own. Their practice obliges
them unto phanaticisme; for they cannot safely say the Lord's Prayer, lest, the
fifth petition should make a blot in their book.

Thus Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites have oppressed and wellnigh suppressed
the Evangelists: and the abuse of the Law has almost overthrown the Gospel.

The question St Peter put to our Savior, is now out of date, Mat. 18.21.
Lord how often shall my brother trespass against me, and I forgive him? And
rather than men will stand to Christ's award to forgive until seventy times
seven; there are many would (if possible) have seventy times seven quarrels
with their brethren, for the value of seven pence.

Some Infidelity a Venial Sin.
ANd what else shall we think of it, when men will not believe their own eyes.

What are you there? Are not you gone yet? Are you come already? Are you alive
still? These are the usual complements of Rusticks with their intimate
friends, and old Acquaintance.

These vulgar errors might suit well with the ^^mutable dispositions of (...)
late times; wherein, through the epidemicall metamorphosis, and protean changes
of men, our eyes, ears, and judgments so far failed us: that we scarce knew
friends from foes, or honest men from others.

When beggars rode on horses, and Princes went on foot, when Tradesmen took the
Pulpit, and Churchmen took to Trades: such Legerdemain of policy and Landskips
of fortune might well deceive the eye, and make men say to their near
neighbors; What are you there? Are you alive still? such questions then might
well be freed from absurdity; when we knew not where to find men; or what to
make of them when we came unto them; or how to trust them so far as we could
see them.

No more manners than a Dog.
MOre than once have I seen a pleasant conceited fellow pull off his hat, and
make a leg to a fierce Dog assaulting him; and that with good success: the
bawling cur being struck dumb, and strangely charmed to turn tail at the sight
of a civil ceremony. It might be a subtle philosophical problem to find out
the mystery of this dog-trick.

A Pythagorean would imagine the beast some transmigrated old Cynick concurring
with morose schismatics; in facing about, and fleering at the first charge of
good manners. And what shall we think? Has the Dog so much good nature as to
be overcome with kindness? Or is opposition a pair of bellows to choler, and a
gentle submission of the nature of water? Or, is even a Dog ashamed of his own
baseness, when he has opened his mouth, and shown his teeth against him, who
neither did nor intended him harm. Or, is he convinced that he ought not to
bawle against virtue, or snap at good manners? Or lastly, has he it by
instinct, that such civil respect and moral obeisance are propper for Men, and
not for Dogs, and so he dares not usurp that, which appertains unto his Master.

Whether all (...) any of these be the cause, let them consider who have a time
and a mind to it. In the mean time, when brutes appear thus inclined to
humanity, le^^ Men learn to decline from brutishness: and seeing Dogs sometimes
do so much as seem to be moral; let not men so much as once seem to be dogged.

No Courtship to an honest heart.
ABout thirty years since (as I remember) the complement among Equals was
altogether love; and little speech of service: Now it is abundance of
services; and no love at all. The substance of good will is evaporated into
aerie expressions; and men are screwed into antic postures. Then they had
settled countenances, sober garbs, and solid salutations; to which they usually
added a strong shake by the hand and a lusty clap on the shoulder; to try (as I
conceive) whether men were sound, or rotten; whether honest, or hallow-hearted.

Thus Aeneas distinguished his ghosts from men. The old way is the best. It was
never good world, since men made it their business, verba^dare, by feigned
words to make merchandise of their brethren.

It is true, there is a service of love: and that is better than Knight's
service, for it is God's service; who has commanded us by love to serve one
another. Gal. 5.13.
But twenty years service in wars has banished love from amongst us; and
left us nothing but mere service. Oh that our hearts and bands were once more
full of our old and first love; that could endure the touch! Experto credit;
when a man has need of help, he shall find one downright faithful friend more
worth than a thousand humble servants.

Better late than never.
IT is not unusual to hear men in their ordinary discourse to bolt out an
Oath; or a Curse upon some person: And then immediately to say, God forgive me
for swearing.

Thus bad servitors after meat bring mustard. Thus backward neighbors after
the child be dead offer themselves for Gossips. Thus careless Grooms, when the
Steed is stolen lock fast the stable door.

I must confess, this is not altogether so bad, at to swear out of vain glory,
and never ask God mercy. But it is too bad to be defended; and it is sadly to
be lamented; and seriously to be repented. Foxes have holes in men's hearts;
and the birds of the air have nests: which make them so deceitful above
measure, that Christ has scarce room allowed him there, to lay his head.

And what shall we say to these things? Do the good motions ferret out the bad,
and then follow them? Or, does repentance strive to overtake sin, and to arrest
it at God's suit? Or, do good men (though frail) think to deal with their
unruly passions, as with wild colts? set a brand upon them, and hang aclog
upon their heels and so let them go? Or, do pious and impious conceptions
struggle in the womb of the mind, as Esau and Jacob did in the body of Rebecca?
and then at last the younger supplant the elder.

God defend us? Romans 3.8.
It is hard doing evil, that good may come. Let none sin upon design to ask
pardon; lest a judgment intercept him. Iam. 3.10.
Out of the same mouth (...) not proceed blessing and cursing. Wherefore
together with his diligence, let this be every man's prayer; Set a watch O Lord
before my mouth, Ps. 141.3.
and keep the door of my lips.

Many words to little purpose.
SOme man in his journey loves to trouble every one he seen, about the time of
the day; and often makes the plough stand still, until the lazy swain and he
do dialogue about the clock and good husbandry: so both lose time, whilst both
talk about it. And this he will do though he has the Sun in his eyes, a Watch
going in his pocket, and knows the hour as well as any man can tell him.

The sport is; by this means sometimes he goes forward, and the day goes
backward: or at least it seems so. For here he shall have it nine of the clock;
and after five miles riding, it shall be but half an hour after eight. So wise
shall he be made who hearkens to every report; and asks every man's advice.
And so shall he be confirmed, who shuts his eyes against the light of his own
knowledge; and follows after every opinion.

Some will ask what the clock strikes, when they hear the first stroke; as
though it were less labor for them to use their tongue, than their ears; or
that they durst not trust their own ears for the matter; or that they never had
learned to count to the number of twelve.

Others will enquire the name of a Town, which they know as well as their own;
and will ask the way where they are able to go blindfold. These Gothamshire
whimseys and many more are as common as the high way. Of which we may say as
the fellow did of the Nightingale, when he had stripped her out of her
feathers; Vox and praeterea nihil, A voice and nothing else.

Men now adays are mere Questonists; loving to put doubts, and raise scruples
where they are most sure: but where they have most cause to doubt, there they
make none. They affect to seem diligent; and their affected seeming diligence
is their real negligence.

When the City of Corinth prepared for a siege and an assault, being threatened
by Philip King of Macedonia; and every man stood to his several task about the
works and fortifications: Diogenes never left tumbling his tub up and down, and
removing it this way and that way. And when a friend of his asked why he did
so? Guido. Bitur.
Because (said he) I would seem to do something, as well as others.

As Diogenes tumbled about his Tub, so some Zealots tumble and to is their
Bibles: never intending to turn a new leaf in their manners; though they turn
down all those in their books for quotations. They will sit musing, as they
were in a deep study; and on a sudden start and ask their neighbor for the
text. And so they can but another day turn to the proofs, and parley upon them;
they never care to turn themselves to the practice. Their words and their deeds
are so many customary for malities: And with a great noise and much stir, at
the last they conclude upon and do nothing.

Men doing worst aim at the Best.
ENvy at Eminence is the anvile upon which each Vulcan-maechanick hammers and
forges all opprobrious works and calumnious inventions. It is the white within
the spell, that the arrows are aimed at. And as we need not question the
goodness of the fruit, where the tree is most generally cudgelled: so without
doubt, there is an Excellency in those men above others; who are most obnoxious
to vulgar affronts and indignities.

And as it has been; so it ever will be. The Generality will never be wiser or
better than themselves. They had rather err with their forefathers in railing
at their betters: than sing a new song of praise to God, for their virtues and
abilities. Thus Horses will choose to dung, and Asses to piss, where others of
their kind has done it before them. This is the nature of the beast.

We shall seldom hear a scurrilous or scandalous story told; but the subject is
either a Friar, or a Parson. And these profane tales as they are become the
pastime of the many; so they are most greedily imbibed for truths, by the
itchingears of Separatists; and made the very Golden Legend of those violent
Saints, whose pretense is a perpetual reformation.

My mind tells me; and the event shows it; that they did not well (whosoever
they were in places of Authority) who by connivency countenanced rude and
ignorant persons, to speak evil of, or scoff at any holy orders; howsoever they
had been abused or the professors thereof had degenerated

And we have lived in an Age, which has paid us home all those injuries with
double interrest; rnd made the name of Parson as odious as ever was that of
Friar; and persuaded the people that every Priest was either a Jew or a Pagan.

And yet schismatics have affected to be Friars (good souls) and never knew
it; whilst they assumed to themselves, by way of excellency, the name of
Brethren. For Friar is brother.

People must have something to speak against; although they speak against their
own conscience, and all reason. Whatsoever the faults of fathers be, it becomes
not children to lay them open: but to reverence their virtues and pious
labors; and to condole their imperfections.

Memnon a famous Captain beat one of his soldiers for railing at Alexander,
though his Enemy: Plut.
because he was a person of honor. Though I hired thee (said he) to fight in
the defense of the Country against him: yet I gave no commission to revile him.

So let men defend the truth and the Church of God by what lawful and laudable
means they may: But by no means let them offend God by speaking evil of
dignified men; much less by speaking evil of dignities.

Contradictions, or backward Commendations.
IT is the less wonder that men customarily speak ill of persons whom they hate
and abhor; when we hear them do the same of the things and persons they love
and value.

It would make a Horse break his bridle (did he understand it) to hear his
master commend him for a devilish good jade. Thus some will tell us, they have
vile good corn; and that their boys are plaguey toward about their business.

It is not so much ignorance, as negligence, that works together these
dissonant terms in ordinary discourse. God gives men happy substantives, and
they rake hell for unlucky epithetes. The world is too apt to call evil good,
and good evil: to account the precious vile and the vile precious.

But alas! this verbal abuse is nothing to the real injury men put upon God's
benefits. As many persons handle, and misemploy their wealth and substance, and
as they bring up their children in all bad sufferance, and wickedness: they may
properly call them bitter sweetings; and truly say, that they are vile good,
devilsh apt, and plaguey toward.

An ill Hearing, but no ill Meaning.
WHen sickness seems mortal; Every visitant usually asks the sick man, how
be does? And he usually answers, oh heighbour, never worse.

It cannot be thought, that the man does then dissemble. And yet Christian
charity persuades us to hope, that his words have a better meaning, than the
letter seems to allow them: and that he was never better, then when he says,
never worse.

And God forbid, that men should so live, as to prove worst, when they should
be best; that is, as their dissolution. Who so does, is in a most wretched
condition. And indeed they who will never strive to be good, must needs be
worst at the last. In a foul corrupt vessel the worst is at the bottom.

But the dying man in two respects may say, never worse, with a safe
conscience. First in respect of his outward man, and corporal state: And so
every eye look's upon him, and pity's him. And secondly, in his inward man or
spiritual estate; and so the words signify a true inspection into his sins;
with a godly compunction, and a serious detestation of his former life.

And thus as he never was worse; so was he never better. As his outward man
decays, so does his inward man renew: and he worse he likes himself the
better does God like him. His Grace is sufficient for the Afflicted sinner; 2
Cor. 12.9.
his strength is made perfect in weakness: And in the infirmity of the patient,
the power of Christ rest's upon him. When he is weak then is he strong; when
never worse, then for ever better.

Sacred Observations.
The World was best, at the first.
IN the Creation there was a positive goodness in each individual creature;
and a superlative excellency in the universe. The most incomparable Maker being
both the fountain of goodness, and the God of order; it was impossible for him
to err, either in the matter of form of the works of his hands. As his holy
will and good pleasure gave all things their being: so his infallible judgment
gave them his approbation. And God saw every thing that he had made; Genesis 1.
last.
And behold it was very good.

It is clear then that the evil weeds, sins and mischiefs which have overrun
the world, were never created in the garden of Eden; nor of the Lord's planting
or watering. Though it be not in the power of man to makethat straight, which
God has made crooked: yet man made that crooked, which God once made straight.
Though man cannot bring a clean thing out of an unclean; yet into a clean world
he brought uncleaness.

The nocivous qualities of Beasts, serpents, flying creatures creeping things,
and mortiferous plants wherewith at this day the sons and daughters of Adam and
Eve are vexed, and annoyed; are as well the just reward of our particular
unjust doings: as the true fruit of the forbidden fruit, eaten by our first
parents

And how can we find fault with the Brutes, and vegetables, seeing the fault is
in our selves? Their present evil nature is but from our voluntary sin; and for
our necessary punishment. Their rebellion and disobedience against us, is an
evidence of their obedience to, and our disobedience against our Maker.

Well may a Lion, or a Bear, destroy and devour a Man; seeing one Man is become
a Wolf to another. The worst of creatures (as we account them) have still this
goodness and Excellency in them (which in us would be a piece of perfection)
that they willnot take part with the wicked, nor love them that hate the Lord.
And this may be said for them, which cannot speak for themselves; that as
Brutes have their cruelty by occasion of Man's fall: so they do but act savage
and brutish parts after our example. For, for ought that appears to the
contrary, before ever a Lion slew a Lamb; Cain killed his brother Abel. And
whereas beasts of prey go single to their work: men go to shed one another's
blood, by hundreds and by thousands.

Thus now is the world altered from what God made it. God looked upon all his
labors, and the works of his hands: And behold, all was very good. But Solomon
looked upon all his works and labors: And behold, all was evil. Behold, All
was vanity and vexation of spirit. Eccles. 2.11.
The Lord looked down from heaven, to see if there were any amongst the
children of men: but found none good amongst them. Ps. 14.


O then let the sons of men look down upon themselves, and repent; and look up
to God for mercy; before he comes down upon them in judgment; when he shall
try the world by consuming fire. For surely, As God took an exact view of all
his own works: so he will take knowledge of ours. And therefore as He takes
notice of all that he had made and done, for his own glory, and our good: so
let us take notice of all that we have made and done, to God's dishonor, and
our own hurt. Let us judge our selves, that we may not be judged And let us
pray, that we may be chastened of the Lord; that we may not be condemned of the
world.

The Devil's Masterpiece.
THe Woman which thou gave to be with, she gave me, and I did eat; Genesis 2.12,
13.
said Adam, the serpent beguiled me, and I did eat; said Eve. The Devil
deluded the woman; and by the woman seduced the man. All this is truth: yet no
party is to be excused. The woman is justly blamed, and punished by God; for
harkening to the voice of the serpent: And the man for harkening to the voice
of his wife. This is all they got, by extenuating their fault; and transferring
the guilt from one to another.

The man had the Commandment immediately from God; the woman mediately from
God, by her husband. And yet (as Tho. Aquinas observes) Mulier plus peccavit
quia gravius punita. The woman sinned more than the man; because she was more
punished. And why so? It is a greater sin to disobey the voice of a man, than
to resist the voice of God? No; but yet where God speaks by a deputy, the crime
is doubled in the party peccant: it being a greater sin to resist two than one.
The more bonds the stronger: And a manifold cord cannot lightly be broken.

This lesson well digested may teach each wife, each servant, and each subject,
so much fidelity, obedience, and Loyalty: that the Serpent shall not get the
upper hand in the world, so much as he has done. The devil still danceth the
beginning of the world. As he began sO he goes on. He makes use of those means
to supplant Mankind; which by experience he has found effectual. And great
need have men of care and prudence against such an Adversary; as is able to
corrupt the best institutions.

The sacred union of Adam and Eve, made two of one, and again one of two; being
a representative of the High Mystery of Christ's Church, taking life and Being
from the blessed wounds, of his pierced side: that sacred union (I say) the old
Serpent the Devil corrupted early; wounding Adam through Eve, and so making his
entrance at the weakest part of the City.

We may say of this Grand Homicide, as the Scripture phrase speaks of deadly
Execution; that Satan pretending kindness, and speaking quietly, smote Adam
under the fifth Rib, so that he died. 2 Samuel 3.27.
He smote him under that rib which God took from out his side, and formed into
a meet second, and gave him for his proper help, and collateral security. And
who could be so unhappily isntrumental to betray the man; as she that so
lately came from about his heart, and had her residence in is bosom? some? O
how are the mighty fallen! thus the philistines outwitted Samson, Jud. 14.18.
by ploughing with his heifer: And having made Delihah on their side, they put
out his eyes, and brough him into fetters. Jud. 16.21.


And as the Devil made choice of an apt instrument; so he propounds taking
overtures: to make them both wiser and better than God had made them. And
withal he blames God to the woman, for not dealing so well with Adam and her,
as he might have done: Therein by a manifest contradiction giving God the lie.
For God said, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. The Devil
said, Ye shall not surely die: For God does know that in the day ye eat
thereof, your eyes shall be opened; and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil.

The Devil knows now by long experience, that women are frequent and violent
Sollicitrixes of their husbands to Covetousness, and Ambition; to superiority,
and contempt of their Betters: especially when he has once informed them, that
all this is for a new and better light; and that it tends to illumination and
perfection. Solomon gives good counsel, had the world wit to sollow it; who as
he bids them not be over much wicked, nor foolish; so he says: Be not over
much righteous, neither make thy self over wise; Eccles. 7.16.
why should thou destroy thy self? This same overmuch righteousness, and
overmuch wisdom, which men of late have pretended to, have filled the world
with wickedness and foolishness. Our epidemicall illuminations are mere
satanical illusions; being all fomented by discontent and pride; carried on by
rebellion and disobedience against God, and his vicegerents, and supported by
violence and wrong against all good Laws and persons.

Aesop tells us of a Quack salver, that exercised his gifts upon a dim-sighted
woman, (that sex is prone to deal with Mountebanks naturally and spiritually)
pretending to open her eyes and better her sight. This cunning Artist, every
time he came to illuminate his Patient, did steal something out of the house;
and carry away with him; so that in a short time, she saw cle^rthat the
thievish villain had robbed her of all the beft things she had in the house; and
had scarce left her any thing to subsist with

And if I be not mistaken; the people of this Nation wherein we live, by their
feminine credulity to serpentine persuasions; (what with our dear Brethren of
Scotland northward, and their Confederates southward) have had their eyes pretty
well opened: And whereas at first, they thought they should all have been made
as Gods: at the last by woeful experience, they were brought to know good and
evil. They saw what good they had parted with; and what evil they had
purchased.

And surely they were as much beholding to those, who seduced them; as Aesop's
Woman was to her Oculist: or as Adam and Eve were to the Devil: For what have
all their New Lights and prodigious Illuminations brought them to see; but
themselves horribly abused, ashamed, and confounded?

And I pray God, they may all be brought to see their errors; and that
hereafter they may beware of the old Deceiver: For (as the Hermit told his
Brother) the Devil is not yet dead. The Apostle feared lest Satan should act
against the Corinthians, such a part as he played in Paradise: And writing to
Timothy, he give's charge to Women, 2 Cor. 11.3. 1 Timothy 2.12.
that they should not presume to teach or usurp Authority over their men: but
to learn in silence with all subjection: remembering that Adam was formed before
Eve; and that Eve was first and deepest in transgression.

And surely both man and woman have now more cause to fear the Serpent's
machinations; who in these last days and perilous times has sent forth his
brood creeping into houses. And it is no marvel that he leads captive silly
women, 2 Timothy 3.5.
which are laden with sins; and led away with diverse lusts: seeing he
captivated the first of women, (and by her all the world) when he undertook her
in her integrity.

No Murderer goes unpunished. Genesis 4.
THough Hell makes no conscience of tormenting sinners, yet the tormenting
conscience of sinners makes a hell of it slef. An evident argument that there
is a judgment to come; and that greater plagues remain for the ungodly, than
any this world affords them: Because they fear so.

Hence often arises desperation, upon the horrible magnitude of men's sins; and
the praeconceit of their future punishments. Praesumption, and desperation, as
opposite as they are, reconcile themselves unto man's perdition. It is a just
judgment from God; that they who feared and trembled at nothing, should do
nothing but fear and tremble: that they who sinned without fear or wit, should
have no wit in their fear; and that they who thought no sin too great to
commit, should afterward think their sin too great to be for given.

O the terrors of a bloody Conscience: Such sinners, every day they rise, may
say to the Devil, as the Daemoniack said to our Savior: Mat. 8.29.
Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? Witness Cain, the
Ringleader of all bloody wretches; and a final Castaway. 1 Jo. 3.12.
So St John says of him; Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his
brother. And the Lord tells us that inquisition shall be made for blood: Ps.
9.12. Mat. 23.35.
And that that Commission shall bear date even from the blood of Righttous Abel.

And now hear the first in humane mortal Murderer speak in his own Case.
Though at first he thought to evade bylying, saying, he neither knew, nor cared
what was become of his brother; yet when God had detected and laid open his
crime, and given sentence upon him; then the wretch cry's out, that his case
was intolerable: My punishment (said he) is greater than I can bear.

And what was his punishment? To be cursed from the earth; cursed in all his
labors; a fugitive and a vagabond. And this is the fiarest that a murderer
can expect. But there is another thing in his doom, which Cain apprehends, and
mentions; and that is worse than all the rest: namely, that he was cast out
from the presence of God; from thy face shall I be hid. And surely did such
desperate wretches forethink on this: it would restrain their hands from
shedding blood. It is more grievous than we can imagine, to be cast out from the
presence of God; and to have his face hid from us.

Another thing Cain feared, was, that every man who found him should kill him.
And why so? what made him imagine thus? An evil conscience. He had furies
raging in his soul; and nothing but blood and murder in his thoughts. He
fancies the world peopled, before it was so; that every man at first sight
should know him for a parricide; and that no man could spare his life, because
he spared not his only brother. His conscience told him, that he deserved
death.

Against the violence of others, God secures Cain; by setting a mark upon him:
which was (say the Rabbis) by branding him with a squalid dejected
countenance, and a perpetual trembling Whether so or no; such a mark it was,
as was significant to every beholder, for this purpose. Thus still, though Cain
was free from violent death; yet he is not free from violent fear: but has the
terrors of death and hell in his Conscience. His doom seems like that of
Arachne, when Pallas turned her into an ugly Spider, for her impudence. Vive
quidem: pende tamen (said she) Live thou shall; Oved. met.
but yet thou shall hang. So Cain lived; but ignominiously and uncomfortably.

And indeed commonly God sets such a mark upon Murderers, as makes them
abhorred both in their own eyes; and in the eyes of others. They are usually so
loathsome, that men shun their company; as they would do a pesthouse. And who
can blame men for so doing, seeing blood defiles a land, Acts. 28.3.
and brings a curse upon the earth? The poor barbarous Islanders of Melita,
who had nothing to guide them, but the light of nature, (...), were persuaded
that vengeance pursued Murderers, both by sea and land.

And now lest any should think God favors those Murderers, who by flight
escape the hand of the Magistrate, and keep from the axe and the halter; let
them but seriously reflect upon Cain's case: and then they will be brought to
understand, that the Lord can sufficiently punish a murderer, though he suffers
him long to live upon earth; and exempts him form a bloody death.

That God, who afterward so solemenly said, Genesis 9.6.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; and commanded,
that no satisfaction should be taken by the Magistrate, Number. 35.31.
for the life of a Murderer: That God (I say) did let Cain live after his
murder; for the which may be given these two reasons:

First, For the paucity of Mankind. Had Cain died for his fact by the hand of
men; Adam must have been his Executioner. But though the Devil sets one
brother to kill another; yet God does not set the father to kill the son:
much less, the son to kill the father; the servant to kill the Master; or the
subject to kill the King. Though it pleased the Devil, that wicked Cain should
kill righteous Abell: yet it pleased not God, that father Adam should kill
wicked Cain.

secondly, Therefore is Cain delivered from exemplary death; because he is
marked out and designed for eternal vengeance. So far is his security from
safety, and his reprieve from mercy; that it is a dreadful judgment, and a
sore severity. And it had been well for some murderers, that they had not
escaped so well in this world; as they have done. It had (doubtless) been much
better for their famillies and posterity in this world: and it might have been
better with themselves, in the next.

Deliver us from blood-guiltyness O God; and let the blood of thy Son Jesus
Christ appear for us in thy sight: And hear thou that, speaking better things
than that of Abell.

Tumultuous Resolutions tend not to Edification. Genesis 11.
WItness the story of the Bable-Builders; who pretending to be wiser than their
forefathers, devised a way how to be above all mischances: By building a City
and a Tower; whose top should reach to Heaven.

This was a conceit above the Moon; though the work came far short of it. Oh
how people please themselves, with a strong conceit of going to Heaven a new
way; which none ever went before them! A fool's paradise is his own invention.
But the multitude go the wrong way.

It must be a prodigious unlucky Building, where every one is a master-workman;
and the defign to top God in his throne. He that sits in Heaven, laughs such
projectors to scorn; and has such politicians in derision.

Go to (said they) let us found, and build up. Go to (said God) let us go down
and confound.

The people were all then of one mind; and God scattered them, by making them
of many Languages. God then made the people of many Languages, to hinder the
building of Babel: But now the Devil has made the people of as many, or more
opinions; to help Babel forward.

And as they of old, misunderstanding one another, brought brick for mortar, a
hammer in stead of a trowell, and fire in stead of water: so men now mistake
rudeness for Religion; Religion for superstition; madness for Christian zeal;
profaneness for wit; and ruin for reformation Pretending to sink Babylon to
the pit of hell, they have cried up Babel to the Heavens: by setting their
mouths wide open against the Church of God, saying. Down with it, down with it,
even to the ground.

Churchmen Church-habits.
THe words of the Lord to Moses, for this putpose. are these; Exodus 28.2.
And thou shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for
Beauty.

Moses as Prince by God's appointment, was to put Aaron and his sons, and the
Levites into their distinct Canonical habits: according to the respective
dignity of their Persons, and places. Which ornaments and Vestments they were
enjoined, upon pain of Death, to have upon them, when they came in unto the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, or ministered in the holy place: As appears in
the last verse of that Chapter.

I know not how it came to pass; but so it was; that a Priestly Habit in Divine
Worship and Sacred Administrations has been had in as much Disgrace amongst
Christians: as ever it was had in Reverence amongst the Jews. God made it as
much as their lives were worth. for the Priests in the Law to minister without
their peculiar Habit: And Men made it as much as their lives were worth, for
the Priests to minister in their Ecclesiastical Habits, in the time of the
Gospel.

Yea, there have been some, who pretended that the Clericall Vestments
debilitated the Pastors parts, srustrated the graces of the Spirit; and
hazarded the souls of the flock. And whereas God enjoined his Priests of old,
to have robes for Glory and for Beauty: they would not allow his
housholdservants, the use of those garments, which God's vicegerents had
enjoined them, for uniformity and for deceney.

They put scorn, contempt, and opprobious terms both upon the things and
Persons; according to the foolish invention of their giddy brains. An
Episcocall Habit was (they said) the Livery of Antichrist; and the Surplice the
Smock of of the whore of Babylon.

Surely these people had forgotten that God was the instituter of the first
Mitre, and the Linen Ephod. They considered not, how in respect of their use.
(though not for their first Principles whereof they are made) even garments
appropriate unto Persons in Holy Orders, are called Holy; and that by God's
example.

It is too gross, too carnal, and too rude for men and women, who pretend to
more than an ordinary illumination, to pick a hole in the Priest's Coat, about
the external form and figure; to think that a Hood makes a Monk, or a Mitre an
Antichrist, or that the Mystical Whore of Babylon is circumscribed within a
material small Linen Ephod.

I would not have the female Sex; such as are called Holy Sisters, of all
things quarrel with clean Linen; lest they bring themselves, whthin the
compass of the Cotholick Inquisition, for sluttery. Let them hate the garments
spotted with the flesh. As for Surplices; (howsoever they have been contrived,
and used by them since their dear sacreligious brethren stole them from the
Church, and brought them to their hands) they were never formerly the Smock of
a Whore. It is possible, since they converted them to their own use, they may
properly so be called. For Thieves and Harlots go hand in hand together in the
World; as Publcans and Sinners go in the Gospel.

It is a pitiful thing, (I mean quarrel) when people fall out with their
Ministers; as the sons of Jacob did with their brother Joseph; who hated him
for the singular love their father bare him; Genesis 37.3. 4,
and for the peculiar Coat he put upon him: And therefore could not speak
peaceably unto him. This is a strain beyond the malice and spite of
Presbiterian Corah; or Independent Dathan and Abiram: though tending to the
like effect; through the garments to wound the function; and together with
Aaron's Mitre; to throw down Moses Scepter.

Good Saints surely they are, that deal with the Priests of the Lord, as the
Thieves dealt with the Traveller between Jerusalem and Jericho: who stripped
him of his raiment, Lu. 10.30.
and wounded him, and left him half dead. And if the injury done to the
Ministers of Christ, and their contempt and scorn be done to Christ himself; Lu
10.16. Act. 9.5.
(as all who have the faith of Christ must believe) than, as the Church once in
the Person of Christ spoke concerning those barbarous soldiers; so Christ
again in the person of his Church, may say of soldiers as bad: They parted my
garments amongst them; and for Vesture they cast lots.

And God deliver us from unreasonable men; in whose eyes our very Coats (though
honorable) make us criminal. It is a sad time, when violence is preferred
before science; when passion overrules reason; and the sword strikes against
the Gown. Even common reason, and general civil practice will afford distinct
professiions their respective differentiall Habits. And shall not the Church
have leave to rule her children in their garbs, and services? Did Christ
promise to send his Holy Spirit upon his Church, Jo. 14.26.
and to lead Her into all necessary truth and knowledge? And has he not
allowed her so much discretion as to clad her children? To appoint her inward
Attendants their Habits and Liveries, both for working days and Holy days?

We see, when any fault is espied in a Minister, he is presently checked by his
Coat: that a Man in his Coat should do so. And indeed God Almighty did upbraid
Eli for his indulgence to his sons in their sins; by the Linen Ephod. 1. Sam.
2.28.
If then the sin of the Priest be aggravated by his Priestly garments, then the
garment serves to put the Priest in mind; that he ought to be clothed with
righteousness. Again, if the sin of the Priest is the greater for his Coat;
then their sin must be the greater allo, who do wrong to him, that wear's that
holy garment. And so much is to be gathered from the black deed of Doeg the
Edomite; which is heightened by this circumstance, that he slew fourscore and
five persons, 1 Samuel 22.18.
that did wear a Linen Ephod.

The white and outward garment (I hope I may say without offense) is
Angelical; Mark. 9.3. Jo. 20.12. Revel. 1.13.
it is celestial. So Christ appeared at his transfiguration; So the Angels
appeared at Christ's resurrection: And Christ appeared unto St John in a
Priestly habit. Seeing God and Angels honor this Priestly habit; how can
wretched man despite it? Seeing they are pleased to appear thus to men; why
should the Ministers of God disdain to appear in like habit, in the presence of
God, and in the face of his Congregation? The Ministers of God in a qualified
sense are Angels; that is, the Messengers of the Lord. And we all hope to be
as Angels of God in heaven. Why then should we be afraid to be like them, in
this also, here upon earth? Rev. 19.8.
Clean Linen is in a mystical sense the righteousness of the Saints: then let
no man wickedly stain it, neither let any man maliciously strain it, to make it
otherwise.

And if any would know how to reconcile black and white in the ministerial
habit; let them take it thus. The black becomes us as Mourners, whose Lord and
Master is for a while gone from us; and as more than ordinary Mourners: who
besides our own sins and miseries, have the sins and miseries of the World to
lament, and bewail. The black shows what our present condition here is in re,
indeed, and at hand: The which shows what we are in spe, in hope, and what we
shall be hereafter. In this World we must have our black and white; and most
commonly black: until we shall be clothed upon, with immortality. In the mean
time, our tribulation works patience, our patience hope, our hope
perseverance, and that will bring the Crown. Contraria juxtase posita magis
elucescunt. Thus black and white are reconciled. Thus contrary things do set
off and beautify one another. Thus all things work together for good to them
that fear God.

It has been the the constant practice of the Church of God, in all ages, to
have peculiar habits; wherein to officiate in holy things: Eusebius. l. 3. cap. 28.
And it has ever been accounted scandalous, for Persons in holy orders, to
transgress this practice. St John did wear the Priestly Habit called (...), as
Policrates Bishop of Ephesus in his Epistle to Victor Bishop of Rome does
witness. And Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia was condemned and deposed
by the Council at Gangra, for casting off his proper habit, and putting
himself into the garb of the philosophers; for putting his follwers likewise
into a new habit; Socr. scho. lib. 2. cap. 33.
for countenancing and encouraging Conventicles; and for taking servants from
the command of their Mastrs under the color of Religion: As also for crossing
the Church inobservation of times; abolishing the fasts of the Church, and
prescribing to his followers to fast on Sundays.

By whichit appearts, the unlucky man was unlike his Name; for that carried
constancy and stability in it: But he had nothing less in himself. And it would
be noted, that when Men begin to waver, and vary from the Church, but in some
outward things; they do not stay there: but fall into pernicious Principles and
practices.

God grant there may not now be found in the Church of God Bishops of
Eustathius his temper; to the Countenancing of Separatists, to the disquiet of
the Church, and to the hinderance of piety and of Churstian amity. For, as
Plato told his young man, though it be no great fault to play, yet it is a
great fault much to use it: So, A custom in disagreement, though but in small
matters; will in the end prove no small matter.

Gehazi's Leprosy worse than Naamans. 2 Kings 5.
NAaman the famous General of the King of Syria's Army, had an inbred Enemy,
which he could neither flee, nor chase: and that was his Leprosy. For which he
is advised by his captive Maid to repair to the prophet Elisha. He is forthwith
sent with the Letters Commendatory (or rather Mandatory) of the King of Syria,
to the King of Israel. And he comes as though he had come to Court, to trade
with some Malefactors near the King; some Merchants of the Church and State; to
buy places. For he brings ten Talents of Silver, ten thousand Pieces of Gold,
and ten Changes of Reyment.

Were he now alive; and in that condition, and equipage; I could direct him to
those; who (though they could not ease him of his trouble) wonld soon lighten
him of his carriage. For though Miracles are now ceased, yet mischief is rife;
And Gehazi's are plentiful, though Elisha's are lcarce.

No man could blame Naaman for valuing his life, and the good of his posterity.
Job. 2.4,
The Devil knew, Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
life. The Prophet bids him wash in Jordan. Baptism cleanses the Leprosy of
sin. The Syrian at the motion, has two Diseases for one. Before, he was a
Leper; now both a Leper and a mad Man. He came not thither to fetch fire; and
he thinks he need not come so far for water.

Abanah and Pharphar, in his judgment are better than all the waters in
Israel. But the sick Patient must observe; not prescribe to himself: and the
hearer must not be his own teacher, That is best for our spiritual Diseases,
which God prescribes to us by his lawful Doctors.

It sometimes happens that the servants are wiser than their Masters, so was it
now with Naaman. They told him, it was but to wash; and that he would have done
a great thing to be healed, had it been enjoined him: and why then will he not
do a small? The Jews were enjoined to cut their childrens skin, and let out
part of their blood, in circumcision; and they punctually observed it: But
among us; many despise to bring their children to the sacred fountain; they
will not submit to wash and be clean.

But Naaman better considering, goes to Jordan, and washes; and is made as
clear as a Child. And behold a Change as well of his conditions as of his
complexion. He thinks now, he cannot express too much gratitude to the Prophet.
He returns with all his retinue. He professes himself a servant to the
Prophet, and to the God of the Prophet. He gives glory to the Lord; and thanks
to the Prophet. He offers rich present, and urges it upon the Prophet; but he
refused it as heartily: As the Lord lives (says he) I will receive none.

Elisha was a pious and a cordial man. It is a good thing to hear men speak
soundly and earnestly; And a better to see them do as they speak.

He was not like the late race of false Prophets; whom some called Tryers:
(perhaps for that they were the Touchstones of Gold and Silver) who being much
entreated, verily, and truly, and really, and I profess, had an hundred feigned
words, fair pretenses, and zealous scruples in public; but would readily take,
and swallow as many pieces in private.

Naaman having taken his leave of Elisha, was gone in peace; when Gehazi
Elisha's man is mad at his Master, and thinks his Master-mad for refusing the
rich present. My Master has spared this Naaman the Syrian; (said he to the
Devil and himself) but as the Lord lives, I will run after him and take
somewhat of him. Thus many times the Apothecaries bill is dearer than the
Doctor.

But what had Gehazi done, to deserve of Naaman? Nothing. And therefore he
frames a lie in his Masters name on the behalf of two young sons of the
Prophets. The Honorable Elishas have too many such cursed servants; and the
poor sons of the Prophets have too many such Back friends, as Gehazi: who
pretend the good of the Church; but rend and scrape all to themselves. And this
makes their Masters so generally odious; and the sons of the Prophets so needy
and beggarly.

The noble Syrian glad of any opportunity to gratify Elisha, gives the villain
Gehazi more than he desired; two Talents of Silver; and two changes of raiment:
and two men (he was no less worthy) to bear the burden of his iniquity for him
till he came at home. And now he wipes his mouth after his lie, and makes it
fit for another, and comes and stands before his Master, like a Saint of the
last edition: Thy servant went no whither.

But the Prophet, who had a blessing for an honest stranger; had a curse for a
servant that took bribes. Gehazi with his two Talents of Silver, and two
changes of raiment, has purchased Naaman's Leprosy; and made it sure to
himself, and to his heirs for ever. Not all the water of Jordan could wash away
Gehazi's Disease: nor can all the water of the Sea wash away bribery, and the
guilt of extortion.

That individual (...) is dead; but he lives still in an aequivocall
generation of Harpies: the Palms of whose hands are lined with pitch; and every
finger is an aduncous tenter-hook, As Gehazi did; so do they: make use of God's
Name; but take money in the Devil's. Gehazi would not spare Naaman: and they
will spare no man. Whosoever comes within their reach, As the Lord lives, they
will take something of him. Oh for one of Domitian's fly-flaps, to kill the
Maggot-flies of State, which Trajan spoke of! A Vespasian-squeese would do well
with such hollow spunges.

Bribery and oppression is a deadly Leprosy, overspreading Kingdoms; and it
cleaves to some great Offices, and to their seed for ever. Evagrius reports
that Justinus the Emperor deposed Anastasius, Lib. 5. n. 5.
the godly Bishop of Antioch, because he refused his simoniacall propositions;
and that Justinus soon after falling into a frenzy, his fellow Emperor
Tiberius took the whole Government: to whom Justinus said, (pointing with his
finger to his corrupt Officers) Never be ruled by these men; Lib. 5. cap. 12.
for they have brought me into this misery. And Tiberius took his Council;
being a man well inclined. He publicly declared, that he looked upon that
gold, which is gotten by the tears of the Commonalty; as upon Counterfeit Coin.
By which account of his, They who exact and take bribes, are worthy to suffer
as Traitors to the King.

God send great Persons and double Portion of the spirit of Elisha; And as for
those who are of Gehazi's base mind; may they never have silver nor changes of
raiment, until they be cleansed from their dearly beloved Leprosy.

No new thing under the Sun. Eccl. 1.9.
SO says Solomon; And he was a wise man: A great Philosopher; and a great
Divine. And well has he said; No new thing under the Sun; because things
subject to mutation, are every minute growing old: until at last they be no
more. The state of Glory and blessed Eternity is above the brightness of the Sun:
Ps. 102.26. 2. Pet. 3.10.
and the starry Heavens come far short of it. They wax old as does a garment:
And they shall pass away.

There is indeed a day of renovation coming; when He, who of old made out of
nothing, all new things in the world; shall out of a ruined old world worse
than nothing; make all things new. Rev. 21.5.
But this will be a work above the Sun: And this will be for ever and ever.

But until then, there is no new thing under the Sun; no not the Moon it self;
(a pure picture of this mutable world) of whose increase though we have every
year new ones a full dozen; yet all is but the old one, over and over. Things
here below seem new to many, and are so miscalled; which in themselves are old,
and known so to sounder judgments.

Nothing pleases fools and children, but the name and thought of Novelties. The
Devil and the world cry up their deluding trash for new; as people do their
Herrings: whenas they stink for age, and want of goodness. Custom is a great
matter. Newmarket-heath until the worlds end is like to be so called. Thus
cunning Brokers and crafty Botchers, put an old trick upon an old Cloak; they
give it a sudden turn, and a new facing: and then it serves to cheat the
Country.

Thus old cried down haeresies are become new cried up lights: and the
Common Counsel men of the Devil, (whatsoever they plot in Conventicles) pretend
to have all by special revelation. Thus the issue of Traitors conspiracies,
are holden for Miracles; and Providence is blasphemed by successful
wickedness: the Generality not discerning how Gold passes through an armed
Guard; and takes the City without opposition. These Angels of men have slain
more Christians, than the Angel of God slew Infidels; when he killed an
hundred fourscore and five thousand in the camp of the Assyrians. 2 Kin. 19.35.


It is no new thing, for men to violate their faith; to betray their trust; to
sell their Country into the hands of their Enemies; to prefer private ill
gotten goods, before public good, and true glory; and yet to pretend piety:
All this is no new thing. Diverse hundreds of years since, the Christian
Governor of the Castle of Abydus, was himself and Castle betrayed into the
hands of the Turks, by his own Daughter. And an hundred and forty years before
that; Turk. Histo.
long before the first Ottoman King; Aleppo, the strongest City of the
Christians in those parts, was betrayed to the Turk, by the Governor. And (oh
miserable) the Patriarch of Antioch, for gold sold into those Barbarian's
hands, that Castle; and by consequence that City.

To hear of Kings deserted, betrayed, and murdered, (a thing most horrible,
execrable, and damnable) is no new thing.

Ask Scotland; and let that Nation repeat their own Chronicles And (not to be
partial) our English second Edward, and Richard, Henry the sixth, and two Sons
of Edward the fourth; and long before these, Prince Arthur will tell us a sad
story. The unlucky products of the several Battles of the Barons, with the
cross swearings of successive Parliaments, may sufficiently tell us; that to
swear and forswear, and to play at fast and loose with the Crown, is no new
thing under the Sun.

I am ^^th to look lower; upon that which is and will be the lasting shame of
the Nation: although I can hardly overlook it, or look upon it with dry eyes. I
shall only say this of it at present; that though it differs from former
Regicides in the open perpetration: yet it bears reference to one precedent,
even to that of the King of Kings; who was forsaken, betrayed, and delivered up
to death by his own people. Rev. 13.8.
And he is said truly, and virtually, to be slain from the foundation of the
world.

It is no new thing, for ignorant and impudent persons to pretend revelations,
and Enthusiasmes; to despise instruction; and usurp to themselves all
mysterious knowledge. This is but the Gnostici and Carpocratists brought again
upon the stage; Epiph. Aug.
with their phanatick dreams and enchanted love-drinks. And those also were but
a few lousie shreds taken from Menander and Simon Magus.

Oh, but to hear and see men act their Roguery in manner and form; publishing
it weekly to the people for their satisfaction; to prevent (forsooth)
misinformation; telling them how many honest men they murdered in such a
battle; what Noble person they beheaded in such a place and day; how they
robbed Churches; how they spoiled the widows and Orphans; how they killed and
took possession; how they took God's Name in vain, rejoiced, and gave thanks,
and praised the Lord, as the Author of all this Mischief: Are not all these
new things? No. There was a sect of damnable haereticks, calling themselves
Caynites; from cursed Cain who slew his brother: who fully parallel these
practices. They honored Cain, Aug.
the Sodomites, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; and also Judas. They called Cain
their Father, and Judas their Cousin: And so might these. They said Judas did
well in betraying Christ because he saw it was good for the people; And we know
who went upon the same principles; crying out, Populi Salus suprema lex. The
peoples safety is the Highest Law.

And what need we wade far in this stream? The height and rigor of
Anabaptisme, is but Confusion and Levelling; and Levellers are but the old
Haereticks of Pisidia, calling themselves Apostolici, Apostolical men: who
hated to see men have proper possessions. False Christ's and false Apostles are
no new thing. Manes had his whole dozen of Disciples; his profession being like
his name, a very madness. His end (...) was according to his work. For having
first poisoned men's minds, next he turned Physician, (as many such since have
done) and poisoned their bodies. Socr. l. 1. cap. 17.
But killing the King's son of Persia; he was apprehended and flayed alive: And
his skin (which before had nothing good in it) was stuffed full with chafe;
and hanged at the Gates of the City.

Impostors are no new thing. Theudas the sorcere (...) made himself a second
Moses; he led the people into rebellion, making them believe that Jordan,
should be dried up before him. But he caused his followers to be slain and
ruind, Jos. Ant. l. 20. c. 4.
and himself to be executed, by Fadus Lieutenant of Judea. And the blazing
Comet Barchochebas, who said he was a Star from Heaven; led the Jews into
rebellion; so that there perished fifty thousand Persons. And this Rebellion
was the final overthrow of the Jews at Jerusalem. Dion. Cass. in Adrian.


And as it is no new thing to have false Prophets, and seducers; by means of
whom Kingdoms have been spoiled, and the way of Truth evil spoken off: So for
these false Apostles to lead silly Women captive, in and unto their lust; this
is no new thing neither. Simon Magus the father of Haereticks had for his holy
sister, Helen a Witch and a Harlot whom he called, Just. Mar. in. Apol.
the principal understanding. There was Incubus and Succubus; two Devils
incarnate. Montanus, who called himself the holy Ghost, had two such she
Angels; Priscilla and Maximilla: Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 14.
And so dearly did they love; that He and Madam Maximilla both hanged
themselves. How sweetly did these Saints agree both in manner of life, and in
manner of Death.

And what think ye of Jack of Leyden? Surely he had abundance of the Spirit of
Error; who had as many Wives as a Turk. These be the Fruits of affected
madness, and of Knipperdolling revelations: which serve for nothing, but to
lead Men into destruction and perdition both of body and soul.

Lastly, For Men to be plainly and honestly showen their orrours and dangers,
and yet to despise their Admonishers; for Men to be hated for their good will;
for the virtuous and painful to be lightly regarded, and the vicious and lazy
to be respected; for merits and good service to be starved in the poor; for
grand offenses and high Crimes to be pardoned and dignified in the rich; for
those who seek God's glory and the Church's prosperity to be slighted; for
such as seek their own glory, profit, and pleasure, to be cried up and
magnified; for flattering parasites and dissembling wretches to be heard
attentively; and for honest hearted men neither to be patiently heard, nor at
all believed: All this is no new thing under the Sun.

This is but the lot of the Prophets. Job 1.
The Oxen labor, and the Asses feed; and the Sabeans make no distinction;
unless it be this; that the Asses shall live, when the Oxen have their throats
cut for their labors. Zedekiah lies, flatters, and dissembles; 1 King. last chapter
and he pleases: poor Micaiah speaks truth, and is smitten on the face for it,
put into Prison, and macerated, with the bread and water of affliction. This
was Isaiah's and Jeremiah's Case; this was the Apostles: and this was their and
our Master's. Thus are we set as a mark. Men will not believe our report. So
it is (the more pity) that the seamless Coat of Christ, once spared by
Infidels, is now torn by Christians. Haeresies and Schisms abound, and
therewith hatred and malice; Truth is almost lost with strife; Piety vanished;
and Charity banished: Whilst Cassander's Labors have Cassandra's doom.

FINIS.

