A NEW DISPENSATORY OF Forty Physical Receipts.

Most necessary and Profitable for all Housekeepers in their Families.

Besides three other pleasant Arts fit for young Gentlemen.

Published by SALVATOR WINTER of Naples, An Expert Operator.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
IN my manifold Travels through Europe, Asia, and Africa, I have observed and
learned many secrets, yea there is scarce any thing profitable for man's body,
but I have knowledge thereof. Here I do freely present unto you forty most
necessary Receipts, and very useful in every family, whereof I have oftentimes
made good proof; Accept of them thankfully, and as you shall have occasion make
use thereof. So Farewell.

SALVATOR WINTER. Operator.

The Contents of this Book.
I. A Salve for all sores. II. For a Pin and Web, and a Pearl in the eye. III.
A special water for sore eyes. IV. For a deafness in the ears. V. For
toothache. VI. To make the teeth white. VII. A precious water for the
Pestilence. VIII. For the Palsy. IX. A comfortable broth for a sick body. X.
To heal a cut or fresh wound. XI. A medecin for the Squinzie. XII. For the
Jaundies. XIII. For the swelling of the legs. XIV. To break a Cake in a Woman's
belly that comes with sorrow. XV. For the bloody Flux. XVI. To cause one to
make water if it be stopped. XVII. For the Piles. XVIII. For the Itch. XIX. For
the Pleuresie. XX. For him that spitteth blood having some vein of his breast
broken. XXI. For the Scrophulus, called the Kings Evil. XXII. Against all manner
of Pestilence or Plague. XXIII. To make a Carbuncle break, or any other botch.
XXIV. For worms in children. XXV. For an Ague. XXVI. For the falling sickness.
XXVII. For a Stitch. XXVIII. For a sore throat. XXIX. For a scald with fire or
hot liquor. XXX. If a child's water be stopped. XXXI. Children stuffed with cold and
phlegm. XXXII. To ease the pain and swelling of the Gout. XXXIII. For a Tympany.
XXXIV. For an Earwigg in the Ear. XXXV. For the bleeding of the fundament.
XXXVI. For the green sickness. XXXVII. For the Convulsion fits in young
Children. XXXVIII. A diet drink to cure the French Pox in a short time: as also
the Canker upon the yard. XXXIX. Pills for the same to be used after the drink.
XL. To dye hair black.
1. To make a mixed stone which being spit upon makes fire. 2. Two waters they
being mingled one with the other will become like milk, and it is good to take
spots out of the face. 3. To make a bullet to hit all marks, yea to kill a bird
flying in the air.
A NEW DISPENSATORY OF Forty Physical Receipts.
I. A salve for all Sores.
TAke Sallet Oil, a Pint and a half, as much Turpentine, Rosin a quarter of a
pound, Mastix Myrrh, Frankincense beaten to a powder, unwrought Wax half a
pound, Sheeps Tallow four pound, Ragwort, Plantin, Orpin, Wormwood, Rue,
Camomil, of each two handfuls, Cut these Herbs and sees them in the things
above written, then put to it one ounce of Red Saunders in fine Powder, let it
boil softly, always stirring it till it be well mingled together; then take it
from the fire, and strain it through a strong Canvass, and keep it for use.

II. For a Pinn and Web, and Pearl in the Eye.
TAke fine white Ginger, grate it upon a Whetstone, and mingle it fine, with a
little white Copperose; and when the Patient goes to Bed put some into his Eye
with a quill, and when it has been there a while, take the Juice of ground Ivy
mingled with Woman's Milk, and put three of four drops into the Eye, Evening and
Morning, after the said Powder has been in the Eye half an hour.

III. A special water for sore Eyes.
TAke a Gallon of fair running Water, and put it into a fair Earthen Pot or
Pan, put therein so much white Copperose as an Egg, and cover it, and so on the
morrow when the Copperose is all melted, scum the top clean with a Feather,
then pour all the water fine, softly into another clean Pan from the grounds,
do this five or six days, till you perceive no grounds left, then put to it a
pint of white Rose water, so keep it in glasses, and set in the Sun, for the
space of a month, after cleanse it through a fine Linen cloth, keep it for
use, of it drop a few drops in the Eyes, Morning and Evening.

IV. For Deafness in man's Ears.
TAke Vnguentum Agrippae, and Oil of Bays, of each a like quantity, and mingle
them together, put thereof into the Ears, it will open the Ears, and make him
hear by Gods help.

V. For the Toothache.
TAke a quantity of Pelitory of Spain, as much Stavesacre, half so much long
Pepper, beat them into a fine powder, temper with them three or four Corns of
Bay Salt bruised, dip your finger in this powder and therewith rub your Gums
and Tooth, then hold open your Mouth, and let the Rheumatick humor run out, and
it will ease you, and if the Tooth be hollow to make it fall out of it self;
take Wheat flower and mix it with the milk of the herb called Spurg, that has
milk in it, and make thereof, as it were a Paste or Dough, with the which you
shall fill the hole of the same Tooth, and leave it in a certain time, and the
Tooth will fall out of it self: Also if you wash your Mouth once a month with
Wine, wherein the Root of the said herb has been sodden, you shall never have
pain in your Teeth.

VI. To make Teeth white.
TAke Vinegar of Squills, and dip a little piece of a Linen rag in it, and rub
the Teeth and Gums therewith; this also fastneth the Gums, comfort the Roots
of the Teeth, and makes a sweet Breath.

VII. A precious Water for the Pestilence.
TAke the waters of Tormentil, Scabious, Dittancy, Pimpernel, Betony,
Marigolds, Featherfew, of each a like quantity, distill all these herbs
together: Of this water, drink every morning fasting, three or four spoonfuls.

VIII. For the Palsy.
TAke Rosemary, Sage, Herbmaudlin, of each a handful, Camomil flowers three
handfuls, and with Sallet Oil make Oil thereof, as you make Oil of Roses, and
so anoint the grieved parts therewith.

IX. A comfortable Broth for a sick body.
TAke an old Cock, scald and quarter him, and bruise his flesh and bones, then
take a pot that will hold a gallon, and fill it with fair water, and put the
Cock in it, scum it clean, then take a handful of Raisins of the Sun stoned,
half so much Pruines the stones picked out, half a handful of Currants, Borrage,
Succory, Endive, Bugloss, of each half a handful, the bottom of a Manchet and
a little large Mace; put all these together into your pot with a little Salt,
let it boil a good while; then take a Saucerfull out of the Pot, and if it come
to a Jelly, it is enough; if you have not a Cock, take a Leg of Veal in stead
thereof.

X. To heal a cut or fresh wound.
TAke so much Turpentine as an Egg, mingle the yolks of two Eggs very well with
it, then spread some of it upon some lint, mingle also a little Oil of St.
John-wort with it, dress it twice a day, and it will heal it.

XI. A Medicine for the Squinsie.
TAke the ashes of Centory, and the powder of white Dogs-turd, make it into a
Plaster with Honey, spread it upon a cloth and lay it upon the grief.

XII. For the Jandis.
TAke Turmerick in powder, a Groates weight, English Saffron the weight of two
pence, the shaving of Ivory, a Groates weight, mingle them together, and drink
every morning two penny weight thereof, either in Milk, Muskadine, or white
Wine.

XIII. For the swelling of the Legs.
TAke VVallwort, Camomil, Mallows, and Havhoove, being very clean, seethe them
well in water, therewith wash your Legs often, fine softly, then dry them
clean, and mingle some Oil of Roses, and Dialthea together, and anoint them
therewith, and it will assuage it.

XIV. To break a cake in a Woman's belly that comes with sorrow.
TAke Parsely, Isop, Sage, Wormwood and Tansey, sees them in a pottle of stale
Ale to a quart, then strain it, of that drink a Wineglass full in the morning
hot, and evening cold, and take the bowels of a Cat, and lay them as warm as
they come out to the sore side.

XV. For the bloody Flux.
TAke a quart of milk set it on the fire, and when it does seethe, put in a
piece of Roch-allome. then will rise a curd, take it off, drink the whey as hot
as you can endure it, and if your stomach can bear it eat the curd also.

XVI. To cause one to make water if it be stopped.
TAke English Saffron in fine powder, pure black Soap, one as much as the
other, mingle it together, spread it upon the fleshy side of white Leather,
make thereof plasters, and lay it upon the Navil of the patient; Give him also
the powder of the herb Golden rod, as much as you can take up with a six pence
in a rear Egg, or in a glass full of Rhenish or white Wine, and he shall make
water.

XVII. For the Piles.
TAke Treacle, spread it upon brown paper, and lay it to the sore place, and it
will help.

XVIII. For the Itch.
TAke the roots of Elecampane and reddocks a pretty quanty, boil them in water
until they be tender, then stamp them and fry them with Barrows Grease, and
anoint you therewithal, and it will kill it.

XIX. For the Plurisie.
TAke a fair Pippin, cut off the top, take out the coar, fill it half full with
fine powder of Olibanum, so lay on the top again, roast it fine leasurely upon
the embers, take heed it do not burn: being roasted enough, cut it into four
parts with the Olibanum in it, so give it the patient to eat, it will by and by
make the Apostume to break, and heal him clean.

XX. For spitting of blood by breaking a vein in the breast.
TAke Mice dung beaten to a fine powder, as much as will lie upon a Groat, and
put it into half a glass full of the Juice of Plantain, with a little Sugger,
give it the Patient to drink in the morning fasting, and at night going to bed,
continue this, and it will make him sound.

XXI. For the Scrophulus, called the Kings Evil.
TAke Ceruse, or white lead beaten to a fine powder four ounces, Sallet Oil
eight ounces, let it boil together five or six hours, stirring it continually,
and when it is become very black, then it is sodden enough, spread it upon a
linen cloth, and lay it unto the place of the sore; if the sores be broken
they will be healed shortly, if not, they will dissolve and loose, and shortly
heal thoroughly.

XXII. Against all manner of Pestilence or Plague.
TAke an Onion and cut it overthwart, then make a little hole in the middle of
each piece, the which you shall fill with Treacle, and lay the pieces together
again, and wrap them in a wet brown paper, and roast them in the hot embers,
and being roasted enough, press out the Juice of it, and give the Patient to
drink thereof a spoonful, and suddenly he shall feel himself better.

XXIII. To make a Carbuncle, or any other botch to break.
TAke Bay Salt well beaten into powder, and sifted, incorporate it with a yolk
of an Egg, and lay it upon the Carbuncle or sore, and be assured that (with the
Grace of God) it will draw to it self all the venom and poison of the Plague or
sore, so that in a short time he shall be cured.

XXIV. For worms in Children.
TAke half a pint of new Milk of a red Cow, half a spoonful of Wormseed small
beaten, boil this a little while, then put to it two spoonfuls of life Honey, a
little Saffron, as much scraped Hartshorn as will lie upon a six pence, boil
all this together a little while: this will serve for three mornings drunk
lukewarm.

XXV. For an Ague.
TAke a Nutmeg, beat it to powder, and the like quantity of burnt Alom, a
quarter of a pint of white Wine Vinegar, mix all together, give it an hour
before the fit, and go to bed.

XXVI. For the Falling Sickness.
TAke a pottle of Sack; Piony roots two handfuls, make them clean, and bruise
them in a Mortar, infuse them in some of the wine four and twenty hours, then
strain them hard, and put all the straining to the rest of the wine, and keep
it for use. To a child give a spoonful in the morning, and as much going to
be. To a strong body give four spoonfuls at a time, there is no danger in it.

XXVII. For a Stitch.
TAke a dry Acorn, beat it to a fine powder, and as much Treacle as a Hasel nut
mixed together in a glass full of white wine, give it the Patient to drink going
to bed.

XXVIII. For a sore Throat.
TAke the red Oak buds when they come out first, distill them by a soft fire in
Balneo Mariae, then put in as much Roch Allome as will make it taste a little
of it, so keep it all the year, gargle the throat therewith, and it will heal,
skin, and cool it.

XXIX. For a scald with fire or hot liquor.
CUt an Onion a sunder, and lay it presently to the place, it will take out the
fire, and keep it from further danger.

XXX. If a Child's water be stopped.
TAke Watercresses a good handful, and heat them twixt two Bricks, and lay them
as hot as can be endured to the stones, and bottom of the belly, and so let it
lie, and he shall make water.

XXXI. Children stuffed with cold and phlegm.
IN a pint of new Milk, boil a head of Garlic: when it is well boiled, give
the milk of it warm to drink (but not the Garlic) with a little Suggar, three
mornings together.

XXXII. To ease the pain and swelling of the Gout.
TAke a raw Turnip, peel and stamp it, make it a Pultis, and lay it so raw unto
the place; if the pain goes not away take another, so change every six hours
till it cease.

XXXIII. For a Tympany.
TAke Scurvy Grass one handful, put it into a pint of white wine, let it stand
all night, then boil it, in the boiling put to it a quarter of a pint of new
Milk, strain it, drink it cold morning and evening, first, and last.

XXXIV. For an Earwig in the Ear.
THe Juice of Wormwood, Rue, and Southernwood, of each a like quantity, put it
into the Ear, and lay some of the beaten Herbs unto it, and that will kill it
in one night.

XXXV. For the bleeding of the Fundament.
TAke the Rust of a Bell, or Bell-mettal, drink it with fair water, and it will
stay it presently.

XXXVI. For the Green Sickness.
TAke seven of the greatest leaves of Ribwort, stamp and strain them therewith
a little white Wine or Beer, and drink it fasting in the morning, for a week
together; and the next week drink burned white wine, with as much Spermaceti as
will cover six pence, twice in the week, and it will surely cure it.

XXXVII. For the Convulsion fits in young Children.
TAke three Seeds of single Pyony, peel off the black Skin, and beat them into
fine powder, put it into a spoonful of black Cherry water, make the child
drink it, and presently after it, give it a spoonful or two more of the Cherry
water by it self, to wash down the powder.

XXXVIII. A Diet drink to cure the French Pox in a short time without much
sweating.
TAke Chips of Guajack four pound, Salsa Parilla, sliced, split, and cut small
two pound, Seen Oriental four ounces, Agrimony one handful, Cinamond two
ounces, Cloves and Nutmegs of each two drams, which you must break a little in
a Mortar; then take a vessel of about five Gallons, and put all these drugs
into it, and put to it four Gallons of white wine, or strong Ale, and so let it
steep twenty four hours.

Then you must take of it every morning in your Bed, somewhat above half a
pint, cover you well, keep in your Bed two hours, sweat one hour, dry your self
well, and rub you with Linen clothes, then you may rise and go about your
business. Note before you take this drink, purge you once with the following
Pills, and let blood; you must not eat any sour things, Cheese, Salt, Fish,
but only Roasted meat, and drink always of this Diet drink; and having drunk
all this Diet drink, purge you with those Pills, taking a dram betimes in the
morning.

Also if any Pushes, Ulcers, Cankers, should break out about a man's body,
especially upon the Yard or elsewhere: Take a quart of running water, heat in a
Pipkin, put then to it four ounces of good unslackt Lime, let it stand all
night, in the morning skim it very clean from the skin, which is gathered upon
it; then take off the clearest water without out any dregs of the Lime in it,
keep it in a glass* put to a pint of it one dram of burnt Allome, twenty grains
of sweet Mercury; with this water wash such affected places, and lay a wet rag
in the same water upon it.

With the Lime so unslackt, you may make a very good salve, for Pistulaes,
Cankers, old sores, putting some Linseed Oil to it, and well-mingled, apply it
as a Plaster.

XXXIX. The Pills for the same to be used after the drink.
SCammon, Rhebarb, Trochisci, Alhhandal, aloes Succotrini, Cremor tartari ana
ii. Tutiae praeparat. i. Mercur. dulcis i.

Redige omnia in pulverem tenuissimum, and excipiantur cum syrupo rosar. the
Dose is one dram at a time, taken betimes in the morning, and some warm Posset
drink after it.

XL. To Dye Hair black.
TAke Gum Lie, and boil with a handful of Leaves of Beet, three or four handful
of Sage Leaves, either green or dry, and a dram of Myrrh with Bay leaves, and
a few leaves or outward peels of a Walnut, with this Lie wet your Hair, but
take heed you wash not your face with it; yet nevertheless, after you have
wetted thus your Hair well with a Brush, or a Comb, with a Sponge at it; wash
your face after with fair water or white wine. Let you Hair dry of it self.

To make a mixed stone, which being spit upon makes fire.
I. TAke quick Lime and Saltpeter fined diverse times, Tutia Alexandrina not
prepared, Calamint, as much of the one as of the other, quick Brimstone and
Camphere, of each of them two parts, and let all these things be beaten small,
and sifted through a fine searce; then put the said powders in a new Linen
cloth, and bind them hard. This done take two great Goldsmiths Crossetees or
melting Pots, and put the said powders in them, and set the one upon the other,
mouth to mouth, and bind them fast with Wire, and Lutum Sapientiae, so that it
may take no manner of Air, and dry them in the Sun, and when it is dry, the
powder will be yellow. This done, set the Crossets in a Furnace of Brick or
Lime, and when it is cold again, take it out, and you shall find your
substance of the color of brick, and it shall be perfect and good. And when
you use of it, to make a fire, or light a candle, spit upon it, or wet it with
a drop of water, and incontinent put to it your Match, and it will light it and
burn. And when you will quench it again, blow on it as you blow out a candle,
and it will go out.

To make two waters, they being mingled together will become like, good to take
away the spots and freckles in the face.
II. TAke Lytharge of silver, half a pound, beat it to a powder, put to it a
quart of Wine Vinegar, boil it together till half be wasted away, and then draw
the liquor from the Lytharge with Woollen shreds, and so keep it for your use
in a Vial close stopped: take also of Camphere three drams, Musk four grains:
against all these things put one ounce and a half of Oil of Tartar, and put all
in a pint of Rose water, and boil it till the third part be consumed, and then
draw the rest with Woollen shreds, and keep it to your use in a Vial close,
and when you will use it, take a very little bottle glass, and fill it half
full of the first water, and fill it up with the second water, and it will
coagulate together straightways marvellously as white as milk, wherewith you
must often wash the red spots and freckles in your face.

To make a bullet to hit all marks, yea to kill a bird flying in the air.
III. TAke Pewter, Lead, and Quicksilver of each alike, melt all together, and
cast bullets of it, shoot them out of your Gun, and they spread abroad that you
cannot miss your mark.

FUrthermore, I pull out all manner of Hollow Teeth, stumps or roots, with great
dexterity, and ease, without almost any pain.

I make Teeth smooth and white, set in Artificial ones, that they shall not be
discerned from the natural ones, yea I do all to Teeth; (without arrogance and
prejudice to other) as well as any whosoever, and I know none shall go beyond
me in that Art.

All these above written Receipts you may make your selves if you please, or
else come to me, and I will show you the manual operation of them and many
others, to make them for you.

I live at present in Bedford-street, next door unto the Sign of the Fox, over
against the New Exchange. Per me Salvator Winter of Naples Operator.

FINIS.

