Boni ominis Votum: A GOOD OMEN To the next PARLIAMENT, Expressed upon occasion
of those extraordinary Grand Juries, lately summoned out of the most eminent
Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, in some Counties, to serve at the
summer Assizes, this year, 1656. By a faithful Servant to this Republic.

London, Printed for John Hardesty, at the black Spread-Eagle in Duck Lane, or
at his shop in the Strand nigh Worcester House.

Boni ominis Votum.
A good Omen to the next Parliament, etc.
GOod speed to this Republike; and, increase
Of happiness, to those who seek her peace.
Sad things are threatened, and a lowering sky
Seems to portend, great storms are drawing nigh:
But look above them, and good courage take,
The Sun still shines, although the clouds be black,
And beamings through their darkest parts appear,
Whereby, discernable good Omens are,
With Symptoms of the Blessing we expect,
If, we our selves, obstruct not their effect,
And turn them to ill signs: which to prevent,
That, which here follows, gives a needful hint.
As both abroad, and here within this Land,
Public and private men's affairs, now stand.
This year is likely to be critical,
About the time in which the leaves will fall,
If, preconjectures, may be builded on
Things put in action, with things left undone,
Speld both together; and from some of these,
We may deduce good cautions, if we please.
Whether it were the policy of some,
In hope, it an Obstruction might become
To Concord; or, the prudence of the Shreeve,
Or, special providence, which did contrive
Those Grand-grand Iuries, that must represent
Their Counties, we, shall best know by the event:
For, whether cheerfully they come to do
That service which their Call invites them to,
Or, by a wilful nonappearance, wave
That duty, which the common cause does crave,
It will be signal; and, to many a one,
A Test, as virtuall as the Lydian stone:
And, also, give an intellectual view,
Of some Results, which thereon will ensue
At their next meeting, who, to represent
This Nation, shall be summoned and sent.
For, those Grand Jurors, are now chosen forth
Of them, whose gifts, estates, degree, or birth,
Has ranck'd them with the best: yea, out of those
(Excepting such as have been open foes
To this Republike) who, have been suspected
Mere Newters, or, else, persons disaffected,
As well, as from among them, whose true zeal
Has kept them constant to this Commonweal;
That, they, whose faiths yet questionable are,
May to this Government themselves indear
Some way; and, from henceforth, enrolled stand
Among the noblest Patr'ots of the Land,
Endowed with all their Liberties, and freed
From those distinguishments, which, either breed
Or nourish secret hat red, to the increase
Of Quarrels, and deminishment of Peace;
If, they, shall not imprudently contemn
That means thereof, which, now, is offered them.
And, who can tell, what providence, by these
(Though some dissent in judgment) will now please,
In season to effect, for preservation,
Or settlement of Peace throughout this Nation?
When things are acted, by a moderate
Expostulation, in a joint debate,
Where, every one, may freely speak his thought;
And, when it is considered, as it ought,
That, no man can of safety be assured,
Until the Public welfare be secured.
We know, that diffring simples put together
To qualify, and to correct each other,
(Though some of them be poison) purge away
Malignant humors, which would else destroy
The life of man: So, they, who formerly
Did in their singular capacity
And private judgment, sometimes, act or speak,
What might, at least, endanger, if not break
The Common peace, may, when they gathered are
Into one fellowship, be helpful there,
Both to themselves and Countries, ten times more
Then they have been, or could be, heretofore.
Yea, as the fat Lime and the barren Sand,
When they are mixed, make a stronger band
To bind together rough or hewed stone,
Then either of them could have done alone;
So, may by them who are dissenters, now,
Our public buildings much the stronger grow,
When, they, into one Structure shall be fixed
Well qualified, and rationally mixed;
And, prove a happy Omen and presage,
To those, who, now are summoned to engage
Within a higher Orb, and, shortly must
Become our Trustees, in a higher trust.
For, he, who has considered it, believes
That, if those petty-Representatives,
By loving prudence, shall prepare a way
Thereto (as in good likelihood they may)
That nobler Body, which to its perfection,
Must (for the most part) rise by their election,
Will be so moduliz'd, and tempered so,
That, discords, into sympathy shall grow:
And, all our fears and dangers, in the close,
Quite vanish, to the terror of our foes.
We see, unlike and disagreeing matter,
Such as the earth and air, the fire and water,
Makes perfect natural bodies: wherefore, then,
May we not hope, that diffring minded men
Themselves, may reason forth, out of a sick
Into a healthy body-politick
By GOD's assistance (when our discontent
Is cured, and, our malignant humor spent)
Before we feelingly, by Sense perceive,
What, Reason, cannot make us yet believe?
It may be thus, and will be thus, if, yet
Men's Wilfulness has left them any wit:
For, why should they, who now may be at rest,
Run hazards to advance their interest,
Whom nothing else could satisfy, but power,
All others, at their pleasure to devour,
And spoilers of their own estates become,
To make a fortune, for they know not whom?
Why should they venture, their respects to lose,
Who, have been ancient friends, to get new Foes?
Or, seek to have that game afresh begun,
By which, all may be lost, and, nothing won?
I hope we shall be wiser, and, that we,
Whose weal and safeties much concerned be
In this expedient, shall so cautiously
Proceed; and, act with so much prudency,
That, whatsoever others do intend,
Or put in practice, we, shall seek that end
We ought to prosecute; and, at the last,
Our Anchor in a peaceful harbor cast.
I wish it heartily; and (since I see,
Wishings in vain, without endeavors be)
That, those whom it concerns, provoke I may
To seek this blessing, and help make the way
To what I wish for, I, composed this SPELL:
Let him, who moov'd me to it, speed it well;
And, make it so considered by this Nation,
(Before things grow beyond consideration)
That, words, which to their safety do pertain,
May not be always spoke to them in vain;
For, they are fools, who, still pursue a course
Which makes a sickly-being to be worse.
And, they are also, somewhat more then mad,
Who would exchange a good-one for a bad,
Or, put in hazard, a possessed LOT,
In hope to get, what never can be got.
So thinks Geo. Wither.


