Lex Talionis: OR, GOD PAYING Every man in his own COIN: HELD FORTH IN A SERMON
PREACHED at Margarets Westminster, before the Honorable House of COMMONS, On
their solemn Fast, July 30th, 1645.

By FRANCIS WOODCOCK, Minister at Olaves Southwark, one of the Assembly of
Divines.

Published by Order of that House.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard, 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe occasion of this Sermons so late coming forth (that I may give you an
account why your commands have been obeyed no sooner) was, partly from the
Sermon preached on the same day, partly from that which was preached on the day
before: That which my Colleague preached on the same day, had so much of novelty
in it, and which so wholly took up the minds of many, that till the wonder
thereof was over, I despaird, that any thing I could publish would be
vouchsafed a look from them, whereby in the least it might become useful. The
Sermon preached on the Fast day before, was (though to me unknown) upon the very
same text I preached on. When I understood it, I waited for the publishing of
it, purposing, if it had come forth (to the intent the Press should not cloy
you, whatever the Pulpit had done) to have suppressed mine; but hearing nothing
of it, after long waiting, I then resolved upon printing, the rather, lest my
forbearance might be interpreted neglect; as also, that a Text so every way
apposite and concerning, should not want a means whereby it might be sometimes
remembered. I therefore once more set before you (as Moses sometime did before
Israel) Isay, I set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, shame and
honor. Which of these you should choose I shall not here persuade, it being the
business of the following Sermon. At the present, J shall only pray; that that
wise and merciful hand, which has hitherto lead you in ways of life,
blessing, honor, would never be weary to continue, and keep you in them;
hedging up all other ways with thorns, that you may never find their paths:
And this shall always be the prayer of

Your faithfully devoted Servant, FRANCIS WOODCOCK.

A SERMON PREACHED at the monthly Fast, July 30. 1645. before the Honorable
House of COMMONS.
1 SAMUEL 2. 3. For them that honor me I will honor; and them that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed.
GOD having laid a law upon us all to do our uttermost to advance his honor;
to make it the better observed, has made promise of reward to them that keep
it, and to them that do not has threatened punishment. And because all men are
not acted by the same motive, and that which prevails with one, does not take
upon another at all; therefore are there variety of rewards and punishments
propounded, and so to none occasion given to slight the duty, because he
wants a suitable motive to excite him to it.

Among all arguments for this purpose, I find none more potent upon ingenuous
and free spirits, then hope of honor, nothing so powerfully dissuading the
contrary, as fear of shame: Yea almost among all men, what is there in their
several businesses and undertakings more regardfully looked upon then shame
and honor? so that I being this day to urge with all my might the honoring of
God, and being to preach to you, to you, most honored Worthies, no doubt a
company of free and noble spirits, what more suitable Scripture could I pitch
upon, whereon to found my discourse, then what I have now read, wherein God
himself is held out unto you, calling for, and urging his honor, by both the
former Arguments? for so the Text, Them that honor me I will honor, and them
that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

I am glad I have not the like sad occasion to preach upon these words, as the
man of God had that first preached them. The occasion was briefly this. The
sons of Eli the Priest, were also sons of Belial, and in the execution of
their Priestly Office, committed unsufferable, unheard of insolences: their
indulgent Father Eli lets them alone: yea, although he was Judge in Israel at
that time, and so had power sufficient in his hand to have restrained them;
Whereupon, God takes the sin of the sons, and the indulgence of the Father so
heinously, as that he sends a Prophet to Eli with this message, That inasmuch
as his two sons had so much dishonored their holy Priesthood, doing things
so altogether unbeseeming such an Office; and he, their easy Father, although
armed with power had not put it forth, that so a stop might be given to their
enormous wickednesses, therefore the Lord was purposed severely to be avenged,
and would cast them out from that honor of Priesthood, which they, while
enjoyed had so much dishonored. And lest the Lord in this threatening should be
argued of unfaithfulness, having formerly promised to Aarons house an
everlasting Priesthood, the Prophet insinuates, that indeed the tenor of that
same Promise was only, quamdiuse been gesserint, upon their good behavior
only, and urges the supreme law, according to which all inferior grants are to
be interpreted, in the words of the Text, Them that honor me I will honor,
etc.

Taking therefore the words in their contexture with the former, and so they
are plainly the reason, why, notwithstanding the promise of the continuance of
the Priestly dignity to Aarons, and so to Elies house, God was now intended to
call in that grant, and deprive them of it. So you have the occasion.

But take them now absolutely, and in themselves considered, under which notion
I intend especially to handle them, and then they are the supreme rule,
according to which God is pleased to dispense honors and dishonours unto men:
Or if you had rather, They are the rate, according to which every man may
purchase to himself shame, or honor.

The division of the words will not at all stay you, they fall of themselves
into two Propositions. 1. Them that honor me I will honor. 2. Them that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed.


In each of these only, as we pass along, observe the changes. In the former,
you have, first, God honored, and man honoring; and then, Man honored, and
God honoring. In the later, first, God lightly esteemed, and man lightly
esteeming; and then, Man lightly esteemed, and God lightly esteeming. In both
is held out that equal law of retribution, and assurance given, that God will
pay every man in his own coin.

Them that honor me] (...), The word comes from, (...), which signifies first
[to be heavy] then [to honour] The Apostle joins both together, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
making mention there of [a weight of glory] and the reason why the word [to
honour] proceeds from such an Original, is this, because whom we honor we do
not account cheap or light; but on the contrary, have weighty thoughts, and a
due esteem of.

And them that despise me] (...). The root of this word is, (...), which
signifies [to despise, neglect, abominate] And is diversely rendered by the
Septuagint, sometimes by (...), [to esteem lightly] sometimes by (...) [to
deride] sometimes they use the word [dishonouring] sometimes the word [making
nothing of] to express it by. It Is here opposed to the former expression of
[honouring] and therefore [to despise God] must needs signify [to set him at
naught, or [to make light of him.]

Shall be lightly esteemed] (...). It is derived from (...), or (...), which
signifies, to esteem lightly, to make light of: It signifies also to [roast]
because roasted or burnt things have much of their weight drawn out by the
fire. [To be despised] is opposed to that [being honored of God] mentioned
before. The sum of all this much.

Such with more, the authority of God carries weight, upon such God will put
weight and esteem; but such as contemn God, shall also be set at naught, and
made light of by him: or as the Scripture speaks other where, shall be
accounted light and vain persons.

The words being thus opened, I now proceed to make Observations upon them: And
first, in that we see God dispencing honors or dishonours to men, according as
they regard, or disregard his honor; I observe this,

God is specially regardfull of, and above all things tender of his own honor.
It Is a clear case, God would not have the esteem of men be measured by that
respect, which themselves have to Gods honor, if above all things God had not
regard to his own honor.

Secondly, In that it is said, He will honor, and He will despise, meaning
God: a next Observation may be this,

Look what reproach or honor happens to any, it is God that is the great and
chief disposer of it. I will honor.

Thirdly, From the manner of Gods dispencing reproach and honor.

According as any endeavor the honor, or dishonor of God, so shall they be
honored, or made light of by him.

I begin with the first of these, viz. God is especially regardfull of, and
above all things tender of his own honor.

He is so, so the Scripture speaks him, Isa. 42. 8. I am the Lord, that is my
Name, and my glory will I not give unto another. God will give away any thing
but his glory, but by no means will he part with that: nothing else so dear to
him, which he will not give away; he will part with his only begotten son; he will
give his holy Spirit, his grace he will give away; he will part with heaven and
happiness; yea, he will give away himself, but yet he will not give away his
glory.

In this consideration it is, he is called a jealous God, he is jealous of his
honor; he loves his creature, I, but he is jealous of his honor, the
strongest passion of all other is conversant about his honor.

And no marvel, for this honor and glory of his, is of all things that are
the most excellent, His Name alone is excellent, and his glory above the earth
and heaven, Psalm. 148. 15. Put heaven and earth with all the glories of them in
the balance, and let Gods glory only be weighed against them, and that weight
of glory pertaining to God, will quickly show the glory of all the creature to
be light and vanity.

Besides, this honor of God is the great end of all things. It was for the
manifestation of his glory, that he made the world; so that of it God may say,
like as once Nebuchadnezzar, Is not this that great world that I have made Dan
4. 30.
by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? For his honor it
was that he made the world, and when this is denied him, by a deluge he again
destroys the world.

unto another: the proud person, because he takes it all unto himself: the
Idolater dishonours God, in making God a creature; the proud person, in making
the creature God: neither of them but are very unacceptable to God, God above
all things regarding his honor, and they altogether regardlesse of it.

end only, we do infinitely abase it, when we make it a means to serve our
ends.

them well, but his honor better; such as have been dearest to him, have paid
for it when they have dishonored him: yea, so passionately is God affected to
his own honor, as that, although we were the signet of his right hand, he
would cast us aside, rather then that by us his honor should be diminished.

Look what honor or dishonor befalls any, it is God that is the great disposer
of it.

The Scripture is clear in it. Promotion (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 75. 6.
comes neither from the East, nor from the West; but God is the Judge, he
puts down one, and sets up another.

It Is part of Hannah's prayer or song, 1 Samuel 2. 8. He raises the beggar from
the dunghill, and equals him with Princes: The antiphone or counter-part
whereof is sung by David, He pours contempt upon Princes, and levels them
with the dunghill, Psalm. 107. 40.

Afflictions (such as dishonor and reproach are) we Job 5. 6.
are told in Job, do not spring out of the dust, they happen not by chance: and
as not dishonor; so nor does honor spring from the dust neither: and though
it is true the Scripture sometime mentions the laying our honor in the dust, it
no Psalm 7. 5.
where says it first arises out of it.

It Is then the same great Potter, that forms vessels of Romans 9. 21.
honor and dishonor for the future life, who also makes the vessels of honor
and dishonor of the present life. He that does the one, does the other also.

And there is good reason he should: Did any else dispose of honor and
dishonor? Did chance or fortune, as they call it, dispose them, it would be a
blind disposal indeed: we then should see that done every day of chance,
which Jacob once did purposely, and of choice, The right hand put upon the
younger, the left hand on the Elder; we Genesis 48. 14. Eccl ^0. 7.
should most familiarly see servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants
by them: and so what encouragement would there be of any to well doing; if
shame and honor happened to us of chance, who would in hope of honor be moved
to virtuous action, when such action is as likely to be rewarded with shame, as
honor? Or, who through fear of shame will be deterred from wickedness, when
that, notwithstanding he is every way as fair as any to be advanced to highest
honors? Nor were the matter much amended, were they at the dispose and
arbitriment of man: it would then be carried with so much partialnesse, so
little regard of worth, and so much regard of friends and interests; besides of
so uncertain a tenure would that honor be that depends upon the fancy and
humor of man, that to want it on such terms may seem as great a happiness as
to enjoy it.

But now that God should have the ordering of them, what more equal? Who more
meet to dispose of reward and punishment (which honor and dishonor are) then
he that makes the law, upon the breaking or keeping whereof, reward or
punishment are to be dispensed? Besides, who so meet to have the award of these
to man, as God, who as he best understands the true weight and value of each
man's actions; so also is most just, to give to every man according to his works?

Prince, or people for honors, not expecting it at all from the hand of God.
Indeed, the Prince may load his favorite with titles, so much may be done for
the man whom the Prince will honor: but as for any real, weighty, abiding
honor, he must say, as once the King of Israel to the woman, If the Lord thy
God do not honor thee, how can I honor thee? 1 King 6. 27.
They therefore mistake the way to honor, who to purchase it depart from us,
going over to the enemy: alas! What do such do, but forsaking the living
fountain of honor, Ier. 2. 13.
dig unto themselves broken cisterns that will yield them none. It Is true, the
King is there, nevertheless, there is not the fountain of honor; for it is God
that does dispose unto the sons of men shame and honor: so that although it
frequently comes to pass (as Solomon observes it did in his days) that every
man seeks the Rulers favor, hoping Prove. 29. 26.
that that being gained, they shall not fail to swim in happiness and honor;
yet (as the same Solomon adds) every man's judgment is of the Lord; God will
have the casting voice in every man's promotion; which is the same was cited out
of the Psalm before, God is the Judge, he lifts Psalm. 75. 6.
up one, and casts down another.



I have done with both the former Observations, upon which I intended but a
touch, and now haste to the third, upon which, I shall (with your patience)
insist a little longer.

Accordingly as we either honor or dishonor God, accordingly shall we be
honored or slighted by him. Or, if you had rather, take the words of the Text,

Them that honor God, God will honor, and them that despise him shall be
lightly esteemed.

In prosecution whereof, we shall enquire,

1. What it is to honor God, as also, what it is to despise, to dishonor God?

2. How it can with satisfaction be made appear to all of us, That accordingly
as any do honor or dishonor God, accordingly they shall be honored or
disesteemed by him?

In answer to the former [to honor God] according to the notation of the word
mentioned before, can be nothing else, then to give God that weight and value
which is due unto him: It is to weigh the Lord in the balance of the Sanctuary,
and to give him all the allowances of worth and value that appertain to him.

Mistake me not, I say not ought can be added to that innate excellency that is
in God: Should all the creatures cast into the balance their several glories,
they all together could not add unto it the least grain of glory: all their
glory in this case is no more then what the Prophet says themselves are, when
put in counterpoyse with God, who are but as the small dust of the balance,
yea, accounted less then nothing, and vanity. We indeed must be beholden to
Isa. 40. 17.
fellow creatures to honor us, else we get none; but it is not so with God, he
being equally glorious before he made any creature, as he is at this day: So
that, though Sun, and Moon, and Stars, Angels and men, yea, all the hosts of
Heaven and Earth, continually empty all their glories into God, yet is he
swelled up no higher hereby, then we see the Ocean is, which, notwithstanding
all the rivers running into it, is never the fuller.

To add then any thing of dignity to God, this is not the Scriptures meaning,
when it speaks of honoring God. It is not (I say) to bestow some worth upon
God which he had not before; but rather to take notice of, and acknowledge that
worth and excellency which was in him before. And therefore if the Scriptures
be consulted, we shall find that to conceive weighty thoughts of God,
believing him to be that great, that gracious, that just and holy God his word
and works show him to be; to speak of him accordingly and readily, and without
dispute to receive his commands, this is plainly to honor God. Thus God having
promised Abraham a son, and he conceiving him able and faithful that had
promised, and thereupon Rom 4 20.
(mauger all the contradiction of flesh and blood) believing the performance,
in so doing, is said to glorify God. In like manner when Achan is called upon
to confess his sin, Josh. 7. 19.
and so condemning himself, to justify the Lord; this in Scripture language is
to glorify God: And when Peter, upon the call of God, is willing to suffer
death for the Gospel, such an obedience unto death, is accounted a glorifying
Ioh. 21, 19.
or honoring God.

You see what it is to honor God, we next enquire what it is to dishonor him.
And this is not to detract any thing of substantial worth from God, for that,
as it is capable of no addition, (as we saw ere while) so neither can it in the
least be impaired: but rather, when God is weighed in our balance, and found
(as once Belshazzar was) too light, and we conceive mean and undervaluing
thoughts of him, in no wise coming up to that excellency of his, which every
where shines forth: and further, when we speak sleightingly of him, as also
make light of his commands, this is without all peradventure to dishonor God.
Thus when the Heathen are so low in their thoughts, as to conceive the Godhead
like unto silver and gold, and God himself like unto a bird, a beast, a
creeping thing, and in such likenesses worship him; this Act. 17. 29. Romans 1.
21, 2^, 23.
in Paul's account is to dishonor God. Likewise when we see a Jew, a zealous
preacher of the law, pressing it in all it is weight and burden upon others, yet
none in practice making lighter of it then himself: the same Apostle tells us,
That through breaking the Law, such an one dishonors Romans 2. 23.
God.

So I have answered the former Query by this time, and you see clearly what it
is to honor and despise God.

As for the later, I mean, the proving of the point. The point is so express
Scripture, that it is needless to stay you in confirmation of it: only let me
present it more fully to your thoughts by a few instances. A first shall be of
Israel; what people so renowned and famous as they were? and what is the reason?
Why, from no Nation, nay, not from all the world had God so much honor as from
them, and therefore they above all the world were honored by him. Moses a man
greatly honoring God as any, and was he not accordingly honored by him? Did
not God set him a Prince over his people (for Moses was a King in Jeshurun) and
did not he impresse such high Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
thoughts of him upon that people, and they so doted on him, that when he died
God was fain to hide his body, lest by the peoples idolizing of it, the body
might do Deuteronomy 34. 6.
him more dishonor being dead, then it did him honor while it was alive.
David may be another instance, a man wholly devoted to honor God: and did not
God abundantly Psalm. 18. 70, 71, 72.
recompense him? He was taken from a sheephook to a Scepter, from following and
feeding sheep, to feed and rule the most renowned people in the world; and
although the top of honor be a stippery place, and those that are advanced to
it do not long keep their standing, for man being in honor abides not, yet
because David to the last honors God, God to the last continues to honor Psalm
49. 1^.
him: He sets clear and unclouded; for, says the holy Ghost of him, He died in
a good old age, full of days, and full of honor. Hezekiah had honored God in
his life, and 1 Chro. 29. 28. 2 Chronicles. 32. ^3
(says the Text) all Jerusalem and Judah came to do him honor at his death.
One instance more, and it is of our Savior himself, all whose thought, life,
business it was to honor God: and was it not requited, when God gives him a
name alove every name? and therefore commits all Phil. 2. ^. Ioh. 5. 13.
judgment to him, to the intent, that all men might honor the Son, as they
honor the Father.

Time would fail me to add modern instances of Princes, Soldiers, Scholars,
who by their Swords, writings, lives, have honored God, and have accordingly
been honored by him: Take but a pair of instances of our own Nation, I mean
that blessed Edward the sixth, and his sister Queen Elizabeth; surely God had
much honor from them both; and was it not as amply repaid? As for him, who
has found a more honorable mention in the records of fame then he has? Read
Cardan. de geneturis. Obiit Euv^^dus ille sanctissimus Rex, quo adolescente
nescio a^ sol doctiorem pro^etate atque prudentiorem, u^quam videriz Pet.
Martyr. Orat.
Cardan a stranger, and of a differing Religion: read our own Cambden, see what
they say of him: and when he dies Reter Martyr leaves this of him to posterity,
says he, That most godly King Edward is dead, and I doubt, whether for his
age, the world ever beheld one wiser or more learned. And of Queen Elizabeth a
Sixtus Quintus. (...) Hist l. 82.
Pope could lay, that he saw but two in all the world, that were fit for Rule,
and with whom he could consult in weighty matters, meaning Henry King of Navar,
and Queen Elizabeth. And there are those among us of the present generation,
honoring God, whose memories (I doubt not) shall be honored, while we are a
Nation.

And on the contrary, That those that have dishonored God, have been as much
dishonored and slighted by him: Nebuchadnezzar is a famous instance, who
endeavoring to swell into an equality with God (I will, Isa. 14. 14.
says he, be like the most high, I will extol my self above the stars of
God) is thrown down into an estate below the meanest of men; and most meet it
was, that he, who was not content, to be man, should be deposed (as he was)
into Dan. 4. 33.
to the condition of a very beast. I could add Saul, another example, who
dishonouring God in disobeying of him, and sparing Agag, and the fat Cattle, is
therefore fain, even shamefully to beg of Samuel to honor him before 1 Samuel
15. 30.
the people, and not without much ado prevails with him. I intend you a taste
only, not a surset of instances, else I could show you Idolaters, transforming
the glorious God into the likeness of a beast, and God in requital
transforming them into the nature of beasts; they, God into Romans 1. 23, 24, 25,
26.
the likeness; them, God into the nature of beasts. Nor are there wanting of
our own Nation, who having slighted and dishonored God, will therefore be
infamous, and a scorn to all posterity.

And there is good reason for this manner of dealing: for what more suitable to
that excellent nature that is in God, then to repay honor to those from whom
himself receives honor. The Scripture styles the Lord, a man of war, Exodus
15. 3.
may I not say also, he is a man of honor? and if so, wherein can it better
appear, then in bestowing honor on those from whom he has it? what could God
do less in point of honor, then to so retaliate?

On the other hand, how equal a thing is it, that those that slight and
dishonor God, should by him also be slighted and dishonored? it is but paying
men in their own coin, the justest law of retribution that can be. Me thinks
there is nothing more equal then if the Moon, (which borrows all her light of
the Sun) shall notwithstanding eclipse and darken the Suns glory; the Sun
should sometime withdraw, and leave her over to her own darkness. And that
those vapors, which being lifted up from the low earth, should upon their
exaltation go about to darken and allay that heat, and light that first raised
them, should therefore be dissolved into showers, and left to fall down again,
unto the low places from whence they were exhaled.

I have done clearing the point, I now proceed to Application, intending to
apply both the branches severally.

And will God honor them that honor him? This Joseph, the most despised of
all his brethren, is yet advanced so far above them: whence David, the
youngest, and least promising of all the sons of Jesse, is yet preferred to the
throne, his other brethren being rejected: whence some of Herdsmen, have been
advanced to Prophets; of Fishermen and Tentmakers, to Apostles: whence Luther a
mean despised Monk, has the honor to conflict with all the powers of Popish
Rome, and overcome them: whence one of this Nation, of mean descent, 1.
Cromwell.
born but a Blacksmiths son, attained, and that deservedly to greatest office
in the Kingdom: As also whence the memories of these, and thousands more that
might be mentioned, are at this day fresh and fragrant, and will by no length
of time be forgotten: sure it is not their stars, it has not happened to them
of chance; but this among others is not the least reason, they were those that
honored God, and therefore God is pleased to make them honored.

This discovers again, which is the high way to come Baron, an Earl; a
Marquess, they signify nothing, without some real vvorth annexed to them:
Turn to the enemies party, relinquish your trust, be the foremost in storming
Towns, or do but bring along with you the plunder and ruins of a Country, as
Titles go now adays: This is the way to procure Titles; all this while the
only way to true honor, is to honor God.

This the ancient Romans (if I mistake not) had some sense of, and therefore
made the way to Honors Temple through the Temple of Virtue, meaning hereby,
there was no way to honor, but by virtue. And I doubt not but some of you
have proved it by experience, that you had never arrived unto that just value,
and esteem which now you have, had you not been regardfull above all things of
Gods honor.

As ever therefore we would consult our honor; Omnes incenduntur ad studia
gloriae. Herostratus adventures to burn that Temple, which in those days was
one of the worlds wonders, for this reason only, that he might be famous
Prove, 2^. 1. Eccl 7. 1.
and talked of. Solomon tells us, A good name is better then great riches; yea,
he goes further, and tells us, it is better then precious ointment, and in those
days what more precious then ointments; yea, experience tells us, to a free
and ingenuous spirit it is dearer then life it self; and therefore to gain a
name the bookish man will waste, and spin out himself in studies, he cares not
how short his days are, so his memory be but lasting: And therefore, says
Diebus ac rectibus hoc ^o^u^ c^g^ar^^ qua me p^ss^m lev^re ^u^^o (...) sec.
Epist. Gloria tantum ^la^us no^ ^ra, in med^o, ho^^es irruere, quod completis
muris consp^^^ ^^pugnantem ^ mur^ spectant^^^^ ^greg^um du^e^at. Live.
one of them, It Is all my study night and day that I may be famous. For honor
the Soldier fights in the face of death, goes on upon the mouth of the Cannon:
Like him in the Historian, who not spurred on by anger, but glory, rushed into
the thickest of the enemy, and all, because he counts it a gallant thing to be
beheld from the walls of the neighbor City, fighting in the midst of them.
And if all of us do so naturally thirst after honor, let no one refuse the
easy terms on which it is now offered; God will assuredly honor us, if we
will be persuaded to regard his honor. Oh therefore let me press this same
indifferently upon us all, to honor God. Be we persuaded every one of us to
conceive high thoughts of God, submit without murmuring and dispute to the
commands of God, use reverently the titles and things of God, particularly roll
thy self upon God by believing, and so honor God: so Abraham (as was shown ere
while) by believing glorified God: Be holy in all manner of conversation, and
so honor God: Holiness it is Gods image, his picture; and wherein can you more
honor any one, then in wearing their picture? Fear God, be zealous for God,
and so honor him. And if thou come with any black guilt before the Lord this
day, confess, repent (as Joshua speaks to Achan) and so glorify God. And now
in the present differences of the Kingdom, wherein the honor of God is so much
concerned: Which of us but has some talent or other, which, if employed, might
bring some honor unto God? If thou have a Sword, may fight for it; an
estate, may lay it out for it; a good pen, write for it; a ready tongue,
speak for it; or in the failer of all these, at least ways thou may pray for
it.

And there is good reason I should press you to honor God; for is there any
thing dearer to God then his honor? Or should there be any thing dearer unto
us? Is not this the great end of all deliverances, mercies, yea, of all his
glorious works? Is not this the great end of all our lives, why we breathe, or
any thing, that we might honor God? Has he not laid a law upon all the
creatures, Sun, Moon, and Stars, to honor him, and they in their manner obey
it? and shall man, who has upon him the greatest engagements, and is best able
to do it, shall he only of all the creatures not honor him? Does God glorify
and honor himself, yea, does he infinitely desire glory, and shall it be
withheld from him? When we court a man, we study what will please him; give
the Lord glory, he cares for nothing else but glory. Does God make it one of
his ends to glorify us, and shall it not be ours to glorify God? Yea, will
God abase himself so low, as to take honor from us, and shall we refuse to
give it? When the Heathens bringing Garlands to their Idols, could not by
reason of the height of them reach their heads, they did not therefore take
them home again, but lest them at their feet; but when the high God will stoop
so low, as that we poor creatures might put the Crown upon his head, shall we
not do it? Alas, consider how little honor he has from the world, he is
feign to get it, he is put to enter, and strain for it, they give him none, and
shall we that profess our selves his people give him none neither? Yea, and
when the glorious Lord shall condescend so far, as to indent with them that
are his vassals, and promise not to be wanting to honor us, if we shall be
studious of his honor, and shall not all this together prevail with us to
honor God?

But I must bring this nearer yet, and endeavor to persuade with you, the
Worthies of your Country, to make it your business, yea, your Parliament
business, to honor God. I have urged you hereunto, as Christians already:
now, as you are Members of the supreme Council of the Kingdom, give me leave
to press you, in this capacity, to make it your business to honor God.

Surely there are not greater matters committed to men, or wherein the honor
of God is more deeply concerned, then those that you are daily conversant in:
You have before you the war, the peace, the common justice, the Reformation,
in short, the Church, the State affairs of three Kingdoms, perhaps on you
depends the welfare of all the Christian world. In which, if you shall show the
uttermost of your Wisdom, Goodness, Zeal, Diligence, and Faithfulness, what
an income of honor will from all accrue to God? Has now the Lord honored you
with so noble employment? Oh be not you wanting to his honor in the managing
of it: Oh for the honor of God, be you faithful, diligent, upright, zealous.
Let every motion made among you, know no other terms from which, and unto
which it tends, but Gods honor. Oh, let those proceedings of your House be
only to the Orders of it, which shall directly aim at Gods honor. Let Gods
honor be among you, as Joseph in Pharaohs house, alone disposing and ordering
all things: yea, and more absolute then he, Let none be Genesis 41. 42.
greater in the throne neither. Honorable, Beloved, let this honor of God not
only be the sense of the House at all times, but even the life, and soul, and
being of it also; as if, not unlike the Roman Senate House, this were inscribed
upon your doors, Ne quid detrimenti honos Dei capiat; This House of Commons
therefore only is, that Gods honor might suffer no prejudice.

And sure you have reason thus to be studious of Gods honor, I beseech you
consider, Did not God advance you to the honor of Members in this present
Parliament? And when you were little in your own eyes, mingled with the rest of
your brethren, and but level with them, was it not God inclined the hearts of
the people to choose you to this dignity, to be the repairers of breachers, and
restorers of paths to dwell in? You might have lived Isa. 58. 12.
and died obscure, having had no eminent stroke in all these greatest of
businesses; had not God adopted you to this honor; and leaves this no
engagement on you to honor God?

But further, as God has honored each of you in calling you into this
Parliament; so since your coming together, has ever God honored any
Parliament, nay, let me say, any society of men, as he has done you? Have any
conflicted with so many difficulties, and overcome them? Have any made such
attempts against Popery, Tyranny, Prelacy, and prospered in them? Have any
fought so many battles, and wone them? Any been endangered by so many cursed
designs and plots, and escaped them? God sometime greatly honored an English
Parliament, in delivering them from a powder treason, though but once; you are
delivered from a powder treason every day, yea, though there are employed, not
one, November 5.
but Armies of Fauxes to give fire to it. And notwithstanding all attempts of
force and fraud, that still you are, you live, are still a Parliament, and now
at last acknowledged so; and all endeavors should fail, to put a short (though
much desired) end to this perpetual Parliament. Kings Letter.


And is this all that God will do for you? and has he already emptied on you
all his store of honor? Or rather, if you go on to honor him, and make it
your business to do so, O the deliverances, successes, blessings, that he
will yet heap upon you! What you have already will be but earnest of what shall
follow after. For your selves, you will be something like a wonder, the
blessing of this, the admiration of all succeeding ages. And make account, that
as each of you have been eminent in promoting Gods honor, accordingly will God
set eminent and lasting marks of honor on you.

Exh. 23.
Once more; Will God honor them that honor him? Oh be persuaded to imitate
God, and do you so also. See you a man that makes it his business to honor
God; Oh set a price on such an one, let such an one be the man whom the
Parliament will honor. Good men will do so, it is the Character of the good
man in the 15. Psalm. 4. to honor such, God himself will honor such, and can
you possibly write after a better copy?

Yea, and honor men, because God honors them. Surely God has exceedingly
honored some men of late, has blessed them wonderfully, has given them
admirable success, and the enemy has come down mightily before them; God in
all this has eminently honored them; now let no man think much to honor
Conc. Trid.
them also. Let no man say, as that Bishop did of Luthers Reformation, He did
not much dislike the thing, but that none but a base, obscure Monk should be
the chiefest promoter of it, this he could not think of with any patience.
Beloved, God will take it well that those that are his favorites should be
ours too, and when he sets himself to honor any, it will be our wisdom not
to show our selves backward to honor them also.

I leave the former branch, a word or two of the other, and I have done.

Kings Letters
any we have formerly fathered upon their bad Counselors. And what other
reason hereof can we assign, but this, Gods honor has suffered exceedingly by
them, and therefore are they fallen under all this dishonor.

and dejected? Consider then, have you not abated unto God somewhat of that
honor you have formerly given him? I charge no man; only think with your
selves, are you not departed from what you sometimes were? Are you not taken
off from that forwardness for God, and that faithfulness to your Country you
have formerly (at leastwaies) made a show of? It will be worth your while to
try: For commonly God does not cast any of us under shame, but having been
himself before by us dishonored.

David did so, who to cover the shame of his adultery, first makes Vriah drunk,
and when that design fails, afterward murders him; but what got he by it, but
a world of more dishonor? It is many times a remedy worse then the disease;
and fares with such as with a man slipped into a bogg or quagmire, who
endeavoring with one foot to help the other, sticks that deeper and faster
then the other. It is sin that first brings shame upon us, and shall we be so
foolish as by adding to sin to hope to cover it?

Jehoshaphat, Should thou honor the ungodly, and love them that hate the
Lord? therefore is wrath 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
upon thee from before the Lord. God takes it well from you, when you honor
them that honor him; but when you countenance and favor those who despise the
Lord, what greater affront can be done to him?

Prelates, and their etc. are at this day? They were not so high ere-while, but
now they are as vile and contemptible: and what was it that lost the house of
Eli the Priestly dignity, but their dishonouring God?

If you of the soldiery do it, who profess your selves the servants of honor
more then any, you will miss of it: experience shows men blasted and infamous
that dishonor God, you will be laid aside, you will die inglorious, if you
dishonor God. Methinks this should take with generous spirits, for who is
there of that number had not rather die, then live with infamy? Vita and fama
pari passu ambulant. Nay it is worse then death to many: diverse have chose to
lay violent hands upon themselves, and so destroy body and soul together,
rather then live to see themselves infamous. And the Italians (I have read)
exceedingly wondered at the Spanish General of the Armado in 88. that being so
foyld, he did not make himself away: they wondered much how he could overlive
so much dishonor.

And shall not this prevail on you (most honored Worthies) Oh do not you
dishonor God. Oh be there none among your number a drunkard, a swearer, an
unclean liver, a scorner of the ways of God, or any such like profane and vile
person: especially, as you are Members of that great and noble body, be it
far from any of you to be acted, either by bad or private ends, to be a
seeming friend, a secret enemy, and one that might be tempted to betray all
into the hands of blood and violence. Should any of you be such, you will be
discovered, carry it never so warily, and be assured your heads shall never be
laid in the grave with honor. But above all, as a Parliament do not dishonor
God. I know not that yet you have, I beseech you at no hand begin now: you will
do so, if you establish any wickedness by a law: God will be dishonored, if all
things be carried among you by interests and sidings. It will be so, if you
refuse men common justice, and give them cause to wish the former times again.
It will be so, if you neglect Religion, and after you have served your turn of
it, and it is most sincere professors, shall then endeavor fairly to discharge
your selves of both. You will do so, if doors shall be flung open, and foul,
profane, unwashen ones have leave, as well as any, to share the holy things of
God. It will be so, if upon any pretense you shall give up our states and
liberties (wherewith you are trusted) into their power, from whom of late years
it has cost us so many lives, and so much blood to recover them.

Oh! do not you dishonor God: the chiefest among us have not escaped contempt
and infamy, they presuming to despise and dishonor God. I appeal to you
(Honorable, Beloved) when the Cabinet-councel was made public; for now upon
the reading of the Cabinet letters, who of us is not of the Cabinet-councel? (I
say) I appeal to you, was Majesty it self When the Cabinet Letters, were read
at the Guild-hal.
on that day a sacred thing among the people, or rather, the highest among them
daring to dishonor God, what honor of word, or action, or person is now left
unto them? Beloved, you have seen, when of your own number a party forsaking
their trust, and banding themselves against you, besides all the scorn by us
cast upon them, for a reward of all the hazard, travel, loss they have
sustained, are counted even by him that first employed them, a MVNGREL
PARLIAMENT. Kings Letter.


And therefore to draw to a conclusion: Would you not be the scorn of men, a
public infamy, for God can pour contempt on Parliaments, as well as Princes?
Oh do not then dishonor God, not as Christians, not as Parliament men; but
above all, not as a Parliament dishonor God. But on the contrary, make but his
honor your business; let this only contention be among you, who shall bring
God most honor, and so expect more honor, more successes, greater and greater
glory to be daily added to you: expect, that when the names of them that have
betrayed their Country, shall either be forgotten and lost, or to their shame
and infamy remembered, your names shall be as an ointment poured out, leaving
an odourand fragrancie to all that follow after.

And though I cannot promise you Titles, the vilest of men having at the
present engrossed them, however you shall want no honor, good men will make up
that want, they, you have seen, will be sure to honor you, God will not fail
to honor you; Himself assures you so much in the Text, Them that honor me I
will honor; and them that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

FINIS.

