THE KINGS CHRONICLE Latter SECTION.

WHEREIN The way, the good Kings, Priest and People have taken for the
well-posturing the Kingdom, is fully d^clared, and made glorious before the
Eye of the Beholder by GODS own Right Hand, for the encouragement of all, who
will walk in the same way, observe the same steps and motions there; and fix
their Eye upon the same Mark, The Glory of GOD; Their own and the Peoples
safety.

By HEZEKIAH WOODWARD.

JER. 32. 39. I will give them one heart and one way. PROVE. 12. 28. In the way
of Righteo^snesse there is life: And in the path way thereof there is no Death.
DAN. 11. 32. The People, that do know their GOD shall be strong and do
exploits. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for George Miller and Thomas Underhill, and
are to be sold at the Sign of the Bible in Wood-street, 1643.

TO THEIR EXCELLENCIES ROBERT Earl of ESSEX Lord General of his Majesty's
Army by Land:
ROBERT Earl of WARWICK High Admiral of his Navy by Sea, for the Defense of
the KING and KINGDOM; his Crown, their life, Religion, Laws, Liberties, GRACE
and PEACE be multiplied.

WHen I looked upon the subject matter of this Book* the History of the good
Kings their good way, good Ayms, good ends; The glory of God, Their own and
their peoples safety: I thought so honorably of it, as that it would become
the hand of the highest Person in the Kingdom. But considering again, That my
self, the lowest of ten thousand, has his hand in it, my thoughts fell very
much in my own sense, and much also in my Dedication, from a King to his
Subjects; notwithstanding, I think so honorably of it still, and still shall
so think (not as it comes from my hand, but) as it comes from Gods mouth, That
the Dedication will become two Persons, though Subjects, yet the most Excellent
in three Kingdoms. Such are You, who, feeling the weight of Duty to Your Prince
and Country, do wish from an entire and ingenuous heart, O King live for ever:
And to his Kingdom, That it may be the Lords Kingdom. Upon this, The noblest
design that ever was on foot, You do move, laying out Your selves and
jeoparding your lives, To maintain the Cause of God, His Gospel, The Crown
of Your King, The Glory of the Kingdom.

You will find a mighty resistance, All the Powers of darkness against you,
the King of the bottomless pit, and all his Subjects associated now and folden
together like thorns. But You cannot be discouraged, The God, Whom You serve
is Great, The Cause You Own and Appear for, is His Cause* The way You are in,
is trodden before You, by all the truly Noble of the world, who made themselves
and their people a Blessing. You can suffer no more from the tongue and hand,
then what all the good Kings and Princes have suffered before You in this way,
not more hard words, nor more ungodly deeds. You cannot be brought to greater
straits, then these Nobles have bin in before You: A Ship tossed with Tempests,
is the Emblem of the Church: So He suffers the Cause of His Church to be
carried as a Ship in a Storm, now UP, and yet the Righteous are where they
were, not raised above the height of an holy confidence and humble dependence,
knowing the manner how GOD brings His People to a wealthy place; Then DOWN,
That the wicked may rise in their hope, may be lifted*up, and made lively and
strong to prosecute their own way, and to hasten their own ruin. But still
GOD is the same, as wakefull as ever; His Cause the same, and it shall be as
victorious as ever, and the more opposition has or shall be made against Him,
by the Assemblies of the wicked; The more glorious the victory shall be* And
the more weight shall be added unto Your Crown of Glory, who have not forsaken
their Master in the hour of Temptation, but have stood by Him, have owned His
Cause, laid out Your Selves for Him.

So You have done; surely the Lord remembers this, and will let You know, What
a good Master You have chosen, His Attributes shall be laid out for You; His
Wisdom, Power, Goodness; As You have labored to advance His Name, He will
make Your Name to spread, and to cast a savor, sweeter then the most precious
ointment to all Generations, when the Name of the wicked shall rot, and their
memorial be as the Cities, GOD over-threw and repented not.

Now blessed be GOD, Who has instructed You to Discretion, gives Courage and
Might, that You can be valiant for the Cities of Your GOD, and can resign all
into His Hands, to do that, which is good in His Eyes. That which He do'^ is
good still, and will be best at the last. In the mean time You know You serve
a good Master, and have a good Cause in hand; And therefore can say with the
whole Family of GOD; The LORD is our Judge, The LORD is our King, He will save
us. Amen say all, That love and fear the Lord all the world over, Amen and
Amen.

THE PREFACE to the CHRONICLE.
We have seen the ways of Ahabs House, whether they led, and their counsels
whether they tended, To the Destruction of all Judah; A Destruction at which
the Nations stood astonished, for it was A casting out of Judah from out of GODS
sight, A removing of them far off, whom He had brought so near, by so many
engagements. If we have let this sink down into our hearts, This Destruction
from the LORD upon His own people, will be a Terror to us, so as we shall
read and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

We come now to behold the way of the good Kings; one and the same still, not
varied, not any turnings or windings there, (The ways of the crooked Serpent:)
But direct (...) and forward, By the same Rule; To the same end; In the use of
the same means. This requires all observation: That these good Kings, all and
every one, had a single eye, and such were their Aims: They set before their
eyes, honest and good ends, The GLORY of GOD: And the advancement of His
Kingdom: They were resolute, constant, and true unto those ends (not (...),
not off and on) And they molded and shaped their actions thereunto, by love,
which forms a Person nothing more dexterously; Love to GOD, Love to His Truth,
Love to His People, Love to their Peace. To summe*up their Actions here* That
we may, with more understanding, enlarge upon them afterward. The first and
prime work was, The removing of all Abominations from out of GODS sight, which
abominable Idolaters had set-up before Hi^eyes.

2. Then they ASSOCIATED themselves, came up to GOD and His ^earmes, entered
into Covenant with Him, and kept close unto Him.

3. And all this with a perfect heart: and so they made themselves and their
People, as a brazen wall, and an Iron Pillar; The blast of the Terrible-ones
could not move them. The purpose and tendency of all that follows, is, to
clear all this for the instruction of the living, That they may do so also:
But I must clear David's intentions toward his Master Saul first, to be Loyal
and Legal.

IT is this three and twentieth Day of December, 1642. Ordered by the Committee
of the House of COMMONS in PARLIAMENT concerning Printing, that this Book,
entitled, The Kings Chronicle be printed.

John White.

SECT. II. THE KINGS CHRONICLE.
The Story of the Kings of Judah is continued; Their wise ordering their
Militia; their direct ways and motions to a desired end are recorded.
. 1. A digression, showing DAVID'S Military design to be loyal and lawful:
and the true Causes of all the Wars against the Church, now or in former
times, discovered. But the lawfullnesse of this Militia now runs-out beyond all
paralels.

I Must turn back that I may go forward in the Chronicle, and begin with
David, (for he fought the Battles of GOD,) To learn from his Story, Who taught
his hands to war, and his fingers to fight. That we may read in order, we
must look upon him a little before he was King, when he returned to Ziglag,
and found nothing there but ruins and ashes 1 Samuel 30. 36
: The desire of his eyes, taken captive; and heard threatening words besides: so
David was greatly distressed; But he encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
And see what the Lord does for His servant David, because he trusted in Him
ver. 6.
! Truly that is very notable; how God strengthened David: and how An
expression ordinary in the Psalms, and a duty to be observed.
David fortifies himself in the LORD his GOD. But I cannot come to that yet; I
must first set David clear from Malignant spirits; for his Actions then, are
questioned now in a Parallel. I will set down the Case as fully as the most
Malignant spirit can do; and then we will see how the sacred Scripture cleares
it, even the Innocence of David then, and of those now, who practice after him.
But it will be said at first entrance, and so I shall dissolve the Story into a
Dialogue, That;

Object. We must live by PRECEPT, not by the Godly man's practice.

Answ. True; for the practice may vary: but the precept is a standard, I mean
a standing rule; And yet I must, for I am commanded so, To follow Paul as he
followed Christ: I may live by the godly man's practice, while they live by the
precept, keeping close thereunto.

Object.

But what is the practice of one man, to justify the practice of the whole
Body of a Kingdom? specially when his practice may be a question, and then it
cannot be an Argument, seeing the lawfullnesse of David's practice was never
decided.

Answ. Yes, that it was long ago. The sacred Scripture decideth it, and I will
read the Records of that decision now;

Besides, David was not alone; he had others joined with him; and one, amongst
the rest, who renders David's practice in his Military design to be
unquestionable by clear testimony from Truth it self; THE SPIRIT CLOTHED
AMASAI 1 Chro. 12. 18. 12. 8.
; (i e) as it is expounded in another place Judge 6. 34. Instruxit eum voluntate
and facultate ad hanc expeditionem pertinante, Trem.
, The Spirit of JEHOVAH furnished Amasai with power and a willing heart, for
that expedition, The helping forwards David^ Military design; The Spirit of
the LORD does not cloth a man, does not so fully set him forth, completing
him with heart, and hand, and council, and strength to practice against His
holy will. So I come to David's practice; and will hear what can be said
against it, and give the Malignants good leave for our better observation, to
urge against it to the utmost.

Object.

David was but a private man, now a subject, designed to the Crown indeed; and
within a few hours the Crown was set upon his head: But who regarded that? he
was a private man now, a poor cast-out, a miserable creature, at the lowest.

Answ. Reader, I will cut off the objection by the middle for thy sake, that
thou may note here with all thy heart this first, That it is GODS way and
method to say Man low, before He raises them; to pluck down the head, before
he will set a Crown upon it; as David here, before he must be highest in the
Kingdom, he must be the lowest there. 2. Note also, for it will clear our
case exceedingly, That indeed David now was but a private man, yet he did so
and so, as we shall read presently: Now let the objection run-on to its full
length.

Object.

And though a private Man, and at the lowest, yet see how proudly he carries
himself! Surely he had treasonable thoughts against his Master, the LODS
anointed; he that scrupeled, at the cutting the lap of his Coat, will not
scruple at the taking off his Masters head; he had treasonable thoughts against
the LORDS anointed now: he purposed to Rebel.

Answ. No indeed not he; not a thought that way ever came into David's heart.

Object. But (no) answers not the question; The case is apparent, David had
gathered together a great Army.

Answ. The same Answer must serve, when all is said, No; David did not gather
together a great Army; They gathered to him; they came in to him for his guard
and rescue; they were not called-in. The persecution of Saul against David was
very notorious, and at length raised the hearts of the people, like a great
bell, which being set up, made a loud sound, and called-in for David's helpers;
so they flocked-in to him, till his Host was as the Host of the LORD 1 Chro
12. 22
: A sure token, that God was with him too; and that Innocence was in his hand.

Object.

That is a gross mistake; and David's carriage is mistaken too, clean
different to what the behavior of a subject should be. David should have dealt
plainly, thus; Masters, remember your selves, and me, subjects all: Saul is
our King and Master; we can set him no bounds, and if he be no law to himself,
he may do as he does, persecute me, and overtake me. But I will out-runne him
if I can, and hide me where I may; If I cannot, yet, not a hand will I lift up
against him; no nor suffer any hand to be lift up against my Master Saul* So he
should have said and done.

Answ. So he said and did, as appears in the Text 1 Samuel 24. 5.
; and will more appear anon.

Object. Nay, clean contrary; he goes forth to meet his helpers; Tells them,
his heart shall be knit unto them 1 Chro. 12. 17.
.

Answ. He tells them so indeed; and said he not well? If ye be come PEACEABLY
unto me; if as neighbors and Brothers, and come not to betray me to mine
enemies; but will help me against them, Then my heart shall be knit unto you.
1 Chr. 12. 1.
Ye may see plainly what ye take in hand; The rescuing a poor Innocent, that
keeps himself close because of Saul and his bloody Courtiers ver. 1.
; ye see, there is no wrong in my hands; I can appeal to Heaven in this; The
GOD of our Fathers look thereon and rebuke it. ver. 17.


Object. Call you this a coming PEACEABLY? It will carry a suspicion, at the
least of the contrary.

Answ. Yes: But what cares a wise man for suspicion in such a case: do not
suspect but be confident, that a wise man will keep the hand of the violent
man from his throat, if it be in the power of his hands so to do.

Object. What! keep Saul the King from cutting his throat?

Answ. Yes, Saul the King: for what glory had it been, if Saul the King had
cut David's throat, any more then if a beggar had done it. The objection holds
on.

Object.

Is this a coming PEACEABLY, when Men of might come-in unto David, and Men of
War, fit for the Battle, Armed with Bows and Arrows; the chief Captains,
ver. 8.
mighty Men of valor for the War, and for number infinite? Is this a coming
PEACEABLY, when every Tribe sent in their thousands, Benjamin also even of
Saul's Brethren? ver. 2.


Answ. Yes; all this PEACEABLY. But I thank you for the last, for that is
notable, even of SAUL'S BRETHREN OF BENJAMIN. David's cause was so just; Saul's
quarrel so unjust; David's Innocence so apparent; Saul's bloody intentions so
clear to all the Tribes round about; That even Saul's Brethren came-in to help
David, with thousands from each Tribe, and all to rescue him from a Murderer;
And all this coming-in was PEACEABLY.

Object. Peaceably! strange! what? Men to come-in, whose faces were like the
faces of Lions; Armed with Bows; could handle ver. 8.
shield and buckler; and all this peaceably?

Answ. Yes peaceably all this, To maintain the peace of the King and Kingdom;
To safeguard Saul's life; I am not mistaken, I say Saul's life, even the soul
of his life, for it was in rescue, if it could have been, of Saul's body, from
out of the hands of bloody men, and in compassion to his soul, It will appear
anon; only we must go about a little, and it will be worth our labor, for it
will instruct us touching this present Military design, the loyalty and
lawfullnesse thereof: But that indeed this now is a transcendent business,
has no parallel, exceeds that, in the sacred Text, as much as a whole Kingdom
is more then David (then, at that time a private man:) As much as all the
faithful in the world, are more then that one Prophet Elisha: yet see what he
did to preserve his life 2 Kin. 6. 3 ^^
; Indeed, life is a precious thing, and worthy our safe-guarding. I add this
by the way, to show, as was said, That this present business exceeds all
paralels, as much as the public and common good exceeds the private, and
particular; As much as a thousand thousand heads exceed one head; But to that
which is undertaken; which is this; 1. That David and his helpers helped Saul
and his Kingdom; 2. That David did what he did in very compassion to the soul
of his Lord, and Master; with respect to his own soul too, for that was but
reasonable.

To goe-on then to the bottom of the business, and to find-out the ground of
this quarrel, and in whose heart war was indeed. We may make more then a
conjecture from the words we shall hear, for they were drawn Swords; but we
will search into the bottom of the quarrel. Saul was wroth with David. What
had David done? He had killed Goliath, and in him Ten Thousand 1 Samuel ^^. 7.
. A Glorious Act that! David had wrought Salvations for Israel. He had slain a
mighty, a proud and insolent Adversary, him that defied, that cursed David by
his gods ^ Sam. 17. 43*
. Little David had slain this great Goliath, the Champion, that CAME up out of
the Camp of the Philistines, ver. 4.
him had David slain: And in that one Adversary, David slew a whole Legion of
Devils. Such a salvation had David wrought for Israel. But for this very Act
was the King of Israel highly displeased; The killing of Goliath caused the very
heat of Saul's displeasure against David: Saul was very wrath for that, and he
eyed David (mark that) from that day and forward 1 Samuel 18. 9.
; and did against him, as we may read. Why? Because he had beheaded Goliath,
ver 9.
that was the reason. Indeed his rage increased and was exceeding; he became
David's Enemy CONTINUALLY ver. 29.
from the very day, David had shaved-off Goliahs head. And see how contrary he
walks against David! For it commands our observation; sometimes in a rage
with David, and manifests his madness, so that all may see it 1 Samuel 18. 11
; sometimes he uses wiles and crafts. He deals treacherously and subtly,
pretending honor to David, because so worthy, and he should be Captain
(forsooth) over a thousand. And then when that would not do, Saul assures
David, he will respect him as a ver. 13.
Father his son; he will take the same care of David, as of his own child,
For he should have his Elder daughter to wife* Only David must be valiant, and
encourage himself to fight the LORDS battles. Who would not trust such words
as these? ver. 17.
Truly David, a simple hearted man, did believe it, That Saul had a zeal for
GOD, the establishing Religion, and, a full purpose to honor him; He should
have his daughter to wife; and the condition was to David's heart, for he could
be valiant, and fight the battles of the LORD. David could not suspect, That a
wicked heart is like a pot-sheard covered with silver dross Pro. 20. 23.
; or that a man may speak fair, when there are seven abominations in his
heart ver. 25.
. There were no fewer in Saul's heart; he cared not what he said, nor what he
did, nor did he regard the hundred fore-skins of the Philistines; he regarded
this, how he might execute His Will upon the innocent. What he said to Day, he
unsaid the next day, or did worse; David should have his elder daughter that he
should; but when she should have bin given to David, she was given to another
the very same day, it is worth the noting, at the same time. And yet 1 Samuel 18.
19.
David must be told, that Saul delights in him, and all his servants love him,
(see what a thing the Heart is, how desperately wicked ver* 22.
) And if it will please David, he shall be the Kings son in law
notwithstanding. And it pleased David well, for he said, in effect, Saul
honors the poor Shepherd very much, For is it not an honor to be the Kings
son in law ver. 23.
? So David performs the condition, which Saul requird m, and Saul performed
his word to David; he gave him Michal his daughter to wife ver. 27.
; but he had said (in his heart) before, I will give him her, that she may be a
snare unto him ver. 21.
. Thus it was almost visible, That there was war in Saul's heart, and seven
abominations beside: But yet Saul cannot prevail against David, neither by open
rage, nor secret cunning. How so? Because the LORD was departed from Saul, and
was with David ver. 12.
: Therefore David behaved himself wisely in all his ways, for the LORD was
with him ver. 14.
. And that troubled Saul most of all, for it defeated all his counsels; it made
him afraid of David; yet he would try all ways he could find out to kill David.

Then Saul spoke to Jonathan his Son Chap. 19. 1.
(he was an honest man, and loved David with his heart ver. 2.
, for he delighted in him) and to all his Servants (they were all wicked, for
their Master hearkened unto lies Prove. 29. 12.
) THAT THEY SHOULD KILL DAVID. So the Master and the servants, did all what
they could to take away his life. But the poor Worm plucked in his head as he
could, he dealt very subtly 1 Samuel 23. 22
. Good reason why, for, Saul secretly practiced mischief against him Chap. 23.
9.
; And David knew it. Nay, Saul had destroyed the City of the Priests Chap. 22.
1^.
: His servants indeed would not execute their Masters bloody command ver. 17,
18.
, but Doeg did y; (A bloody Master cannot want a bloody Doeg) if the other
servants will scruple at so nice a point, Doeg will not, he fell upon the
Priests and slew on that day 84. persons, that did wear a linen Ephed* Nay he
did more then so, like the Doegs of our days, they could not be avenged of
David* the faithful servants of the Lord, therefore they slew poor naked men
and women, yea and dogs too. So Doeg then, he smote Nob, the City of the
Priests with the edge of the Sword, both men and women, children and sucldings,
and oxen and asset, and sheep with the EDGE OF THE SWORD. It is twice repeated
ver. 19.
to express the extreme cruelty of that execution. See here what a bloody
persecution is raised, when Saul seeks David's life, and Doeg is his minister!

But what does Saul say now? Can he call GOD to record upon his soul, That his
heart is upright? That he has a zeal for the Lords battles? So he said, can
he say so still? Yet may be he could; but no wisemen regarded what he said,
when they saw Doeg was with him, and had made such a miserable destruction.
Wisemen did observe what Saul did, and who were his ministers; and they knew
as well as David himself, That the persecution was raised against the most
faithful servant in Saul's Kingdom; and therefore it was, that who so were
faithful in the Kingdom, next to David, were slain too for his sake. Now Saul
might speak, and swear and protest, and call GOD to witness, it could not be
regarded; his bloody execution (for it was his, he commanded Doeg to fall) upon
the Priests, and that cruel outrage against Nob, undeceived all the people in
the Land, and in point of Law. But Saul now makes no pretense; he marches on
now (for he was now entered into blood) (...), with open face against David, and
see what an Army he has gathered together, three thousand chosen men out of
Israel; mighty hunters 1 Samuel 24. 2.
all, and they all hunted David, as one hunteth a Partridge in the Mountains
Chap. 26. 20.
, and once, nay twice they had him in a coop, enclosed 1 Samuel 23 26.
him in a Cave with more then five hundred drawn Swords round about; but the
Lord gave David the day, and the advantage; Truly David's deliverances and
rescues Chap. 24. 3, 4.
were the greatest miracles that GOD wrought in those days.

But why all this prosecution and persecution against David? That is the
enquiry: What had David done? It was half answered before, and but the half;
he had killed Goliath, and in him ten thousand. Now we must hear the other
part; but read first and note it, David shall have enough urged against him;
That he conspired against his Master Saul 1 Samuel 22. 13.
, for Saul says, as if he did believe, that David sought his hurt Chap. 24. 9.
, and he went in danger of his life every day. Who? Saul, he was afraid of
David that David would kill him; so he said, and so his Courtiers said also,
but what said the honest Priest, for we must believe him, Who is so faithful
among all thy Servants, as David Chap. 22. 14.
; and Saul knew it to be so too, though he spoke, that David conspired against
him, and that he sought his life; they were but fained words, he feared David
no more, then a dog fears the hare, or a wolf a lamb: and Saul cleares David
at this point also, in his words and in his heart both 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17, 18. 1 Samuel 26. 21. Chap. 23. 8. 1 Samuel 23. 17.
. But Saul conspired against David to take away his life, that was visible, he
called all the people together to war to besiege David, for the reason above
said, and for this which follows, Thou shall be King over Israel, and that
also SAVL MY FATHER KNOWS, mark that, and then you have the other part, and
are come to the bottom of the business.

What ever the pretenses were, this was the ground of the quarrel; Saul's house
shall not be established; David must succeed, and not Jonathan, and SAVL KNEW
IT. Why then would Saul resist, fighting against GOD, and a good conscience?
The answer is short; because he was an enemy to GOD, and to the good pleasure
of His will; Therefore he endeavors nothing more earnestly, then to make void
the decrees of GOD, though yet they are as the everlasting hills and perpetual
Mountains. Indeed this ever was, and is the great design of the world, What?
To dethrone David, The Lord Christ King of Saints: He shall not rule in the
Kingdoms of the world; not over them; they still said so, and so they say
still; so they set themselves, taking counsel together, still against the
LORD, and against His ANOINTED. And so we have the whole ground and reason
of the quarrel, which we will read over again.

1. David had done vvorthily for the people of God, in one Adversary he had
slain ten thousand.

2. The mercies of God were made sure to David, his Kingdom must be
established for ever, Saul would make all this Null, and of none effect. And
this has been the cause of all the wars against the Church from the
beginning of the world; and will be the same to the worlds end. David should
not be King then: Thence rose the quarrel, and it has continued ever since
upward to this day. What an heaving and shouldering do we make now, That His
Seed may not keep His Throne, and have, according to the Promise, the
Kingdoms of the Earth for His possession? And yet, if we ask these men, they
will answer in cool blood, That the LORD CHRIST does reign, and must reign;
He will take to Himself Power, be the Nations never so angry: Notwithstanding,
what they think in coole-blood, thus they Rev. 11* 17, 18
do in their Anger; They break His bands in sunder, and cast away His cords
from them. This is the ground of the quarrel, the dethroning of the LORD
CHRIST; as this has, Psalm. 2. 3.
so it will cause the bloudiest war, that ever was read of in the world. My
Promise was to make a discovery hereof only, and no more.

Now to the maine business, 1. To vindicate David and his helpers, from doing
wrong or injustice against Saul.

2. Then I shall clear David's compassion to Saul, and to his own soul; All
this in standing upon his guard, and defending himself.

1. The first is as clear as the Sunshine, David took nothing from Saul,
but added to him, he would have maintained Ziglag for him; All David's designs
were to safeguard Saul's life; and still his in-rodes were upon Saul's
Adversaries; All his ways were not always warrantable there; then he wandered
erring from the way, when fear surprised him, and that was more then once; but
not once in all his life, did he do the least hurt to Saul, but much good
service.

Object.

By your leave, David might have hurt Saul, and have slain him too: For, had
not the LORD told David, that the men of Keilah 1 Samuel 23. 10, 11.
, notwithstanding their engagements to David, yet would deal treacherously
with him, he had stood upon his guard there, and fortified the Town, and
maintained it against Saul; who, so glad of that advantage, and calling
together all the people to befiege ver. 9.
David, might have endangered his life there, that he might.

Answ. Yes indeed might he; No doubt but Saul would have made a furious onset
upon Keilah for David's sake, (it was as some Town our thoughts may be upon,
well fortified, and had gates and bars,) for he was the very But and white
whereat malice shot all her Arrows; and if the Keilites had been faithful to
David, he would not have been treacherous to himself; and then in the heat of
the battle, and hot charge against David, he could not teach the arrows, or
what other instruments of death they had, to make difference betwixt Saul and a
common Man. Saul might have forborne, and have taken leisure enough to look to
himself, David had work enough, to prevent Saul, and to save his own throat.
If Saul will run upon the Sword, who can stay him? It is all the answer that
needs to a question but supposed.

But seeing we are upon that Chapter, let us observe the bold confidence of the
man; David is come to Keilah says he; he is shut in there, by entering into a
Town that has gates and bars ver. 7.
. Well, what if he be? There is a POWER with David, that can break Gates of
brass and bars of Iron. But observe, I say, how* confident the man is, and
yet how mistaken! He is sure enough now, says Saul, I have him now fast
enough: GOD has delivered him into my hand. Look ye! Saul thought that GOD
shined upon His bloody counsels: (indeed the LORD gives some success that way,
that the counsel of the wicked may be carried headlong) when as indeed GOD
went clean cross unto him, and declared His Name to be Wonderful for David;
only the LORD gave Saul this advantage to manifest the spirit of the man, and
to discover the treachery of the people, that was it. But Saul understood none
of all this, he thought, as was said, that GOD blessed His endeavors,
prospered his design, though it was the persecution of David, throughout all
the thousands of Judah 1 Samuel 23. 23.
.

How came Saul to be so blinded in an evil way? Say hardened and brawned too;
Then look in the Chapter immediately before; and that will give you answer to
both 1 Samuel 22.
. Saul had taken a bloody Edomite to his side; had rushed furiously into a
Town of Priests, and we have read what a slaughter he made there. He washed
his feet in the blood of the Lords chief servants; he must needs be blinded
now and brawned in an evil way. This in passage: But I think I have cleared
this, which was the first: That neither David, nor his helpers did any wrong to
Saul. I come now to the second thing, which is the chief of my undertaking;
That David in seeking to defend and safeguard himself, did show compassion to
Saul, even to the life of his life.

2. Saul's understanding was now so clouded, the light which was in him, was
overspread with such a thick darkness, that he accounted the delivering up
David into his hands (which the people, so brutish and vile they were, so blind
also, they followed Saul up to the knees in blood; and such enemies to their
Kings peace, were ready to do) so as he might sheath his sword in David's
bowels, even this, To be a mercy to his soul, Blessed be ye of the Lord, for
ye have compassion on me 1 Samuel 23. 21.
: See there, Saul blesses murderers, whom GOD curses, and he should have put
to death. And he accounts it a COMPASSION to his soul. What? To have the
opportunity given him for the taking away David's life. Lay this together,
consider on it, then we must conclude, that David, in standing upon his guard,
and admitting such helpers, which GOD sent-in unto him, did show compassion
even to his Masters soul: As he did to his own soul, in rescuing that by all
fair means out of the hands of a murderer. I said, compassion to his Masters
soul; That is compassion indeed, to keep a man from shedding innocent blood.
That restraint is a blessed restraint, which keeps the foot from the path of
the destroyer: That counsel, blessed counsel, which checks and stopps a man
in the pursuance of bloody designs. We may say of such restraints, and of such
counselors, as we weade; Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, and blessed be
the advice; and blessed be those counselors, who would keep this day from
shedding innocent 1. Sam. 25. 32, 33.
blood.

We will look over this once more that we may observe in passage thence, and
stand humbled at our observation; first;

1. What a thick cloud man has cast over his understanding! What does Saul
call a compassion on him? The delivering up of David into his hands, that so he
might sheath his Sword in his bowels: And now that the Ziphites will (after
the manner) do Saul this kindness to deal treacherously with David, ver 19.
aand betray innocent blood, Saul will bless them in the Name of the LORD.
Truly here is a strange compassion, and as strange a blessing, yet not strange
from Saul, a stranger to the Commonwealth of Israel, and has made such a
slaughter, and committed such an outrage upon Nob, for that must be remembered
still all along,

2. Compare we the compassion the Ziphites would have shown to Saul, with the
compassion David did show unto him 1 Samuel 24. Chap. 26,
, Then we shall see plainly, that the Ziphites compassion was trencherous and
bloody, they can show no compassion; But David can; his compassion is
compassion indeed, mercy to the Body, and to the Soul also. All this David
showed to Saul. Now in the next place, we must give David leave to show,

2. Compassion to his own Soul; so I said; And is not the soul worthy
whereto a man should show compassion? Why should a man suffer the thread of life
to be cut, his soul to be let-out by a bloody hand, which no sooner is
let-out, but it lancet forth into the deepes of eternity, where it must live
for ever? Why should a man neglect his life, his precious life, which is given
him here, to make provision for a happy life hereafter. We have heard what
David a private man did, for his Master Saul, and for himself, how just and
innocent in all; now hear him out, what he says; If you be come peaceably
unto me, mine heart shall be knit unto you, but if ye be come to betray me to
mine enemies, seeing there is no wrong in mine hands, the GOD of our Fathers
look thereon and rebuke it. In the next place, hear what Abigall says; The
LORD will certainly make my Lord a sure house 1 Samuel 25 28.
How a Chro. 12. 17.
knows she that? Because my Lord fights the Battles of the LORD. What
Battles were they? Offensive against the Philistines, defensive against Saul.
And evil has not found in thee all thy days: Yet a man is risen to pursue
thee, and to seek thy soul. Who was that? Saul; But the soul of my Lord
shall be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy GOD, and the soul of
thine enemies, them shall He sling out as out of the midst of a sling. She was
no Prophetess, but it was just as she said. In the last place, hear what
Amasai says, for he spoke by the Spirit; Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, who
was chief of the Captains, and he said, Thine are we David, and on thy side,
thou Son of Jesse, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers, for thy
GOD helps thee. Then David received them, and made them Captains of the
band, David might receive those helpers, and employ them, for they came unto
him with a blessing from GODS Mouth, and with a Warrant from His Hand. And so
the sacred Scripture has cleared David's Militia to be loyal and lawful.

The same Oracle says as much, and more in the justification of our Militia,
raised for the Defense of our Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity: The
Malignant Party will interrupt me here; they and they only are a WALL to the
King, a Defense to the Kingdom by night and day 1 Samuel 25. 19.
So they say, and you may believe them. Now what shall I say? That our Militia
(I call it ours, because our Laws, Liberties, Lives, the life of our lives,
Religion and all, are concerned in it) is raised for the offense of the
Kingdom, to open the doors and frontiers thereof, that the Beasts of prey may
enter-in thereby; to make the Nation the portion of Foxes. I may say so if I
will, but no sober man will think me sober for saying so; Therefore I will
speake-out my words, That the sacred Scripture says as much, and much more in
justification of our Militia, raised for the fortifying the Kingdom (the King
also, for what is good for the one; is good for the other: As what is good for
the Bee-hive is also good for the Be) That it may be a WALL about the Kingdom
indeed by night and day; for the safe-guarding of All we count good there, his
Majesty's Person, Crown, and Dignities; our Laws and Liberties, and the life
of all, our Religion; This great Business is managed according to the clear
mind and will of GOD, that His Glory, and the Glory of the Land, should be
maintained with all that we count dearest unto us, our dearest blood, in
resisting those, who do oppose that Glory, and would spoil us of so
unesteemable a jewel; It is pure obedience in this case, and for those in
Authority, to bring, forth the Sword, and Spear, so to stop the way against
such a spurious company; A Malignant generation, a viperous brood, such evil
doers, bloody Edomites, who say now (and do as they say) as their Fathers
before them in the day of Jerusalem, raze it, Psalm. 37. 7.
raze it even to the foundation thereof, which may awaken the Nation, and
stir them up to defend themselves, and avenge themselves of such Adversaries.
But I forbear, supposing the Readers judgment (if he is not willingly
ignorant) cleared in this matter, by those many clear Treatises in every man's
hand, which do fully state the business, and make full answer to the cavils
against it. I goe-on now where I left; I have cleared the justice of David's
Militia; now it is objected, The justice of ours is not so clear.

Object.

What is all this to justify the Militia now on foot? For first, David did
this in a quiet way, shifting from place to place, like an hunted Partridge, to
shelter and defend himself, and no more: David was offended, but he gave no
offense at all. It is granted also, That there came-up to David day by day, out
of all the Tribes, until he had a great Host, like the Host of GOD 2 Chro.
12. 2^.
and yet we read not of any thing this Host did for David's defense: or of any
thing, that Saul did against David.

Answ. To answer the last first, It is clear in the Chapter, That, to the 23.
verse, those are numbered, who came-up to David, to defend and safeguard him,
against the malicious attempts of Saul and his bloody servants, who sought by
force and fraud, to take away his life. Past all question, that was the end,
and tendency in coming to David in Troops; and not to pick Cockleshels, as, I
read a great Host was commanded to do, to show, I think, the authority and
force of their Generals command: They came for the purpose aforesaid, there is
no doubt of that; And yet the Scripture is silent in what they did for David:
very little sure, but standing-on his side, and making such an appearance for
him, it must needs strike some terror into his Adversaries; It is more then
probable also, That Saul at this time, observed the Philistines gathering
strength again, and they were Enemies indeed, which might take him-off from
pursuing David: for sure this appearance, on David's side, was near the time of
Saul's death, and David's coming to the Throne.

But this I would have noted in our passage here, That, as we read not here of
any deliverance, that God wrought for David by this great Host: So shall we
never read, that God wrought any great deliverance for His Church by great
Hoasts at any time: No? What say you to the Year 88? I say it is our
weakness, I might say our wickedness, to give the glory of that deliverance,
as we do, to our great Host; The LORD fought against that Sisera, as
wonderfully then, as, in ancient days, He did, when the Stars in their
courses fought against him Judge. 5. 20.
. And so He scattered, not the ships only, but the bones of them that encamped
against us. The Lord put an hook into the nose of that insolent Adversary, as
once He did into the nose of him (so like a Beast) and turned him back not by
the way 2 Kin. 19 28.
, which he came forth; but so, that he, who came out against His Church one
way, did fly before Her seven ways Deuteronomy. 28. 7.
. Thus the LORD did, that He might be magnified and have all the glory. I might
be large here and to excellent purpose, but then, I should digress from the
business in hand; only let me say this, That GOD wrought then for David, when
David was alone, skipping from this place unto that, now from this hole into
another, when Saul would search him out throughout all the Thousands of Judah:
Then the LORD wrought gloriously for David, and then David could see the
Bare-ARME of the LORD in his deliverance, which he not seen if the LORD had
done it by his great Host. This is n GOD usually hangs the greatest weights
upon the smallest wyars: He does the greatest works, both in the way of mercies
and of judgments, by the silliest and weakest executioners.
spoken not to take us off from making provisions, and taking such helps, That
GOD sends-in unto us: But that we put no confidence there; nor give glory
thereunto; which, because we are apt to do, therefore the LORD works no great
matters by His great Hoasts, unless they be Hoasts of Froggs, Liee and Flies:
By these contemptible things, the LORD has confounded the Adversary, because
the Adversary, and His people much more, must say, The finger of GOD is here *.
It pleases the LORD to work the greatest things by the weakest instruments,
That man may say, the Arm of the LORD was made bare here, His hand brought
these mighty things to pass. So much to that part of the objection; The other
is;

Object. That David passed-on in a quiet way, made no noise at all: nor made he
a war offensive, unless against the Philistines, the enemies of GOD.

Answ. Briefly, to the last first; It was not possible that David should defend
himself against Saul, and not offend him, as in the case of Keilah, had not
the inhabitants there been treacherous: we read not that they came to a set
battle, therefore there could be no offense, and therefore little noise indeed;

Secondly, As little as might be, as he will do, that shifts for his life; his
work was to save one, and then he saved all, and that he might do, and not
make much a do, or much stir in the Land. Here now a whole Kingdom, All
that is dear or near unto us in it, whether Persons or Things are to be
saved, defended, rescued, delivered.

This will be a hot and sharp contention sure, for it is to make a Kingdom
Honorable, the head of Kingdoms, now set low because of the abominations
there; It is a contention for the Faith, and not against flesh and blood only,
but against principalities and powers, against the Ephesians. 6. 12.
Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places. The wicked there had turned the Kingdom quite from GOD; now it must be
turned again, and, as was said of Paul's preaching, upside down with it is face
toward GOD again. It must needs follow, that we shall be full of stirs, a
tumultuous people now, that the wel-posturing a Kingdom, this Reforming Work
in hand; for (I allude to that place) Hell from beneath Esa. 14. 9.
is moved to meet this work: It stirs up the dead against it, even all the
chief of the Earth: It will raise up from their Thrones, all the Kings of the
Nations. It was ever so, it must be so now, now that Jerusalems wall, the
breaches there are making-up, specially after such Ruins there; it must needs
make the Nations angry, so grievous it is to the Head the Pope: To the Tail,
the Prophets, that teach lies: To the brutish People, and to the King of the
bottomless pit. But it is the surest and clearest sign, that the work is of
GOD, To promote His Glory, which is so opposed by all the Devils in hell, and
his servants on earth. This is enough to assure us, we must look to hear a
voice of noise from the City now, and the like from the Countries: For now the
work is not to save one Man, no nor one Kingdom, but three Kingdoms, To
posture them against their Adversaries, and to set them with their face toward
GOD.

Object. Then here is like to be a confused noise, and garments rolled in blood.

Answ. Yes, for it is the battle of the Warrior; besides, the Land has been
defiled with blood, and it cannot be cleansed, but by the blood of them that
shed it. We shall never r^ade, That a Kingdom was established before the
wicked were taken away. Therefore David begins there, as we shall see anon, and
gives his son Solomon the like charge too, that he suffer not the Murderer to
live, nor the vile person neither, he must turn the wheel over the wicked:
And thou will do it, says he, for thou art a wise-mans, and thou look thy
Throne should be established in righteousness. c 1 King. 2 9.


2. As the Nations are angry; so the LORD is angry too, His Sword shall be
filled with blood, as we read it was by His own command, and at that very
time, when the enemy thought to have power over His people Est. 9. 1. and 15.
16.
. Surely the LORD has a Sacrifice now in these Kingdoms, as in Bozrah; and a
great slaughter, as in the Land of Idumea, For it is the day of the LORDS
vengeance, and the year of Recompenses for the controversy of Esa. 34.
Zion.

Object. But the sword knows no difference betwixt the Righteous and the
wicked; it may be bathed in the blood of the Righteous too.

Answ. True, and yet there shall be a great difference, for it is the LORDS
sword in whose hand soever it be, and He will make a difference; and the will
of the LORD be done. If now be the time when His WITNESSES must be slain, the
will of the Lord be done. His Antipasses cannot be discouraged in standing to
their Testimony; for what ever indignities shall be done unto their bodies,
though in the openest place of the great City; what ever insultation over them,
yet they cannot be discouraged, for it shall be done against them in that
place, where our LORD was crucified; there is a strong consolation See Cure of
Fear, p. 56. etc.
. g Revel. 11. 8.


I will recollect what has been said and conclude; Our MILITIA is raised for
the Defense of King and Kingdom, of all that is dear and precious to us
there; therefore in the justice of it, it exceeds all Paralels, and is
according to the Mind and Will of GOD: His Host sentin unto us for the saving
of His Own Kingdom. What works He may do by it He knows, we know not;
His manner is not to work great matters by great Hosts of men: He has broken
the Ship to pieces, yet brought the passengers safe to Land Act. 27.
; He may confound all our confidences, and yet do the work for the
magnifying His Own Name, in creating ways and means for Deliverance; making
the unfaithfullnesse in man, To advance His faithfulness Gods power is
magnified by man's weakness; His wisdom by man's folly; His truth and faithfulness
by man's treachery and falsehood, Chr.
: And Man's improvidences, To serve His Providence. And this we are sure of
also, That the Host of GOD never miscarried; if they have turned their back
upon their enemies, as sometimes they have done, it is to make them set their
faces more steadfastly Heavenward ever after. If the Adversary and Enemy puts
them once to the worst, they take great advantage by it, for they are made the
better all the days of their warfare. Let us do our Duty, that is our work,
opening our Mouths wide, and our hearts and our purses: And let the LORD alone
with His work, He will work like Himself for the good of His Church in a
good time, His own time. His people would not have things done better or
sooner then their GOD pleases to do them: For the Time when He does it is
best of all: And there they rest and stay themselves: For His words touching
this Matter also, Shall be fullfilled in THEIR SEASON Luk* 1. 20.
. Now we passe-on to The ACTS of David.

THE ACTS OF DAVID.
CHAP. I.
David is delivered out of the straits, and enlarged. Before he sat down in
his Throne, he does Justice, shedding the blood of the Murderer. He sets his
heart and hope in GOD; therefore he had dominion over the mighty. His care is
about the Arc; GOD cares for him: He does his duty, that is man's work; GOD
safeguards him; makes provision for him; that is GODS work. There Is a breach
made upon him, which he makes up by Repentance, and is made better by it. He
does Judgment and Justice, charge his son Solomon so to do: Directs
him the way to make Himself and People prosperous; He dies.

GODS Servant, David, is destitute of an harbor* GOD provides for him a
Kingdom. Now his strait was greatest, his Deliverance was nearest; he is set
on the Throne presently after he thought himself on the dunghill at the
lowest. David knew his head was long before anointed, yet he will not stir
till he consults with the Lord, resolving to do nothing, without a word from
His mouth, and, having that, he orders his Militia, pursues his enemies, and
overtakes them: redeemed all the enemy had taken from him, returned to Ziglag
with the spoils of them, 1 Samuel 30. 7*
that spoiled him; Devides the prey into equal portions; and then a few hours
after, he hears of his Crown, which he might have received from an unhollowed
hand, before that time, even from the hand of an Amalekite; but David had 2 Samuel 1. 7, 8, 9 10.
good experience of GODS faithfulness; He could possess his soul in
patience, he would not now make haste, for he is going to his Throne. A man had
need walk softly, that is going thither, and be very circumspect, that is
laying his hand upon a Crown; for of all ornaments, he must be careful how
meetly the Crown is set upon his head: As it is set on at the first, so it
stands ever after, either firm and steady; or, like a tottering wall and
broken fence. David is very wise and exemplary at this point; for, he that was
a Subject but now, and in a very low estate, begins to be lifted-up on high, he
is entering upon his Government Great caution, providence and circumspection is
to be used at our entrance upon an office: so also about our first actions
there.
; now he must look, with all his eyes, how he begins, and not so much how he
Times his beginning, (though that be a great point of wisdom) but with what
discretion he enters the government, and sits down in his Throne. We will
observe now with what circumspection he lays hand on a Crown: How he ponders
his steps, now he is entering the Throne. Thus it was;

There comes a man to him out of the Camp from Saul, like a mourner, but with
joyful news in his mouth (he thought) for though he must tell David, That the
people of Israel were many of them fled, and many fallen; and many dead, and
Jonathan dead also: yet this would make amends for all, and comfort David, even
over the death of Jonathan; and Saul is dead also 2 Samuel 1. 4.
: Thus the wicked man museth as he uses; and judges of David's heart by his
own; That David will not think of Jonathan in the day he hears of Saul's
death: and quite forget the affliction of Israel (for that is the manner of
men) now he hears of a Kingdom: and will kiss that man's hand (though an
Amalekite) which tenders him a Crown. We read on,

David questions the man, and the man is as ready in his answer, assuring David
concerning the truth of the whole matter; but cleares this, which he thought
would be most welcome, and sweeten all the bitterness in Isreal's slaughter,
and Jonathans death, That Saul is dead also; I am sure of that says he, very
sure, for I my self stood upon him and slew him; And, because I would be yet
surer, I have, (like Soldiers) pillaged ver. 10.
him too, I have taken the Crown from his head, and the Bracelet from his
Arm, and have brought them hither unto my Lord: So he has tendered David a
Crown, expecting a reward; he shall have it anon.

This sounds very ill in David's ear; he is not glad to hear his Enemy was
fallen; No, though he stood betwixt him and a Crown: David does, as a man,
that cannot see matter of joy, no not in being set-up, and chief in the
Kingdom, When Israel is set under: Israel mournes, he mournes also; and as the
Master, so all the Servants do, likewise all the men that were with him ver. 11.
.

David questions the man yet farther, whence and what he was? He tells him, That
he is the son of a stranger, an Amalekite ver. 13.
. The very same; his actions told David as much before; he shall have the
reward of an Amalekite; he destroyed Saul (his own confession was so) he was
not afraid to stretch his hand against the LORDS anointed; The hand of Justice
shall be now stretched out against him (since it was not stretched out before,
when GOD commanded 1 Samuel 15. 3.
) to cut him off from the Earth. The Crown of an Israelite is tendered by the
hand of an Amalekite unto David; he looked upon it with disdain; and his head
shall be taken from his shoulders, because he was so bold to take an
Israelites* Crown into his hands.

It was a custom (it may be it continues still) That at solemn times, when
the Crown is setting upon the head, Prisoners are loosed; the Jews had such a
custom on the day of their Feast Mat 7. 15.
; They had it by tradition, and took-it-up, as they did other things, upon
trust: but they had it not from David; he slew that notable Murderer at that
solemn time.

I heard a great man say, that this great work now in hand, The well* Posturing
the Kingdom, could not be prosperous. Why not prosperous? Because the very
first step into it was in blood, he spoke feelingly that spoke thus; But, the
more likely to prosper will every wiseman say; If there had bin more
bloodshed, it had prospered the more, even so much, as that the Church might
have washed her feet in the blood of her Enemies. But we must leave the issue
of these things in GODS hands. We have observed how David enters into his
Throne; we have found his first Act very exemplary for Judgment and Justice,
though very cross to the custom of after times; He is stepping-up now to the
Pinnacle of honor; That he may stand sure on that tottering place, his first
step unto it shall be exemplary for Justice to all Kings and Princes after him;
his first step shall be underlayed with Justice and paved with Judgment.

We go-on, observing all along, how direct a way David goes in still (he is
going to a Throne) to establish his Throne for ever, and make his Crown
flourish upon his head; He enquires of the Lord (He will not move a stepp but
by direction 2 Samuel 2. 1.
from GODS mouth) touching the place of his annoynting. And God so orders all
for him, that all might know he was designed, preserved and called to the
Kingdom (as miraculously as Queen Elizabeth was) by GOD Himself. And yet he
finds opposites, as she did (The Kingdom of David shall have all the
opposition, the Devils in hell, and all their Angels on Earth, can make against
it:) but David prevails over them all; he waxed stronger and stronger 2 Samuel
3. 1.
, and the house of Saul weaker and weaker.

David's Militia was so strong now (for God was with him) That he took courage,
and marched to Jerusalem, laid siege to 2 Samuel 5. 6.
that strong-hold, which held out all the days of the Judges: The Adversary
thought it impossible, that David could take it, and that the lame and blind
would defend it: and so they jeered at him; not considering, that they had to
do with more then a Man. David comes against his Adversary in the strength of
God: He looked not how strong the City was, for then he had been discouraged,
he considered how strong God is, and the more easily prevails against his
Adversaries, the more ready they were to mock and jeere at him: Nevertheless
David ver. 7.
took the strong-hold of Sion, the same is the City of David. And David went
on and grew great; How so? The Lord God of Hosts was with him h. Then what
could stand against him ^ His enemies could not stand before him, for the LORD
brake forth upon them like the breach of waters ver. 20.
. GOD was with him, no matter how many were against him: The God of all the
Hosts in Heaven, Earth and Sea, they shall all fall and be destroyed; and the
gods, they in their hasty flight left behind them, David and his men burnt in
the fire, that is notable. ver. 21.
Note this also, GODS being with, or departing from a people, is the cause of
all the real comforts and sorrows in the world: It is the cause also of our
standing or falling before our enemies. We read on,

Now David's care was about the Arke^; It was well his 2 Samuel 6.
care was so well placed. Be careful for that, and be careful for nothing;
(that is) let your care be about the service of GOD, that it be according to
rule, after His Will, Whose service it is, and then you may cast all your care
upon GOD, for He cares for you 1 Pet. 5* 7.
. Let a man seek what he should seek in the first place; and let GOD alone
with all the rest; Though they be many things, yet all shall be added Mat. 6.
33. (...).
unto him; (i. e.) they shall be cast in to him without his care, as an
advantage or surplesage to his reckoning. Let a man do his duty, which is his
work; and let GOD alone to safeguard him, to make provision for him, for that
is GODS work. Again;

David's chief and first care was about the Arc. It was most fit it should be
so. Indeed a good Prince must needs bethink himself first, how to advance
Religion; what should the Deputies of GOD rather do, then honor Him, Who has
honored them, and Whom they represent?

But they should have looked to the manner, and what Law 2 Samuel 6.
the LORD had set-downe, for the removing and carrying ver. 3.
of the Arc: The Testimony of Gods presence is in their hands, and they handle
it rather as Philistines then as Israelites: The Arc should have been carried
on the Priests Numb. 7. 9.
shoulders, they set it upon a Cart. See how ready Israel is to follow an
example against the Rule, and to do as the Philistines did; so did they, and a
way they went merrily, a very little way, for quickly, (See the Tides and
changes in worldly things!) The Lord turned their dancing into mourning; He
made a Breach upon them, and so He taught the generations following, this great
lesson; That when we cannot do any thing in the degrees that GOD requires,
yet we must learn to do all things in the FORM that He requires: David has
learnt his lesson Ps. 2. 11.
now, settles to the work again, does all according to the Law, Decently and
in Order, he serves the LORD with fear, and rejoices with trembling; he will
account of worldly joy and contentment as it is, a thing very momentany, of
very small continuance; he will never trust prosperity again, there may be a
change within an hour, nor will he let himself loose to a fearlesse joy.

1. The breach is made upon Vzzah, but it strikes David also to the heart, and
see how softly he walks, and humbly before his GOD, (His judgments were before
his eyes) he was afraid of the LORD that day, and said, how shall the Ark of the LORD come unto me? 2 Samuel* 6. 9.


Thus a good man learnes much by affliction, and is made better by another
strokes, for the hand of GOD, that was sore upon Vzzah, pointed to David's sin
also, and the LORD might have been as quick with him, being the chief person
there, and a Leader to His people: So David enquires wisely into the matter and
cause of this the LORDS displeasure, and he finds it out and expresses it; Our
GOD made a breach upon us, for that we sought Him not after the DVEORDER 1 Chr.
15. 13.
. See how that breach made-up Prince, People and Levites, and made them all
whole again; So the Priests and Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the
Ark of the LORD GOD of Israel; SANCTIFIED THEMSELVES ver. 14.
, that is to be noted; Take we heed of an inconsiderate rushing into, or upon
Gods service, such, especially, as concern the Arc: A man must be prepared
and sanctified for such works. 2. Look to thy feet (thy heart, thy affections)
when thou art going into* Gods house: He is in Heaven, thou art on Earth. The
Admonition is seasonable; when our foot is entering upon Gods work, when we
would do a work for God, Ioshuahs direction is as useful as it was to the
Priests, when they should see God working for them; Sanctify your selves,
Josh. 3. 5.
for to morrow the LORD will do wonders among you: So, Sanctify your selves
(for to morrow you are to work for GOD;) as you expect He should work
gloriously for you.

3. This is of high concernment for us simple ones, who are all for the work,
not regarding the manner; It is spoken to us in a figure. We also are all for
the matter and substance of the work; if our prayers be said (as we say) If we
have sat out the hour, and heard the Sermon; and, when that is done, have
received the Sacrament, that is enough, the work is done. Assuredly this is as
if we should think; if the Arc be carried, and brought to his place of rest;
no matter for the manner how, though it be put in a Cart, and the Oxen drew it.
We must look to the manner of our performance, or else look for a breach upon
us: Sooner or latter God will make it, for He is the same, He was in David's
days Sieut Deus est semper, sic justitia Dei semper; sicut omnipotentia Domini
indeficiens, sic censura inde mistabilis: sicut Deus jure perpetuus, sic
justitia perseverans Sal. de. Gub l. x p. 60. 1 Cro. 15 3.
; and then thus it was; Our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought Him
not after the due order. Then we must remember, how they ordered themselves
after this breach was made upon them, and as they did, so should we do in our
services, before God make a breach upon us (Because you did it not at THE FIRST
1 Chr. 15. 13 ver. 14.
, therefore the breach was made upon them at the last) So the Priests and the
Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the Ark of the LORD GOD of Israel.
So must we do according to the charge in Ioshuab, and this here, Sanctify
your selves both you and your Brethren, specially ye that are the chief of the
Fathers, that ye may do the service of the LORD after the DVEORDER.

David has given the charge, and he leads the way* the breach upon Vzzah is
still in his eye, not to dishearten him from removing the Arc, for he saw,
that a blessing did accompany the Arc, and was visible there, where the Arc
was: but to make him wary and very circumspect in his walk now about to remove
the Arc. And see with what deliberation he does it, still eying the Rule, and
his way, and the breach upon Vzzah, so having gone six paces, he sacrifices.
Then he goes-on rejoicing carrying the Arc into his own City. His wife sees
no beauty in her husbands zeal and holy mirth but folly rather and madness.
David cannot endure a reproach from her, whom he loved, cast upon his zeal for
God, he checks her very sharply: And because her mouth was so open against her
husband in the cause of his God, The Lord shut-up her womb, she should bear
no child unto him, Whom she had contemned, She had no child to the day of her
death: a great reproach that in those days, among men Lu 1. 25.
. But David rises the higher by his outward abasement: And that, which in his
wives eye would make him vile and contemptible, should 2 Samuel 7. 3.
make him honorable and gracious; for what he did was before the Lord, and His
abasement before Him, is his way to Glory, therefore he is resolved to be yet
more vile then so, and base in his own eyes.

Thus K. David, and his people have done now, touching the Arc, it is brought
in a due order to it is place. But David takes not his eye from off it, his care
is still about the Ark, That, now the Lord had given him rest, the Ark might
rest too, and in a fitting house which he will build for it. No, but he shall
not; and yet the Lord takes it very kindly from him, That it is the purpose of
his heart to build GOD an house 1 Kin. 8. 18.
; Go and tell him, says the LORD, I will build thee an house 1 Samuel 7. 11. 1
Chro. 17. 10. 1 Chronicles. ^9. 3.
, that I will: will thou lay out thy self for Me and My House, I will build
thee an house, and it shall be a sure house, It shall continue for ever; Thou
shall be no looser for the good will thou intendest to Me, or the good service
thou will do for Me, I will build thee an house, and it shall be established
for ever. Reade-on and observe how comfortably the Lord speaks to David, and
how sweetly David answers the Lord: I observe only this, That

The only way David could take to establish his house for ever, was to take
care of Gods House on Earth The reason why our houses, many of them melt away,
as if they were made of Snow, is, because we mind not Gods house, and His
service there.
: So he did, and 2 Samuel 8. 14, 15
see what provision he made for that building, because he had set his AFFECTION
thereupon; and see how he prospered? What exploits his MILITIA wrought! No
Enemies could stand before him, for the LORD preserved David wh^thersoever he
went. The Enemy had no power to stand before David, for GOD was with him. We
see then where our strength lies, not in multitudes of Charets, and troops of
Horsemen: Though our Arm be weak, and our Adversary strong, yet his gods are
but fuel for the fire; GOD is with us, and He is strong. We reade-on, That
David grew mighty, got himself a name; for it follows, presently after, David
reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and justice to all ver. 13.
his People b. JUDGMENT and JUSTICE! These ver. 15.
are like the two Pillars JACHIN and BOAZ 1 King. 7. 21.
, the upholders of the Throne. David executed judgment and justice: To whom? To
ALL the People; to the poor and needy, to the Dumb Pro. 31. 8.
man, that cannot open his mouth for himself, or his purse to bribe another to
speak for him; whom the vile Judge, as an evening Wolf, has appointed to
destruction: David will open his mouth for this man, for this Dumb man, for he
will do judgment and justice to ALL the People. To his Courtiers also; if
they be proud and stout, David would not suffer Ps. 101. 5.
them; and if they be privy SLANDERERS, David will CVT THEM OFF; He would turn
the WHEEL over the wicked: Hear him what he says, for never any King did
speak and practice better.

I will EARLY (mark that, he would begin betimes. Judgment and Justice should
be his first work, as we heard) I will EARLY destroy all the wicked of the
Land: that I may CVT OFF ALL wicked doers from the City of the LORD.

This is to execute judgment and justice, to do it EARLY, and to have a
special eye to the Slanderer; and to him that has an high look, and a proud
heart; to the deceitful person also, and to him that tells lies. These
should be rooted-out, they are the Pests and Plagues of the Court, and of the
Kingdom.

But upon whom were David's Eyes fastened for good? Upon the faithful in the
Land, they should dwell with him; and they, that walked in a perfect way, they
should be his Servants. An infallible sign of a good man this; Mark you, do
you see a man setting his Eyes upon (i. e. does he favor, does he take by the
hand) Doegs wicked bloody men? He is a Saul. Does, he set his eyes upon the
faithful in the Land? He is a David. Signs and tokens may deceive you, but
this never failed; does he delight in wicked men? Do they dwell with him? Do
such vile persons serve him? Will he not suffer them to be cut off, he is a
wicked man, for his eyes are upon the wicked to favor them; he will not
execute Judgment and Justice. Has he a respect, does he heartity favor (i. e.
does he take by the hand) good men? Does he delight in such? Is his heart
toward them? he is a good man.

The government is upon David's shoulders, he will do Judgment and Justice, for
he is set upon GODS THRONE, (as 2 Chro. 9. 8.
Solomon was) to be King for THE LORD HIS GOD (a mighty consideration) Therefore
made He thee King over them. What them? over Israel. Why King over Israel? To
do Judgment and Justice to ALL the people.

But David did some injustice too in the matter of Vrijah the Hittite. 1 Kin.
15. 5. 2. Sam. 12. 9.


True, he did indeed, He killed Urijah with the Sword, and so he called for the
Sword home to his house; It came, and never departed from his house, according
to the word of the Lord: ver. 10.
And so we may reade-on and of nothing but the Sword, the Sword, now in the
brothers hand, and therewith he slew his brother: Now again in the sons
hand, the beloved Son, and he would dethrone his Father. It is very notable,
but it belongs not to this place. We may look upon the Sword in David's house,
so as to keep it from our own: And think of the Saints falls, so as to make us
look to our standing; we may ponder their stepps and their failings in the
way, so as that we admire free Grace. We may speak of their falls too, when
there is just reason so to do, but with trembling; pointing at them, as
SEA-MARKS to bid us beware, that no man presume to come thither; though one man
plunged in there, and yet escaped, many have fallen-in and were drowned.

David did transgress in the matter of Vrijah; but David watered his bed with
his tears. David did according to the desire and pleasure of his Eyes; but he
was overwhelmed with sorrow. We have our direction at this point in these
words; He that once persecuted the faith, now preaches the Faith, which he
once destroyed. What then? And they glorified God in me Gal. 1. 23, 24
. There is a direction for us, when we think or speak of the godly man's falls.
But indeed, in this place, we are to say nothing touching this matter, unles we
will go against the rule, and the practice of all the godly, even of God
Himself. Sarah had her infirmities, so had Moses too, though the meekest man
upon Earth; their FAITH is only mentioned and no more. David himself might
have said much in the dispraise of Saul; he does not so, he fills his mouth
with Saul's commendation. 1 Samuel 1. 17.
Job did speak when time was, unadvisedly with his lips, as an impatient man.
See in his third Chapter, he breaks out a little. A little! You will say, he
breaks-out a great deal, he curses the day and the night both. True, and yet
I said well enough, he breaks out a little; a little in reference to those
breakings, that were upon him, under which he was pressed down, and lay
flat, then behold a little impatiency; I may well say so: I or indeed St.
James mentions none at all, he tells Iam. 5. 11.
us only this, You have heard of the patience of Job, as if we never heard of
his impatiency. Matthew the Publican, says he of himself, but no Evangelist
besides himself. Of Paul before. Luther another Paul, but of a more hot temper
(the fitter for those cold days, and the work he was upon) Epist.
contended, upon a time, with Mr. Calvin, somewhat too eagerly. Well, said
Calvin, though Luther in his haste, overtaken with infirmity, should call me
Devil. yet I must call him, as I do account of him, An excellent Servant of
the LORD. And so we see what the servants of the LORD have done; and yet we
are shown a more excellent way. For see what the LORD does in this case, My
Servant David, a man after My Own Heart, who did that which was right in 1
Kin. 15. 5.
Mine Eyes, and turned not aside from any thing, that I commanded him all the
days of his life, save only in one thing, And that I have passed over, as if
it had never bin done; And shall we recall it? Surely the LORD speaks much for
our comfort, Ier. 31. 34.
and for our instruction too, I WILL FOR GIVE their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin NO MORE. Shall we then remember it? We heard what David
did, and from GODS own mouth; And when we read what he did in the matter of
Urijah, we must do as St. Paul says the Jews Gal. 1. 24.
did, when they heard what Paul had bin, And they glorified God in me.

And now we will draw toward the shutting-up of David's day, for we must hear
of him, as of the longest lived man, that ever was, AND HE DIED. We will
passe-on in his story, and make a stand there, where David found himself even
in the hands of death. Then we read with what affection he speaks to the
people; even as one that had set his affection upon them, as he had done upon
the House of GOD: He was now leaving them and that house, which must know him
no more; and now, mark with what affection he speaks; Hear me my brethren
and my people 1 Chr. 28. 2.
. Then read what he 1 Chr. 29. 3.
spoke, and what his charge was to the people, that they and their souls might
prosper ver. 8, 6.
; then how he blesses Solomon, and charge him, but that requires double
observation; he charge him to keep the charge of the Lord, for that was the
way to prosper in all that he did, and whithersoever he turned himself ^ Kin.
2. 2.
. We will set a Mark upon the charge to his son; And thou Solomon my son,
KNOW thou the GOD of thy Father. Is that all? No, there is much more, which 1
Chr. 28. 9.
commands our observation, but upon this we set the mark, it is the greatest
part of that charge, and in observance of it, has the greatest recompense of
Reward. If a dying Father can bequeath it to his children, he leaves them a
richer legacy then is imaginable. And thou, my Son, KNOW the GOD of thy
Father; He is JEHOVAH, has His Being in Himself; gives Being to All; The Great
and Terrible GOD, The gracious and merciful GOD; That gives Being to all His
Promises, to all His Threatenings. NOT ONE THING HAS FAILED Josh 23. 14. 1
King. 8. 56. Exodus 15 11. Genesis 48. 15, 16
. Know this God, none like Him, Glorious in holiness, fearful in Praises,
doing wonders. The GOD of thy Father, before Whom thy Father walked; The GOD
Who ^ed him all his life long, and redeemed him from all evil; My son, KNOW
this God. They that so KNOW Him, will love Him, will fear Him, will serve Him
with a perfect heart, and a willing mind They that love Him not, nor fear Him,
nor serve Him, they KNOW Him not; so we read still; they KNEW not the LORD:
We have set the mark thereon, as the chief part of the charge; and it must be
remembered first and last.

The second part is, touching Gods House, whereunto the Father had set his
Affection, and made answerable provision; his son now must put to his hand
and his heart to make an House like GODS House, exceeding MAGNIFICALL,
WONDERFVLL GREAT, for so is the God, to Whose Name it 1 Chro. 22. 5.
must be built. The remaining part of the charge is, touching the 2 Chro. 2. 5.
execution of Judgment and Justice; and there we must set a mark too: how
David charge Solomon touching cruel Joab 1 King. 2. 5.
, and malicious Shimei ver. 8.
, both these must be removed upon the first opportunity, for Solomon must
learn by-times, what he must never forget; That the dross must be remooved
from the silver; The wicked must be taken from the King, else his face cannot
shine, nor can his Throne be established in Righteousness Prove. 25. 5.
. Then David, having seen his son sitting upon his Throne, and charged him
concerning His Duty to GOD and to His House, that he must build it exceeding
MAGNIFICALL, as we heard; and having blessed the LORD, and 1 Chro. 22. 5. 1
Chro. 29. 10. 1 King. 1. 48.
his son, and the people, and commanded them to bless the LORD 1 Chronicles. 29.
20.
, DIED in a good old age, with Blessings and Supplications in his mouth, full
of Days, Riches, and Honor. ver. 28.


THE ACTS OF SOLOMON.
CHAP. II.
Solomon his chief desire, and how GOD answered the same, making him a most
glorious King; what ecclipsed all his glory, and took away his heart; The Glory
of the world had daz'led his eye, and his Queens Idol had put it quite out.
The Lord cleared his eyesight again, so that he could see into things, and
account all Nothing.

SOLOMON his son, the Beloved of the Lord, blessed with the blessings of the
LORD, with the blessings of the Father, and of the People 1 King. 1. 47.
, reigned in his stead. His Father said to the son, Thou art a wiseman 1 King.
2. 9.
; Solomon said to God, Thou have made Thy Servant King, and I am but a LITTLE
CHILD 1 King. 3. 7.
, and yet I must go out and in, before a great and wise people. All this was
true, and in a true sense of this LITTLENESS, and the peoples GREATNESS,
Solomon prayed for an understanding heart ver. 9.
. That desire pleased the LORD so well, that He granted it, made Solomon excel
therein all the wisemen on the Earth 1 King* 4* 30, 31.
. Ask the greatest thing; GOD will give the least without asking: He gave him
also therewith, that he desired not, both riches and honor: so as there was not
any like him all his days; nor in all these years after him 1 King. 3. 13.
. Then sat Solomon upon the Throne of David his Father (nay, upon the Throne
of GOD, to be King for the LORD 2 Chronicles. 9. 8.
) and his Kingdom was Established Greatly 1 King. ^. 12.
, for he was strengthened therein, and the LORD his GOD was with him and
magnified him EXCEEDINGLY 2 Chro. 1. 1.
.

Then we read of his magnificence; The Glory of his Court; The beauty of GODS
House; his Dedication; his Prayer there, and that is excellent.

Truly, I know not well what to say next, but Idols and their abominable
services, will darken all this glory; for thus it was; Solomon was the greatest
example of Wisdom, Riches and Honor, that ever was in the world: and the
strangest example of humane frailty, that ever we read* off, being so wise a
man. But what is man in his best estate, though the wisest and the strongest?
Not Substantive enough to stand of himself, nor wise enough to order his
steps. If the LORD, Who is our strength and our wisdom, withdraw His hand, we
fall, and possibly so low, that he, who was a mirror of wisdom even now,
becomes anon the mirror of folly. Hold me Lord, and I will hold Thee, said a
good woman, who saw how weak she was in her self, and how strong she might be
in her GOD* There man's strength lies. It is an high point of wisdom to know
all this: And that wicked and Idolatrous Counsels, specially from her, that
lies in the bosom, will weaken strength, and besot reason; and those are the
lessons we are to take hence. How the LORD met with him is remarkable also,
which I passe-over, touching only upon it anon.

Concerning his fall and recovery again, there is pregnant proof in sacred
Writings; and no matter what fools say, though they write books about it, no
wiser at the end, then at the beginning. True it is, though Solomon was really
so wise, so rich, so honorable, yet, when he A WOKE (for I allude to it) when
he came to himself, behold it WAS A DREAM 1 King. 3. 15.
, his wisdom, his riches, his worldly power, Behold! It is a dream, Vanity of
vanities all is vanity; so said he, who hastened to find satisfaction; who more
then he? Eccles. 2. 25.
he kept not from his eyes, what they desired, nor withheld his heart from any
joy; ver. 10.
yet so said Solomon the King: for what can the man say, that comes after the
King? Even that, which has bin already ver. 12.
said; Solomon said of All things under the Sun, they are vanity and
vexation; he could look through All, and discern a Nothingnesse at the
bottom. Surely this did argue, he had a spiritual eye, and that GOD had
instructed him to discretion. As GOD made all things, by His power, of Nothing;
so he, by wisdom from GOD, made Nothing of all things; Nothing in reference to
that one thing Necessary; or Nothing, in reference to Heaven, our putting
forward or backward in our race thither-ward, to our Crown. The conclusion is,
He, that sees all things to be Nothing, see's also GOD to be all things: He
that sees a Nothingnesse, in the creature, sees a fullness in GOD, an
All Sufficiency in Him. It is clear from Solomon's writings, That so Solomon
did, and that makes clearer proof to them that have questioned it (I think no
wiseman ever did) That Solomon's heart was turned from Idols to serve the
Living GOD.

We reade-on now, That we may learn to look the better to our standing by
Solomon's fall; and to avoid with all our care the snares that are in a
prosperous and full estate.

That little more, which concerns our present Theme, is this; Solomon was a
King of Peace, and enjoyed long peace, he and his people; Judah and Israel were
many as the sand, which is by the Sea in multitude, eating and drinking and
making merry 1 Kin. 4 20.
: An interrupted peace, never broken till Solomon broke Covenant with his GOD,
and then all breaks to pieces, but till then all was peace, Eating and drinking
and making merry. Here was a considering time for Solomon the wisest, and for
all his people. They were now in a Land, where Silver and gold was as plentuous
as stones 2 Chro. 1. 15:
: But that more precious commodity, BREAD, That they eat without scarceness
Deuteronomy. 8. 9.
; there was no lack of any thing, houses full, and wells full, vineyards full
and barnes full, a fulness of all good things. What is to be done now? It
should not be questioned, because the answer Deuteronomy. 6. 11. 12.
is near; But, because of our evil and forgetful hearts, we are still
remembered, as often as we meet with all this fulness; Beware Least thou
forget the LORD, That has done thus and thus for Thee, and has given thee all
this fulness. O remember and forget not to bless the LORD thy God for all
this good, which He has given thee. Beware now (mark what cautions are given
to a people that is full) That thou forget not the LORD Thy GOD, now when Deuteronomy.
8 10. 11, 12.
Thou have built goodly houses, now when thy herds and flocks are multiplied,
Thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is multiplied,
now look narrowly to it, else ver. 13, 14.
thy heart will be lifted-up, and thy spirit will be flat and down; Thou will
forget the LORD Thy GOD, Who gave thee all this fallnesse, and multiplied thee
so exceedingly, if thou art not now aware and look narrowly to thy self. A
man cannot easily beleve, how he can forget GOD, when he has so many
remembrances of Him still before his eyes, fields full, and Barnes full, and
house full and table full; yet now thou will forget God or never, Remember
Solomon. It will make us beware; the wisest man that ever was, yet, when all
good things were multiplied to him, his heart was lifted up, and his spirit
fell down flat, he forgate the Lord. Note, It is an hard thing (impossible
without special assistance) to keep the heart down and humble, when the
person is lifted-up with the fulness of all things; the hardest business
well to husband peace and plenty, for the good of the soul, that the soul may
prosper as the outward man does, an hard work it is; pray therefore, That we
may be filled with the fruits of Righteousness; Phil. 1. 11.
; that we may not be drunk with the world, wherein is excess, but be filled
with the Spirit, even with all the fulness of God: Then we shall beware and
not forget, then we shall bless Ephesians. 5. 18. 3. 19.
the Lord for all His fulness; then we shall well husband our rest and peace,
as the Churches before us, They had rest: What then? And were edified, and
walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were
multiplied. The digression is Act. 9. 31.
necessary, if it be a digression: And these considerations and cautions very
useful, when we are, as those people were, in those days, Eating and drinking
and making merry. There we breakoff. It follows;

No warrlike actions were performed by Solomon, nor memorable, excepting his
buildings, which were great, wonderful and very many a Chron. ^.
, with other works of magnificence, wrought for the glory of his own State,
not much inferior to that house he built to the honor of GOD in fewer years
by six, then he was building his own, which he was building 1 King 6. 38. Chap.
9. 1.
thirteen years, and the building the house of GOD but Seven; That was not
for his honor. But we must observe his prayer at the Dedication of Gods
House, for that is notable 1 Kin. 8. 2 Chr. 6.
. As for the works, though very MAGNIFICENT, yet they might be quickly
compassed by him, who could set down and count his cost, and quickly clear
all disbursements, That made SILVER and GOLD, as plenteous as stones, and had
Cedars in abundance 2 Chro. 1. 15. Chap. 9. 20
.

Touching his MILITIA, we read much in a little; He provided 2 Chro. 1. 14.
for the troubles of war, in the leisure of Peace: And, to maintain his peace,
he maintained a mighty MILITIA, for he had four thousand Stalls for Horses
and Charriots, and twelve thousand Horse men, whom he bestowed in the
Charriot*cities, and with himself at Jerusalem 2 Chr. 1. 14. 9. 25.
; and he reigned over all the Kings, from the River even to the Land of the
Philistines, and to the border of Egypt. ver. 26.


But it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his Wives turned away his
heart after other gods (the words 1 Kin. 11. 4.
are clear, as soon understood as read;) And the LORD ver. 9.
was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned away from the LORD GOD of
Israel, Who had appeared unto him TWICE, and had warned him touching that
Matter 2 Chro. 7. 17, 18, 19, 20.
. If the LORD graciously appear unto a man once, and he regard not; this will
kindle GODS wrath: But if he appear TWICE, and yet he will not beware, this
will make His wrath burn, for the more mercy, the more displeasure, if mercy
be despised. We reade-on, and how the LORD charged him touching that matter;
Solomon had a fair warning, much grace was shown unto him; GOD appeared to
him TWICE, and charged him as often; yet Solomon did contrary, he hearkened
what his ver. 10.
Wife said, not what GOD said; He kept not that, which c ver. 11.
the LORD commanded. Therefore his son should not keep his Kingdom entire
e. Surely, The LORD would rend it out of his sons hand. Howbeit not all, for
David's ver. 12.
sake. And yet Solomon himself should outlive his ver. 13.
Glory, he should see affliction, and feel it too from one Adversary, and then
another; For thus it was; When this Kings heart was divided betwixt strange
Wives, and as strange vanities; when he turned from the LORD, Who had appeared
to him TWICE, and so instructed him, touching the establishing his Throne: Then
the LORD stirred-up Adversaries, now one, and then another; The one did great
mischief f 1 Kin* 11. 9*
; and the other abhorred Israel ver. 25.
. Solomon should have abhorred Idols, those cursed and mischievous things; he
did not so, he clave to them in love, for his heart was turned after other gods
and goddesses: he did smart for this in this world; The Lord did stir-up two 1
Kin. 11. 4, 5*
Adversaries, the one did Solomon great mischief; the other served him, as he
should have served Idols, He abhorred Israel. To shut up Solomon's Story, we
have but this more: He reigned over Israel forty years. The Sun of his
glorious ver. 4^*
Day did set in a Cloud (that we may not admire persons, but free Grace) Then
it was night with him, went to bed, and slept with his Fathers. Rehoboam his
Son reigned in his stead. We have read his Story, his Sons follows.

THE ACTS OF ABIJAH.
CHAP. III.
Abijah, none of the best men, but a good Captain, and well able to posture
his Kingdom; He relied upon the LORD and overcame his enemies, destroys
Jeroboam utterly; In whom we see what end the Lord makes with Idolaters; Abijah
waxed mighty, but dies.

ABijah, Solomon's Grandchild, Son to Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 13.
begins his reign, and quickly ends it, he reigned but three years: he was
not much better then his Father, for he walked in all the sins of his Father
1 King. 15. 3.
: but he was a much wiser man. I register him amongst the good Kings, because
he ordered his Militia according to Rule; nor was he such a fool, as to humble
himself before stocks and stones, or think them gods, which were made with
hands, or put considence thereon: he was valiant also and stout-hearted, and
could looke-up to GOD, who gives spirit, courage and invention, when and where
he pleases. We reade-on in the Chapter, and his Acts there.

In the close of the former Chapter we read, That there were wars betwixt
Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. And in Chap. 12. 15.
this Chapter we find it intimated, That Jeroboam pursues the War against
Abijah, and, finding himself twice as strong, (for he set his battle in array
with eight hundred thousand men mighty in valor) sets upon Abijah by force and
fraud both, after the manner of an Idolater: Abijah setts his battle in array
against him, but before he fights, he speaks; and, That he may be heard,
craves audience, hear me thou Jeroboam and all ver. 4, 5.
Israel. What Abijahs sins were, the sacred Text tells us in general terms,
he walked in all the sins of his Father. What his words were we shall hear,
as full of wisdom and grace as any we shall read throughout the Chrouicles;
These are his words. Ought you not to know, that GOD has given the Kingdom over
Israel to David, and his seed by a covenant of Salt, firm and stable to him
for ever? You do now, in seeking to reverse this decree, rebel against GOD:
ye have indeed, ver. 6.
vain men as ye are, and children of Belial, strengthened ver. 7.
your selves against my Father Rehoboam the Son of Solomon; and he could not
withstand you, being a man, and no more, young and tender hearted: No hard
matter to prevail against a man, and such a man: but you must not think to
withstand ver. 8.
the Kingdom of the LORD in the hand of the Sons of David. You have
multitudes, twice as many as I have, but what are they against the LORD; You
have gods good store also, They are but such as Jeroboam made you for gods;
gods of man's making, will do their makers and their worshippers little service.
But wot you what! ye have cast away your strength, for you have cast-out the
Priests of the LORD, and the Levites too; and, instead of them, you have made
you Priests after the manner of the Nations of other Lands; and fit Priests
they are ver. 8, 9.
for such gods, all of Jeroboams making. Thus Abijah has mustered-up Jeroboams
Troops, his multitudes of men, of gods, and of Priests, like their gods. Then
he tells Jeroboam where his and Judahs strength is, But as for us, the LORD is
our GOD* and we have not forsaken Him (that was very comfortable;) and the
Priests, which minister unto the ver. 10, 11, 12.
LORD, are the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business, for
we keep the charge of the LORD our GOD; But ye have forsaken him; and, behold,
GOD Himself is with us for our Captain, and His Priests with sounding
Trumpets to cry alarm against you: O children of Israel fight you not against
the LORD GOD of your Fathers, for you shall not prosper.

Thus Abijah has declared to Jeroboam and all Israel the whole Counsel of God,
touching that matter, the Kingdom of Judah, the Stability of the same. But see
the treachery of Jeroboam and all Israel! While Abijah was thus wisely advising
Israel, Jeroboam was dealing treacherously with Judah, (that is the manner of
Idolaters) Jeroboam caused an abushment to come about behind Judah: so when
Judah looked back behold ver. 13.
Jeroboams Troops were there; and when they looked forward, the Troops were
there also, before and behind Abijah has dealt fully and clearly ev^n in the
sight of his enemies, in m^king known unto them the counsel of the LORD: but
he has lost time, which the Idolater has improved to the bringing of Judah into
a snare; whereby the Lord would tell Judah, That there is no treating with an
Idolater.
Truly Judah has Lost much by standing to parle, treat and debate matters with
Idolatrous Israel; while Abijah is opening to Israel the purpose and counsel
of God: Jeroboam is wholly careless of that, minds only how he may cross the
counsel of GOD, and has brought Judah into a snare; he has caused an
Ambushment to come about Judah before and behind: And now he makes no doubt,
but he shall reverse the purpose of GOD, (The great design and project of the
world, the very trade they drive) touching the Kingdom over Israel, given to
David by a covenant of Salt, an everlasting covenant. When Judah saw this they
cried unto the LORD. Then was Judahs time to cry, and Gods time to help, for
the battle was before and behind. Then Judah cried, and the Priests did their
office: Then it came to pass, that GOD smote Jeroboam, and all Israel before
Abijah and Judah: And read what a slaughter there was, there fell down slain
of Israel, five hundred thousand chosen men: Thus the children ver. 15, 16, 17,
18.
of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Israel
prevailed. How so? It follows, because they relied upon the LORD GOD of their
Fathers; Judah relied upon his GOD, JEHOVAH is my strength Esa 11. 2.
, there is the strength of Judah, and it never fails. Israel relied upon
multitudes of men, of Priests, and gods; all of man's making. It is the
conclusion we made before; An Idolatrous people, who make flesh their arm,
leane-upon gods, and Priests of Man's making, are a weak people; they have no
power to stand before Judah Host, while Judah relies upon the GOD of Hoasts.
Let Judah stay themselves thereon, on the Almighties Arm, and he shall
shatter. Idolatrous Israel to pieces; so did Abijah here, he pursued after
Jeroboam, and took his strong holds from him, neither did Jeroboam recover
strength again in the days of Abijah, And yet Jeroboam, such an Idolater, so
treacherous, (for while Abijah ver. 20.
was opening to him the counsel of GOD touching the stability of David's
Kingdom, he was contriving an ambushment against Judah) so treacherous, so
rebellious, but I said all before, such an Idolater, shall not escape so; he had
made gods for Israel, after the similitude of Calves, that eat hay; and
Priests for these gods, and he had dealt treacherously with Judah; GOD will be
avenged of him for all this, He will vindicate His Glory, The LORD will smite
Jeroboam also; He had smote him before, and all Israel with him, but then
Jeroboam made an escape; The Lord smites him now with a deadly stroke, he
shall make no more gods, nor Priests, after his order to offer sacrifice unto
Devils.

The Lord smote him and he died. The time when this destruction ver. 20.
came upon him is remarkable; Then the LORD smote him with a deadly stroke,
that he died, when Judah might say of him, as David said of his Adversaries,
They are lively and strong, and full of wiles, and are multiplied Psalm 38. 19.
. When Jeroboam was very proud, then the Lord brought him exceeding low; when
his thoughts were most mischievous against Judah, then the Lord broke him to
pieces. Let Judah rely upon his God still; trust in the Lord for ever, in
assured confidence, That, when the Idolater has made his ambushment, and
cooped-up Judah with his Troops before and behind, then is Gods time to work,
and to magnify Himself; then the Lord comes-in for them, that relied upon
Him; then He smites His Adversary: He causes fear and dread to fall upon
them: By the greatness of His Arm, His enemies shall be as still as a stone
Exodus 15, 15.
. So it was here; Judah prevailed over Israel because they relied upon the LORD
GOD: and the LORD struck Jeroboam and he died. But Abijah waxed mighty; What
ver. 21, 22.
his Acts, and ways, and sayings were, are recorded all, but the Records are
lost. Yet we are sure of this, if it had not been recorded, Abijah made his
bed in the dark, was laid in it, and slept with his Fathers.

THE ACTS OF ASA.
CHAP. IIII.
ASA does that, which is good and right before the LORD, for he takes away the
abominations from before His eyes, then waxes mighty; obtaines a glorious
victory over as mighty an host, as ever we read of. A good Prophet takes the
oceasion, and incourageth Asa to go on, and do more for GOD, That did all for
him. Asa hearkens; he and his people enter into covenant with GOD; and then he
would not spare the highest person in his Kingdom, because she had committed
folly there with stocks and stones. He has his infirmities in body and mind
both; but there is a Mantle wide enough to cover all; he fell into a sweet
sleep, and was laid in a bed of spices.

ASA his Son reigned in his stead; An excellent man, 2 Chronicles 14
yet his Father bad enough, and his Mother stark naught; for she served I
dols, and worshipped before stocks and stones; Good principles are from our
good GOD; not borne with us, nor conveyed unto us by all the labor and
diligence of godly Parents. (Yet they stand bound to do what they can:) Nor
can the worst Parents, such as Asa had, wicked and Idolatrous both, lodge
Idolatrous principles in that heart to corrupt it, which GOD will sanctify.
Notwithstanding what the Father was, and Maacah his Mother, yet Asa was a very
good man, a great example of wisdom in the posturing himself and his
Kingdom, and of success thereafter.

Asa did that, which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God ver. 2.
. What did he do? He took away those abominable, those accursed things, which
brought Sodom to Jerusalem, the Idols there from before the eyes of the LORD,
for He took away the Sodomites 1 Kin. 15. 12
the Altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the
Images, and cut down the groaves. That was a good beginning; to thrust-away
those cursed things, which will thrust us away from God, and God from us. So
Asa began, and his very first stepp brought him ver. 3.
half way to the end; such an Energy, influence, and effectual working the
beginning has into all the periods of time following* This taking away of
Altars, and strange gods; this breaking down of Images is indeed the prime and
first work, it must have the priority, as in nature, so in time. The Rubb^sh
must be cast-out before the building can go up, these abominable things, which
make a Kingdom naked, which consume like a Moth, nay like a Cancer, eating out
the heart of a Kingdom, these must be thrust away first, else the Kingdom
cannot be set in a Posture of Defense; nor is that done (till this be done,
till these abominations be cast-out) which is good and right in the Eyes of the
Lord: When Asa did do so, it follows (to give clear testimony that so he
did) For he took away the Altars, and brake down the Images.

Having so well begun, he follows* on the work as well, he commanded Judah to
seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law and Commandment; We
must mark this, that we may put the more observation upon it; And commanded
Judah, that is, he made an Ordinance in Judah, that Judah ver. 4.
should seek the LORD, and do the same, as Asa had done (which was good and
right in the eyes of the LORD) doing the Law and the Commandment. Now this
Cammand or Ordinance was in season, for the verse before tells us, He took away
the Altars; and the verse following tells us somewhat ver. 3. ver. 5.
more, That he took them away out of all the Cities of Judah. Had not Asa done
so, he had done a deceitful work, nay, he had mocked God; he had made a show
only to do that, which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD, if he had
suffered those Altars and Images, such abominable things to stand before the
Eyes of the LORD. We must observe Asa's way and method still; and how one thing
follows another, and gives clear proof and strength to that, which went
before, He did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD; For he
took away the Altars, brake down the images, and (then) commanded Judah. All
this was done decently and in order.

But how did Asa command? By the word of a King sure, and there is power Eccles
8. 4.
; Yes, and by his example sure enough, for that is the greatest command; He
will do what himself commanded, He took out of all the Cities of Judah, the
high places ver. 5.
and the Images, and then, he commanded Judah; what follows now, that there is
such a clear riddance of that, which is so contrary to the Militia of a
Kingdom, that we may call it the Malitia [the malice] of the same, unhallowed
Altars, dunghill gods: What follows after this riddance? And the ver. 5. 1
King. 15. 12.
Kingdom was quiet before him. Yes, quiet now, for these Achans, these
troublers, Altars, Images, which brought Sodom into Jerusalem Asa took away
the Sodomites out of the Land, and remooved (the cause) all the Idols there.
Admit the Idols, y^ cannot doubt of the Sodomy, for the reason given, Romans 1
23. Dr. Hall^ Cont. 2. King 9. 22.
etc. are removed, then quietness and rest, and not till then. If we should
ask Jorams question, Is it Peace? We must be answered, as Jehu answered him,
what Peace so long as the whoredoms, and the witch-crafts are so many? What
peace so long as Images stand, and Crucifixes stand, and Altars stand? But
Crosses are broken down; and Altars are thrown down; and Images are stamped
to powder; Then it will be, as it was here, The Kingdom was quiet, GOD gives it
rest, it is a peace of GODS giving; Mercy and Truth are met together,
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: And the Kingdom was quiet
before him.

And now he has leisure, while the time is calm, and the ver. 6.
Kingdom quiet, to provide for the troubles of war, which Psalm. 85. 10.
he did, He built fencea Cities, for he had no war in those years, because
the LORD had given him rest; Asa had rest and Peace from GODS hand, that was a
good, an assured and secure peace, for God set His Hand to it, then gave it to
Asa* Therefore he said to Judah, let us build Cities, and make ver. 6.
walls and Towers, Gates and Bars, because we have sought the LORD our GOD; We
have sought Him, and He has given us rest on every side: so they built and
prospered. We will look over this again, for the way Asa goes-in to posture
his Kingdom, is exemplary, safe and excellent, there is ver* 7.
not any one step he takes, but is remarkable, He did that which was good and
right in the eyes of the LORD, for He took the abominations from before His
eyes: Then he commanded Judah to seek the LORD, and to do the Law and the
Commandment: Then, says he, let us build Cities and fortify them, for we
have sought the LORD after the right manner; we have sought Him by Prayer and
Fasting, so as He is found of us; We are sure we have sought Him, and as sure,
we have a blessing from His hand: He has given us rest on every side; We will
build and GOD will prosper, for we have done the Law and the Commandment in
removing the Idols from before His Eyes. Then read how strong he is, and what
an Army he has, Five hundred and fourscore thousand, all these were mighty
men of valor. ver. 8.


Now Asa has done according to the mind and will of GOD* in Posturing his
Kingdom; he has removed all that, which is offensive to the eye of his LORD,
and so has made his Kingdom, as a wall of Brass. It is well he has done all
this, for he will find presently, That the Nations are angry, That Hell from
beneath is moved at this Posturingworke, and stirs up the dead against it:
Next news he hears is, That Zerah the Ethiopian is come out against him with
an Host, as the sands for multitudes, a thousand thousand, ver. 9.
and three hundred Chariots, and they were come-up unto Mareshah, in the very
borders of Judah; enough, if multitudes of men, and Chariots, and gods could
do it, to lick up Judah as an Ox licketh up the grass. What now? Asa was
glad with all his heart, that the LORD had instructed him to discretion: though
he had enemies without (he cared not how many) yet he had made a fair riddance
of his enemies within, Idols and Idol services, he had cast-them-out, those
mischievous things; he had commanded Judah, to seek the LORD* and to do the
Law and the Commandment; he had used the means in fortifying his Kingdom; he
had not slept away the peaccable time that God gave him, but improved it to the
strengthening himself and his Kingdom; now he can mock at fear, and laugh at
his Adversary, though, to look upon, very terrible. Laugh at his Adversary,
who is come out against him with an Host of a thousand thousand; laugh at him!
Yes, he might laugh at all the Adversaries in the world, and in hell too, that
had cleansed his Land and his heart of Idols: He can look his Adversary in the
face, and have him in derision. Then Asa went out against him, and they set the
battle in array [We ver. 10.
must use the means, else we do not trust but tempt GOD,] And Asa cried unto
the LORD his GOD. [What! Laugh and cry both together? Yes, one and the same man
may do both, and both together: He cannot laugh at his Adversary, who is a
Legion, that cannot cry unto his God.] Asa cried [That is, he set his face
steadfastly to heaven; his eyes were upon ver. 11.
his GOD] And said, Lord, it is nothing with Thee to help, whether with many,
or with them, that have no power [It is all one to an Almighty Arm, to work
with many or with few: with means or against means; but then His Arm has the
Pre-eminence, when it is made bare of flesh, and works for them that have no
Power.

But had Asa no power now, when he had an Host of five hundred thousand; All
these mighty men of valor?

This Asa accounted no power. Alas! what can two Arms of flesh do, but dash
together like two Potsheards, break and consume one another. Asa durst not
trust in his Chariots, nor in his Horsemen; who ever did so were brought down
and fallen; he would Remember the Name of the LORD, That was Ps* 20. 7, 8.
the way to stand upright:] Help us, O Lord our GOD, for we rest on Thee. [A
mighty Argument to draw God to his side. Our Fathers trusted in Thee; what if
they did; it follows ever, they were delivered; because they trusted on Him]
We rest on Thee. [A sure prop, it never deceives; I say, Ps. 23. 3, 4.
never deceives that man, who has done as Asa did, That which is good and right
in the Eyes of the Lord, Help us, for we rest on Thee; and the Lord will help
his servants. Why? because they rest on Him; He will not deceive their Trust,
and it was Asa's confidence in the LORD his God.

In thy Name we go against this multitude, [(i. e.) not in our own, but Thy
strength, in the power of Thy might, in whose hand multitudes are, but as one
man; and Thou can make one man chase multitudes] O Lord, Thou art our God,
Thou art ours, and we Thine by Covenant; Thy Name is called upon us; we have an
interest in Thee; Thy people, Thou art our God.] Let not man, a poor weak
creature, let not him prevail; [Put him in fear, O Lord, That the Nations may
know themselves to be but men Psalm. 9. 20.
; Men, not God, their Horses flesh, not spirit Esa 31. 3.
; Let not this man prevail against Thee. Do but stretch forth Thy hand, show
Thy self to be God, then both he that helps shall fall, and he that is
helped shall fall down^, and they all shall fall together. And so it was, for
Asa had done that, which was good in the eyes of the Lord; has given Him the
glory of His wisdom, power, mercy, goodness, has secured himself and his
People, under the shadow of the Almighty; improves his interest there; then
enters into his Chambers Esa. 26. 20.
, as he was commanded, for he has committed the whole matter unto God, has told
Him plainly, That he will rest on Him. And it pleases GOD wondrous well, That
He is rested upon; now see what GOD will do for them, that trust in Him: So
the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before ver. 12, 13.
Judah, and the Ethiopians fled: And Asa, and the people that were with him,
pursued them unto Gerat, and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could
not recover themselves, for they were destroyed before the Lord, and before His
Host, and they carried away very much spoil. Here was a wonderful victory,
such an one as Israel had many years before over Midian Numb. 31. 49
, for very probable it is, there was not, at this time, as then, a man lost on
Isreal's side: My reason is, the Lord did drive them with His Tempest: they were
destroyed before the Lord and before His Host, the Lords Host: And now the
Cities of the Philistines shall besmitten too, and those that wished well to
the Ethiopians. The fear of the Lord shall come upon all their neighboring
ver. 14.
places, and all shall be spoiled.

Thus Asa prospers, he and his people had removed all that, which enfeebles a
Land, makes a Kingdom naked, those dung-hill-gods, those mischievous things;
and see how he sinites and lays all plain before him, prospers every way, and
returns with spoils in abundance to Jerusalem, to pay his vows there, as we
shall read presently, for we readeon. ver 15.


Asa is no sooner come to Jerusalem, but a Prophet meets him 2 Chro. 15.
there (a good Prophet, upon whom the Spirit of GOD came) deals plainly with
him, as a Prophet of the LORD, and that had the Spirit of the LORD, assures
him, saying; The Lord is with you, while you be with Him 2 Chro. 15. 2.
: Bids him consider seriously how it was with King and Kingdom, when they were
without the true GOD, and without a teaching Priest ver. 3.
, and without Law: when ignorance reigned, when vile and abominable things were
exalted, set upon high and served; when Sodom was in Jerusalem, and the cause
of that abomination, Idols there. Bids Asa consider how it was then in those
dark times; he must find upon easy search, those times to be dark, vexatrous
and miserable; nothing prospered with Israel; nor peace, nor war; not
Counsels, nor designs, nor debates, nor preparations for the one or the other;
nor Parliaments, nor plantations, nor traffic (the synnewes of the State)
nothing prospered; all went back, tending to a miserable desolation; In those
times there was no Peace to him, that went out, nor to him that came in: but
ver. 5.
great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries; ver. 6.
Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City; how so for GOD did (...)
them with all adversity. They had forsaken Him, and He plagued them; but here
was the complement of their misery, The Lord forsook His people, and then all
the forementioned followed, for when GOD forsakes a people, it shall be a
miserable time with them, there shall be an howling, because of oppression,
They shall be vexed with all adversity. When Asa heard these words; (O it is a
great matter, almost all in all, when Prophets will deal faithfully with their
Lord and Master.) When Asa heard the Prophet say so, for the Prophet had set
the judgments of GOD as a Mountain before Asa's eye; Then he took courage,
and went on toward a more thorough Reformation; took away the abominable
Idols (as before out of Judah and Benjamin, or made clearer riddance then
before he had done:) so also out of the Cities, which he had taken from mount
Ephraim; If he were ver. ^.
Lord of their Cities, they should serve his GOD too, that they should; Is not
Asa their King? Then the Cities of Ephraim too, over whom he was King, should
serve his GOD, and not the gods of their own hands and choosing; And he would
refine the worship of his GOD, impured with Idolatrous services; and renew the
Altar of the Lord, which, their Altars, made unto Devils, had quite defaced.
Now mark, GOD had made a Mountain, a plain before Asa; and the hills to melt;
He wrought so wonderfully for Asa, that strangers were taken with it; The
people round about came flowing in to him, They fell to him (says the Text)
out of Israel in abundance. Why fell they to Asa? That is expressed too, They
ver. 9.
saw that the Lord his God was with him: Yes, He was so, and He will be so,
while we are with Him; so the good Prophet assured K. Asa.

Now he engaged himself to serve the Lord more; Oh! It is well when Gods
goodness toward Prince and people make them all the better; are bonds of
assurance to serve God more; to be yet more vile in their own eyes; and to
walk more humbly and more faithfully with GOD! Now Asa will do great service
to his God, and to himself also: The greatest service that ever was heard of,
if it be done, as he did it, in a right manner, and we keep unto it. But mark
first how methodically, how orderly Asa goes-on; there must be a Thankoffering
first, he had a glorious victory, God must have the glory of it.

Thus Asa did, in a full and free acknowledgement, That GOD did all for him; he
gathered all Judah and Benjamin, ver. ^.
and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon
together at Jerusalem; and there they offered ver. 10.
unto the Lord of the spoil, which they had taken: The LORD had given the
enemies and the spoils into their hands; in homage to This Lord, the Giver of
victories, they rendered back into their LORDS Hand of the spoil, which he had
brought to theirs. A very just, reasonable and equitable thing, and but
according to the command and rule: Offer unto God Ps. 50. 15, 16.
Thankesgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High. Asa had called upon the
LORD in the day of trouble, the Lord kept promise with him, and delivered him:
Asa stood bound now, in the strictest bonds, to do as he did, To offen
Thankesgiving unto GOD, for that was the only way be could take, To glorify
the LORD, the Giver of victories.

Asa goes on, he and all the people are gathered together at Jerusalem
something should be done now, which might well become so solemn a meeting: And
this it was; Asa could not think, that he and his people could be joined close
enough to their God, Who had wrought so and so for them, such Salvations: yet
they would join themselves as close as they could; They entered into a Covenant
to seek the Lord: How? That is worth the asking; still the manner how, for
that commends all; with all their heart and with all their soul. That is the
way, with all the heart and soul, for so 2 ver. 12.
the LORD showed Himself with them; Assuredly, He did them good, With His
whole heart, and with His whole soul Jer. 32. 4.
.

Aye, but very likely, they should find some refractory and stubborn spirits,
very cross to this great work, this engaging the heart to serve the LORD;
Some men or women among the great ones, or amongst the small ones, having a
spirit of contradiction, would not join with their Brethren; great ones might
be stout, and small ones might be careless. It might be also the Cities of the
Prophets, and many of the Levites would be refractory now, they would not
come-in and protest to serve the LORD, and to renew Covenant with Him. No I
That were strange indeed, that men, who had understanding in the visions of
GOD, should be backward here to renew Covenant with their GOD, to seek and to
serve Him, Who SOVGHT them out at the first, and served 2 Esa. 62. 12.
them ever since, all their days; Who gives them plenty of all things, richly
to enjoy; gives them leave to reap where they fowed not; and to dwell in
houses, which they built not; and yet unwilling to renew Covenant with This
GOD, Who has so engaged them to come unto Him, and to keep with Him all their
days! If any would be so abominable, refractory and stout, that they would not
come-in, they should be brought-in; If they would not yield to a golden
Scepter, they should stoop to an iron Rod; if not submit to a sweet easy
yoke, they should be broke to pieces with that of iron; And whosoever would
not seek the LORD GOD of Israel, should ver. 13.
be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.

Well now; and yet it is not so well as we may think it is: for though we
seek the LORD with all the heart, and with all the soul, yet all the heart is
deceitful, and at the best a fleeting and unconstant thing; GOD knows, for
indeed we know not, how deceitful the heart is Ier. 17. 9, 10.
; Now we have it, we think at command, it deceives us quickly, gives us the
slip, and is gone. Therefore there is a Caution put-in for that; They bind
themselves fast with bands and coards, as with iron and brass; They swear unto
the LORD; [they protested ver. 14.
to serve the LORD; they solemnly vowed themselves His sworn servants; They
avouched the LORD for their GOD: Deuteronomy 36. 17.
They had sought GOD and found Him, none like that GOD; then they swear, that
they will hold Him fast, and keep unto Him.] But was it not with some of them,
as it is now with all our vile Priests, and treacherous Prophets; did not their
Protestation faulter in their mouths? No; All Judah (mark that ALL) Judah
swear clearly, as if they were best content, that all the world might take
notice, They swear with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and
ver. 14.
with Cornets.

But the heart commonly does not love to be in bonds, and fetters; was there no
grief of heart, no regret and giving-back there? No; for then it would have
showed it self, as it does in our Priests, they could not have framed to
swear with a loud voice; But the Text cleeres it, That it was the merriest
day, that ever they saw; And ALL JUDAH ver. 15.
REJOICED AT THE OATH: for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought Him
with all their whole desire.

And they that so seek, shall find; so it follows, And He was found of them:
And they that have found GOD have found all in that finding, Rest and Peace;
and that is all; and that follows too, And the LORD gave them Rest round
about. It is not imaginable, much less can it be expressed, what peace, what a
shower of Blessings follows this entering into Covenant, and keeping to it I
will leave this to the heart of the Reader, and go on, when I have said but
this; That then Asa had made himself and his Kingdom strong* then he had
postured, he had set himself and Judah in a posture of defense, when he had
done as we have read. And they whose aim is so to do, must do as he did; for
when all is done, nothing is done, till that be done, which Asa did; till we,
in a contrariety to the wicked in their wicked way, shall ASSOCIATE our selves,
as the wicked all the world over, to break bands, and cast away coards, so we,
To bind our selves with those coards (which the wicked break) To enter into
covenant with our GOD; To keep close with Him, and walk humbly before Him all
our days, Amen. We read on.

Asa had engaged himself, had bound his heart with bonds and coards, so he
goes on, for he will prove himself, as was said, a complete pattern of
Reforming, of right posturing his Kingdom; I say, Asa goes on, meets with a
Mountain in his way, which he will make a plain; He has engaged his heart to
walke-after the LORD Deuteronomy. 13. 14.
, and fear Him, and obey Him; serve Him, and cleave to Him; And now he must
not spare; nor must his eye pity, no not the stoutest I mage in all the
Country; No, though a Brother in Law, or his Son, or his Daughter, or the Wife
of his bosom, or his friend, who is as his own soul, though any one of these
should set it up, yet Asa must throw it down, his eye must not pity nor
spare, for so the charge Deuteronomy. 13. 8.
is; and Asa must do thereafter, for he has sworn. Let me object, like a
fool, after my manner, as if I were in Asa's stead; The Answer shall make
amends for the folly of the objection, for it shall be given from Gods Mouth; I
object,

Ob.

I may express my Authority, that GOD has given me, over my Brother, I am in
place over him, and, in that respect, he is my inferior; And over my Son, and
Daughter, I am their Father; And over my wife too, GOD has made me her head,
and Master; But now suppose (though I need not suppose, but for instruction
sake) That a Queen should say, let us go, and serve other gods, whom thou
have not known, thou ver. 6.
nor thy Fathers; suppose, she should say so, and so do, set up an Idol in a
grove? Nay yet higher, suppose she be a Queen, and a Mother too, what must be
done then? Thus I have made a question, where no wise man ever made any: I
answer, or rather the Lord by me, by way of expostulation.

An. Is there any command can give check to GODS command? Is there any Relation
so near, as that betwixt GOD and His people? Is there any Bond so strong as
the Bond of a Covenant? Is there any such a Binder as an Oath? I have bound my
self in an Oath, nay I have entered into a Curse if I perform not. I must now,
in the fear of GOD, and Neh. 10. 29.
dread of a Curse, throw away, that, which sought to thrust me away from the
LORD my GOD; Who has wrought all the works in me, and for me. I will not say
now, as Hierom says, That, in such cases, I must thrust away my Father, Hier.
li. 2. Ep. 6. Per calcatum perge patrem.
and mother, who would thrust me from GOD; And, if, being thrust away, they
will lie in my way to withold me from following GOD, I must trample upon
them; I will not say so. But this I will say, I must break down their Idols,
then stamp them to powder, and more also, but it follows presently.

This I have set down for the information of us simple ones; for we shall
meet with an Idol in the bosom, which will plead as much as all this, and
entice more secretly; but if we remember the Covenant, the Oath, and the Curse,
we shall be too hard for that Idol, though it be a beloved one, and it shall
down, and be thrust away. Now mark what Asa did, for he instructs very
much, a very great example of well posturing his Kingdom.

A foolish woman, a notorious Idolatresse, some say an Adulteress also (these
commonly go together, for the reason rendered, Rom 1. v. 23, 24. and are,
whether he is or she is, the stoutest fools in the world, for they are stout and
proud before GOD, and humble before stocks and stones) had committed folly in
Israel, worshipping an Idol in a grove, some called it Priapus, an obscene
god, but gilded over, and made, by art, a pretty gaudy thing; And she thought
verily she had been a privileged woman, she had a license to lift up her
heart and eyes to lying and strange vanities; she was the Mother of Asa, the
King ver. 16.
, and, why might not she do as she pleased, under her Sons protection, being
Queen and a Kings Mother? Again, this foolish Idolatrous woman (for she had
degraded her self by falling before an Idol, and such an Idol, which was
named before I was aware) considered not, That Asa the King had entered into a
covenant with his GOD, therefore he must not suffer any abomination to stand
before His eyes, with whom he has entered covenant, and struck hands.

Oh but he might spare that one Idol, it was the Queens Idol, and the
Queen his Mother, he might spare that: No but he might not; better spare a
Thousand then that one; for, though one be no number, yet it is the beginning
of a number, and you may quickly add one to it, and then one is two; and now
it will multiply, specially a Queens Idol. Certainly the Devil blesses
Idols, for they multiply like fishes: Solomon had many Wives, and half as
many Concubines, and yet but one Son: But his Wives Idols, multiplied, and
filled City and Country both. Therefore Asa did not spare Maacah, though she
was his Mother, he pl^cked her down, and that is very emphatically expressed;
And also Maacah his Mother, even HER, he removed from being Queen, because she
had made an 1 King. 15. 13.
Idol in a grove; The Idol must down too, and be destroyed; that follows,
for if he would not spare his Mother, NOT HER, then, not her abomination sure,
that should be destroyed, and so it was; And Asa CVT DOWN ver. 16.
her Idol; Was that all? No; Idols must be dealt more roughly with then so;
and STAMPED IT; yet that was not enough to consume an Idol utterly; Now he
makes an end of an old block, and BVRNT IT. Where? It is a good question, ver.
13.
and the answer is notable, at the Brook Kidron; That when he had stamped it to
powder; burnt it to ashes; he might show his just indignation against it yet
farther, he would drown it too; And all this for just reasons, clear in the
Text.

1. That he might show Maacah his Mother what a vile god she served, that might
be stamped to powder, then burnt, and then dround.

2. To show his just indignation against Maachas Image; she was Queene-Mother,
her Idol, even hers, must be served so, for it had brought more then a
suspicion upon her, That she was as unclean as the spirit she served in that
obscene Image: Besides, it was the Mother of Abominations, by the Devils
blessing it had been not only fruitful, but had multiplied, filling the City
and Countries round about with Idols; And these, the Devil working effectually
by them, filled Jerusalem with Sodomites, they made Jerusalem, the beloved
City, a Sodom, which GOD overthrew, and repented not: for so we read; when
they knew GOD and glorified Him not as GOD, but changed the Glory of the
incorruptible GOD into an Image made like to, what? I cannot tell, but what the
Carver pleased; Therefore GOD also gave them up, etc. I pray you read Romans 1.
23, etc.
the place, and there you shall see Idols and Devils and Sodomites yoaked all
together. Therefore Asa cut down Maachas his Mothers Idol, EVEN HERS, and
stamped it, and burnt it at the Brook Kidron; That when he had done all this,
he might do yet more, drown it also. Truly now Reformation is risen to the
highest, it did not stick at the head. While Reformation sticks there, a
Kingdom is never well postured; but there we leave it.

The Chapter concludes thus; There was no more war till such a time. We
goe-on now, to enquire into that time.

And now we have heard as much as can be expected from an excellent King; the
truest subject to the LORD his Master; a stout and valiant Soldier, every way
provident for the peace of his people. He was a King, and a very good King,
whose Actions we have been treating of all this while; He was a Man too, that
we all know, but we do not always wisely consider that, and answerably make
an allowance. It follows now, how he acted as a man, standing alone; and
there, we look to find slips and falls, infirmities, some worse then that in
his feet, whereof he died.

Surely the wise GOD suffers it to be so; leaves Man, as we do our Child, to
try how substantive he is, how he can stand alone; and behold he totters
presently, perhaps fall. slat upon his face. Why so? for excellent reason; That
man may know, when he stood, he did not stand alone, but underpropt by an
Almighty hand; that sustained him: And what he did, he did by an Almighty hand
too, that did it. O blessed be GOD for man's infirmities, whether these be in
his head, or in his feet, or all over his body; These, as the Lord graciously
orders them, makes him know, and know to purpose, that he is a man. A great
point of knowledge this, and this of all men Kings are very unapt to know:
Kings said I; alas! we poorer men, beggars in comparison, forget it often
times, as our words and deeds do testify (for we blow as big in our little
Ponds, as Kings do in their great Seas Vide Dominum saevientem in servos, etc.
Fluct^s easdem, Lips. de Constable. l^. 2 p. 25.
) much more may Kings forget themselves quite, being upon their pinacles. But
then God leaves them (and so He may do and in much mercy) that they may try,
what is in their hearts; He knows it well enough, for He knows all things,
But He would have them to know it also. Blessed be God, I say again, for our
infirmities, That, though our heads may stand high, yet, looking down to our
feet, (our infirmities, our weaknesses) we are kept low, and made to walk
softly all our days. And so I shall speak of Asa's weaknesses or
infirmities, for to that head I shall rank them all; and then cast a covering
over them, wide enough to hide all.

Baasha King of Israel, came up against Judah; blocks-up 2 Chronicles 16.
the passages to the intent that he might let none goe-out or come-in to Asa
King of Judah ver 1.
. That which seems strange is, why Asa, being able to bring into the field,
and Army of five hundred and fourscore Thousand, all mighty men of volour 2 Chronicles. 14 8.
, thought it fit rather at this time, not to draw them forth; but to fight
rather with money 2 Cro. 16 2, 3.
, and to purchase his peace with the treasures of GODS House and his own, at
the hands of an infidel. A learned Knight in his History of the world, speaks
thus for him, That Asa's many thousands of hands, employed in the late service
against Zerah, might be now busied about their Lands, and other Trades, and
better to wink at that apparent inconvenience, which the building of Ramah
would bring upon them in aftertimes, then to take off his peoples hands and
intentions from so necessary employments. Well, but this pleads nothing for to
excuse Asa; he might wink at the building of Ramah (which yet he had not done,
if his understanding had not been clouded with fear) But he ought not to shut
his eyes at this, That he calledin Benhadad the King of Syria into GODS
inheritance upon these two dear rates; The breach of Benhadads league with
Baasha; and the expilation of the Temple. Here was an infirmity, a very great
one, to call-in a Heathen King, and to make him break covenant. Let this go,
for we will pass it over. But Hanani the Seer will not let it go so ver. 7.
, he came, and, like a good Prophet, reprooves even Asa the King, saying; Did
not the LORD deliver a huge Host, with very many charets and horsemen into
thine hand? Thine enemies did ride upon horses, and were very swift; but the
LORD thy GOD, did ride upon the Heavens for thy help, and in His excellency
upon the sky Deuteronomy 33. 26.
. And it is His manner so, To spy abroad even over all the world, where this
faithful man is, whose heart is strong and perfect with his God, That He may
show Himself strong in the help of such a man. Ah! thou should have relied
upon this GOD, Whom thou have, so lately, found to be a strong ver. 9.
GOD; so faithful, and true. Thou should have relied upon Him, and not on
the King of Syria. But because thou have done so, thou must hear of it in
plain terms, though thou art King, and feel the smart of it too; Herein
thou have done FOOLISHLY (there is plain English; That was the manner in those
times, and then it was better with Kings then in aftertimes) Therefore from
henceforth thou shall have war 2 Chro. 16. 9.
There is one infirmity discovered; the King had done FOOLISHLY, which showed
plainly, that the head was ill-affected, and the very heart faint. There is yet
more discovery made of his weakness; he will not abide reproof; he is so
sick, that he beats the Physician, and then anon, huggs him too much, as if he
could cure heart and feet, and all; for be relied upon him, and in so doing he
made him a god; We look over all this in order as it was done.

1. He will not abide reproof; That was a great infirmity, and the very note
of a brutish man Pro. 12 1.
. He beats his Physician, that good Prophet; that was yet a greater infirmity;
Then Asa was wroth with the Seer, and put him in a prison house, for he was in
a RAGE* with him because of this thing. Good man! he was in a rage indeed; but
it was his infirmity. We read on, and behold the greatest weakness of all!
And Asa oppressed some of the people the same time. We thought verily that
would follow, after we read that he was in a rage, and with his best friend,
that he had in the world, for he told his Lord the truth, and his Lord was in a
rage for that thing; then it followe^, and Asa oppressed; in a rage with a
Prophet, and for telling the truth, and oppression of the people, went all
together.

2. Poor weak man! for by this time he found and knew himself to be so, and
no better; and, as he grew old, so his infirmities growing upon him, His
disease in his feet was now EXCEEDING GREAT: He should then have sought (that
is, trusted) to the LORD; his eye should have been ver. 12.
fixed upon Him, the great Physician, that makes a man (every whit) perfectly
whole, feet, and heart, and head and all. Asa did not so; a poor weak man
leanes upon man; weakness upon weakness; Asa sought to (i. e. relied upon)
the Physicians; put confidence in them, so made them gods. What shall we do
with all these, for here are many infirmities?

We must learn hereby how to judge of others; and to make use of their
infirmities, so as to strengthen us against our own. If we judge at all it
must be by the rule, observing the best actions See Child's portion, p. 94.
that we can see in men, and judge not by their sudden and inconsiderate
ways, but by the course of a man's life, and according to the more constant way
and frame of his spirit. And here we may observe a great variety, and change in
the ways and actions of good men, as here in Asa; In the 14. Chap. he does
that, which is right in the eyes of the Lord, and commands Israel so to do:
and then he beares-up himself See Job in his second Chapter, then look upon
him in the third.
in the Hand and Power of GOD, and does wonders. In the 16. Chap. he is
cleane-off again, and fainting before a creature, and then does like a man,
standing, working alone without divine assistance. In the 15. Chap. he is
hearkening to the good Prophet, and very attentive to his words, and striking
Covenant with his GOD, and bringing his people into Covenant with Him. In the
16. Chapter, he is wrath with the Seer, puts him into prison, and oppresses
the people. It is a resolved case; Man is not Substantive enough to stand
alone; if GOD leaves Him, he falls, but that was noted before. We will note this
here, That the inward-man, the inward frame of spirit is subject to as many
changes, as the outward man; nay, it is exposed to more invasions, and greater
incursions, whereby to unsettle it, and put it out of frame, then is the
outward man, the outward frame of body: which consideration, if laid to heart,
teaches us first,

1. To walk softly all our days, and humbly before our God; To fix our selves
upon His Arm, and stay our selves there continually; To say, as we heard
before: Hold me, LORD, else I cannot hold Thee: if Thou take me not by the
hand, to hold me there, I shall slip, perhaps fall too, I know not how low. And

2. To breath after that place, where the Spirit shall be put into a constant
frame of Holiness: It shall warpe no more, decline the good way no more, but
be constant and unmovable for ever. And thus we have learnt to judge of others
infirmities, and to make use of them to our selves. Now we must find out a
cover for all this, and, blessed be GOD it is found out to our hands. Blessed
be God the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, there is a Garment pure enough and
large enough to cover all these infirmities, and heal all thy diseases; Ps.
103.
And this I leave to Faith, for it is not in sight. There is another Garment,
which I may call the mantle of Sincerity, that will hide great infirmities
also, and under that covering, so wide and large, I will leave Asa: Though
after such experiences of the commings-in of GOD unto him, yet he fainted
before His creature; he was afraid of a man. Though the high places were not
taken away: Though he was in a rage with a Prophet, for telling truth; and an
oppressor too: Though in exceeding great distress, and then sought not to the
LORD, but to the Physicians; though all this was in Asa, overtaken 2 Chro. 15.
17.
with infirmities, yet this mantle of Sincerity is wide enough, Nevertheless
the heart of Asa was perfect all his days. Under that covering we leave him,
which hides a multitude of sins: Remembering still, what man is in his best
estate, and what were the first ways of Asa: He did that, which was good and
right before the LORD, and remooved the abominations from before His eyes;
commanded the people to seek the LORD, to do the Law and the Commandment; he
entered into Covenant with all his heart, he did not spare his Mother, nor her
Idol, no not her. Certainly, The LORD remembered all this for good; he did many
things amiss, like a man, but he took away the Sodomites, and the Idols,
which caused them; he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, he
commanded all Israel so to do (it may do you good to read it again and
again) he brought them into a Covenant with their God, and all this with a
perfect heart, this must be remembered to all Generations, Notwithstanding the
heart of Asa was perfect all his days. Chap. 15. 17.


Now hear the end of all the sons of Adam; So Asa slept with his Fathers, and
died in the one and fortieth year of his reign: and they buried him in one of
the Sepulchers, which he had made ver. 13, 14.
for himself. He was a wiseman sure, he had serious thoughts of his long and
last sleep, who had prepared his Bed before night came. This might be a means
to set his soul in a good readiness, and his house in good order, that when
death came, he might have no more to do but die. I knew a man my self, that
had done the like, he had, with his own hands, made his Bed, his Coffin, I
mean, many years before he dyed; I have seen him lie down in it with much
comfort, for so he could think of his latter end; he told me it was his
manner daily, and it was a means to keep him exceeding humble.

We read of two, our Country men both, in their times very eminent persons
here: They made themselves, not Beds, but Monuments, and the one remains a
Monument of his pride to this day. The other made himself a Monument also, and
glorying much in the Power he had put forth against the Lutherans, (the
faithful servants of CHRIST) would glory of it also, when he lay under his
Tomb a sleep; and, that he might not perfect his own praise with his own
hands, sent over his mind to Erasmus, with an ambling Horse Esa. 22. 15. Even
unto Shebnah, etc. Quoties hunc locum lego simile exemplum mihi po^^ssimum in
mentem venit, etc. Vi^l. Call. in versum 17.
, That he would, after his manner, express his worthy deeds in crushing the
Lutherans, and then return it to him, to be set upon his Tomb. But see the
luck of it! This man was cut off by the shoulders, his body buried we know not
where, but without honor, near to the block, where his body and his head were
parted: And no other Epitaph over him, that we read off, but the Axe the
instrument of the execution. I mention all this here, to show the different
works and aims of men: some made themselves Sepulchers, to tell the world
their pride, and where they placed their glory: Others made themselves Beds, to
tell themselves what they are Dust, and Ashes, and thither they must when all
is done; and that there is a grave for their glory too: But if they do glory,
they will glory in the LORD.

Asa had prepared his Bed before night came; when night came, death I mean, he
was ready for it, and his Bed ready made: His people laid his body in it, after
that they had made his Bed, the sweetest of any, that ever we read off, for it
was ver. 14.
filled with sweet Odours, and diverse kinds of spices, prepared by the
Apothecaries Art. He had left a Name behind him, better then precious ointment;
it was as an ointment powered forth, therefore they laid his body a sleep
amidst Spices: And so they made, in our language and manner, a very solemn
funeral for him. The good Father is dead, and yet he is not dead, he lives in
his good son, whose Acts follow.

THE ACTS OF JEHOSHAPHAT.
CHAP. V.
Jehoshaphats heart is lift-up in the way of the LORD; takes care, That all
the Cities and People of Judah be taught out of the Book of the Law; and so
waxes great exceedingly. He go's down to Samaria, and returns to his house
in Peace; but that was a wonder which GOD wrought: He stands the firmer after
his fall, and is more zealous: Charge the Judges, and the Priests: A world of
Enemies come against him, he cries to the LORD, is wonderfully delivered, and
his Enemies destroyed. His Sun sets in a Cloud too, but he shall rise
gloriously.

AND Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, followed-on in his Fathers
stepps, closer with his 2 Chronicles. 17.
GOD then his Father did (toward his latter end) and more successful. He
strengthened himself against Israel, and set his Kingdom in a posture of
Defense; but before we read any thing of his Militia, how great and prosperous
that was, we read first, That the King walked in the first ways of David
[those were good ways, when David fullfilled all GODS WILS] and sought to the
ver. 3.
LORD GOD of his Fathers. [There is the first seeking; Act. 13. 22. (...).
and if we so seek GOD at first, that we find Him, good success ver. 4.
follows, even all good, in it is own nature so, or made so, for in finding
God we find all things.] It follows, And walked in His Commandments, and not
after the doings of Israel, [those were strange doings, for they served Calves,
strange ver. 4.
gods] Therefore the LORD stablished his Kingdom ver. 5.
, for his heart was LIFT-VP in the ways of the Lord: Lift-up, He could not
else have stept-over the blocks, stopps and walls in his way, those high
places, if he had not been more bold, ver. 6.
Cum audentiorem factus esset ad promovendum verum Dei cu^tum quam fu^sset Asa
Pater ejus. Trem.
, and resolved in his way, then Asa his Father was (toward his latter end.)
But because his heart was LIFT-VP in the ways of the LORD, It follows,
Moreover he took away the high places from out of Judah ver. 6.
. [A man may talk much, he will do but little, unless his heart be lift-up
in the ways of the LORD, he will never be able to do any great matter, nor
overcome any great difficulty: if his heart be not lift-up, if not, and there
be a rub in the way, he will stumble; but if an Hill be in the way, he will
faint before it, because his heart is not lift-up in the ways of the Lord, as
Jehoshaphats was.

And so Jehoshaphat has made a good Beginning, and he timed it well, as his
good Father before him. He took away the abominations, and then He appointed
the chief of his Priests (whom he calls Princes, found faithful, and after
his own heart) to their charge. What was that? Not to gather in their Tithes;
nor to over-see their Rents, and in-comes, as the manner is. No, he charged
them, touching that only thing necessary for Priests to do, though Princes,
To teach in the Cities of Judah ver. 7.
: And because there is much teaching work in a Kingdom, enough to set all on
work, Priests and Levites all, of all ranks, for there is great want; great
want of Knowledge, and for want of knowledge, the People perish: Therefore the
King appointed inferior Ministers, (Levites) to teach the People out of the
book of the Law of the LORD ver. 8, 9.
. So they went Circuit through all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people.
A blessed work. This is the way of well-posturing a Kingdom, to take away the
Idolatrous places and services, then to take care the people be taught in the
book of the Law of the LORD, through all the Cities of Judah. Jehoshaphat knew
well till this was done, nothing was done; an untaught people will ever be an
untoward and contrary people, they will stand in a Posture of offense against
GOD and His holy ways. Woe, woe to them, who have taken no care, that the
people might be taught in the Law of their GOD: And blessings be upon the
souls of them, who, seeing the mischief of ignorance, what those people are,
that are an untaught people, make it their prime and chief work (after the
casting-out of Idols) To provide for a poor people, nuzzled in ignorance,
that they may be taught in the Law of their GOD through all the Cities of
Judah. This was Jehoshaphats care; he will have his Priests and Levites, all
do their work, which becomes them, belongs properly to them, to keep the
Charge of the LORD, Teaching the people the Law of GOD, throughout all the
Cities of Judah. These two Conclusions do naturally follow from these
premises.

1. To appoint Lecturers (call them what you will) The Spirit calls them (The
Messengers of the Churches, and the glory of CHRIST 2 Cor. 8. 23.
) Preaching Ministers, such as can teach the People the Law of the Lord, is a
princely duty, the prime and chief work of a Parliament, not below that great
Council of State.

2. That a well exercised, taught and trained People, I do not mean in the
use of their weapons, and military Postures, (though very comme^dable all this,
and very serviceable to a Kingdom, but) exercised, and taught out of the Book
of the Law of their GOD, is the Militia of a Kingdom, makes the King and his
People secure at home, and feared abroad. So it follows, presently after the
People were so taught and trained, That the ver. 10, 11
Enemies of Jehoshaphat round about, feared and submitted themselves; would
rather stoop to the dust of his feet, then stand out with him to try the power
of his Militia: Indeed it was terrible to the Inhabitants round about; for we
reade-on in his ver. 12.
Story, That he waxed great exceedingly; built Castles and Cities of store; he
had much BVSINESSE, and the men of War mighty men of valor were with him.
But out of all this we note only; The comely order, his Militia ver. 13.
comes last. All his work before was this, to instruct and teach his people
touching the Law of their GOD; To enter or inroule himself, and his People,
the Soldiers of the GOD of HOSTS: To make Him their General. That was his
care, and how he prosecutes it we shall see hereafter. Here we may read that
Jehoshapat had a greater Host, then the Ethiopians had, who came forth against
his Father. Yet, as we shall see anon, Jehoshaphat put no trust in them. The
Number of them are recorded according to the House of their Fathers ver. 14.
; and one amongst the rest shall be named, Amaziah the son of Zichri; for he
willingly offered himself unto the LORD first ver. 16.
, and (that is the ready way to do good service for the Land) then with his two
hundred thousand mighty men of valor, waited upon the King his Master.
Doubtless he did the King his Master good service, for he had offered himself
to the LORD first. Thus we have seen Jehoshaphats strength, and what made him
so exceeding great; now we shall read his weaknesses too, what brought him
exceeding low; he had joined affinity with Ahab, which consumed his house, and
destroyed his Kingdom utterly.

But so much is recorded before Sect. 1. Chapter 4.
; here we shall see, how he acted standing alone, and upon his own bottom,
and what an hazard he ran, going down to Samaria, and with Ahab to battle,
this follows.

Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance, and 2 Chro. 18. 1.
joined affinity with Ahab: Jehoshaphat had matched his son Jehoram to
Athaliah, Ahabs daughter (or sister, I am not resolved whether, but I take it
for granted, That Athalia was Jezabels daughter, being so like her) A strange
over sight in a wise King! But it may be, the young Prince was headstrong; he
might say to his Father, Get her for me, for she pleases Iud. 14. 3.
me well: And the Father was loath to cross the son in his first love. What
gained the Fathers consent we know not: but so it was, Jehoshaphat joined
affinity with Ahab. How Sect. 1. Chap. 3.
his son prospered, we have read; and what befell the Father, we shall now
read, no small trouble, and a very great danger. It was not possible, (I say)
not possible, To come clear off and join affinity with Ahab. We reade-on: And
2 Chro. 18. 2.
after certain years, Jehoshaphat went down to Ahab to Samaria. He and his
company find royal welcome, he is entertained like himself, a King, and a
Brother. Then Asab makes a request to him, and persuades him, To go with him
to Ramoth-Gilead; WILL THOU GO WITH ME? Yes, answered Jehoshaphat, I am as
thou art, and my people ver. 3.
as thy people. A strange speech from a Wiseman, and as strange a compliance;
I am as thou art: he was not so; Ahab was a gross Idolater, Jehoshaphat a
faithful servant of the LORD: My People as thy people; That was not so
neither; Jehoshaphats people were in Covenant with their GOD, as we heard,
their Vows were upon them: Ahabs people not so. Truly it is dangerous to come
near an Idolater; To go to him to Samaria, may alter a man as much, as the
going-in once into the Highpriests house; There they were set down together,
and Peter sat down amongst them Luke 22. 55.
. We know what followed presently; his zeal to his Master, cooled before the
fire; he was in the Highpriests house, and then as one of them Obad. 11.
. We will reade-on where we were; Jehoshaphat is in Samaria, feasting with
Ahab. Now he can deny Ahab nothing, We will be with thee in the War. See! 2
Chr. 18. 3.
There he had passed his promise, but now he will enquire about the lawfulnes
of the war, and success in the same, which he should have done first.

Touching the justice of this war, there was little or no question to be
made: for Benhadad, who owed Ahab his life, breaks one Article of the League,
in withholding Ramoth Gilead 1 Kin. 20. 34.
most unjustly from him; Therefore Ahab might justly moove a war to recover
his own from a perfidious Tributary; But that Ahab should make a League with
Benhadad then (which was his sin) or that Iehoshaphat should join with Ahab
now, there was no reason of a religious stamp, though some reason there might
be of State: And yet therein Iehoshaphat should have enquired first, before he
had passed his Promise. Surely a good King can order nothing wisely with Ahab
in Samaria; he will be with Ahab in the War, That is granted; But counsel
is for the war; Let us enquire I pray thee at the word of the Lord to day. It
was well remembered, but had he remembered that before, he had not gone ver. 4.
down to Ahab to Samaria; much less had he made promise, to be with him in
the war. But Jehoshaphat will enquire before he begins his march; And Ahab
agrees with him to enquire, for he knew he had Prophets enough, (as bad as
himself) who could speak to their Masters mind, though it was to his
destruction; Jehoshaphat should see, that Ahab would order his war with
council; and that he had counselors enough, that would approve of the war:
and those Prophets too; how many? four hundred These 400. Prophets. Ahab had
reserved from the dint of Elijahs Sword; Now these shall requite his kindness;
they live to betray the life of him, who saved theirs; That no King after Ahab
may dare to rescue or uphold an Idolatrous Priest from the block
, and one, and that one only an honest man Our judgment must be swayed not by
number of men, but by weight of reasons: One good man will give better reason
then 400. vile Counselors: so many against one, and but that one in the
right; and for the prosperity of his Master.
. A false worship shall have false Prophets enough: And a wicked King shall
have wicked Counselors more then enough; and all for war: GOEVP AND PROSPER.

Jehoshaphat is jealous of these 400. Prophets, (too many to be good) and would
prefer an honest man's judgment, especially in point of war, before them
all; Is there not here a Prophet of the LORD besides, that we might enquire of
him? Yes, said Ahab, there is one man more, but I HATE him. Why? I will answer
that; Because he was an honest Prophet, and would speak the Truth, and that is
always evil to an evil heart. But yet Jehoshaphat prevails, and the man is
sent for by a messenger sent from Ahab, who must lesson the good man before he
come (as some have been taught what to say from Man's mouth when they were to
speak from GODS Mouth) and put words into his mouth ver. 12.
; Behold, says he, one Prophet has taken to himself horns of Iron, and has
destroyed the Kings enemies already in a fancy ver. 10.
, and all the other Prophets are of the same mind, and lip too, and conclude,
It shall be prosperous; They say to Ahab go up and prosper: And thou must
frame thy mouth, when thou come unto the King, to say so too; go up and
prosper. No but I will not, said the good man; Does thy Master pretend to
enquire of the LORD, and do thou tell me what I must say: And Micaiah said,
As the LORD lives, even what my GOD says that will I speak. A good
resolution, and but becoming ver. 6.
a Prophet of GOD.

And now the good Prophet is with the bad King, and the ver. 13.
first words he says are ironicall, which make the strongest denial by
affirming, (which the King does not well understand;) But see his hypocrisy I
he seems eager to hear the truth, which yet he hates, and cannot endure to
hear; how many times shall I adjure thee, that thou say nothing but the truth
ver. 15.
to me in the Name of the LORD? What a notorious hypocrite was this! he adjures
the man to tell him the truth in the Name of the LORD, and when he has heard
it, he will turn his back upon it, suffer him to be stricken; nay, he will
command him to prison too, and to be fed with the bread and water ver. 26.
of affliction there. How long? till I return in peace. See there! Ahab
expects to return in peace, though he went to war against the express will
and word of GOD. But that is no wonder; his bloody sin had closed-up his eye,
and care both; he will rush-on to his own destruction: The sentence was passed
upon him, it must be executed, In the place, where dogs licked the blood of
Naboth, shall dogs lick thy 1 King. 21. 19. 22. 38.
blood, EVEN THINE. An Idolater will please himself with vain thoughts;
dreams of peace, and yet seek war, and pursue it; and persecute those that
stand in his way, though they would hold him back from running into ruin. And
still be thinks, it will be well, until I return in peace. He is missed by
liars, they by the Devil 2 Chr. 18. 21.
, they hurry him into a war, and yet Ahab dreams of peace, until I return
in peace, That is never. His iniquity is top-full; wrath is running over;
Though he will not hear the truth, yet he shall see it fulfilled, according to
the word of the LORD, by Micaiah; Thou shall not return in peace, for so the
LORD has spoken, And he said, hearken all ye people. ver. 27.


Now this had been a wonder to the reader, that Jehoshaphat, notwithstanding
all this, went-up with Ahab to battle, but that we find him joined in
affinity with Ahab; gone down to Ahab to Samaria, and at a feast with him. All
this, nay any one of these, was enough to take away the heart from the wisest
King, that ever was; But take all together, and then see how one thing draws
on another, till Jehoshaphat be drawn into a desperate condition, to the very
pit brimme of destruction; No doubt, for this very end, that no good King after
him may join affinity with Ahab; go down to Samaria to him; feast with him
there, and then join in a war with him. I will only repeat the danger he
was in, and note the deliverance, and then goe-on.

The Captains of the Charets saw Jehoshaphat, and taking ver. 30.
him to be the King of Israel, they compassed about him to fight: Good man! he
was in a coope now, Captains of the Charets round about him, But he cried out:
he had one refuge left him, and a way for escape; he cried to Heaven, and the
LORD helped him; after His manner, a present help in trouble, (who would join
in affinity with Ahab against the expresle command of such a GOD?) And GOD
moved them to depart from him. GOD MOVED THEM. Mark it, The Captains of the
Charets thought verily they had the prey in their hands, and they would devour
him presently; but they must stand and deliberate upon it, as those that must
ask GOD leave first.

They thought so and so, but there came a motion into them; and they depart. We
say, Captains and Soldiers do all in war, with their strength, and with
their counsel: No, we are mistaken greatly; GOD does all; As he moves, so the
Captains and their weapons come and depart: just as it was here with
Jehoshaphat; GOD moved them to depart from him; then they turned back from
pursuing: It was upon GODS motion; so the Enemy moves or stands.

And Jehoshaphat the King of Judah returned to his house in 2 Chronicles. 19. 1.
peace to Jerusalem. The goodness of Jehoshaphats GOD! Jehoshaphat was wandered
quite out of his way; he had been at Samaria; with Ahab in the battle; in a
bloody skirmish there; GODS Hand was with him notwithstanding, delivers him,
and brings him off with a motion and back to his own house in peace.
Iehoshaphat will not presume any more, he fears GOD and His goodness, Who
would not take his servant at an advantage. Doubtless Jehoshaphat thought upon
it; he had joined in affinity with Ahab; in a war with Ahab; was taken for
Ahab; was hemmed in by the Captains of the Chariots, yet escaped; saw Ahab
wounded, with an arrow, shot at a venture, but directed by an invisible hand,
and so slain before his face; and yet he returns to his house in peace. So
GOD could do, and do it easily, upon a motion.

But now the Son of that good Prophet, who dealt so plainly with his Father,
deals, in the same plainness of language, with his Son Jehoshaphat, saying;
should thou help ver. ^.
the ungodly, and love them that hate the LORD? (i. e.) Thou should not have
done so, but so doing thou art much to blame.

Does not the King interrupt him? No; The Kings heart is melted within him, in
sense of that he has done against the LORD: and the goodness of the LORD
toward him; he has a patient care now, and lets the Prophet go on; he will
speak comfortable words presently; Therefore is wrath upon thee from before
the LORD. Now mark how he comforts ver. 2.
him again; Nevertheless, though thou have done so and so; yet all that thou
have done shall not blot out the remembrance of the GOOD THINGS thou have done,
in that thou have taken away the groves out of the Land. Mark that, the taking
away Idolatrous things, Altars and the like, and Idolatrous services, (in truth
of heart) makes amends for many miscariages, and shall be remembered and
reckoned amongst good things found in the man, where there are evil things
too, but they shall be, (as if they had not been) remembered no more.

See again? Jehoshaphat stands the firmer after his fall: After his
deliverance he followes-on Hose 6. 3.
to seek the LORD; he dwelt at Jerusalem ver. 4. Resedit (i. e) quievit
habenis regni Ioramo commissis, etc. Trem.
, (i. e.) he set his Son Jehoram in his Throne there, while he goes in Person,
and visits the Churches! Priests are deceitful many of them, and Levites too,
he will visit his people himself; his own eyes and ears shall tell him how
they thrived. We are an unconstant people; now we set our faces toward Heaven,
then we turn back; so it was with the people of that time, but Jehoshaphat
went out again ver. 4.
(he had sent forth the Priests and Levites, as we read, it may be he went out
himself then also) through the people from Bersheba to Mount Ephraim, and
brought them BACK to the LORD GOD of their Fathers. They were revolted and
gone, Jehoshaphat sent Priests and Levites after them, and then went forth
himself. And see the success: he brought them back to the LORD GOD of their
Fathers.

Then he prosecutes the work of the LORD; rectifies things amiss in the
Church and State, sets Judges in the ver. 5.
Land, gives them a charge very strict, and pressing to duty; Take heed what
you do, you judge not for man, but for the LORD, ver 6.
Who is with you in the judgment: You are gods on earth, in ver. 7.
GODS stead, let the fear of the LORD be upon you, and no iniquity in you, for
there is none with the LORD your GOD, no respect of persons, no taking of
gifts: [A corrupt Judge from that day this charge was given, to this present
hour, never respected this Scripture] Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of
the Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the judgment. Of
whom? of the ver. 8.
poor and needy, and of the rich also: but it is called the judgment of the
LORD: That they might consider well their charge and not trespass against the
LORD, and so bring wrath upon themselves and upon their brethren; Thus shall
you do in the fear of the LORD faithfully and with a perfect heart ver. 9.
. Corrupt Judges, vile Priests, treacherous Levites, trespass sore against the
LORD, and against their brethren; they bring wrath upon themseves and upon the
Land ver. 10.
: But do thus in the fear of the LORD faithfully and with a perfect heart,
and ye shall not trespass. Ye shall have Rulers over you, and officers before
you, all this for your encouragement; but this is for the comfort and
encouragement both, of all the good; Deal courageously and the LORD shall be
with the good. These very words gave heart and courage to the inhabitants of
Libnah, to forsake his Son Jehoram, when he had forsaken the LORD, as says
the learned Knight in his History of the World.

And yet there is a question m^de, whether the Priests might forsake Jehoram or
not. Hear the case, consider on it, and then judge; This is the case; Jehoram
followed-on in the ways of Ahab and after the counsels of Athaliah his wife,
a wicked woman; that is clear in the Text, and so is this; That Jehoram
forsook the Law of his GOD, and forced the people so to do. These Priests,
the inhabitants of Libnah followed-on in the ways of the LORD, keeping the
charge of the LORD, and close to the Law and the Commandment; They would not
be forced to forsake the LORD, so they turned the back on Jehoram and forsook
him; This is the case, and this the question; Whether the Priests might
follow-on in the ways of Ahab to destruction; or in the ways of the LORD unto
salvation? More briefly; whither they might forsake Jehoram, or forsake the
LORD, whether GOD be King or Jehoram? That is the question. The Judge of all
the world has made answer hereunto (as His manner is) by Himself Ezech. 14 7.
. He has laid fore judgments upon Jehoram, and He will be sharp and quick in
answering those, who make question, whose ways are to be followed, the ways
of Ahab or the ways of GOD: And who is to be forsaken, Jehoram or the Law of
GOD. The sacred Text makes clear answer here, the Priests forsook Jehoram,
because he had forsook the LORD GOD of his Fathers. They 2 Chro. 21. 10.
that will not take this for answer, shall be answered in another manner, as
Iehoram was answered; the LORD will answer them by Himself: This in passage by
occasion of Jehoshaphats charge, Deal courageously, and the LORD will be with
the good. Thus Jehoshaphat has ordered the Church, and State according to
rule, and very wisely postured the Kingdom. ver. 11.


Now we read on, and behold a whole world of 2 Chronicles. 20.
Enemies are marching-on against Jehoshaphat. What way will he take now, for
they think to swallow him up? He was not to seek his way now; he had prepared
his heart to seek GOD Chap. 19. v. 3.
; that GOD, Who had moved the Captains to depart from him; That GOD, Whom he
had sought with all his heart, and took care that all his people should so
seek Him would be found now. He that had prepared his heart to seek the LORD,
was prepared for his adversary; Jehoshaphat he was not to seek now (the Enemy
was upon him) what way he was to take; he that had so lifted-up his heart in
the ways of the LOLD, that he had stepped over the groves, and taken them away;
and had given a charge, that judgment and justice should be executed to all
the people; That all the Cities of Judah should be taught, touching the Law out
of the Book of the LORD; he whose heart was so lift-up in the ways of the
LORD, could tell what to do now, even lift-up his eyes to Heaven; The doors
of that Sanctuary always stand open, to those, whose hearts are so lift-up;
And when a man, looking before and behind, and on every side, and knows not
what to do; when refuge fails, then he can tell what to do; lift-up his eyes
to Heaven, hear what GOD will say; (He will speak peace,) and wait
patiently, in the use of all means, what GOD will do; He will do wonders;
where? At the mountain of straites: certainly He will, and Jehoshaphat will
lift-up his eyes unto Him; and thereon stay himself. It is a clear case, so
every man should do, lift-up his eyes to GOD in time of trouble; Nay, so every
man will do, whose heart is not like a stone; but Iehoshaphat only can lift-up
his eyes thither, and find present help from thence, for he lifted-up his
heart in the ways of the LORD in the days of his peace.

And this I thought most worthy our noting from the expression in the Text,
which yields us this comfortable conclusion; That he and he only, whose heart
is LIFT-VP in the ways of the LORD; can LIFT-VP his eyes to the LORD in the
day of trouble, with assured confidence of present help. Now we read on in
the Chapter.

A great multitude comes against Iehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat FEARED and set
himself to seek the LORD, and ver. 2.
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah ver. 2.
. [That's a good fear, which drives a man, not to his heels, but closer to
GOD: and it will be well sure, for it empties his heart of all creature
confidence, and then GOD comes-in.] But was this a time to fast, and pray; or
rather, was it not the fittest time to lay hold on Bow and Spear, and prepare
for Battle? No, Iehoshaphat looked not to Bow nor Spear, but looks to GOD,
acknowledging, he has no might, nor knows he what to do, but looke-up. We
have no MIGHT, says he; we know not what to do ver. 12.
. No; let reason come in now, that would tell him; he has MIGHT enough, and may
know what to do; he had men of war, mighty men of war 2 Cro. 17 13, 14,
15, 16.
; see a list of them; their numbers, greater then was the Host of the
Ethiopian; And yet, no might, nor knew he what to do! Let him bring forth
these men of might, and march on; so reason would counsel. Iehoshaphat was
wiser then so, for he had a better counselor: Asah! what can these two do,
flesh against flesh, but, as we do, eat each the ^^hers Arm? he and his
people look steadfastly to the Father of Spirits, the GOD of Hosts, Who created
the Smith, that forms the Instrument, and the waster to destroy Isa* 54 16*
; our EYES ARE UPON THEE (...) 20* 1^
. The King relied more upon HIS GOD, as appeared in seeking to Him, and
praising of Him, then upon his many companies, or could have relied for
dependence, if those many had been multiplied by Thousands. And we hear his
prayer, he called upon GOD, and SO he was delivered; he remembered GOD, Who is
GREAT and TERRIBLE; in Whose Neh. 4 14.
hand is power and might; art not Thou GOD in Heaven ver 6.
? Then he pleads his interest in This GOD; art not Thou our GOD ver* 7.
? Then he calls to mind the Right Hand of the Almighty, what He had done of
old; And SO he is delivered, and had the victory, a glorious victory, whereof we
may say indeed, as a great Commander greatly beloved, said of a late victory,
never was there seen less of man, and more of GOD; for the Enemies here, every
one helped to destroy one another ver. 23.
. So, when Judah looked toward the great multitude, behold they were dead
bodies, fallen to the earth and none escaped ver 24.
. And when Iehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of them,
they found among them in abundance; both Riches and precious Jewels more then
they could carry away, and they were three days in gathering the spoil, it
was so much ver. 25.
[It is not in vain to fix the eye upon GOD.]

Then Jehoshaphat makes a memorial thereof, calls the place where GOD gave
them that victory, BERACHAH ver. 26, 27, 28.
, a Valley of Blessings. So they returned, every man of Judah, Jehoshaphat in
the forefront of them to Jerusalem with joy and praises in their hearts and
mouths. Praise was comely then, for then GOD gave them the victory; He must
have the praise and glory; He made them to go again to Jerusalem with joy,
for the Lord had made them to rejoice over their Enemies. ver. 27.
He caused His Fear to come upon all the Kingdoms of ver. 29.
those Countries, when they had heard that the LORD fought against the Enemies
of Israel. So the Realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: For HIS GOD gave him rest
round about; he had ver. 30.
a P^ace of GODS making, from His hand, That was a sure peace. Rest indeed;
such a Peace the LORD will give to that man, whose heart is lift-up in His
ways. More is recorded, touching this King, the time when he began and ended
his Reign; his Mothers name also, and how he walked, even as his ^^ther Asa,
doing that which was good in the sight of ver. 32.
the LORD; Howbeit the high places stood still, as in his Fathers days; but
the people are blamed for that (indeed we are j^^ly blamed, we are the block
in the way, the Hill, the Mountain, a mighty hindrance to Reformation) An
unprepared heart is such an hindrance, and such an heart we have, then such an
hindrance are we, for we have not prepared our hearts unto the GOD of our
Fathers. It is now, as it was then: Howbeit the high places were not taken
away, for the people had 2 Chronicles. 20. 33.
not yet prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers. The high places
will not down, till the stout heart falls; till the high thoughts and
imaginations there are down, these abominable things cannot be taken away;
till the heart be prepared for such a mercy, till it be squared (whether by
blows or sweet entreaties, that is not the question, but squared, and most
likely as stones for the building, by hard blows) to GODS holy word, and will,
till this be done within, and upon the heart, this execution will not be done
upon the abominations before the eye. The heart must be prepared, must be put
into a frame of holiness before they can be fit for, or deal with holy
things, Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast Mat. 7. 6.
your pearls before Swine; Swine will trample pearls under their feet, and if
you give holy things to dogs, they will turn again and rent you. What should
a rough and an impolished Stone do in GODS building! What should an
Hypocritical heart do with a sincere worship? An unprepared heart with pure
and prepared Ordinances? These agree no better then old cloth to a new garment;
then new wine with old bottles. Holy things relish no better with an unholy and
unprepared heart, then did Mannah to the Israelites. Now our soul is dried
away Numb. 11. 6.
. Was there nothing to stay their souls, and to refresh them? Yes, they had
Angels food, excellent food, Meat from Heaven, Mannah, was their food, but that
was as good as nothing; There is nothing at all besides this Manna before our
eyes. See there! Leekes, Onyons, and Garlike, Aegiptian fare and slavery to
boot, would relish better with them, for their hearts were in Egypt. We might
observe the sore wrath of GOD upon that people, who were so contrary in their
choice and liking, and upon the people here, whose hearts were so unprepared:
Their next King fitted them very well, he was to them according to their
stubborn hearts; he gave the people their Idols, they loved so well, bids
them serve stocks and stones, and they, that would not show themselves so
brutish, he would have forced so to do. But we must observe our selves, it is
our own case, We have not prepared our hearts to the GOD of our Fathers; We
will not be reformed; we count Reformation, as that perverse Israelite did, a
killing; we account no better of it, and it is so Exodus 1. 13, 14.
indeed to an unprepared heart. But O what sorrows, what breakings will these
our stubborn hearts cause unto us! The LORD is about His strange work, and he
will accomplish it. Now the LORD sanctify His Own work, and prepare a people
for Himself by all this. The LORD prepare our hearts also, that we, who would
not be drawn by allurements, may be compelled by hard blows. Amen.

The rest of the Acts of Jehoshaphat first and last are written, but the
writings are lost ver. 34.
. And yet some of his last Acts are recorded; not so good as the first. Toward
the end of his days, he was as his good Father, overtaken with infirmities
ver. 35.
. And after this he joined himself with him, who did very wickedly; and to
make Ships to go to Tarshish. A Prophet tells him roundly of it, in effect
thus; Though hand joined in hand, and strength with strength, yet the wicked
shall not be unpunished Prove. 11 21.
; no nor the Righteous man neither, That joins himself with the wicked, The
LORD has broken thy works; and so it was; And the Ships were broken, that
they were not able to go to Tarshish. Surely the LORD will have his Servant
ver. 37.
join himself to the LORD, not with those that hate the Lord; If he do join
strength with such, it shall do him no good, but hurt, it shall weaken him.
But thus Jehoshaphat did, and it is the last Act of his, that is recorded. So
the wise GOD permits it to be; otherwise, the very best Kings (which was
intimated before) might forget themselves, how weak they are, standing alone.
If there were nothing of humane frailty, even in open sight, to stain their
best works, they would cast too great a luster in their eyes; if no cloud to
eclipse the speciousnesse of them, they might make an Idol of their Acts, and
their credit by them: And we poor People would think of them, and give unto
them, above what is meet: Therefore it is (there may be other Reasons, which
GOD knows) that the Sun of the most glorious Kings, that ever were upon the
Earth, has, in the close of their day, set in a cloud, he shall rise in glory.

That which follows now touching Iehoshaphat is that, which will ever follow;
for it is concerning his death and burial, which needs not be mentioned any
more, seeing it has been to this day, and will be ever to the worlds end, the
end and close of all, as with Iehoshaphat, he went the way of all the 2 Chro.
28.
world after his Fathers, slept with them, and was buried. His Son Iehoram, a
very wicked man, reigned in his stead; and he has a Son too like the Father,
and yet, though Partus sequitur ventrem, not half so bad as the mother: Father
and son both blundred-on in the ways of Ahabs house, and after their counsels
to destruction, as we read before. Then Athaliah played Rex, till Iehojada cut
her short, we will read his Acts now worthy such a Priest.

THE ACTS OF JEHOJADA.
CHAP. VI.
Jehojada the chief Priest takes an excellent way for the Posturing the
Kingdom, executes judgment and justice: makes a covenant between GOD and
the people; between the King and the People; breaks down the Altars and
Images of Baal, slays the vile Priests there, appoints Officers for GODS
House, and sets Porters that no unclean thing shouldenter enter there.

IEhojada, a Chief Priest indeed, and a Prince too, takes care to set the
Kingdom in a Posture of Defense against an usurping and insolent Idolatresse:
the way he takes is remarkable; he first causes the Captains to enter into a
Protestation 2 Chro. 23. 1.
or Covenant with him; Tells them Gods Counsel, touching the succession in
David's house ver. 3.
; orders the Militia of the House of GOD, after that calls forth the Captains,
makes them provision of Arms, and then swears allegiance to their true King;
appoints every man his place ver. 4, 5.
; sets a guard about the King; every man with his weapon in his hand ver. 7.
. All is done as Iehoiada appointed; Then the King is brought forth, the Crown
is put upon his head, but he is not made King yet. The Testimony is put into
his hand. What is that? The Law of GOD, the Kings Law-Booke ver. 18.
, whereof you read, Deuteronomy. 17. Wherein the King must learn, how to serve GOD,
and to govern his people.

This is the Testimony they gave into his hands, and so they made him King ver.
11.
, And having anointed him, they said, GOD save the King, Amen. But Athaliah
says not so; she expected to hear, GOD save the Queen, when in truth, there
could be no such prayer put up for her; she hears of a King, and she calls out
Treason, and she doubles it, Treason, Treason. Who does so? Athaliah, that
firebrand in Judah, who had consumed the noblest Families therein, and
murdered all the Seed Royal: The most notorious woman in all the world,
except one, and that was her Mother Iezabell. See the manner! This wicked woman
cries out Treason, Treason; calls others by her own name. But what was the
matter, that occasioned such an outcry? This was all; The Crown was set upon
the right head; the testimony was put into the Kings hand; he is of the house
of David, he must be King; and the people put up a Prayer for him, heartily,
GOD save the King; and all the people rejoiced. Think upon it, ponder it well.
Is there any Treason in all this? Yes, says Athaliah; Treason, Treason! That
was Treason in her account, That the Seed of David should reign: That there
should be such acclamations, such prosperity wished to the Kingdom of David.
But her time is come, she must be made drunk with her own blood, that had shed
the blood of her husbands children. No matter what she says now, Iehoiada will
not dispute so clear a case; He charges his Captains, saying, have her forth
of the Ranges ver. 14.
: And if any one be so foole-hardy, as to appear on her side, Slay him also
with the Sword, but defile not the house of the LORD. So they laid hands on her
ver. 15.
. And where was she slain? It is worth our observation; just at the entering
the horse-gate; she was hurried out of GODS Court, and could not reach home to
her own Court, before she felt the Sword in her bowels; she had lived like a
beast, tyrannized like a Lioness; she must be slain near to her Stable,
entering the Horse-gate. Look about you and consider; you will find that some
ignominious death has befell the Idolatresse; and a place where very suitable to
the manner of her life. Where was she buried? There is no answer to that. As
her Mother Iezabell was trampled under the feet of her enemies herses: So
Athaliah was slain at her own horse-gate; Iezabell was devoured by dogs, as
the LORD had threatened. What became of Athaliah, we do not find; she was
slain, and before the Horsegate: That was as much as Jehojada was to look
after, not where such a wicked woman was to be buried.

And now here was a good work dispatched; what was that? Judgment and Justice
was executed; The wicked Counselor was remooved, she, that had destroyed the
Seed Royal, and councelled her own Son to his Destruction.

A good riddance indeed! Now Jehoiada goes on comfortably; And what does he? He
made a Covenant between Him, [GOD] and between all the People, and between
the King, that they should be the LORDS People ver. 16.
. Of infinite consideration (...).
all this; He made a Covenant between GOD, the People* and the King; He showed
the King the meaning and purpose of the Testimony, put into his hand; bids the
King remember, he was in GODS stead, sat in GODS Throne; must do all by GODS
book: That is his Covenant betwixt GOD and his people, now that GOD has made
him King over them.]

That they should be the LORDS people. Had Jehoiada sat muzing, as many days
as he spent minutes upon this great business, the crowning the King, securing
him, and his Kingdom; he could not have thought of a speedier and more
compendious way then this, to engage them to be the LORDS People. If they be
so, they have assured confidence for ever. The LORDS vineyard, it is the
security of that vineyard; The LORDS Kingdom, it is the security of that
Kingdom; The LORDS People, it is the security of that people. Touch not these
annointed-ones. Why? They are Mine: Nor the Prophets, for the same Reason, they
are Mine also, and as the Apple of Mine Eye, So I tender them, says the Lord.
It is so, and so you may run through all the Cities, Towns, Houses, Gates,
Ships, Strongholds and Forts; it is the Lords City, a secured City, etc. But
look to it now; if not the Lords, we have no security from His hand for our
Peace: Every thing may do us hurt, nothing shall do us good, if not the LORDS:
Go ye upon her Walls and destroy; Take away her battlements Ier. 5* 10.
. Ai, if we had an Arm like GOD, we could easily do it might the Adversary
say; But it is not so soon done as spoke; the walls are high, and the
battlements very strong. No matter how high they are, nor how strong they are,
you shall take them. Why? They are not the LORDS (i. e.) Their defense is
departed from them Numb 14. 9.
; The LORD protecteth them not, and then wounded men shall take the Fortress
Ier. 37. 10.
; and the lame the prey Esa. 33. 23.
. In being or not being, the Lords people is summed* up all our comforts, or
all our woes. Therefore of mighty consideration this is, That they might be the
Lords people. And now the people of GOD rise apace and down falls Baall, and
they shatter his house all too pieces over his Lordships head; and yet the
work is not done; they break down his Altars, and Images all to pieces l: And
yet they have but little more then 2 Chro. 23. ^vor. 17.
half done: But here will be a perfect Reformation presently, when they have
slain the Mass Priest, Mattan the Priest of Baal before the Altar, and that is
done now, and before the Altars: I pray you note it; That Priest of Baal, like
our Mass-Priest now, had been offering before the Altars, and when he did so,
he offered sacrifice to Devils. Now he must be slain before the Altars; where
he had wrought such abominations, there he must be slain. Now Jehoiada has but
one work more to do, then the Reformation is complete, and Judah is as
well-postured, as can be expected. He appointed the Officers of the house of
the LORD; set the Porters at the gate of the house of the LORD ver. 18.
, that none, which was unclean in any thing should enter in there ver. 19.
. Indeed there cannot be too much Caution about the house of the LORD, a double
watch there does well, for if any thing that is unclean enter in there, it
will diffuse it is self there like a Leprosy unto all the people. Of mighty
Consideration this also, for filthiness from the Priest, is as spreading as
oil from the head, spreading it is self through all the people, for from the
Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone-forth into all the Land. And now
the MILITIA Iet. 23. 15.
was as completed as it could be, for so it was ordered: And so successful
it was, That all the People of the Land rejoiced, and the City was quiet, When
was it quiet? The Answer to that is very considerable; After ^ Chron. 13 20, 21.
that, they had slain Athaliah with the Sword, that wicked and idolatrous
woman; the City was quiet, and not before. She was still divising iniquity,
and working evil upon her bed, and when Morning was light, she practiced it,
as the power was in her hand, and this did greatly disquiet the City: but it
was quiet after that they had slain Athaliah with the Sword. The rest touching
good Jehoiada follows in the Story of King Ioash, but it is gone before in
this Chronicle: For Ioash was, though a good Prince, yet a very bad King, and
the most unthankefull Person that ever we read off. He has an Amaziah, a
son little better then the Father: Amaziah an Vzziah, both naught: Vzziah a
Iotham, a very good man, we will read what he did, and not much, but very
well.

THE ACTS OF JOTHAM.
CHAP. VII.
Jothams Story is short, for his life was not long; he lived long in a short
time. He built much, and was mighty; A mighty Reason, why he was so.

KING Iotham follows in the Story, for he succeeded Vzziah, and the plague,
that rose-up in his Fathers forehead, must needs 2 Chro. 27. ^.
be in the sons eye: So he was forewarned not to meddle with Temple-work, but
to leave that to the Priests, and to see that they were faithful in it. And
yet this is noted of the people, not for the credit of the King; And the ver. 2.
people, yet did corruptly: And this of the King, he built ver. 3, 4.
MVCH, an exceeding high Gate (sixty Cubits upright, says Josephus) and
Cities, and Castles, and Towns: He subdued the Ammonites, and made them
Tributaries, Ejusmodi ver^ Pr^^cep^ fuit, ut nullum in e^ virtutis genus
desideres.
they gave unto Iotham very largely: He prospers, for GOD was with him. I will
add hereto the Testimony Josephus gives of him: This was such a Prince, as a
man could find no kind of virtue wanting in him; He worshipped GOD so
religiously; he governed his men so righteously; he was so provident for the
City, and did so greatly amplify it, That by his virtue and prowess, he made
his whole Kingdom not contemptible to his Enemies; but to his Servants,
Inhabitants, and Citizens, prosperous and happy. In short, his reign was not
long, but as happy in all things, as himself was devout and virtuous. So
Josephus. I will rest in that Testimony, the Spirit gives of him, and conclude
with it. So Jotham became MIGHTY, because be prepared his ways before the
LORD his GOD. How old he was, and how long he reigned is recorded in the same
place, and then good ver. 6.
Jotham slept with his good Fathers. Ahaz succeeds him, a bad Son, but Ahaz
has a good Hezekiah, and his goodness is upon everlasting Record. We will
read his ACTS now.

THE ACTS OF HEZEKIAH.
CHAP. VIII.
Hezekiah his first work is the purging of the Temple, and first care, the
setting faithful Officers there. Then about the COVENANT and the PASSOVER,
this way he takes to secure his Kingdom, and he finds it a sure and secure
way, which never yet failed, and never can fail unto the Worlds end. No
Adversary can do a Kingdom hurt without, when Idols are thrown down within.
Hezekiah has a great Deliverance, from a proud Adversary, then a great
Affliction, He finds changes in the World, tells us what we must look for
there, but peace in GOD.

HEzekiah, Jothams Grandchild, began his reign, and Reformation together; he
was religious, and wise both, and must delay no time, for indeed 2 Chro. 29. 3.
his Father King Ahaz. had caused a Deformation ver 3.
through his Kingdom, and weakened his MILITIA very much. So that it did but
stand in a fainting Posture. Therefore Hezekiah bestirred himself, and let no
time run-out to waste. In the first year of his reign and month, he opened
the doors of GODS House, and repaired them [It was observed before; he must
look well to GODS House, that expects GOD should look to and establish his
house, and there he must begin and end both] brought in the Priests and
Levites, charge them; Sanctify now your selves, and sanctify the house of
the LORD GOD; carry forth the FILTHINESS thence ver. 5.
, make clean work there; Remember my sons, the fierce wrath of GOD, yet
before your eyes: He has delivered us to troubles, to astonishment, and to
hissing; keep his judgments like frontlets before your eyes: And be not
negligent in such a time as ver. 11.
this. And he found the Levites (the ordinary Ministers) very obedient in word
and deed, for they were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves then the
Priests ver. 34.
. But so he charged them. And for himself, it is in his heart to lead the way,
making a Covenant with the LORD GOD of Israel ^, that His fierce wrath may
turn away from us ver. 10.
[would we have the fierce wrath of the LORD turn away? Then we must come up
close to Him in a Covenant:] So the King does, and see how all follow, and how
quick they are, how they bestow themselves. Indeed the King is a leading-hand,
whether he goes on the right or the left, the people observe not curiously, but
they follow. It was well here, K. Hezekiah kept strait-on, and see how well all
perform their duty! But you must note, The good King is at their elbows, as
chief Over-seer there, he is zealous for the bringing forth the uncleanenesse
ver. 16.
out of the Temple; and the Levites show their zeal too, [The Kings presence
presses much to duty, else the Levites are but slaggs; but now they are very
active, and out they carry the filthiness, and throw it into the brook
Kidron. And very much filthiness there was, for Ahaz in his transgression ver.
19.
, had made holy things common, which caused the King, Priests, and all more
work and trouble, as it is always when the Predecessor is wicked, but they
went through it willingly; The Kings zeal and example carried all smooth
before them with rejoicing; [nothing is hard to a willing mind: And zeal in
GODS service feels no burden there] A great deal of work was done in a
little time; And Hezekiah rejoiced with all his heart, that GOD had so postured
the people (i. e.) set them in such a good frame to obedience: So we read; 2
Chro. 29. 36.
and Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that GOD had prepared the people,
for the thing was done SVDDENLY.

We will note it twice over, if thrice it will do us no hurt, The Kings heart
is upright; the peoples heart prepared, all are willing; what now? Great things
are done suddenly. Read back-ward now, people hang back, are not a willing
people; The heart is not prepared, not upright; What now? Things are done
heavily. Come-on again for now we are quite-off. Here is a Covenant; All
ASSOCIATE themselves, the King, he is the Leader, Priests, Levites, People,
these follow close, ASSOCIATED; here are many; and yet but one shoulder, one
hand, and one lip; and, which makes the Union, one heart and one mind; and now
things are done suddenly. In his Epist.
I remember here what one Man did, and how suddenly, Mr. Fox comes into my
mind now, he took an excellent work in hand, we all know it, he had an
excellent spirit, an upright heart he had, and his heart was, next to GOD, with
the upright still; he did that in a few months, which, we would scarce think
could be done in so many years: But he was all for GOD, and for His Church,
indeed he was for he was nobody for himself: and he did all those volumes, in
reference to such a work, suddenly.

Now the LORD give us such hearts so upright, so prepared, and then, we also
shall be so willing, and shall do things suddenly. The King go's before we
will follow, he is a fair and full example in our eyes.

He has made himself, and his people sure in a Covenant; 2 Chronicles. 30.
now he applies himself, and sets his heart to the Seal, the PASSOVER. And
mark well, for I can can but point to it: What means he makes, That all
Judah, Ephraim 2 Chro. 20. 1.
and Manasseh shall here of it, He takes counsel about it (if ver. 2.
I were not in haste, I would note it) for, notwithstanding all the haste, he
will consult upon it, and take deliberation, how such a company should be
called together and fitted, I mean, Sanctified for so solemn a work: The
Proclamation ver. 5.
issued forth, and the Posts carry it throughout all Israel from Beersheba even
unto Dan, according to the Kings Commandment, ver. 6.
and these words, Turn again unto the LORD, and He will return to the
remnant of you: Be not like your Brethren, that trespassed against the LORD GOD
of their Fathers, who therefore gave them up to Desolation, as you see, etc.
[still the good King sets the judgments of GOD, as a mountain before the
Peoples eye] Be not stiffnecked, if you will continue so, the fierceness of
GODS ver 7, 8.
wrath will beat you to pieces: But if you turn to Him, He will return to
you, and show you favor in the eyes of them, ver 9.
that lead you Captive; and He Himself will be a gracious, and merciful GOD
unto you. I have read the Contents of the Kings Proclamation, and Letters, I
think you never read the like: How is it entertained? With scorn and mocks
ver. 10.
. Thus it was, such a pious Proclamation; such Letters, as full of Grace as of
words, have bin entertained with disdain and derision; when the contrary, A
Declaration for Liberty, Letters as full of dishonor to GOD, as of sillables,
have bin entertained with hand and heart and all acceptance. Such a brutish
people we are, and yet all are not so; Nevertheless diverse of Ashur and
Manasseh, and of Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem e: Also in
Judah the hand of GOD was ver. 11. 12.
to give them one heart to do the Commandment of the King, and of the Princes
by the word of the LORD.

The hand of GOD, Mark that, till that be given-out, Hezekiah may call and
call, and pull and pull, and have no answer; he may as well pull at a Bell
without a Clapper to call the people to Church (as our Phrase is:) But GODS
hand is reached forth to a person, or to a people, and then they come-in to do
according to the Law and the Commandment* suddenly. I cannot forget that word.

I do not speak this to make men slack in their commands, or their
endeavors: but to quicken all; and, when all is done, first and last, to
looke-up to GOD, for He speaks with a ver. 13.
Strong hand. I cannot stay upon things here, they be so many, and so notable;
my contrivance is here to thrust out of the throng.

And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the Feast, a very great
Congregation, and they arose. What then? ver. 14.
It follows. I warrant you; and away they took the Altars, even all, and cast
them into the brook Kidron. That brook was fatal to Altars and Images,
thereunto they tumbled those dunghill things, after the uncleanenesse found in
the Temple. They were now about to celebrate a great Feast, never the like
since the time of Solomon; and down the Altars must, else they had bin ill
fitted for a Feast, and worse fitted for a Blessing and such a rejoicing: down
they be tumbled, and into the Brook, and then they kill the Passover, all
decently and ver. 15.
in order. And the people go so stoutly on in this good way, That they shamed
the Priest quite, that they did, for the people had more zeal then the Priest
(and that is very possible, the more their shame indeed) so the Priests,
beholding the peoples forwardness, blushed at their own coldness; and for
very shame sanctified themselves after the manner.

But the multitudes, they were many; were newly met from all quarters; things
could not be in an outward conformity to the Requisites of that solemn time,
nor to the Purification of the Sanctuary, then Hezekiah bestirrs himself,
knows which way to look, puts-up a sweet Prayer for his People: Thither they
came in great multitudes, with their faces steadfastly set to Jerusalem, and
with good hearts sure, upright and sincere; The King prays; Now the good LORD
pardon every one, that prepares his heart, who sets that right, the good ver.
18, 19.
LORD pardon him, though legal preparatives are wanting, some things there out
of order: yet pardon good Lord, where Thou see a ready will, and a bent
heart, in a good posture and frame toward Thee, and do desire with desire,
That all things in Thy service might be done according to Thy Mind and Will,
and all suddenly; Good LORD pardon those persons, that have those hearts, Amen.
What follows?

The LORD hearkened and heard Hezekiah, and healed the ver. 20.
people, That he did, and it will still be so, where there is, as it was here,
such an heart, and such a prayer. Goe-on I pray you, for it is better and
better; The LORD has spoken comfortably; Hezekiah speaks Comfortably ver. 22.
too (GOD spoke so first, but I can but point to things) To whom speaks the
King so comfortably? To those that were good sure, and were good Teachers, for
so we read, That taught the good Knowledge of the LORD; Good knowledge, for it
makes men good, and so do not Riches nor Honors, nor any other thing, which we
call good under the Sun; yet that is the good we most of all look after, not
the good knowledge of the LORD, That made it so good; Know the LORD, and you
know all things; if you know Him not, you know nothing: A comprehensive
knowledge indeed, but it was noted before p. 32.
;

Observe this here: What is the work, the duty of a Minister? To teach the good
knowledge of the LORD. What shall I say to them, that do not thus? Nothing;
The Lord will say enough to them, to make them speechless: And the good King
will never speak comfortably unto them, who do not teach The good knowledge of
the LORD. We go-on, And behold how merry (in the Lord) the good King, and his
good people are! For they were upon the service of the Lord; Their hearts were
taken with it; here was Pass time indeed; for in an holy mirth, as well as in a
Calvish brutish Mirth, time passes away and is gone before we are aware; O it
is all in all, when a man feels a relish, a delight and sweet contentment in
the service of the Lord (as he does, that is targht The good knowledge of the
LORD) he is as merry in his service before the Lord, as we are when we have our
minstrell with us, and are dancing and skipping after our measures, and manner
of Heathen people before a May Pole, there learning the knowledge of war, by
such feats of Activity as are learned at May-games (for so much I have learnt
by reading) That such sports will make us fit for war; and is it not even so!
Have we not gained well by our May-games! Have we not got experience to fit us
for war by our activenesse before a Minstrell! Our sporting with the Lord,
has made us fit for war indeed, to be consumed by the Sword of the Almighty;
And truly, though I am no Prophet, I feared all this more then 7 years ago.

I have not forgot my self all this while, I know where I am, though out of my
way a little: Nor do I forget how much I was mistaken a little before, where I
compared the mirth of that man, who delights himself in the good knowledge of
the LORD, in service done to His Name, where I compared I say, his mirth to our
mirth, in our warrlike exercises, I mean, rioting in the Daytime. And yet
there is some conformity, agreement and a^swerablenesse, not betwixt mirth and
mirth; person and person: but betwixt heart and heart, affection and affection,
set upon this mirth. (I express my self, as well as I can) We in our warrlike
exercises have passed away the time, we know not how: The Holy day (we will
call it so, for whether it be the LORDS DAY (Holy indeed) or Saints days in
our conceit, all one to us, to Whom that Day is most holy, whereon we may be
most profane) The holy Day is too short, we wish it longer, and that every
Sunday had it is seconds (so one expresses it) as two Sundays have (now my
mind is upon their sports, I will name days, as the Heathen did)
Red-Letter-Dayes are as pleasing to us, as to children; we may riot on them,
and they may play. Why now our minds, our affections meet, Heart answers heart,
ours upon our sport ver. 23.
, theirs in the sacred Text, Let out upon their service before the Lord; and so
we will look upon that again, and shall find it just so;

They had continued seven days at their Feast in their holy mirth, Offering
Peace Offerings, and making Confession to the LORD *GOD of their Fathers (the
more hearty the confession, the more hearty their mirth: As the sowrer the
Herbs, the sweeter the Passover) And now those days were over.

The whole Assembly (mark you that) took counsel. About what? To keep other
seven days: And as they advised, so they did; They kept other seven days with
gladness. Look you there, how hearts and affections answer, theirs and ours.
And it must be so, for this reason; While the heart is altogether carnal, it
let us forth, and spends it is spirits upon profane things: Answerably, as a
spiritual heart let us forth it self toward holy things. But here is a wide
difference again, our mirth is of no continuance, it ends with the day, when
we shut-in our doors at night, we shut forth our mirth for the most part; and
if death, or something like it, should stare us in the face, the night after we
have bin so merry after our manner: where is our mirth then? The very relish of
it is gall and worme-wood, and we are dead with very fear. The righteous not
so, because such is not their mirth; They can keep days with gladness, and
does their mirth cease with the day? No they have their Songs for the Night,
even their night of sorrow, their deepest affliction. I have not been too long
upon this point, but though * breake-off, the sacred Text carries it on
further, for behold nothing but joy and gladness and blessings, never the like
since the time of Solomon; There were mighty Prayers too, full of spirit and
life, Their Prayer came-up to His holy Dwelling place, even unto Heaven. ver.
27.


They goe-on in the work of the Lord, as men refreshed with 2 Chro. 31.
new wine* and see how they execute the wrath of the Lord upon Groaves, Altars,
Images, breaking, cutting, hewing, throwing them down, till they had utterly
destroyed them all: Their hearts were now warmed with zeal, they could ver* 2.
not now hold their hands still, till they had utterly destroyed them all.

Then the King appoints the courses of the Priests and the Levites, every man
to his service; and portions to the Priests and Levites also, that they might
be encouraged. Thus did Hezekiah, what he did, and how he did it, we will note
it down more fully anon.

Now it will be said by some, That I have spoke a great deal, and little to my
purpose, which indeed is, To show how a Kingdom is fortified, and it is MILITIA
maintained and made strong; and to this, I have said nothing, so it may be
said; And if so, my answer is; That they are much mistaken in the matter, for I
have said all, that makes for the security and establishment of King and
Kingdom; when I have set down all that Hezekiah has done, for that great
purpose: we have not all yet; we have heard what he has done, in reference to
the Covenant, to the Passover, to the Priests, to the services therein; what
he has thrown down, and cast forth, and what he has brought-in: In all this
the King has engaged himself and his people to their GOD; he has entitled
GOD to his Kingdom, that the Kingdom may be the LORDS Kingdom; his people,
the LORDS people; he will have the house of his GOD, to be kept as GODS house,
and those that serve therein to be sanctified ones, the Lords Priests and the
Lords Levites; and that they may attend the work there, that unum necessarium:
They shall not take care about many things, f^r the King will take care for
them; so he commanded to give the portion of the Priests and the Levites, That
they might be encouraged in the Law of the LORD 2 Chro. 31. 4.
, which was not noted before.

2. He will suffer nothing to stand, which cut-faceth the command of his GOD,
all shall down which his LORD GOD will have thrown down. This was the way to
make himself and his Kingdom, to stand fast and firm for ever, as the
perpetual hills, and everlasting Mountains: The way to make himself, and
people as a wall of Brass, and the Blast of the terrible one, as a puff of
wind against it, I mean, against 2 Chro. 31. 1.
a Pillar of Brass, or a Mountain made of Northern Iron and ver. 20, 21.
steel. We shall observe it to be so anon; we will recollect here in two
verses, What Hezekiah did, and the manner how he did it; Thus did Hezekiah
throughout all Judah, and wrought that, which was good and right and truth,
before the LORD his GOD. What had he wrought?

That was spoken before, but we will read it again: for me thinks the words
run like a whirlwind or a Tempest, so carrying Idols and Images down
before it, and scattering them; he brake the Images in pieces, cut-downe the
Groaves; threw-downe the High Places and the Altars, out of all Judah and
Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh. How long was he upon that work? Until
they had utterly destroyed them all. Now mark the manner of performance, in
what sincerity, truth and uprightness of heart, Hezekiah did all the
forementioned, for the manner and the carriage of the heart commends all, in
all that we do; And in every work, that he began in the service of the house
of GOD, and in the Law and in the Commandments, to seek his GOD, he did it
with all his heart, and prospered 2 Chro. 31 23*
.

Now King Hezekiah may take his rest, lie down and sleep; he can repose his
head in the lap and Arms of the Almighty, for he had done the Law and the
Commandment; he had removed the cursed things; but now he will not be carnally
secure, rather the more watchful, because of this thing, for now he shall
hear of enemies rushing like mighty waters. Why now? Because now he has
angered the Devil, and all his servants; he has cut them to the heart, and
they g^aw their tongues for pain: For King Hezekiah has persecuted them, their
Groves, Altars and Images with his Tempest. Now the Enemy will come-in like a
flood, and if Hezekiah sleep now, as we call sleeping, the Enemy will come
upon him before he shall know or see. The King keeps his watch; has done his
duty, postured his Kingdom by plummet and rule, for they had ASSOCIATED
themselves (I purposely mention it again and again, because there is no other
way) King and people have entered into a Covenant: So now, if the Adversary do
come, he comes upon the greatest disadvantage.

But this the Adversary considers not, he is not coming but come: So we read,
Senacherib King of Assyria came and entered into Judah, and encamped against the
fenced Cities d; that 2 Chronicles. 32. 1.
he did, he durst come into Judahs land, while it was the LORDS Land, and her
Cities the Lords Cities, and thought to win them for himself. What made the
raging Beast, for he does not speak like a man, so confident? It is worth the
labor to hear this, for in feeling this man's pulse, if I may call him so, we
may know the temper of others like him, What says he? This is the first fault
he finds in the King, he bad his people be confident, That the Lord his GOD
would deliver them out of the ver. 11.
hands of the King of Assyria. This he lays to the good Kings charge, and he
is well content to be charged with it.

2. That Hezekiah had taken away his high places, and His Altars; The good King
is content with this too, but he will ver. 12.
have the man know, That the things he took away were not the Lords, but the
Devils; his high places, and his Altars; The Priests there, the Devils
Priests, and the services done there, were done to Devils too.

3. That Hezekiah said, Ye shall worship before one Altar. The good King said
so indeed; for it is according to the command of GOD; and however, more Altars
may be commanded, and Priests to serve before them, yet it is against the
command of GOD, Who commanded to worship before one Altar; and now that is
removed, we have but one still, and He is the Priest, and the Sacrifice, and
the Altar, and All. Hark how he blasphemes now, None of all the gods of other
Nations, ver. 13, 14.
could deliver their people out of my hands, or my Fathers band: And does
Hezekiah think, that his GOD can deliver him and his people? There shall be no
reply to this; For they spoke against the GOD of Jerusalem, as against the gods
of the people of the Earth, which were the work of the hands of men 2 Chr. 32.
19.
. Then he wrote letters to rail on the LORD GOD; Railing letters, and a
railing Rabshekeh, all rail, and there the charge is also, Answer him not.
ver. 17.


But one thing I would have noted, which passed while Rubshekeh was railing.
Eliakim desires a courtesy of him, That he would not speak to the people in
their own language, for that would dishearten them (half dead already) A
plain hearted man, and he considered not, That now Rabshekeh would roar,
stand up and cry out the louder in the Jewish language, That 2 King. 18. 26,
they might be the more disheartened. You must not expect a favor from an
enemy; nor let him know where your sense is quickest, for there he will pinch
hardest. I remember a proud Tyrant, delighting in proud wrath, had slain a son
ver. 28.
before the Fathers eye; The Father thanked him, and held-in his grief pretty
well; one asked him how he could stand so cheery before a Tyrant, and thank
him too. Great Reason, said he, to conceal from the Tyrant, where my care lay,
Habebam alterum, I have another son, and feign I would hold that one, and so
I bit in my sorrow. If we let that go, yet take this example in the sacred
Text, learn we never to expect a favor from an Adversary, he will do you none
at all, but all the injury that can be.

The King cares for none of all this, nor his rage, nor his blasphemy, for
there was nothing in sight now standing, to offend the eye of his GOD; Hezekiah
had destroyed all those cursed things utterly, and then Senecherib may swear
and curse and rage, and blaspheme; though it troubles the good King, (it is as
a Sword in his bones to hear his GOD blasphemed:) Yet I say in point of hurt
and danger, to him or his City from without, the good King is careless,
because there are no provocations within. Indeed the proud Adversary did the
good King much good, for it made the King to strengthen himself with such
means, as his GOD allows him; he called a Counsel of war, gathered much
people, stopped all the ^ountaines, strengthened himself, built up the Wall,
raisedup the Towers, made darts and shields in abundance. But his more special
care was to engage himself to his GOD, and his GOD to him: See how he
encourages his people, with us is the LORD our GOD to help us, and to fight
our battles: 2 Chr. 32. 3, 4, 5
Then it follows, And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah.
So the victory is got already; but we will see how wonderfully matters were
brought about, and what destruction from the Almighty, befell this proud
Adversary. It was unto him according as the LORD had said; ver. 8.
He sent a blast upon him, he heard a rumor; The LORD 2 Kin. 19 2.
caused him to fall by the Sword of his own sons, in his own Land. But by
what means these great matters were brought about, that is our enquiry now,
and it is worth our observation.

Senacherib wrote letters, says the Text, To rail on the Lord God of Israel;
an old fashion, and yet not worn out of use: I have cast mine eye upon the
like now a days, both in prose and verse, as railing as were Senacheribs
letters here, and as foolish as were the Songs the drunkards made of David, let
them pass in the crowd, he that reads them, is as he that made them; and he
that makes them, is as he in the sacred Text, a Rabshekeh, and as those
Drunkards the Prophet mentions: I was saying Senacherib wrote letters. What
does Hezekiah with them? Not rail too, we must not return railing words, not
if we contended with the Devil; nor did he go to his closet to make answer to
them, for then he had done against his own command, Answer him not 2 Kin. 17.
36.
. Hezekiah received the letter and read it, and Hezekiah went up into the house
of the LORD. What more? And spread it before the Lord; ver. 14.
The King lays open the whole matter before the LORD, Tells Him how the
Infidel had dealt, how he had reproached and blasphemed His Name. Aye, GODS
Name; had he reproached a man, in respect of common nature and principles, like
himself, then Hezekiah had held his peace; he had not spread the matter before
the LORD; but in Hezekiah, the LORDS Servant, That Beast opened his mouth, and
blasphemed the living GOD, so he remits the matter, puts it over to GOD,
Revenge is Thine, Thou shall repay is, for Thy Glory is interessed here. An
excellent pattern before the servants of the LORD in these times; you shall
have a company of drunkards, worse, if it can be, will give up their tongues
and their pens to the Devills-forge, entreating him, that he will sharpen them
against the face of the Righteous; he will do it; for, as the LORD will work
with, and for them, who will give up their tongues, and hands, and hearts to
Him and His service: So also the Devil will do for his servants, entreating
him (they are not so shameless as to entreat GOD) That he would enable them to
blaspheme and reproach GOD, and His Servants. The Devil grants their request
with all his heart, they shall do it, and it is done; away they run well
apaid to their fellow Printer, as forward as themselves, and serving the same
Master, and next Morning out it comes. What is done with it? The same now, as
in ancient days, according to the very pattern, It is spread before the LORD;
here LORD Thy Glory is concerned; for ours, it is of no account with us; we
have laid out our selves for Thee, and to promote Thy Glory; our lives are not
dear unto us, so we may drive on this great design against Thine Adversaries:
But therefore, for Thy sake we are reproached: Open Thine eyes Lord upon it, we
are a scorn and a derision, Drunkards make Songs over us. Thus it is spread
before the Lord. And as sure as this is Scripture, which we are now upon, so
sure the Lord will answer these foolish and brutish Men in His wrath, and vex
them in His sore displeasure. We goeon.

The letter is spread, And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord, 2 Kin. 19. 15.
as follows. What now? Now you shall see the Scene Alters, and a strange
exploit wrought. You read of a Prayer, and no sooner put up, but answered,
That, which thou have prayed to me against Senacherib King of Assyria, I have
heard. And presently, see what a slaughter there is! Who slew all them? The
ver. 20.
Angel of the Lord; That is true, but we say as truly, Elisha's Sword did it;
That is Prayer, I think, for I do not conceive what other Sword Elisha had:
But that is not granted on all ^ Kin. 19.
sides, yet this is most clear, That Hezekiahs Prayer, that did the execution;
Prayer commanded the Angel, I am not mistaken, I say, commanded (for Prayer
commands GOD) The Angel to come out of Heaven, to execute the vengeance of the
^ Esa. 45. 11.
Lord upon that cursed Host.

I could say as much of Prayer, as is said of Faith, it is the most efficacious
of any thing in Heaven or Earth, next to the blood of CHRIST: I say next, for
it has it is Energy, and efficacious working therefrom. It has the quickest
motion of any thing in the world, and has as quick a return. What always?
That was well remembered; No, not always, but in some cases; many times the eye
is dim with looking upward; and the heart faint with expectation. Of what? Of
the Return of Prayer. How so? For excellent reasons; The children of GOD must
not always ask, and have presently; they must be held in expectation; their
time is now; they have prayed now, and now they would have a Return; No, GODS
time is not yet; They must not think to sow and reap together. Their graces
must be exercised, and they taught to wait, and in patience to possess their
souls; They must stay till GOD may be magnified in His Salvation; Every
Salvation is His, but His Name is not magnified, except things rise to a
height, and there be an extremity of danger. And when the case is so; Refuge
fails the Church, then God comes-in; The return of Prayer is speedy then;
And this was the case here; The Adversary very proud, the Church very humble;
The Adversary very high in his demands, the Church very low; The Adversary
would hear of no conditions of peace, unless Israel would be his servants, he
refuses all ^ffers. So the valiant men did cry, and the Ambassadors of Peace
did weep bitterly Esa. 3^. 7.
[There is no Treaty with an Infidel, or an Idolater] The Adversary despised
the Cities, and regarded ver. 9.
no man ver. 8.
. The Earth mourned, Lebanon was ashamed, Sharon ver. 10.
was like a wilderness. Now is GODS time to arise, and to be exalted; now He
will appear in His glory: He will regard Psalm. 102.
the Prayer of the destitute: And the return shall be speedy: And see what an
exploit it has wrought? It returns with an Angel, which went out, and smote
in the Camp of Ashur an hundred fourscore and five thousand: So when they
arose early 2 King. 19 35.
in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses. So Senacherib departed,
returned to his house, thought to dwell in safety at Nineveh: And it came to
pass that he went into the house of ver. 36, 37.
Ni^^och his god, there to worship; and there he must be slain: he had
blasphemed the true GOD, he must be slain before his Idol; and by the Sword in
the hands of his own Sons; he had reproached the Sons of Jacob, the servants of
the Lord; he shall be slain by his own children.

Thus the LORD did for Hezekiah, according to the good word He spoke unto him,
and whereon the people rested 2 Chro. 32 8.
; He cursed from Heaven (after His manner) bold and daring enterprises managed
against His hidden ones: The LORD said, upon all the glory shall be a defense
Esa. 4* 5.
, and so it was. The fear of the LORD is his Treasure Esa. 33. 6.
; It was spoken of King Hezekiah; that all may make GOD their fear, then He
will be a Sanctuary. To recollect all; Senacheribs Host were all slain in a
night, prayer commanded an Angel (for there is no intermediate thing in sight)
the Angel does the execution: The King slinkes away, thinks to hide himself
in his house, from the wrath of the Almighty; The Sword, which he three atned
Judah, finds him-out and slayes him before his gods, and the execution is done
upon him by his own Sons; he falls by the Sword of his own Sons in his
own Land 2 King. 19. 7.
. Thus the LORD dealt with the Adversaries of Judah, and guided them on every
side 2 Chro. 32. 22.
. And many came to congratulate the King, and rejoice with him after this
victory, so they brought gifts unto the LORD, and presents to Hezekiah: so that
he was ver. 23.
magnified in the sight of all Nations from thenceforth.

Now whether Hezekiah did boast of the LORD, the giver of victories, all the
day long, I cannot tell; he was an excellent Man, and yet but a Man, he might
look on his own arm too much, and on GODS Arm too little. Certain it is he
gloried in his riches; it may be also, but that is one man's conjecture, he
rejoiced too much at the destruction and lamentable end of his enemy. But this
is clear from the connection of the Chapters, which we must observe here; That
our joys do not run smooth and clear away, there is a a mixture and mudd
with them, and a settlement at the bottom; nor is our peace here below, a
solid, continued, or an interrupted peace; no, as our outward peace may be
plundered: so our inward peace may be and is often ecclipsed. We must look for
changes here below; our comforts, as not full here, so nor permanent; we must
look for that in Heaven. Nay, commonly thus it is on earth; when our joys
here below are at the highest, yet there is a cloud above them, which, at that
instant, that point of time, will overshadow them: when we are at the heights
in our joys, then fear some depth of sorrow; there is such a connection
between these two, joys and sorrows. So it seems it was here with Hezekiah;
In those days; what days were those? good and joyful days, as we may
imagine upon such a glorious victory as that was, and comming-in of Ambassadors
to joy with him. See now! But then, in those days, Hezekiah 2 King 20 21.
was sick unto death. The King was joyful no doubt, and very comfortable,
being so wondrously delivered, and like enough, was thinking of building
Tabernacles upon his comforts, well persuaded they would be of some
continuance; but behold then at that time, sickness came and overshadowed all.
Peter seeing the glory, was so well pleased with the sight, that he spoke of
making Tabernacles for continuance; But what says the Spirit, so indeed he
said, not knowing what he said Luke 9. 33.
. Indeed we do not, when we talk of building Tabernacles upon our comforts,
expecting a continuance of them. There is such a connection betwixt joy and
sorrow, as there is between 2 King. 19. and ^0. 1.
those Chapters and Verses 2 Chronicles. 32. 23, 24.
: The one concludes with joy, the other begins with sorrow. And in those days
Hezekiah was sick unto death; that is, his disease was deadly in it self, for
it was (supposed to be) the plague: And now the message is, you must not think
of the victory now, but in setting your inward and outward house in order; for
thou shall dye and not live. See here! But as yesterday, an Enemy was at his
gates, threatening to swallow up all: the LORD sent that adversary packing. No
sooner delivered from the oppressing Sword, but he is smitten with a disease as
with a Sword in his bowels. It is strange, but so it is; That man can think of
building Tabernacles upon his comforts here below, or upon any worldly thing,
whereunto we give the Name of Glory, which has so many waines and ecclipses,
how soon comes a cloud and overshadowes all our glory! sometimes when we are
speaking of setting up a Tabernacle, I mean our rest upon the creature, the
cloud comes; that we may learn to expect changes here, and of sorrows too. An
Enemy was even now at the Kings gate; no sooner was he removed, but a sickness
sent unto him, which cut his heart like a Sword in his bowels. This trouble is
blown over, and now it is peace. Alas! man's peace here, is like a sunshine
after rain, trouble as the cloud returns again.

What is our expectation then? That our houses, our comforts will continue?
that cannot be; here is no continuance; if we so expect, our expectation is
vain. Blessed is the man, that looks for continuance there, and there only,
where is a City that has a foundation; that can say, my soul wait thou Psa
12. 5. Psalm. 39. 7.
only upon GOD: for my expectation is from Him: And now LORD what wait I for?
my HOPE is in THEE: I do not expect any thing can be certain here, but
changes of sorrows, trialls in this kind, and in that; I wait for
afflictions, Thou have said, in the world ye shall have them: But my hope is
in Thee, that Thou will support me in them; do me good by them; work my
deliverance out of them, I wait Thy salvation.

We proceed to that, which was as a Sword in the Kings bowels; set thy house
in order for thou shall dye and not live. Then we read which way he turned;
what his prayer was, and what his comfort; the sweetest cordial, that a man
can think of upon his sick bed, REMEMBER, etc. he wept 2 King. 10.
sore (for he had no Son, and yet the LORD promised to ver. 3. 3.
give a light to David and to his Sons for ever:) The LORD 2 Chro. 21. 7.
heard the voice of his weeping, gives him a wonderful sign, that the LORD
would heal him, and that he should go up to the House of the LORD; so he was
wonderfully recovered 2 King 20. 8.
(no plague being beyond the skill of this Physician) and upon his feet again,
and an Ambassador at his elbow, to congratulate such a mercy. It follows,
Hezekiah shows his treasuries ver. 12.
unto them, even ALL that was found there; But the Prophet cooles his spirit
quickly, saying, all this store (being the spoils of Senacharibs Camp, who had
robbed him the year before, repayed all with advantage, and made Hezechiah
richer upon the sudden then ever he had been, which unexpected wealth was a
strong temptation to boasting) But I say, the Prophet takes down his spirit,
saying, all this store which thou have shown to the Princes of Babylon, shall
be carried thither, nothing shall be left, says the LORD. We may ver. 17.
read what follows; The good King hears all this and more, and submits
humbly and thankfully to the will of GOD, saying, good is the word of the LORD;
All is good to the good, 2 King. 20. 19.
the good LORD so ordering all.

But I will set the mark upon this; The LORD gave unto Hezekiah wonderful
signs, and a recovery of health: But Hezekiah rendered not again according to
the benefit done unto 2 Chro. 32. 25*
him. The reason is given, for his heart was lifted*up: [If the heart be lifted
up with pride, it cannot be lifted up in rendering praises.] Read on; Therefore
there was wrath upon him. [That follows still, when the heart is lifted-up,
then is the time when, wrath comes down.] Came this wrath down upon the King
only? no, for Kings do not sin alone, nor are they punished alone; There was
wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

It seems not so; wrath was not already come upon them, it was to come: True,
that which the Lord threatens is reckoned as already done; we may say of it,
as we read concerning the last violl of wrath, that shall come pouring down
upon the last Enemies of the Church, long since threatened, yet to be executed,
and thereof it is said, behold it is come, and it is done, says the LORD Ezekiel.
39 8.
. The servants of the Lord are moved, and melt more at the Lords threats; then
the wicked do under blows. If there be but mention of wrath, it is enough,
(for it is our Lords wrath) to humble the righteous man; he will say of it
presently, though but denounced, great is the wrath of the LORD that is powered
out upon 2 Chro. 34. 11.
us.

And so King Hezekiah here, he humbled himself for the pride of his heart
(both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem) so that the wrath of the LORD came
not upon them in the days of Hezekiah 2 Chro. 32. 26.
. No; he had humbled himself; True humiliation turns away wrath, as here, and
instead thereof he had blessings 2 Chro. 32. 26.
good store, for he had exceeding much of all precious ver. 27.
things, and substance very much, and he did great works, ver. 28.
and prospered in all he did. One thing he did very foolishly, ver. 29.
recorded after all this, which was before, and ver. 30.
that was about the Ambassadors: but then GOD left him ver. 31.
to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart. [The ablest and
strongest Christians must be left a little, else they will trust themselves too
much; They must know by their falls how weak they are, else they cannot know
all that is in their hearts, even such thoughts as these, That they and their
mountain can stand all alone, so strong they are: But then they fall, and so
they know the vanity of such thoughts, and can correct them.] The rest of his
Acts, and his GOODNESS; Mark that; and his GOODNESS; The pride of his heart
in showing of the Treasures, that shall be remembered no more, his goodness
shall; his infirmities all shall be forgotten, as if they had never been, his
GOODNESS shall never be forgotten; and his Goodness. What a good GOD did King
Hezekiah serve, He passes over all, and all shall be forgotten; but his
Goodness shall still be remembered. Again, see the portion of those that fear
the LORD and His Goodness; They live desired, and they dye lamented; and when
they are dead, it is in every man's mouth; And their Goodness. See also the
measures of the wicked, clean contrary; They live undesired, they dye
unlamented; and when they are laid in the grave, if they have so much honor,
their Name rots above ground, as their bodies under ground, and it is in every
man's mouth, and their Badnesse, the evil that they wrought! Oh! who would not
choose the fear of the LORD, and to walk before Him in truth, That it may be
said of him, when he is taken hence; And his goodness! All are recorded in the
visions of Esaiah; and in the Book of the Kings. But let me note what I have
observed all along these Chronicles; That after many glorious acts of the LORDS
Worthies, their slipps and falls are recorded almost last of all. Why so? for
excellent reasons sure, though I may not hit upon them; I think verily this is
one; That we may remember our sins first and last, with bitterness of
spirit, after a godly sort, and then, being remembered so this once, they shall
be remembered no more for ever. I will remember your iniquities no more: but the
Goodness shall be remembered to all generations.

Death still concludes the Story; It follows, And he slept with his Fathers,
and all Judah did him honor at his death, for he honored all Judah.

THE Repentance of MANASSEH.
CHAP. IX.
Manasseh does exceeding wickedly, worse then the Heathen; as a Man besides
himself. At length he is taken in the Thorns, there he comes to himself
again; He sinned greatly, and was humbled greatly: This is the more largely
discoursed of, That ^ Chron. 33.
the humble ^inner may not despair, nor the proud sinner presume; Manasseh his
tears of true Repentance, could not wash-off the guilt of blood from Judah.
These things follow orderly in their several Paragraphs.

MAnasseh his Son, an older King then his Father was a Man (for he reighned
fifty and five years So long the LORD waited to show mercy and to give
repentance; Who would not wait upon Him so long-suffering!
in Jerusalem:) began to reign when he was twelve years old Good education
cannot make the child good, Goodness being derivitive from Him, Who only is
Good: yet Parents must attend it as their proper and special charge.
; What discerning he had at those years, into his Fathers pious carriage, and
the prosperity that followed him, we cannot certainly tell; we think very
little, for this is apparent and upon everlasting record; That never any Son
walked more cross to the Fathers stepps, as contrary as evil is to good; Hell
to Heaven*; Those abominations his Father cast down, the Son set up; and what
his Fathers soul hated, his Son did practice: To pass by all the rest,
wherein he did like to the abominations of the Heathen; here he exceeded, ver.
2, 3.
burnt his Sons for a sacrifice to the Devil, and filled Jerusalem ver. 6.
with innocent blood, from one end to another, (worse then the 2 King. 21. 16.
Heathen) into which channel did stream down the blood of that reverend and
aged Prophet Esaiah, whom he caused to be beat to death with a Fullers club,
or to be sawne in sunder with a wooden saw, in the 80 Year of his life: The
sacred Esa. 1.
Scripture indeed is silent here, only it says, That Prophet lived to see, and
feel that Kings tyranny; Other writers, too many to rehearse, and too good to
be suspected, affirm it with a loud voice; That, in such a barbarous manner,
he put that good Prophet to death. Yet he is reckoned-up in this place,
because, when he comes to the business, he ordered his Militia according to
right reason and rule. Indeed we read nothing of Manasseh his Militia, before
he was taken in the thorns, bound with fetters, and carried to Babylon, and
brought ver. 11, 12, 13.
again thence to Jerusalem, for then he knew, that the LORD He was GOD. [See
how the sharp thorns and briars of affliction, can teach us, when the LORD is
pleased to sharpen and sanctify such goades] But this is the lesson; To admire
the height and depth of GODS mercy; He suffers Manasseh to run-up to the height
of all heathenish abominations; to plunge himself into a depth of innocent
blood; and then, when he was near the end of his race, the LORD recovers him,
fetches him from out of that depth, and turns his heart back again. We must
insist upon this, that we may put the more observation upon it.

1. The truth of Manasseh his Repentance, is cleared from the sacred Text, not
that there are any who doubt of it, but that none may presume from it. What
takes off somewhat from the weight of his sin, and adds to the terror of an
hypocritical person, who does one thing, and professes another: so Manasseh
did not do; and yet his sins are heightened, so as to magnify free grace.

OH the height of GODS merciel He lengthens out Manassehs day, and brings him
into the Thorns toward night, that there he might bethink himself of all his
abominations. That we may admire free grace, we must make a stand here, and
look upon Manasseh in the Thorns, and what exceeding mercy he found there:
And I speak of it here, that the proud sinner may not presume, nor the humble
despair; for a sinner shall not be condemned, because he is an old sinner, and
a great sinner: but because he is an impenitent sinner: And such an one
Manasseh was not, when he was in the Thorns. And when he was in affliction he
besought the LORD his GOD, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
Fathers.

But may we think this Humiliation to be sound? Yes, we 2 Chro. 33. 12.
dare not judge otherwise; nay, this Scripture assures us, it was sound: True
it is, (and therefore I speak of it in this place) when we are in the Thorns,
when our sorrows reach unto the heart, when our Month is come, and we are in
our Ier. 2.
pangs, then there will be pangs of sorrow, whether after a godly sort, or a
worldly sorrow unto Death, cannot possibly be discerned by the most discerning
spirit, that dwells in flesh, GOD knows, Who only knows the hearts of the
children of Men; but there are some expressions in the Text, which are full of
use to the Penitent and impenitent, both, clearing Manasseh his Repentance unto
us.

He besought the LORD his GOD; so a wicked man may do. He humbled himself, so
a wicked man may do also: nay, greatly in man's judgment. Some might be
pointed to, who, being in the Thorns, in great Agony of body and spirit both,
expecting to make their appearance before the great Throne, have humbled
themselves greatly, given as great Testimony of true sorrow, as possibly could
be expressed; yet, being delivered out of the Thorns were worse then ever
before, Therefore, I say, greatly in man's judgment, so a wicked man may do too.
But he humbled himself GREATLY, before the LORD greatly, and as in GODS
presence, and by the Testimony of the Spirit, before the Lord condemning,
judging, loathing himself, accepting his punishment, greatly humbled before
the Lord; so a wicked man cannot do, none but a true Penitent. That again,
which follows, he prayed, and GOD was entreated of him. For a temporal
Deliverance you will say; but We speak of a soul mercy, of an eternal
redemption: And this me thinks may be concluded also, from the following
words, Then Manasseh knew that the Lord He was God. All our evils, which are
committed, are, as I may say, charged upon this one word, as their original
root, they knew not the Lord: So all our works of righteousness upon this word,
He knew the Lord; I cannot express the fulness of that word, but it
contains all: It is the sum of the Apostles Prayer, That the Lord would give
the Ephesians the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the KNOWLEDGE of Him
[Eph. 1. 17.]

In the last place, it does not appear, that Manasseh, recovered out of the
thorns, did return unto folly, but the contrary will appear anon, when we
shall look upon him, as a pattern of true Repentance.

Now I will take leave, for the instruction of the living, to take so much from
the weight of Manassehs sins, and to put in so much allowance for it, as, I
am confident, the sacred Scripture will allow me to do: for GOD forbid I
should do more. And all this I shall do for this great end, to discover the
danger of Hypocrisy, and to magnify free grace, Manasseh was an abominable
Idolater professedly so; but that was some help for him; he did not persecute
that way, he himself walked-in; nor that Religion he seemed to profess; he
was indeed what he seemed to be, such was he, and that I say was some help
unto him. He offered his son to Molech; he did it when he knew not the LORD.
The Altars, his good Father threw down, he set-up; but he did not set them up
with his hand, and cry them down with his mouth. He slew that Evangelicall
Prophet Esaiah; who ever was the Executioner, or what ever the instrument of
his Death, Manasseh slew him: But Manasseh did not call them bloody Rebels,
that killed Isaiah, as though they had done it against his mind and will. He
shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to
another; 2 Kin. 21. 16.
But he did not, at that time, seem to relent at what his hand did, and so
water the same City at the same time with tears of fained compassion: I mean
by this, he was not an hypocritical King against whom that severe judgment is
denounced, as against an Hypocritical Nation, and against the people of GODS
wrath. Manasseh was not one manner of Esa. 10. 6.
man in show and profession; and another in deed and in truth. He did do worse
then the Heathen, he was most abominable in all his ways; But he was what he
was, and he walked according to his light in his own ways, which seemed right
in his own eyes. I think verily no man ever went further toward ruin, then
Manasseh did, and returned in peace; never any plunged himself deeper into the
gulf of sin, and escaped: But this is it I say; we cannot charge him with
Hypocrisy. He set himself against GOD, he openly and manifestly opposed GODS
Truth: So an Hypocrite does not do; he will oppose it, but he will make you
shows and overtures of the contrary. The established Religion, he will seem
to be all for that, and to do all for it, nothing against it. Paul breathed
out threatenings Act 9 1. Act. 16. 11.
; he compelled men to blaspheme; He was exceedingly MADD against the righteous,
that he was, for he persecuted them even to strange Cities. What was his
comfort, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
or what helped him? he did it ignorantly, and obtained Mercy. It was so with
Luther too, a bloody persecutour in heart: as all Idolaters are, as he says of
himself, and all that are as he was; Had I bin, said he, at the place where
John Hus was burnt, Nemo nostrum, non erat vir sanguinum, si non opere tamen
cord. Abhorrebam vel ipsum nomen Io* Husse Ad^oque Zelab^ pro Papa^, ut ad
occidendum Io: Hus ipse serrum and ignem subministrasse in Lu^^ Galat c. 1. v.
15. 1 Cor. 4 7. d Esa. 35. 8. Act. 17 30. (...).
I would have made the fire a little hotter to have scorched the Heretic: for,
I would have brought two Faggots upon my shoulders thither: Why would he have
done so? In his blind zeal to Munkery, he would, as all his fellows would
have done, shed blood to their power, he with them would have rejoiced to have
seen John Hus fry in the fire. But why do I mention these excellent servants
of the LORD? For excellent reason* To magnify free Grace, That made them
DIFFER FROM ANOTHER: But here I mention it to evince and clear this, That
Hypocrisy is the DAMNABLE SIN. A man may be a Malignant Person, he may
persecute the good way (wherein the fool cannot err) and the righteous in
that way* and may do it ignorantly: And then see the help and the comfort,
the time of this ignorance GOD winked at. He saw and would not see, He
over-looked it. I do not plead for ignorance, that cursed root, that mother of
witch-crafts and superstitious devotions. Some thing might have been said for
it fourscore years ago, for that ignorance which was in those dark and
gloomy days, rather that night of superstition and Popery: But not a word for
it now in these days, where the light is so clear, and knowledge so abounding:
now to be ignorant, does not lessen, does not extenuate or take-off from, but
aggravate the fault; for it is now to stumble in a Sunshine, and to grope for
the way in mid*Day, as at midnight. But I say, for a man to do what he does
professedly, walk in a way he thinks good in his own eyes, and to do it
ignorantly, as, for ought I know, Manasseh did, This has helped very many;
Paul, Luther, and so Manasseh, for the time of this ignorance GOD winked at,
and he obtained mercy.

What? And his sins so great! Yes, he was GREATLY humbled, the spirit, says
so, and adds, BEFORE the LORD; The LORD saw that he abhorred himself, admired
free grace, he was GREATLY humbled.

But his sin was great?

True, But it is said, He knew the LORD, He remembered the LORD, That He is
GREAT; and, as he had sinned Neh 4 14.
to the utmost, so This Great GOD could save to the utmost. He had gone far
indeed, never any man beyond him; yet not so far, but This Great GOD, whom he
knew now, could fetch him back-againe with His outstretched Arm. Again, his
sin was great, but that was his Father David's Argument before him, wherefore
he did expect pardon; his sin was great Ps. 25. 11.
, and GOD is great, and has laid strength on Him that is Mighty, a great,
strong Redeemer, can save to the utmost, O LORD pardon mine iniquity, for it is
GREAT. The glory of GOD is Great in the salvation of great Sinners: And by
putting confidence in Him, Who is Mighty, We lay Glory and Majesty upon Him;
for to those words we may properly Ps. 21. 5.
allude; His Glory is great in thy Salvation, honor and Majesty have Thou laid
upon Him. We are entreated to mark Disc. of Just. p 519.
this, for the hour may come (says Mr. Hooker) when we shall think it a
blessed thing to hear, what? That if our sins were the sins of Popes and
Cardinals (of Manasseh say I) the bowels of the mercy of GOD are larger. I must
read his following words too, I do not propose unto you a Pope with the neck
of an Emperor under his feet: A Cardinal riding his horse to the bridle in
the blood of Saints: But a Pope or Cardinal sorrowful, penitent, disrobed,
stripped, not only of usurped power, but also delivered and recalled from
error. Antichrist converted and lying prostrate at the foot of CHRIST: And
shall I think that CHRIST will spurn at him? So, I do not propose unto you
Manasseh slaying the innocent: Walking after all the forementioned
abominations: But Manasseh in the Thorns, seeking the LORD, humbling himself
greatly before the LORD; and now behold the LORD hearing his supplications,
entreated of him. And o the riches of Grace, and the freeness thereof! How
exceeding, how admirable, how unexpressible! And this Grace was shown to
Manasseh, that no penitent sinner may despair; Manasseh and he only went so
far toward Hell, and turned back, that no man might presume. Not sin but
impenitency kills! I thought I could have said something more at this point;
but I see it is too high for me, I can say no more of it: But, now unto Him
that is able to do exceeding abundantly, Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.
above all that we can ask or think, Unto Him be glory in the Church by
CHRIST JESUS throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

2. Manasseh his Repentance makes clear proof to all Generations following,
what Repentance is and true conversion.

NOw we return where we left, and found Manasseh in the Thorns, and
graciously delivered thence. There we must observe how he goes on with his
Militia, removes that which hinders, does all that, which will further the
same: Now after this he built a wall, etc. And he sooke away the strange ver.
14, 15, 16.
gods, etc. And he repaired the Altar of the LORD, etc.

And this is spoken so fully unto already, that more needs not be said of it
here. This rather I would insist upon a little; To thou, ^ha^, ^ Manasseh was a
true pattern of reforming and poster^^ (...) Kingdom after the right manner;
so is he a pattern of (...) I ^^t^nt, one that had truly repented, and
heartily turned to the LORD. Repentance is the change of the ^ind, and of the
heart too, and then all is changed: the way also, wherein the impenitent person
walked before his conversion, is changed and turned clean cross, or as I may
say, up^^^e down; which is the reason, that Reformation, where it comes, makes
such stirrs and tumults in the world; for it turns the world upside down. But
let that pass, the present time will speak enough to that. To this in hands
now, and thus it will appear by what Manasseh did, after he was recovered out
of the thorns; he went clean cross to the way now, wherein he walked before:
he went a direct way before to ruin himself and his Kingdom: Now he goes a
direct way, but clean cross, to make himself strong, and to establish his
Kingdom; it shall appear in all the several ways or motions thereunto. But I
will make instance in the Jailer first, where Ast. 16.
we shall see how contrary a penitent man walks to himself, and his own way;
He had, by the Commandment of the ver. 22.
Magistrates, beat the Apostles, and receiving further charge about them, he
thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.
When he was changed by a wonderful ver. 14.
work from Heaven upon his heart; see how cross he is to that he was before,
and how cross he does to that he did before; he was stout and proud before,
now he trembles; his Sword was drawn in a readiness to kill himself; now he
ver 29.
asked the way, how to live for ever with the LORD: Before, he made the
Apostles stoop to him, for he made their feet fast in the stocks; Now he fell
down before them. Before, he thrust them into the inner prison; thrust them
in roughly enough, for these Jaylors are as cruel, as their Masters, that
command them, and into the inner prison; the worst place in the house is
fittest for the Apostles, so it was then; how now when the Jailer is a changed
man? Now he brought them out; And when the maine work was done, which the
Apostles ver 30.
minded more then their stripes, he took them the same hour of the night, and
washed their stripes, those sore blows himself ver. 31, 32, 33, 34.
had given them, and then he set meat before them: The right way of a true
Penitent this, for it is clean cross to the way he walked in before his
Repentance.

Now see the same crossenesse in Manasseh his way, now he is graciously
delivered out of the Thorns. And the more cross his way is to the way he went
in before, the better the way is and more instructing us to discretion. Let us
well observe it, because it will make clear proof, what a living man's
condition is, whether he be a changed, a reformed man, well postured; I mean,
whether he be set now in a sure and safe way of defense in these exceeding
fierce and perilous days, for if he have truly repented, he needs fear no
evil; if his way be turned, he needs not care though the world be turned
upside down.

Manasseh was all for strange gods, his heart went a whoring after them, now he
takes them away, as those his heart loatheth; He took away the strange gods.
He had set up Altars, 2 Chronicles. 33. ver. 15.
and worshipped before them; now away they shall with indignation, he cast
them forth out of the City. He set up Altars and graven Images. When? Before he
was humbled ver. 19.
: As the saying is, If the headache went before drunkenness, a man would never
be drunk: So had he been humbled before, he had not set-up Altars before his
eyes; but now* that he is humbled, down the Altars are tumbled, out they are
cast as the filth in the streets, And cast them out of the City. These
Idolatrous Altars had defaced and defiled the Altar of the LORD, as all false
worship defiles true worship. Now he repaires the Altar of the LORD: ver. 16.
He had been a stout Rebel; he made himself strong against the LORD,
maintained enmity and war against the Almighty, so bold he was. Now he
sacrifices on his Altars Peace Offerings. He had been a most unthankful
person, he had a good Father, that was a good mercy, a fair example before his
eyes, many grave instructions from his mouth. He had received a Kingdom from
his LORDS hand, and all good things, but he was not a ware; and then we read
how he requited the LORD; but now he is changed, He sacrifices on GODS Altar,
Thank offerings, Ps. 50.
and so he glorifies the LORD. How? There is but one way to glorify Him on
Earth, in praising of Him, in giving thanks unto Him; so he glorified the
LORD: And so it follows, And sacrificed thereon Thank-offerings. He ver 16.
had caused Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to err and to do worse
then the Heathen. What does he now, now, ver 9.
being a converted man? He commanded Judah to serve the LORD GOD of their
Fathers [commanded.] We see now, Repentance is a change of the man, the heart
and way. The way of a penitent man is clean cross to what it was in the night
of his impenitency. It is well called by another name, 1 Kin. 18. 37.
conversion; A turning the heart back again. A man, in his unconverted
estate, goes a way cross to Heaven; when he is converted his heart is turned
back again, then he goes clean cross to that way he went in before; where
he set his back before, there he sets his face now. So the Jailer did, so
Manasseh, and so all true Penitents. We will make up the conclusion and so
end; A man walks contrary to himself, now that he is not himself; what he
loved before, he now hates; what he hated before, he now loves; Ego non sum ego.
his delight is now with the excellent upon the Earth; before none were more
unpleasing and tiresome to him; before the service of the LORD was a burden, it
is now a delight; he snuffed at it, and said, when will the Sabbath be gone;
now he thinks the day too short: nay seven days not enough, as we heard, he
would have seven days more; his mind is changed, and now all is changed, his
delights, his recreations, his contentments. New wills now, and new ayms, all is
new, and old things are passed away; old sorrow and old joy, they run fresh and
new now in the right Channel, so do all his affections, all to GOD, and for
GOD.

3. Manassehs Repentance kept off wrath from himself, but could not keep it
off from the Nation, His corrupt example had leavened the whole Land; Idolatry
in a King being like a leaprosie in the head, which presently corrupts the
whole Kingdom.

WE read on now, where this follows; Nevertheless ver. 17.
the people did sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto the LORD their
GOD. There was a mixture in their service, much superstition there; Idolatry
was so rooted in the Kingdom, that it could not be rooted out, till the
Kingdom was rooted out; like a leprosy, it begun in the head Vt in corporibus
sic in imperio, gravissimus est morbus, quia capite diffunditur. Plin. l^. 4.
Ep. 22. In morbido capite nil sanum est: neque ullum omnino membrum officio su^
sungitur, ubi quod est principale non constat Sal* de Gub. 7. p. 234.
, thence spreads it self through the body. It is of a spreading nature, more
spreading then leaven; it leavens a whole Land quickly; because it is so
agreeable, so complying with man's corrupt heart. Manasseh made Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse th^n the Heathen, Ai, that
was an easy matter to do; an easy matter to make men walk in their own
ways, the way of sin and death; but to call them back again, that is a hard
work, nay impossible.

A Ruler may go far in a wicked way, and then, by a strong hand, be turned
back again, to walk clean cross to the same way: But the mischief he has
done by his example in his old way, may spread so far, that do, or say what
he can, it is past remedy. We might have heard more of Manasseh his goodness,
of his ways, prayer and humiliation, but that the writings were lost 2 Chronicles.
33. 19.
: But this is recorded, That Manasseh could not with all his tears, which
doubtless were abundant, wipe out the filthiness (for stain is too light a
word) of his Idolatrous example; his miserable seducement; No, that was 1 King
21. 9.
such as could not be purged, but by the fire of GODS wrath: for so we read;
Because Manasseh had made Judah also to sin with his Idols, therefore so and
so would the LORD deal with Jerusalem, in such a manner as the very 2 King.
21. 11, 12, 13.
hearing of it, would make both the ears to tingle: A Ruler, by his prayer and
humiliation, may repair his own breaches in his own house, and soul, not
those breaches he has made in a City or Kingdom; he may, by those sanctified
means, plead forth his own pardon, and save his own soul, but not save a
Nation: as his seducement there has been spreading, and National, so must the
humiliation be, of high concernement this;

To conclude; if a Ruler, joining himself to Idols, cannot consider what a
breach he makes betwixt GOD and his own soul: Yet, O that he could consider
what a breach he makes through his whole Kingdom, a breach like the Sea, which
he can never make up again; and how he has, by so doing, endangered, nay
undone the whole Land, by provoking GOD to stretch over it the line of Samaria,
and the plummet of the house of Ahab; and wipe his Cities as a man wipeth a
dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down. O that a Ruler could consider
this; 2 King. 21* 13.
for just so it was here; Manasseh could not repair the ruins, that his
sins had made both in City and Country; nor could his good Grandchild (for
Amon his Son did evil, as did Manasseh his Father before his conversion) after
him; The best King that ever had his Kingdom in this world; he, for whom, the
people could not be in extremes, in desiring 2 Chro. 35. 24, 25.
too much, or lamenting too much: so desired was his life, and so lamented his
death, Josiah by Name; such a King could not repair those ruins, though he
took the only way, as his great Grandfather before him; he made a covenant
before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, as his 2 Chro. 34. 31, 32.
great Grandfather had done; and, this one thing more, he caused all TO STAND
TO IT, and so maintained his Kingdom in a posture of defense all his days.
But, the sins were great, the provocations many, the transgression of the
Land heavy upon it, Therefore many were the Princes thereof Pro 28. 2.
. Then the man of understanding and knowledge, by whom the State and peace is
prolonged, was taken away: And when that man, a man betimes, for while he was
yet young he sought the LORD, and 2 Chro. 34. 3.
so lived much in a short time, when this man in understanding, Josiah was
taken away, by the stroke of death, which he received near Megiddo, and
lingered about him 2 Chro. 35. 22.
ver. 23.
till he came to Jerusalem, there brought him to the Sepulchers ver. 24.
of his Ancestors; when, I say, this King of Desires, this so dearly beloved,
was taken away from seeing the evil to come, then the cloud of blood powered
down upon Judah; Then Judahs Militia fainted, and mouldred away also, and,
being in a miserable consumption, as we read, died: The strong holds fell into
the hands of their Enemies, like new ripe figgs into the mouth of the eater.
This we must repeat again, for it is also HIGGAION Selah, a matter Psalm. 9.
seriously to be considered on.

THE Reformation of JOSIAH.
CHAP. X.
Josiah, an excellent King; went very far in Reforming and posturing his
Kingdom; was taken away in the height of this work; housed in his grave, and
then the storm fell. GODS ways equal; Man's unequal.

I Have ended the Story of Josiah before I began it, for the dependence it had
with that of his Father Amon, and his Grandfather Manasseh; And also because,
what he did in point of Reformation, is fully contained and runns parallel
with that his great Grandfather did before him: only some one or two
expressions there are of great observation, which I shall observe anon. True it
is, and well observed; As Amon his Father succeeded in the sins of Manasseh's
youth; so Josiah his Grandchild succeeded in the virtues of his age. Joash
began well, and ended ill; Manasseh began ill and ended well; Josiah began his
reign, and ended, never any King better. True it is also, never any did rise
to an higher pitch of holiness, and from a surer bottom, 2 Chronicles. 34 3.
(for he laid the foundation thereof in his young years) then Josiah did; and
never any more desirous and zealous that way, to carry all with him to the same
height; And for this he stands upon everlasting record, to be the best King
that ever was before him, and never the like after him, though we could speak
of one, who was a young King, and an old Saint. All this I leave to the Readers
perusal, for his Story is plain; Some things of note I shall take in, in
passage, while I shall plead forth a case with our own hearts, for our better
instruction, but not with the LORD, for we are concluded He is Righteous Ier.
12. 1.
; His ways are just and equal; And I would show the equity thereof in this
place, where we have as completed a Reformation as ever was, and yet as sore
judgments executed as we have heard of, and at the very instant time when the
Reformation was so completed, Notwithstanding the LORD turned not from the
fierceness of His great wrath, 2 King. 23. 26.
wherewith His anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations
that Manasseh had provoked Him withal: See! here was a King, that had engaged
his heart to the whole work of the LORD; had proceeded very courageously in
it, even to the completing of the same; yet he was taken away in the height
and heat of his work, when he and his work was going on to perfection, then
he was taken away. Is it not in vain to serve GOD? what profit is it, etc. Let
the wicked Mal. 3 14.
man speak it out; let it so be spoken in Gath, and published in the streets
of Askelon; as for Israel, they will not say so, but the contrary; It is good
to serve the LORD; to work for Him; to deal courageously for His cause: In
His service is perfect freedom, and it has an assured recompense of reward.
Doubtless there is a reward for the Righteous, as sure as there is a Psalm. 58.
11.
GOD that judges in the earth. All the faithful servants of the LORD will say
so, for they have found it to be so; And so Josiah found it to be even then;
never any King began sooner to seek after the LORD then he did, for it was his
first seeking, while HE WAS YET YOUNG 2 Chronicles. 34. 2
, and never any King followed-on Hose. 6. 3.
better in the way of the LORD, for he declined neither to the right hand nor
to the left; And so soon as he felt himself strong, (for Amon his Father, and
Manasseh his Grandfather had weakened and polluted his Kingdom very much) he
began to PVRGE Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and all the
abominations that were SPIED 2 Chro. 34 3. 2 King. 23. 24.
, (Mark that, it cleares our duty before our eyes) he sought diligently, he
pried narrowly into every corner, where that abomination might stand,
out-facing GODS command, and grievous to His good Spirit, THAT WERE SPIED in
the Land of Judah, did josiah put away, that he might perform the words of
the LORD ^ Kin. 23. 24
. He took away the Horses given to the Sun, and burnt the Charets of the
ver. 12.
Sun with fire; Nay in a holy indignation mark what he did, he brake the
Altars and Images in pieces, made dust of them, strewed them upon the water; he
slew the vile Priests upon the Altars, and burnt their bones there, and strewed
the ashes upon the graves of them that had sacrificed there; In a word; All
that the Idolatrous Kings of Israel had made to provoke the LORD to anger,
Josiah took away. ver. 24.


This is granted you will say, Josiah was steadfast, unmovable, 2 Chro 34. 4, 5
always abounding in the work of the LORD; But what was his reward? I cannot
express that, but the part of it, which was in sight, was very great; he
should not see the evil, that was to come 2 Chr. 34. 28.
upon his dwelling place, and the inhabitants of the same. There was some
return for his goodness, he should not see the evil. Treasures of wrath were
sowed and sealed up in a bag Job 14. 17.
, by his Father and Grandfather: the bag must be opened, and down the wrath
there must be powered, but Josiah should neither feel nor see that tempest;
before that storm fell he should be HOUSED, gathered to his Fathers, ver. 28.
and to his gave in PEACE. In peace! He was taken 2 Chronicles 5. 21, ^^.
away in war, as we read, he would not forbear from meddling with GOD c: He
would not hearken to the words of Necho from the Mouth of GOD. It is true; he
had politic respects enough, to engage him to the war, (which we examine
not) but certain it was, he did not ask counsel at GODS Mouth, for then his
reasons had shrunke-up to nothing. But the bag of wrath was full; it must be
empited; wrath must come upon Jerusalem; but that could not be, till Josiah was
taken thence, and housed in his grave. As it was said of Lets going to Zoar; so
of Josiahs going to his grave; wrath must fall, but I cannot do any thing till
thou be come thither Genesis 19. ^2.
. And thither he was brought, to his grave by an Arrow shot from an Enemy, and
yet IN PEACE, in perfect peace, a peace that passes all understanding; That
King, who shall do as Josiah did, begin as he did, so proceed as he did, in
cleansing his heart from Idols; and, being a King, shall SPYE-OUT through the
whole Land, what is offensive there, and shall remove it. This King, dies in
PEACE, though in battle, and dashed in pieces there as a snow-ball dashed
against the wall; yet in PEACE, because in the peace of a good conscience,
which makes a man the merriest feast; when? when his body must go to feast the
worms. And again;

In PEACE, for it was peace in comparison of that, which was shortly after to
follow, when that bag of wrath must be opened, and the fierceness thereof must
kindle against Jerusalem, and Judah must be removed out of GODS sight. In
peace, 2 King. 23. 26, 27.
with reference unto that time.

Now we come to the case, and there if we will spy into it, we may see our
own case. And could not this good King, and his goodness keep off wrath? did
the meltings of his own spirit, the spying-out and removing all abominations,
did all this do no good to the Land! did it but deliver his own soul? yes
doubtless; It was a means to respite the judgment; to hold-back the wrath.
Certainly were it not for these Josiahs, these melting spirits, these that
spye-out all abominations, and do their uttermost for removing of them, were
it not, I say for these, our sins, our abominations, had found us out before
this day, wrath had been upon us before this time, our blood had been upon
our heads, and our Images had destroyed us before this day. But this is the
point, the decree was passed and gone forth, wrath must come. Again;

Innocent blood was shed in abundance, that filled up the measure apace. That
cries and calls for vengeance; the voice of it will not be stopped till the bag
be opened, and wrath be powered down.

Object. Why, but Manasseh shed innocent blood?

Answ. True, for we do verily believe, that Kings may do injustice; Manasseh
shed innocent blood; he was an Idolater, therefore a Man of blood, and chief
in the trespass; but he had bloody ministers, as bloody as himself, and woe
unto them both Tum auctor^b^s male sic^rrum, tum admin^s^^i^. I^^. in Isa. 2.
10 ^.
.

Object. But Manassehs sin was put away^; so might theirs be, who were his
ministers in fulfilling his bloody commands.

Answ. Grant that, and that was David's case; the LORD had put away his sin:
and yet see, what wrath fell down, 1 Samuel 12. 13,
and abided upon his house. Sin may be done away, and yet temporal
punishment may be inflicted for mighty and just reason, which may easily be
gathered up from that place, and else where.

Object. It may be said again; Manasseh was gone, and his generation with him;
why should wrath fall upon the children for that the Fathers did?

Answ. There is a mighty reason for that also, which will charge and feoff all
the righteous blood, shed in Qu. Mary's days upon us, an impenitent people.
Manasseh and his bloody ministers had shed innocent blood in abundance, and
they were gone. The generations following approved their doings. How does that
appear? Thus; Because it does not appear, that the generations after them did
ever humble themselves for that bloodshed in their Fathers days, any more
then we have done for the blood our Fathers shed in Qu. Mary's days. True it
is, Josiahs heart was tender, he humbled himself before GOD when he heard a
sound of wrath, Chr. 34 27.
and we read how it fared with him; It is not to be doubted also, but many
amongst us have been and are so humbled too and for the reason above said. But
the people were not humbled, they were not tender, their hearts did not melt;
there was not a National humiliation, for we know what followed; they were so
far from humbling themselves thereby to turn away wrath, that they
transgressed more and more; There was a forsaking in the whole Land; all were
revolted, all degrees and estates, and they continued revolting, till there was
no remedy, till they had brought Sodom and Gomorrah into Jerusalem; They had
Rulers, but they 2 Chr. 36. 16. Esa. 1. 9.
were (not (as) but) Rulers of Sodom; and the people, the people ^^r. 10.
of Gomorrah.

But that which was the determining sin, and filled up the measure was this,
They mocked the Messengers of GOD, and despi^ed His words, and mis-used His
Prophets. How long persisted they in so evil a course? Until the wrath of the
2 Chro. 36. 16.
Lord arose against His people. It is clear; That there was no humiliation,
for there was no Reformation, nay, there was a contrary walking still, so
approving the sins of their Fathers by committing the very same. Therefore it
was fullfilled according to the threat, I will cause them to be remooved into
all the Kingdoms of the Earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah King
of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem: Ier. 15. 4.
And so we are come to the end of The Kings Chronicle. And it has a sad close,
very unanswerable to expectation: for the last King we read off, was the best
King that ever was: And the Reformation he made was as complete and perfect,
(as imperious) if the Adversary will have it so, as ever was any so much as
upon design, For he SPIED-out what Israel had made to provoke the LORD to
anger, and took it away: And yet he could not hinder the saddest effects of
GODS displeasure, the violl of wrath from pouring down: Notwithstanding
desolation followed even to astonishment, and an hissing. Josiah could not make
up the many breaches in the City of David, which Idolaters had made there. How
corrupting, eating and consuming abominable Idolaters are; and what a
prevalence there is in a wicked Idolatrous example to destroy, more then is in
a good example to make up and heal, has been spoken-off before. This only I
will add to this place, That where sin is let in like a flood, the storm of
GODS Judgments follow after, and falls down swiftly and heavily upon the
hairy scalpes of those, who were instruments to open that sluice or flood-gate:
GOD has set it down by an aeternall Iussisti Domine and sic est ut omnis
inordinatu^ affectus sibi sic paena. c Ier. 8. 17.
Decree, that vexation and sin should be inseparable. Have thou not procured
this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the LORD? Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings c shall reprove thee, etc.

An Abridgement of the Chronicle. One conclusion drawn from the two Sections,
with an use to those that are in Authority, To walk in the good way, after the
example.

TO make a collection of the whole Chronicle, I have in the former Section and
Chapters traced the steps of the bad Kings of Judah, tending in show to the
strengthening themselves and their Kingdom; but indeed and in the issue, to
the ruin and destruction of all. Their irreligious Policies carried them
hopefully-on sometime, but confounded them and broke them to pieces at the
last, for they would be wise with their own counsels and strong in their own
strength, so they rooted-in that, which could not be rooted-out, till even
Judah was rooted-out of the Land. So strongly, as one says, does the painted
vizour of wise proceedings delude even those, that know the foul face of
imp^ety lurking under it: But behold the wretched ends, that have ever followed
it, whereof the Kings of Judah first mentioned, were themselves very great
examples, and so they are propounded to following generations, holding forth in
their example DEATH and EVIL before Kings and people.

But now here is the wonder, that the wicked have not yet learnt, after so many
thousand years experience, That they work a deceitful work, that they pull
down wrath upon their own heads, and that the Politicians beaten ways tend
to death. They march-on as furiously now as ever they did: but I forbear.

In the latter Section and foregoing Chapters, I have traced the stepps of the
good Kings, and we have found them walking strait-on toward those two great
ends, the glory of GOD, and the safety of their Kingdom, carrying all level
thereunto; for their counsel was taken from GODS mouth, and their strength
from His right Arm: They SPIED-out what Idolaters had done to provoke the LORD
to Anger, and took it away. All their care was to make their Kingdom the
LORDS Kingdom; and their Land the Lords Land. I need not add, And they
prospered; but I will add, So they prospered, as that they were the wonder of
the world, and The fear of them fell upon the Nations. And so these hold forth
to after Generations, Life, Good, and Blessings. We might wonder here also, how
any should forsake this good way, and choose a way of their own, but the heart
is deep, and the deceit there cannot be bottomed, and there are depths of
Satan, and we are not ignorant of his wiles, how ready and able he is to
seduce, and how willing the heart is to follow, though to destruction; but I
forbear here also.

From these two so different ways, the bad and good Kings have walked in, we
will conclude what way must be taken well to Posture a Kingdom, for that is
our maine scope of all that is said: And first I will put it down negatively.

Not a Magazine of treasures; nor an Arsenall of Armor, nor a Fleet by Sea,
nor Forces by Land; nor Towers, Walls, Bars, none of all this can secure a
Kingdom, nor put it into a Posture of Defense; for then Babylon, that great
City, had stood it out to this day, which had a mighty River, a wall of water
to secure it, and indeed thereby the King was so secured in his safety, That he
was drinking wine in bowls, when part of his City was taken; and the Sword in
his bowels, before a I^^* 51. 31.
he feared it, for the LORD pleaded His Churches cause; He dried up her Sea,
and made her springs dry ver. 36.
; then did the Inhabitants of Zion say, The violence done to me and to my
flesh, be upon Babylon ver. 35.
. And so it was, which tells us also, what shall be in after times, for the
LORD will stretch forth His hand upon her, and roll her down from the Rocks,
ver. 25.
and will make her as a burnt Mountain.

The same might be said of populous NO. If a MILITIA could have defended her,
she had been defended, for we read her strength was INFINITE. Yet she was
carried away, she went into Captivity: her young children also were dashed in
pieces at the top of all the streets, and they cast lots for her honorable
men, and all her great men were bound in chains. Nahum. 3. 9, 10*


I must not forget Jerusalem, concerning whose MILITIA we have been speaking
all this while, if strength of Walls, Towers, Gates and Bars, could have
defended Jerusalem, she might have bid defiance to her enemies and have mocked
at fear. And that was the opinion of all the world at that time touching
Jerusalems MILITIA; The Kings of Lam 4. 12.
the Earth and all the Inhabitants of the world would not have believed that
the Adversary and Enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. But
make a chain, says the LORD (that is) I will judge her, she shall go into
Captivity, for her Ezekiel 7. 13.
Land is full of bloody crimes, the City is full of violence. So the LORD
abhorred His Sanctuary; he gave-up into the hand of the Enemy the walls of her
Palaces; Then her gates sunk into the ground, I know not how to understand
the Lam. 2. 9.
words, but sure I am the Roman Conqueror acknowledged, That an Almighty hand
made way for him, and let him into the City. And the remnant ever since, Zion,
I mean, and her inhabitants, are resolved to say now, Ashur shall not save us,
we will not ride upon Hos. 14. 13.
horses. We will not look to foreign aids, nor to strength of men or horses
at home, We will trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength. The Lord is good* a strong Esa 26. 4. Nahum. 1. 7.
hold in the day of trouble, and He knows them, that trust in Him.

Then it will be said, what need of walls, towers, gates and bars? Yes great
need; for though the safety of a City does not consist in having walls and
gates, and bars about it, but in the safeguard of the Almighty, and His
shutting in the gates, as He did the doors of the Arc: yet the City will not
neglect her walls and gates or leave them open; for this were to tempt GOD, and
to forfeit His protection: We must not write Salvation upon any 1 King. 7. 2.
visible fortifications, how mighty and strong soever; we must not trust to
them. But such is the foolish pride of man's heart, he can glory in his own
strength, and magnify his own wisdom, courage, foresight, and forget God the
Maker, and giver of all things. Whence it comes to pass, that the stronger he
finds himself, the more he turns from God, and falls before his enemy, at such
a time when he thought it most impossible. The walls then may be too high; the
Castles too strong; the people too many for GOD to defend a people, or to give
them the victory, because of the cursed pride of man's heart, who will ascribe
salvation to the strength of his Mountain (which GOD made so strong) and can
quickly weaken, if Man will not lookup to Him, off from himself, and give GOD
the Glory. In Him the fatherless find mercy, they that put no confidence in
the Hos. 14. 3.
Arm of flesh.

A people then may look to their Militia and use all means to fortify
themselves with walls and brazen bars, but they must have respect to Him, Who
strengthens the bars of his gates. 1 Kin. 4. 13.
Solomon is not blamed for building that stately house of the Forest; Ps. 147.
13.
the house of Armory for his whole Kingdom. Nor are the people blamed, because
in the day of trouble, of treading down and 1 Kin 7. 2.
perplexity, they did look to the armor of that house (though they Esa. 22. 5,
8.
should have looked to it sooner, and how provided they were of store and
provision there:) Nor are they blamed for beholding the breaches of the City,
which were many, and looking to all means to stop the same, and to fortify
themselves: All this was considerable, had they done it sooner. But for this
they are blamed, and stand deeply charged of folly, that they looked to the
Armor of the house, and how they might fortify the wall, and ver. 11.
make a ditch; but did not look unto the Maker thereof, neither had respect to
Him, that fashioned it long ago. So then we may look to our Armories, and to
all means of Fortification, but so as we look steadfastly to the maker thereof;
for we can tell now, what the Militia is, not an Arm of flesh, neither
Chariots nor horsemen, vain things to save a man: It matters not how high
Stantibus maenibus ruentibus, morbus. ^id* Aug. de Civ: l. 1 c. 33. and l. 2.
Ep. 16.
and towering our walls and ships are; if walls stand and manners fall, a
people cannot stand it out long. Walls joined to walls, and piles upon piles,
an hundred walls cannot defend a City, when blood, rapine, and abominable
Idolaters, are within, for then GOD departs from them, and takes away His
defense. We must ponder and well weigh these things in our hearts, because it
is so hard a matter to beat the heart off from these things, I mean, from
putting confidence therein, though whosoever have so done, trusted on the Arm
of flesh, Chariots and hors-men are brought down and fallen, whereas, All
they, who have remembered the name of the Lord their God, have risen and stood
upright: Ps. 20.
for the strength of Israel is not in any outward thing, but in Isreal's GOD,
The saving strength of His Right Hand. First Section Preface.


2. This, I say, for I will not recall that which went before Psa. 68. 17.
, is the Militia of a Kingdom; GOD with His twenty thousand Chariots, even
thousands of Angels, the Lord among His people, as 2 Kin. 6. 17.
in the Holy place: for He, That is, Isreal's God, is the God of salvation, and
unto this God the LORD belongs the issues from Death. Therefore it was, that
all the good Kings and Princes, took this one way to secure then Kingdom; they
and their people AS. SOCIATED themselves (that was their next work after the
Abominations were spied out and removed) came up to God, even to his Terms,
joined themselves in Covenant with Him, thereby shrewded themselves and their
people, under the shadow of the Almighty, that His Salvation might be round
about them, and their people for Walls and Bulwarks: As this was their design;
so this one way they took to bring their design about (it cannot be spoken
too often) they spied*out what Idolaters had done to provoke the eyes of the
Lord, and all that they removed: then they associated themselves, came up to GOD
to bind themselves to Him in the bond of a Covenant. This is the old way, which
good men have trodden, direct and strait forward in a conformity to the rule,
and driving-on these great ends; The glory of God and the good of His people.
And it is one and the same way, and varieth not; It is the way of the wicked,
that has turnings and windings in it, for they, as the crooked Scrpent their
leader, and like harmfull Beasts, do love confusa vestigia: But I say, the way
of the righteous is one and the same stra^-forward. And it is observable,
though it could be no otherwise, That these good Kings, went all one way,
minded one thing, carried all level to one mark: all made the same beginning,
the same progress, attained the same end, Sabbath and Port of their labors,
their own and their Kingdoms peace here, and everlasting Peace in a Kingdom,
which has a foundation, and shall never be shaken.

A man would wonder now, That this way) so beaten out before us by the
footsteps of the godly, so direct, so plain away, wherein it is said, the
fool cannot err (i. e.) he that has ceased from his own wisdom) a way of
pleasantness and of peace; a way, which GOD has be strewed all along with
blessings; and wherein His footsteps have dropped fatnes: A wonder I say, that
this way should be mistaken. And yet no wonder, when we consider again, that
(it is said) the fool shall not err in it, but the wiseman shall not find
it, who is his own guide and trusts in his own wisdom.

And now we can discern the reason, whence it comes to pass, That, though
there be but one way, one maine and chief end (the other but subordinate and
secundary;) all the motions to th^s and made plain and direct before us, yet
we leave this good way choose rather to walk in ble*pathes; The reason is,
because we will be wise in our own wisdom, and think our selvesable enough to
order our own steps.

And this is of high concernment to the high Court of Parliament, c^^led
together at first, and kept together till this time (I will make no question of
it) for such a time as this Esth. 4. 14.
, when they have a price put into their hands, never any the like before them,
The saying of the King and Kingdom; of high concernement unto them, called now
to be Saviors, that as they were at the first but one House, so they would go
all one way, the good way beaten-out plain and direct before them. I say, and
I will insist a little upon it: First,

That there is but one House of Parliament: pride and ambition, and I know not
what, have made them two, and separated them, whom God had joined at the first,
and made one, if the Records of time tell true, and I have read what they say.
Notwithstanding we allow heartily a distinction in persons and places, though
yet, as God has made them, let them be, and be so called, no longer two, but
one House, for so anciently it was. But if there be a distinction in point of
office and service, then the scale turns toward the lower House, for there
one man stands for ten thousand, a great engagement to his service. In the
upper House (whereto we give as much honor, as man is capable of) They are but
Unites, one is but one, like a great letter in the front or beginning of a
Patent, which has many flourishes, and yet but one letter. So as (and to
express it as well as I can) if there be upper and lower there (as certainly
there must be, while there is order in the world) yet is it, but as the upper
and lower teeth, they stand above the other in a Posture of opposition, Mart.
l. 1 Epigram 37.
and the upper move not, but do all equally the same work, and therefore if
there be any contention betwixt them, it should be ever the same, I read, was
betwixt two brothers, who never contended, but who should do each other the
best service; It should be said of those two Houses, as one said of his Mother
and of his Sister, He had lived with his Mother threescore and seven S^ nunq^a^
(...) matter (...) qua^ cum (...) ^n sim^^^^^^e. In vita (...) C^^er^ in fine
Epistolarum ad Att^^um in folio 329.
years, with his Sister not half so many, but in all that time, there was
never any RECONCILIATION betwixt them, for there was never any difference or
falling*out. A noble Concord, becoming none more then a House of Parliament,
that as they were once one, so they may continue one still, follow-on in one
way, be of one mind and one judgment, for they have but one way, and that is
plain and direct before them; but one manner of proceeding in it; and but one
principal aim (the other is subordinate thereunto) the glory of God, and the
salvation of his people. If we will see the way, the first entrance into it,
the progress in it, the end, and all shut-up together, behold we the way of
the good Kings of Judah set before the Nobles and Worthies, to do thereafter,
they associated themselves, came up to God, entered into Covenant, kept
thereunto, then they spied-out what Idolaters had done to provoke the eyes of
the Lord, and they removed it; and so they made their Land, the Lords Land; and
the people, the Lords people; and now seeing there is but one way, one method
of proceeding in it, one aim, and one mark, whereto all is to be carried
level: And all this is so plain and direct and clear to the eye, that the
fool cannot err in it, he that has renounced his own wisdom; I will shut up
all in the Apostles prayer; Now we beseech 1 Cor. 1. 10.
you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the
same thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And the Lord
fulfill His good promise; I will give Ier. 32. 39.
them one heart, and one way, that they may fear Me for ever, for the good of
them, and of their children after them. Amen.

FINIS.

