The Dressing up OF THE CROWN. IN A SERMON Preached at St. Edmunds Bury in
Suffolk, May 17. 1660. WHEN His MAJESTY was there solemnly proclaimed KING of
ENGLAND, etc.

By LAURENCE WOMOCK.

Psalm. 45. 1. I speak of the things, which I have made touching the King.



London, Printed by W. H. for Will. Sheares at the blew Bible in Bedford street
in Covent Garden.

THE Dressing up of the CROWN
Psalm. 132. verse. 18. the later part of the verse. But upon himself shall his
Crown flourish.
THe end of this Convention is, to proclaim the Authority of his Sacred Majesty
over us, and to profess our dutiful subjection to it. But, will our Fanatics
say, why should we trouble our selves about a Magistrate? The Apostle does
advise us not to be the servants of men 1 Cor. 7. 2 3.
: and he says, the Law is not made for the righteous 1 Timothy 1. 9.
; and if the Prince makes any civil Sanction, it must not be adopted into the
Law of Faith, and therefore it is ipso facto, void and of none effect; for
whatsoever is not of faith is sin Romans 14 23.
. Besides, compulsion cannot bring the conscience to conformity, and capital
punishments are severe, cruel and unchristian; for they do not only deprive
the Malefactor of his life, but of his time too, and so happily prevent him of
some miracle of providence, which otherwise might have led him to repentance.
And for these considerations, say these men, why should we give our selves the
temptation of setting up a King over us.

But these Objections carry their confutation upon their forehead; and were
there nothing else to be said, it is sufficient to evacuate their force, that
these very Objectors, when ever they gain their opportunity, do not only
practice the same things themselves, which they now condemn in their
Superiors, but also act beyond them. When it becomes their own concern, they
can plead necessity, and find reasons, and interpret these very Scriptures in
favor of themselves, and allege others in justification of their proceedings;
which will evince, to any discerning judgment, that the design of these men, in
pulling the Crown from off the head, and wresting the Sword and Scepter out of
the hands of others, is but to gain an advantage to take them into their own
possession.

What I represent in this discourse, is but an imperfect Copy of that which we
have seen drawn out to the life before our eyes.

For the carrying on of which achievement, Good God! what adulation and
flattery, what dissimulation and hypocrisy has been used! what horrid
perjuries, abusive invocations, profane mockeries, execrable blasphemies have
been put upon Almighty God! what juggling collusion, villainous cheats, devilish
treacheries have been practiced upon the Lords Anointed! At last they laid his
sacred Body in the dust (though they could never lay his Honor there) to be as
a stepping stone to advance ambitious Treason to the Throne. But blessed be our
good God, who is as well a God of Justice as of Patience; who has not suffered
the glorious light of our eyes to be always eclipsed, nor the designs of that
bloody Insolent to take root for ever, but has blasted them when they seemed
to be almost full bloomed, not permiting them to bring forth any fruit to
maturity; and has cast confusion upon the Tyranny and Triumphs of those
Usurpations, and by a wonderful hand of providence, has vouchsafed to restore
the most excellent Majesty of the Son, to the Scepter of that power, and the
splendour of that glory, that had been ravished from the hand of that blessed
Father. So that what was calculated for the Family and Successors of that David
mentioned in the two last verses of this Psalm, may serve the ends of our
discourse, as if they had been a prediction of the Family and Successors of
Ours, in their Dominion over us. There will I make the Horn of David to bud, I
have ordained a lamp for mine anointed. His enemies will I cloth with shame:
but upon himself shall his Crown flourish.

These words are a representment of the Power and Majesty Royal, in its
continuance and amplification. And, blessed be God! how wonderfully does the
horn of that power sprout and grow up amongst us! what gladsome rays of light,
of joy and glory does the lamp of that Majesty display upon us, at a distance,
even to the envy and amazement of the enemies. But for them since the fatherly
affection of our most gracious Sovereign is pleased, upon their submission, to
vouchsafe them a better Livery, a Livery of his own Royal favor and grace, I
shall not exasperate any passion to cut out and make up the garment of shame
for them; and yet I must add this, That I have no protection for them from the
severity of a Divine vengeance, except they repent. If they repent not, God
will take the office into his own hands; for he says, His enemies will I
cloth with shame. The next words are my Theme this day, [Upon Himself shall
his Crown flourish.] Wherein I must first handle the Crown, and make some
reflections upon the Owner, the Sacred Person whose Crown it is; and then
proceed to show you how you are engaged to support, and adorn, and dress it up
to make it flourish; and lastly, I shall acquaint you with those great
blessings and advantages that will accrue to you by the influences thereof; for
this [Himself] is of a very diffusive nature, and is vertually extended over
all the body of the people; And this Crown set upon the Sovereigns head, the
more it flourishes there, the greater refreshment, the more blessings will you
all receive from the shadow of it.

I. Of the Crown first.
And this we must handle under a threefold notion.

1. As a representation of the Divine Ordinance or institution of Government in
general.

2. As the highest Ensign of Authority, the peculiar ornament of Monarchy; and
so we must consider it as having the Supremacy or Sovereignty, which is the
greatest excellency of Power and Dominion lodged in it.

3. As a peculiar instrument of a Monarch, distinct from the Sword; for it is
not the Sword that shall flourish; that would bring but little ease, little
contentment to a Nation under the triumphs of it. It Is the Crown shall flourish.

1.
Of which as it represents the Divine Institution or Ordinance of Government in
general; For God has set up a kind of Authority, that is, an Order of Rule in
universal nature, even in the purest constitution of it. We may observe this in
all the several parts of the world. Amongst Inanimates there is a first mover
that carries about all the other Orbs of Heaven; and in the Heaven there is a
Sun to rule the day, a Moon and the Stars to govern the night; and the
influences of those Superior bodies have a great sway over all sublunary
Creatures, and their operations. If we look into the world of Animals, we shall
find a certain kind of subordination amongst them. A King amongst the Beasts; a
Queen amongst the Birds; some excellency is stamped upon them by the Royal
Sovereign of the world, to which the rest of each kind do stoop and yield
obeisance.

In the world of Rational Creatures we may observe the same method of
superiority and subordination. There are several Orders of Angels, and the
Schoolmen tell us, that those of an higher Order do communicate light and
knowledge to such as are inferior; and we find they have their several
Provinces over which they do preside, in the 10. and 12. Chapters of Daniel.
There is order and subordination even in Hell it self; and perhaps it would be
a worse Hell than it is, if there were not a Prince of Devils to rule over it.

If we look into our own Bodies, we see the head derives the sense and motion
into all the parts and organs; and in the Soul, we have the Will, that rational
appetite to direct and command all the Members and Affections. And thus it
should be in the Church and State; wherein the Commands and Orders should issue
from the Head, where the excellency of power is chiefly lodged, and from thence
they should be regularly transmitted to the rest of the Body.

God gives a blessing to such a Constitution, and to the people that lives
under it, Psalm. 99. 6. Moses and Aaron amongst his Saints, and Samuel among
such as call upon his name. These called upon the Lord and he heard them.

Without this all the bands of Society are dissolved; the people without it are
like a flock of scattered 1 King. 22 17. Zac. 13. 7.
sheep (which indeed are not a flock) without a shep herd. And when this Order
is perverted, when the power and authority runs not in the proper channel: when
commands are not issued forth from the Head and Fountain, but usurped and
enforced by inferiors without and against, Them; this the Holy Ghost delivers
for a sore infliction, a heavy judgment upon a people. This was a great
exorbitancy and eye-soar to the wisest Solomon, To see folly set in great
dignity, servants upon Eccles. 10. 6, 7.
Horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth. It is a huge
undecency, not seemly for a servant to rule over Princes, Prove. 19. 10. It Is
Molestum too, an exorbitancy, that will disquiet the whole land, it is so
intolerable. For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four, which it
cannot bear. For a servant when he reigns; That Is the first, Prove. 30. 21,
22. This is not the ordinance of God, but his judgment upon a people; and so
it is threatened (therefore not a blessing, but a judgment) Isay 3. When God
takes away the Judge and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Honorable man,
and suffers Children to be their Princes, Children in knowledge and experience
(though otherwise old enough) and Babes to rule over them; The people shall be
oppressed every one by another, and every one by his Neighbor; the child shall
behave himself proudly against the Ancient, and the base against the
Honorable: and Women See the original. verse. 12.
shall rule over them, and they that can best flatter them and call them
blessed, shall lead them first into error, and then into destruction, verse 2,
3, 4, 5. with the 12. And if you will not for all this believe it to be a
judgment, though swallowed up by such as call you blessed (as if there were a
happiness in being ruined by such Instruments) hear the complaints of those
that groaned under such a judgment, and observe the effects of it in their
example; The Crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us that we have sinned,
Lam. 5. 16. If the Crown falls from the head, wherever it lights it is woeful;
and therefore the Church proceeds in her complaint, Servants have ruled over
us: there is none that does deliver us out of their hand. Princes verse. 8.
verse. 12.
are hanged up by their hand: the faces of the Elders were not honored.

When men shall Canonize themselves, or pass an Act for their own Saintship,
and then presume (notwithstanding their oaths, and bounden duty to the
contrary) to bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron,
and cut off their heads, and say, such honor have all the Saints; and to
palliate the crime, abuse and profane the sacred Text, which is rest rained to
one peculiar process of affairs under Gods own immediate conduct and direction;
For Moses was but Gods Lieutenant in the management of that expedition, and
received his particular orders from his own hand; and upon this account, the
Psalmist tells us, This was to execute the judgment that was written, Psalm.
149. last. If men will make use of such actions for precedents, as were never
set or intended for their imitation, casting behind their backs Gods express
commands, which were given to be the standing measures of their obedience; This
is a very sad strain for the Church of God to dance after.

When the fire out of the Bramble shall devour the lofty Cedars, as in Jothams
parable, Judge. 9. when the lusts that war in the Members shall overtop the
head, and prescribe to reason, and rebel against the law of the mind; All good
souls, in this case are concerned to take up that complaint, Lam. 5. 17. For
this our heart is faint; for these things our eyes are dim. We ought then to
mourn, forasmuch as it is evident, that sin has provoked God to anger, and
that sin, and that anger together, have disturbed the regular method, order,
and constitution of the world, which consisted of subjection and superiority;
and this is that which the Crown betokens and is the sum of our first
Reflection upon it.

2.
But we must reflect upon it as the highest ensign of Authority, the peculiar
ornament of Monarchy, having the Supremacy and Sovereignty, that is, the
greatest excellency of Power and Dominion lodged in it. And so we may consider
that it comes from a word, which signifies to separate and consecrate; and
consequently it is a thing sacred, and renders the person such that wears it.

This form of Government commenced with the world in Adam, who was the
firstborn (as it were) of all mankind, and so it commenced upon the account of
primageniture. Neither was this prerogative lost by Adam's fall, either to
himself or his first begotten; For we see it descended upon Cain, and is
asserted to him by God himself, Genesis 4. 7. And long after we find it
acknowledged by Jacob in his firstborn Ruben, Genesis 49. 3, 4. Ruben, thou art
my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power. And it was this prerogative with other
advantages that made Jacob so ambitious of the birthright. And though upon the
division and dispersion of families for peopling the world, there was a kind of
necessity to alter this Constitution in this circumstance of Person; yet the
Form it self (of Monarchy) continued, and as far as my observation reaches, it
was the only Government that was exercised in the first ages all the world
over; which argues it was generally taken up, upon the authority of some
Universal, unquestionable principle.

And although this were interrupted amongst the people and Church of God, while
they sojourned in Egypt, and after their Redemption too, for a season, when God
took them by a special providence, and carried them under the wings of his own
immediate jurisdiction; yet even in his own Law, he was pleased to make an
early provision for the restitution of this Government, when they came to a
settlement in Canaan, Deuteronomy. 27. 14. And though there were some miscarriage in
the management, some inordination in their desires of a King, yet was God
pleased to sign the Grant, and own the constitution, and appoint a special Rite
of Unction for the consecration of Saul's person to that office, 1 Samuel 8. And
therefore what is said by the Lord, [I gave them a King in mine anger,] Hes.
13. 11. is not to be understood of Saul; for it is evident to me, that God gave
him to that people out of Compassion, and at their cry, and designed him the
instrument, to save them from the Philistines, 1 Samuel 9. 16. And to this end
God poured out his Spirit upon him, and gave him another heart, a heart fit for
Government, 1 Samuel 10. 9, 10. And had he had the patience to wait upon God,
some few hours longer, till Samuel's coming to Gilgal to offer the sacrifice,
the Lord had established his Kingdom upon Israel for ever, 1 Samuel 13. 13. And
if we consider how Samuel aggravates his ingratitude upon this account, we
cannot conclude that God made him King out of anger; 1 Samuel 15. 17.
no anger I am confident, against Saul at that time in respect of his Person,
or his settlement in that Royal office.

To put the matter out of all question, David was a King too, yet certainly he
was not given to that people out of anger; for the Lord says, I have chosen
David Psalm. 89. 20
my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him, etc. Psalm. 89. 20. And the
advancement of that people unto a Monarchy, was such an exaltation of State and
Dignity to the whole Nation, that God upbraids their ingratitude, as being
heightened upon this very score, that God had set a beautiful Crown upon their
head, and prospered them into a Kingdom, Ezekiel. 16. 12, 13.

And the truth is, the wisest Statesmen do conclude Monarchical Government; A
threefold advantage we may observe it has, above States more popular; It Is
more easy, more potent, more honorable.

1. More easy; This is evident in short; for where there are more men, there
are more lusts and passions to command, more appetites and interests to be
gratified; and this must needs evince their Government, in the general to be
more difficult.

2. As Monarchy is more easy, so it is more strong and potent; because (besides
the advantages of secrecy, which can never be so firmly sealed, when designs
are communicated to a multitude.) A Monarchy is less subject to divisions; and
less subject to divisions it must needs be, because it is more reduced to unity
in one single person of the Prince. Hereupon we see all bodies Military, that
they may be the more united and potent, are governed after this Form, under the
command of one chief General.

3. As more Potent so more Honorable; because the splend or and glory is all
contracted, as it were, into one center, and so carries the figure of Gods own
Supreme Majesty.

For when the Almighty is pleased to set forth his own State and Creatness, he
does not assume the Title of MAGISTRATE, nor call himself by the name of
Senator or Protector; These are creatures of too low a stature to be his
Representativs: But he clothes himself in the Royal apparel, and makes choice
of the sign of the Crown, as the fittest for his Majesty to appear in. He is
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and this name and title is that which we find
engraven, not only upon 1 Timothy 6. 15.
the Vesture, but also upon the very Thigh of Christ, as if these were a
production that issued from his very loins, Rev. 19. 16. And if you please to
take the observation the holy Ghost in Scripture has remarked it, as the
greatest honor the Father could do to Christ, and the greatest blessing he
could confer upon his Church, that he would raise up Kings to serve him and
succor her. All Kings shall fall down before thee, as is promised unto Christ,
Psalm. 72. 10, 11. And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, as is promised to the
Church, Isa. 49. 23.

And indeed we may observe, that God reposeth a very great trust in Princes,
for the support and advancement of his worship. When he was about to build the
Tabernacle for his own service and glory, the model of it was not given to the
heady multitude, nor yet to Aaron the Priest, but to the Prince, to Moses, his
own immediate Minister, Exodus 25. 9. And when he was pleased to have his
worship fixed, the pattern of the Temple that he will be honored in, is given
to David, to the King, 1 Chronicles. 28. 17, 19. The Prince is Custos utriusque
tabulae, God has committed the care of his worship and service to his
inspection, the Holy Bible to his custody, not finding a safer place than the
Crown to lodge it in. The Tables of the Law are deposited in the hands of
Moses, Exodus 34. 31, etc. And the Book of the Testimony was wont to be
delivered into the hands of the King at his Coronation; and this was according
to Gods own prescription, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. where 2 Chronicles. 23. 11.
the King is directed to transcribe a Copy of the Law, and to peruse and study
it for his instruction; and ever since Defensor Fidei, Defender of the Faith,
has been a Title due to all religious Princes.

The office of a King then is no way inconsistent with the privilege of a
child of God: He may very faithfully serve God in that high calling; For I do
not find that God does depose Princes, or prescribe them to renounce their
Function, when he invites them to adore and worship Christ: Be wise now
therefore, O ye Kings, serve the Lord with fear, and kiss the Son left he be
angry. That is all we find them exhorted to, Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. Nay even to
such, as are (mentioned in that Psalm, to be) in a confederacy against Christ,
to such, I say, does the Holy Ghost reserve the reverence of their Titles.
Saint Paul enjoynes us to pray for them: Saint Peter, to submit our selves unto
them, under this consideration, that 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
they are invested with such an Authority.

But some of Saint Peter's pretended Successors are so far from following his
example, that they take liberty (at their pleasure) to transform Princes in to
Tyrants, and that they may spoil them of their Kingdoms, they alienate the
hearts and affections of their Subjects and absolve them from their Allegiance.
But observe the cunning of their practices: They allow not Subjects to withdraw
their obedience or duty from their Prince, by no means; that were against a
divine Right, an execrable injustice; but to free the Subject from such a
guilt, the Pope unkings the person of the Prince, and then the people, no
longer owes him duty; Thus the Cardinal instructs the people, as the Popes
Curate, Non permitto, ut Regi non pareas, quod esset contra jus Bellar. Cont.
Bar. cap. 31.
Divinum; sed facio, ut qui tibi Rex erat, non sit deinceps tibi Rex. Regi
rejecto Vicarius Christi obedientiam exhiberi prohibet. But Christ has
surrogated no Officer in his Church to practice such black Arts, or exercise
such a Vicarious power for the advancement of his Kingdom; nor will he
acknowledge such Instruments to be his, but rather the Devils Vicars, whose
usurpation and arrogance they imitate. And I wish some of those that do pretend
to Reformation, did not justify the Church of Rome in this particular: for I
must do them that justice, I find the more ingenuous amongst them, at least if
we may believe them, do disclaim such Doctrines, and abominate the practice.

There is such a vicinity, such a relation betwixt God and the King, that
commonly they are served and disobeyed together. If you read of an
Insurrection, it is Psalm. 2. 3.
against the Lord, as well as against his Anointed. In David's time, those who
did blaspheme God, did slander the Psalm. 89. 50 Edit. Leiturg.
footsteps of his Anointed also. And in Isaiahs time, those who bade defiance
to their Prince, did at last fly as high as there was any Majesty to be
affronted, they spit their poison in the face of Heaven it self, Isa. 8. 21.
And how is it possible, but the dishonor put upon the King, should reflect
upon God himself? For the King is a Coin of Gods own impression and stamping:
He says, By me Kings reign: and I have said, ye are gods. The Pro. 8. 15.
Psalm. 82. 6.
Prince has Gods image and superscription engraven upon him. Indeed his
Majesty is the only visible image that God has set up of himself to be
worshipped: and yet I would not have you turn your Prince into an Idol, but to
perform what you find enjoined by Christ and the Holy Ghost, and the Apostles
in Holy Scripture: Render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, says Mat. 22.
21 Prove. 24. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 17
our Savior: Fear thou the Lord and the King, says Solomon, Fear God and
honor the King, says St. Peter.

But suppose the King will not comply in the reformation and settlement of
Religion. Why, if we speak of Reformation, the question will be, who is fittest
to judge, as having the best assistance and advantages to discern what is fit
to be reformed. In the great Council of Ephesus, the Bishops address themselves
thus unto the Emperor for settlement of Religion, Supplicamus vestrae
Majestati, ut fidem immotam custodire sanciatis: They supplicate, but have no
Commission from their great Master Christ to levy war, and put a force upon
their Sovereign. In this case the Church of God is allowed no other weapons,
but Preces and lacrymae, prayers and tears. Defendenda Religio est a privatis
omnibus, non occidendo sed mortendo, non saevitia sed patientia, non scelere
sed Lib. 5. c. 20.
fide, says Lactantius; Religion is to be defended by all private persons, by
laying down their own lives, not by attempting the lives of others, not by
cruelty, but by patience; not by treachery, but by a constant and innocent
profession of the Faith. Thus did the blessed servants of God, this was their
faith and practice in all the purest ages of the Church; They loved Revel. 12.
11. chap. 6. 9.
not their lives unto the death; but were slain for the word of God, and for
the Testimony which they held. And in this case, is it not enough, that the
Apostle says, If we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him: adding
withal, That if we deny him, he will also deny us. And truly Romans 8.
it is a very great degree of our denial of him, to refuse to bear this part of
his Cross, when his wisdom and providence shall think fit to impose it upon
us; when to shift it off our selves, we lay it upon the shoulders of our
Sovereign, whose Crown entitles him to a Supremacy of command, but does not
inthral him in a subjection to the people. And thus you have my reflection upon
the Crown, in the second notion of it, as it is the Ensign and Ornament of
Monarchy.

3.
I must make a third reflection upon it (though it be a very brief one) as it is
distinguished from other Instruments, that have relation to the Royal Office,
the Scepter and the Sword; for all these three, the Crown, the Sword, the
Scepter, are the Instruments of a King, to which we owe respective duties. The
Scepter (always supposed to be a just and For the King can do no wrong.
right Scepter) must measure our actions; to that therefore we owe obedience.
And because the King bears not the Sword in vain; therefore to the Sword we owe
fear. And because the Crown entitles the person that wears it unto Majesty, it
requires of veneration, we must therefore pay honor to it.

If this had been such a prediction, as we find that touching Hazael (which put
the great Prophet into a bitter passion of weeping to utter it) 2 King. 8. 12.
That his Sword should flourish in his hand, and be bathed in your heart-blood,
that it should triumph in the slaughter of your innocent Babes, and in ripping
up your women great with child, and other bloody outrages: This had been very
dreadful (how just soever in the eyes of Heaven) to you. But we have a God of
mercy, and his Vicegerent resembles him in this virtue. The King of our Israel
is a very merciful King; if by any gracious concessions, his Majesty can
possibly ptevent it, he desires not to have his Sword (amongst his own
Subjects) but his Crown to flourish.

II. The second General Part.
But how is this to be accomplished? That shall be our next enquiry. Without
question it is our duty to do something to this effect: It Is not to be expected,
that all should come immediately from Heaven, and the hand of God. Here is a
blessing from Heaven insinuated in the Text, [It shall flourish,] and Divine
providence does offer fair to make it good: But we are concerned, it is our
bounden duty to contribute our endeavors, and use all the best means we can to
accomplish it.

That the Crown then may flourish, we are obliged to do two things; 1. To water
it. 2. To dress it up.

1. To water it, with our Prayers, with our Tears, with our Estates and
Fortunes, with our Lives and dearest Blood.

1. With our prayers. This is a prime duty charged upon us by Apostolical
Authority, 1 Timothy ^. 1, 2. I exhort first of all, that supplication, prayers,
intercessions be made for all men: For Kings, and for all that be in Authority.
And the twentieth Psalm is an excellent prayer penned to this purpose. But
therein we find none of those perverse insinuations, which some men insert into
their supplications for their Princes; they have their seditious Is'es, and
scandalous Proviso'es; If God has reserved any mercy in store for him and his
Family. These are dangerous insertions, and leave very ill impressions upon
men's minds, as if their Princes Title were still questionable in Heaven, when
it is most clearly asserted on earth, and vindicated by all the Laws of God and
man.

And I am jealous, though other things have been pretended, that one main
reason why the Liturgy of the Church was laid aside, was, because the Prayers
therein, for the prosperity of the Kings Majesty, were so clear a contradiction
to some men's intendments, and so too apt to give a check to their after-horrid
practices against him. Which practices have invited and engaged all Loyal
Subjects to water his Crown with their Tears, in order to its reflourishing.
And,

2. This is the next way of watering it. And thus was that Crown watered by the
tears both of Prince and people, when it was invaded by that seditious
flatterer Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. 30. And David went up by the ascent of Mount
Olivet and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot,
and all the people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went
up, weeping as they went up. And to my knowledge our English Crown has many a
time, under our late sad Revolutions, been thus watered. But it was thrown down
so low in the dust, and trampled so deep in the mire, and the earth of
seditious people grown so stiff and hardened over it, that had it not been
wonderfully watered with showers of blessings from Heaven, somented and
cherished by sacred influences from above, it could not have visited the world
with such a glorious and comfortable Resurrection; for which we have as just
cause to water it now with tears of joy, as before with tears of sorrow and
lamentation.

3. But prayers and tears cost us little, (though some men will not afford
their Sovereigns Crown such a Subsidy.) You must water it with your Estates
too, Romans 13. 5, 6, 7. For this cause pay ye Tribute, and render unto every one
his due, tribute to whom tribute is due; It Is debitum, a due debt, and that for
conscience sake.

If the Laws of the Land have set bounds to the Subjects Contributions of this
kind; it is not my concern to cancel them; but the needs of the Crown must be
supplied, the charges defrayed, the State and Grandeur of it supported. We must
share in the burden, if we would share in the honor and benefit; and unless we
do support it, it cannot protect us. Neither

4. Can it in every juncture of time flourish to this effect of protection,
unless we water it, as occasion serve, with our blood also. And this is a duty
incumbent upon us, and that in regard of the Oath of God. We are obliged
Eccles. 8. 2.
to maintain His Majesty's Crown and Dignity with our lives as well as with our
Fortunes. And those loyal Subjects of David did not think their blood too dear
to water his Crown, when they thought him worth ten thousand, and yet would not
consent, that he should hazard his sacred Person in the battle, for fear he
should 2 Samuel 18. 3. etc. 21. 17.
miscarry in the adventure, and so quench the light of Israel. All the loyal
blood, that is shed in the just quarrel of the Crown, will be congealed and
turned into Jewels to dress it up; and if it should not prove succesful (in all
essays) to this effect, yet mixed with other virtues, it would contribute to
the dressing up of a more glorious Crown for Majesty and Loyalty in Heaven.
And thus you hear how the Crown is to be watered.

2. But this is not the All of a loyal Subjects duty. The Crown is as well to
be dressed up, as to be watered, to make it flourish. Dressed up with lauds and
acclamations to the person of the Prince; dressed up with praises and
thanksgivings to Almighty God for him; dressed up with an honorable Militia to
adorn and guard it; dressed up with a prompt and cheerful obedience to serve its
interests.

1. Dressed up with Lauds and Acclamations to the person of the Prince, we must
sing a joyful Hosanna to our Son of David. At his Coronation the Trumpets
sounded, and the people shouted, God save King Solomon, 1 King. 1. 39. How did
Samuel dress up Saul with commendations, when he set him before the people! 1 Samuel 10. 24. And Samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the Lord has
chosen, that there is none like him among all the people. And all the people
shouted and said, God save the King. The Holy Ghost has been pleased to
inspire the Psalmist to indite a sacred Poem to this purpose. The 45. Psalm
contains nothing but matter of Encomium, and commendations to dress up the
Crown, and the person of the Prince that wears it. If you understand the Fifth
Commandment, it enjoins you to honor this your Civil Father, and he that
uncovers his nakedness to his reproach, the curse of God, first or last, will
light upon him. If Princes are not to be flattered, they are much less to be
reviled. Commendations, which may seem flattery, may be hansome insinuations
and admonitions unto duty: but they are stigmatized for wicked men by two of
the Apostles, who despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. Saint Peter
wonders at 2 Pet. 2. 10 Jude v. 8.
such men's impudence, that they are not afraid to do so, 2 Pet. 2. 10. And well
might they be afraid, had they not hearts of Adamant, as well as foreheads of
Brass; for Abishai thought the crime so heinous, that he should do but a piece
of justice, in striking off the head of that dead dog, that barked in a railing
language against his 2 Samuel 16. 9.
Sovereign; and the very pretense that he had blasphemed God and the King, cost
the precious life of Naboth.

Our Laws are strict enough in this point, if men had but the Conscience to
execute and observe them. And the Law of God is very severe too. Thou shall not
speak Exodus 22. 27. Act. 23. 5. Eccl. 10. 20
evil of the Ruler of the people, says the Lord; And, is it fit to say to a
King thou art wicked, and to Princes you are ungodly, says Elihu, Job 34. 18.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, says Solomon.

But we have railing Shimei's, whose tongues are spears and arrows, swords and
rasors, full of deadly poisons, and set on fire of Hell; They durst do that
against their dread Sovereign, which the Archangel durst not do against the
Prince of Devils. They durst bring against him many Jude v. 9.
railing accusations. These are your godly men, of the late Edition; though
Saint James says, if any man seems to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, this man's Religion is vain, James 1. 26.

But it has been the practice of these men, to go a gleaning in the holy
Scriptures, and shutting their eyes against the light of clear and express
commands, they retire into the shades of obscure Prophesies, and serve their
base and unworthy ends out of such dark passages as they understand not (for
did they understand them, they would know, they signify nothing to their
purpose. Out of this Quarry, they pick up stones to throw at the Crown, and
dazzle the Authority of their Sovereign.

I insist the longer upon this, because Rebellion, which is as the sin of
Witchcraft, use to begin as Witchcraft does in mutterings and murmerings of the
lips, and the Prince is wounded first in Pulpits, and Pamphlets, and Corners,
ever murdered by the tongue in his Reputation, before he is murdered by the Ax
or Dagger in his Person.

And let no man think to excuse this insolence, by alleging, that some of the
Prophets did make bold with the Majesty of some Princes; For were those Princes
never so notoriously wicked, those Prophets did, sin if they had not a special
and immediate commission, to reprove them in such rude language; And therefore
Saint Paul convented before a person clothed with Authority, because he had
called him whited Wall, and threatened that God should smite him; upon
admonition, he recants his rashness, and condemns himself by a sentence of holy
Scripture, and is sorry for his error, Act. 23. 5. For the Crown of Authority
is not to be aspersed with foul language: but to be dressed up with lauds and
acclamations to the person of the Prince.

2. It is to be dressed up also by praises and thanksgivings rendered to Almighty
God on the Kings behalf. For this we have an Apostolical exhortation, in the
place foremention, I exhort that supplication and thanksgivings too be made for
Kings, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. And the holy Ghost has prompted another Divine Poem to
be penned for such occasions. The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord,
so that 21. Psalm begins, and the conclusion is this, Be thou exalted, Lord, in
thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power. And doubtless such as
understand and value so great a blessing, will heartily bless God for it.

3. You must dress it up with an honorable Militia. Solomon's Throne was
supported by Lions; and he says, the Throne is upheld by Judgment, taking the
word in the severest sense, when occasion does require it. Without a Militia
(the Sword and a fair train of Artillery to attend and dress it up) the Crown
will stand but for a golden Cipher; it may serve other men's ends, to swell the
accounts of their ambition and avarice: but it can neither protect the best
Loyalty from oppression, nor defend its own just Rights from usurpation and
violence. The holy Ghost therefore, in that Celebration of the Kings Majesty
and Glory, calls upon him to secure his Title and Interest in this particular,
Psalm. 45. 3. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty: with thy Glory
and thy Majesty. And in thy Majesty ride prosperously, and thy right hand shall
teach thee terrible things. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings
enemies, whereby the people fall under thee. Thus you see the Militia serves to
dress up the Crown. And if it did not of right belong unto it, why should St.
Paul make the Prince the most immediate Sword Bearer of the Almighty, Romans 13.
4. He therefore that is invested with the Crown, must have the Militia to adorn
and guard it.

Lastly, if you would have the Crown to flourish kindly, you must dress it up
by a prompt and cheerful obedience. But for the most part, the Commands of our
Prince goes against the hair with us; they beget doubts and scruples; nay, it is
well if they be not entertained with murmurings and disputings; as if we had
never learned our duty to our Superiors by the rule of the Apostle, nor been
taught by his spirit. For his injunction is this servants be obedient to them
that are your Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. Colos. 3. 22 23, 24.
of your heart, as unto Christ: not with eye service, as men-pleasers, but as
the servants of Christ, doing the will of God (even in point of obedience to
your Sovereign) from the heart: with good will doing service, as to the Lord,
and not to men: knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance: for (even in this your civil obedien) ye serve the Lord Christ.
And upon this account, how does Saint Peter conjure us to a dutiful subjection
and obedience; Submit your selves, even for the Lords sake, to the King as
Supreme, and to them that are commissioned under him to rule over you, 1 Pet.
2. 13. And perhaps (as the Psalmist has it) the people will be willing in the
Psalm. 110. 3.
day of the Kings power. If not the Crown is obliged to secure its own glory,
as well as Gods, with the welfare of Church and State. And to this end, it was
a just sanction, that Artaxerxes inserted into the Commission of Ezra, in these
words, And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God and the Law of the King,
let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of Goods, or to imprisonment, Ezra 7. 26. But I
must tell you, were there not a necessity of such proceedings to secure the
public peace and order, it would be a tarnishing of the Crown to have it thus
garnished; I do rather therefore beseech you to honor it by a free obedience.

And yet I am afraid there are some, that (were it in their power) would be
ready to dress up the Crown with more thorns and crosses, instead of yielding
their dutiful assistance to make it flourish; some that would yet clip and wash
it, and use other of the late artifices to extract more gold out of it to
varnish and guild over their own crimes and fortunes. And yet I am loath to
entertain so uncharitable a thought of such men, as are under a solemn Vow and
Covenant, whereby they have engaged themselves with hands lifted up to heaven,
to preserve the Honor and Dignity of the Crown, and profess to approve
themselves His Majesty's best Subjects. I am unwilling to believe, that any of
these men will invade the Rights of the Crown for their own advantage. Sure,
they will never retain those Lands in their own possession that were designed
and appropriated to bring forth fruits to dress up the Crown and make it
flourish. Godly and well affected persons, I grant, might make Purchases of
such Lands, to secure the Crowns interest, against God should vouchsafe an
opportunity for its Restitution: but who can think so hardly of any tender
Conscience, that it will defile it self with such an execrable sacrilege and
perjury as will attend the alienation of those Lands. No, no, persons of
integrity to their King and Country, if they keep any of those Lands, it is to
turn them all into Mines of Gold and Silver, into Ore or Bullion, that rescuing
the Crown from so mean a thing as common earth, they may render it more
glorious by a more refined and opulent Revenue. And indeed what loyal heart
will not be ready to do as much to adorn the Crown, as Megpibosheth offered to
gratify the avarice of a Sycophant upon the like occasion, and say, Let the
Crown take all (at least all its dues) forasmuch as my Lord the King is come
again in peace 2 Samuel 19. 30.
unto his own house.

III. The third general Part.
And my Lord the King is the person to whom of right the Crown belongs; it is
His Crown. And we must needs make some Reflections upon this most excellent
Person; A person not trained up in a trade of brewing -- mischief, against an
opportunity should offer it self, to set the vessel abroach, and vent it abroad
to intoxicate the Kingdom with rage, fury, and confusion, not a person studied
in the Arts of Adulation and Hypocrisy, to seduce the hearts of the simple, to
withdraw them from their allegiance, and tempt them into a conspiracy to murder
their lawful Sovereign, that he Himself may seize upon his inheritance. No,
this is a Prince, the right and lawful Heir and Successor himself, extracted
out of the Loins of such a Father of blessed memory, as was the glory of his
Church and Kingdom, though the shame and confusion of his enemies. And blessed
art thou O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, Eccles. 10. 17. The Prince
that owes this Crown, has running in his veins the blood of that Royal Martyr,
who sealed to the truth of that Maxim by his sufferings, whereof other Kings
made but a complement; Salus populi Suprema Lex. He verified it by his death on
that account, that the welfare of Church and State were his supreme Law. And
that pious sacrifice did hallow the consecration of this Prince to his Throne.
A Prince preserved by a special providence, and I should not miscall it if I
said a miracle, from the malignant Sword, as that sword is styled by the
Psalmist, which is drawn against the Lords Anointed. This is a Prince inspired
by the most incomparable discourses of his Renowned Father, Psalm. 144. 10.
Edit. Vulg.
with all the methods of prudence fit to instruct and furnish the wisest and
best of Governors; and trained up by a better Tutor too, in the School of
Adversity, where he has learned to govern with prudence and moderation, even
by the things which he has suffered.

There is a Character written of this Prince, a very short and full one, which
I desire you all to buy and study, and as far as you are capable to imitate. If
that does not give you satisfaction, touching the Heroic Virtues of this
Prince; for my part, I shall not pretend to it: But if you seriously peruse
that, I think you must needs conclude with me, that were all the Crowns of
Europe embroidered upon one Scarff, or melted down into one Diadem, with this
motto, Detur Digniori, the merits of this Prince would entitle His Majesty to
stand in competition for it against all Princes under heaven. This Prince, as
if he had been sent amongst us for some signal blessing, was ushered into the
world at his birth, by a star from heaven, and without all question it was some
special light from heaven that directed the wisest men of those Nations to
address themselves to him, as the only Instrument of Gods designation, to
redeem us from our long intolerable bondage. This was that stone (and there
needs no more to be said in his Commendations, than that this was He) which the
builders of Babel amongst us had refused, but is now become the head stone of
the Corner to support and unite us. This is the Lords (only) doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. So that we may, in his Majesty's Name, shut up this
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 21. 1, 2, 3. The King shall rejoice in thy strength O
Lord: exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation. Thou have given him his
hearts desire: and have not denied him the request of his lips. For thou
preventest him with the blessings of goodness: and shall set a Crown of pure
Gold upon his Head. And if God sets the Crown there, we need not doubt our Text
will have a full and happy accomplishment, upon Himself shall his Crown
flourish.

IV. The fourth General part.
Upon Himself] But will Himself or His Crown, like that dead Sea, our late
insatiable gulf of Usurpation, swallow up all our treasure that is cast into it
to water it, and return us nothing in lieu of it, but oppression and tyranny,
wars, blood, and confusion? There is no fear of that: the Crown has vents
enough to let out all you cast in to water it, or apply to dress it up, and
will return it back again upon you; and return it not such as it was when you
cast it in, but it will take a sacred tincture from the Crown, and flow back
upon you with sufficient interest, with blessings and glorious advantages.

Upon Himself: that is, upon you; for in a politic capacity the Prince and
people make but one Body; he is the Head, they are the Members; So that while
the Crown flourish upon Himself, the rays of its splendour and beauty do
reflect upon us, and adorn us all.

This observation represents the union and endearments that should be betwixt
Prince and People, as Head and Members. But let no seditious miscreant abuse it
to divide them, and set the law of the Members in opposition to the law of the
Mind, in the Supreme Governor. For in this sense it is a distinction forged in
Hell, to teach men to reconcile Rebellion with obedience, and to persuade them
they may destroy the natural person of their Prince, and yet be saved harmless
from the Treason, by the charms of a politic capacity; and so it is designed to
defeat the severity of the Apostles intermination, Romans 13. They that resist
shall receive to themselves Damnation.

To return from this digression. If the Crown flourish upon Himself, the
influences thereof will make all things flourish under it. The Gentry will
flourish, and the Priesthood will flourish, and the Commons will flourish; See
Psalm. 72. and 132. verse. 15. 16
Merchants and Tradesmen, Artificers and Husbandmen, and all will flourish; for
there will be no breaking in of sorraign forces, no leading into captivity by
civil insurrections, no more cause of complaining in our streets. And which is
best of all, in his time the righteous shall flourish, and Religion shall
flourish; for the Cross of Christ never Triumphs so gloriously, as when it is
advanced upon the Crowns of pious Princes. Truth shall flourish out of the
earth, and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven: Mercy and Truth will meet
together, Righteousness and Peace will kiss each other. The Sun of
righteousness will smile upon us, and spread his soft wings over us to heal and
shelter us.

And by the flourishing of the Kings Crown upon Himself, the whole Kingdom will
be Crowned. The Church will be crowned with Order and Devotion, the Country
with plenty and contentment, the Cities with Wealth, the Universities with
Learning; all Professions will be crowned with privileges, and the whole Nation
with happiness, peace, and glory. These are the blessings we are to proclaim to
you this day under the Authority of our most Gracious Sovereign.

And yet I am unwilling to precipitate any backward inclinations to transact an
affair of so great importance. Are you not hereby invited to oblige your selves
to a huge piece of modern injustice, of rendering unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods. Shall you not commit your
selves prisoners to golden setters, by owning and submitting to this Authority?
Will you not lose the happiness of Confusion, and that great privilege, for
every man to do what is right in his own eyes? Will not this be a return to
your bounden duty and service, and so cancel those several late Oaths and
Engagements, which have so long stood at Push-a-Pike one against another? Will
you not return into the Sacred Canon, those many Monarchical Texts of
Scripture, which have so long been laid aside as Apochryphal? shall you not run
the hazard of being put under the influences of such an ignorant, scandalous,
or disaffected Ministry as will grate your tender ears with the harsh Doctrines
of loyalty and obedience; such as will not have consciences wide enough to
permit you to swallow those sweet morsels of Sacrilege without a check; but
will enveigh against it as a crime to enrich your selves with the spoils of Gods
House, and a crime of so great a magnitude, that it is not to be expiated
without repentance and restitution? And will not such a Ministry be ready to
press upon you the observation of those obsolete rules of the Apostle, to have
all things that appertain to Gods worship and service, done decently and in 1
Cor. 14. 40.
order? Will you not betray tender consciences by this means, and deprive them
of their sweet liberty (which they have so long taken) to despise Dominion, and
speak evil of Dignities, and to revile all persons in Sacred Orders under the
Title of Baals Priests? Will you not hereby give encouragement to have that
intolerable yoke of bondage put upon them, of worshipping God in the beauty of
holiness? And though a due tolleration be Psalm. 96. 9.
allowed to tender Consciences, will they not be apt to be allured and drawn in
by the Loadstone and the Charms of a Royal example, To serve the Lord with
fear, and to rejoice before him with reverence.

These, I know, are some of your great fears and jealousies; Psalm. 2. 11.
nay, your main objections; though perhaps you will think fit to cloth them with
more dismal and odious Epithets; and truly, if any of you be not able to
satisfy your selves in these particulars, for my part, I shall never advise
you, to wound such Consciences by presenting your selves to assist in the
accomplishment of this undertaking.

And for such whose hearts the Lord has touched with a sense of loyalty, and
their duty to his Anointed, I have but three words to add by way of request to
them, not to eclipse or sully the Glory of this happy Day, with any debauchery
or intemperance; for in stead of dressing up the Crown, such unworthy practices
will stain the fair flowers of it.

And now give the King thy Judgments, O God, etc. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 12. lin. 2. read, Monarchical Government to be the more excellent, p. 15.
l. 31, custodire for custodiri.


