THE SEVERAL Examinations and Confessions OF The Treacherous Conspiratours
AGAINST The City of BRISTOLL.

Together with the judgment of Death by the Council of War upon Robert
Yeomans, late Sheriff of the said City, chief actor in the said Conspiracy.

Also a Message from the Earl of Forth, Lord Lieutenant General of His
Majesty's Forces, in the behalf of the said Conspirators, to Colonel Fines,
Governor and Commander in chief, and the rest of the Council of War in
BRISTOLL.

With the Answer of the said Col. Fines and the Council of War in the said
City to the said Message.

Die Lunae 22o Maii 1643.
It is this day Ordered by the House of Commons, That the Examination of Robert
Yeomans, and the rest of the Examinations sent up from the Governor of
Bristoll, together with the Sentence of the Council of War, and the Letters,
be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Middle Temple, May 25. MDCXLIII.

Robert Yeomans Confession.
AFter I had the Commission from the King, which was promised by John Thruppe
and John Bowcher, unknown to me, and brought by Millard, as I have before
declared, I did nothing in it, but laid it by me, until being in company with
some of the Commanders of Colonel Essex Forces, many of them declared
themselves to be for the King, and that whenever any of the Kings Forces
came, they would deliver them the Town, and the rather for that they perceived
that there were a great many of the Town that would take their parts, by whose
help they doubted not but easily to do it; those that so declared themselves to
me, were Captain Hilsdon, Lieutenant Marshall that commanded the Sergeant
Majors Company, Lieutenant Cheyney that commanded the Lieutenant Colonells
Company, and Lieutenant Moore which commanded a Company of a Captain which was
in London: When I perceived so many of the Commanders, and many of this City
that way affected, and I believing that Cause to be the justest, so as I were
sure that the King himself was acquainted with the proceedings, and not done by
others unknown to him, or he seduced by them, those Commanders and my self, and
others had conference together, and we received a Message from the King, That
we should send some able man to him, to inform him of the true state of the
City, and how the Citizens stood affected: Whereupon we sent George Teage to
Oxford together with Cowling, who went and spoke with the King himself, and
acquainted him with the estate of the City, and all things here; he gave the
King such content therein, that he lent him his own Horse to ride to Prince
Rupert to acquaint him with the business, as, Teage reported to us at his
return, when we met all together at the Rose-Tavern, with many thanks sent by
His Majesty to us all, but especially to those Commanders, persuading them to
persist, and they should be well rewarded; Cowling brought the like Message,
Doctor Marks also brought the like Message, and was willed by the King to speak
with those Commanders themselves, and to tell them, That they should be
private, until the coming of his Forces thither, which should be ere long, and
that he would reward, and prefer them; whereupon Doctor Marks spoke with
Hilsdon and Marshall to my knowledge, whether he did with the rest I know not,
but I know that Teage, Cowly, and Captain Cockram did speak with them
themselves, Cockram himself being sent to them and us from the King, and return
their and our Answer to the King. Afterward those Commanders and we meeting
but a day before the coming of the Kings Army, they complained of the want of
money to give their Soldiers, without which they could not cause them to do
what they would have them to do: whereupon they importuned me to lend them
forty pound (viz.) ten pound apiece, faithfully promising to repay it me, and
upon their importunity I did lend it, and then it was agreed that some of us
should have company provided to aid them, and that at the second Round (
Hilsdon and Moore being of the grand Court of Guard) Hilsdon was to go the
second Round, and then he and those with him coming to the Guard at Fromegate,
as friends should have seized them, and George Bowcher and his Company should
come and open the gate, and keep it open, and send to the Down to Prince
Rupert to enter: and then I and my Company should come to the main Guard, and
there with Moore and his associates secure the main Court of Guard in peaceable
manner (he being of the Guard, and we expecting no resistance, being so assured
by Hilsdon and Moore both) and for the better effecting all without any
bloodshed, it was agreed that all our Soldiers, and those that were made
acquainted by the said Commanders, and those without also should every one wear
a piece of White Tape, to the end that the Soldiers might be distinguished,
that Pr. Rupert might know that they were his friends, and not doubt that he
were betrayed at his entrance, for it was appointed by the King that we should
have some such sign, such as Prince Rupert should direct, which was so by him
directed. The King had also assured us, and given charge to Prince Rupert, that
no violence should be used to any, which I believe was his full intent, the
rather for that I hear there came a Proclamation to that effect; but before the
business came to be effected on that Tuesday in the evening, I had intimation
from Hilsdon and Moore, that the business was discovered, and that I should
send away the men that were there, which I was about to do, but before I
could effect it, Captain Buck came and seized us. Now all the blame is laid on
me, whereas after the Commission was brought to me, I stirred not till those
Commanders declared themselves as aforesaid, and when I perceived them so to
declare themselves, and did, and do believe that most of Colonel Essex
Commanders and Soldiers were that way minded, I feared lest if the Town
should be delivered up or taken, and I lie still as it were despising or
neglecting the Kings Commission, that then I should much suffer; and indeed I
was then of opinion by the persuasions of others, that that party had the
justest Cause, which made me to do that I did, which was but little, I being
ignorant in those courses, only following the directions of those Commanders.
And because we vowed each to other secrecy, and I not till now thoroughly
convinced in my conscience of the justness of the Parliaments Cause, by reason
of my restraint from speaking with my friends, by whom I should, and now am
thoroughly satisfied and convinced in my judgment therein, I have forborne to
discover, other men being persuaded also that what was done, would not be
esteemed so heinous, as now I find by the proceedings against me.

The Judgment upon ROBERT YEOMANS.
Upon due consideration of the Articles exhibited on the eighth day of May, by
Clement Walker Esquire, Advocate to this Council of War against Robert
Yeomans, and others the late Conspirators in this City, and upon due hearing of
the Answers and Defense of the said Robert to the several Articles, and also
upon Examinations and Proofs before them taken upon Oath, It is unanimously
adjudged by this Court, That the said Robert Yeomans is guilty of Traitorous
Intelligence, and Correspondencie with the Enemy, and of a Traitorous and
wicked Conspiracy to betray this Town into the hands of the Enemy; And
thereupon this Court does adjudge, and pass sentence of Death upon him as a
Traitor and Conspiratour, and accordingly does Order, That the said Robert
Yeomans shall be returned to the place of his former Imprisonment, and from
thence be brought before the main Court of Guard, and there to be hanged by the
neck till he die.

Nath. Fiennes. Rich. Cole. Wall. White. James Ford. John Clifton. John
Chamneys. Tho. Hippesley. Martine Husbands. Tho. Raulins. Rich. Hippesly. Tho.
Air. Tho. Goodere. James Heane. Tho. Wallis. William Bowell. Robert Baugh.

The Examination of George Teage, taken upon Oath before the Counsel of War,
held at Bristoll the 27 of April 1643.
THis Examinate says, That about six weeks ago Robert Yeomans invited this
Examinate so drink with him, and then acquainted him that he had a Commission
from the King to raise a Regiment of Foot in Bristoll for his Majesty's
service, telling this Examinate, That if he would take part with the King, he
would make him one of his Captains; this Examinate replying, That he was
willing to serve the King, the said Yeomans said, That his intent was to seize
upon this City for the King, and to let in the Kings Forces; This Examinate
further says, That within three or four days after Colonel Fiennes came into
Bristoll, having some occasion to go to Oxford, he went thither in company which
Cowly a Practitioner in Physic under Master Bennet, upon the way Cowly
discovered to this Examinate, That he was sent to Oxford by Robert Yeomans, M.
John Throupe and John Bowcher the Merchant, son of Nath, Bowcher, to invite the
Kings Forces to subdue Bristoll, saying, That the King had a great party in
Bristoll ready to join with them when they came; the said Cowly further said,
That he would address himself to Captain Veale; he says he had communication
about the state of this City, and what party the King had in it, with one
Togood a Scholar, son to M. Togood Minister in Bristoll. He says, That being
in company with some Gentlemen Oxford (whose names he has forgot) the said
young Togood told them, this Examinate was a Bristoll man, well affected to the
Kings service; whereupon they told him they would presently have come for
Bristoll, but that they were to go upon another Design, but they would come to
Bristoll shortly; he says, he saw there Walter Cowly, and Robert Doule.

He says, That Thomas Hilman said (about a fortnight before the Kings Forces
came before this Town) that he would be upon the Kings side; Moreover he says,
That he was diverse times at the Tavern in company with Robert and William
Yeomans, M. Throupt, M. Green the Lawyer, John Bowcher Merchant, and others,
where they had ordinarily communication, with how many men to seize upon the
Guard, and open a gate to the Kings Forces.

George Teage.

Captain Jeremy Bucks Information upon Oath, before the Counsel of War, the 21
of April 1643.
ON the seventh of March I was sent from Colonel Fiennes and the Counsel of
War in Bristoll, about ten of the clock at night, to the house of M. Robert
Yeomans, there to apprehend him and the Conspirators, who as they said, they
were informed they were to destroy the Guards, and so to give entrance unto
Prince Rupert and his Forces then against the Town: I took 20. Musketeers from
the Bridge and went thither, and the first knock or suddenly after, M. Yeomans
came to the door, and desired to know my business; I answered, It was to speak
with the man of the house; He again desired to know my business, I answered
again, He should know when I came in; He then said, The Taptow had beaten, and
therefore I would not after that time of night enter his house; I told him, I
would enter, and then called up the Musketeers, who before stood silent, and
called for something to break up the door, Yeomans then said, he would open it,
but used many delays; at length, I being urgent, he opened a little wide gate,
and I entered and took him prisoner, and demanded of him, How he could be so
inhumane as to endeavor the destroying his own Town; He answered me with vows
and deep execrations, That there was no men in his house, and that he was
innocent of any such intention; but after I had secured him, upon searching
some upper Rooms in his house, I found his brother William Yeomans, and one
Master Arundel a Merchant, with diverse others, Masters of Ships and Sailors,
with others; whom I found very desperate, one of them brake a Sword striking at
me, and they swore they would not be tied neck and heels together; I promised
they should not, but would use them kindly and fairly as prisoners: Master
William Yeomans and Master Arundel, and some few more, I think but two, had
before quietly yielded themselves prisoners; at length one of the rest yielded,
but would hardly be disarmed, disturbing my Musketeers, the rest of the
company pressing to go down that second pair of stairs, to second him as I
conceive, whom with my Sword I kept off, and after I had a little pacified
them, I acquainted Master Robert Yeomans of it, who was below under a Guard,
and he came up with me, and he with his bother William Yeomans, and Master
Arundel, and one or two more went with me to their company, who were in the
second pair of stairs, and there persuaded them to yield themselves prisoners
and submit, when as before all my threats could not prevail, for they said,
They did not care or fear, to lose their lives, M. Robert Yeomans, William
Yeomans, M. Arundel, and others, vowed their meeting was only to save his
house from Plundering by our Garrison, and likewise that they were but eight,
ten, or twelve men in all, but at the top of the house, after the Soldiers had
searched, I took a Soldier and went up my self with him, and there found eight
men near together in by corners, and a little Barrel of Gunpowder in a Loft
close by: In all I took about three and twenty men in the said Robert Yeomans
house, some of which formerly mentioned in the stayres, that opposed were so
desperate before they yielded, that I was enforced to send for twenty
Musketeers from the main Guard, which were first appointed to go along with
me; I do believe that many escaped out of the top of the house. And this is the
effect and sum of all that I can testify:

Witness my hand Jeremy Buck.

The testimony of Moses Longman and Robert Hawkesworth, taken upon Oath before
a Counsel of War held at Bristoll, May 8. 1643.
Who says, That Captain Jeremy Bucks Information is all true: And further
says, That they saw in Robert Yeomans house that night, a Thunderbusse, some
Petternels, and Carrabynes, and Clubs, and Swords.

Robert Hawkesworth. Moses Longman.

The 1 Examination of George Boucher taken by Clement walker Esquire tenth
March 1643.
TO the 1 Interrogatory this Examinate says that himself framed an oath in
these words I do voluntarily protest before Almighty God that I will to the
utmost of my power and with my life and fortunes defend and mayntayn the rights
and Privileges of my dread Sovereign Lord King Charles his Crown and
dignity against all force and forces that are or shall be raised against his
Majesty without his own consent assent and command he says he took this
Protestation on Friday was seavennight and administered it to one Thomas Barrett
a Cutler John Nickins a trunk maker Ephraim Goody a Goldsmiths all now in
durance and to diverse others whom he remembers not, he says he gave a copy
to Edmond Daker, a plummer who took, it and is likewise in hold, he says that
by the rights and Privileges of the King his Crown and dignity he meant the
Laws of the Land, he says also he gave white inkle to many men for
distinction sake and had an intent to surprise the guarde at Froome-gate and
let in the Cavalliers who should have fallen in upon the ringing of St. John's
and St. Michaels Bell and then this examinate with his party (whereof about 20
he had in his house) were to fall upon the backs of the said guarde, he says
he had many consultations about this business with Robert and William Yeamans
Mr. Arundell and Mr. Teague he says he knew 8 days before they came of the
Cavalliers coming, and that their said consultations tended to this purpose,
how they might with most safety let in the Cavalliers. whereupon they concluded
that Robert Yeamans with his Company should fall upon the mayn Guard and seize
the ordinance there and scowre the streets with them he says Robert Yeamans
company consisted of his brother William Yeamans Mr. Arundell and diverse others.

George Boucher.

This examinante farther says that Mr. Milward had a party; but he knows not
who they wear. He says that Io. Collins came to him upon Tuesday night 7
March to join with him in letting in the Cavaliers and beleiveth he knew the
plott, before hand, he denies that Ancient Darker who then lay in his house,
was privy to the business to his Knowledge this examinant further says that
upon monday 6 March Robert Yeomans sent a youth about 15 or 16 years old
(being his apprentice to this examinant to give him notice that Prince Rupert
would be before this town the next night being Teusday willing him to give
warning to M. Milward and in his absence to M. Brent to ring Saint Michaellts
bell for a warning. He further faith that he acquainted Robert Blackborough
that there was a difference between the King and his Parliament, in which they
were all like to suffer and there was some service to be done upon Teusday
night the seventh of March for letting in the Kings forces at Froome-Gate and
desired Blackborough that some of the Actors in that design might have leave
to pass through the said Blackboroughs Garden toward Froome-Gate.

George Bourcher.

An other examination of George Bourcher taken upon Oath before the Council of
war the 27 of April 1643.
WHo affirms all his former examination and further says that C: T. Cole did
some 8 days before P. R. comeing before this City tell this examinant as they
were walking upon S. Austins Back that Pr. R. would shortly come to this town
and for his more comodious coming into this City he the said Capt. Cole.
would frame a bridge of lighters over the key for passing of horse and foot.

He further says that he heard Mr. Robert Yeomans to say that he had made
some of the main guarde, and that it is likely they were to be distinguished
by their cloths or else that they had some other mark or tape given them:

George Bourcher

Another examination of George Bourcher taken upon 3 May 1643.
Who says that upon tuesday 7 March last about 9 of the clock at night R.
Yeom. sent a messenger to this examinant who told him that there was way made
with the party that was to ride the second round to be friend us in letting in
Pr. Rupert. to which purpose this examinant and his company was to come in the
rear of the said round and fall in with them upon the Guard at Froome-gate,
but further he says he does not remember who brought the said Message but
says the messenger told him that he which rid the second round was to be
known by wearing a scarlet gippo or coat.

George Boutcher

The examination of John Bourcher son of George Bourcher taken upon Oath
before the council of war 28 of April 1643.
Who says that he has seen the draught of a Protestation penned by his said
father to this effect viz. that with their lives and estates they should
maintain the Kings prerogative and dignityes. He beleiveth that many did take
it. He further says the design or conspiracy was, that upon tuesday the 7
March last his father with his company should issue forth about midnight and
seize upon the Guard at Froome-gate and take the soldiers prisoners that were
at the said gate and let in Pr. R. and his forces, who should have notice
given him when to fall on by the ringing of St. Michaells bell: by the
appointment of Mr. Milward he says that His father sent a boy to Mr. Milward
to take order for ringing the said bell, and if Milward were not at home, the
boy was to go to Mr. Brents to look for Milwarde there, because Milward had
promised George Bourcher to fetch the keys from him or from the sexton, He
says that Robert Yeomans and his company were to surprise the main Guarde,
and they were to seize the ordinance in both places, he says that Tho.
Milward and his company were to come down upon the out side of Froome-gate and
join with George Bourcher after he had possessed the said gate, He says
he heard young Cowley say about 5 or 6 weeks before Pr. R. marched toward
Bristoll. That Robert Yeomans sent him to Oxon to invite Pr. R. and his forces
to Bristoll saying it would be an easy matter to give them entrance into the
city because they had a great party there already he says the said Cowley
was suddaynely sent back from Oxon to Bristoll with an answer but what the
answer was this exam* knows not; but say h that he has heard by the
relation of George Teague the said answer was to this effect, that the King had
then another design on foot and as soon as that was over be would send his
forces for Bristoll. He further says that long before Cowleys said Ioureny to
Oxon namely be for Christide last. Tho. Milwarde went to Oxon by whose
appointment his examinant knows not.

And he believes that Milward brought a Commission from the King to Robert
Yeomans, for that he heard John Throop, and John Bowtcher Merchant at Oxon say,
that Milward must have a great care to carry that safe to Bristoll, this
Examinant believes the particular that was spoken of was the said Commission,
He says, that he heard it spoken at Oxon usually, that the King should say he
would make Bristoll a famous City, if the said Forces were let in. He says, he
heard one of the Company at his Fathers house, the seventh of March last say,
seeing Ancient Parkers Colors lie in the Room, that if he might have leave, he
would carry forth those Colors that night. He says, he heard his Father say
that they should not go forth until the 2d. Round was past* and that he that
did lead the second Round would be known by a Scarlet Gippo: and that he
thought he would be for them, he believes that M. Throop or Robert Yeomans
gave his father notice of the particular time when Prince Rupert would be
before this Town, he says, he saw a Prentice boy of Robert Yeomans with his
Father that day, but knows not who gave notice of his approach to Robert
Yeamans, he says, he heard at Oxon, and has since seen a Printed Proclamation
purporting a pardon to all that were in Bristoll, except Colonel Finnes, in
case the Forces were admitted, Prince Rupert was to proclaim it after his
entrance into the City, and should have bin proclaimed before Prince Ruperts
entrance, but that it was doubted it would much discover the plott.

Io. Boucher.

The second Examination of Edw. Hunt, taken upon Oath before the Council of
War, 3 May 1645.
Who says, that Robert Yeomans said unto the company in the room where this
Examinant was in Robert Yeomans house, and in his hearing. That they were
resolved to surprise the main Guard, to open the gates of the City, and let in
the Kings Forces with Prince Rupert, and that if they prevailed, they should
see great men, who would reward them, and make them for ever, saying further
you are the men that I must trust to and that they should have Arms to
accomplish the Design, and that he hoped to disarm the main Guard, and
furnish them with their Arms, he kept the door of his house locked, and would
suffer no man to go forth.

E. H.

The examination of Master Robert Yeomans, taken upon Oath before the Counsel
of War, 28 April, 1643.
WHo being demanded whether he knew of any Message sent to Oxford to invite the
Kings forces to come to this Town.

He says, that about a fortnight or three weeks before Prince Rupert came
before this Town, Doctor Marks came hither from Oxford, and told this
Examinant that the King gave thanks to all his loyal Subjects that were of his
party in this City, and wished them to keep themselves private, until he had
occasion to send his Forces to this City, and then they should have timely
notice thereof.

And being further demanded whether this Message of Doctor Marks did not arise
from some Message formerly sent from hence, to invite the Kings Forces hither.

He answers, that he does believe, there was, but being asked whether he
knew of any one that did send any such Message.

He answers, that he knows none.

And being further asked, whether he knew of any one that was acquainted with
any such Message.

He answers, that he believes, that diverse were acquainted with it, but he
desires to be excused for nominating any particular.

And being asked what answer was returned to that Message brought from the King
by Doctor Marks.

He says, that he answered he should be ready to serve his Majesty to his
power upon any occasion, and that he does verily believe diverse others did
know of the same Message, as namely, Io. Throop and Io. Bowtcher, and others.

He further says, that Doctor Marks came again the Saturday before Prince
Rupert came hither, and brought word from the King, that his Forces were
coming this way, and therefore desired that they would be ready here to
observe such Commands and Directions as they should have from Prince Rupert, or
words to this effect: and hereupon Prince Rupert sent one Cockaram a Soldier
to know whether we could secure him of a Port if he came here, to which he
says, that he answered, that now it was impossible to do, but formerly it
might easily have bin done, because the Garrison was but weak and the Guards
carelessly kept, or to this effect.

This Examinant being demanded further why he and his brother provided such a
Company of men that night in his house.

He answers that he does not remember that he spoke to his Brother to bring
any company to his house that night, but says, that the Company which was at
his house, came out of love to him, to assist him, if need were, if his House
should be in danger to be plundered.

This Examinant being further demanded, whether he did not know of several
meetings and consultations, touching the letting in of Prince Rupert and his
Forces, before they came to this Town.

He answers, that he was at diverse meetings and consultations with his
Friends, but he does not remember any such discourse.

This Examinant being further demanded whether he knew of any Message or
Employment that M. Weeks had in this business.

He answers, he knows none.

This Examinant being further demanded what Company of any Quality was in his
House that night.

He answers, that that he knows of none but those that were taken and
apprehended in his House.

This Examinate being further asked whether he did not know of some design to
surprise the main Guards that night.

He answers, that he knew none.

He being further asked whether he did not know of some of the Officers of
Colonel Essex, or Soldiers of the Garrison that were acquainted with this
business.

He answers, that he knew none.

This Examinant being further asked whether he did not know of any design, to
set some part of the Town on fire.

He answers, that he knows none.

Robert Yeomans.

The Examination of John Pestor, taken upon oath before the Counsel of War
held at Bristoll, 12 April 1643.
THis Examinant being asked what he knew concerning a Commission granted uno M.
Robert Yeomans, answers, that a little before Colonel Essex came into this
Town, Master Robert Yeomans told him, that he understood, he the said Robert
Yeomans had a Commission from His Majesty to make more Captains, and desired
this Examinant to be one of those Captains which he consented unto, M. Robert
Yeomans having told him that the effect of his Commission was for the
mayntenance of the true Protestant Religion established in the Church of
England, the Kings Prerogative and safety of His person, Privileges of
Parliament, and the liberty and propriety of the Subject, and the defense of
die City, against all forces, without the joint consent of the Major, Aldermen
and common Council, amongst whom there was some difference at that time
concerning the admission of any Forces: And he further says, that not long
after Colonel Essex coming into the City, the said Robert Yeomans meeting him
in the street, said, that he could have wished he had received his Commission
sooner, that he might have prevented their coming in, or to that purpose.

He being asked whether he were not at Richard Luckets House one Tuesday
night the seventh of March, he answered, that he was there, betwixt eight and
nine of the clock, and that he was sent for thither by Tho: Steephens, and
Matthew Steephens, and Richard Lucket was the Messenger, and this Examinant
says, that whilst they sat at the same Luckets house, there was discourse
amongst them concerning meeting at Saint Michaels Church, and to go from thence
unto M. Robert Yeomans house, to assist him (as he believes) to seize the
Guards, for that they had discourse that the Guards were so weak, that it might
easily be done, and that they were entreated to go unto M. Robert Yeomans. And
he further says, about two or three days before, meeting with M. Robert
Yeomons, the said Robert Yeomans told him that the Kings Forces were marching
toward Bristoll, and that he would let them in if he could, and wished that
all others would be as willing and forward as he was so to do; whereunto this
Examinant seemed willing, but says, that about ten days before, the said M.
Robert Yeomans gave him some Tape, and told him that if he did wear it in his
Hat and his Breast, it would be security unto him, whenever the Kings Forces
came into Bristoll, for that it would be their own Colors: This Examinant
further says, that when the said Robert Yeomans gave him the Yape, he gave
him also the word which was (Charles) which word, the rest which he met at
Rich, Luckets house had before him as they acknowledged to him.

John Pester.

The Examination of Nath. Street Tiler, taken upon Oath before the Council of
War, 21 April 1643.
WHo says, that William Yeomans brought this Examinant upon Tuesday the
seventh of March last, into the House of his brother Robert Yeomans, where he
was brought into a large Chamber, where he found diverse men. Where he heard one
Harry Russell ask what those men should do who had no Arms, to which he heard
Robert Yeomans, say, Clubs.

Nath: Street.

Patrick Earl of Forth, Lord Etterick, and Lord Lieutenant of all his
Majesty's Forces.
I Having bin informed, that lately at a Court, or Council of Wat, you have
condemned to death, Robert Yeomans late Sheriff of the City of Bristoll, who
has his Majesty's Commission for raising a Regiment for his service, William
Yeomans his Brother, George Boucher, and Edward Dacres, all for expressing
their Loyalty to His Majesty and endeavoring his Service, according to their
Allegiance, and that you intend to proceed speedily against diverse others in
the like manner: Do therefore signify unto you, that I intend speedily to put
M. George, M. Stevens, Captain Huntly, and ohers taken in Rebellion against his
Majesty at Cirewester into the same condition: Do further advertise you, that
if you offer by that unjust judgment to execute any of them, you have so
condemned, that those now in custody here especially M. George, M. Stevens, and
Captain Huntly must expect no favor or mercy.

Given under my hand at Oxford, this 16 of May, 1643. Forth.

To the Commander in Chief, and the Council of War in the City of Bristoll.
Nath. Fiennes Governor, and the Council of War in the City of BRISTOLL.
HAving received a Writing from your Lordship, wherein it is declared, That
upon information of our late proceedings against Robert Yeomans, William
Yeomans, and others, you intend speedily to put Master George, M. Stevens,
Captain Huntly, and others, into the same condition. We are well assured, That
neither your Lordship, nor any mortal man, can put them into the same
condition; for whether they live or die, they will always be accounted true
and honest men, faithful to their King and Country, and such as in a fair and
open way have always prosecuted that Cause, which in their judgment, guided
by the judgment of the highest Court, they held the justest: Whereas, the
Conspirators of this City must both in life and death carry perpetually with
them the brand of Treachery and Conspiracy. And if Robert Yeomans had made use
of his Commission in an open way, be should be put into no worse condition then
others in the like kind had been: But the Law of Nature amongst all men, and
the Law of Arms amongst all Soldiers, makes a difference between open
Enemies, and secret Spies and Conspirators: And if you shall not make the like
distinction, we do signify unto you, That we shall not only proceed to the
execution of the persons already condemned, but also of diverse others of the
Conspirators, unto whom we had some thoughts of extending mercy: And do further
advertise you, That if by any inhumane, and unsouldier-like sentence you shall
proceed to the execution of the persons by you named, or any other of our
friends in your custody, that have been taken in a fair and open way of War;
then Sir Walter Pie, Sir William Crafts, Colonel Conneysby, and diverse others
taken in open Rebellion, and actual War against the King and Kingdom, whom we
have here in custody, must expect no favor or mercy. And by Gods blessing upon
our just Cause, we have pawns enough for our friends security, without taking
in any that have gotten out of our reach and power; although diverse of yours,
of no mean quality and condition, have been freely released by us.

Given under our hands this 18 day of May. 1643. NATHANIEL FIENNES, President.
CLEMENT WALKER, etc.

To Patrick Earl of Forth, Lord Lievtenat-Generall.
FINIS.

