THE HISTORY OF INDEPENDENCY, WITH The Rise, Growth, and Practices of that
powerful and restless FACTION.

Dus AMBROSIUS. Nec nobis ignominiosum est pati quod passus est Christus, nec
vobis gloriosum est facere quod fecit Judas.

TACIT: Scelera, sceleribus, tuenda.

VIRGILIUS. -- sua cuique Deus fit dira libido.

1 St. JOHN C. 2. V. 16. Quicquid est in mundo est concupiscentia oculorum,
concupiscentia carnis, aut superbia vitae.

Printed in the year, 1648.

Reader,
GEntle or ungentle, I write to all, knowing that all have now got almost an
equal share and interest in this Gallymaufry or Hotchpot which our Grandee
Pseudo-politicians with their negative and demolishing Counsels have made,
both of Church and Commonwealth: and therefore I write in a mixed style, in
which (I dare say) there are some things fit to hold the judgments of the
Gravest; some things fit to catch the fancies of the lightest, and some things
of a middle nature, applying my self to all capacities (as far as truth will
permit) because I foresee the Catastrophe of this Tragedy is more likely to be
consummated by maltitude of hands, then wisdom of heads. I have been a curious
observer, and a diligent inquirer, after, not only the actions, but the
Councels of these times; and I here present the result of my endeavors to thee:
In a time of mis-apprehensions it is good to avoid mistakings, and therefore I
advise thee not to apply what I say to the Parliament, or Army in general, if
any phrase that has dropped from my pen in haste (for this is a work of haste)
seem to look asquint upon them: no, it is the Grandees, the Junto-men, the
Hocas-pocasses, the State-Mountebanks, with their Zanyes and Jack-puddings,
Committee Men, Sequestrators, Treasurers, and Agitators, under them, that are
here historified: were the Parliament (the major part whereof is in bondage to
the minor part and their Janisaries) and the Army freed from these usurping and
engaged Grandees, who betrayed the honor, and Privileges of Parliament and
Army to their own lusts; both would stand right, and be serviceable to the
settling of a firm, lasting peace under the King: upon our first principles,
Religion, Laws, and Liberties; which are now so far laid by, that whosoever
will not join with the Grandees in subvetting them, is termed a Malignant, as
heretofore he that would not adhere to the Parliament in supporting them was
accounted, so that the definition of a Malignant is turned the wrong side
outward. The body of the Parliament and Army in the midst of these distempers)
is yet healthy, sound, serviceable; my endeavor is therefore to play the part
of a friendly Phisician, and preserve the body by purging peccant humors; were
the Army under Commanders and Officers of better principles, who had not
defiled their fingers with public moneys, their consciences by complying with,
and cheating all Interests (King, Parliament, People, City, and Scots) for
their own private ends, I should think that they carried the Sword of the
Lord, and of Gideon; but clean contrary to the Image presented to
Nebuchadnezzar in a dream, the head and upper parts of this aggregate body are
part of clay, part of iron, the lower parts of better mettle: I cannot reform,
I can but admonish; God must be both the Aesculapius and Prometheus, and amend
all; and though we receive never so many denialls, never so many repulses from
him, let us take heed how we vote (even in the private corners of our hearts)
no Addresses, no Applications to him. Let us take heed of multiplying sins
against God, lest he permit our schismatic Grandees to multiply Armies and
forces upon us, to war against Heaven as well as against our Religion, Laws,
Liberties and Properties upon Earth, and keep us and our Estates under the
perpetual bondage of the Sword, which has been several ways attempted in the
Houses these two last weeks, both for the raising and keeping of a new Army of
30000. or 40000. men in the seven Northern Associate Counties, upon established
pay (besides this Army in the South) and also for the raising of men in each
County of England, and all to be engrossed into the hands of his Excellency,
and such Commanders and Officers as he shall set over them; and this work may
chance be carried on by the Grandees of Derby-house and the Army, if not
prevented; for the General (notwithstanding this power was denied him in the
House of Commons) has sent Warrants into most Counties to raise Horse and
Foot; yea, to that baseness of slavery has our General and Army, with their
under-Tyrants the Grandees brought us, that although themselves did heretofore
set the rascallity of the Kingdom on work, (especially the schismatic
party) to clamor upon the Parliament with scandalous Petitions, and make
peremptory demands to the Houses, destructive to the Religion, Laws, Liberties
and Properties of the Land, and the very foundation of Parliaments: to which,
they extorted what Answers they pleased: and got a general Vote, That it was
the undoubted right of the Subject to petition, and afterward to acquiesce in
the wisdom and justice of the two Houses: Yet when upon 16. of May, 1648. the
whole County of Surrey (in effect) came in so civil a posture to deliver a
Petition to the Houses, that they were armed for the most part but with sticks:
in which Petition there is nothing contained which the Parliament is not bound
to make good by their many Declarations and Remonstrances to the people, or by
the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, or National Covenant, or by the known
Laws of this Land. Yet were they, 1. Abused by the Soldiers of White Hall as
they passed by, where some of them were pulled in and beaten. 2. When those
Gentlemen of quality that carried the Petition came to Westminster Hall, they
found a Guard of Soldiers at the door uncivilly opposing their entrance to
make their address to the House. 3. When they pressed into the Hall and got up
to the Commons door, they were there reviled by the Guard. 4. The multitude
which stood in the new Palace, (because some of them did but whoop as others
did, who were purposely set on work (as is conceived) to mix with them, and
disorder them) were suddenly surrounded with a strong party of Horse from the
Mewes, It is reported by some, that Sir H. Mildmay, Col. Purefoy, and the
Speaker (doubting the House would give too good an Answer to their Petition)
sent for these Horse and Foot.
and some more Companies of Foot from White Hall, who by the appointment of the
Committee of Schismatics at Derby-house were ready prepared for this design,
and catched them (as it were) in a Toil, and with barbarous and schismatic
rage fell upon these naked, un-armed Petitioners, flew and wounded many without
distinction, telling them, They were appointed to give an Answer to their
Petition, and they should have no other; (as indeed they had not) though the
Lieutenant Colonel that did all the mischief was called into the House of
Commons, and had public thanks given him at the Bar) took many of them
Prisoners, and Plundered their Pockets, Cloaks, Hats, Swords, Horses, and some
of them (even Gentlemen of as good quality as their General) were stripped of
their Doublets. Those Gentlemen of quality who were in the Lobby before the
Commons door civilly expecting an Answer, were abused, and violently driven out
by the Guard to take their fortune amongst the rabble; what Tyrants ever in the
world refused to hear the Petitions and grievances of their people before? The
most Tyrannical government of the world is that of Russia, and John Vasilowich
was the greatest Tyrant of that Nation, yet shall this Tyrant rise up in
judgment at the latter day against these monsters. Behold what entertainment
your Petitions shall have hereafter, if public peace be the end of their
desires: yet many Petitions ready drawn are sent up and down in most Counties
by Committee Men, and Sequestrators, to enforce men to give thanks for the
four Votes against the King: And many Petitions from Schismatics, destructive
to Religion, Laws, Liberties and Property, have been obtruded upon the Houses,
and received encouragement and thanks because they tend to subvert the
fundamental government of Church and Commonwealth, and cast all into the
Chaos of confusion, whereby the Grandees may have occasion to keep up this
Army, and perpetuate their Tyranny and our Burdens. And from these Tumults of
their own raising, the Grandees pretend a necessity to keep this Army about
this Town, to watch advantages against it: Cromwell having often said, This
Town must be brought to more absolute obedience, or laid in the dust; in order
to which the Soldiers are now dis-arming the Country, and then the City is
next, who being once dis-armed, must prostitute their mony-bags to these
fellows, or be plundered. Reader, having spoken my sense to thee, I leave thee
to thy own sense; submitting my self to as much charity as God has endowed
thee withal. God that made all, preserve and amend all, This shall be the
daily prayer of him that had rather die for his Country, then share with these
Godly Thieves in eating out the bowels of his Country, and enriching himself
with public spoils.

Faults escaped, correct thus:
Page 1. lin. 21. read their differenees. p. 9. l. 23. r. has been. p. 15. l.
1. r. public Proclamation. ibid. l. 37. r. had to do to. p. 16. l. 13. r.
self-defence. p. 17. marg. l. 6. r. by whom. p. 18. l. 20. r. Court of Request.
p. 29. l. 8. r. whereof you. p. 49. l. 21. r. rock is. p. 51. l. 21. r. friend
into. ib. l. 25. r. Presbyterian Commoners. p. 53. l. 22. Peaces place. p. 56.
l. 32. r. Trained Band. p. 61. l. 22. r. promising to. ib. l. 23. r. desiring
the. p. 66. l. 1. r. instructions to stay. ib. l. 24. r. Counties.

The History of INDEPENDENCY.
YOu have in The mystery of the two Juntoes, The Preamble.
PRESBYTERIAN and INDEPENDENT, presented to your view these two Factions, (as
it were in a Cockpit pecking at one another) which rising originally from the
two Houses and Synod have so much disturbed and dislocated in every joint both
Church and Commonwealth. I must now set before you Independency Triumphant,
rouzing it self upon its Legs, clapping its Wings, and Crowing in the midst of
the Pit, with its enemy under its feet: though not yet well resolved what use
it can or may make of its victory.

But before I go any farther, 1. What Independency is.
it is fit I tell you what Independency is:

It is Genus generalissimum of all Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies and Schisms.
A general name and Title under which they are all united, as Sampson's Foxes
were by the Tails; and though they have several opinions and fancies (which
make their vertiginous heads turn different ways) yet profit and preferment
(being their tails) their last and ultimate end by which they are governed
(like a Ship by his Rudder) and wherein they mutually correspond. The rest of
your differences being but circumstantiall are easily playster'd over with the
untempered mortar of Hypocrisy by their Rabbis of the Assembly, and their
Grandees of the two Houses and Army, in whom they have an implicit faith.

As Mahomet's Alchoran was a Gallemaufry of Jew and Christian; so are they a
Composition of Jew, Christian, and Turk. Independency is compounded of Iudaisme.
With the Jew they arrogate to be the peculiar people of God, the Godly, the
Saints, who only have right unto the creatures, and should possess the good
things of this world, all others being Usurpers: A Tenent so destructive to all
humane society and civil government, that by virtue thereof they may and do
by fraud, or force, Tax, eat up with Free Quarter, cosen, and Plunder the
whole Kingdom, and account it but robbing the Egyptians: To this purpose they
overthrow all the Judicatories, Laws, and Liberties of the Land, and set up
Arbitrary Committees, and weathercock Ordinances in their room, made and
unmade by their own over-powering Faction in Parliament at pleasure, with the
help and terror of their Janisaries, attending at their doors.

Christianisme.
With the Christians some of them (but not all) acknowledge the Scripture, but
so far only as they will serve their turns, to Pharisee themselves, and
Publican all the world besides; men filled with spiritual pride, mere
Enthusiastiques, of a speculative and high-flying Religion, too high for Earth,
and too low for Heaven: whereas a true and fruitful Religion like Jacob's
ladder, Stat pede in terris, caput inter nubila condit; must have one end upon
earth as well as the other in Heaven. He that acknowledges the duties of the
first Table to God, and neglects the duties of the second Table to man, is an
Hypocrite both against God and man.

Turcisme.
With the Turk they subject all things, even Religion, Laws, and Liberties (so
much cried up by them heretofore) to the power of the sword, ever since by
undermining practices and lies they have jugled the States sword into the
Independent scabbard.

2. The E. of Essex and Si^ Will: Waller undermined to let in the Independents.
The Earl of Essex General of all the Parliaments Forces (a man though popular
and honest, yet stubbornly stout, fitter for Action then Counsel, and apter to
get a Victory then improve it) must be laid by, and his Forces reduced. The
like for Sir William Waller and his Forces, that Commanders of Independent
Principles and interests with Soldiers suitable to them, might by degrees be
brought into their room to reap the harvest of those crops which they had sown.

This was the groundwork of the Independent design, to Monopolize the power
of the Sword into their own hands.

This could not be better effected then by dashing the Earl of Essex and Sir
William Waller one against another: for which purpose that hotheaded
Schismatique Sir A. Haslerigge was employed with Sir W. Waller and some others
(whose Ashes I will spare) with the E. of Essex to break them one upon another.
This was at last effected by taking advantage of their several misfortunes;
the one at Listithyell in Cornwall, the other at the Devises in Wiltsh. where
Hasterigge (a man too ignorant to command, and too insolent to obey) not
staying for the Foot who lay round about the Devises in a storming posture,
charged up a steep hill with his Horse only against the Lord Wilmot's Party,
one Division so far before another, that the second Division could not relieve
the first, thereby freeing Sir Ralph Hopton from an assured overthrow, and
bestowing an unexpected Victory on the L. Wilmot: he received a wound in his
flight, the smart whereof is still so powerfully imprinted in his memory, that
he abhors fighting ever since; witness his praying and crying out of Gunshot
at the Battle of Cheriton, when he should have fought; and his complaint openly
made in the House of Commons of the Earl of Stanford for Bastonadoing him.
Which rashness of his (if it deserve not a worse name) was so far from being
discountenanced, that he received not long after a gift of 6500l. from the
House, and is lately made Governor of Newcastle and 3000l. given him to
repair the Works there. I shall not need the spirit of prophecy to foresee
that the tenth part of the said 3000l. will not be bestowed upon those Works.
Thus was he favored by his party in the House who were thought to look upon
this action as an acceptable service.

In farther progress of this design Manchester (a Lord, 3. The E. of
Manchester undermined.
and therefore not to be confided in) was undermined and accused by his
Lieutenant General Cromwell of high Crimes, whom he again recriminated with a
Charge of as high a nature; and when all men were high in expectation of the
event, it grew to be a drawn battle between them; whereby all men concluded
them both guilty: Manchester was discarded.

Out of the ashes of these three arose that Phoenix (forsooth) a new modeled
Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, a Gentleman of an irrational and
brutish valor, fitter to follow another man's counsel then his own, and
obnoxious to Cromwell and the Independent faction (upon whose bottom he
stands) for his preferment, it being no dishonor to him to become the property
to a powerful Faction.

4. The Victories of the new Model how achieved.
It pleased God to bestow many Victories upon this Army over the Kings Forces;
then strong in bulk, but weakened by Factions, want of Pay and other
distractions (whereby many of their Commanders not confiding in one another,
began to provide for their future safety and subsistence) but above all, they
had generally lost the peoples affections. To these their Victories, the
constant pay, and supplies, and all other helps and encouragements from a
concurring State, which their working and restless Faction carefully
accommodated them withal (far beyond what any other Army had formerly) did
much conduce, in so much as they cleared the field, and took in all the enemies
Garrisons with so much facility, that to many men they seemed rather
Cauponantes bellum quam belligerantes, to Conquer with silver then with steel.

5. Artifices to make Cromwell and his new Model popular.
Thus this Faction having got a General fit for their turn, and a Lieutenant
General wholly theirs in Judgment and interest, were diligent to make him
famous and popular, by casting upon him the honor of other men's Achievements
and valor. The News-books taught to speak no language but Cromwell and his
Party; and were mute in such actions as he and they could claim no share in:
for which purpose the Presses were narrowly watched. When any great exploit was
half achieved, and the difficulties overcome, Cromwell was sent to finish it,
and take the glory to himself, all other men must be eclipsed that Cromwell
(the Knight of the Sun and Don Quixote of the Independents) and his Party may
shine the brighter.

6. The new Model new-modelled by degrees to put the Sword into the hands of
Schismatics.
And that Cromwell's Army might be suitable to himself, and their Designs
carried on without interruption or observation of such as are not of their
Principles, all the Sectaries of England are invited to be Reserves to this
Army; and all pretenses of scandals and crimes laid hold of at their own
Councels of War to casheer and disband the Presbyterian party, that
Independents might be let into their rooms, though such as (for the most part)
never drew Sword before: so that this Army (which boasts it self for the
Deliverer, nay the Conqueror of two Kingdoms) is no more the same that fought
at Nazeby, then Sir Francis Drake's Ship that brought him home can be called
the same Ship that carried him forth about the earth, having been so often
repaired, and thereby suffered so many substractions and additions, that hardly
any part of the old Vessel remained. It was therefore nominally and formally,
not really and materially the same.

The said Mystery of the two Junto's farther tells you, that the Independent
Junto bottomed all their hopes and interests upon keeping up this Army; whereby
to give the Law to King, Kingdom, Parliament, and City, and to establish that
Chimaera called Liberty of Conscience. That this was Cromwell's ambition
formerly, the Earl of Manchester's aforesaid Charge against Cromwell (though
let fall without prosecution, lest so great a mystery should be discovered)
makes it probable, and his later practices (upon which I now fall) makes it
infallible.

The Houses long since (for ease of the people) in a full and free Parliament
ordained the disbanding of this Army, 7. The Army Voted to be Disbanded through
Cromwell's craft.
only 5000 Horse 1000 Dragoons, and some few Firelocks to be continued in pay
for safety of this Kingdom, and some of them to be sent for Ireland: for which
purpose they borrowed 200000l. of the City, (being the same sum which
disbanded the Scots) and for the rest of their Arrears they were to have
Debenters and security, without all exceptions: such terms of advantage as no
other disbanded Soldiers have had the like; neither are these like to attain
to again; so that they have brought the Soldiers into a loss, as well as into
a labyrinth: their continuing in Arms without, nay against lawful authority,
being a manifest act of Treason and Rebellion; and so it is looked upon by the
whole Kingdom; nor can the Parliaments subsequent Ordinances, (which all men
know to be extorted by force, as hereafter shall appear) help them.

To the passing of this Ordinance Cromwell's Protestations in the House with
his hand upon his breast, In the presence of Almighty God before whom he stood,
that he knew the Army would disband and lay down their Arms at their door,
whenever they should command them, conduced much: This was maliciously done
of Cromwell to set the Army at a greater distance with the Presbyterian Party,
and bring them and the Independents Party nearer together; he knew the Army
abominated nothing more then Disbanding and returning to their old Trades: and
wduld hate the Authors thereof.

8. Agitators raised by Cromwell.
9. The beginning of the project to purge the Houses.
10. The Army put into mutiny against the Parliament, whereby Cromwell
monopolizeth the Army.
And at the same time when he made these protests in the House, he had his
Agitators (Spirits of his and his Son Ireton's conjuring up in the Army, though
since conjured down by them without requital) to animate them against the
major part of the House (under the notion of Royallists, a Malignant party, and
enemies to the Army) to engage them against Disbanding and going for Ireland,
and to make a Traiterous Comment upon the said Ordinance, to demand an Act of
indemnity, and rely upon the advice of Judge Jenkins for the validity of it,
and to insist upon many other high demands, some private, as Soldiers; some
public, as Statesmen.

11. Cromwell's Family in the Army.
Cromwell having thus by mutinying the Army against the Parliament, made them
his own, and monopolized them, as he did formerly his Brew House at Ely (which
he might easily do, having beforehand filled most of the chief Offices in the
Army with his own kindred, allies, and friends: of whose numerous family,
Lieut. Col. Lilburne gives you a list in one of his Books) he now flies to the
Army, doubting (his practices discovered) he might be imprisoned: 12. Cromwell
and Ireton usurp Offices in the Army.
where he and Ireton assuming Offices to themselves, acted without Commission;
having not only been ousted by the self-denying Ordinance (if it be of any
power against the godly) but also their several Commissions being then
expired: and Sir Thomas Fairfax having no authority to make general Officers,
as appears by his Commission, (if he make any account of it) and therefore
Sprigg, alias Nathaniel Fines, in his Legend or Romance of this Army, called
Anglia rediviva, sets down two Letters sent from Sir Thomas Fairfax to the
Speaker William Lenthall, one to desire Cromwell's continuance in the Army:
another of thanks for so long forbearing him from the House: see Ang. Red. p.
10, 11, 29. which needed not, had he been an Officer of the Army.

And now both of them barefaced, and openly join with the Army at Newmarket,
in traiterous Engagements, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Manifesto's; and
Petitions penned by Cromwell himself, were sent to some Counties to be
subscribed against supposed Obstructers of Justice, and Invaders of the Peoples
Liberties in Parliament, and the Army at Newmarket and Triplo heath prompted to
cry Justice, Justice, against them; and high and treasonable demands,
destructive to the fundamental Privileges of Parliament were publicly
insisted upon; many of which for quietness sake, and out of compassion to
bleeding Ireland were granted: yet these restless spirits (hurried on to
farther designs) made one impudent demand beget another; and when by Letters
and otherwise they had promised, that if their then present demands were
granted, they would there stop and acquiesce, yet when they seemed to have
done, they had not done, but deluded and evaded all hopes of peace by
mis-apprehensions and mis-constructions of the Parliaments concessions; making
the mis-interpretation of one grant, the generation of another demand, so that
almost ever since the Parliament has nothing else to do but encounter this
Hydra, and roll this stone.

Having thus debauched the Army, 13. Securing Oxford, and plundring the King
from Holdenby.
he plotted in his own Chamber the securing the Garrisons, Magazine, and Train
of Artillery at Oxford, and surprising the Kings Person at Holdenby: which by
his instrument Coronet Joyce, with a commanded Party of Horse he effected:
though afterward (having recourse to his usual familiarity with Almighty God)
he used his name to protest his ignorance and innocence in that business both
to the King and Parliament; adding an execration upon his Wife and Children to
his Protestation; yet Joyce is so free from punishment, that he is since
preferred, and his Arrears paid by their means. And though both Houses
required the Army to send his Royal Person to Richmond, to be there left in
the hands of the Parliaments Commissioners, whereby both Kingdoms might freely
make Addresses to Him; (for they had formerly excluded and abused the Scots
Commissioners, contrary to the Law of Nations, and Votes of both Houses; and
yet then granted free access to the most desperate persons of the Kings Party)
yet they could obtain no better answer from these rebellious Saints, Manifesto
of the Army, 27. June 1647.
then That they desired no place might be proposed for His Majesty's residence
nearer London, then where they would allow the Quarters of the Army to be. This
was according to their old threats of marching up to London, frequently used,
when any thing went contrary to their desires. They knew what dangerous and
troublesome guests we should find them here.

How much is this Army degenerated since Cromwell and his demure white-livered
Son-in-law Ireton poisoned their manners with new Principles? Anglia Rediviva,
p. 247. tells us that about Woodstock private overtures were made by some from
Court for receiving His Majesty, who was minded to cast himself upon the Army:
but such was their faithfulness in that point, that conceiving it derogatory
to the honor and power of Parliament, (for His Majesty to wave that highest
Court, and address Himself to any others) and therefore inconsistent with
their trust and duty, being Servants of the State, they certified the
Parliament thereof, and understanding it to be against their sense also, they
absolutely refused to be tampered with. Oh, how faithful then! how perfidious
and Cromwellized are they now! let their frequent tampering with the King and
His Party, to the amazement of the Kingdom, and the abusing of the King
testify. Read Putney Projects written by a considerable Officer of the Army,
and a friend to Cromwell, though not to his false practices.

14. Their project to keep the Parliament in wardship.
15. Purging the Houses again.
16. Accusing the 11 Members.
Having thus gotten the King (the first and most visible legal authority of
England) into their possession; their next design is to get the Parliament
(the second legal authority of England) into their power.

This could not be effected but by purging the two Houses of Presbyterian
Members (especially the most active, and such as had labored their Disbanding)
that an Independent Parliament and Army might govern the Kingdom: In order to
which design they sent to the House of Commons in the name of Sir Thomas
Fairfax and the Army, a general and confused Charge of High Treasons and other
mis-demeanors against eleven Members, for things done (for the most part in the
House) and many of the principal, such as the House had long before examined
and acquitted them of, and such as the whole Kingdom knows Cromwell and Ireton
to be apparently guilty of: as, Trucking with the King, etc.

One chief Article insisted upon in the Charge was, That by their power in the
House they caused the Ordinance for Disbanding this Army to pass. Here you see
where the shoe wrings them. This Charge was not subscribed by any Informer
that engaged to make it good, or else to suffer punishment, and make the House
and the Parties accused reparations: as by the Stat. 25 Edw. 3. c. 4. 27 Ed. 3.
c. 18. 38 Ed. 3. c. 9. 17 R. 2. c. 6. 15 H. 6. c. 4. but especially by 31 H. 6.
c. 1. concerning Jack Cade (which comes nearest this case) ought to be: And
they professed in the 2, 3, 4. Article of their Charge, That they were
disobliged and discouraged from any farther engagement in the Parliaments
service or Irelands preservation; and demanded the House should forthwith
suspend the impeached Members from any longer sitting and acting. Whereupon the
House after full debate in a full and free Parliament, Resolved June 25. 1647.
That by the Laws of the Land no Judgment could be given for their suspension
upon that general Charge, before particulars produced and proofs made. 17.
Threats to march up to London.
18. London solicited to sit Newters.
Yet the Army (which had now learned only to acquiesce in their own prudence
and justice) insolently threatened to march up to Westminster against the
Parliament, in case the said 11. Members were not suspended: and courted the
City of London to sit newters, and let them work their will with the Parliament.

The 11. Impeached Members therefore modestly withdrew to free the House from
such danger as they might incur by protecting them, as in Justice and Honor
they were bound to do. After this, the Army sent in their particular Charge:
and Libellously published it in Print by their own Authority. To which the 11
Members sent in, and published their Answer: Upon which there had been no
Prosecution, because they pretend first to settle the Kingdom, but if they
stay till these fellows have either authority, will, or skill to settle the
Kingdom, they shall not need to make ready for their Trial till Doomes day.
Here you have a whole Army for Accusers, and the chief Officers of the Army
(being Members of the House) not only accusers, but parties, witnesses, and
Judges, and carrying the rules of Court, and Laws by which they judge, in
their Scaberds. And the Charge or Impeachment, such (as all men know) mutatis
mutandis are more suitable to Cromwells and Iretons Actions, then the Accused
parties. If the proceedings in the Kings name against the five Members
mentioned in The exact Collection, page 38. were Voted a Traitorous design
against King and Parliament; and the arresting any of them upon the Kings
Warrant, an Act of public enmity against the Commonwealth: How much more
Treasonable were these proceedings; and the Armies March toward London to
enforce them; and their arresting Anthony Nicholls, having the Speakers Pass,
and leave of the House; Colonel Burch, being upon service of the Parliament
going for Ireland; and Sir Samuel Luke, resting quiet in his own House?

19. The first occasion of quarrel against the City.
20. Courting and cheating the Country and all other interests to lull t^em
asleep, till the Grandees had wrought their will upon City and Houses.
21 Petitions to the Army, and for the Army.
Whilst these things were acting, Cromwell finding he could not have his will
upon the Parliament, but that he must make the City of London (who had denied
the newtrality) his Enemies, cast about how to cheat the Country people of
their affections; (for to have both City and Country his Enemies in the posture
his Army was then in, was dangerous) he therefore by many Printed books and
papers, spread all England over by his Agitators, and by some journey-men
Priests, (who is Pulpits are the best Juglers Boxes to deceive the simple)
Absolon-like, wooeth them to make loud complaints of the pressures and
grievances of the People: to neglect the King and the Parliament, and make
Addresses to the Army as their only Saviors, the Arbitrators of Peace,
restorers of our Laws, Liberties and Properties, setlers of Religion,
preservers of all just interests: pretending to settle the King in his just
Rights and Prerogatives; to uphold the Privileges of Parliament, establish
Religion, to reform, and bring to account all Committees, Sequestrators, and
all others that had defiled their fingers with public money, or goods; To
free the people from that all-devouring Excise and other Taxes; To redress
undue elections of Members; To relieve Ireland: Things impossible to be
performed by an Army, and now totally forgotten, so that they have only
accepted of their own private demands as Soldiers; That the Parliament should
own them for their Army; Establish pay for them; put the whole Militia of this
Kingdom and Ireland, both by Sea and Land into their Hands; and Vote against
all opposite forces. But they are now become the only protectors of all corrupt
Committee Men, Sequestrators, Accomptants to the State, and all other
facinorous persons, who comply with them to keep up this Army, for their own
security against public Justice.

Having thus courted and cheated all the public and just Interests of the
Kingdom, they deceived the people so far as to make them Issachar-like
patiently to bear the burden of free quarter, and to make addresses to the Army
for themselves, by Petitions to which they gave plausible answers, That this,
and This was the sense of the Army: as if the sense of the Army had been the
supreme Law of the Land, and to make addresses to the Parliament for the Army
not to be disbanded (for which purpose their Agitators carried Petitions ready
penned to be subscribed in most Counties.)

The people being thus lulled asleep, 22 A quarrel against the City invented.
they now cast about how to make benefit of a joint quarrel both against the
Parliament and City, (since they could not separate them) or at least against
the Presbyterian party in both; They had withdrawn their quarters (in a seeming
obedience to Parliaments commands) 30 miles from London, (of which they often
brag in their Papers) and presumed the suspension of the 11 Members, had struck
such an awfulnesse into the Houses, that most of the Presbyterian Members would
either absent themselves (as too many indeed did) or turn renegadoes from their
own principles to them: but found themselves notwithstanding opposed, and their
desires retarded (beyond their expectation) by the remainder of that Party.
They must therefore find out a quarrel to march against the City, and give
the Houses another Purge stronger then the former.

The Army being principled, 23 The Army demand the City Militia to be changed
into other hands.
and put into a posture suitable to Cromwells desire, and the Country charmed
into a dull sleep, now was his time to pick a quarrel with the City, that what
he could not obtain by fair means, he might effect by foul; To make them
desert and divide from the Parliament; And leave it to be modelled according to
the discretion of the Soldiery. He could not think it agreeable to policy,
that this City which had slain his Compeere and fellow Prince Wat Tyler (the
Idol of the Commons in Rich. 2. time) and routed his followers (four times as
many in number as his Army) should be trusted with their own Militia: The City
being now far greater, more populous and powerful then in his days. In a full
and free Parliament upon mature debate, both Houses by Ordinance dated 4 May
1647. had established the Militia of the City of London for a year, in the
hands of such Citizens as by their Authority and approbation were nominated by
the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council; and though the Army had
recruited it self without Authority, and had got themselves invested with the
whole power of all the Land forces of the Kingdom in pay of the Parliament; so
that there was nothing left that could be formidable to them but their own
crimes; and that it was expected they should go roundly to work upon those
public remedies they had so often held forth to the people in their popular
printed Papers: yet the Army (contrary to what they promised to the City in
their Letter 10. June, and their Declaration, or Representation 14. June 1647.
That they would not go beyond their desires at that time expressed, and for
other particulars would acquiesce in the justice and wisdom of the Parliament
(behold their modesty!) by a Letter and Remonstrance from Sir Thomas Fairfax
and the Army, See the Letter and Remonstrance from Sir Tho. Fairfax and the
Army, page 8, 9.
with unresistible boldness demand the Militia of the City of London to be
returned into other hands, without acquainting the City or their Commissioners
(then resident in the Army to keep a good correspondency with them) therewith.
Upon which letter alone the House of Commons (being very thin, and many Members
driven away by menaces) upon July 22. Voted the repealing the said Vote of 4
May, and a new Ordinance for reviving the old Militia, presently passed and
transmitted to the Lords the same day about seven of the clock at night, and
there presently passed without debate; though moved by some to be put off
until the City (whose safety and privileges it highly concerned) were heard
what they could say to it.

Observe that neither by the said paper from the Army; nor by any man in the
two Houses, any thing was objected against any of the new Militia.

And indeed, formerly the Parliament never made choice of, enlarged or changed
the City Militia, but they were still pleased first to communicate the same to
the Common Council. A respect justly showed to that City which had been such
good friends to them. But of late, since the Parliament have shifted their old
Principles and Interests, they have learned to lay by their old friends. The
pretense for this hasty passing the Ordinance, was to prevent the Armies so
much threatened March to London, if the Houses refused to pass it; and the
Cities opposition, if not passed before their notice of it. But the real
design was to strike a discontent and jealousy into the City, thereby to
force them to some act of self-defence, which might give a color to the Army
to march up against them, and their friends in the Houses.

The unexpected news of this changing their Militia, 24. The City troubled at
the change of their Militia.
caused the City ( June 24. being Saturday) to meet in Common Council, where,
(for some reasons already expressed) and because the repealing this Ordinance
upon no other grounds then the Armies imperious desires, might justly be
suspected, to shake all other Ordinances, for security of money, sale of Bishops
lands, I appeal to Colonel Harvy whether this did not fright him.
by making them repealable at the Armies pleasure; they resolved to petition
the Houses upon monday morning following, being 26. July, which they did by the
Sheriffs, and some Common Council men: 25. The City petition the Houses for
their Militia again.
26. The Tumult of Apprentices, 26. July.
But so it happened that about one thousand Apprentices wholly unarmed came down
two or three hours after with another Petition of their own to the Houses:
Therein claiming, that to order the City Militia was the Cities Birthright
belonging to them by Charters, confirmed in Parliaments, for defense whereof
they had adventured their lives as far as the Army. And desired the Militia
might be put again into the same hands in which it was put with the Cities
consent by Ordinance, May 4.

Upon reading these Petitions the Lords were pleased to revoke the Ordinance of
July 23. and revive that of May the 4. by a new Ordinance of July 26. which
they presently sent down to the Commons for their consents, where some of the
Apprentices (presuming they might have as great an Influence upon the House to
obtain their due, as the Army in pay of the Parl: had to obtain more then their
due) in a childish heat were over-clamorous to have the Ordinance passed,
refusing to let some Members pass out of the House, or come forth into the
Lobby when they were to divide upon the question about it, (so ignorant were
they of the customs of the House) which at last passed in the Affirmative about
three of the clock afternoon: and then most of the Apprentices departed quietly
into the City. After which, 27. The Tumult of Apprentices ceased, but
artificially continued by Sectaries.
some disorderly persons (very few of them Apprentices) were drawn together and
instigated by diverse Sectaries and friends of the Army who mingled with them
(amongst whom, one Highland was observed to be all that day very active; who
afterward (26. Sept.) delivered a Petition to the House against those Members
that sat, and was an Informer and Witness examined about the said Tumult)
gathered about the Commons door and grew very outrageous, compelling the
Speaker to return to the Chair after he had adjourned the House: and there
kept the Members in until they had passed a Vote, That the King should come to
London to Treat.

This was cunningly and premeditately contrived, to increase the scandal upon
the City; yet when the Common Council of London heard of this disorder as they
were then sitting: they presently sent down the Sheriffs to their rescue with
such strength as they could get ready (their Militia being then unsettled by the
contradicting Ordinances of the Parliament) who at last pacified the Tumult,
and sent the Speaker safe home; which was as much as they could do in this
intervall of their Militia, being the Houses own Act.

The Lords adjourned until the next Friday; the Commons but until the next
day. Tuesday morning the Commons sat again quietly, and after some debate
adjourned until Friday next, because the Lords had done so.

28. The Speaker of the Commons complained of a report, that he meant to fly
to the Army: yet ran away to the Army.
The next day being Wednesday, the monthly Fast, the Speaker and Members met in
Westminster Church: where the Speaker complained (in some passion) to Sir Ralph
Ashton and other Members of a scandalous report, raised on him in the City, as
if he intended to desert the House, and fly to the Army, saying, he scorned to
do such a base, unjust, dishonorable act; but would rather die in his House
and Chair: which being spoken in a time and place of so much reverence and
devotion, makes many think his secret retreat to the Army (the very next day)
proceeded not so much from his own judgment, as from some strong threats from
Cromwell and Ireton (who were the chief contrivers of this desperate plot to
divide the City and Houses, and bring up the Army to enthrall them both) That
if he did not comply with their desires, they would cause the Army to impeach
him for cousening the State of many vast sums of money.

And truly, I remember I have seen an intercepted Letter, sent about the time
of his flight, from the Army to William Lenthall Speaker, 29. The City proclaim
against Tumults.
without any name subscribed to it, only the two last lines were of John
Rushworth's hand; earnestly importuning him to retire to the Army, with his
friends.

On Thursday morning early, the newly renewed Militia of London, made public
protestation throughout the City and Suburbs, and set up printed Tickets at
Westminster: That if any persons should disturb either of the two Houses, or
their Members, the Guards should apprehend them, and if resistance were made,
kill them: yet notwithstanding, the Speaker and his party (carrying the causes
of their fear in their own consciences) in the evening of that day secretly
stole away to Windsor to the Head quarters.

Upon Friday morning at least 140. 30. The Houses appear, the Speakers being
at the Army.
of the Members assembled in the House (they that fled being about 40.) whither
the Sergeant coming without his mace, being asked where the Speaker was?
answered, he knew not well; that he had not seen him that morning, and was told
he went a little way out of Town last night; but said, he expected his return
to the House this morning: after that, being more strictly questioned about the
Speaker, he withdrew himself, and would not be found, till the House (after
four howrs expectation; and sending some of their Members to the Speakers
house, who brought word from his servants, 31. New Speakers chosen.
that they conceived he was gone to the Army) had chosen a new Speaker, Mr.
Henry Pelham, and a new Sergeant, who procured another mace. The like (mutatis
mutandis) was done by the Lords, to prevent discontinuance and fayler of the
Parliament for want of Speakers to adjourne and continue it; and take away all
scruples.

As for the Petition and Engagement of the City (so much aggravated by the
Independent party) it was directed to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common
Council from diverse Citizens, 32. Petition and engagement of the City.
Commanders and Soldiers, and was occasioned by some intelligence they had,
that the Army would demand an alteration of the City Militia, in order to a
design they had against the City. It was only intended to the Common Hall, but
never presented, as the Soldiers Petition was to their General, which being
taken notice of by the Parliament as it was in agitation, was so much resented
by the Soldiery as to put themselves into the posture they are now in (as
Lieut. Col. Lilburne says in one of his Books) to act no longer by their
Commissions, but by the principles of nature and self-defence. Nor did the said
engagement contain any thing but resolutions of self-defence in relation to the
City: so that we cannot see what the Army had to declare their sense upon it in
their Letter, 23. July. and so put a prejudice upon it in the Houses. I have
insisted the more particularly upon this Grand Imposture as being the anvile
upon which they hammered most of their subsequent designs, violencies and
illegal accusations.

33. Votes passed after new Speakers chosen.
The new Speakers chosen; the two Houses proceeded to vote and act, as a
Parliament. And first, the House of Commons voted in, the eleven impeached
Members; next they revive and set up again the Committee of Safety by Ordinance
of both Houses enabling them to join with the Committee of the restored City
Militia: giving power by several Ordinances to them, to List and Raise Forces,
appoint Commanders and Officers, Issue forth Arms and Ammunition for defense
of both Houses and the City against all that should invade them: Which votes
and preparations for their safe defense (warranted by the same law of nature as
the Armies papers affirm) were not passed, nor put in execution until the Army
(every day recruited contrary to the Houses Orders) were drawing toward
London, and had with much scorn disobeyed the Votes and Letter of both Houses,
prohibiting them to come within thirty miles of London.

34. Members emgagement with the Army.
The Army, to countenance their Rebellion, draw the two Speakers and fugitive
Members to sit in consultation and pass Votes promiscuously with the Council
of War in the nature of a Parliament, and to sign an Engagement ( dat. 4.
August.) to live and die with Sir Tho: Fairfax and the Army under his command;
affirming therein that generally throughout their sense agrees with the
Declaration of Sir Tho: Fairfax, and his Council of War: showing the grounds
of their present advance toward the City of London. In which Declaration the
Council of the Army take upon them, To be supreme Judges over the Parliament:
Telling you who of the two Houses they hold for persons in whom the public
trust of the Kingdom remains, and by whose advice they mean to govern
themselves in managing the weighty affairs of the Kingdom: They declare
against the late choice of a new Speaker by some Gentlemen at Westminster; and
that as things now stand there is no free nor legal Parliament sitting, being
through the violence (29. July) suspended. That the Orders and Votes, etc.
passed 26 July last, and all such as shall pass in this Assembly of some few
Lords and Gentlemen at Westminster are void and null, and ought not to be
submitted unto.

Behold here, not only a power without the Parliament Houses, judging of the
very essence of a Parliament, and the validity of their resolutions, but
usurping to themselves a Negative voice, which they deny to the King; and yet a
Schismatic faction in the two Houses complying with them, and betraying and
prostituting the very being, honor, and all the fundamental Rights and
Privileges of this and all future Parliaments, to an Army of Rebels who
refuse to obey their Masters, and disband.

This engagement so over-leavened the Army, that their brutish General sent
forth Warrants to raise the Trained Bands of some Counties, to March with him
against the City and both Houses: Although Trained Bands are not under pay of
the Parliament; and therefore not under Command of the General, by any Order
or Ordinance. But, what will not a fool in Authority do, when he is possessed
by Knaves? Miserable man! His foolery has so long waited upon Cromwells and
Iretons knavery, that it is not safe for him now to see his folly, and throw by
his Cap with a Bell and his Babble. The Earl of Essex dyed so opportunely, that
many suspected his death was artificial.

Yet the City were so desirous of Peace, 35. The City send Commissioners to the
Army, Fowkes, Gibs, and Eastweck, by which they are betrayed.
that they sent Commissioners sundry times to the Army to mediate an Accord;
who could obtain no more equal terms of Agreement then that, They should
yield to desert both Houses and the impeached Members: Call in their
Declaration newly Printed and Published: Relinquish their Militia: Deliver up
all their Forces and Line of Communication to the Army; together with the Tower
of London, and all the Magazines and Arms therein: Disband all their Forces:
Turn all the Reformado's out of the Line: Withdraw all their Guards from the
Houses: Receive such Guards of Horse and Foot within the Line, as the Army
should appoint to Guard the Houses: Demolish their Works: And suffer the whole
Army to March in Triumph through the City, as Conquerers of it and the
Parliament, and (as they often give out) of the whole Kingdom: Terms which
they might have had from the great Turk, had he sat down before them and
broken ground.

All which was suddenly and dishonourably yielded to, and executed
accordingly, by such an Army as was not able to fight with one half of the
City, had they been united: But they are the Devils seedes-men, and have sown
the Cockle of Heresy and Schism, so abundantly in City and Country
(especially amongst the more beggarly sort) that these men joining Principles
and Interests with the Army, weaken the hands of all opponents. They often brag
that they made a civil March, free from Plunder: I Answer, they neither durst,
nor could do otherwise: their Soldiers being ill Armed, and so few, that they
were not able to keep stands in the streets, and keep the Avenues while their
fellows dispersed to Plunder. Charles 8. with a far greater, and more
Victorious host, durst not offer violence to the far less City of Florence
when Signior Caponi put an affront upon him in the Townhouse; Bidding him beat
his Drums, and they would ring their Bells.

36. The fugitive Members returned.
Upon the 6 of Aug. 1647. the General brought the fugitive Speakers and Members
to the Houses with a strong Party, (who might have returned sooner without a
Guard, had not their own crimes and designs hindered them) the two Palaces
filled with armed guards, double files clean through Westminster Hall, up the
stairs to the House of Commons, and so through the Courts of Request to the
Lords House, and down stairs again into the old Palace. The Soldiers looking
scornfully upon many Members that had sat in the absence of the Speaker, and
threatening to cut some of their throats. And all things composed to so
ridiculous a terror, as if they would bespeak (without speaking) the absence
of those Members that sat Placed the Speakers in the Chaires without Vote, out
of which they had been justly Voted for deserting their calling; where the
General was placed in a Chair of State (enough to make a fool of any man that
was not fit for it) and received special thanks for his service from both
Speakers. And in the second place, a day of thanksgiving was appointed to God;
(I think) for his patience in not striking these Atheistical Saints with
thunder and lightning for making him a stale to their premeditated villainies.
Here Sir Thomas Fairfax with a breath (and before any man that was not privy to
the design could recover out of his amazement) was made Generalissimo of all
the Forces and Forts of England and Wales; to dispose of them at his pleasure:
Constable of the Tower of London. The Common Soldiers Voted one months
gratuity, besides their pay (the Commons being in good case to give gifts
before they paid debts:) left to the discretion of the General to set what
Guards he pleased upon the two Houses. Whereby you may perceive in what
unequal condition those Members that did not run away with the Speaker, do
now sit; after so many reiterated threats of the General against them in his
printed Papers.

After this, the General, Lieutenant General, and the whole Army, 37. The
Armies March in Triumph through the City: with other subsequent Acts.
with the Train of Artillery, marched through London in so great pomp and
triumph, as if they would have the people understand that the Authority of the
Kingdom (in whose hands soever it remains in these doubtful times) must
submit to the power of the sword, the hilt and handle whereof they hold. They
turn out the Lieutenant of the Tower without cause shown. The consequencies
of these two actions were, that immediately the City decayed in Trade above
200000 l. a week; and no more Bullion came to the Mint.

They displace all other Governors, though placed by Ordinance of Parliament,
and put in men of their own party; for this incroaching faction will have all
in their own hands. They alter and divide the City of London, setting up
particular Militia's at Westminster, Southwarke, and the Hamlets of the Tower,
that being so divided they may be the weaker. Demolish the Lines of
Communication; that the City and Parliament may lie open to Invasion when they
please; and fright many more Members from the Houses with threats, and fear of
false Impeachments.

The 11. Impeached Members having leave by Order of the House, and license of
the Speaker some to go beyond Sea; and Anthony Nicholls to go into his own
Country to settle his Affairs: some of them (as Sir William Waller and M. Den:
Hollis) were attached upon the Sea; Nicholls arrested upon the way into
Cornwall by the Army, and despightfully used; and when the General was
inclined to free him, Cromwell (whose malice is known to be as unquenchable as
his nose) told him he was a Traitor to the Army. You see now upon whom they
mean to fix the peoples allegiance, (for where no Allegiance is, there can be
no Treason) and to what purpose they have since by their 4. Votes (first
debated between the Independent Grandees of the Houses and Army) laid aside the
King.

Col: Dirch formerly employed for Ireland by the Parliament, was imprisoned,
and his men mutinyed against him by the Army: and Sir Sam: Luke resting quietly
in his own house, was there seized upon and carried Prisoner into the Army.

All these acts of terror were but so many Scar-crowes set up to fright more
Presbyterians from the Houses, and make the Army masters of their Votes.

38. Proceedings of both Houses under the power of the Army.
I must in the next place fall upon the proceedings in both Houses, acted under
the power and influence of this all-inslaving, all-devonring Army, and their
engaged party. To attain the knowledge whereof, I have used my utmost industry
and interest with many my near friends and kinsmen sitting within those walls,
heretofore (when Kings, not Brewers and Draymen, were in power) the walls of
public liberty.

39. Ordinance to null and void all Acts passed in absence of the two renegado
Speakers.
The Lords that sat in absence of the two Speakers (all but the Earl of
Pembroke, whose easy disposition made him fit for all companies) found it
their safest course to forbear the House, leaving it to be possessed by those
few Lords that went to, and engaged with the Army: which engaged Lords sent to
the Commons for their concurrence to an Ordinance, To make all Acts, Orders and
Ordinances passed from the 26 July (when the tumult was upon the Houses) to the
6. of August following (being the day of the fugitive Members return) void and
null ab initio. This was five or six several days severally and fully
debated, as often put to the Question, and carried in the Negative every time:
yet the Lords still renewed the same Message to them, beating back their Votes
into their throats, and would not acquiesce, but upon every denial put them
again to roll the same stone, contrary to the privileges of the Commons.

40. Menaces used by the engaged party in the House.
The chief Arguments used by the engaged party were all grounded upon the Common
places of fear and necessity: M. Solicitor threatening if they did not concur,
the Lords were resolved to vindicate the Honor of their House, and sit no
more: they must have recourse to the power of the sword; the longest sword take
all. That they were all engaged to live and die with the Army. They should have
a sad time of it. Hasterig used the like language; farther saying, Some heads
must fly off; and he feared the Parliament of England would not save the
Kingdom of England, they must look another way for safety. They could not
satisfy the Army but by declaring all void ab initio; and the Lords were so
far engaged, that no middle way would serve. To this was answered, that this
was an Appeal from the Parliament to the Army. And when these and many more
threats of as high nature were complained of as destructive to the liberty and
being of Parliaments, the Speaker would take no notice of it. Sir Henry Vane
junior, Sir John Evelin junior, Prydeaux, Gourdon, Mildmay, Tho: Scott, Cornel:
Holland, and many more, used the like threats.

Upon the last negative (being the fifth or sixth) the Speaker (perceiving
greater enforcements must be used) pulled a Letter out of his pocket, from the
General and General Council of the Army, 41. A threatening Remonstrance from
the Army to the House.
(for that was now their style) pretending he then received it; But it was
conceived he received it over night, with directions to conceal it, if the
Question had passed in the Affirmative. It was accompanied with a Remonstrance
full of villainous language and threats against those Members that sat while
the two Speakers were with the Army: calling them pretended Members, Charging
them (in general) with Treason, Treachery, and breach of Trust: And protested
if they shall presume to sit before they have cleared themselves; that they did
not give their assents to such and such Votes, they should sit at their peril,
and he would take them as Prisoners of War, and try them at a Council of
War.

What King of England ever offered so great a violence to the fundamental
Privileges of Parliament, as to deny them the Liberty of Voting I and No
freely? Certainly the little finger of a Jack Cade or a Wat Tyler, is far
heavier then the loins of any King.

Many Members were amazed at this Letter, and it was moved, That the Speaker
should Command all the Members to meet at the House the next day, and should
declare, That they should be secured from danger: And that it might be Ordered
that no more but the ordinary Guardes should attend the House. But these two
motions were violently opposed with vollies of threats by the aforesaid parties
and others. And after more then two hours debate, the Speaker refused to put
any question upon them, or any of them; and so adjourned to the next morning,
leaving the Presbyterian Members to meet at their Peril.

The next day being Friday, the 20 Aug. there was a very thin Assembly in the
House of Commons; the House having with so much violence denied protection to
their Members the day before, made most of the Presbyterian party absent. Some
went over to the Independent party: others fate mute. At last a Committee was
appointed presently to bring in an Ordinance of Accommodation; which was
suddenly done and passed, and is now Printed at the latter end of the said
menacing Remonstrance of the Army: a Child fit to wait upon such a Mother.

42. Debate in passing the Ordinance of null and void.
Thus was this Ordinance of null and void gotten (which has been the cause of
so much danger and trouble to Multitudes of people) by the Lords reiterated
breaches upon the Privileges of the House of Commons. The engaged parties
threats within doors: The Armies thundering Letters and Remonstrance: Their
Guardes upon their doors, and a Regiment or two of Horse in Hide Park, ready
to make impressions upon the House, in case things had not gone to their
minds: diverse of whose Commanders walking in the Hall, enquired often how
things went, protesting they would pull them forth by the Ears if they did not
give speedy satisfaction.

Thus for the manner of passing that Ordinance; the matter of Argument used
against it was (as far as I can hear) to the purpose following. It was alleged
that the force upon Monday 26 July, ended that day, that the next day being
Tuesday, the House met quietly and adjourned. That upon Friday following, the
Houses fate quietly all day, and gave their Votes freely and so forward; the
City having sufficiently provided for their security. That this tranfient force
upon Monday, could have no influence on the Houses for the time to come. That
the Supreme power of no Nation can avoid their own acts by pretended force.
This would make the common People, the Jurors, and Judges to question all acts
done in Parliament, since one man can, and may judge of force as well as
another. This were to being the Records of the House into dispute: Magna Charta
was never gotten nor confirmed but by force; force was threefold: upon one or
both Houses; or upon the King, in giving His Royal Assent; neither could plead
it, the Parliament is presumed to consist of such men as dare lay down their
lives for their Country. When the King came with force to demand the 5 Members;
when the City came down crying for Justice against the Earl of Strafford; when
the women came down crying for Peace; when the Reformado's came down in a much
more dangerous Tumult then this of the unarmed Prentices; yet the Houses
continued sitting and Acting, and none of their Acts were nullified. That to
make their Acts, Orders and Ordinances void ab initio, would draw many
thousand men who had acted under them into danger of their lives and fortunes,
who had no Authority to dispute the validity of our Votes: we must therefore
give them power to dispute our acts hereafter upon matter of fact; for to tie
men to unlimited and undisputable obedience to our Votes, and yet to punish
them for obeying whenever we shall please to declare our acts void, ab
initio, is contrary to all reason. If to act upon such Ordinances were
criminal, it was more criminal in those that made them. And who shall be
judges of those that made them? Not the Members that went to the Army; They are
parties pre-ingaged to live and die with the Army; and have approved the Armies
Declaration, calling those that sat, a few Lords and Gentlemen, and no
Parliament: they have joined with a power out of the Houses to give a Law to,
and put an engagement upon both Houses; a president never heard of before, of
most dangerous consequence, it takes away the liberty of giving I and No
freely, being the very life of Parliaments: If all done under an actual force
be void, it is questionable whether all has been done this 4 or 5 years be
not void; and whether His Majesty's Royal Assent to some good Bills passed
this Parliament, may not be said to have been extorted by force: if the Kings
Party prevail, they will declare this Parliament void, upon the ground your
selves have laid. 1 Hen. 7. That King urged the Parliament to make void ab
initio, all Acts passed Rich. 3. which they refused upon this ground: That then
they should make all that had Acted in obedience to them liable to punishment,
only they repealed those Acts.

The debate upon this Ordinance of null and void, held from Monday 9 of Aug.
to the 20 Aug. (when it was passed) but not without some interloaping debates
of something a different na-nature, yet all looking the same way: occasioned by
Messages from the Lords: Namely, once upon a Message from them, The said
Declaration, from Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Army, 43. The Lords Message to the
Commons to approve the Declaration of the Army.
concerning their advance to London was read and debated in gross, whether the
Commons should concur with the Lords in approving it? But almost all but the
engaged Party and their Pensioners distasted it, it was laid by without any
question put, lest it should prove dangerous to put a Negative upon their
Masters of the Army. Yet many menaces (according to custom) were used by the
engaged party to get it passed; Hasterig affirming that those Gentlemen that
sat and voted for a Committee of safety, 44. The Committee of safety.
and the Kings coming to London, did drive on the design of the City
protestation and engagement. To which was Answered, That the Committee of
safety was not then newly erected by those which sat, but the old Committee
revived by that Vote, which had been long since erected in a full and free
Parliament, when the Army first mutinyed and threatened to March to London: and
for the same ends; Defense of Parliament and City. And for the Kings coming to
London, it was Voted only to get Him out of the power of the Army; as formerly
in a full and free Parliament he had been voted to Richmond for the same reason.

45. A Committee to examine the Tumult.
Upon another Message from the Lords, the Commons concurred in an Ordinance to
erect a Committee of Examinations to inquire into, and examine the City
Petition, engagement, and the force upon the Houses 26 July, and all endeavors
to raise any forces, 46. A Sub-committee of Secrecy selected to examine the
Tumult.
etc. This Committee consisted of 22 Commons besides Lords, almost all of them
Members engaged with the Army: but because there were some three or four
Presbyterians gotten in amongst them, to shut these Canaanites forth, that the
Godly, the true seed of Israel might shuffle the Cards according to their own
mind, the 13 Aug. after (upon another Message from the Lords) there was a
Sub-committee of Secrecy, named out of this grand Committee of Examinations, to
examine upon Oath. The persons were, the Earl of Denbigh and Mulgrave, Lord
Gray of Wark, Lord Howard of Escrig, Sir Arthur Hasterig, Mr. Solicitor,
Gourdon, Miles Corbet, Alderman Pennington, Allen, Edwards, Col: Ven, or any
three of them. All persons engaged to live and die with the Army, and now
appointed to make a clandestine scrutiny, and search into the lives and Actions
of the Presbyterian party that sat in Parliament doing their duty, when the
engaged party fled to the Army, and brought them up in hostile manner against
them.

The unreasonablenesse of this way of proceeding was much urged; 47. Debate
upon the passing the Committee of Secret examinations.
and farther alleged that it was neither consonant to the Customs of the
House, nor unto common reason, That a Sub-committee should be chosen out of the
Grand Committee of examinations, with more power then the Grand Committee it
self had, and excluding the rest of the Committee, under the pretense of
secrecy. Besides, it was against the privilege of the House of Commons, that
the Lords should nominate the Commons in that Sub-committee as well as their
own Members. But the Independent Grandees would have it pass. Breach of
Privilege, and all other considerations are easily swallowed when they are
subservient to their present designs.

The party engaged were resolved to be Examiners, Informers, 48. The manner of
prosecution and proceeding upon the Tumult.
and witnesses, as well as parties, (so active was their malice) and had so
well packed the Cards, that eight or nine Schismatic Lords engaged likewise
with them, and the Army should be judges of the Presbyterian party that sat in
absence of the two Speakers, the better to give the two Houses a through Purge,
and make them of the same complexion with the Army: without which they had no
hopes to divide the power and profit of the Land between themselves by 10000.
l. 20000. l. in a morning shared amongst the godly; and to make the whole
Kingdom to be Gibeonites, hewers of wood, and drawers of water to the faithful.

In order to the playing of this game, 49. Miles Corbet makes report of
Examinations taken at the close Committee.
First, against the Committee of Safety.
Miles Corbet (Interpreter to that State-puppet-play behind the curtain,
commonly called The close Committee of examinations) upon the 3. September. stood
up and began his Report from that Inquisition, saying, he would begin with the
Committee of safety, wherein many Members were concerned; and it was necessary
to purge the Houses first. But farther said, he would suppress the Nantes of
many of his Witnesses, because the Depositions he should report were but
prepatory examinations, and it would be for service of the State to conceal
their names.

He first produced many Warrants signed at the Committee of Safety by the
Earls of Pembroke, Suffolk, Middlesex, Lincoln, Lord Willoughby of Parham,
Maynard, Mr. Hollis, Sir Phil: Stapleton, Sir William Waller, Mr. Long, Mr.
Nicholls, Sir William Jews, Mr. Baynton.

Next, Corbet reported he had a Witness who deposed that a Gentleman with a
red head had signed many Warrants, supposed to be Mr. Edward Baynton: Against
Master Baynton.
at length after much wyer-drawing of the business, one Warrant was shown to
Mr. Baynton, which he confessed to be his hand. And presently Haslerigge moved
that Mr. Baynton might forthwith Answer: against which was objected, That since
these were but preparatory examinations, not legal proofs, no man was bound to
answer them: otherwise a man shall be put to as many several answers as
several new matters of Charge come in against him, and shall day by day be
liable to new vexations, and never know when he has cleared himself. But
Corbet (who of an Examiner was now become the Kings Solicitor, or Advocate
Criminal) moved to proceed to judgment against him: but first to ask him some
preparatory questions. But it was answered, that it was illegal to squeese
examinations out of a man's own mouth; neither was a man bound to answer, where
his words may condemn, but not absolve hi^: for so much as depends upon the
testimony of Witnesses against this Gentleman, you cannot proceed unless he be
by, and have liberty to put cross questions to the Witnesses. It is alleged,
Warrants were signed, and all done in relation to a new war. It is answered, it
was done in order to self-defence (allowable by the Laws.) Long before this
occasion, when the Army first mutinied and threatened to march up to London, and
use such extraordinary means against the Parliament and City as God had put
into their hands, you then in a full and free Parliament appointed a Committee
of safety for your defense, who sat and acted. This Committee was but the same
revived, and upon the like or worse threats and menaces, as by the many printed
Papers from the Army will appear; you have no Testimony against this Gentleman
by name, but only a Character of his hair: and for signing the Warrant
confessed by himself he is acquitted by the Proviso of the Ordinance, 20.
August last, which excepteth only such as acted upon the force, But when the
Committee of safety was revived, the Parliament was freer from force then it is
how. Mr. Baynton notwithstanding was adjudged to be suspended the House during
pleasure of the House, which is as much as to say, So long as the Tyranny of
this domineering Faction lasts.

The 4. Against Master Walker.
of Sept. Corbet reported he had a Witness (but named him not, because they
were but preparatory examinations) who deposed that an elderly Gentleman of low
stature, in a gray suit, with a little Stick in his hand, came forth of the
House into the Lobby when the Tumult was at the Parliament door, and whispered
some of the Apprentices in the ear, and encouraged them, (supposed to be Mr.
Walker.) Mr. Walker denied he spoke then with any man in the Lobby, or saw any
face that he knew there; and so neglected the business as a thing not
considerable. But the next day Corbet moved that Mr. Walker might be ordered to
put on his gray Suite again and appear before the Close Committee, and the
Witness, who says he knows him again if he see him. I hear Mr. Walker
desired to know (seeing the Witness had not named him) by what authority the
Examiners should take such a Deposition, and make application thereof to him:
and seeing there were many Gentlemen in the House that day with whom that
Character agreed as well as with himself, why the Reporter did not move that
all to whom that Character was applyable might be put to that test as well as
himself, but singled him out for a mark to shoot at: complaining he was not
ignorant out of what Quiver this Arrow came: he had been threatened with a
Revenge by some of that Close Committee, and had other enemies amongst them,
that could bite without barking. He told them that yesterday Mr. Corbet
Reported that the supposed old man whispered, etc. but desired those that were
then in the House to call to mind that the noise was then so great in the Lobby
that no whisper, nay the lowdest words he was able to speak could not be heard.
Then Corbet changed his Tale, saying, the words were, What you do, do
quickly: and were spoken aloud: and said, the Character agreed best with Mr.
Walker, for that the Deponent said, the Gentleman was a Lean meager man.

Here Mr. Walker desired the House to take notice that the Reporter had twice
varyed his Report. 1. In the words spoken, from a whisper to loud speaking. 2.
In the Character enlarged with the words lean and meager. Here is Hayle-shot
provided, if one miss, the other must hit; Yet with this addition, there were
diverse in the House with whom the Character agreed as well as with himself. And
by the incivility of his words, it should seem the Witness is a man of no
breeding: wherefore he desired to hear his Name, that he might enquire of his
credit and repute. If the Reporter thinks he may be practiced, he does not
think him a man of honesty: and then he had more cause to suspect him. He
farther complained, that to make Hue and Cry after him (as it were upon fresh
suite) upon a character of his person and cloths five or six weeks after the
supposed fact, (he never having absented himself one day from the House)
favored too much of a party overswayed with malice and Revenge.

Your close Committee of examinations carry on businesses so in the dark
(being parties engaged with the Army, and not sworn to be true in their
office) that no man can see how to defend himself, or how he is dealt with, or
when he is free from trouble and danger: It seems we are here called ex tempore
to answer for our lives, ore tenus; And our Accusation begins with the
examination of our persons: to make us state a Charge against our selves, to
betray our selves, and cut our own throats with our tongues, contrary to Magna
Charta, the Petition of Right, and all those laws of God and man, which in the
KING'S time, were in use. And no Witnesses are produced, nor so much as named:
methinks therefore we are compelled to play at blind-man-bough for our lives,
not seeing who strikes us. You have the most summary way of hanging one another
that ever I saw; It is a kind of Star Chamber proceeeding in matter of life and
death; your secret examinations savor so much of the Spanish Inquisition, and
of the Council of troubles erected by the Duked' Alva in the Low Countries
(called Concilium Sanguinis) that they can never agree with the laws and nature
of our Nation: If our Kings shall imitate you hereafter, they will be the
greatest Tyrants in the world. Formalities and privileges of Court, derogating
from the common rules of Law, and practice of the land, are but curtains drawn
before oppression and tyranny to dazzle men's eyes. Give me leave to tell you
that I have served you faithfully from the beginning, and have taken as much
pains, and run as many hazards as most men in your service, wherein I have
lost my health and above 7000l. of my Estate, without one penny compensation,
as other men have had, nor have I laid my hands upon any man's money or goods, or
had any gainful employment from you: I contented my self to serve my Country
gratis: and with some little Honor I had gotten thereby; whereby, you have now
Robbed me, by a Roaving accusation shot at Random at me. Had I cheated the
State of 40000l. or 50000l. peradventure I might have been thought a godly,
confiding man, of right principles, and have had 10000l. given me for my
pains. Sir, you have heard the voice of a Freeman (not of a Slave) that dares
keep his first principles, Religion, Laws, and just Liberties whosoever lays
them aside; and protest against Tyranny and Oppression, wheresoever he finds
it, whether in the Government of one or many. You may murder me by the Sword of
Justice, but you cannot hurt me: but deliver me from the evils to come. Nor
shall I be unwilling to suffer a Goale-delivery of my soul from the prison of
my body when I am called to it.

When Mr. Walker had done his defense, the debate followed, much to this
purpose, That to order him to appear in his Gray suite before the close
Committee and Witness was illegal, and against the Laws and Liberties of the
Subject.

1. It is to help another to accuse himself; which is all one as if he did
accuse himself.

2. To bid a Witness look upon a man (after he is engaged to name some body)
is to prompt him to go no farther then the party showed.

3. A Witness ought not to be twice examined against a man. That is, to draw
him on by degrees to swear home, and to mend in his second Deposition what fell
short in his first.

4. If the Witness first depose to the matter, not naming the party, and five
or six weeks after declare the Person, without oath, this is no Deposition, and
if the Oath be renewed the Witness is twice examined. So the business was laid
by, and Corbet allowed to show Mr. Walker casually as he could meet with him to
his witness, which was (in a manner) to draw dry foot after him with his
bloud-hound.

I was the more curious in gathering the circumstances of this business out of
the reports of many several men, in regard of the rareness of the case, and
the exquisiteness of the malice with which it was prosecuted. And it seemed to
me the more admirable, because I hear generally that Mr. Walker has always
been opposite to all parties and factions, both Presbyterian and Independent,
upon whom he looks as the common disturbers both of Church and Commonwealth,
and enemies of peace. Nor could he ever be persuaded to be at any of their
Junto's or secret meetings; and therefore it is not probable he should suddenly
and in the open view of the House go forth and engage with a company of silly
unarmed Apprentice Boys. But I hear they cannot endure his severity, nor he
their knavery. What will not the malice of a desperate Anabaptisticall faction
attempt? they have long sported in the blood and treasure of the land, as the
Leviathan does in the waters: and do now keep up a numerous Army to carry on
those designs by force, which they can no longer make good by fraud. All
England is become as Munster was, and our Grandees suitable to John of Leyden,
and Knipperdolling.

Against Master Recorder Glyn.
The next report Corbet made concerning Mr. Recorder Glyn. The chief things
objected were, That he had frequented the Common Council, the Committees of
the Militia, and safety, more then he was w^nt to do: That he was silent and
made no opposition: And that he gave thanks to the Apprentices when they
delivered their Petition to the City, offering their help for defense thereof
against whomsoever.

The Recorder answered, the Charge was long, and his memory short: He desired
time to examine his memory, concerning the circumstances of time, place,
persons, and other matters; and that he might examine witnesses for clearing
his innocence. But his Prosecutors (hoping to do more good upon him by way of
surprise, then in a deliberate and legal way of proceeding) put him upon it to
answer ex tempore. He confessed and avoided some things, but denied the most
material. He denied he was more frequent at their meetings then ordinary. For
his silence, he alleged he was but the Cities servant and had no voice amongst
them, but when his opinion was demanded: That he gave thanks to the Apprentices
as a servant by command, yet had mixed some admonitions and Reprehensions in
speech to them.

So the Recorder withdrew. And presently Hasterig (according to his custom)
moved judgment might be given against him. To which was answered, that the
Recorder denied (...) principal parts of his Charge; and offered proofs by
witnesses: you must give him that leave, or take all parts of his speech for
granted; as well what makes for him, as against him. Two or three days more
will make this business ripe for judgment: let him have one judgment for
all. If you judge him now to be expelled the House, he is already forejudged,
and that will be a leading case to a farther judgment: For who dares acquit
where you have condemned? A man ought to be but once judged upon one
accusation. The dishonor of expulsion is a punishment exceeding death. If you
judge now upon one part of the Accusation, and hereafter upon another part of
the Accusation, he will be twice condemned upon one Accusation. And shall never
know when he has satisfied the Law; an endless vexation.

Yet Hasterig moved he might receive judgment now, for what was already proved
or confessed, to be expelled the House; (saying, the Lords went on without
obstruction in their businesses, because they had purged their House) and that
he might be farther impeached hereafter upon farther hearing. So he was
adjudged to be discharged the House, committed to the Tower, and further
impeached hereafter.

Sir John Maynard the same day was called to Answer. Against Sir John Maynard.
He desired a Copy of his Charge, with leave to Answer in writing by advice of
Council, as the 11 Members formerly did: To examine witnesses on his part, and
cross examine their witnesses.

But these requests were denye^, and he Commanded to answer ex tempore. He gave
no particular Answer, but denied all in general: as Col: Pride (whom he cited
for his President) had formerly done at their Bar. He was adjudged to be
discharged the House, committed to the Tower, and farther impeached. The like
for Commissary General Copley whose case differed little.

The 8 of Sept. the Earl of Suffolk, Lincoln, Middlesex, Against the 7 Lords.
the Lords Barkley, Willoughby, Hunsdon, and Maynard were impeached of High
Treason, in the name of the Commons of England, for levying war against the
King, Parliament, and Kingdom. The Earl of Pembroke (then sent to
Hampton Court with the Propositions on purpose to avoid the storm) was omitted
until Wednesday following, and so had the favor to be thought not worth
remembering. Sir John Evelyn the younger sent up to the Lords with the
Impeachment, and a desire they might be committed. They were committed to the
Black Rod. And so the engaged Lords had their House to themselves according
to their desires.

50. Schismatic Petitions.
The 14. Sept. a Petition from diverse Schismatics in Essex came to the Houses,
bearing this Title, To the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, distinct
from those Lords and Commons that sat in absence of the two Speakers.

16. Sept. a Petition from diverse Sectaries of Oxfordsh: Bucks: Berkesh: was
delivered the House against diverse Members sitting in the House, enemies to
God and Godliness, enemies to the Kingdom, etc. Usurpers of Parliamentary
Authority, who endeavored to bring in the King upon His own Terms. They
desired a free Parliament, and that (according to the desires of the Army)
those that sat when the Parliament was suspended in absence of the two
Speakers, might be removed: there was a clause against Tithes, etc. in it. Such
another Petition came but the day before from Southwarke.

These Petitions were all penned by the engaged party of the Houses and Army,
and sent abroad by Agitators to get subscriptions. The aim of these Petitions.
The design was to put the two parties in the House into heights one against
another, to make the lesser party in the House ( viz. the engaged party but 59)
to expel the greater party being above 140. whereby the House might be low and
base in the opinion of the people, and no Parliament, and so leave all to the
power of the Sword. The Army daily recruiting, and thereby giving hopes to all
loose people, that the Army should be their common Receptacle, as the Sea is
the common Receptacle of all waters; because those who had no hope to be
Members of Parliament might become Members of this Army. Besides their
plausible way of prompting the people to petition against Tithes, Enclosures,
and Copy hold fines uncertain, was to encourage them to side with the Army
against all the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy of the hand, (from whom the Army
did most fear an opposition) and to destroy Monarchy it self: since it is
impossible for any Prince, to be a King only of Beggars, Tinkers, and Cobblers.

But these interloping discourses omitted, let us again return to these
prodigious Impeachments. Against the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens.
The next in order comes in the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens, with whom
short work was made. Impeachments were sent up to the Lords against them, and
they sent to the Tower, upon a bare report of the Inquisitor General Corbet,
and the reading of some depositions, the Witnesses names for the most part
concealed, and none of them so much as called to the Commons Bar to see what
they could say for themselves: Contrary to Magna Charta, 29. chap. and contrary
to 28 Edw. 3. enacting, that no man shall be put out of his Land, etc. nor
taken, nor Imprisoned, etc. nor put to death, etc. without being brought to
answer by due process of Law. That is according to the Stat. 42 Edw. 3. chapter 3.
That no man be brought to answer without presentment before Justices, or matter
of Record, or by due process, or writ original, according to the old Law of
the Land: not according to new invented Articles of impeachment, but according
to those Laws that were well known, and old in Edw. 3. time: see Stat. 37 Edw.
3. 1 Edw. 6. chapter 12. 6 Edw. 6. chapter 11. and the Stat. 25 Ed. 3. says, no man
shall be taken by Petition or sugestion made to the King, or his Council, etc.
and the House of Peers is no more but the Kings Council, as anon I shall make
evident.

It was moved by diverse that these Gent: 51. Arguments against impeachments
before the Lords.
might be Tried according to Law at the Kings Bench by a Jury of twelve men de
vicineto, their Peers and equals to judge of matter of fact: alleging that
the Common Law was the Birthright of all the free people of England: which was
one of the three Principles for which the Parl: so often declared in print that
they fought, and for defense whereof they had entered into a Covenant, with their
hands lifted up to God: the other two principles were Religion and Liberties.

1. The Lords were not Peers to the Commoners: At the Common Law they shall
have sworn Judges for matter of Law, of whom they may ask questions in
doubtful points, nor can they be Judges in their own cases.

2. They have sworn Jurors of the neighborhood for matters of fact, whom they
may challenge.

3. The known Laws and Statutes for rules to judge by, which in case of Treason
is the Stat. 25 Edw. 3. you cannot Vote nor declare a new Treason: And if you
could, to do it ex post facto, is contrary to all rules of justice: The Apostle
says, Sin is a breach of a Commandment (or Law:) I had not known sin but by
the Law: the Law therefore most go before the Sin.

4. At the Common Law, They have Witnesses openly and newly examined upon oath
before the Accused's face, who may except against them, and cross examine them.

5. Even in Star Chamber and Chauncery (where only hearings are upon
Testimonies) the Examiners are sworn Officers.

6. A man has but one Trial and Judgment, upon one accusation: so that he
knows when he has satisfied the Law.

In this way of proceeding, all these necessary legalities are laid by: and
these Gentlemen have not so much fair play for their Lives and Estates as
Naboth had for his Vineyard: he had all the formalities of the law: yea, he had
law it self: yet he had not justice: because they were the sons of Belial that
were set before him: what shall we conceive these Witnesses are that do not
appear? nay, whose very names are concealed? yet Naboth was murdered by the
sword of Justice: for the honor of Parliaments give not the people cause to
suspect, these Gentlemen shall be so too: non recurrendum ad extraordinaria,
quando fieri potest per ordinaria.

But all this was but to charm a deaf Adder: the nine or ten engaged Lords
that then possessed the House, were thought to be fitter then a Jury of
Middlesex to make work for the hangman, 52. Arguments proving the Lords to
have no power of Judicature over the Commons.
and yet they have no Judicature over the Commons: as appears by the the
president of Sir Simon de Berisforde, William Taylboys, and the City of
Cambridge. Note that one president against the Jurisdiction of a Court is more
valued then a hundred for it: because the Court cannot be supposed ignorant of
the Law, and its own rights; but a particular man or client may: see Sir John
Maynard's Royal quarrel, and his Laws subversion: Lieut. Col. Lilburne's whip
for the present House of Lords: and Judge Jenkins Remonstrance to the Lords and
Commons of the two Houses of Parliament, dated 21. Febr. 1647. As for the cases
of Weston, Gomenes and Hall, (cited by Mr. Pryn) they were for facts done
beyond Sea, and before the Stat. 1 Hen. 4. chapter 14. whereof the Common Law could
then have no conusance: and therefore an extraordinary way of proceeding before
the Lords was requisite, and by the Kings special Authority it was done,
without which, (I dare boldly affirm) the Lords have no Judicature at all: 53.
The House of Peers no Court of Judicature at at all properly, and per se.
which thus I make appear.

1. The King by delivering the Great Seal to the Lord Keeper, makes him Keeper
of his Conscience for matter of equity. By his Brevia patentia to the Judges of
the two Benches, and the Exchequer, the King makes them administrators and
Interpreters of his Laws: But he never trusts any but himself with the power
of pardoning and dispensing with the rigor of the Law in Criminal cases: And
though the Lord Keeper is Speaker of the Lords House of Court, yet he is no
Member of the Lords House virtute officii: The Judges are not Members, but
Assistants only: So that no man in the House of Peers, as he is simply a Peer,
is trusted by the King either with dispensation of law, or equity.

2. When a Peer of Parliament, or any man else is tried before the Lords in
Parliament criminally, he cannot be tried by his Peers only, because in acts of
Judicature, there must be a Judge superior, who must have his inferiors
ministerial to him: Therefore in the Trial of the Earl of Strafford (as in
all other Trialls upon life and death, in the Lords House) the King grants his
Commission to a Lord High Steward to sit as Judge, and the rest of the Lords
are but in the nature of Jurors. So that it is the Kings Commission that
authoriseth and distinguishes them.

3. When a Writ of Error issues out of the Chauncery to the House of Peers,
they derive their Authority merely from that Writ.

For the three Reasons aforesaid, The House of Peers is no Court of Judicature
at all without the Kings special Authority granted to them either by his Writ.
or his Commission. And the Lords by their four Votes having denied all farther
address or application to the King, have cut off from themselves that
fountain from which they derive all their power: And all Trialls by Commission
must be upon Bills, or Acts of Attainder, not by Articles of Impeachment; a way
never heard of before this Parliament, and invented to carry on the designs of
a restless impetuous Faction: Had the Faction had but so much wit as to try
those Gentlemen by Commission of Oyer and Terminer, before Sergeant Wild, he
would have borrowed a point of law to hang a hundred of them for his own
preferment.

Observe that almost all the cases cited by Mr. Pryn concerning the Peers
Trialls of Commissioners were authorized by the King, upon the special
instance of the House of Commons; As for the House of Commons they never
pretended to any power of Judicature, and have not so much authority as to
administer an oath, which every Court of Pye-pouldres has.

54. Bl^nke impeachments dorment.
But this way of trial before the pre-ingaged Lords, and upon Articles of
Impeachment (which they keep by them of all sorts and sizes fit for every man,
as in Birchin-lane they have suites ready made to fit every body) was the apter
means to bring those men to death whom they feared living: had not a doubt of
the Scots coming in taught them more moderation, then their nature is usually
acquainted with; and to fright away, or (at least) put to silence the rest of
the Members with fear of having their names put into blank Impeachments. And
that it might be so apprehended; Miles Corbet moved openly in the House of
Commons that they should proceed with the Impeachments which were ready,
nothing wanted but to fill up the Blanks, they might put in what names they
pleased. This Inquisitor general, this prologue to the Hangman that looks
more like a hangman then the Hangman himself, has since gotten the rich
office of Register of the Chauncery, as a reward for his double diligence: Oh,
Sergeant Wild and Mr. Steel despair not of a reward.

55. Establishment for the Army.
Friday, 17. Sept. the advice of Sir Tho: Fairfax and his Council of War was
read in the House of Commons, what standing Forces they thought fit to be kept
up in England and Wales, and what Garrisons. Also what Forces to send for
Ireland; namely, for Ireland, 6000 Foot, and 2400 Horse, out of the
supernumerary loose forces, being no part of the Army; And for England, upon
established pay, 18000 Foot at 8d. per diem. 7200 Horse at 2s. per diem each
Trouper; 1000 Dragoones, and 200 Firelocks. Train of Artillery, Arms and
Ammunition, to be supplied. The Foot to be kept in Garrisons, yet so that 6000
may be readily drawn, into the field.

The Independent party argued, That the Army were unwilling to go for Ireland,
pretending their engagement to the contrary; if you divide or disband any part
of your Army, they will suspect you have taken up your old resolutions against
them, to disband the whole Army: It is now no time to discontent them, when the
Kings Answer to your Propositions tends to divide you and your Army, and the
people are generally disaffected to you.

The Presbyterian party argued, That the engagement of the Army ought to be no
rule to the Councels of the Parliament; otherwise new Engagements every day may
prescribe the Parliament new Rules: we must look two ways. 1. Upon the people
unable to bear the burden. 2. Upon the Army. Let us keep some power in our
own Hands, and not descend so far below the dignity of a Parliament, as to put
all into the hands of the General and his Council of War. You have almost
given away all already. The Army advises you to keep up more Garrisons, then
upon mature deliberation this House formerly Voted: you have already many
Garrisons manned with gallant and faithful men, to whom you owe Arrears; to
remove them, and place new Soldiers in their rooms, will neither please them,
nor the places where they are quartered: who being acquainted with their old
guests, will not willingly receive new in their rooms. These men have done you
as good and faithful service as any in the Army; and were ready to obey you,
and go for Ireland, had they not been hindered by those who under pretense of
an engagement to the contrary (which they mutinously entered into) will neither
obey you, nor go for Ireland, nor suffer others to go. Though you discharge
these men without paying their Arrears, (which others of other principles will
not endure) yet give them good words: If you will be served by none, but such
as are of your new principles; yet consider your Army are not all alike
principled, and peradventure the old principles may be as good as the new for
public, though not so fit for private designs and purposes. You have passed
an Ordinance, That none that have borne Arms against the Parliament shall be
employed: if you disband all such, your Army will be very thin; many have
entered into pay there in order to do the King service, and bring the
Parliament low. There is no reason you should keep up 1400 Horse more then you
last voted to keep up, being but 5800 at which time 60000l. a Month was thought
an establishment sufficient both for England and Ireland. But now the whole
charge of England and Ireland will amount to 114000l. a month: which must be
raised upon the people, either directly and openly by way of sessement; or
indirectly and closely, partly by sessements, and partly by free quarter, and
other devices: nor will the pay of 2s. per diem to each Trouper, and 8d. to
each Foot Soldier enable them to pay their quarters. If you mean to govern by
the Sword, your Army is too little: if by the Laws and Justice of the Land, and
love of the people, your Army is too great: you can never pay them: which will
occasion mutinies in the Army, and ruin to the country. Thus disputed the
Presbyterians, but to no purpose, it was carried against them.

Observe that when the War was at the highest, the monthly tax came but to
54000l. yet had we then the Earl of Essex's Army, Sir William Waller's, my
Lord of Denbigh's, Maj. Gen: Poynt's, Maj. Gen: Massey's, Maj. Gen:
Laughorne's, Sir William Bruerton's, Sir Tho: Middletons Brigades, and other
Forces in the field, besides Garrisons.

56. Monthly Taxes
But now this Army has 60000l. a month, and 20000l. a month more pretended for
Ireland; which running all through the fingers of the Committee of the Army.

57. Ireland why kept in a starkept in a starving condition.
That Kingdom (which is purposely kept in a starving condition to break the
Lord Inchequin's Army, that Ireland may be a receptacle for the Saints against
England spewes them forth) has nothing but the envy of it, the sole benefit
going to this Army: This 20000l. a month being a secret unknown to the common
Soldiers; The Grandees of the Army put it in their own purses.

Moreover, this Army has still a kind of free quarter, (under color of
lodging, fire and candle) for who sees not that these masterlesse guests upon
that interest continued in our houses, do and will become Masters of all the
rest? and who dares ask money for quarter of them, or accept it when it is
colourably offered, without fear of farther harm? besides, the Army (whose
requests are now become commands) demanded that they might have the levying of
this Tax: and that their accounts might be audited at the Head quarters: And
though the Officers of this Army (to catch the peoples affections) encouraged
them often to petition the Houses against Free Quarter, pretending they would
forbear it, after an establishment settled upon them; the use their party in the
House made of these Petitions was to move for an Addition of 20000l. or 30000l.
a month) and then they should pay their quarters, lodging, fire, and candle,
nay stable-roome too excepted.

Here it is not amiss to insert a word or two of this villainous oppression,
Free Quarter; 58. Free Quarter.
whereby we are reduced to the condition of conquered Slaves, no man being
master of his own Family, but living like Bondslaves in their own houses,
under these Egyptian Taskmasters, who are Spies and Intelligencers upon our
words and deeds, so that every man's table is become a snare to him. In the
third year of King CHARLES, The Lords and Commons in their Petition of Right
(when not above 2000 or 3000 Soldiers were thinly quartered upon the people
but for a month or two) complained thereof to His Majesty as a great Grievance
contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and humbly prayed as their
Right and Liberty, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom that he
would remove them, and that his people might not be so burdened in time to
come; which His Majesty graciously granted. Yet now we are ten thousand times
more oppressed with them, and if these quarterers offer violence or villainous
usage to any man in his house or family, or commit murder or felony, they are
protected against the laws and justice of the land, 59. Martial Law.
and Triable only by a Council of War at the Head quarters, where a man can
neither obtain justice, nor seek it with safety. So that we live under the
burden of a perpetual Army of 30000 or 40000 men, exempt from all but martial
law, which frequently oppresses, seldom righteth any man: witness Oliver
Cromwell's taking of Thomson (being no Soldier) from the House of Commons door
with Soldiers, imprisoning and condemning him at a Council of War, where he
sat Judge in his own cause, there being a quarrel between them: Yet it was
held Treason in the Earl of Strafford to condemn the Lord of Valentia so,
being a member of his Army, because it was in time of peace, as this was. Many
other examples we have of the like nature, and of this Army, enough to persuade
us that these vindicative Saints will not govern by the known Laws of the
Land, (for which they have made us spend our money and blood) but by Martial
Law and Committee Law, grounded upon Arbitrary Ordinances of Parliament, which
themselves in the first part of exact Collections, page 727. confess, are not
Laws without the Royal assent.

This Army has been daily recruited without any Authority, far beyond the
said number or pay established; the supernumeraries living upon free quarter.
And when complaints have been made thereof in the House, the Army being
quartered in several Brigades, supernumeraries have been disbanded in one
Brigade, and their Arms taken by their Officers: 60. Cheats put upon the State.
and shortly after they have been listed again in another Brigade, and their
Arms sold again to the State, after a while to new Arm them. And of this
sort were those Arms which being found in a Magazine in Town by some zelots,
and rumoured to belong to the City for the Arming of Reformado's, were upon
examination found to belong to Oliver Cromwell: so the business was buried in
silence: for though the Kings over-sights must be tragically published to the
world, yet the heinous crimes of the godly must lie hid under the mask of
Religion.

61. Arreares secured, although the State owes them nothing.
And though they have usually taken free quarter in one place, and taken
composition money for free quarter in another place, some of them in two or
three places at once 3s. a day, some of them 5s. for a Trooper, and 1s. a day,
and 1s. 6d. for a foot Soldier, whereby no Arreares are due to them, but they
owe money to the State; yet they have compelled the Houses to settle upon them
for pretended Arreares, 1. The moity of the Excise (that they may have the
Soldiers help in leavying it. Although to flatter the People, the Army had
formerly declared against the excise.) 2. The moity of Goldsmiths-Hall. 3.
Remainder of Bishops Lands. 4. The customs of some Garrisons. 5. Forest Lands.

This Army brags they are the Saviors (nay Conquerors) of the Kingdom. Let
them say when they saved it, whether at the fight at Nazeby, or taking in of
Oxford: and we will pay them according to the then List. And for all the
Recruites taken in since the reducing of Oxford, it is fit they be disbanded
without pay, having been taken in without, nay against Authority, to drive on
wicked designs, and enthrall King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom.

24. December. 1647. 62. Four dethroning Bills presented to the King at
Carisbrook-Castle.
The two Houses by their Commissioners presented to the King at
Carisbrook-Castle four Bills to be passed as Acts of Parliament, and diverse
Propositions to be assented to. They are all printed, so is His Majesty's
Answer to them, wherefore I shall need to say the less of them, only a word or
two, to two of the Bills:

1. The Act for raising, settling, 63. Act for the Militia.
and maintaining Forces by Sea and Land, within the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, Wales, etc. (though it seems to be but for 20 years) devests the King,
his Heirs, and Successors of the power of the Militia for ever, without hope
of recovery but by repealing the said Act, which will never be in his nor their
power: for, first, it says, That neither the King, nor his Heirs or
Successors, nor any other shall exercise any power over the Militia by Land or
Sea, but such as shall act by authority and approbation of the said Lords and
Commons. That is, a Committee of State of twenty or thirty Grandees, to whom
the two Houses shall transfer this trust, being overawed by the Army, (for the
groundwork of this Committee was laid by these words, though the Committee be
erected since.) And secondly, it prohibiteth the King, his Heirs and
Successors, etc. after the expiration of the said 20 years to exercise any of
the said powers without the consent of the said Lords and Commons, and in all
cases wherein the said Lords and Commons shall declare the safety of the
Kingdom to be concerned after the said 20 years expired, and shall pass any
Bills for raising, arming, etc. forces by land or sea, or concerning levying of
money, etc. if the Royal assent to such Bills shall not be given by such a
time, etc. then such Bills so passed by the Lords and Commons shall have the
force of Acts of Parliament without the Royal assent. Lo, ^^re a foundation
laid to make an Ordinance of both Houses equal to an Act of Parliament, if
this be granted in one case, it will be taken in another, and then these
Subverters of our Religion, Laws and Liberties will turn their usurpation into
a legal Tyranny.

2. It gives an unlimited power to the two Houses to raise what forces, and
what numbers for land and sea, and of what persons (without exceptions) they
please, and to employ them as they shall judge fit.

3. To raise what money they please for maintaining them, and in what sort they
think fit out of any man's estate.

64. Bill for adjournment of the Parliament as well for place, as time.
The Bill for adjournment of both Houses to any other place, etc. will enable
the engaged Party of the two Houses and Army to adjourne the two Houses from
time to time, to or near the Head quarters of the Army: where those Members
that refuse to enter into the same Engagement, shall neither sit with
accommodation nor safety, and so be shaken off at last: this is a new way of
purging the Houses. Besides, the Parliament following the motions of the Army,
the King shall follow the Parliament, whereby the Army having both King and
Parliament present with them, whatsoever attempt shall be made against the Army
shall be said to be against the safety and authority of the King and
Parliament, and a legal Treason, triable by Indictment, not a constructive
Treason only Triable before the Lords.

65. The King's Answer debated.
Monday 3. Jan. the Kings Answer to the said Bills and Propositions was debated
in the House of Commons. And first, Sir Thomas Wroth (Jacke Pudding to
Prideaux the Postmaster) had his cue to go high, and feel the pulse of the
House; who spoke to this purpose, That Bedlem was appointed for mad men, and
Tophet for Kings: That our Kings of late had carried themselves as if they were
fit for no place but Bedlem: That his humble motion should consist of three
parts:

1. To secure the King, and keep Him close in some inland Castle with sure
Guards.

2. To draw up Articles of Impeachment against Him.

3. To lay Him by, and settle the Kingdom without Him. He cared not what form
of Government they set up, so it were not by Kings and Devils.

Fretons Speech.
Then Commissary Ireton (seeming to speak the sense (...) the Army under the
notion of many thousand godly men who had ventured their lives to subdue their
enemies) said after this manner, The King had denied safety and protection to
his people by denying their four Bills: That subjection to him was but in lieu
of his protection to his people; This being denied they might well deny any
more subjection to him, and settle the Kingdom without him: That it was now
expected after so long patience they should show their resolution, and not
desert those valiant men who had engaged for them beyond all possibility of
retreat, and would never forsake the Parliament, unless the Parliament
forsook them first.

After some more debate when the House was ready for the question, Cromwell
brought up the Rear: Cromwell's Speech.
And giving an ample character of the valor, good affections, and godliness
of the Army, argued: That it was now expected the Parliament should govern and
defend the Kingdom by their own power and resolutions, and not teach the
people any longer to expect safety and government from an obstinate man whose
heart God had hardened. That those men who had defended the Parliament from so
many dangers with the expense of their blood, would defend them herein with
fidelity and courage against all opposition. Teach them not by neglecting your
own and the Kingdoms safety (in which their own is involved) to think
themselves betrayed: and left hereafter to the rage and malice of an
irreconcilable enemy whom they have subdued for your sake: and therefore are
likely to find his future government of them insupportable, and fuller of
revenge then justice: lest despair teach them to seek their safety by some
other means then adhering to you, who will not stick to your selves. And how
destructive such a resolution in them will be to you all, I tremble to think
and leave you to judge.

Observe, he laid his hand upon his Sword at the latter end of his Speech; that
Sword which being by his side could not keep him from trembling when Sir Philip
Stapleton baffled him in the House of Commons.

This concluding Speech having something of menace in it was thought very
prevalent with the House. 66. The four Bills for no addresses nor applications
passed.
The first of the four Questions being put, That the two Houses should make no
more addresses nor applications to the King: The House of Commons was divided,
141. yeas, 91. noes, so it was carried in the affirmative. The other three
Votes followed these votes with facility: see them in print. 67. The Committee
of S^fety revived and enlarged.


The Members had been locked into the House of Commons from before nine of the
clock in the morning to seven at night, and then the doors were unlocked, and
what Members would, suffered to go forth, whereby many Presbyterians thinking
the House had been upon rising departed; when presently (the House being grown
thin) the Vote to revive the Committee of both Kingdoms called the Committee of
Safety at Darby House, passed by Ordinance dated 3. Janu. 1647. in these words:
Resolved, etc. That the powers formerly granted by both Houses to the Committee
of both Kingdoms, (viz. England and Scotland) in relation to the two Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, be now granted and vested in the Members of both Houses
only that are of that Committee, with power to them alone, to put the same in
execution. The original Ordinance that first erected this Committee, and to
which this said Ordinance relates, bears date 7. Feb. 1643. in which the
English Committees were appointed from time to time, to propound to the
Scottish Commissioners whatsoever they should receive in charge from both
Houses, and to make report to both Houses, to direct the managing of the War,
and to keep good correspondency with forain States, and to receive directions
from time to time from both Houses; and to continue for three months and no
longer. The Members of this Committee are now: The Earl of Northumberland. To.
Earl of Warwick. The E. of Kent. Edw: Earl of Manchester. Will. Lord Say and
Se^^. Phil. L. Wharton. John Lord Roberts. Will. Pierre. point. Sir Henry Vane
sen. Sir Gilbert Gerrarde. Sir Will. Armine. Sir Arthur Hasterig. Sir Hen.
Vanc, Iun. John Crew. Rob. Wallope. Oliver St. John's Sol. Oliver Cromwell.
Samu. Brown. Nath. Fiennes. Sir John Eveline, Junior.
But this Ordinance 3 Janu. 1647. vests the said powers in the Members thereof
only, and alone: words excluding the two Houses: and for a time indefinite.
There were then added to this Committee, Nathaniel Fiennes, in place of Sir
Phil. Stapleton; Sir John Evelin Junior, in place of Mr. Recorder; and the Earl
of Kent, in stead of the Earl of Essex. 22. Janu. following, the Lords sent
down a Message for a farther power to this Committee; which was granted in
these words: Power to suppress Tumults and Insurrections in England, etc. and
at Barwick, and for that purpose the Committee to have power to give orders and
directions to all the Militia and forces of the Kingdom. The addition of four
Lords and eight Commoners likewise to this Committee was desired, but denied.

68. White Hall and the Mewes Garrisoned.
Friday 14 Janu. after a long debate it was ordered that Sir Lewis Dives, Sir
John Stowell, and David Jenkins, be tried as Traitors at the Kings Bench: the
Grand Jury had found the Bill against Jenkins. Master Solicitor, etc. appointed
to manage the business, * but Jenkins is so great a Lawyer, See Judge Jenkins
Remonstrance to the Lords and Commons of Par. 21. Feb. 1647.
that the Solicitor durst not venture upon him, the long sword being more
powerful in his mouth then the Law; wherefore the Solicitor found an Error in
the Indictment, turned him back again upon the House to be impeached before
the Lords, to whose Jurisdiction he pleaded: so the Solicitor put the affront
from himself upon the Houses. It was now 12. of the clock, and many of the
Independent party began to cry, Rise, rise; The Presbyterians thinking all had
been done: many went to dinner, yet the Independents sat still: and finding
the House for their turn, moved, That a Letter might be forthwith sent to Sir
Tho: Fairfax, to send a convenient number to Garrison White Hall; and a party
of Horse to quarter in the Mewes. The Lords concurrence was not desired to this
Vote, but the Letters immediately drawn and sent.

Observe that before this Vote passed, diverse forces were upon their March
toward the Town, and came to White Hall Saturday following by eight of the
Clock in the morning.

Saturday, 15. Janu. 69. The Armies Declaration thanking the Commons for their
4 Votes.
The Army sent a Declaration to the House of Commons, Thanking them for their 4
Votes against the King, and promising to live and die with the Commons, in
defense of them against all opponents. Many of the Lords had argued very hotly
against the said 4 Votes, insomuch that it was ten Lords to ten; but this
engagement of the Army, 70. The Lords pass the 4 Votes
and the unexpected garrisoning of White Hall and the Mewes, turned the scales:
so that they passed the said 4 Votes, only adding a short preamble (little to
the purpose) holding forth some reasons for passing them, to which the Commons,
when they came down, assented. When presently (about 12. of the clock the House
being thin) Dennis Bond moved, That whosoever should act against those 4 Votes,
or incite others to act against them, should be imprisoned and sequestered.

Three or four days after the Lords had passed the said 4 Votes, 71. The Army
thanks the Lords.
the Army vouchsafed to spit thanks in their mouths, and make much of them.
These 4 Votes were generally sinisterly taken, and filled men's minds with
suspicion, what form of government the Grandees would set up, now they had
laid by the King: and every man's mind presaged a new War; which they conceived
the Independent Grandees were willing to have, to color their keeping up this
Army, and raising money to maintain them: and every man began to lay the
project of a new War at their door: notwithstanding (by way of prevention) they
had impeached diverse Members and Citizens of London, for endeavoring a new
War when they did but raise men for their selfe-defence.

72. The Declaration against the King.
To show the people therefore, the reasons of these 4 Votes, the Independent
Grandees appointed a Committee to search into the Kings Conversation, and
errors of his Government, and publish them in a Declaration to the world:
wherein they objected many high crimes against Him, concerning His Fathers
death, the loss of Rochell, and the Massacre and Rebellion in Ireland: which
upon debate in the House, were very much moderated by the Presbyterians: of
which Declaration I will only say, That they have set forth no new matter
therein, which they have not formerly published in parcells: since which time
they have taken and caused others to take the National Covenant; whereby they
vow to maintain the Kings Person, Crown and Dignity, in defense of Religion,
Laws, and Liberties: and therefore to reprint only the same things as Arguments
to lay by the King, savours more of design, then justice. I will wade no
farther in the censure of the said Declaration, lest I imitate the Authors of
it: and as they by a feeble accusation have done the King much right, so I by a
weak defense should do him much wrong. The people were as ill satisfied with
this Declaration as with the four Votes, 73. Tho: Hasterig's Letter concerning
the King.
wherefore 24. Febr. Mr. Speaker, with much seriousness, presented to the
House a Letter out of Leichestershire from Thomas Hasterig, (brother to Sir
Arthur) which was read to this purpose, That there was one Mr. Smalling a
Committee-man of Leichestershire, who had been a Deputy-examiner in the
Star Chamber, and affirmed, that above twenty years since there being a suite
in Star Chamber between the Earl of Bristoll complainant, and the Duke of
Buckingham defendant, concerning Physic presumptuously administered by the said
Duke to K. James, the said Smalling took many depositions therein, and was
farther proceeding in the Examinations, until a Warrant signed by the King was
brought him, commanding him to surcease and to send him the Depositions already
taken; which Smalling did: yet kept notes by him of the principal passages,
doubting what farther proceedings might be hereafter, in a business of such
importance. Sir Henry Mildmay moved that Smalling be sent for and examined upon
oath by the Committee that penned the said Declaration: but upon motion of the
Presbyterians, he was ordered to be examined at the Commons Bar. Smalling came,
produced the Warrant, but no notes: so this Chimaera vanished. What the said
Committee would have made of this, who knows? God bless us all from
clandestine examinations, especially when they are taken by parties preingaged.
3. Caroli this business had been ventilated and examined against the Duke, and
no mention made of poisoning or killing K. James, It was then only called an
Act of high presumption and dangerous consequence in the Duke: nor was there
then the least reflection upon K. Charles; yet now because K. Charles dissolved
that Parliament, the Independent party were willing to raise a suspicion
against him concerning his Fathers death: whereas the Accusation against the
Duke of Buckingham 3 Caroli contained seven or eight Charges against him, the
least whereof might occasion the dissolving of that Parliament.

These desperate courses (to dishonor the King and make him incapable of
Government, to ruin his Person, Crown, 74. Why the Independents went so high
against the King: To usurp the Regal power into themselves either in the
Houses purging: or in the Committee of safety at Derby house.
and Dignity, and extirpate Monarchy root and branch) were taken in order to
the usurping of the Kingly power into the Grandees of the Parliament and Army,
and in case they could not purge the two Houses and make them wholly
Independent, (which they now despair of) then into the hands of the Committee,
or Council of State at Derby House, and Grandees of the Army. In order to
which, they are now contriving to strengthen the said Committee with more power
and more Members, and to adjourn the Parliament and send down the Presbyterian
Members into the Country upon pretense of service, where if any Tumults happen
(for which their extortions will give sufficient provocation) the said
dissenting Members shall bear the blame; and have Blanck Impeachments given
them to purge them out of the Houses, if not out of the world; or at least be
sequestered: for now they have squeezed what they can out of the Kings party by
Sequestrations, the next fuel to their covetousness is to sequester the
Presbyerians; and then to sequester one another: for they are already divided
into pure Independents and mixed Independents, and have feuds amongst
themselves, for this Faction; (insatiate with money and blood) are all beasts of
prey, and when they want prey, will prey upon one another: nor shall the Houses
meet above one Month or two in a Year to ratify and approve what Derby house
and the Junto of the Army shall dictate to them: and to give an Account to the
domineering party how each Member has carried himself in the Country: Thus in
stead of one King, we shall have twenty or thirty Tyrants in chief, and as many
subordinate Tyrants as they please to employ under them, with the Iron yoke of
an Army to hold us in subjection to their Arbitrary Government.

75. Why the Grandees do still continue to truck with the King:
notwithstanding the said 4 Votes.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid four Votes and Resolutions, the Caball of
Grandees still keep Ashburnham and Barkley in the Army, and have sent diverse
turn-coat-Cavaleers, and Emissaries underhand disguised to the King, who
pretending that by Bribes they have bought their admission to him, after some
insinuations endeavor with false and deceitful news and arguments to shake
his constancy: and persuade him to pass the said 4. dethroning Bills; (for
these usurpers of Sovereign Authority long to turn their Armed and violent
Tyranny into a legal Tyranny) or (at least) to make him declare against the
Scots coming in. In both which cases he will dishearten his friends, who
endeavor to take the golden reins of Government out of the gripes of these
Phaetons, and restore them again to his hand, un-king himself and his
posterity for ever, be carried up and down like a stalking horse to their
designs, and be Crowned Ludibrio Coronae, with straw or thorns. For who can
think that at the end of 20 years, these Usurpers will lay down what they have
so unjustly contrary to all Laws, Divine and Humane, and contrary to their own
Declarations, Oaths and Covenants extorted? and who can or dare wrest those
powers out of their hands, being once settled and grown customary in them: the
peoples spirits broken with an habitual servitude; a numerous Army and
Garrisons hovering over them; and all places of Judicature filled with corrupt
Judges; who shall by constrained interpretations of the Law, force bloody
presidents out of them, against whosoever shall dare to be so good a Patriot as
to oppose their Tyranny? They that could make steel sharp enough to cut
Captain Barlyes throat for attempting to rescue the King out of the hands of a
rebellious Army that neither obeyes King nor Parliament, will find gold and
silver enough to corrupt all the Judges, they mean to prefer and make them wyld
and vilde enough for their purposes. But it is hoped he has more of King, more
of man in him then to lose his principles, and stumble again at the same
stone, dash again upon the same rock, whatsoever Sirens sing upon it; knowing
he has a Son at liberty to revenge his wrongs, all the Princes of Christendom
his Allies, whose common cause is controverted in his sufferings, the greatest
men of England and Scotland of his blood, and the people generally (whose
farthest design was to preserve their Laws and Liberties, and to defend the
Parliament from being conquered by the Sword) looking with an angry aspect upon
these Seducers, who by insensible degrees and many forgeries have engaged them
farther then they intended, not to the defense of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, but to the setting up of Schism, Committee law, and Martial law,
Impeachments before the Lords, and unlimited slavery.

And I am confident this Faction despair of working upon the King, who like a
rock in mediis tutissimus undis, whatsoever reports they give out to the
contrary, having from the beginning made lies their refuge, which being wisely
foreseen by the King, he sent a Message to both Houses, (by way of prevention)
delivered in the painted Chamber by the Lord of Lauderdale one of the Scots
Commissioners: consisting of three heads.

1. That He was taken from Holdenby against His will.

2. That they should maintain the Honor and Privileges of Parliament.

3. That they should believe no Message as coming from Him during His Restraint
in the Army, but should only credit what they received from His own mouth.
These Grandees have cheated all the interests of the Kingdom, and have lately
attempted the City again, and had the repulse. But the King is their old
customer, and has been often cheated by them, and having Him in strict
custody, peradventure they may persuade Him it is for His Safety to be deceived
once more: wherefore (notwithstanding their many endeavors to root up
Monarchy, dethrone the King, and his Posterity, and usurp His power: in order
to which, they have overwhelmed Him, and all His, with innumerable calamities
and reproaches) yet since the passing of the Declaration against the King,
their desperate condition has enforced them to make new addresses in private
to Him: notwithstanding their four Votes inflicting the penalty of Treason upon
the infringers. But Treason is as natural to Cromwell as false-accusing,
protesting and lying: he is so superlative a Traitor, that the Laws can lay no
hold of him. Lieut. Col. Lylborne, in a verbal Charge delivered at the Commons
Bar, accused him of many Treasonable acts, which the avoweth to make good: and
in his Book, called, A Plea for a Habeas Corpus: But as if Cromwell were a
Traitor cum privilegio, the House of Commons (being under his armed Guards)
dares take no notice of it. But the Roman Tribune said to Scipio Africanus, in
Livy, Qui jus aequum far non potest, in eum vim hand injustam fore, He that
exalts himself above the law, ought not to be protected by the law.

To conclude, Cromwell has lately had private conference at Farnham with
Hammond.

The Earl of Southampton has been courted to negotiate with the King, and
offered the two Speakers hands for his warrant.

Capt. Titus taken into favor, and employed that way.

These Grandees have brought themselves into a mist, and now wander from one
foolish design to another.

The Spaniard is said to forecast in his debates, what will happen forty years
after. But these purblind Politicians do not foresee the event of their
Councels forty days, nay hours beforehand; but it is a curse laid upon wicked
men, to grope at noone day.

76. Debates in the House of Commons upon the Scots Letters.
1. Concerning the said four Votes.
About the 5. or 6. of Jan. 1647. the Scots Commissioners had written certain
Letters to the House of Commons; one whereof repeating the four Votes against
the King; propounded to know, whether the Houses by their Votes, That no person
whatsoever do presume to make or receive any Application or address to, or
from the King; would debar the Scots to make or receive any Addresses to or
from him, and so put an incapacity upon Him to perform Acts of Government
toward them. In the debate, the Independents called to mind a more ancient
Vote, whereby it was ordered, That the Scots might be admitted to the King.
Against which, was alleged. That these latter Votes being made general,
without exception, Repealed that former Vote. At last by an interpretative
Vote, it was concluded, That notwithstanding the said four latter Votes: the
former Vote, That the Scots Commissioners might make Addresses to the King, was
still in force. Observe that this was done four or five days after the Scots
Commissioners were on their way toward Scotland.

The second Letter was concerning 100000l. due by contract to the Scots from
the Parliament, 2. Concerning 100000l. due to the Scots.
whereof 50000l. was payable by assignement to diverse Scots Gentlemen who had
advanced money to hasten the Scots Army to our Relief; whereof 10000l. was
payable to the Earl of Argyle.

Sir Henry Mildmay made a long Speech in praise of Argyle, saying, That he and
his party, and the Scottish Clergy were the only men that upheld the English
interest in Scotland, and were better friends to us then all Scotland besides:
wherefore he moved that Argyle might be paid his 10000l. and the rest
continued at Interest at 81. per cent. Presently the whole Independent gang,
with much zeal and little discretion, ran that way, until more moderate men
stopping them in full cry, minded them what dishonor and danger they might
bring their friends into by laying him open to suspicion.

After this, it was Resolved to send four Commons, 77. Six Commissioners sent
into Scotland.
and two Lords into Scotland as Commissioners, with Instructions: to send all
Independents, would not be acceptable; Two Presbyterians Commoners therefore
were sent, one whereof was sweetened with the gift of 1000l. and an Office
before they would trust him: with them were sent Mr. Hearle and Mr. Marshall.

Marshall, when he saw Independency prevail, 78. M. Marshall.
had secretly turned his coat the wrong side outward, and joined interest with
Mr. Nigh. But before he declared himself, he was to do some service for his new
party: Wherefore when the Army looked with a threatening posture upon the
Parliament and City, before they marched through London, (the common Soldiers
being in such discontent for want of pay that they were ready to mutiny and
disband, and their Officers scarce daring to govern them) the first fruits of
Marshall's service to his new friends was to persuade the City to lend the
Parliament 50000l. to pacify the Soldiers: assuring them by Letters that the
Army had nothing but good thoughts toward the City, only the common Soldiers
was troubled for want of pay: after the City had laid down the said 50000l. his
next labor was, to persuade the Citizens to let the Army march through the
City without opposition for avoiding of bloodshed and firing: and to let them
possess the Tower, and Line of Communication. After these services, the
Grandees of the Parliament and Army, finding him suitable to them, received him
into an avowed favor; and then four Independents, and four Presbyterian
Divines (conjoyning their interests) were sent to season the Army, and new tune
them according to the more modern design: Marshall was one; where, after he
had preached according to the Dictates of the Grandees of the two Houses and
Army for diverse weeks, Marshall was thought fit to attend the Commissioners
into Scotland: He and Mr. Nigh had been sent to Carisbrooke Castle formerly with
those Commissioners that carried the four Bills to the King, and had 500l. a
piece given them for their journey.

Scotland, a longer journey, promised a larger reward: it is good being a
postilion of the Gospel at such rates.

The Sunday before he went, he preached at Margarets Westminster, and as much
cried up Presbytery and the Covenant there, as he had before slighted them in
the Army. This was a preparation Sermon to make him acceptable to the Scots,
that he might cajole them the easier. Before he went he sent his Agents from
house to house at Westminster to beg men's good wills toward his journey. He
was willing upon this pretense to get what he could from St. Margarets Parish,
where he found the people to grow cold in their affections and contributions to
him. Wherefore having made his bargain before he went, to leave S. Margarets,
and officiate in the Abbey, where he is to have 300l. per annum certain
allowance, he would rob the Egyptians at S. Margarets for a parting blow. This
Priest married his own Daughter with the Book of Common Prayer and a Ring, and
gave for reason, That the Statute establishing that Liturgy was not yet
repealed, and he was loath to have his Daughter whored, and turned back upon
him for want of a Legal Marriage: yet he can declare against all use of it by
others. He has so long cursed Meroz and neutrality, that he has brought Gods
curse upon the land: and has put Church and Commonwealth into a flame, but
himself and his Brats have warmed their fingers at it: as moneys are decried or
enhaunced by the Kings authority, so is every man's Religion cried up or down by
Marshall's authority and stamp.

About the 24. 79. The Answer to the Scots Declaration.
Feb. the Answer to the Scots Declaration began to be debated in parts: in
which Debate the Covenant was much undervalued, and called an Almanac out of
Date. Nath: Fiennes argued against it, That that clause in the Covenant, [To
defend the Kings Person, Crown, and Dignity, etc.] was inconsistent with their
four Votes, for making no Addresses to the King: To which was answered by some,
That then they would relinquish the four Votes and adhere to the Covenant.

About the beginning of March, 80. Money shared amongst godly Members.
was given to Col. Sydenham and Col. Bingham 1000l. apiece, as part of their
Arrears: their Accounts not yet stated. To the Lord of Broghill 2000l. To
Master Fenwicke 500l. for losses. To Mr. Millington 2000l. for losses. To Col.
Ven 4000l. notwithstanding it was moved he might first account for
Contribution-money, the Plunder of the Country about Windsor, and the Kings
Household Stuff, Hangings, Linen, and Bedding. Mr. Pury the Petty-bag Office,
besides 1000l. formerly given him. To Pury's Son, the Clerk of the Peers
place, and 100l. a year: all Independents.

The 7. of March, 81. Cromwell.
an Ordinance passed the Commons to settle 2500l. a year land, out of the
Marquess of Worcester's Estate, upon Lieutenant General Oliver Cromwell. I
have heard some Gentlemen, that know the Manor of Chepstow, and the rest of
the Lands settled upon him, affirm, That in the particulars the said Lands are
so favorably rated, that they are worth 5000l. or 6000l. a year: It is farther
said those Lands are bravely wooded. You see though they have not made King
Charles, a glorious King, 82. A Message from the Lords, desiring the Commons
concurrence to the engagement of the Members with the Army.
as they promised: yet they have settled a crown Revenue upon Oliver, and have
made him as great and glorious a king as ever John of Leyden was. Wonder not
that they conspire to keep up this Army, as well to make good these Largesses,
as to keep their guilty Heads upon their shoulders.

Thursday, 9. March, the Lords sent a Message to the House of Commons, To
desire their concurrence to the Engagement of those Members that fled to the
Army, The engagement approved by Threats.
to live and die with the Army. It was Debated all day, until seven of the
clock at night; and at last the question put, That this House does approve the
subscription of the said Members to the said Engagement. The House divided upon
the question, yeas 100. noes 91. Observe 1. that Mr. Solicitor, Hasterig, and
many more, when they perceived difficulty in passing it, began to skirmish with
their long sword again. And many told them, they must give content without
doors (meaning, to the Army) as well at within, or else all would go naught. 2.
44 Of those Members that engaged with the Army sat in the House, and voted in
their own case; many of them carrying themselves very high and insolently in
their gestures and expressions. 3. Many Presbyterians left the House because it
was late, and some (as it is thought) not daring to vote in the negative. 4.
This engagement about six Months ago had been sent to the Commons by the Lords
once or twice, and was rejected; yet now was obtruded upon them again by the
Lords, who would not acquiesce; contrary to the Privileges of the House of
Commons. 5. This approbation thus surreptitiously gotten, is equal to a Pardon
sued forth before conviction, which in law amounts to a confession of the
crime. 83. The temper of the House tried, had the engagement not been approved,
a new Charge from the Army intended.
6. The Agitators tell you in Derby-house projects, p. 7. That this engagement
was sent down to the Commons to try the te^per of the House, and if the House
had not approved of the Engagement, the resolution of their secret Council was
to fly to their Arms, and make a new Charge against their principal Opposers;
for they acknowledge amongst themselves, that they Rule by power only, and that
the House of Commons is no longer theirs then they overawe them, and that they
fear the Critical day will come which will discover the Parliament to be no
longer theirs then while they have a force upon it.

As men ready to sink, embrace every shadow of help, and catch hold of leaves,
twigs, and bulrushes, to support them: so these desperate and purblind
Projectors, having engaged themselves in a way of Tyranny, out of which, they
can find no issue; lay hold of frivolous inventions to peer up from time to
time their ill laid designs, like the man in the parable that patched up his
old Garment with new cloth, 84. A project to unite all Interests.
which breaking out again left the rent wider then it was before.

Their last project was to unite all interests in the Houses, City and Army: To
which purpose Cromwell (the heaviest, basest and most ridiculous Tyrant that
ever our noble Nation groaned under) made a Speech in the House of Commons: to
which was answered, That the Members were chosen and trusted by the people to
pursue on common interest, which was, the common good, the Safety and Liberty
of the people: and whosoever had any peculiar interest eccentricke from that,
was not fit to sit in that Assembly, and deserved to be called to a strict
account by those that trusted him.

Observe that the extent of this project was to conjoyne these three interests
for upholding the greatness of the Grandees, in the Parliament, City, and
Army; for in all three the vulgar multitude, and the more modest and honest
sort, are but in the same condition with other men: The Parliament bearing the
Authority, the Army the Sword, and the City the Purse.

The first shall be the Taskmasters, and impose Tribute.

The second, the Sheriffs, or rather Free-booters, and leavy it by distress.

And the third, the Brokers to receive it, and buy it off.

But it pleased God to bestow so much providence and integrity upon the City,
that when upon Saturday, 8. April, 1648. Cromwell and his fellow Grandees
offered this temptation (at a Common Council) to them;

The City grew wiser then our first Parents, and rejected the Serpent and his
subtilties, in so much that Cromwell netled with the affront, called his
Solicitor Glover to account by what authority he had offered the restitution of
their Tower and Militia, and the enlargment of their accused Aldermen: who
answered, he did it by his authority and delivered him a Warrant to that
purpose signed by Sir Tho: Fairfax. Oliver Cromwell, Mr. Solicitor, and young
Sir Henry Vane: which Cromwell had the impudence to put in his pocket.

Cromwell had felt the pulse of the City long before by his Agents Glover and
Watkins, 85. A device to put the Apprentices into a Tumult.
and found them averse from complying with him: wherefore (being a man of an
early as well as an implacable malice) he (by advice of the Committee of
Derby-house) cast about with the schismatic Lord Mayor Warne^, (he that
raised the ridiculous Tumult at Christmas about Rosemary and Bays: a man that
had been chosen Mayor by power of Parliament (out of course) to carry on the
design of the Faction) and with the Lieutenant of the Tower how to put the
City into some distemper, of which they might take advantage. The Citizens were
well acquainted with their juggling tricks, they had no hopes to work upon them:
wherefore they contrived how to put a provocation upon the silly Apprentice
Boys, and put them forth into some rash action, of which they might make use
to carry on their designs against the whole City: wherefore upon Easter Day,
1647. in the evening some few Apprentices playing in Finnisbury fields, some
Soldiers were sent to drive them away; which they did, and imprisoned some of
them for not readily obeying: Upon Sunday following, 9. April, diverse
Apprentices being at play (according to custom) in Moore fields, the Mayor
sent Captain Gale (one of the new Captains of the Hamlets, a Silke-Throster
and a Tub-preacher, and one that ran away at the Fight at Newbury-wash, and hid
himself in a Ditch, as my L. Wharton at the Battle of Keynton hid himself in a
Saw-pit) thither to disturb them, with about 50. or 60. of his Trained Band
and no more (that he might the better encourage the Boys to resist him) who
surlily asking them what they did there; some of them answered, they did no
harm but only play, and since all Holydaies have been Voted down they had no
other time of recreation: The Captain insolently commanded them to be gone:
they replied, he had no authority so to do, and continued playing: whereupon
the Captain commanded his Musketeers to shoot amongst them; which they
forbearing, he took a Musket himself, and discharged amongst them, when
presently two or three schismatic Musketeers of his Company following his
example discharged upon them likewise, and killed (or as the Schismatics say,
wounded only) one of the Boys: whereat the Boys making a great outcry, more
company gathered to them, and so with stones, Brick-bats, and sticks they
dispersed the Trained Bands: and at last, got their Colors, and instantly in a
childish jollity marched (unarmed as they were) toward the Mewes, when
presently a party of Horse (ready prepared for this fore-laid design) met
them, charged and with ease routed them, Cromwell himself animating the
Troupers to shoot and spit them, and to spare neither man, woman, nor child.
All Sunday night the Apprentices kept in a body in the City, locked the City
gates, but set no Guards upon them; whereby you may see this business
proceeded merely from the rash and un-premeditated folly of Children, not from
the advice of men: howsoever the Independent faction in the House of Commons
have since aggravated it, to countenance their future cruelty and rapines upon
the City: Monday morning Sir Tho: Fairfax sent a strong party into the City,
who fell upon this boyish rabble, routed and killed many, and shot poor Women
great with child, sitting in their stalls, one whereof the child lived two
hours in her belly after her brains were shot out: a man likewise not knowing
of their coming, as he was drinking milk at the corner of a street, was shot
(as it were) in sport: as they rid, they cried, Cuckolds keep your houses,
cutting and wounding all they met; Cromwell (who followed in the Rear safe
enough, the Van having cleared the streets before him) crying out to them to
fire the City. Oh Oliver! what a barbarous John of Leyden art thou become? Oh
London! how wretched a Munster will thou become? at last they drove those silly
unarmed wretches into Leaden hall, and took many of them Prisoners, none of the
Trained Bands nor Citizens appearing to help these poor Boys, but leaving the
Soldiers to get as bloody and as boyish a Triumph over them, as they pleased,
they are now imprisoned in Cromwell's shambles at White Hall. This is the truth
of the business, notwithstanding the long-winded lying report made by Alderman
Foukes, at the Commons Bar: a man that has feathered his nest well these
miserable times, and has much public money sticking to his fingers; who when
he gave in his Account before the general Committee of Accounts, refused to
give it in upon Oath (as other men did) alleging Magna Charta, that no man was
bound to accuse himself: It should seem he had something in his Conscience that
would not endure the Test of an Oath: But he is one of the Godly, and therefore
the good things of this world belong unto him. The House of Commons (upon this
occasion) gave 1000l. to the Soldiers for this valorous exploit, and voted
1000. Foot, and 100. Horse to be kept in the Tower. The Garrisons of White Hall
and the Mewes to be strengthened: three Barges capable of 50. Musketeers a
piece to lie at White Hall for the Soldiers to convey themselves to any
landing place to disperse such Watermen as shall assemble: The City Chains to
be taken away from their posts, and a Commission of Oyer and Terminer to Issue
forth to murder more of these Children legally. The Major having kindled this
fire in the City, stole out at a window disgu^sed, and hid his foolish head in
the Tower. The House of Commons (overruled by the Grandees) Voted a day of
Thanksgiving for this Delivery. So bold are these Saints, as to mock Gods holy
Name with impious devotions to color their designs.

86. The Lord Inchiquin.
The Lord Inchiquin, president of Munster, and General of the Army there, had a
long time been heaved at by the Independent faction. The Lord Lysle, (who gaped
after his employment) Sir John Temple, Cromwell, the Lord Broughill, Sir
Arthur, and Sir Adam Loftus, and others: who by obstructing all supplies of
Money, Ammunition, Victual, Clothes; labored to mutiny and disband his Army,
that they might send Schismatics of their own party to Lord it there, as they
do here, and keep Ireland as a Retreat for the Saints: for the better
effecting whereof, they had sent over many emissaries, whom they had commended
to him, to be officers in his Army. When this would not do, they printed
Scandalous Articles against him, and put infinite provocations upon him to
incite him to do that which they falsely accused him to have done already: But
the many gallant services he performed since the publishing those Articles,
gave them the lie, and confuted all their slanders; at last (under color of
sending a supply of forces to him) they projected to surprise him, and bring
him away prisoner: So that he has suffered all the convulsions that
treacherous friends, and malicious enemies could put upon him. And lately (for
the more close conveiance of the design) the Houses sent three Commissioners
toward Ireland; to survay his actions: but (as if it were purposely done) when
the Commissioners came as far on their way as Bristoll, about a dozen renegado
Officers of his Army met the Commissioners and turned them back again. The
said Officers posted up to the Parliament before the Commissioners, and the 13.
April were called in to the Commons Bar, where they made a relation to the
House, to this purpose: That the Lord Inchiquin having made an expedition into
the County of Kerry, upon his return, sent for these Officers into his
presence Chamber, and told them, He intended to declare against the Army and
Independent party in England, who kept the King and Parliament under a force:
That he would stand for the liberty of the King and Parliament, and a free
conference to settle Peace; and that he expected all his Officers should join
with him in so honorable an undertaking; but should take an Oath of secrecy,
before he discovered himself farther to them. They answered, They could take
no such Oath before they knew whether they might with a safe Conscience keep
it: saying, they would be true to the Parliament. My Lord Inchiquin replied; So
have I, and will be; delude me not with ambiguous words. Do you mean this
pretended Parliament? telling them farther, he had good, correspondence with
all the Presbyterians in Scotland and England, as well in the Parliament, as
out of it; that he doubted not to go through with his undertaking; and if the
worst happened, to make good conditions for himself and his party. That he would
make peace with the Lord Taffe, and that he knew the Independents in England
were upon treaty with Owen, Roc, Oneal, who was a man of their humor, and
loved to keep all in a combustion. They refusing to join, he dismissed them
for England. The same day Letters from Captain John Crowther, Vice Admiral of
the Irish Seas from a Shipboard, were read in the House, much to the same
purpose, though not so large: wherein he said, he had already blocked up all my
Lord Inchiquines Havens.

Presently Allen the Goldsmith moved, 87. Allen the Goldsmith, moves to put
the House to the touch, by some Covenant Declaration.
That since the Lord Inchiquine had discovered that he had a correspondency
with the Presbyterians in the House, before they dealt with their Enemies
without doors, they should try who were their enemies within doors, by putting
all men to some Covenant, Engagement, or Protestation, etc. and Lieutenant
General Cromwell said, That being to debate this business to morrow,
whosoever with cross Arguments shall spin out the debate, and so retard our
proceedings, (by my consent) shall be noted with a black coal: to which was
Answered, That this tended to take away freedom of debate, which was the life
of Parliaments and of all Counsels: and was destructive to the very being of
Parliaments. (It is not amiss to insert here by way of digression, what I
formerly omitted) Sir Henry Mildmay long since moved, That 150. rich
Guard-Coates of the Kings, might be sold for 800.l. to find fire and candle
for the Soldiers in White Hall. The Question put: The Speaker gave judgment,
the Yeas, had it. Master Edw. Stephens declared the No's, had it. They were
unwilling to divide upon such a Question: But M. Stephens persisted; and Robert
Reynolds said aloud, notice shall be taken of him, for putting such a dishonor
upon the House. Upon the Division, the No's carried it by nine voices.
Thereupon complaints was made against Reynolds, for attempting against the
liberty of Voting, but no redress. But to return from my digression. The next
day 14 of April, it was moved, that my Lord Inchiquins son, a child of 8 or 9
years old, going to School at Thistleworth, might be secured in the Tower, and
kept for an Hostage. To which was Answered, That no man could give an Hostage.
An Hostage must be given upon the public faith, upon some stipulation, and
must be so received, by mutual agreement, you cannot punish the Child for the
Fathers fault; yet he was Voted to the Tower, and sent. My Lord Inchiquins
Commission as president of Munster, and General of the Army, Voted void, and
no man to obey him, himself Voted a Traitor: Yet no man examined upon Oath
against him, nor any man sent to take information of the business into
Ireland, and his professed enemy the Lord Lisle is to go General into Munster
in his room; and the said fugitive Officers all rewarded, as if they had
brought acceptable news. This day Reynolds revived Allens motion for putting
the Members to the Test, by some Covenant, Protestation, or Declaration
subscribed, That this is a free Parliament, and that they would live and die
with this Parliament and Army: To which was Answered. 1. That by Ordinance of
both Houses, all men were enjoined to take the National Covenant. This
Covenant is the true Touchstone of the Parliament, and so agreed upon by the
wisdom of both Nations: Yet many sit here who refuse to obey this Ordinance: I
know no reason therefore, why any man should obey you in any other Ordinance of
this nature: let us keep the old Covenant before we take any new. 2. It has
been moved in this House, that the Oaths of Justices of the Peace and
Sheriffs, might be taken away: I hope you will not abolish legal Oaths, and
impose illegal Oaths. This House has not so much Authority, as to administer
an Oath, much more to impose one: you must allow to others that liberty of
Conscience which you demand for your selves. 3. Major Gray told you, my Lord
Inchiquine said he had correspondency with all the Presbyterians in the House,
who had made their peace with the King. But my Lord Inchiquine told him
farther, the Independents were upon Treaty with Owen, Roc, Oneal, let them
clear themselves of that imputation first, before they give a purgation unto
others, otherwise what you do, will savor of force. 4. The true Touchstone
to try every man's integrity is, To examine, who have enriched themselves by the
calamities of the times and your service: and who are impoverished. 5. This is
a new device to Purge the House.

The Grandees of the House have cantonized the Kingdom between, 88. The
Counties compelled to give thanks to the Houses for their Votes against the
King.
them every man in his division protecting the Country Committees, and
receiving tribute from them in recompense of their protection; and Prideaux the
Postmaster being king of the West Saxons, his Viceroy or Lord Deputy for the
County of Somerset is that running Colonel John Pyne, who being often inspired
with Sack, rules the Committee and County by inspiration. Pyne and his Peers of
the Committee, to please his Superiors, set on foot a draught of a Petition to
be handed by the Country: Giving thanks to the Parliament for their 4 Votes
against the King, and promised to live and die with the Parliament and Army,
and desired the County might be freed from Malignants, Neuters, and Apostates;
which (in their interpretation) signifies Presbyterians and moderate men, who
will not dance about the flame when the Independents make a bonfire of the
Commonwealth. The Eastern Division of Somersetshire rejected the Petition:
in the Western Division Pyne and his Committee sending abroad their
Sequestrators, with the Petition, (and threatening to take them for Malignants
and sequester them that refused) got many subscriptions; but the Subscribers
since better informed of the danger and mischief of those Votes, retracted what
they had done by a counter. Petition, wherein they declared that their
Subscription to the former Petition was contrary to their judgment and
conscience, and extorted by terror of Sequestrators, and threats of being
sequestered. This affront stung the Committee, and opened the eyes of the
Country: as the like foolish attempt of Sr H. Mildmay did the eyes of the
County of Essex. Wherefore to find a plaster for this broken pate, Sergeant
Wild (he that hanged Capt. Burly) coming that Circuit, care was taken to have
a selected Grand Jury of Schismatics and Sequestrators blended together, who
made a presentment subscribed by 19. of their hands, which Sergeant Wild
preserved in his pocket; and upon Tuesday 18. April delivered with as much
gravity as a set speech and set ruff could furnish him withal in the House of
Commons, and was read and hearkened unto by the thriving godly, with as much
attention, as pricking up of ears, and turning up of eyes could demonstrate:
the contents of this Presentment were the same with the aforesaid revoked
Petition. Great care was taken to give thanks to the high Sheriff and Grand
Jury, who had so freely delivered the sense of that well-affected County: and
as much care taken to improve this Talent and put it to interest throughout the
Kingdom. Colonel Purefoy is now at this work in Warwickshire. Sir Arthur
Hasterig about Newcastle: others in other places. Pitiful Crutches to support
a crippled reputation, which now halts and begs for relief worse then their
own maimed Soldiers do, and with as bad success; they have juggled
themselves out of credit, and would fain juggle themselves in again. Behold the
wisdom of our Grandees, wise, religious, new-modelled Politicians, who have
brought themselves and the whole Kingdom into these deplorable, contemptible
straights; take notice of your Representative you that are Represented, call
them to a seasonable account: But whither does my zeal carry me? I shall anon
stumble upon a newfangled Treason to be declared against me.

89. Men's tongues tied up by an Ordinance.
Friday, 21. April, an Ordinance was presented to the House, entitled, For
suppressing all Tumults and Insurrections, (the Committee of Safety at Darby
house had before an ample power conferred upon them for that purpose; but
guilty consciences though they be safe, are never secure; like Cain, they think
that every man will slay them) it was passed after some amendments to this
purpose, That any three Committee men shall have power to Imprison and
Sequester all such as shall actually adhere to any that shall raise, or
endeavor to raise Tumults and Insurrections, or shall speak or publish any
thing reproachful to the Parliament, or their proceedings: Behold here an
excise (amounting to the value of all you have) set upon every light word: A
man made an offender for a word to the utter ruin of him and his posterity,
under color of defending Laws, Liberties, and Properties, you are cheated of
them all, and reduced to mere and absolute slavery and beggary: you are not
masters of your own carcasses, yet your mouths are buttoned up, you must not be
allowed that silly comfort of venting your griefs by way of complaint: what
Tyrant was ever so barbarous, so indiscreet as to do the like? It was moved
that Offenders of this kind might be bound to the good Behavior, and the
offense proved openly at the Assizes or Sessions, before so destructive a
punishment be inflicted. There are three principles in law, of which the Laws
are very tender, and will not suffer them to be touched but upon great
offenses, clear proofs, and exact formalities observed; life, liberty, and
estate, by Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and many other Statutes; these
principles are so sacred, that nothing but the Law can meddle with them, Nemo
imprisonetur aut disseisietur nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, you have
made the people shed their money and blood abundantly, pretending defense of
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, let them now at last (being a time of peace)
enjoy what they have so dearly paid for; and delay them not with a pretended
necessity of your own making, you now make all that is, or can be near and
deer to them liable to the passions of three Committee men to judge and execute
according to their discretion without Law, or so much as a formality thereof:
And yet both Houses of Parliament have often heretofore offered to abolish
those Committees as men whose wickedness and folly they and the whole Kingdom
were ashamed of: The Grandees of the Parliament and Army when the Houses are
called and full, have resolved to draw their Forces nearer about the Town, and
by that terror to try the temper of the Houses; such Members as will not
comply with them, they will with fresh Charges purge out of the Houses, and
publish base and infamous scandalls against them, to which if they submit with
silence, they betray their reputations for ever; and spare the credits of their
juggling enemies. If they make any defense for their honors by way of apology,
they shall be brought within the compass of this devouring, enslaving
Ordinance, as men that reproach the Parliament and their proceedings. Thus the
same whip shall hang over the shoulders of the Presbyterian party (who will not
agree to King-deposing, Anarchy, and Schism) as it did formerly over the Kings
party. And the Presbyterians shall be squeezed into the Independents coffers,
as formerly the King's party were, so long as they had any thing to lose; for
the whole earth is little enough for these Saints, who are never satisfied with
money and blood, although they never look toward Heaven but through the
spectacles of this world. The old elogium and character of the English Nation
was, that they were, Hilaris gens, cui libera men's, and libera lingua. But now
(Countrymen) your tongues are in the stocks, your bodies in every jail, your
souls in the dark, and estates in the mercy of those that have no mercy, and
at the discretion of those that have no discretion: Farewell English Liberty.

90. General Conclusions.
Out of these Premises I shall draw these Conclusions following:
1. The Grandees have subverted the fundamental Government of the Kingdom,
and why.
1. THe engaged Party have laid the Axe to the very root of Monarchy and
Parliaments: they have cast all the mysteries and secrets of Government, both
by Kings and Parliaments, before the vulgar; like pearl before swine: and have
taught both the Soldiery and people to look so far into them, as to ravell
back all Governments, to the first principles of nature: he that shakes
fundamentalls, means to take down the fabric. Nor have they been careful to
save the materials for posterity. What these negative Statists will set up in
the room of these ruined buildings does not appear; only I will say, they have
made the people thereby so cur^^us and so arrogant, that they will never find
humility enough to submit to a Civil rule; their aim therefore from the
beginning was to rule them by the power of the Sword, a military Aristocracie
or Olgarchy, as now they do. Amongst the aincient Romans, Tentare Arcana
Imperii, to profane the mysteries of State was Treason; because there can be no
form of Government without its proper mysteries: which are no longer mysteries
then while they are concealed. Ignorance, and admiration arising from
Ignorance, are the parents of civil devotion and obedience, though not of
Theological. 2. They have subverted the Church.


2. Nor have these Grandees and their party in the Synod, dealt more kindly
with the Church then with the Commonwealth: whose reverend Mysteries; their
Pulpits and holy Sacraments; and all the functions of the Ministry are by
their connivence profaned by the clouted shoe; the basest and lowest of the
people making themselves Priests: and with a blind distempered zeal Preaching
such Doctrine as their private Spirits (spirits of illusion) dictate to them:
But let them know, that their burning zeal without knowledge, is like hellfire
without light. Yet the greatest wonder of all is, The Sacrament of the Lords
Supper discontinued, and why?
That they suffer the Lords Supper (that Sacrament of Corroboration) to be so
much neglected in almost all the Churches in the Kingdom. Is it because men
usually before they receive our Savior, (that blessed guest) sweep the house
clean, casting out of their hearts, (those living Temples of the holy Ghost)
Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Envy, Hatred, Malice, and all other unclean
Spirits, to make fit room to entertain Jesus, that prince of peace: whereby
the people having their minds prepared for Peace, Charity, and Reconciliation;
may happily spoil the trade of our Grandees, who can no longer maintain their
usurped dominion over them, then they can keep them disunited with quarrels and
feudes; and uphold those Badges of factions, and terms of distinction and
separation: Cavaleers, Round-heades, Malignants, Well-affected, Presbyterians
and Indedendents? or is it because they fear, if the Church were settled in
peace and unity, it would be a means to unite the Commonwealth, as a quiet
cheerful mind often cures a distempered body? I will not take upon me to
judge another man's servant; but many suspect this is done out of design, not
out of peevishness.

3. That these Grandees govern by power, 3. The Grandees rule by the arbytrary
power of the Sword, not by the Laws.
not by lo^^ and the the Laws of the Land, (which was my last assertion)
appears by

1. The many Garrisons they keep up, and numerous Army they keep in pay to
overpower the whole Kingdom, more then at first the Parliament Voted.

2. Their compelling the Parliament to put the whole Militia of England and
Jreland, by Land and Sea, into the power of Sir Tho: Fairfax and their party.

3. Nor do they think the Laws of the Land extensive enough for their purposes;
therefore they piece them out with Arbitrary Ordinances, Impeachments before
the Lords, and Marshall Law, which is now grown to that height, that the
Council of War, General, and judge Advocate of the Army do usually send
forth instructions to stay suites, and release judgments at Law, or else to
attend the Council of War, wheresoever they sit, to show cause to the
contrary: And when Lieut. Colonel Lylborne was ordered to be brought to the
Kings Bench-Barre, upon his habeas Corpus, Easter Term, 1648. Cromwell sent
word to the Lieutenant of the Tower not to bring him, and Cromwell was obeyed,
not the Judges. Thus the Laws of the Land are daily baffled, that men may be
accustomed to Arbitrary Government, and those actions which no Law of the Land
calls a crime, may be interpreted Treason when our Grandees please to have it
so.

4. Their allowing Money to some Committees to reward Informers, Spies, and
Intelligencers to betray even their nearest friends and relations.

5. Their holding Honest, Generous, and Grave men in suspicion, and making the
Houses of Parliament and Army snares to them, expelling them with false and
extrajudiciall Accusations.

6. Their owning dishonest, base minded men, that have cheated the State, as
instruments fit to be confided in, and associate with them in time of danger.

7. Their impoverishing the people with confused Taxes, decay of Trade, and
obstructing of the mint, and thereby breaking their spirits.

8. Their changing and dividing the Militia of London purposely to weaken it.

9. Their not restoring to the Countries their Militia, and trusting them to
defend their own houses as formerly.

10. Their nourishing factions in the Commonwealth, Schisms in the C^^^ch.

11. Expelling learned Divines to let in ignorant men. All these are
Tyrannical policies grounded upon the old principle; That a Tyrant should
deprive His Subjects of all things that may nourish courage, strength,
knowledge, mutual confidence and charity amongst them; which Maxim the best
Politicians say contains the whole Systeme or method of Tyrannical Government.

4. The Independents divide the Taxes, Spo les, and Preferments of the Land
between them.
4. As this encroaching faction have usurped all the Military and Civil power
of both Kingdoms; so they have Monopolized all the great Offices, Rich
employments, and Treasure of the Land; They are clearly the predominant party
in all money Committees; They give daily to one another for pretended Services,
A^^ars, and loosses, great sums of money: many of their largisses I have
already set down, They gave lately to Colonel Hammond Governor of the Isle of
Wight, for his Table 20l. a week, 1000l. in money, and 500l. a year land; to
Major Genesis Skippon 1000l. per annu^ land of Inheritance; to Col. Mitton 5000l.
money. All the cheating, covetous, ambitious persons of the land, are united
together under the name and title of The Godly, the Saints, etc. and share the
fat of the land between them, few of them pay any Taxes, but all the Land paies
Tribute to them. It is thought this Faction, their under-Agents and Factors
have cost this Commonwealth above 20 millions never laid forth in any public
service. Nay, the Treasurers and Publicans of this Faction have clipped and
washed most of the money that comes into their fingers before they pay it forth,
knowing that any money that comes out of their fingers will be accepted; two
Goldsmiths are thought to be dealers this way, yet they lay the blame on the
Scottish Army, as the Cuckoo lays her brood in other nests.

5. Having thus imped their wings for flight, 5. The Independents provided of
Places of retreat to fly to.
they have provided themselves of places of retreat in case they cannot make
good their standing in England; Ireland is kept unprovided for, that they may
find room in it when necessity drives them thither. If their hopes fail in
Ireland, they have New England, Bermudas, Barbadas, the Carybi Isles, the Isle
of Providence, Eleutheria, Lygonia, and other places to retreat to, and lay up
the spoils of England in: nay, they usually send chests and vessels with money,
plate, and goods beyond Sea, with Passes from the two Speakers, To let them
pass without searching: the Navy is in their power to accommodate their
flight, and by their Instruments called Spirits, they have taken up many
Children and sent them before to be Slaves and drudges to the Godly in their
schismatic Plantations: as the Turk takes up Tribute-children from the
Christians to furnish his nursery of Janisaries: and so they have their Agents
that buy up all the Gold they can get: Cromwell not long since offered 11000l.
in silver for 10000l. in gold; besides, he is well furnished with the Kings
Jewels taken in his Cabinet at Nazeby, many of them known jewels, as the Harry,
and the Elisabeth.

6. Nor shall the vulgar sort of Independents either in Parlialiament, Army, or
City, fare better then the rest of the Kingdom. 6. The vulgar Independents but
props and properties to the Grandees.
The Grandees both of Parliament and Army endeavoring to adjourn the
Parliament, and draw all the power of both Houses into the Committee of
Derby-house, consisting but of 20. or 30. the rest of the Independent Members
will find their power dissolved in the adjournment, and swallowed up by that
Committee, and rheir services forgotten: nor shall they have any power in the
Militia, which is the only quarrel between them and the King: the Grandees
disdaining to have so many Partners in that which they have got by their own
wits; for know that the Grandees have always been winnowing the Parliament.
First, they winnowed out the moderate men under the notion of the Kings party;
then the Presbyterians; and now they will winnow forth the lighter and more
chaffy sort of Independents, who stand for the Liberty of the people; a thing
which Cromwell now calls, a fancy not to be engaged for; and so they will
bring all power into their own hands. Thus having contracted the Parliament
into a Committee of Safety, they will adjourne themselves (though the
Parliament cannot) to Oxford, or some other place which they more confide in
then London: and this is the settling the Kingdom without the King, they so much
aim at: and which they had rather the people should be brought to practically
and by insensible degrees, then by Declarations held forth to them before hand,
or by politic Lectures in the Pulpit. Thus is it decreed that this Caball of
Godly men at Derby-house shall with a Military Aristocracy or rather Oligarchy,
rule this Nation with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters
vessel.

Observe that the Ordinance by which the Committee of Derby-house is revived,
and the additions of power to it, are purposely penned in such ambiguous
terms, that he that has the Sword in his hand, may make what construction of
them he pleases: neither were they clearly penned, is it in the power of the
Houses (being but the Trustees of the people) to transfer or delegate their
trust to a lesser number of men: a trust not being transferable by law, and the
people having chosen a Parliament, not a Committee to look to their safety and
peace.

7. The Army hinde^^ Peace and Setlement.
7. The Grandees of the Parliament and Army have brought the Kingdom to so
miserable a condition, that they have left no Authority in England able to
settle peace: the King is a close Prisoner to the Army, therefore all he shall
do will be clearly void in law by reason of Dures: The Parliament is in
Wardship to them, who keep armed Guards upon them, Garrisons round about them,
and by illegal Accusations, Blancke Impeachments, threatening Remonstrances,
and Declarations, etc. fright away many Members and compel the rest to Vote
and un-Vote what they please, whereby all the Parliament does is void and null
in Law ab initio, it being no free Parliament but a Sub-committee to the Army,
and living as the Egyptians did under vassalage to their own Mamaluchi or
Mercenaries: The people therefore must resolve either to have no Army, or no
Peace.

8. They have put out the eyes of the Kingdom, 8. The two Universities
destroyed.
the two Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and have brought the whole Land
to make sport before them, knowing that Learning and Religion, as well as Laws
and Liberties, are enemies to their barbarous, irrational, and Russian way of
Government.

9. Many honest men took part with this Parliament, 9. Many honest men seduced
by fair pretenses, took part with them; never intending to leave their first
principles, and enslave King, and Kingdom.
seduced by those fair pretenses of defending Religion, Laws, and Liberties,
which they first held forth to the people; and being unwilling to have a
Parliament conquered by the Sword, not thinking it possible that a prevailing
Faction in Parliament should so far prevaricate as to conspire to enslave King,
Parliament, and Kingdom, to subvert the Laws, Liberties and fundamental
Government of the Land, under which they and their Posterity were, and were
likely to be so happily governed, and betray Religion unto Heretics and
Schismatics, and share the spoils of the Commonwealth between them, and
think of enriching themselves with them in foraine lands; yet many at the
beginning much disliked that Religion should be used as an ingredient to the
carrying on of a Civil War, and that Schismatics should have so great a
stroke in managing the business: yet were pacified with this consideration,
that we must refuse no helps in our defense: if a man be assaulted by Thieves
on the high way, he will not refuse to join with Schismatics or Turks in a
common defense; the same authority that then countenanced those Schismatics
(it was hoped) would be able to discountenance them again when the work was
done. But the Grandees of the Houses (having other designs) had so often
purged the Houses, that they left few honest moderate men in them to oppose
their projects, still bringing in Schismatics and men of their own interests,
by enforced and undue Elections, into their rooms; and so by insensible
degrees, new modelled the House suitable to their own corrupt desires, and new
modelled this Army accordingly: so that the people (who had no intention to be
entrusted so far) were step by step so far engaged before they were aware, that
they could not draw their feet back, and do now find (to their grief) that the
Bit is in their mouths, the saddle fast girt on their galled backs, and these
Rank riders mounted; who will spur them (not only out of their Estates, Laws,
and Liberties) but into Hell with renewed Treasons, new Oaths, Covenants and
Engagements, if they take not the more heed, and be not the more resolute: they
have changed their old honest principles, and their old friends, who bore the
first brunt of the business; and have taken new principles and friends in
their room, suitable to their present desperate designs, and now (that they
have squeezed what they can out of the Kings party) they think of sequestring
their old friends, because they adhere to their old principles.

10. Who are the King's bitterest enemies.
10. Amongst those that are most bitter against the King, his own Servants
(especially the Judasses of the Committee of the Revenue that carry his purse,
and have fingered more of his money and goods then they can or dare give an
account for) are the greatest Zealots, those that take upon them employments
about his Revenue, and share what allowances to themselves they please for
their pains; those that buy in for trifles old sleeping pensions, that have not
been paid nor allowed this thirty years, and pay themselves all arrears: those
that rent parcells of the Kings Revenue, for the eighth or tenth part of the
worth, as Cor: Holland, who renteth for 200l. per annum, as much of his Estate
as is worth 1600l. or 1800l. per annum: Thus you see the Lion (Lord of the
forest) growing sick and weak, become a prey, and is goared by the Ox, bitten
by the Dog, yea and kicked by the Ass; Look upon this president you Kings and
Princes, and call to mind examples of old, that of Nebuchadnezzar and others,
lest by exalting your selves too high, you provoke God to cast you too low.

The Epilogue.
I Am not Ignorant that there is a natural purging, a natural phlebotomy,
belonging to politic, as well as to natural bodies: and that some good
humors are always evacuated with the bad, yet I cannot but deplore what I
have observed, That the honestest and justest men of both sides (such as, if
they have done evil, did it because they thought it good; such as were carried
aside with specious pretenses, and many of them seduced by pulpit-Devils who
transformed themselves into Angels of light) have always fared worse then
other men, as if this difference between the King and Parliament were but a
syncretismus or illusion against honest men: nay, I do farther foresee that in
the period and closing up of this Tragedy, they will fare worst of all, because
they have not taken a liberty to enrich themselves with public spoils, and
fat themselves by eating out the bowels of their mother, but are grown lean and
poor by their integrity; whereby being disabled to buy friendship in the days
of trouble, they will be put upon it, to pay other men's reckonings: When Verres
was Praetor of Sicily he had with wonderful corruptions pillaged that Province;
and at the same time the Praetor of Sardinia being sentenced for depeculating
and robbing that Province, Timarchides, Verres correspondent at Rome, writ a
very anxious Letter to him, giving him warning of it: But Verres in a jolly
humor answered him, that the Praetor of Sardinia was a fool, and had extorted
no more from the Sardinians then would serve his own turn; but himself had
gathered up such rich Booties amongst the Sicilians, that the very overplus
thereof would dazzle the eyes of the Senate, and blind them so that they should
not see his faults: such (I foresee) will be the lot of the more just and
modest men, who shall be guilty because they were fools; as the other sort
shall be innocent because they were knaves: whatsoever befalls (you clear and
innoxious souls) be not ashamed, be not afraid of your integrity: if this
Kingdom be a fit habitation for honest men, God will provide you a habitation
here; if it be not capable of honesty, God will take you away from the evils
to come, and pour out all the vials of his wrath upon this totally and
universally corrupted Nation, this incurable people; Qui nec vitia sua nec
eorum remedia far potest: for my own part, (if I am not such already) I hope
God will make me such a man, Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula
terrent; and if Moses in a heroic zeal, to draw a remission of the peoples sin
from God, desired to be blotted out of his book, (the book of life) and S.
Paul to be Anathema for his brethren, why should not I (with relation to my
self, and submission to Christ) say, oportet unum mori pro populo, it is fit
one man die for the people, and devote my self to death for my Country, as the
Family of the Decii in ancient Rome were wont to do? I have read and admired
their examples, why not imitate them? is it because (as Machiavell says) the
Christian Religion does too much break, enfeeble, and cowardice the spirit of
man, by persecuting and subduing nature by denying her due Liberty, and tying
her to be more passive then active: At facere and pati fortia Romanum, imo
Christianum est: or is it because in this general deluge of sin and
corruption, all public spirit, and all excellency in virtue is accounted a
degree of madness? or is it because of the corrupt Judgment of these times,
which makes a man more infamous for his punishment, then for his sin? and
therefore Heroic acts are out of fashion; the Circumstances and Ceremonies of
death, are more taken notice of then Death it self: these follies weigh not
with me. Sublimis an humi putrescam, parvi refert. The theif upon the Cross
found a ready way to Heaven: how much more an honest man? many a man out of
prison steps into Heaven, no man out of Paradise ever found the way thither:
Salebrosa sit via, modo certa, modo expedita; alte succinctus ad iter me
accingo.

THe premises considered, I do here in the name and behalf of all the free
Commons of England, declare and protest that there is no free nor legal
Parliament sitting in England; but that the two Houses sit under a visible,
actual, and a horrid force of a mutinous Army, and of a small party of both
Houses conspiring and engaged with the said Army, to destroy, expel and
murder, with false Accusations, and blank and illegal Impeachments and
Prosecutions, the rest of their fellow Members, who sat in Parliament doing
their duty, when the two Speakers with a small company of Members secretly fled
away to the Army, and sat in Council with them, contriving how to enslave
King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom, and how to raise Taxes at their pleasure,
which they share amongst themselves and their party, under the name and title
of the Godly, the Saints: And afterward they brought the Army up to London,
against the Parliament and City in hostile manner; A design far exceeding the
Plot of Jermine, Goring, etc. to bring up the Northern Army to London to
overawe the Parliament: I do farther protest, that the two Houses have sat
under the said force, ever since the 6. of Aug. last; and therefore all they
have done, and all they shall do, in the condition they now sit in, is void
and null in Law, ab initio, by their own doctrine and judgment included in
their Ordinance of the 20. of Aug. last; whereby they null and void, ab initio,
all Votes, Orders, etc. passed from the 26. July 1647. to the 6. Aug. following.

FINIS.

