A VVonder in Staffordshire; OR, A STAFFORDSHIRE WONDER.

Of a strange and horrible apparition of the Devil, appearing to one James
Fisher a Phrenatick near Brummingham late in the Night, in the shape of one of
his Brethren as he was going to one of their Meeting places.

Together with their several Discourses and Disputes betwixt this Phrenatick
and the Devil, to the shame and terror of all other Sectarians.

Being published as a Warning-piece to all other People to beware that they are
not seduced into such Eronious and damnable Opinions.

Being testified by Mr. John Hill, and Mr. Francis Collins, and one Mr. Peck
living in the Town of Brummingham, besides many hundreds more, which for
brevity sake we omit.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Coals, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign
of the Lamb in the Old Bailey, 1661.

To the Reader.
REader peruse this little Book and see
If in the world a stranger thing might be,
Then this which happened late in Staffordshire,
And was by many thousands made appear:
How that a grand Phrenatick called by name
James Fisher, living near to Brummingham,
Which unto Sectaries he leaned so,
That Night after night would he a meeting go;
So prone unto ambition he was set,
That after by the Devil he was met;
For which Eronious grand Opinions be
Was lulled asleep by Satan's policy.
Which in a Mortal shape he did appear,
And called him out as after you shall hear:
Though the Phrenatick he imagined then
It had been of his own Brethren,
And so Discoursed as along they past,
But it proved to be the Devil at the last,
Which did direct him by a Wood to stand,
And there Disputed with him hand to hand.
The Devil then his Gospel so displayed,
The Phrenatick yielded still to what he said.
But mark before that ever they departed,
By that same Devil he was quite Converted:
And so went home though in a world of sadness,
And from Religion turned into madness;
This book was writ a purpose for to be
A Warning-piece unto the Sectary,
Which if you read it through then you may tell
It Is the strangest Wonder in our times befell.
It is no Fable nor a fiction bold,
But real Truth truth as people has me told:
And whatsoever is writ within you see,
Three of that Town repeated it to me.
NOw all you which are the quoiners of new Religions and the hare-braine
disturbers of peaceable quietness, you which are the objects of Christianities
and the Town-talke of infidelities, look upon the examples shown upon your
Sectaries, and behold throw the looking Glass; One of your grand Brethren and
chief seditious Communrca^ts, Iames-Fisher near Bromingham in Staffordshire,
and as you read these Lines, consider what posture he then stood in: For as
the Spirit moved him, he then disputed with the Masterpiece of all your
factious Number hand to hand, bating neither time nor title to either, but
prosecuted the matter in hand to the purpose hereafter mentioned, and as the
Spirit did move him they confided each to other, though after I think, the
Phrenatick supposed that it proved at the end to be a contrary Spirit, even
such a one as transformeth himself to any shape, except his deformed cloven
feet: But as for the Method of the story, now we will come to it, where in a
smart and brief Discourse I will show you, the whole substance, beginning and
ending of this strange, mavelous, and miraculous Wonder.

THe Twelfth or Thirteenth of this Instant February, this said James Fisher
being reputed for an arch and seditious Fellow among the Sectaries and factious
people, which for many years had refrained the Churches and denied the Parish
public Congregations, which late has caused him to be the Object of the
Country; His mind and inclination was wholly bent to keep their Correspondency
and Confederacy in secret house, but chiefly and especially in nightly private
Meetings, but the Devil met with him at last, as you will hear by the story:
This Fisher as it is creditable reported by several of that Country people
which came lately to Town, that on the 12th of February at night he was
preparing to go forth, and designed for a Meeting in a lone house under a Wood
side Two miles and an half from his own house, where the Sect were usually
wont to meet, as the Country termed it like the Witches of Lancashire, he
heard a Voice call three times in this manner, Come away, come away, come away;
At which he answered are my Brethren there, but hearing no body he replied to
his Wife, and said that the Spirit had warned him to be gone, and in that he
spoke truth, for a Spirit it proved to be indeed, this grand Phrenatick then to
hasten his speedier expedition to repair to the place, lighted up a Candle and
opened his door, that if any of his Confederacy had been there to have
treated them in; But the Devil at that time used much manners, stay^d without
and refused to come in, but whether it was out of Policy or fear of Discvery
judge you, but Works of darkness cannot endure the Light, for the flame of
the Candle (as he was entering in his presence) burned blew a yard above the
Candlestick and soon went out, at which the Phrenatick fell into a doubt that
all things was not right, and thereupon desired to see his face: The Devil
then replied, thou shall see my face when we come to the place and many more
things beside, and as the old Proverb says, The Devil never was ashamed of
his Actions; He very confidently takes him by the hand, and led him such a hard
march that made the Phrenatick cry out, He did walk at such a damnable rate
that never went Man before; And very moderately required him to stay saying,
Brother, I think thou have the coldest hand that ever I felt before. The
Devil replied, trouble not thy self I will make thee hot by and by we will
sweat by turns, and though I am cold if thou cleavest to me thou shall like
fire burn; Yet the Capacity of this Phrenatick being so weak could not
understand his Devilish Mystery, but still complains of his hard march, which
indeed he had no small reason for it, for often times he was lifted so up above
the ground in an Acres breadth together, which made him conjecture he walked
at no ordinary rate; He was carried over the tops of Thorny hedges, and
through the bows of thick Mauple trees, but not a whit distrustful but that
he had been on the plain Land; Yet still he rebuked the Devil and told him,
he had a shroud suspicion that he led him in the wrong way, for quoth he,
thou leadst me through nothing but brambles and briers. Why yes quoth the
Devil, the ways of the righteous is to suffer Afflictions, is to pass through
straight and craggy places. Why truly I do find it so answered the Phrenatick,
for my Vestment is almost torn from my back. Nay if it be said the Devil, it
is written thou must part with thy Coat also. Why truly said the Phanatick,
thou go the way to perform it, for if I pass this road but a little
longer I shall not have a Coat left to my back, and several other Scripture
phraises passed betwixt them until they came unto their designed Harbor; But
it was even such as was suitable both for the journey and the Company, the
Gates flew open which way they went and mighty Trees were blown down, which
reduced the Phanatick into such a fear that the drops of Sweat tr^ckled down
his Hair: Then said the Devil, how likest thou the Weather? Truly said the
Phanatick, I am no Philosopher but according to an old Proverb we have, When
the wind is so high it is a sign it will rain; But this is such wind as if the
Devil was abroad, and upon this they arrived at the place: The Phanatick like
to a weather beaten Spaniell, most durty and wet and in a tottered condition,
which the Devil perceived began this Argument. Brother said he, thou do
look now like an afflicted Catiffe. How can I choose answered the Phanatick,
for I seem like one as had been in the hands of the Devil, yet little did he
think it had been him all this while, and therefore he opposed the Devil in
this manner. Friend said he, before we dispute demonstrate unto me what is thy
name. Why answered the Devil, do thou question me so high, who am so
generally known amongst all your Congregations for the prime instigator and
promotor of your Actions? But nevertheless we will not differ in judgment,
and therefore my name is Robin Good fellow; At which his Countenance always
was changeable, but being but a dusky and glimering light, the Phanaticke
supposed he had but jested, told him the Devil was a Liar from the beginning,
and therefore imagined he would be also, yet there is many a true word spoake
in jest you will say. But nevertheless they waved this and so proceeded, quoth
the Phanatick, we two shall never agree except thou can refrain the Church,
deny the Congregations, raise up Sectaries and prohibit the Clergy if you can.
Aye if I can said the Devil, there thou say true, but if I should refrain
the Church where should I be to make confusion in it, and if I should deny the
Congregations how should I raise new Religions? under which pretended Zeal I
do raise up new Sectaries, thereupon my friend I must needs confute thee, and
as for the Clergy they are guarded with the thing called the Gospel, we must
dispute with them at the staffes point, although I cannot say but my constant
labor is to advance your Interests upon the ruins of their Liberties. At
which answered the Phrenatick, those are the things we are aiming at, so that
if thou can throw thy sub^ile devices direct our Actions in the skilfulst
probabilities, we will maintain thy quarrel and continue up our Sectaries. Then
answered the Devil you must follow these Directions and constantly keep my
advised Admonitions: First, You must be circumspect in your Dealings, and that
shall prove a cloak for your pretended Religions. And secondly, You must prey
into the hearts of the Vulgar, thereby you shall make your Flock the more
numerous. Thirdly, You must express your selves (though with a counterfeit
Explication) and tell them you have the Spirit of Revelation, teach them in
secret corners, seduce them to fields and public places, tell them you are
Prophets, if they will not believe you, throw off your Garments and run naked,
show them how you walk in the paths of humility, and then they will believe
you are Saints indeed, seeing you are neither prone to Ambition nor Honor:
Then being numerous you may easily disturb mighty Congregations, breed mutinies
in great Cities, and if you lay down your lives for the cause I Will receive
ye. Hold said the Phrenatick, let me know what is become of those that laid
down their lives already. Question you not that then answered the Devil, but
teach you this Gospel and follow my Directions. Aye said the Phrenatick, so we
may repent it. No, no, said the Devil, it is too late to repent, you must go
through with your work if it was as high as the Tower of Babell. Nay I think
said the Phrenatick, it is too high for to accomplish, and as for to repent you
say it is too late, the old Proverb says, It is never too late, and therefore
my friend I must needs confute ye now. Let it pass said the Devil, it is but
one for the 'tother, but if you will effect the enterprise of your Ambition,
you must follow my Counsel and persist in my Doctrine. Nay hold said the
Phrenatick, if we preach all thy Doctrine some will aver we take counsel from
the Devil: The Devils countenance all this while was enterchangeable, which
made the Phrenatick in no suspicion in the least, but a rugged raged
tempestuous wind blew continually all the while of their Dispute, which made
him complain 'twas such a terrible wind, as if all the Devils of Hell were
there: Which when the Devil heard him reply the word so often, swelled with such
jealousy that his eyes appeared as big as Sawcers, that they glimered like
two counterfeit Moons, at which the Phrenatick most ghastly beheld, with a
trembling fear bowed his head toward the ground, and there he espied another
dreadful Object, he saw two deformed cloven Feet, which in a terrible sweat
replied these words:

Who is your Shoemaker good Sir,
if I so bold might be,
The shape is no good fashion, for
it does astonish me;
For the middle of it it is round,
the Toe is of the least:
And when you tread upon the ground,
the tracke is like a Beast.

Devil. My feet is troubled with the Gouts,
one Shoemaker I use,
And he that always make my Boots,
the same does make my shoes;
I travel still both night and day,
I slumber not nor sleep,
And Nights forlorn Companions they,
within my compass keep:
There Is neither Theft nor Murder that,
within this World has bin,
But I my very self was at,
and Author in the thing.

Phrenatick. Why then a Devil I think thou art,
as it seems by thy foot;
I said I would maintain thy Part,
but now I Will never do it:
Thy legs deformed every whit,
thy foot is cloven so,
And when so e're J look on it,
it seems as if 'twas two;
Besides thy prick and horns I now,
more fuller do perceive,
Thy swarfie breast and rusty,
which no man will believe,
Except my self which now does see,
thy hellish parts descried,
That needs a Devil thou must be,
and nothing else beside:
All Meeting places I Will refrain,
a Convert I Will be now,
And never will be seduc't again,
by such a Fiend as thou.

Thereupon arose a mighty shocke of Wind, that the Bark flew from the Trees
and left them naked, the Devil aspiered himself aloft and parted in a
horrible flame of fire; This wretched and miserable Catiffe in a trembling
fear and distracted Condition, continued till break of day, and then with
much ado scambled home* the Hew of his Phisognomy being so much altered with a
pale and dismal Hew, that even he was grown out of knowledge with his own
Family: He remained three days speechless, which sense being after restored,
he repeated these wonderful and horrid Relations in the presence of many
Towns people, who have testified their Evidences since for a truth, which
being so strange and remarkable a story, I have here committed the same to the
Press, as a warning piece to all Seditious persons, wherein they might view
the whole Proportion of their il-shap't Opinions, and what Judgment and
Examples have lately been upon them for the same.

So there is an end of the story.

FINIS.

