CHRIST-MAS DAY,

The old Heathens feasting Day, in honor to Saturn their Idol-God.
The Papists Massing Day.
The Profane man's Ranting Day.
The Superstitious man's Idol Day.
The Multitudes Idle Day.
Whereon, because they cannot do Nothing: They do worse then Nothing.
Satan's, That Adversaries Working-Day.
The true Christian Man's Fasting-Day.
Taking to Heart, the Heathenish Customs, Popish Superstitions, Ranting
Fashions, Fearful Provocations, Horrible Abominations committed against the
Lord, and His Christ, on that Day, and Days following.

Ezekiel. 11. 12. Ye have done after the manner of the Heathen. Jer. 7. 31. Which
I commanded not, neither came it into my heart. Gal. 4. 10. 11. Ye observe
days, I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. Hos. 2.
17. compared with Exodus 23. 13. Deuteronomy. 12. 3. I will take away the Names of
Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their name.
London, Printed for Henry Cripps, and are to be sold at his Shop, in
Popes-Head-Alley, near Lumbard Street, 1656.

TO THE READER.
WE must give out reason, though happily you may guess at it, why we put the
third Section first. Please you to consult the Epistle to the Reverend
Ministers, there you will find an account of our business, and Method of our
process therein; and that this of Christmas, for we must speak that we may be
understood, is the third part of enjoined task. But considering that Day is now
approaching, whereon the God of this world (as a world of men have made him,
and do now as God honor him) will be together with the Belly another God (of
the same make) most studiously served with a service well becoming such Gods,
Riotting and Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness: considering this time, as
we said, together with thy good now and hereafter, we have offered this to thee
first, least you should run with the multitude that keep Holy Day into all
excess of riot, whereunto you will feel your self driven by a cunning Satan
within, and another without, if a glorious Arm interpose not: For so it must
needs be, where two Gods are served, The only True One is blaspheamed and
abhorred. Considering, we say, all this we have done as you see, desiring
heartily, it may be a word well Timed, spoken in season, and set as upon the
Wheel, Prove. 15. 23. 25. 11. 12. It is not proper for us now to Charge or to
Counsel, But woe to that man that will not hear the Charge of the Lord, and
Counsel from his mouth, for so says the Lord. Therefore indeed of that woe let
us pray That we may hear this charged upon us, by truly learned and Godly
Ministers as deeply as Paul charge Timothy upon another account 1. 5. 2. 11.
we charge you before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, That
ye enquire into the mind of Christ, in reference to the observation of those
days, we very ignorantly, and then as boldly, if not presumptiously, call the
Day of his Nativity and Circumcision-No more.

Then secondly, that we hearken what God says by the said Messengers of the
Churches and glory of Christ, and as dear children be followers of them, as
they follow Christ, and those truly called Christians, who through faith and
patience inherit the promises. And for other guides follow them, as they lead
to Christ, and be commanded by them, as they command for him: For there is One
and but One, a Leader and Commander for his people, Isa. 55. 4. He that rules
over men should be just, and command in the Lord; But be that at his peril.
Look we well to this, that we obey in the Lord. The greatest Rulers in the
world then much more our petty Rulers in our Towns (we will go no higher, that
we may not out compass our knowledge) O how cross and contrary they are, and
as they are they run, some of them clean cross to that Only Leader and
Commander, stretching out the hand against God, and strengthening themselves
against the Almighty, they run upon him. Some, yea too many of them, even on
his neck, upon the thick Bosses of his bucklers. So Job describes a wicked man
in his natural course, chapter 15. 25. 26. Even so our Rulers in some of our Towns
do, what they do in Cities we enquire not. But we were saying, the greatest
Rulers in the World are but Rules ruled. Jesus Christ alone is the Rule Ruling,
Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
transgressions: for my Name is in him, says the Lord, Exodus 23. 21. If you
shall observe this with all observation, you shall do well.

Farewell.
SECT. III.
The Third Query is, whether the Day, commonly called Christmas Day, is to be
kept holy? The Negative, That it is not to be kept holy, is under our
Maintenance.

CHAP. I.
WE would promise some things here also very briefly. Sect. 1.
First, to the Reader in common, then to the Reverend Minister in special that
enjoined this Task.

To the Reader, That he may be cleared in the progress of our enjoined and
undertaken sa^k, which was: To hold this forth from sacred Scripture, That,
supp^sing (for we may suppose that of which we make no question) Christmas Day
is not to be kept holy: A godly Minister ought to teach his people so, and
trouble them ab^ut it, and heat them off from that observation whereunto they
will feel themselves driven by a cursed thing within them. Indeed we hold to
this, That he ought and must drive his people as he can from the observation of
those Times, which have not the impression and stamp of God upon them. But this
we shall not meddle with here, ^eferring it to its proper place, the fifth
Section. This only, as we said, falls under our maintenance here, [That the
Day is not to be kept holy;] And if we are able to make good this Negitive,
then you may think we have causam facilem, no hard task in our hand, to clear
this from Scripture, That a godly Minist^r must tell his people so, as
aforesaid; and shall we doubt not, through Divine Assistance, be fully cleared
hereafter in the progress of our undertaken task. So much to thee Reader.

And nextly to your self. Sir, Before we enter upon the debate, Sect. 2.
and to maintain our undertaking, we hold it our duty, to clear you as much as
we can in this matter. And where we cannot, though we do what we can, there we
will leave you to God to clear your self before him. This we must speak out for
your clearing. That you did not honor this day, while you were amongst us,
with a Sermon, or any other service upon that day, though importuned so to do,
as a sottish, brutish people use to do. That is all we can say for you; that
which you say now, makes against you, as we suppose, and now falls under
debate, for you say, That holy men have done it, kept the day holy, and have
maintained their doings in their writings: And therefore you conclude, That
other matters are to be handled, and that point of observation, as to that day,
not to be dealt in before the people, (let them alone with their customs) It
is a controverted point, holy men are for the observation of that day, and holy
men against it; Let it be left in Medio, speak neither for it nor against it,
medio tutissimus ibis; this is your advice, and we judge it not, but thank you
for it. Your intentions may be holy, your ends pure before your own eyes, and
the eyes of others; And all that is nothing before God, unto which Master you
stand or fall: It is not what our intentions are, but what the word of
institution is, for that carries it against all the godly and learned men of
the world; suppose them to be all and every one for the keeping holy that day;
whereas we are verily persuaded, you will not find two godly men now adays,
maintaining the Observation of that Feast, either by their writing, preaching
or practice: yet if you should spy out two, we humbly conceive, they are too
many by two. And we could wish that you had not spoken a word in favor of it;
for the least word whispered in favor of an Idol Day, should be as much
avoided by a true Christian, we think, as was the offering the least Grain of
Incense to an Idol God, by the faithful Antipasses [Anti-papas] in days of old,
whereof you have read so much, that we will Brightman.
tell you nothing.

And we are persuaded we could hold this forth (had you commanded us, but you
considered our strength, and dealt with Sect. 3.
us as with children in understanding; as indeed we are yet) able to clear this
from them uth of God, That this name Christmas is not to be named, unless with
indignation by a godly man, truly and indeed such an one, godly in Christ
Jesus. Let 1 Cor. 5. 1. Hos. 2. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 20. See Cartw. p. 576. 577.
us, say the Rhemists, which is their council also, " Keep to our forefathers
words, and we shall keep to our forefathers faith, [and be as Idolatrous still
as they were.] Keep up the Name of Christmas, (that is one of their old words)
and we shall keep up [the superstitious Customs, and Heathenish practices in
use among us at that time.] Do not you, (if our advice may take We must do what
possibly we can, that the very names, terms and phrases that Idolators have
used might be utterly abolished, and remembered no more, Exodus 23. 13 Deuteronomy. 12.
3.
place) a low your people the Name, for then they will allow themselves the
thing, those Idolatrous services, customs and practices, before spoken of: If
you will allow them an Inch here, as we say, indulgeban: sibi latius, they will
take an El. Certainly, Ministers should not suffer us to come nigh Popery, they
should bid us keep from the Verges of it; to abstain from the least appearance
of that great evil. Ye must restrain us in our provoking ways, ye must tell us
we stand not fast, while we stand near to danger, no more then we do, standing
near those places where the Sea is bearing-in; yet if we will do so, for we are
very wilful; ye should frown upon us, we think, and restrain us what ye can;
assuring us, nothing is little or small, as not in Gods Law, so nor in His
Worship, nor in any of those matters which lead on to the greatest and highest
provocations. And if ye shall not so do, ye bid us, upon the matter, to speak
and do as we have done: Name the 25. of December as superstitiously, as we
commonly name the Lords day qui non velat cum potest jubet.
heathen^shly: Ye must estrain us in these things, else ye bid us do it;
Keep-on your Heathen^sh Names and Customs still. Let us, say the R^emists. in
the place ^ore mentioned; take heed of the words of Heretics (they mean those
truly godly, all over Act. 24. 14.
the world, who can speak of that Heresy as Paul did:) And should not we say
as much of those Heretics indeed, whose Religion or way of Worship is but mere
error, as their head 2 These. 2. 3. merum s^^lus. Bez.
and body is but mere wickedness? Let us take heed of the words of these
Heretics, else we shall never come off clearly from their works. You teach
your people, we think, we know it is your duty, That it is not enough that they
forb^a an Oath, but that they must fear an Oath; not only not to commit sin,
but to hate, yea to abominate so to do; so i^ this case, not enough not to
observe this Idol-day, but to loath to do it: We cannot choose or like that we
do not love; not leave or decline that we do not loath. We must hate every
false way, because God hates it: And with that excellent R^ler, contend
against those that will walk therein, stirring up our selves against
superstious persons and practices, as all that truly worship the Father, must
do; so they cannot but show how much they love him, what zeal they have for
him, and with what indignation they are carried out against all that and only
that, their Lord has indignation against. -- But we will take no more work
into our hands, but what you were pleased, considering our Shoulder (for which
we thank you) to impose upon us, The maintaining the Negative, That Christmas
Day, (commonly so called by common and unclean tongues) is not to be kept holy,
that the people are to be told so, and beaten off from it, and no delay to be
used in these matters, shall be we hope cleared, as was said in its respective
place.

CHAP. 2.
Here we must excuse you again; you like not that ancient plea for the
observation of the day, old customs, Sect. 1.
our Grand-parents kept this day, so did our parents, and so have we done
hitherto, and so we are resolved to do while we live, stubbornly enough. This
is too rotten to hold, and as will and sawey reasonning it is, as theirs was,
what our Fathers did, we will do, how abominable soever their doings were. And
yet the little you have said, for the observation of the Day, has no little
force in it, being taken from Scripture, if your Allegation be right: that
which you may borrow from the writings of holy men, and from their practice
also, is of little or no account at all with us, though something may be said
to it in due place: we would deliver our selves from your Scripture allegation.
First, for that will bear you out if any will, Scripture proof being sure proof.

Your Scripture (we call it yours, for possibly it may be mistaken, Sect. 2.
if not perverted; and male dum recitas incipit esse tuus) is taken out of John
10. 22. And it was at Jerusalem, the Feast Ioh. 10. 22. Vid. Bez.
of Dedication, and it was Winter, and Jesus walked in the Temple, etc. Now as
we conceive, here is the very Hinge ^^ the Argument from our Lords example,
observing that novel Feast (for that is the force of the word, is of the
Argument.) Our Lord and Savior observed that Feast, a novel thing, and merely
of man's institution; Therefore may we observe the Feast of his Nativity. Well,
It is not a day for mirth, but rather in some respects of signing, with
breaking of the Loins; yet we cannot pass over this without a smile at least,
though we are serious for the truth; and ridentem dicere, vere quis negat? so
we say on, and enquire into this farther, we mean, this Feast of Dedication,
that so we may try the strength of this H^^e, whereon this Argument holds. We
read the Temple was Dedicated three times: First by Solomon, in the seventh
Month, 2 Kings. 8.
that was in the midst of Autum; Then after the Temple was restored and built
again by Nehemiah and his fellow-workmen. It was Dedicated again by him, the
third day of the twelfth Neh. 12. 27.
Month, which falls out in our twelfth and first Months commonly called
February and March: It was a Festival time with them, as we read; but it held
but that time, we mean, it was not Anniversary, it was not observed the Year
after, neither by King Solomon, nor by that Prince-like Ruler Nehemiah. The
third time, after it was renewed and purged, Dedicated by Judas Machabaeus, in
the Month Chisten, which answers our tenth Month, December; therefore it was
said in the Text; And it was Winter. It was ordered also that ^he Mac. 4. 59.
Feast of Dedication be kept in its season from Year to Year, by the space of
eight days; from the five and twentieth day of that Month, called with us
December: Indeed to speak our mind here in passage only, and then to go on.
This their Feast, and th^s your Feast (we make bold to call it yours, because
you seem to own it, and to hold for the observation of it (falling out pat upon
one day, would make a wise man after the flesh (as surely it does) mad upon
that Idol-day, to observe it as an holy day, and with more strict and solemn
observation, then he will, or possibly can, that only Holy Day which has the
stamp of the Lord upon it: but of this anon. That which is now to be done, is
to vindicate our Lord, going up to that Feast: And that in so doing it will not
justify us in our observation of that Festival Day, the Church observes all
over the Nation, or the National Church there.

First then to justify our Lords practice, (...) it needed ou^ justification:
Sect. 3.
This we say, That our Lord did not observe the Feast, but the season or
opportu^^^^, (...) of (...) good: As Paul, who followed him obs(...) day of
Prince? at Jerusalem, and afterward ^^ Ephes^^, Acts 20. 16* Co^. 16. 8. See
Calvin upon the place.
There he knew he should find a grea(...) of people, very observant of their
ow^ days, which are devised of their own heart, as Jeroboams Feast was, and
have their own s^a(...)on them; His heart was upon his work, the doing (...)
will; He did it as cheerfully as we eat and drink; (...) the seasons and all
advantages to do good, the manner of all that walk as he walked: He went up to
the Feast, though of man's institution; and as the advice is, spragit manum,
some good might be done, some seeds might take, as he well knew, that knew all
things: And though i^ was winter, yet he went up: Be it fair or foul, Sunshine
or rain, Summer or Winter, it hinders not a true Christian from doing his duty;
for he does in desire and endeavor as Christ did. It is natural to the new
Creature, the divine Nature so to do.

But now if it be replied here, as we think it will, That a Minister is never
like to find such a Concourse of people at his meeting place, as he may do on
that day; And therefore if all advantages of doing good may, and ought to be
taken, why may not a Minister preach a good may, and ought to be taken, why may
not a Minister preach a good Sermon on that day, and take his Warrant from his
Lords practice, going up to Jerusalem on that Feast day?

To this we would briefly reply these things. Sect. 4. 1.


It is not always safe to do what we read the Lord did, though we may urge him
for our example. Our Lord went over the Sea on foot, he could that made the
Sea, make the sea solid like the land, to bear him up: we must not do so
unless we have a more then his Example, his word too, as Peter had COME,
Again, the Lord Christ went into a chief Pharisees house to dinner Mat. 14. 29.
on the Sabbath day, where there was great Company, and answerably great Cheer;
probable it is, it was a marriage feast. Luke 14. 1.
He did not allow of the feast, nor of the usage or manners of the guests
there, nor of our feastings on the Lords day: but there he took the season to
do good, and to correct the ill, and being Lord of time, and Master of the
means and end, could remove as pleased him, whatever hindered all this, which
the best Minister in the world is not able to do, which we take to be
considerable at this point.

Secondly, we should say granting this, that all advantages are to be taken for
doing good: That as Master Buroughs, an excellent preacher in his days says,
A Sermon may be preached on that day, and another on the following day, it
being a time of leisure, a vacant idle time (which no time should be, the least
minute whereof is too much to give to idleness or sin, which is all one, the
one is the mother, the other the daughter) his meaning i^, A good Minister
should take all the advantages to do good: why then, take the season, give the
people their expectation, a Sermon on this day, so we may do, and do well too
as he may choose his Text, and handle it before the people (which will be sure
enough, if he be a good Minister and a Godly man too) to throw out the
observation of this day, their super^^itions her in, and their heathenish
customs, all that time along, (which will not be a good Sermon in the peopl^s
ears.) But if this Sermon be for the holding up of that day, the greater the
concourse of people shall be, the more hurt and mischiese he will do by his
Sermon. It is the word of institution from the Lord, that makes the day holy.
And the words which the Minister speaks to the people, must have a word from
God for it, else no word of blessing can be expected from the Lord upon it.
Gods word of blessing goes along wi^h his word of institution; So now we have
done with the first undertaking to justify our Lords pract^se.

(2) The second is, that the feast of Dedication cannot justify Sect. 5.
the observation of this imagenary feast devised of our own heart, as Jeroboams
was, celebrated as a memorial of our Saviors Nativity. Our Reason is but one,
and we a^e not careful to s^ek, another for this place: This Dedication feast
was a known, set, and stated day, returning every year in the return of such a
month, and of such a day of the month, the Temple was reformed, purged,
dedicated. It cannot be so said of this day, that it was the day on which our
blessed Lord and Savior was born into the world. It is true many have been
daring this way, and one among the rest in some of our hearing, from Luke 2.
11. unto you is born this day (the 25. of December) But how has God left them
to their own seeking? how bewildred have they been? how benighted at noon day?
declaring to all whom the Lord has instucted to disc^etion, that there is no
morning in them; no light at all except it be that which is in the grave, where
the light is as darkness, and how great is that darkness? we take leave to
speak more to this. And,

That it has posed the best scholars in the world, we mean Sect. 6.. 2.
best seen in the Records of ancient times, the two Scaligers, the Father and
the Son, to search out our blessed Saviors birth day; and after long search
(we speak it to our best remembrance, as we are helped by one that read it
thirty years agone, and so some mistake may be, we were saying after much
search) to little purpose they gave i^ off, as impossible to find it out, as
to find the Philosophers stone, as Moses his grave, whom the Lord God buried
there. Others not half so skilful, have adventured on this Search (as ever,
the more blind, the more bold) and have given us the set and stated day, as you
find it in your Almanick, mistaken as much in the day as in the weather; So as
the proverb may be verified of these Searchers, as very liars as the Alman^ck
is, which for one truth tells us ten lies. The wise Go^ befooling the
Star-g^zers, still as once he did him in ancient days (so that noble Morneus
tells us) who foretold a goodly and pleasant year, the very year when the flood
came, that Deluge of wrath, which swallowed up ^ll. Princes, (as one says)
keep State in their works, I^ all a mans-actions be level to the lowest, his
person will be so too. Much more the Prince of the Kings of the earth, as he
does not love to let the Creature look to ^ha^ (...) his designs, but hides
himself, and as we may say, troubles and muddeth his footsteps; these are as
in the great waters, not p^ssi^ly known to us; the creature shall not ken them,
least he should say, behold I know them: So also this Isa. 45. 15. 58. 7.
only Lord of time likes it not, that we should presume to know any more of
the times and seasons then he allows us to know, which is neither more nor
less then what he has revealed to us in his word. This suffices u^ to know,
when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman.
Make we a full stop there; But if we will search farther, which is our duty to
do, (search we this to the bottom^, and h^re we may ^ai^e of the very day to)
Is he born in our hearts? we mean, is he Gal. 4. 19.
conceived? is he formed in us? as our godly Ministers are: have we been in
travel about it? that the saying knowl^dge of Christ may be formed in us? till
this be we are not forme^, for Christians; we may have a ^^me we live, but we
are d^ad, And when we are upon this search, it will take up so much of our
time, that we shall not have a minute to spare in s^a^ching out the day he was
born in the world: Nor shall we regard two straws what others say of it, that
dares say and do any thing but what they should say and do, which should not be
a word or a work more, but by warrant from his Word and light there, which must
be the Standard, whereat we (...) all we say or do in the matters of God, the
nearest con^e^^^^^^t of his Glory and of our own Souls; for you know non
loquenaum est de Deo sine lumine. We will close this quickly, we have been
longer in it, because here is something of the Scripture, and from the practice
of our blessed Savior, to bear out the observation of this day. Therefore we
would add this to that before, which indeed carries much with us.

2. That this birth day of Christ in the world, lies as hidden, S^ct. 7.. 1.
and as we may say buried to us, as Moses body was: and the same God hid the
one who buried the other: And will he take it well, if we search into that he
has hi^? and is it not observable, that none of the Evangelists tell us what
shape or proportion our Lords body had; that none might adventure to picture
him sure; for he that pictureth him a Man, dishonors him as much, as if he
had pictured him a Worm: as he that presumes to show us the likeness of God
by an Angel, dishonors God as much as they, who made him like a Calfe, if we
do make him like any thing, we make him nothing. And so of this day: there is
altum silentium, ne (...) quidem, not a syllable, not a title sounding that
way. And has the Lord God hid it from us, among the secrets of his wisdom? He
has. Then it is folly and more: it is madness for a man to search into those
secrets, to pluck out that Day thence, and show it openly to the world, this is
the day. The Sun will not be looked into, nor gazed upon, it is such a vehemens
sensibile, that it will make the eye stark blind, which is ^^eadfastly fixed
upon the ou^side of it. You may see, work, and walk by it, the light from it:
but if you will see unto the body of this light, you shall neither see it, nor
your work, nor your walk, for the Sun will put out the eye that dares so gaze
upon it. And will the Maker of the Sun, the Father of lights, suffer man,
wre^ched man, to neglect things revealed (for that is the manner) and search
into things hidden, the secrets of his Wisdom? we leave this upon your inmost
thoughts. We will end with this plain saying, and so the better befitting us:
Where the Scripture has no tongus, we must have no ears.

The Scripture is silent here as to the day of Christ birth, if we will be
speaking to it, it is not speaking, but prating and talking like Children and
foole^; or if we shall think that something we Tim. 5 13. 3 John 10.
have done, we have but magno nisu su nugas, thrown a Feather with strongth of
arm. And so we are come off from your Scripture Argument, taken from the
practice of our Lord Jesus Christ going up to Jerusalem at the feast of
Dedication. This proves no more, as we conceive, the observation of Christmas
feast, then midday proves it is mid night, or mid night proves it is midday
with us.

CHAP. III.
HAving now don with your Scripture Proof, such as it was, Sect. 1.
and proved it (we think) to be invalid, of no fore, and to prove nothing but
what makes against you: We doube not, but we shall turn over that which
follows, with a lighter hand, which is, your allegations from the writings
and practice of men; for be they in repute never so holy, it is not much with
ns, what they say or do, as to those matters; the very best of them are but men
at the best: Yet we will hear what you say of them, They have kept the Day
holy, and they have maintained their so doing by their writings.

This now we take upon your bare word, as it is meet for us to do: And we shall
not here remind you what was spoken touching the Torrent of former times;
Tyranny of Custom, practice of our fore-men, or leaders. etc. bearing down,
like a springtide, or Torrent, all before it. We do not doubt but the Day has
been observed by some, with all observation, and with an honest heart: And
possibly at this day, some o^e or two may be found, we know not where, who can
say as to the observation of this day, as Abimelech in a different cause, in
the simplicity of my heart; we have, and do now observe this day. But aliquid
dicit nil probat. This proves nothing, though indeed had you not told us so, we
could not have believed it so to be: Tha^ many learned and godly hold for that
day. We verily thought that here one, and there one learned and godly, had be^n
too many by two, to hold the observation of that day, as was hinted before. You
mentioned, if we forget not, Reverend Studder, speaking something that way, how
long since we cannot tell; but sure it was before some of us were born; dark
times then, or not so light as these are now: You remembered also, for it makes
for your purpose, That Dr. Ham has spoken much that way after his manner, and
does operose contend for the holiness of that day. He is as in charity may be
judged, a godly man, as may be evidenced by his practical Catechisms; and his
answer to Dr. Cheniel, taking, as some may say, some inconsiderable exceptions
against it: His good learning, right understanding, and sound judgment in the
mystery of godliness, may appear also in his Scripture Expositions, or
Anotations thereupon, very well becoming, in whole and in part, an Admirer of
Grotius. But whatsoever he be, how learned and godly soever, it makes no
matter to us; for Man's saying, is but the saying of a man: Grotius himself,
that Admired man, had his failings some might add, and very gross ones,
speaking very much without the Book, some may say, and very much against what
he found written: So possibly might his Admirer too. But as to that matter now
under dehate, you can tell us what Answer has been made to that said learned
Man, by one learned and go^ly also, we think without exception. We should not
have mentioned all this or any of it, had we not p^rc^ived you spo^king a
little, and a little might be too much, in favor of this day; enough of this.
We have a cloud of witnesses, only mind we it well, that we follow the light
side of the Cloud, and so, according to the Counsel, Be followers of them, who
through faith and patience inherit the promises.

We must remember here your wholesome counsel, in reference Sect. 2.
to this day, and thanking you for it, speak a word to it. You would have out
Minister deal in necessary things, and not to pronounce or define matters of
doubtful construction, or things that neither help nor hinder, whether they be
so or no. You proposed also an example of a very excellent man; the oldest
Desciple the Lord Christ had in this N^tion; and we believe made as many,
gaining them to Christ, as any of his fellow workman there. We shall take it in
anon after, in its order. Truly we like this counsel the better, because it
savoure h^so much o^ excellent Tindals spirit, breathed forth in a L^tter, to
his dear Friend Jacob, indeed called John Frith. It is very good, what he spoke
once to hear it twice, with the sensible and inte^l Ctual ear both: There is
not a man in the world, in whom my heart rejoices as in you; not the thousand
part so much for your learning, and what other gifts else you have, as that you
will creep allow with the ground, and walk in those things that the conscience
may feel, and not the imaginations of the brain; In fear and not in boldness;
In open necessary things; but in things that may abide leisure, you will defer:
In unity, and not in seditiou^ opinions. We shall not willingly turn from our
scope, if we set down here the two heads of Doctrine, which he would have ^i,
dear friend press upon his hearers: expound the Law truly, and open the Vail os
Moses to condemn all flesh and prove all men sinners, and all deeds under the
Law, before mercy has taken away the condemnation thereof to be sin and
d^mnable; and then as a faithful Minister, set abroach the mercy of onr Lord
Jesus, and let the wounded consciences drink of the water of him. And all
Doctrine that casts a mist on these, to shadow and hide them, I mean, the Law
of God, and Mercy of Christ, that resist you, with all your power; and show you
Scriptures for what you speak: and let Adversaries talk what they will, stick
you stiffly and stubbornly, in earnest and necessary things.

Sir, Your savory words by way of good counsel to our Pastor, put us in mind of
those, and we bless God for it, that al Sect. 3.
this fell in together with your good counsel. Now it is a point of high
discretion (too high for us, unless the most high God for ever more come into
us) where to take and where to leave. But according to our measure, thus we
understand matters with reference, as your words tended to the observation of
that day. That the taking an hours time at the fittest season for the throwing
down that Idol day, so highly exalted, by brutishly ignorant persons, is not
against the mind of Christ, or rule given us in his word or practice of his
holy ones, all along the Scriptures of God, and ages of men: None preached
Christ Crucified more feelingly then Paul did? and none to our seeming, does so
thunder and lighten as he does against those false Teachers, who preached up
Circumcision, and the observation of days; so as he protested before them in
some heat of spirit (for as he had much light, so h^d he much heat too) much
after the rate of those words, That if they drank in those da^^nable Doctrines,
they would spew out Christ, or cast their spewings upon him. And for the
observation of days, he speaks much after the same rate; They had indeed the
stamp of God upon them (so has not this day whereof hereafter) and were to be
observed with all observatio^, holding forth to the eye of faith the Day of
Christ to come into the world. But when that day came, called by the Apostle
the fullness of time, and he was exhibited and manifest in the flesh, then the
observation of days must cease, and the stamp or institution of God before upon
them, shall be taken off from them; and a curse stamped upon those persons,
which, without repentance, shall cleave unto them that will be so daringly
bold, as to revive the memory of those days, and give their observation to
them. And to all this (which we may find through out the Epistle, beginning at
the first Chapter, 8. 9. verses) he adds, That if they did observe days, they
could not observe his words, so all his pains was lost upon them: he had
bestowed upon them labor in vain. I^deed Sir, This Observation you wot of is
not of doubtful construction, nor in the number of those matters, which may
abide leisure for determination. We thought it resolved long ago, from the Word
of God: The Day is not to be observed which has no word or command for it:
What the State has done as to the observation of that Day, is known to all
that would know: what the State will do more we know not; but this you know,
for we suppose you have read, Christ will not wait the leisure of the State;
and all true Christians have the mind of Christ, so that is their mind too. Yet
as was said in another case, and to allude to it, what should the State do
after the King of Kings has so clearly resolved the case, as to the
observation only of his Holy Day, returning to us once a Week: qui
deliberavit, desivit: He that makes question here, is a superstitious person,
past all question. But more necessary truths are to be preached first, say you:
We grant you, If there be a more necessary truth then this, That what opposes
our Lord Christ's his truths, must be thrust away as an abomination: Let that be
preached first, but then this must follow: for we are peaswaded, no one thing
more hinders the Gospel work, all the year long, then does the observation of
that Idol day once in a year, having so many days of cursed observation with
it. It was smartly spoken by a Heathen man, and as wittily, for so Heathen
Christians were reproved in ancient days, rioting in December: December mensis
erat nune anuus est
It was a Month returning once a year, before those Christians came amongst
us; but now December is all the year long.

But we will not prevent our selves. WHAT did Father Dod, in a case very
different from ours, whose precious name is like an oyn^ment poured out, no
sooner named, but the place is filled with the savor thereof, what did he?
Thus, as we have heard, (only a mistake there may be, but not considerable
betwix: your relation and ours) being to deal with a great Man, that had an
head of hair, Absolom-like, so we read (with a Lady so, if we mistake not,
garishly attired you read) seeks in the first place to hide pride from his
eyes, and take down that Idol in the heart.

A sure way sure, for if the Idol within falls, it will not stand without. This
was the way that Luther took also, he would not contend with the Popes Miter,
or the Monks Bellies; neither the one nor the other had any cars; and it were
as if a man would buffet a way the darkness: he would preach Christ Jesus the
Lord unto them, which is, as the b^inging of light into a Principate crimen
gener is humani summus siculi reasus tota causa judicii Idolatry. It is the
principal heinous crime of mankind: It is the chief guilt of the world, and the
only or whole cause of judgment in the world Idolat. Tert.
dark place, the darkness is gone, for the light is come: And yet he that shall
read his Sermons, will find, that this was his practice, as it was, (if we
mistake not his counse) omnis sermo adaptandus est contra Idolatriam, every
Sermon must be pointed against Idolatry: And truly, many a by-blow did he lay
upon e^rors, while he was holding out the truth; As a Minister may strike down
that day, by holding up the Lords. Day. And yet sometimes he, as a good
Minister may do, may take a Text purposely for the throwi^g down the Idol
before the eye, as of that in the heart, wherefore else have we that choice in
the Scriptures? Luther had to deal, as our Ministers now, wi^h no^ very
intelligent and understanding people, being enemies to the Cross of Christ,
making their Belly their God, and their shame their glory: Therefore the
people, at we now, were very horn skinned, they feel you not till you pierce
them to the quick; when is that? when you strike at their Heathenish Customs,
and their Belly cheer: they feel no quick flesh, till then: And so having in
desire and endeavor made the best use of your good counsel; we come to make
proof from the holy Scriptures; That it is the duty of every good Minister to
bend his speech, when the season is against the observation of this Idol-day.

CHAP. IV.
For the first, how else shall he discharge a good conscience? Sect. 1.
or answer his matters to God? The people go on holding fast to their
Heathenish Customs, and abominable Idolatries, and think they do well: They
never heard their Minister reproving it, or restraining them from it: The
Minister knows if he knows any thing in these matters, whence our Feasts (as
the days of the week, and months of the year, commonly called) had their first
rise, ground or original. The first of November, a memorial of all their Gods;
which sounded not well in the ears of those that were newly b^come Christians:
change therefore the name, and for Gods say Saints; and keep your Feasts still,
In December they had their Saturnalia, and eight days to celebrate their Feast;
but being newly turned from Paganism, they must not keep the Feast as they did
before, to the honor of Saturn, but of Christ, (should we mention these things
and not with indignation?) and to gratify them further upon that score, they
should have four days added to the number; before but eight, now twelve, very
pleasing to the people then, as now: for who ever heard them say, as of the
Lords Day, what a weariness? It is not pleasing to us to proceed to tell you
these matters which you must know much better then some of us, though you have
read but only Poludore Virgil, suffiseth it to know, That these Fests are
Heathenish not Christian: And so it has been observed over since in an
Heathenish manner, quite c^ntrary, and shaming Christians; n^y they were a
shame to the very Heathen too, the better part of them, and the more mo^alized
men: for one among the rest you know, says ^hus of them: Christians are mad
once a year, that is in the Month of December; nay, they are so habi^u^^ed to
a ranting fashion that Month, that they are scarce sober all the year after:
December was but one Month, now it is a year; it has been spoken twice, that
ye might hear it once, and ^ell the people the very truth in this matter, That
they honor the Devil so devou^ly at that time, that they cannot cease from his
worship, no more then he or they (...) cease from sin all the year after. We
will supply you with an Argument or two more since you have put this service
upon us whereby to throw down this Idol day.

Hear how the people cry it up? It is certainly a day of their Sect. 2.
own, as their sin is, they like it so well; were there any thing of God in it,
we mean, had it Gods stamp upon it, how would they abhor it! how would they
rise up in indignation against it? as they do against the observation of the
Lords Day? The Ruler in the Country Town, or City, may (we hear they did not)
save his breath in forbidding marketting on that Idol day: (clean contrary,
that December, 1652. resolved by the Parliament, that the Marqu^ts be kept to
morrow, being the 25 of December, and that no observation shall be had of the
Day, commonly called Christmas Day, nor any Solemnity used or exercised in
Churches upon that Day, in respect thereof) we were saying, The Ruler need not
forbid Marquetting on that day, but how hardly have they been kept from keeping
Fairs on the Lord's Day? Excellent Perkins will tell you, if you please to
consult with his writings: would you have a visible Character of Gods way and
his Command to walk in it? of man's way and his command to walk therein?
Assuredly this is it: There is a spirit of opposition against the way that God
has set; there is a rising of the heart with indignation against any thing;
every thing that has God in it: the stamp of God upon it. But now for man's
way, a way of sin and death, how pleasing in man's eye? And if a Ruler shall
give a command for it, he will not do it sure, or if he have, he will shame
himself before the Lord for what he has done; for he that rules over men,
must be just, command and do just things: I but if he do command such a thing,
we will (that have not another spirit) follow the Commandment: Non jubentur
Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 1. dec. l. 1.
dura non prohibenter impura, no hard things are commanded no unclean things
are forbiden: to use Aug. words, sit down to eat, and drink, and rise up to
play; what more pleasing or desirable to flesh and blood? Indeed we need not a
command for it, our natural course is to run from God, as the stream runs from
the Fountain: but when we have a commandment for it, as so daring man may be:
then we are carried storm-like, or like a mighty Torrent, wind and tide with
us: And now if an Almighty Hand give us no check by the way, we shall arrive at
our own place, as soon as the stream will be at its Center the Sea; for we have
but a velliety, a faint will or wish Heavenward: The will in the strength and
power of it, bears us down Hell-wa^d: The Argument is strong and will hold:
There is nothing of God in the observation of this Day, for the men of the
world, of a national Church there (who have nothing to plead for their
Christianity, but that they were born Christians, being bapiz^d presently after
they were born) without Christ, Aliens from the Covenant, strangers to the
promises without hope surely set and settling, without God in the world, these
men of the world observe this Day; there is nothing of God in it, for what is
of God they abhor, their hearts are carried out in opposition against it: But
it is of the will of man and of the flesh, and most pleasing to the flesh,
Feasts and merry m^^tings are: It is not of God, but of him that is the god of
the world, and rule^ in the darkness of the world, mightily in the children of
disobedience: What is of God, we mea^^ every Commandment of God: jubet dura, he
commands hand things, grievous to be born, yea impossible to flesh and blood:
They will not move it with one of their fingers, i. e. not practice them in the
least degree, being yet not subdued, not conquered, The carnal mind, the
godli^ess thereof, the most excellent thing there, is (...)
enmity against God, it deadly hates and monstrously opposes Romans 8. 7. (...)
See Beza, Mr. P. G.
God: nay the word is plural, enmities against God, importing as one says,
multiplied perverseness. As there are many excellencies in God for man, so there
are many enmities in man against God, enmities against all the Atitibutes of
God, enmities against all the Ordinances of God: so many commands, so many
enmities, says Salvian: enmities against all the actings of God in the world.
The spirit of man from his birth, is bitterly bent and utterly turned against
God: he does act up his spirit in rebellion against God, blessed for ever: nor
is it possible to be otherwise till this enmity be slain; and so it follows,
This carnal mind is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; for
the Law of God prohibet impura, it forbids all impurity, be ye separate from
among them, and touch not the unclean thing. Thus we have the distinguishing
Character, what is of God, what is of Man. The heart rises up with
indignation, against that which is of God. It runs out with the Commandments of
man, these never put the flesh to cost.

CHAP. V.
Quest. THen happily it may be said, are not fasting days, and Sect. 1.
thanksgiving days (loquendum est cum vu^go) appointed by man? and being so
appoin^ed do not these command observation from men?

Answ. Surely yes, when it is appointed of God, that men A Governor is not
imperious, but where his command is injurious, nor is there pride, but when due
discipline is neglected and contemned. Austins Latin englished by Mr. P. G.
206.
should appoint such days, fasting days, wherein to afflict the soul before God
for all we have done against him: And feasting days called good days in
Scripture, wherein to lift up the high praises of our God for the riches of his
goodness toward us all, bu^ (in special) for the wonderful Salvations he has
wrought for his Church, so that in all this we do not more obey man then God:
The State we mean, our Ruler or Rulers there, may and ought appoint a set and
stated day, whereon to afflict our souls before God; and a day also whereon to
rejoice, before him. But then they must eye and ^bserve well Gods providence,
call^ng them forth to all this. And so here humbly to give our opinion, being
called f^rth unto it, and pe^^wasion in this matter, we are persuaded that our
excellent Buroughs was right in this thing, That no Christian State should
appoint a day once every year (much less once a month) to be a fasting day or
a feasting day; and he gives his reason, because they do not know, bu^ God may
call them to rejoicing upon that day, which they have appointed for mourning.
All that the Rulers can do is this, when God calls to fasting, they must
appoint days of fasting; and when God calls to rejoicing, they must appoint
days of rejoicing.

Quest. Why then is not (for we must tell you that we have Sect. 2.
heard to justify the observation of this f^stival day) the five and twentieth
of December, rightly appointed by man? and to be observed by us; thereon to
give thanks to God the Father for the marvelous R^d^mp^ion wrought for us by
his Son Christ Jesus the Lord? I^ is always seasonable to give thanks to God
for this unspeakable gift, and wonderful Salvation wrought by him; Is it not?

Answ. 1. It is so; But why o^ce in the year, which is seasonable, yea r^quired
of us (as we shall hear presently) every day? do we put no difference betwixt a
temporal Savior as Joshuah was, and all those Saviors were and now are, which
the Lord has caused to come up on mount Zion, to jude the mount of Esau? and
him that is the Eternal Savior, and everlasting Redeemer? no difference
betwixt these? though the difference be as great as is betwixt the Creature and
the Creator, in whose strength of hand the Crea^u^e moves; and does all, and
being laid out of that hand, it moves no more then an inst^ument can that is
laid out of our hand, and now hangs up by the wall. All our prayers for our
Saviors hands, that they may be sufficient for them, will prevail nothing,
unless we pray this may be added, And be thou an help to them, D^ut. 33. 7. No
difference then betwixt men-Saviours and the Lord God the Salvation of his
people? upon which bottom God builds up as we may have leave to say all the
piles and stories of Salvation? What? ^o difference betwixt the Salvation of
our bodies and outward man and the concernments hereof, and the Salvation of
ou^ Eternal Souls? surely the people of God, the redeemed of the Lord discern
a marvelous difference here, and accordingly they behave themselves as to these
matters, not keeping a day once a year for a memoral of these things.

Answ. 2. We say, That this is an high presumption to appoint a day once in the
year, whereon to honor the Son, as if man were more regard^ul of the Sons
honor, then the Father is, though he has commanded that all men should honor
the John 5. 23.
Son, even as they honor the Father. Now to do more then is commanded, is as
displeasing unto God as to do less. The Father was honored by the observation
of one day returning once a week, whereon his people made his name glorious for
the work of Creation. And has appointed his Son to be honored with a day
also, wherein his people sing the high praises of their God for the -- glorious
work of Redemption, making all new, Heavens and Earth and all.

Yea but this is not enough, says presumptious man, the Son shall have two
days, the one returning once a week, the other once in the year: if this be
not the highest presumption, what is?

Be we at the allowance of the only wise God? he is all sufficient to provide
for his Sons honor, and for his Churches honor 1.
too; Sons and Daughters adopted in him, they shall have a day, a stated day,
return unto them once a week, whereon to record the whole hum^liation of
Christ, his incarnation, sorrowful life, cursed death, his Resurrection also,
with his Ascension and Intercession, for is Christ divided? or have we need of
a part and not of the whole? we must not parcel out his Redemption, wrought for
us, taking it out by pieces, and appoint one day for a memorial of his birth,
another of his death, a third of his resurrecti^n: No, there is one day
appointed for all this, to be a memorial of all together, the day of his
Resurection, appointed by God, as the old Sabbath wa^ to be a sign betwixt the
Lord and his people, That he is the Lord God that sanctified them, affording
unto them the means of Sanctification in his Son preached on that stated day,
wherein we are to sanctify a Rest, that we may attend upon God in the
Conscionable use of means, for our sanctification, whose will and work it is.

And s^e yet farther, how the Father has provided for his 2.
Sons honor, he has not only appointed a day wherein by his Herolds to
proclaim him to the world, and salvation by him; but also thus the Father has
appointed, That whenever we call him Father, we must call his Son Lord; and
through him and his Mediat^on, have access unto him, and acceptance with him.
So then, whenever we come unto God praying for the supply of what we want as
we are still wanting, or praising him for what we have, we must make hearty
mention of the Lord Christ Epist. 2. 18. 3. 12. 5. 20. Col. 3. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 21.
here, or else all is vain: every time we come to God, we tender up a Mediator
to him, else we can have nothing from him but wrath and vengeance. O its
terrible, says you know who, to think of God out of Christ. Therefore, says
Luther, upon Psalm. 130. I inculcate this to my Hearers, that they should shut
their eyes and their ears, and say we know no God out of Christ, nor do we
expect the least crumb of mercy, but through him, and for his sake. So now,
since in seeking he ^ace of our God the great King, we must take up his Son in
the a^m of our ^aith, (to allude to that know^ story) else we shall ^ev^r
^^e^^s face. We have daily, if not hou^ly cause to make m^^^ion of him; And
besides all this we have a stated day returning ^nce a week, whereon we may
hear a voice from Heaven, the voice of Christ in the Gospel, and the voice of
the Father again Hear Him. It is presumption John 5. 25. Ephesians. 5. 12.
then that reaches to Heaven, to appoint a day of our own, whereon to celebrate
the memorial of all this.

But now suppose in the last place, any of us did as devou^ly serve God and his
Christ on that day, as the most of the National Sect. 3.
Church do serve the Devil on that day, and the twelve days following. Suppose
it so, we did pray to God, and praise God all day long, and night also (oh how
devout are we on the birth day of ou^ bl^ssed Savion^^!) suppose it so, as
doub^less such devout persons men and women, there may be not a few more devour
that day then any day: ^or it is a day devised of our own hearts: we will be
devout on that day, how d^ssolu^e so^ver on the L^rds day: the manner of these
d^vout ones, they will do no manner of work on this day; as they say, the Bird
will no carry a straw to i^s nest on Ascension day, it will on the Resurrection
day, though it mour^ all good Friday. But as we were saying, suppose it so, we
were as devoue as devotion it self ou^ that day, o^ on some of the twelved
days following. Hear what that excellently Learned Man D. Owen says, for it
is not possible to find words more fit for our purpose. The most stopendious
endeavors of men, the most laborious drudgery of their Souls in duties Page
230.
not commanded, are so far from obedience, that they are as high rebellions
against God, as they can possibly engage themselves into.

CHAP. VI.
We will now offer four things to your considerati^n, hoping you will allow
them some weight in your seriour thoughts.

God has abolished his own d^yes, Jewish we mean, all those festivals that had
his own stamp of institution upon them. And Sect. 1.
can we think, and think like men, that he will give liberty to man to set up
other days, as they did their Idols of old according to their own
understauding? If this could be imagined, that upon Gods abolishing his own,
men should have liberty to set up theirs, then the Christians were under a more
heavy bondage and grievous paedagogue, then ever the Jews were: 'for it is
better to have an hundred days of Gods 'appointment, Upon Hos. 2. 403.
then one of man's: it is more honorable said excellent Buroughs.

Consider whether the rising of this day in the heart, as to the Sect. 2.
observation of it, be not the sinking of the Lords day; we mean whether the
observers of this day; are not most notorious profaners of the Lords day? and
from both the horrible contempt Sect. 3.
and profanation of the Lords day; and more then heathenish Bad joy strips God
of all. No evil carries the heart so totally from God as evil joy. It carries
away the heart, and every heart string. A man is very heartily, very totally
wicke^, every faculty, every sinnew stretch themselves to sin when sinrul
injoys. Mr. Lockr. Col. 1. p. 234.
observation of this day, whether a deluge of damnable errors and pernicious
opinions threatening a d^luge of wrath be not broken in upon us.

Be pleased to consider whether the Devil be served by us so affectedly, so
zealously, so industriously, so warrantably (as the people think, taking a
command from men, and their own lust for a law) any season of the year, as at
this season? Not to tell you the observation of the Heathen, which was hinted
before, do men and women so exceed in the pleasures of sin, in rioting and
drunkenness, in chambering and wontonnesse, in all excess of wickedness, as
they do at this time you call Christmas? It is true, the Lords day is
fearfully profanned, as if it had its name from the name Bacchus, which was
Plutarchs conceit, that signifies to live jovially, as we say, and to speud the
day riotously, and in mad merriment. Yet they only so spend the Lords day,
making it the Devils day, who are mad upon that Idol day, making it as to their
observation of it, the Lords day. So true is that saying, we are marvelously
pleased with our own inventions, specially those that pleases flesh (as seldom
or never do we invent that which crosses the flesh, unless upon an after
advantage, which to our seeming, shall reach as high as heaven, and so may
cross the flesh at present, in hope of after glory, the meritorious product of
that Cross.) You may have read also what a Child in years, but a Man in
understanding has written. Man's idle time Mr. Ven^ing.
is the Devils working time; he does most when men do least. For as holy
Latimer said after his manner, The Devil has more service done him in one day
we call holy, then in many working days. Therefore in the last place,

Consider what you may have read, That a whole National Church (how is ours
declined now, and tantum non unchurched Sect. 4.
her self) some hundred years ago, appointed a solemn Fast upon those very
days; we foolishly without a Scripture warrant, call the birth and
circumcision day of Christ, because of the notorious abuses, heathenish
customs, and dam^^ble usages wont to be upon those days; we strange that they
saw more clearly in their midnight then we do in our midday; Are we not dark
with light? we proceed to tell you our hope, and so to an end of this matter.

CHAP. VII.
WE believe Sir by this time, you see cause enough to improve all your
Rhetoric among your people, for the throwing down of this Idol day. Yet if you
have not enough, we will make bold to remember you one thing more, and so draw
to a close, we read the Jews some of them, put this question to themselves:
What should that sin be, which provokes God more against us then ever he was
provoked? surely said they, there is some greater sin then we yet have
committed, but we cannot find any offense beside the killing of Christ, to be
a greater offense then Idolatry: surely then the great sin is the rejecting and
crucifying the Son of God. If we should put this Question to our selves, what
is the sin which provokes God more against us then ever he was provoked? Judge
you whether this must not be the answer. We reject Christ in the offers and
tenders of the Gospel, yet pretend to receive him at the Lords Table; We have
no appetite, no desire after him at the hearing place; but a Dogs appetite we
have to the bread on his Table, representing his sacred body there. Again, we
worship him according to our own understanding; we for the most part all the
National Church over, and in every parochial Church there, put all the
dishonours upon the Lord Christ, and his only holy day, such a Church are we,
so notorious for our brutishness, while yet we give honor to this day of his
Birth, as we call it, and serve him all the day long after our own manner.
Shall not God be avenged of such Idolaters as we are? shall not he send a curse
upon us? will he not curse our blessings? yea has he not cursed them already,
because we lay it not to heart? Has he not punished us with the sorest
punishment? what is that? A punishment made of sin. The Lord has delivered us
up, even the greatest part of that bulky body, the National Church into a
reprobate mind, void of judgment: we are abominable Idolaters, we Idolize days
and places, and duties, and the graces, those we have, we idolize too: we lean
to any thing, to every thing, but him whom only we should make our ^ean to. A
just judgment upon such Idolaters as are we, and now our ears are seated
against instruction. Thunder in the ear of an Idolater, a strict observer of
this day, and other days of man's institution, and he hears no more then does
the deaf stone, nor does he move any more then a Mill-Post. A sore judgment
upon Idolaters, a superstitious Christian, a ceremonial Hypocrite, he observes
a day devised of his own heart; he is more hard and Rocky then a Turk is, Jews
or Pagans are, and he is as cruel too, as cruelty it self: A bloody man, if he
be a super^^itious man, so says Luther, as bloody as Paul, while he was in his
Cell; though my shoulders are weak with fasting, yet had he lived in those
times, he would have carried some Faggots to make the fire wherein John, Husse,
and Hirron of Prague were burnt more burning. Idolaters, all and every one of
them, men and women and all are hard-hearted and bloody ones all, as Edom was,
he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all piety, his anger
did tear perpetually, and kept his w^ath for ever: So true is that which that
excellent man has upon Jer. 15. 19. Superstition and persecu^ion, will worship
and tyranny are inseparable concomitants. Therefore Sir, bend your Tongue
against these superstitious persons, else it may be feared you will bend your
Tongue the other way; and speak to your self in Paul's Language, your labor is
in vain, with your people, if you prevail not with them in this thing, mind
well that learned man's words, Docter Owen, of Tol. p. 78. in a case not very
differing. Your not opposing here is providing you allow that you oppose not,
there being no middle thing betwixt those two. Lift up Christ Jesus the Lord,
and you lift up his day too, and throw down man, and you throw down his Idol
day also: where Christ is lifted up, self is abased, and the rising of his day
will be the falling of the other. The spirit that stoopeth lowest, you have
hea^d, and we hope you know, is best prepared to become a thrown for Christ.
And to shut up, if you know those, as sure enough you do, that lift up this
day, which every good man (we think) will throw down, till him or them, they
have no morning in them, their light is like that in the grave, where the light
is darkness, and how great is that darkness. But here is a double comfort, (1)
The folly of these is now manifest to all m^n, they shall not proceed much
farther. (2) the Devils are Christ's prisoners, and should not be suffered to
walk up and down in the world, but that there is need of them. And for your
self Sir, we hope you know your duty, and are learning it every day more
perfectly, and to do what you know looking up to him, and calling for his
spirit, which leads us by the light of his word into all necessary truths,
Amen.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line 1, for promised read premised

FINIS.

