A DIALOGUE, ARGVING That Archbishops, Bishops, Curates, Neuters, are to be
cut off by the Law of GOD; Therefore all these, with their Service, are to be
cast-out by The Law of the Land.

Notwithstanding, The world pleads for their own, why some Bishops should be
spared, The Government maintained; The name had in honor still; But the word
of God is clear against all this, for the casting-of-all-forth.

The great Question is, which way of Government now? For two ways are
contended for, The Presbyteriall and Independent: Something is said to both
these ways: But we have a sure word for it, That these two ways are but in
show two, and will assuredly meet in one.

Neuters are shown openly here, and the curse of GOD upon them.

Presented to the Assembly of DIVINES.

And the Lord has given a Commandment concerning thee, That no more of Thy
name shall be sown: I will make thy grave, for thou art vile. N^h. 1. 14 Sing
unto the LORD, for He has don excellent things; This is known in all the
earth. Isa. 12. 5. Upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness. Obad. 17. They have made themselves vile, cast them out of My sight,
and let them go forth. 1 Samuel 3 13. Jer 15. 1. (...), that thou stoodst on the
other side, A looker-on the day of thy brother; even thou wast one of them.
Obad. 11. LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. in Gold-Smiths-Alley, 1644.

TO THE EXCELLENT IN THE LAND, Dr. WILLIAM TWISSE, Master of the ASSEMBLY: And
to the DIVINES there: With the most highly honored, and dearly beloved, The
Commissioners for the Church of SCOTLAND.
AN unknown person, (and desires so to be) the meanest of many Thousands,
presents these papers to your hands, which he call a Book, having (he doubts
not) Truth and reason for its Parrons Libri, hoc nomine dignandi, in veritatis
tantum et rationis clientelam se dare debent. Ver. de Aug. l 1.
; Therefore he does not doubt, but ye will be its Patrons too; ye will
countenance these, wherever you find them, though amidst some refuse, bearing
GODS Image and superscription. For the man, you will weigh him with his full
allowance, he needs all that, and he looks for no more. So far as he dares
trust a great Deceiver, he dares say, That he has no other end in this, but the
glory of GOD, and good of his brother: That he may be informed, if ignorant;
confirmed, if weak; convinced, if froward and obstinate, That is the White he
levells at. There are Three maine Exceptions. 1) Against the Title, It is a
Dialogue. (2) Against the Author, A known enemy to Bishops, says Here-say, a
most notorious liar. (3) Against the ways of worship now: For some say, There
be two. I shall endeavor to give clear satisfaction to all this in the next
Pages. I cease here to interrupt you any farther, so fixed upon your work,
Earnestly contending for the faith; and striving together each with other, and
for other, in your prayers

Now the good will of Him, That now dwells in the Bush, dwell in your Assembly
(upon that glory let That defense be) and in your houses, To supply your
absence, and all needs there; In your several Congregations, and be a small
Sanctuary there; In your hearts, and be Lord and King there, Amen. The GOD of
Truth, lead you into all Truth, Amen. The Lord of Peace Himself, give you
peace always by all means, That no occasion be given to the Adversary to
speak reproachfully, Amen. The LORD be with you all, Amen. Take you by the
hand, keep you in His way, hold you fast to it for the Churches good, and your
own good everlasting, Amen and Amen.

By way of Preface to all that love Truth and Peace.
THat is, To all over the Christian world, for all love Peace. No; There is a
generation of men, That shall leave their names to posterity for a curse, who
love Death, set themselves in Battle Array against the Truth, and are pretenders
to peace, no more, they hate it in their hearts. I do not fear to point-out
these men, and to tell, who they are; They, who stand-up for Archbishops, and
Lord-Bishops, (I call them by that common name, though Prelate seems a more
proper name) They will maintain the Government by Bishops, and their service
in full force and virtue, as it follows in our Briefes, Notwithstanding that
there is all law and reason against it: And, which is above all Reason, though
the LORD CHRIT has taken to Himself power in all the peoples sight, bringing
these men down, even to the sides of the pit, whence they shall not return,
till they rise to Judgment. The common people lookers on now, and observing
the Princes and Nobles of the world, in this eager contention, betting (with
the Devil) and staking down Earldomes, and Lordships, and the crown of their
glory; cannot be persuaded in their hearts, That this betting and staking is to
win a very triste; to gain a thing of naught. Therefore, having such
examples before them, They stand-up for Bishops also, for their Government, and
service: And some of them, not common men amongst the commons, give their
reason, why they would have Bishops, neither their Government, nor their
service abolished; Because, Their No wise Reason from so wisemen.
forefathers were born and dyed under the Bishops Government, served God after
the Bishops manner, and prescribed forms of worship: and why should they yield
to alterations, or subscribe their names to a Covenant, touching that matter?
For these men's sakes, whom I tender as brethren, All made of the same blood;
have all the like precious souls; bought with the same price; professors of
the same faith; called all by the same name; seem to rejoice under the same
hope; look to inherit the same kingdom; for their sakes, I have taken this
pains; To show them, that will not shut their eyes, the clear will and law of
God touching the forementioned, The throwing down of the Bishops (I carry it
no higher) the rooting-out of their Government; The casting-out of their
service; The abolishing of their name. There be three maine exceptions now, as
was said, I Will tell what they are, and remove them as I can.

(1.) It is a Dialogue: and therein I dispute and argue the case with my self;
and so wise I am, I will put no other arguments to my self, but what I can
tell my self how to answer: And so I must needs overcome, as the Boy must
win the game, that plays with himself. To this I make answer first.

(1) I thought A continued discourse not so proper as a Dialogue, that the
phancie might have more liberty to work upon the understanding.

(2) I can say truly, That this is no fained disputation, but truly and really
acted; only now enlarged with such Objections, and Answers, which, upon due
considerations, I could imagine might be made for the upholding of the Bishops,
the continuance of their Government, or the name. I say again, and as in the
ears of GOD; That I have, by His good hand on me, thoroughly considered the
present Controversy, and have desired to take-in, as my understanding did
supply, what I thought could be suggested, for the maintaining of the
forementioned; That I might cast-out all scruples, and clear the minds of the
ignorant, and weak Christians touching these matters: So much to the first
Exception.

A. 2. The next is, That I am not to be be heard in this Controversy, for I
was always a professed enemy to Bishops; I answer first


B. 1. That I do not crave Audience; let GOD be heard, and Truth be heard, and
I have enough.


2. I am an enemy to Bishops! Indeed I am, and ever was (since I understood
them, and my self) An enemy to them: But no farther, than as they are enemies
to their LORD CHRIST; (I Will add) and to themselves, no farther. But because it
is an hard matter, To walk evenly toward men, neither having their persons in
Admiration, because of Advantage; nor contemning them, because of some evil
they have don against the Church; and some cloud of disgrace, which has
over-cast their pleasant Sunshine: Because of this, I shall say a little more;
That I bear no ill will to any Lord-Bishops person in the world. Ill will!
nay, I call GOD to record upon my soul, That, To lift-up the Archbishops, and
Lord-Bishops (Wren and Pearce) nearer to heaven, I could fall-downe upon the
earth, and wallow in the dust there; I could behave my self for them, as for
my friend or brother; I could bow-downe heavily for them, as one that mourns
for his mother; I say, I can mourn for them; That I can do without an if; I
cannot pray for them, but with an if. I Will tell you my reason; I have heard, and
from the Pulpit too, Julian and Spira coupled together, and so concluded (from
false premises sure) That even Spira (whom good-men hope to meet in heaven)
that Spira sinned as Julian did, he fell into that sin, which none but the
cleare-sighted man can fall into. Ah Lord I says any so of Spira? What may we
fear touching these Bishops? who have played and sported themselves upon the
hole of the Aspe; and blundred very near the brim of the darkest dungeon; They
have fought against GOD at noonday, holding a To^ch in their hand, the while:
and so came-up near borderers upon them, who opposed of malicious wickedness.
This is spoken, Reader, for mighty Reasons; The least for to clear my self,
a friend to the Bishops souls. (2) To move all to do for them, as Samuel for
Saul, mourhe for them Si non ores gea^as tamen, etc. Rev. 9. 20, 21.
. (3) And to command our wat^^fulnesse, That we do not oppose clear T^uths
n^r set our selves against a common light: for something is in this; The m^n
that were not killed with the plagues, repented not of the works of their
hands, that they should not worship Devils and Idols: neither repented they
of their mu^thers, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornications, nor of
their theits: There is something in this: and it is in fight. A good warning to
us, That we do not so and so, as Archbishops and Lord-Bishops have don; And
so much to evidence my tenderest respect to their persons, and to their souls.

A. 3. The third exception; And what way of Government now? These
Disciplinaries should have continued the Government of Bishops, till they had
established another.


B. That is against the method of Edification; The old frame must be taken
down first, and the Rubbish cast-out, before the new frame can be erected, or
set-up.


A. But here are two ways of Government Argued for; which way shall we, poor
ones, take?


B. Stay a little, and we will praise God first, Tha^, when there were so many
cross and contrary ways of worship, and service, as contrary as are Christ
and Belial; the Temple of God, and of Idols; These ways are clean forsaken,
now they shall never be trod-in any more: And the people of God are pointed
unto two ways, so agreeable to the word of God, comming-up so near to the
rule, and closing with it, That the most cleare-sighted-men cannot tell which
way comes-up nearest. I would we could praise God for this.

2. Let us, poor ones, be advised here, and be wondrous careful and
circumspect, That we do not go our own way: for this is an undoubted Truth,
That it is our own way, which does and will cause all the trouble to the
Church, and to our selves Here I could speak great words sio^ GODS mouth,
against Master Randall, and such like, who will go their own way, pleasing in
their own eye, but abominable in GODS sight.
.

3. Mark we these, that are most querulous here, and are readiest to make
Objections; They are such, who would make Divisions amongst us; They are
children of Belial; they would be under no yoke; It is their own way, the way
of their own hearts, which they contend for, and would walk therein: And that
will cause all the Trouble. Note this. It is not this way, or that way, which
the people oppose; but GODS way and Command, which is, That every man should
look to his own way, be Judge there Note, That the sacred Scripture wills us
not to judge another way, but our own way. 1 Cor. 11. 31.
, and give account thereof, how agreeable it is to the Gospel-way; Which,
giving account, we wickedly call a Shrifting now adays, and will oppose
mightily.


A. But here are two ways of Government still.


B. So they say, and so it seems to be, and but seems; These two ways are
but like two streams, taking several channells, so they run cross a little
time, and then fall into the maine again, and keep one way, a direct way for
ever Book, p. 38 40.
.

Three words to him or them, who, with desire do desire, That the way of
worship may be cleared, and quickly resolved upon. Amen.

(1) But consider, That, in the mean time, if thy heart be right, thou may
order thy self and thy house in a Church way, the way of holiness; What
hinders? 2. Thou do desire pure Ordinances, an holy Discipline; It is well;
But is thy heart fit for all this? Is it prepared? Thou hopest, Yes; It is
well; But put it out of question. 3. Thou expectest now, That the LORD will
make great provisions for His servants; He is preparing a feast now in His Holy
Mountain, for an holy people; He is indeed; But consider we, what have we
don with all our store, that abundance which we have had, specially these
four last years? Those soule-quickening Ordinances! What have we don with
all that abundance? Certainly, these were given unto us, That we might have
life thereby, and have it in abundance. Ah Lord! I remember now how Chrysostom
brings in the Heathen before the Throne of GOD, accepting their Judgment, from
His m^uth; b^nding the knee, and giving glory to Him, that sits thereon; yet
had they but a common light, and never heard of the Lord Jesus Christ, not a
word. I say not, says he, Where shall the wicked appear? But, where shall the
Gospellers appear? Who have been lifted-up to heaven by the means of grace,
yet were their conversation low, and earth-ward; how low will their fall be? A
consideration, if put home to every man's heart, will throw fire and brimstone
in thither for present, That he may escape it for the time to come, and for
ever. Let us consider, What good things we have; how we have improoued them;
not what we want and would have, but how wanting we are to what we have; I
have don Prefacing: We must hear now what God says, and would have don: Then
we will hear what man can say; God will be heard first.


A DIALOGVE, ARGVING That Archbishops, Bishops, Curates, Neuters; All these
are to be cut off by the Law of GOD; therefore to be cast-out by the Law of the
Land.
THey that have don the same abominations, for the committing whereof their
fathers and brethren, in former ages, have been, by the law of God, cut off
from the earth; These ought, by the law of man, to be Cast-out of the Land: The
Archbishops and Bishops have committed these abominations, for which others,
in ancient times, have suffered death; Therefore these ought to be throwne-out
of the Land, by the Law of the Land.

A. I deny that the Bishops have committed such abominations.


B. They have committed the same abomination (I will instance in particulars)
against the Day of Gods worship, which, one man having committed, was, by the
command of God, cut off from the earth. Numb. 15 35*



A. I am not so slenderly read, but I know whom you mean by that one man, him
that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath, and was by the command of God put to
death for so doing; But you can never prove, that the Archbishops and Bishops,
gathered sticks upon the Lords day; neither their graces, nor their Lordships
would stoop so low, I am confident of that: And as confident I am, that they
did not commit the same Abomination.


B. Your confidence will deceive you, and you must forsake it: The Bishops have
committed the same abomination with an higher hand, and a more open face. I
say, the same in your sense, First,

(1) They commanded Rushes to be gathered against the Lords day: And when the
people should be preparing themselves to their solemn address before the
Lord, they were commanded to bestrew the Chapel with Rushes; A service not
worth a rush, but a notorious dis-service to the Church, and scorn to the Lord
of the day; But the Bishops would show their power.

(2) The same in your sense and understanding; The Bishops commanded the people
to gather flowers, therewith to plat a garland, and to set it upon a May Pole;
To the intent the people might, upon the Lords day, dance about it with more
cheerfulness. O ye heavens! be ashonished at this! Never the like dishonor
to the Lord Christ, since their forefathers platted a crown of Thorns for his
head. But I go on.

(3) The same in our sense and true construction; For you must not conceive,
that the man was stoned for gathering sticks; there was more in it then a bare
action; there was a malignancy in it; As his need might have required, he might
have gathered sticks, and kindled them upon the Sabbath day too, and have given
a good account for so doing: As a more toylesome work might have been don, and
is don upon the Lords day, then is strewing of Rushes; But there must be a
command for doing it, if not from GODS mouth, yet from man's necessity, that
has a command: If you observe the Context, this one man did presumptuously; he
needed a fire no more then others of his brethren, yet he would presume above
all; he would try the Patience of the Lord; and, in so doing, he reproached the
Lord, says the Text: his action was presumptuous, a reproaching Ver. 30.
of the Lord. The Archbishops and Bishops did the same abomination; The same!
They did more presumptuously; They did* reproach the Lord; never any, from the
beginning of the world to that day, did so presumptuously as they did; never
did any of the Heathen so reproach their gods, which yet were no gods, as these
have reproached the God of gods, and Lord of Lords; and so have been an inlet
to that fire, which now rages in the Land; They have been a means (I would
take no man off from communing with his own heart, and enquiring how willing
he was to have it so) They have been a means to make our Land a Tabherah;
Because of the fire of the Lord amongst us Numb. 11. 3.
. I demand then, Is the Law of the LORD clear, for the cutting-off these men?


A. Yes, those that have committed that abomination; but all the Bishops have
not don so.


B. You shall have free liberty, to speake-out, and what you have to say for
them, anon. This is to our purpose now; That the Law was clea^e, for the
cutting off that one man; muoh more for the cutting off these men, who were
guides unto others; had a clearer light than he had; did more presumptuously,
more reproached the Lord, than he did; The clearer the light, the clearer the
Judgment; And the clearer God^ Law is against them, for the cutting of them
off; the clearer the Law of the Land is against them, for the casting of them
forth.


A. But you have charged this upon the King.


B. Not I, The King of Kings has charged this blaspemy, has laid this burden
upon the Kings shoulders; yet so, as it is not a grain the lighter upon the
Bishops shoulders. It is charged upon the King, decreing that blasphemous
decree; upon the Bishops, prescribing the same: Upon the King, as chief
Author; Upon the Bishops, as Instruments. Woe Isa. 10. 1. Vae auctoribus
maleficiorum tum etiam administris. Woe to the Authors of wicked decrees, and to
the Ministers executing the same. Isa. 10. 1^ Trem. Isa. 10. 3. Jer. 13. 1^.
Act. 9. 26.
unto both, says the LORD, And what will you do in the day of visitation, and
in the day of desolation, to whom will they flee for help? They have defiled
their Sanctuary, polluted their Lords day, reproached the LORD of the Day. Say
unto the King, and to his Bishops, Humble your selves, sit down, for your
principalities shall come down, even the Crown of your glory. And until the
King, chief in the trespass, shall say so much to his own soul, and not
only say it, but be indeed and in truth humbled for it, giving clear
demonstrations thereof in all the peoples sight, till he says so, and does so
humble himself, his good people will be as jealous of him, as afraid of him
joining with his Parliament, as the Disciples were of Paul, when he would join
himself with them; They were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a
Disciple; This is he, said they, who compelled the people to blaspheme, and
persecuted the Saints to strange Cities; Therefore Paul's repentance was as
fully declared as his sin was, and then he was trusted, and not before. I
proceed to a second Argument.


II Argument. The Bishops have blasphemed, etc.

A. You have said enough, if you can prove that.


B. I prove it first, They said they are Bishops, when they were not; for they
did nothing as became Bishops.


A. Is it blasphemy to say, We are, what indeed we are not?


B. Yes, in Gods account, and He can best judge of Blasphemy; I know, says the
Spirit, the blasphemy of them, who say they are Jews, and they Rev. 2. 9.
are not; What was their blasphemy? Surely, we know no other but this, They
said they were, what they were not; That was their blasphemy: And it is of high
consideration, and of the same concernment to us Christians, to teach us To be,
what we say we are.


A. The Bishops said they are Bishops, and they are Bishops, (...) see them to
be so.


B. Yes, if lawne sleeves, and an outward dress, or garb, can give in
sufficient evidence, That they are, what they say they are; But let us,
according to the Charge, speak as the Oracles of GOD, and deliver forth
clearly, what they say, and what we see: It is true, the Lord Christ, who sees
the heart, and knows the secrets therein, does not judge after the sight of
the eye, nor reprove after the hearing of the ear. But we, poor Isa. 11. 4.
men, who see no more but the outside, we must take leave to judge after the
sight of the eyes, and reprove (for we have no other means) after the hearing
of our ears: We profess heartily, we mark not so much, what men say, as
what they do; We care not what they say they are; but what we see they are;
And so we will compare what they say they are, and what we see they are, and
so leave it to others, thereby to give Righteous Judgment; They say they are
from heaven; we see they are from Rome. They say they are Fathers; we see
they have no natural affection at all; bloody Fathers have they been, bloody
Fathers. They say they are spiritual; we see they are altogether carnal.
They say they are Lords; we see they are slaves to their lusts, to their
honors, to men, Time-servers, Men-pleasers. They say they are ovex-seers; we
see they over-see nothing but their Rents and Revennewes, which was the
complaint long ago See History of the Council of Trent. Book 2. Page 252. and
216. Non magis de pascendagrege, Cogitant qua suitor de orando. Calvin Instit.
4. Chap. 5. Sect. 12, 13 Jer. 23. 13 14. Ezekiel. 22. 26. Zach. 11. 17.
. They say they are men of GOD; we see they are men of the world. They say
they stand for Christ; we see they stand against Christ, opposing Him in all
His ways. They say they are Ministers of the Gospel; we see folly is in them,
and horrible things are committed by them. They say they are Shep-heards; we
see they are Idoll-Shepheards, and the sword is upon their right eye, and arm;
their Arm is clean dried-up, and their right eye is utterly darkened: This
we see, that they are not what they say they are. Their mouth was yet wider
open to utter blasphemies; for

2. They said they were Bishops by divine Right: I mean it not in their sense
now, nor as it was commonly understood, though that was an high presumption,
this was more. They said they were Bishops, and would have made themselves so,
by the same right, whereby the Lord Christ, blessed for ever, was made a Priest
for ever; By the same right would they have made themselves, Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. for ever. Mark we whether it was not just
so; To be established by an Oath, was a peculiar Instalment to our High Priest,
the great Bishop of our souls, He was made with an Oath; Other Priests,
without an Oath Heb. 7. 20, 21.
; But so they thought to establish themselves, that their thr^^ might endure
for ever; for, unto an immutable thing, wherein it was impossible (they
thought) to be mistaken, they had fixed the Anchor of their hope, both sure and
steadfast. What do you think of this?


A. I think it to be a greater blasphemy, than the other.


B. It is hard to make a comparison, who blasphemes most; he, that blasphemes
in words; or he, that blasphemes in deed. But you think this to be a great
blasphemy?


A. Yes.


B. Surely you cannot think less, for here they said more presumptuously,
than that proud King did; We will exalt our Throne above Isa. 14. 13, 14.
the Sta^res of GOD; we will ascend above the height of the Clouds; we will
be like the most High, (will was all their reason.) And now see what the LORD
has don! (for it is the work of His hands) He has brought them down even to
the sides of the pit. I argue from hence, the lawfulness of the eradicating,
or rooting-out this abominable root (the Hierarchy with its branches) by the
same Argument, which they used for the rooting themselves-in; And we are sure,
that there is strength enough in the Argument, if the highest presumption, and
most horrid blasphemy can give strength unto it, for all this is in it.

Hitherto we have seen the Law and Hand of the LORD against these men, for
the Abomination committed against the LORDS day. 2. For their presumptuons
sayings and blasphemous doings against the LORD Himself. We proceed now to
another Argument, for the Casting of them forth, because of their force and
fraud against the people of GOD, the Clergy indeed, the lot of His
Inheritance; Thus I argue;

entice and turne-away the servants of GOD from serving so good a Master, were,
by GODS command, to be hanged-up Number. 25. 4.
before the LORD; The Bishops have spoken all that they could speak, and have
don all that they could do, whereby to entice and Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
thrust-away the people of God, from the service of God, to serve abominable
Idols, the work of men's hands; Therefore, by man's law, these are to be
Cast-out; What will you deny here?


A. This, That the Bishops have don as you have said, sought to entice the
people of God secretly, and by fraud: or by force to thrust his people away
from the service of their God; All this I deny.


B. All this you deny! It is quickly said, but you stand charged to consider,
what you deny, least you contradict the evidence and verdict which all your
senses give-in unto you touching this matter; I shall call them-in now to give
witness; and I charge you before the Living God, answer now the truth, and the
whole truth, as your senses have made report unto you; first,


B. What hear you from their Pulpits?


A. I cannot answer that question; for the Archbishops have not preached these
(I know not how) many years: and the Bishope preach in the Lent-time only;
and then there is such a throng to hear a Bishop preach, that I cannot come
within hearing; Therefore I can give you no certain report.


B. Though you heard not the Bishop, yet you heard of his Sermon; What heard
you?


A. That the Bishop no sooner named his text, but he ran away from it as from
an adversary, with which he could not agree: Indeed the report of the Bishops
Sermon is very various, and monstrous, so inconsistent it is with its self,
and with the text: for though the sacred Scripture be constant to its self,
yet the Bishop and his Chaplin (for he stoodup often in the Bishops place) did
mould, frame, and fashion his Text as you can do Wax, to the fashion of the
time, or business in hand, still turning head upon God, and his Word, and
preaching not the preaching which God said unto him, but what best agreed with
the work in hand, Jonah 3. 2.
to make the King absolute; and the Bishop an absolute Monarch also. So they
preached; for just as the time served, so the text should serve. Now he
preached-up the Kings Prerogative; and preached down the Subjects Privilege;
set the Kings throne above GODS throne, and his people below his foot. This
was the chief part of the Sermon, as pertinent to the Design in hand, as it
was cross to the text. Then Episcopacy must be Asserted by Divine Right; The
Government in the Church must be Monarchical, as in the Civil state, it must
be absolute: And the better to bring about all this, They preached-up
Ceremonies, Altars, A brutish service will render a people brutish.
and Organs; and the lawfulness of the war with Scotland; the pursuing that
brother with a sword; Peace with Rome, but no peace with Scotland; What ever
was the Text, that was the Doctrine and subject matter a great while. I pray
you do not ask me any further account of the Bishops Sermon; I can give no
more account of it, than the sickman can of his dreams. Surely, It was so
Heterogeneous, incongruous, Inconsistent with, I say not baptized Reason, but
common reason, and Baptizatam rationem.
sense, that in very truth, no good report can be made thereof.


B. I believe you, and therefore I have done with your ear: What read you?


A. A very godly book, the Archbishops against the Jesuit Fisher; wherein
there is nothing sure to thrust away the people of GOD from the service of GOD:
but rather from the service of Rome; I am confident of that.


B. Be not so confident of an Archbishops book; for, as one said of his
loving friend, a blow from that hand would never hurt him: So you may be
confident, That the Archbishop never intended, by that book, to hurt the
Pope, or his Cause, but to promote it heartily: I do assure you, that the
Archbishops intent was so honest, so true, so hearty toward Rome, and so
false toward the true Church, that had he had as many necks, as I read one man
had mouths (no fewer than fifty,) they deserve every one to be tr^ssed up
about with a rope; and yet not a full recompense of reward for his ungodly
labor in that book.


B. Proceed, What read you?


A. A very pious book, which has thrust us quite off from Rome; has caused a
deadly fewd betwixt us and Rome, it is called, No peace with Rome.


B. There is such a book indeed, but you do read also, that the same man has
written, That Rome is a true Church; have you not read so?


A. Yes, and truly, me thought, there was a great contrariety in words, such a
difference as could never be reconciled; No peace with Rome, yet Rome a true
Church, it can never be reconciled, thought I.


B. Yes, that it can, though not well; distinguish the times, and persons, and
all is reconciled; The same man writ both, No peace with Rome before he was
Bishop: Rome, a true Church, after he was Bishop; The one, as a Minister of
Christ, the other, as a Minister of Antichrist. When he was a Bishop, he must
write as a Bishop, that is the point. And he could reconcile all very well (he
had been unbishopt else) and so he put forth a book, and called it a
Reconciler; which caused more than a suspicion of the man, that he was not a
fearful man only, but a right man, a Proctor for Rome, a subtle broker for
Babylon. GOD give him an heart to think of this, for surely, such a man as he
should not have given so just a cause of suspicion. But proceed; What read you?


A. Pray you do not trouble me with that question any more, let it suffice to
tell you, what I know in two words, the Bishops books, and books licenced by
their Chaplines (if they may be called books) are very many, and stand as fully
charged against their LORD, and the Lords Anointed, as any books in Italy, or
in the Popes Library can do.


B. I Will ask you no more, What you read; but what do you see; do you see any
thing from the Bishops tending to edification?


A. Yes, if edification be a building and setting-up, (as I think the word
does import) I see much tending that way. I saw Bishop Wrens Library opened,
where I saw (what do you call them?) pretty knacks, Images and Crucifixes,
etc. All tending to edification of Romes Church, and the Popes liege people.


B. Have you seen any Altars?


A. You might as well ask me, whether I have seen any Churches, or Chapels,
or Cathedralls; for in every of these places, there is an Altar, and most
eminently seen there; there is an ascent to it, by degrees and steps, as to
Solomon's Throne; Indeed I may answer your question in the words of the LORD,
According to the number of (Thy Cities) Jer. 2.
of thy Cathedralls, thy Chancells, thy Chapels, are thy Altars, thy gods, O
England.


B. You have bolted out a Truth here, I think, before you were aware; I pray
you, let us understand our selves, and examine whether you have spoke a Truth
or no? I asked you, whether you have seen any Altars? You answer me, Yes, as
many as there be Cathedralls, and Chapp^lls, and then you called them gods: I
pray you understand, that it is not the Bishops calling wood or stone, an
Altar, or the setting of it like a D^esser-board in your Kitchen, Altarwise,
which makes it an Altar? No: They may (for they are Bishops, you may not) take
a stone a^ a stock, hew and polish the same, then ^avish gold out of the bagg,
and so adorn it: though all this cost and pains be bestowed upon it, yet it
is not an Altar, nor a god yet; no nor yet, when they have set-it-up, as was
said, Altar-wise, like the D^^sser table in your Kitchen, yet it is not an
Altar, nor a god yet. But if the great man Isa. 2. 9.
, the Archbishop humbles himself; and the mean man, the in^eriour Bishop,
bowech-downe before it, then you may call it an Altar, and, i^ you please, a
god too. But if you have seen no bending nor cringing, nor bowing, nor
humbling before this wood and stone, then you have miscalled this wood and
stone, and wronged the Archbishops and Bishops all.


A. I have not miscalled it; I have called it as they have named it.


B. You are a man of short Discourse, pray you remember what was said; That it
is not the form, fashion, placing, settling of wood or stons, or calling it an
Altar, which makes it an Altar: none of all this; but the bowing and humbling,
that gives unto it a worship, and that makes it an Altar, and a god hoth Ecce
plumbatur erig^tur nec adhuc Deus est. Consecratur oratur ^unc postremo Deus
est. M. Fell. in fol. 1. page 16. lin. 27.
.


A. But now, nor Pope, nor Bishop, will grant, That bowing and humbling before
wood and stone, make it a god.


B. I think as you say, and no matter what Pope, or Bishop, Jesuit, or Papist,
grant ordeny. This we affirm to the face of all the Papists in the world;
That this bowing and humbling (no Civil worship in the Church) is a worship
proper and peculiar to God alone; He is a God, whom we so worship; or we make
it, though out wood or stone, we make it a god, as much as in us lies; while
we make wood and stone share in this worship, we deifie it, we exalt it on
high, (and our folly with it) we make it more than a creature. In a word, By
bowing and humbling before wood and stone, we make it a false god, and our
selves; I say not, abominable; but a very abomination. My Question then is;
Have you seen any of all this, bowing and humbling before wood and stone? Have
you seen Archbishops and Bishops, the great men, and the mean men do so?


A. I can give you a clear answer to your Question; for I can tell you, what I
have seen with mine eyes. In April 1640. The day after the Parliament sat,
then and there, in Paul's Quire, I observed the Archbishops and Bishops every
one, except two, ducking so low before the Altar, that their back-parts
appeared, and their fore-parts (their heads) dis-appeared: And what call you
that? Bowing and humbling sure. And what they did in Paul's, they would do in
the Kings, and Queens Chapel, and in their own, where they have the same
piles of wood and stone, with wax-tapers upon them; and Priests (with what call
you it upon their backs?) before the Altar; I call it an Altar now by your
allowance, and a god too; for the great man has humbled himself before it, and
the mean man has bowed down.


B. Had we time to stay upon it, I would bid you read on; Therefore forgive
them not; These are terrible words, but we must pass them over, and so
proceed, Your eye has don you good service; It has shown you the most
abominable Idolatry that ever was committed under the Sun, exceeding that of
the Priests in the Queens Chapel; for there they humble themselves, and bow,
but not before wood and stone, but before a wooden or a Breaden-god, the work
of their own hands. They that can make gods with their own hands, can worship
them, and with the same Reason. I descend now from the eye, to enquire of your
other senses.


B. What did you Smell, and Taste all the time of the Bishops reign?


A. As was the smell of the Services in the Queens Chapel; where was the
grossest, the rankest, the most stinking Popery; yet not so abominable, as the
Bishops Idolatry, for the Reason abovesaid.


B. What have you felt?


A. You should not ask me that Question; I am, as they call me, a layman (by
which name, I cannot tell my self what I am) nor must you ask any of the
Bishops Clergymen [The Bishops and their Ministers are the lot and inheritance
of the Lord, the Clergy, they say, though] They are as their Lords are; Ask a
Minister of Jesus Christ, any one faithful Steward in Gods house, he will tell
you, That if the Bishops could not thrust him off from the work and service of
the LORD, then he could thrust him-out of GODS house, and his own; and thrust
yet sorer at him, till he had thrust him out of the Land; It is unspeakable
what Gods faithful Ministers, and faithful people, have suffered from the
Bishops themselves, and their bloody servants; what Devouring words! what
violence from their hands!


B. Very well: Now I pray you answer me from what all your senses have
reported to you, whether you have observed any thing spoken or don by the
Bishops, any fraud, any force, whereby to thrust away the people of GOD from
the service of GOD, their good Master in heaven? Answer according to the report
your senses have given to your understanding touching this matter?


A. That the Bishops have endeavored by all their sayings and doings, To
render The Lords Day, vile and contemptible; more marred than any Day. They
endeavored also, to thrust away King and people from the worship and service
of their God, etc.


B. That is enough, for grant so much (and yet more you must grant) and then
that follows, which, being well prosecuted, will strike at the Bishops heads,
and trusse them short by the necks. But yet you must answer me more fully, and
so you will put me to the trouble of other Questions, and your self to the
answers. Was all this fraud and force, these Devices, Methods, Depths of the
Bishops, were all these but an endeavor only, and a Design with them? In
polluting To pollute The Lords Day; In defiling To Defile the house of God, and
the services there; Was it but an endeavor only to thrust away the Deputy from
the faith? To stop the mouths of the Ministers? To thrust them out of GODS
house, and their own, and into prisons, or out of the Land? Was it but an
endeavor; but a Design only, To make some of them, who would do their
duty, a spectacle to God, Angels, and men? [I know the Lord has His Reserve,
a Remnant, a few Names, who would not defile their garments; He did preserve
some out of the fire; and some in the fire; some He delivered from the Lions
den; and some He rescued from out of the Lions mouth. I know the LORD has had
His Reserves evermore; and His Deliverances, and His Rescues are wonderful. It
is granted also, That all these hard words and ungodly deeds, have tended to
the spreading of the Gospel; the furtherance of it even in this Land, and to
the increase of the faithful, the ennobling and hightening of their Spirits,
by the opposition made against them: It has made many lights burn the
brighter, the stronger the wind was to put them out. The LORD has many and
fair ways to re^rute His Nobles, and Worthies, ways well beseeming and
becoming the God of Gods, and Lord of Lords. But what the Lord has don, what
good He has brought out of all this evil, is not the Question now.] I charge
you before the Living God, answer me to this; Were all the writings, sayings,
doings of the Bishops, but an endeavor only, but a Design? Have they
effected nothing touching the premises: Open your mouth, and speak as the
Oracle of God, and as in the ears of God, Have the Bishops but endeavored
only in polluting To pollute The Lords Day? Answer me that first.


A. It cannot be denied, That the Bishops set-out a Book, wherein they gave an
Advousion of liberty to the people, for harmless sports, and pass-times, to
pass over the Sunday, as they, The Lords day, as ye call it. Indeed this
Grant of liberty, workt contrary effects, as all men say, but that was by
accident, as the Logicians say; It was not in the nature of the thing, but in
the nature of the people.


B. You are mistaken in the first word, and so all along. You call the
Declaration for Sports, a grant of liberty to the people. That is true, though
they need not such a grant, for they will take it without leave; But it was a
Law and Command to the Pastors, To give their people that liberty. Secondly,
You call them harmless Sports, and lawful pass-times. You should understand,
That these very names, sports and pass-times, are not compatible, not any way
congruous with so sacred a Time, as is The Lords Day: Therefore the Bishops
should not have distinguished of sports, but have cast-them-out, as neither
Civil, nor Harm-lesse nor Man-like; but the contrary: nor lawful (specially
mixed dancing) on any day, most unlawful and brutish on the Lords Day. Thirdly,
You say, That this Declaration for Sports, work contrary to the Bishops
meaning; and that the effects were by accident. We say the Declaration workt
according to the heart of the Bishop, And that such effects, as we have now
seen, were in the nature of the thing; as well as in the nature of the people.


A. You must remember, That there were two very godly expressions in the
Declaration for Sports, whereby the Bishops did declare a very pious meaning
sure. The first; That they commanded no other sports, but what would make the
people fit for war, that is the expression.


B. A godly expression said you, and declaring a godly intent! by giving the
people a liberty to sport and passe-away a sacred Time, with Whitson-Ales,
May-games, etc. thereby to make the people fit for war! I Will tell you a Story,
whereby you shall be enabled to give Judgment upon this. Cyrus, a brave
Commander, vexed still with the Lydians, a very warlike people, bethought
himself of a way to tame the Lydians, and to make them sober men, by making
them first drunk with wine, and sotted with pleasures; for thus it was; Cyrus
sets forth a gracious Declaration unto them; gave the Lydians the same liberty
then, which the Bishops gave to the people now, A license to set-up Alehouses;
Cauponias ^t ludicras arts exercere.
To exercise their bodies, and refresh their minds with sports, pass-times,
games, etc. I put a Question now, and crave your answer; Was Cyrus his intent,
by this grant of liberty unto the Lydians, To make them fit or unfit for war?


A. Unfit sure.


B. You have spoken like a man, the very Truth, for so it was; A very warlike
people before, becomes as weak as water presently after; And, to give you in
short, what Aelian contributes to this Story; These people were so delighted in
dancing, That they taught their horses to dance: So when the horses heard the
Trumpet and the Drum, they thought it was the Taber and the Pipe, so the horses
fell to dancing, and gave up their Riders to the spoil. And now if you
cannot, the present time shall declare the Bishops meaning, and the purpose of
those words; To make the people fit for war; (i. e.) make a people fit for
destruction, To be devoured by the mouth of the sword, as it is at this Day.
The people were made drunk with wine, and strong drink, and drunk with
pleasure, Now the Lord has made them drunk with their own blood in their own
Land. We, by command from the Bishops, have blasphemed Gods Name; polluted His
day; defiled His Sanctuaries; Now The LORD has made us fit for war Now He has
given us for a spoil, and to the Robbers, He has powered upon us the fury of
Isa 42. o.
His anger, and the strength of Battle. And do we complain, That our Cities
are, some of them, wasted, and othersome, impoverished? Let us admire, That our
Cities are not all so wasted, and left without Inhabitants; That all are not
made as Sodom, and like unto Gomoral^ That is the wonder, and the patience of a
God! That a God, so provoked, should be so gracious, there is matter for wonder.


A. To interrupt you a little, I must tell you, That the Declaration for sports
and Pass-times, does declare its self against silthy Tiplings and
drunkenness, The other expression, very godly and gracious! express against
Tippling, that swinish sin, forbidding it in express terms.


B. You are mistaken; That D^claration commands Riott, Luxury, Drunkenness.
Intemperance, and wantonness, Though not directly, and in express words, yet
by most necessary and undoubted consequence, as an effect from the cause, which
being natural and sufficient, includes the effect, and always gives it. It
is true, There was an express forbidding of filthy Tiplings, and Drunkenness,
for so run the words; They are but words; Filthy Tiplings, and Drunkenness,
and Rioting in 2 Pet. 2. 13
the day time, all these were in that Charter for liberty, as in the root; As
Death was in the Pott; As a fall in pride; As destruction and death, in sin and
rebellion. It is not possible to countenance Whitsun-Ales, and discountenance
Drunkenness; To Command Wakes, and forbid Tiplings; To allow of setting-up
May-poles, and other sports therewith used, and disallow of Chambering and
Wantonness. If I grant the cause, I cannot forbid the effect, no more than I
can forbid a stone to fall down-ward, or an Eagle to hasten to its prey; no
more than I can forbid the fire to burn, or the Sun to shine. But if I take
away the fuel, then the fire will go out. No man will show himself so
uncivil, and below himself, as to Command Drunkenness, Intemperance,
wantonness, in plain terms; Nor need we a command to do that, wherein our
natures too much command us; Where the law of nature speaks, no need it should
be assisted by a Commandment; We carry about us a law in our members, which
leads us captive to the law of sin. If a Magistrate will be entreated for the
erecting and supporting of bloody dens, Schools of mis-rule, nurceries of the
Gallows (so blessed Bolton calls Alehouses) he does encourage and support
swinish Drunkards, worse than swine in the Church, and more harmfull than they
in that garden; Set open the Alehouse, you may be sure some body will come
reeling out. The same may be said of setting up May-poles, and countenancing
other sports thereto belonging; You cannot command them, and forbid the taking
pleasure to riott in the day time. We do not read, (and it is worth our
observation) that Balaam did command the people to commit whoredom with the
daughters of Moah. He did not point Zimri and Cosb^ to go to the Tent in the
face of the Congregation and on that solemn day; he had more civilitie than so.
Balaam Numb. 24. 14. Chap. 31. 16. See Trem.
did advise, only so and no more. Balaam was an old Man; as he was, so his
counsel must be, grave, not seemingly sour, nor apparently uncivil. Let
Isra^l and Moab come to an inter-view; let them see each others faces; let them
be present at each others sacrifices. This was the Counsel, but worse than a
curse, for now folly will be committed in I^^^l no doubt of that: And then The
GOD of Israel will be offended wi^h Israel He will depart, and then a curse
follows, as certain as when the Cloud is thick, The thunderclap follows (in
our senses) the sparkling flash; Bad Counsel is worse than sower Counsel, and
more poison u^, for by bad counsel, not sower counsel, Balaam taught Balack
To lay a stumbling block before Israel, as the Spirit calls Rev. 2. 14
it: And it proved in the issue sower counsel too; Israel found it so, as we
read Numb. 25. 9. 1 Cor. 10. 8
. To apply here; The Bishops did not command Idolatry, saying, Go serve other
gods. No, but they set-up Altars, That was enough to defile the whole Land, and
to make a people commit adultery with stones and with stocks Jer. 3. 9.
. The Bishops did not command Tippling and Drunkenness. No; But they commanded
sports and pass-times, Whitson-Ales, and May-poles; Allow the cause, and
countenance that, you allow the effect, and countenance that also which
naturally issues thence. If the maid lay leaven in three pecks of meal, she
need not command it to sower the whole lump; Put fire and fuel together, you
need not bid it to burn; Set a desirable object before the eye, you need not
command the heart to lust after it; Set the windows, doors, gates all open,
you need not bid the enemy enter; A small spark falling into gunpowder, you
know what it will do, whether you will or no, or though you command the
contrary. And you know as well, That they, who command Wakes, Whitson-Ales,
setting up May-poles, and other sports therewith used, do command filthy
Tiplings, and Drunkenness, and other abuses in such distempers usual. I have
been the longer upon this, to clear your judgment in so necessary a point. I
proceed now to the next Question; Did the Bishops but endeavor, was it but
their seeking only, To turn the Deputy from the faith? Act. 13. 8.



A. I cannot make answer here, for I cannot tell whose endeavor, and seeking
it was; I can tell All are turned from the Faith, King and Bishop, Priest and
people, and all; All are turned away from God, that is clear enough. The Church
and State are turned up-side down, what possibly Churchmen could do, But who
was the chiefest Artist, and Turner here, that I cannot so well tell.


B. If you cannot, you are content to be informed at this point from them who
can tell us from ancient Records, That the Bishop turned the Deputy from the
faith, and with him very much people; we will read the Records; but consider
with me first, How high the Bishops Power and Authority was?


A. How high the Bishops Power? He was not in the Zenith The Zenith is the
highest point in the heavens over your head: The Nadar is that point of earth
your foot stands upon; The place where the Popes must be laid, and their honors
in the Dust.
of the Church, for there only the Pope sits. Take it at the height of its
elevation, The Bishops power was but Derivative, as a stream from the Sea of
Rome; a bastard-power from the Pope.


B. You are mistaken, our Bishops power was as independent as the Popes power
is; as absolute a Pope in his Diocese (and that was all over the Land) as the
Pope is all over the Christian world: And all his Actions, Dictates,
Determinations, etc. were as Magisteriall and Pope-like, as ever were the
Bishops in Rome. But I pray you consider with me, what I was about to say, but
that you interrupted me.

2. What an influence (like some malignant Starr) the Bishops power had, from
the Councell-Table, Starr-chamber, every Court and place, into the affairs and
transactions of Church and State.

3. Enquire we of ancient days, and we shall well understand, That, while
the Priests were good, The King was good: When the people might say, He is a
very good Priest; Then they might say, He is a very good King. Jehojada an
excellent Priest, for he made a Covenant between 2 Chronicles. 23. 16.
God, the King, and the People; That all should be, not their own, but The
LORDS People; an excellent Priest he. So was Joash the King, as forward and
zealous (to say no more) as the Priest was Ver. 6.
. The Priests zeal kindled the Kings zeal, made it fervent and boyling-hott;
So it was like the burning of thorns, quickly in a flame, and as quickly out;
It was not a zeal, a fire from above; But this is the point; So long as the
Priest was excellently good, a living example before the Kings eye, so long the
King was good. Zechariah, a very good Priest too, And in his days, Vzziah was
a very good King, for he sought God in the days of 2 Chro. 26
Zechariah: and all that while he prospered: I might be large, we will read
but one or two Records more; The one tells us;

4. That the Temple, and the Temple-worke there, was never defiled, while the
chief Priests there did their office. It is true, The King fretted against the
Priests, and stormed against the LORD, till the LORD 2 Chronicles. 26. 20.
smote him in his forehead, then he was calm and still; But while the chief
Priest, and fourscore more with him, did their office, all was well, except
the King; It was ill with him, who did fret against the Priests, because they
did their office, and against The Lord, That charged them so; It was ill with
him. But the Censer and the Sacrifice was in their hands, unto whom it did
belong, To offer unto the LORD, and serve before Him. Let us record one example
more, and that will relate to these times. King Ahaz had a servant, a Right man
for his s^^vice; But as vile a Priest as was in all Judah; What was the King?
If any man makes it a question, The sacred Records will resolve him, As
miserable a King, as his Idolatries, and other abominations could make him: And
his Priest, the basest servant in the world, a slave to his Masters lusts, and
his own; The Priest hastened his Masters destruction, for he did, according 2
Kings 16. 16.
to all that King A^az Commanded; I have read the Records What is the result
from thence? You must tell us; for from the premises, you have drawn the
Conclu^ion; I pray you what is it?


A. That, I^ it be now* as in ancient days it has been, then the Bishop is the
Witch, the Sorcerer, he is the cun^ing Artist, he turns all up-side down, he
has turned the King, and people from the faith.


B. There is no new thing under the Sun, What was, now is; like Priests, like
people; Brutish Priests, brutish people. And now since you have answered me so
clearly to this, I Will ask you no more questions; I will not ask you whether
the Bishops endeavored only To defile the house of GOD, and the services
there? Not; whether they set-up their Thresholds, by Gods Thresholds Ezech. 43.
8. Adhibendo traditiones suas ad praecepta mea. Jun.
? Not, whether they thrust GOD out of His House, and His servants out of their
houses, and Gods House also? Not, whether they have thrust His servants into
corners, and out of the Land? Not, whether they have used Gods precious ones,
villanously? All this is as clear to all the Christian world, as is the noone
day: And indeed, you have yielded to all this, when you granted, what you could
not deny, That the Bishops set-up Altars, and made gods. Will the GOD of gods
endure this, To be mated in His own house with gods of man's own making?
Surely, surely, This is enough to cause the LORD to measure us, as He did Judah
and Israel; or (to relate unto Times nearer hand) to streteh over this Land
also, the line of Germany, and the Plummet of the Palatinate-house, To cause
the Land to be wiped, 2 King. 21. 13.
as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and turning it upside-downe; Enough and
enough, (so much as a man can do, and was in his power) To make all the
Inhabitants of the Land Papists and Atheists all; Setting-up Altars, and making
of gods, has don all this; O wonderful! That all this has been don here before
the face of His Holiness, and yet He has spared, He has not meated out unto
us, as unto other Lands; He has not wiped the Land yet as a maid wipeth a dish;
He has not made our Land Hormah Numb. 21. 3.
, utter Destruction, or Anathema, a curse; Not yet, Though these abominations
are found here; And yet behold ^ greater Abomination than has been shown
hitherto, which I shall not declare here.


A. I pray you let us hear all; declare what you can declare; show me ^^d the
world, that other Abomination.


B. You must spare me, and your self that trouble; Indeed I can say nothing
touching the Bishops example, that is the abomination, my words cannot reach
unto it; how provoaking! how defiling! how corrupting! how spreading! No
leprosy so infecting, so destroying. This how cannot be expressed; A Bishops
Example! A Bishop, and setup Altars! A Bishop, and make gods! Ah LORD, how many
thousand thousand souls, has a Bishops example Destroyed! He has by his
abominable Doctrines (as we heard,) he has thrust away King and people from
the worship of their GOD; By his example, he has commanded Persuadet lingua
jubet vita Athan.
, forced Gal. 2. 14 Cogi eos dicit, qui exemp^o Petri, Judaizabant Jun.
. compelled King and people to serve other gods. I can say nothing touching
this Abomination; I confess it is hard to forbear; but I do forbear, for
your sake, That you may now take the more scope, and liberty, to say what you
have to say for Archbishops, and Bishops, Their government, their office,
their Name. Come, gird up your loins, and speak like a man; What say you?


A. Truly I have much to say, yet nothing at all against that you have spoken
from the word of God, and Judgment from His mouth, upon the Bishops. I can
yield unto your hearts desire, That our two Archbishops ought to be
thrust-out; Nay, more, That those two (I ever except a third, The Primate of
Ireland) ought to be hanged-up by the necks; for, we know what one has don;
and it is as legible what the other does; he fights stoutly for the Pope his
Lord; I could yield you-up some of the Bishops too, to the Justice of the Law,
to be hanged by the neck, or roasted in the fire; I could yield you up our Wren,
etc. But to tell you, what grieveth me, I cannot endure to hear all the
Bishops jumbled together, like Chest-men in a bagg, honest men and -- together;
Two Metropolitan Bishops, and one Primate together; Great men, and mean men,
together; vile men, and precious men, together; you have made no distinction; I
profess unto you, you have so confounded the persons, that I cannot find out
the Primate of Ireland, nor difference him from another Bishop, (now he is in
Oxford) where all the Bishops are, or where all their hearts are: You have made
such a mingle-mangle one with another, that I cannot single-out Bishop Wren,
that vile man, from Bishop Hall, that precious man: You have, as I said at
first, jumbled them together, like Chest-men in a bagg: You should have
considered, how soundly some of them have preached, [but some; some not at all;
very few oftener than once a year, and then not soundly neither] what good
books they have written. And touching the Ceremonies, how clear they are for
the innocence of the same. All this you should have considered, and not have
jumbled them all together. Indeed I am grieved, that you cannot distinguish
better.


B. Truly I would grieve no honest man; and I hope to clear my words so unto
you, That they shall be no grief to your heart. You say I have jumbled the
Bishops all together, like Chest-men in a bag. I Will answer you to that first,
and grant, so I have done, and purposely I have done it, for mighty reason,
for so they jumbled the days of the week, the seventh Day with the six days,
they made no difference, no distinction at all. Destinction! No, They marred
their Lords day more than any Day. I grant you, they have don some good works;
So did Alexander the Great, greater works than they; But Alexander killed his
dear friend Calisthenes; Him, who dearly loved Alexander, and the King both;
and ever after that, when it was alleged for the honor of Alexander, That he
had don such and such great things; It was checked with this; He did so indeed,
but he killed his true and honest friend, Calisthenes, he killed him; And that
darkened all his glory to his dying day. So when it is said, The Bishops, some
few of them, have written good books; Yes, but they have polluted the Lords
Day; which, if there were no more, is enough, to stain their glory, while the
world stands; But there is more. Have they, the best of them, answered their
names? have they magnified their office? have they given attendance to 1 Timothy
4. 1^. Ezekiel. 22. 30. (...)
reading, to exhortation, to doctrine? or, when The LORD sought for a man
amongst them, I say a man *, to speak for Him, was there a man amongst them,
the Bishops all, that did appear? They should have taken His people by the
hand now in this day of their trouble, do they A man indeed that has the fire
of zeal in him, will stand in the breach till he has hedged-up the hedge.
do it? I say again, do they do it? or do they take the people of GOD by
their throats? GOD is witness, even GOD is witness. He is witness also, What
blasphemies they have heard belched-out from the Pulpit, and they were silent
the while, and afterward. What hard words have they heard in the Court,
pointed out against His hidd^n ones, which they reproved not? Reproved not!
encouraged rather; God knows, what ungodly deeds they have seen! and how the
best of the Bishops have strengthened the hand of the wicked, doing violence to
the godly! GOD knows all this; He knows, even the Holy One, who tries the
reins, and searches the hearts, and understanddeth the thoughts long before.
He knows, That the best of them have dealt most corruptly in His matters; most
treacherously with His people in the Day of visitation; most wickedly in the
Covenant; The best of them is a briar; Mich. 7. 4.
The most upright is sharper than a thorne-hedge; The day of Thy Watchmen and
Thy visitation comes, now shall be their p^rplexitie, Amen.


A. I cannot join with you; You should have pulled out the Primate hence, and
Bishop Hall, before you had said Amen; Why man, The LORD bids you put a
difference betwixt the good and the bad; the precious and the vile; And, when
the LORD visits a people in wrath Psalm. 4. 4. (...) Exo. 8. 22 B. 9. 4. 11. 17.
Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 1. cap. 9. See Cure of fears. page 33.
and indignation, then He sets a mark, He makes a separation, H^ marvellously
seperateth a. B. He do^^ indeed, then He sets apart, then He seperates indeed.
Then He sets a mark, a legible mark, a proper and peculiar mark upon His
chosen ones. But not visible to a common eye; as it was in the 4. Psalm, and
other places. No; good and bad* the precious, and the vile, are carried away
with the same flood of GODS wrath; there is no distinction made to your outward
eye, for the reasons intimated before, more fully set down in that notable
Chapter, pointed to in the margin b; But because I find your spirit grieved,
I Will open the sacred Records, and read what we find there; This, That Number.
25. 3.
Israel joined himself unto Baal-Peor (an abominable Idol:) and the anger of
The LORD was kindled against Israel. What was Isreal's Idolatry Primari^s
populi, Iun.
to their Governors, and Chief-taines, the Heads of Israel c? Yes to them, and
they must suffer for it. What! The people joined to Baal-Peor, and the Heads of
the people lookers-on! They must be hanged up all for that. It is the Charge of
the LORD; Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up. All the heads;
you will observe that, All. Doubtless, some heads did not contrive for the
setting up, or serving that shame Hos. 9. ^0.
Nay, doubtless some heads, there, thought the setting up that shame, and
serving before it, To be as abominable, as any heads amongst us judged the
Declaration for sports (that shame) to be, even so abominable. Nay, doubtless,
could they have maintained their honors, and head-ships amongst and over the
people, they would have withstood that abominable service, the peoples joining
to Baal-Peor, that shame; But not one, not one man was found, that would do as
Phineas did; not a man, that would show his head appearing for GOD, and against
that shame: Therefore, Take all the heads, and hang them up; Where? Before The
LORD, before whose glorious eye, they committed that abomination; And because
not one of these men would show their heads, would appear for their Lord; hang
them up before the Sun; put them to shame; make them a public example; show
them openly; make them a spectacle; set their heads before that Sun (which they
made an Idol) that all may point at them with the finger, and say, These are
they, who did slinke away, who hid their heads, would not appear when time
was, for their Great Lord, and Master in heaven: Now they do appear; Now they
are showen openly before the Sun. It must be so don, it ought to be so don for
GOD has said it; Take all the HEADS of the people, and hang them-up before the
LORD against the Sun, that the feirce anger of the Numb. 25. 4.
LORD may be turned away from Israel. Look you well upon it, consider it well,
and you must conclude from hence, That all the Bishops, the chief, the
Primate, and Metropolitan, the great men, and mean men, all must be thrust
down, all cast-out: I Will carry it no higher than to a thrusting down, a
casting-out; Hang them-up before the LORD, and against the Sun, That I leave to
the Judges, as it follows*; But if you Verse. 5. 6.
will not yield so far for the Thrusting all the Bishops down, and casting
them all out; Then I must say, you are the man, who will not be satisfied from
reason, or Scripture, nor from the mouth and command of GOD.


A. I am satisfied; I yield them up all patiently to the Justice of the Law:
And I say now, Currat lex siat justicia, ruat mundus; Let the Law have its
course; let Justice be don, though the earth shake, and the kingdoms be moved,
yea, shattered to pieces, let Justice be done. Amen, But


B. What another But yet, and so out of place! you are not satisfied, I
perceive, touching this All.


A. Yes that I am, content, That all these Archbishops (they are but two) be
thrust out; And all these Bishops every man; Take them, even All the heads, and
etc.


B. Speak out man, the terror of an Archbishop, or a Lord, cannot make you
afraid now, GOD will be terrible to them, speak out; And hang them-up before
the Sun that follows.


A. True, But I was speaking for them, yet indeed I am ashamed, but I consider,
All your Allegations are but vitia personarum, these may be thrust away, or
hanged-up before the Sun, and others thrust into their places, for indeed
Arch-biships are venerable for their Antiquity.


B. Ah Lord! What a word is that! The same word will serve to establish error,
very ancient, Truth, its opposite, but a few hou^es before it. Venerable for
Antiquity! You may say as much for the Devil too* that old Serpent. Venerable
for Antiquity! So is Sunday and Monday, and so through the whole week, (and
Saints days, as we fools miscall them) anciently called by those names by the
Heathen in honor to the Sun, and to the Queen of heaven. Venerable for
Antiquity! So is the Pope too, and his Cardinals more ancient than he, if you
will believe them, or their Advocate; for he and they conclude from sacred
Scripture too, (see what Interpreters they are) That the Cardinals are two
days older than the Moon; They were in the firmament of the Church, before
the Moon was set in the heaven, as they collect very wisely from the Text 1 Samuel 2. 8 See Child's patrimony page 104.
pointed to in the Margin; I will not contend with you, nor you with me; you
shall have your saying, Archbishops are venerable for their Antiquitis: So you
say, so I say; we are agreed: Archbishops are as ancient as Paganism, as
Heathenisme in this Land: They were here before the Land was Christian; And now
that this Land must be the LORDS Land, and the people there, The LORDS people,
Christians indeed, now shall Arch bishops be no more.


A. Let Antiquity go, I see it will do them no good, but a necessity there
is, there should be Archbishops.


B. A necessity! then there is reason for it, and Law both: but there is
neither; He be as plain with you as a pack-staff. Tell me. when I have told
you; There ar^ several flocks of sheep in the Land, a Shepherd over every
flock; so careful we are of our sheep, that harmless, useful cattle: And
great reason for that; Now tell me; What reason or Law is there, That there
should be a great, a Catholic Shepherd to o^ersee all these Shepherds; have
you any Reason or Law for that?


A. No truly, That there should be a great Overseer over small overseers.


B. I thought so; Therefore I know there is no necessity.


A. I must grant it; but there is a Decency.


B. A Decency! worse and worse; You should remember your charge, To speak as
the O^acle of GOD, and as in the ears of GOD. You do not answer your charge,
when you say, That the being of Archbishops in a Church, makes for the decency
in the Church. I answer you, there are not Arch-Angells in heaven: And is it
decent, there should be Arch bishops or Primates on earth? There is no decency
in it at all. I know you will forsake that Argument.


A. Well: But they say, there can not be a glorious Church without Archbishops.


B. A foppery! I had almost said a blasphemy; I shall say it anon. The Church
is glorious in heaven, you will say, and yet there be no Archbishops there, all
men say.


A. I have heard them highly extolled, commended, and praised.


B. For what, for their virtues?


A. Yes.


B. So was Hildebrand Beno Cardinalis Aventinus, making his entry to speak of
Pope Hildebrand, says thus; Now must I speak of wars, slaughters, murders,
killing of fathers strives, hatreds, fornications, robberies, spolings, of
common treasure, spoilings of Churches, debates and seditions more then civil.
the Pope praised, who had poisoned six Popes his predec^ssours, was a Conjurer
and raiser of Devils and threw the Sacrament into the fire. This man was
commended for his virtues. Judas has been comcommended above the Apostles.
Commended! Is that any news, when Robbers, Murderers, Rebels, Traitors, vile,
and treacherous Priests, and persons are highly commended at this day; they are
honored, dignified, titles of grace and honor are conferred upon them? To say
all in a word, the Anti-Parliament, the Parliament in Oxford, consisting of the
outcasts from this Parliament, Oxford Parliament I say, the refuse, the
garbage of the land, that Parliament is commended. Will you put any force in
praise and commendations? I pray you know from me, that a quartane Ague has
been praised: so has folly been exalted by very learned men. Nay, I could read
you a long oration in the praise of a Louse. If I should tell you what persons
and flatuous things have been commended, I should make you laugh heartily. But
we are serious. Certainly that Argument will not hold neither. But to speak-out
plainly, and all in a word. It is blasphemy for a man to take unto himself
that honor.


A. I grant it to be blasphemy in the Popes mouth.


B. In the Popes mouth! It is blasphemy in the man's mouth, who will assume unto
himself that name (that incommunicable name) Archbishop, or Primat, for he is
Pope, the mouth that speaks blasphemies, as truly Pope in London, as Pope Leo
was in Rome. To dispatch this, and to clear your judgment from the clearest
light; I pray you consider, That the Lord Jesus Christ, Blessed for ever, is
(if I might use our Dialect) the Archbishop and Primat in heaven and earth: And
the Seven Spirits is His Vicar-generall; He is the great Shepherd, the sole
Monarch, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. And because the Gian^s of the
world, and Lords of the earth; because Almighty Kings (in their conceit,
thinking they have an arm like God, and so) Lord-like Bishops, have set
themselves against this Lord and King; therefore has this Lord and King set his
face against them: He has taken to Himself power, and an Iron rod into his
hand, and now we see him thrash the Nations like straw, and the Hills like
chafe: and coming upon Princes Isa. 41. 15. 25.
as upon mortor: Now we see him smiting the earth terribly, nor will he leave
smiting till the bloodshed there be discovered; till the gods there be
starved, till the Idols there be cast out to the Moles and to the Batts; Isa. 2.
now we see him shaking Kingdoms and Crowns, nor will he leave shaking, till
he have shat^ered and broken them to pieces, because they would not be the
Lords Kingdoms, nor would they with the Elders, cast down their crowns before
the Throne. If they continue obstinate, if (...) 4: 10
they will not rule for Christ, if they will not submit unto Him, then thus and
thus the Lord Christ will do unto them, that all the Kingdoms of the earth may
know, The Lord Christ reigns, there is a God, that judges in the earth. But
who shall bold out while he sees these things accomplished? They that wait
patiently for the Lord, (for here is the patience of the Saints) They that
leave God to his own time, work and way; do their own work faithfully, take
hold of the Almighty arm, wrap up their souls in a promise touching this
matter, so they are at peace: And this peace of God which passes all
understanding* shall keep their hearts in perfect peace, peace, peace, Amen.


A. I (...) you have not done.


B. Ye^ indeed have I, unless you have any more to say for Archbishops; have
you?


A. Not a word; I could bite my tongue for saying so much. But I have much to
say for Bishops, that others may be put into their rooms, that the Bishops
government may be continued, their office, and their name.


B. I see you will trouble me, and I am content with the trouble, so it may
ease your mind, and give you content. But touching the government by Bishops, I
thought verily you were resolved clearly, and fully, that it is Antichristian,
are you not?


A. No indeed not I.


B. I see your memory fails you, not your understanding; you have understood
that the head of this bulky body is reprobate silver; what will you think then
of the other members of this body? What of the tail? What of the f^ot? Nay,
you understand that the head of this body (nay the heads, and that argues it is
a monstrous body) the Archbishop, is struck-off by his own hand, a slain man
An Idolater is a slain man: I will cast down your ^lain men. Ezekiel. 6. 4.
. For to say all in a word, which you heard before; in that head is the mouth
that speaks blasphemies, he is a slain man, cast out as an abominable branch.
Will you plead now for any part of this body: For the shoulders? they are the
Bishops. Or the Belly? That is their Courts. Or the Thighs? They are the
Chancellours, Commissaries. Or Feet? They are their Proctors, and Doctors, what
shall I call them? They are the Bishops Purvayers, and Caterers, to serve the
Bishops lusts and their own: Will you contend for these?


A. I tell you, I contend for the government by Bishops.


B. A government! If you have the government, you must have the governors,
Archbishops and Bishops, Archdeacons and Deacons, Chancellours and
Commissaries, you must have their Courts too, with their Doctors and Proctors
there, the most notorious --, I want a word whereby to express their villainies
and notorious insolences; you must have that -- garbage too, their Emissaries,
their Paritors, those execrable rabble that stink all the world over. All these
you must have. Will you contend for these? or will you have all this prodigious
government and governors sink down and fall into the earth, from which it had
its rise and original, after the Archbishops?


A. I would have the government stand.


B. You would anger a Saint! pray you consider, the Bishops are but the
Archbishops hands: the other officers (not worth the recording) are but
Instruments in the Bishops hands. Will you contend that these brethren in
iniquity, instruments of the Devil, that these should be reserved and kept
alive; will you contend for this?


A. Yes indeed will I, life is a precious thing: I Will pray that they may be kept
alive, that is, that the Governors may continue in their full force, power and
virtue, notwithstanding any law (though Gods law) to the contrary.


B. A pitiful man! But it is a foolish pity, and spoils a City and Kingdom
both: had you lived in the days of Joshua, you would have been a very earnest
suitor to him, That Achans silver, his garment, and his wedge of gold, and his
sons and his daughters, and his oxen and his Ios. 7. 24.
asses, and his sheep and his tent, and all that he had, might be preserved,
would you not?


A. Yes surely, it would have grieved me to have seen all those persons and
things to perish before mine eye, as it grieved the Singing-men that were in
Paul's, to see the Priests -- (what do you call them) vestiments, or horse
trappings, to be burnt there before their noses: so it would have grieved me to
have seen such an execution, such a destruction.


B. You have more wit then you show: for in showing your pity, you had seemed
wiser then Josua and all Israel; For Joshua and all Israel with him took Achan,
and all the forementioned with him, stoned him and them: then burnt persons and
things. (Do you mark that? stoned them first, and burnt them after; stoning
was not enough, they must be burnt too) Then they raised a monument there, and
there they set a mark, they called it the valley of Achor: (i. e.) a valley of
trouble, and perplexity: Achan had troubled all Israel, he and all his must be
troubled for that, neither persons nor things must be spared. Junius gives us a
large note upon the place, the sum is, to teach us, how contagious a thing sin
is, and how execrable the instruments of sin are. Can you apply this to the
persons and things in hand?


A. Yes I thank God.


B. That is well; but if you can apply it indeed, you will be aware you do not
your self trouble Israel: nor will you have a word to say for them that are
troublers there.


A. Not a word for Troublers, yet I must speak for the government: for indeed
we idolize it, we dote upon it, we must have it.


B. If there were no other reason but that, for the abolition of that
government, that were enough; we make it an Idol, we dote upon it, therefore
it shall be taken away. But will we have the Government still, then we must
have the Governors still. And now if I should tell you what horrible,
prodigious, execrable, -- (I want a word) murders, villainies, have been
committed by those Governors and their servants, (slaves rather) I should make
your ears tingle.


A. I think so too: But you could tell me no more then the faults of persons
only, and their Courts, no more. Might not the persons be purged, and the
Courts too, and the government preserved? Though there be no Catholic Bishop
(an Archbishop) yet might there be a Diocesa^ Bishop. And now I have told you
what we would have, (and our meaning) a Diocesan Bishop we would have.


B. Very well: But you must explain your meaning now, what do you mean by a
Diocesan Bishop? Or what is a Diocese?


A. I cannot tell: It is Greek to me.


B. To me also (...).
. But you a strange man to conclude for that, which is Greek to you, you
understand not: You contend for a Bishop over his Diocese, and you know not
what his Diocese is. I Will tell you as well as I can, for it is a strange word.
A Diocese is a government in an house, or in the place we commonly call the
Church, and they have stretched it all over the City and Country; I mean,
they have enlarged the Diocese, they have so out compassed it, that all the
Bishops in the land, were they Bishops indeed, could not be sufficient for that
place, to fill up such a roomth: they have rendered it so capacious, that their
Diocese contains more roomth, then Philippi, a City in Macedonia contained,
and yet they allow but one Bishop there, whereas by the express word of GOD,
there ought to be Bishops and Deacons Philip. 1. 1.
. To inform you yet more fully, I will tell you a story. A request was made,
(who made it, or to whom, is not pertinent) for such a length of ground as an
Oxes-hide would cover (or rather be stretched unto.) A modest request, it was
granted; a small spot of ground would be covered with an Oxes skin. The
petitioners make much of the gift; for they did not do as our Curriers do,
and as Homer, after his manner, relates the manner very fully, they did not
tugg at it to stretch it out, that it might fill-up as much as possibly the
hide could hold: But they cut large thongs out of it, as we say, and so
stretched and tentered those thongs, that they could reach over so much ground,
as thereon to build a City as capacious as Philippi was, King Philips town,
and there they placed, if I well remember, one Regent. Here was a notable
policy to get ground. Truly the Bishop has dealt as politickly with the
Diocese, he has made it wide, and large, he has cut large thongs out of it, he
has gained much ground (if all be gain that comes to his hand) he has built a
palace thereon, and found a Lordship there; and there he (was) there he had
elbow-roomth enough, and was a Lord in his Diocese. Do you understand what an
overgrown thing this Diocese is? How the Bishop has lengthened it? what
incomes the Bishop has from it? what provisions were made for him there? And
yet Lucullus coenat cum Lucullo [as he said when he had prepared a supper for a
King* which he al^ne did partake of.] All these provisions and preparations are
but for one Bishop: all this to cram and fatten one Capon (that was his name
who was predecessor to Mr. Juel (of him anon) as vile as the other was
precious. You know a Diocesan Bishop now, and what his Diocese is; A monstrous
thing, wherein I know not how many hundred parishes are crowded-up together,
that there may be more roomth for the Lord. You understand this?


A. Yes, I thank you; I understand your meaning fully, That you would have a
Bishop in every Parish.


B. My understanding is not clear there: For to be brief with you; First, I
do not allow of the name Bishop; and I believe, when I shall have told you
something about it, as I shall anon, you will not allow the name neither. 2. And
for a Parish, I do not well understand that division, or who made that
distinction.


A. Can you tell what you would have?


B. Yes, I thank God; I would have in such a place as Philippi was, Bishops and
Deacons, for that is according to Gods express will. Phil. 1. 1.



A. Very true: But how many Bishops and Deacons must there be for such a place
as Philippi was?


B. I cannot tell the number. But there must be a Bishop and Deacons for every
Diocese.


A. So think I too: one Bishop for one Diocese, non est elenchus inter nos, we
are agreed.


B. True; but then it must not be a Diocese stretched out and tentered, as the
Oxes-hide was, beyond all imagination. We were concluded even now, that that is
properly a Diocese, which one man can oversee: and whereunto his voice can
reach, when his people are assembled in their meeting place.


A. A meeting place! Why not a Church?


B. Your question is not to purpose, therefore you shall have no answer. Can
you except against any word, that has been last spoken touching the Diocese,
and the Bishop there? that is the question.


A. In effect I have answered already, No, for what you have spoken, is the
express will and word of GOD. But you seem to hold, that there is no
superiority in the Church: quit your self there first, that I may resolve
others touching that great objection.


B. That I will: These words Bishops and Deacons Tit. 1. 5.
, (not my words) hold forth the contrary, so also these, and ordain Elders a:
These words do infer, not only, That the Ministers are above their people;
but that there is a superiority amongst themselves; nature, sense, reason; the
natural body, if we should go over it, and observe the parts from top to
toe, will clear all this. There is the head, and so downward; put your finger
into your mouth (that is the little worlds heaven) there are upper and lower
teeth, but all do the same service for the body. It is so in the body
politic; There are some for Counsel, they are heads; Some for direction,
they are eyes; Some to uphold and bear up others, they are shoulders; Some for
action, they are hands; It is so in the house of Parliament, two houses they
say; there are Speakers in both, to whom all turn themselves when they speak;
Superiors for the time, and when the work is done, then there may be a
change. It is so in every Court, a Chair there, and some one sitting in it. It
is so in the Assembly of Divines; every where, in Church, Chapel, House. It
is fit it should be so, nay, it must be so. What a fond conceit is it then to
think, That there cannot be Overseers in the Church, but they must be
everlasting Lords, and as perpetual Dictators? There is a destinction of
gifts, of graces; therefore of persons, and of places. How gross a mistake now
to think, That we allow of no Superiors, because we abhor those that have
Lorded it over the LORDS inheritance? We do indeed, for it is express
against the command of GOD. I might be large here; but you are a sober man; you
are satisfied touching Superiors; and I have quitted my self at that point,
have I not?


A. Indeed you have. But now, That we are, as our vows are upon us,
throwing-down and rooting-out the Hierarchy, that Antichristian, that cursed
Government; Its friends make clamours against us; I Will tell you what they say
very briefly, (for so you will answer I am sure,) They bring Scripture, and
object first; That we speak evil of Dignities. Jude 8. Verse 10.



B. Bid them say on, things, which we know not; Then bid them prove, That we
know not, what the Dignities of Archbishops and Bishops have been: or know
not, that they be evil: Bid them prove that; but that they can never do; we
know those Dignities are evil; and since they call evil* good, woe unto them.
What say they next? They speak Scripture still; So did the Devil too; What is
it?


A. That the Archbishops and Bishops, are Powers: Therefore not to be
resisted, for there must be no resisting of Powers.


B. Bid them read on; That are ordained of God. Now bid them prove, that
Archbishops and Lord Bishops, etc. are ordained of GOD; are the ordinance of
God. Romans 13.



A. I have enough to choke my adversaries now.


B. No, but you have not, They will go on with the argument, but mark how
they proceed; Just as a boy that goes upon his head, his heels are upward, and
so he spurns against heaven; Just so, these kind of men will goe-on, till
they have wrought out this conclusion; That the Devil and man's will are to be
obeyed; Their Reason, for they are POWERS; and all powers are of God; do you
observe?


A. Yes, very well, and I am sure, I shall be too hard for my Adversaries Aug.
takes away the honor (Lord) from the Bishop, and leaves him the work: The
Bishop does clean contrary, takes to himself all the honor, and leaves the
work. Lib. 19. ca. 19. 1 Timothy 3. 1 These. 2. 7, 8, 9.
at that argument. But I have two words, wherein I would be satisfied before
we come to a full stop; The one is touching the office of a Bishop; the other
is, touching the name. Concerning both, great things and honorable are spoken,
even by GOD Himself. Touching the office first; Can you except against it?


B. No indeed can I not; I cannot except against a good work, and that is the
office; To give the mind to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine, that is
the office. Naturally to care for the children, exhorting, comforting, charging
them (as a Father does thence his duty is concluded) That is the office. To be
gentle among the Children, knowing them by name; affectionately desirous after
them, provoaking them by tears; and as a nurse, cherishing them; That is the
office. It cannot be blamed, nor the Bishop neither. I mean the man, for he is
a father, a nurse; he is that which stands in the nearest relation, importing
the tendrest care, and dearest affection, and he is blameless in all. How dare
you or I blame him, whom GOD commends?


A. So say my Adversaries too; The office is not to be blamed, nor the Bishop;
You see both are as ancient as Paul was; And you know too, That a Reverend
Father of the Church, has calculated the nativitie of the Bishops, and the
descent of the office, and he finds the office in heaven; and the Bishops
before the ancient Kings in this Land.


B. Very true all this. And now you need not tell your Adversaries, That the
Reverend Father is answered by the Sons of the Church; ^or that he sta^ed
heaven in the face so long, that, at last, he fell into the Ditch: You need not
tell your Adversaries this, for they know it well enough. I could tell you now
a notable Story, as judicious Calvin tells it me, concerning Maximilian the
Emperor, a notable Story, and very pertinent; but I will not trouble you with
it, only point at it in the Margin Calvin upon Isa. cap. 19. 11.
; And so question you a little; Do you think, that Paul means by office, and
Bishop, the Government of a Catholic and universal Bishop, (an Archbishop)
or Diocesan, and Lord Bishop, do you think so?


A. I cannot tell what to think.


B. No; why I told you before, their office cannot be found in the earth.


A. They have found it in heaven.


B. So presumptuously they said, and now you see, though they will, not, that
they are brought down to the sides of the pit; You should not put me to
repetition, for indeed, what I spoke of their Government, might have sufficed
for their office. But read the Text again. The office is a good work, cannot
you tell your Adversaries now, what work they have made in the Church, and
Commonwealth? I know you can. You read also, That the office of Paul's Bishop
was naturally to care for his people; as a father, as a nurse. His office was
to feed the flock of Christ. The mighty word of GOD, was the Scepter of Paul's
Bishop, therewith he cast down strong holds: strong rodds Ezekiel. 19. 11.
were the Scepter of these Bishops; These did not feed* but rule the sheep of
Christ with a rod of Iron Rev. 2. 27. (...), signifies, He shall feed, or rule.
The Pope and his Bish. make the later to be the office of a Bishop; So the
sheep have had a hard feeding from that interpretation.
. You read again; Paul's Bishop must be blameless: were these so?


A. What is all this to the office?


B. I told you before, and I will repeat it but this once, Their office is not
found in heaven, or earth. It is true; If we believe them, they have found
their office in heaven, and have executed it upon earth (as we heard) but who
will observe the whole Series of things, shall discern plainly, That a curse
has cleaven to their office evermore, closer than the Ivy to the wall; or the
mortar betwxt the joining of the stones: As it always does to that office,
which is not of Gods ordaining, and for which, no man (though for his
sincerity, honesty, learning, without exception) can be sufficient. I will
not recall here what was said, how cross Catholic Bishops, Lord, or Diocesan
Bishops, are to God, and His Word. I will only say what some have said of the
Pope, and apply it to ours; Some Popes have been Fathers, but never any Pope an
holy Father; And some few, very few, good men, But never any, a good Pope. So
also as true of our Bishops, look we over them all, we may find some good
men (very few) but not one Good Bishop. And this, I must ever think, is by
virtue of the curse, which cleaves to the office.


A. I am in a worse case to answer my Adversary now, than before. Never any a
good Bishop! Many good Bishops, say my Adversaries, for many of them were
martyrs.


B. Not many, if I remember, five only; but twice five were persecuters. Five
martyrs will not argue so strongly for the goodness of the office, as twice
five against it. Again, Martyrdom does not make a good Bishop; he must render
himself good while he lives, by magnifying his office.


A. Well, and so they did. Bishop Ridley, and Bishop Latimer; What can you say
against them?


B. Nothing, not a word, God has accepted them, He has pardoned, It shall be
remembered no more; how Bishop Ridley dealt with King Edward the Saint; he
would, but I forbear. Nor how Bishop Latimer, that good man, over-taken
through Infirmity, did, in a Sermon, comply with a murderer, against the good
Kings Uncle, the good Lord Protector, too like a Bishop.


B. Bishop Hooper, what say you against him.


A. Against him! I have much to say for him, an excellent man he! he had his
Table full (with good cheer, you will say, and so have our Bishops too, no)
full set with company, (he eat not his morsels alone) and they the poorest of
his flock, and, which I would have noted, God would have it followed, he fed
their souls first from his own mouth, and then their bodies with his meat;
his doctrine did drop upon them Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
as the rain, and his speech distilled as the dew. The meaning is, he
Catechized them first, and then said, Eat friends, and be merry, GOD accepts
the work. An excellent man. So was Bishop Juel too, the Jewel Lege vitam
Juelli.
of our Church, set as a Diamond there; He gave himself up to the LORD, and
His work; he spent and wasted a wearied body therein; and gloried in it, as
well he might, that so he did. And it greatly refreshed his dying spirits, when
his soul sat on his lips; That he had wasted his body, and spirits too in the
work of the LORD, etc. to whom he has given-up his account with Joy.


A. Very well; excellent men these! and were not these good Bishops?


B. Look how you force me; yet I will not reply bluntly, No: But this I say,
All this argues the goodness of the men; but does not argue the goodness of
the Office. They were good men; yes, and good Bishops too: but not so far as
their Diocese reached, for that was all over whole Shires: But so far as they
could oversee their flocks, so far as they could quit themselves as good
Bishops, catechizing their poor people, exhorting, comforting, or as we heard,
so far, and not further. They were good Stewards, and faithful in their
administration, (that is as much as is required) so far as was possible for
their oversight and care to reach. We think, and with reason, that a man cannot
be said to be a faithful Steward in that house where he never was, nor can
know what rooms or what persons are within. I say then, for I would be as
plain as I can, so far as their overfight could extend, (that is, to the
compass and extent of that Diocese, explained before) so far they did well,
no men ever before them better. We say further, and we think it is no more but
what all must grant, That there is a point (easily decernible) where the
creatures impotency and weakness must necessarily set bounds to his oversight:
if yet he will willingly Augustus, Candidus, Philopater, etc. good names, and
Sapientiae, Justinians Towns name, exceeded all, but no honor these names to
the persons. Salv. lib. 3. ^. and lib. 4. within two leaves of the end. lege
Naz. Orat. 21.
and knowingly, for ends best known to himself, if he will lanch-out further
beyond these bounds, and so out-bound himself. At that very point of his
transgression he shall meet with a curse. In short, the meaning is, To that
very point and part of the office, which out-compasseth the officer, thereto
the curse cleaves, which the person may quit himself of, but he shall never
quit the Office. And so I have done my best to clear your understanding
touching the office.


A. Indeed you have cleared the office of a Bishop, now I hope you will allow
us the name.


B. No matter for my allowance, you need not stand upon that; but yet, I wish
you would not contend for a name, an empty thing. A name! what is that, if the
man be naught? Cain, a good name, the man not so. Abel a vain name, the man was
excellent. I assure you, the vilest men have had the best names; Popes have
been called Pious and Innocent both. It is true as the heathen Emperor said,
Nomina magna onerosa, great names are great burdens; good names are a good
engagement to fill-up, to answer their names. A Christian King, a Christian
man, is an honorable name; but dishonours him or them very much, who are not
answerable to that name, but are against Christ all they can.


A. But I pray you, tell me, what is your reason why we should relinguish the
name?


B. I will; but you must tell me first, the reason why we should retain the
name?


A. That I can do, I can give one reason which shall have more weight in it,
then two of yours, it is a Scripture name, Bishop Timothy, Bishop Titus, and
Bishop Peter, Bishop of Rome, as I hear.


B. You do not well to tell me what you hear, and neglect what you read,
which is this, as Peter speaks of himself, Who am also an Elder. 1 Pet. 5. 1.
(...). 2 John.
.


A. He was the chiefest of the Apostles, the Papists say.


B. There is no heed to be taken to what they will say, they prattle clean
contrary to what Paul says of himself, and Peter of himself. But if you
would observe their Acts, and one Chapter there, you would see it as clear as
noon day, that Peter was not the chief, (nay, there was no chief amongst them)
nor was he Bishop.


A. I am sure we have Bishop Timothy, and Bishop Titus: for I can point to the
place.


B. You can; but neither to the chapter nor the verse, which you might have
done, if it had been Canonical. The Bishop has thrust it into our Bibles, as
they have thrust in a whole family of the Jesuits Numb. 26. 44. A text as
boldly perverted, and so has been ever since 1610. As are the contents before
Psalm. 149.
into our English Bibles; a notable prank. God has found them out for this,
they shall be thrust out, and then our Bibles shall be purged.


A. Christ himself is called a Bishop.


B. He is not: He is called an Overseer, and so he is; and by his Vicar
general, he looks to his flock, he cares for them, he holds them fast, not
one of them shall be lost or taken out of his hand. To put you out of doubt,
Bishop is not a Scripture name: for it is neither Hebrew, nor Greek, nor
Latin, nor does it concern you what it is, only pertinent to this place it
is; That it is not a Scripture name, and so your strong reason, as mighty as
two, proves nothing, why the name should be retained. Now if it please you, I Will
give you my reasons why the name should be abolished.


A. It pleases me very well: I pray you let me hear them.


B. First, because it is a name so greatened and hightened, that we have not
roomth enough in the world, not a place big enough, or high enough to contain
his Lordship; he has out-compassed a natural body. Let his name go. Secondly,
the name is abused, clean perverted, as the name Tyrant is, a good name once,
and good English still: for it signifies a King; but when the King stretched
his power the contrary way, to the hurt of his people, in stead of doing them
good; and to the subversion of his Kingdom, and throwing down laws and
liberties, in stead of building all up; Then the name grew odious, and was
abolished. The same reason for the abolishing this name; The Bishops, not
Prelates, but Pilats; not Pastors, but Impostors; not Doctors, but seducers, as
their unreasonable carriage has caused the Rhyme. They have made the name
odious, and themselves abominable. A sufficient reason why the name should be
abolished, and themselves, as aforesaid. Thirdly, Bishop is as terrible a name
to some, as a Devil is: as pleasing as a God to others. That neither side may
be hurt, take it away: It is the Idol of the land, Idolized as much in our
days, as the Brazen Serpent was in King Hez^kiahs days. I cannot submit here
to another judgment; I must judge it very reasonable, That, as when the
people began to put a religious honor upon the Serpent, then the King would
have it called plain Brass. So now, since Bishop is so idolized by the common 2
King. 18. 4.
people, let the name go, and let the man be called a Minister of Jesus
Christ. If he be so indeed, he will like well of the name, for it is all one,
as if he were called, The messenger of the Churches, and the glory of Christ. I
might add a fourth reason here, There is no need of the name; Cast it away,
and there will be no lack.

Lastly, should I read you a leaf in the Rhem: Testament, how effectual the
holding-up and keeping-in of names has been, for the keeping-in of abominable
persons, and things; you would yield me so far at least, That this name
Bishop, is to be abolished. I have don.


A. And I am satisfied, and at a sweet agreement in my soul, That
Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, their Government and office, is to be thrust-out;
and the name abolished. I pray you heartily, give me leave to weep.


B. You need not ask leave, you have a command for that; Weep with them that
weep. It is sufficient you have a command to weep for your own sins, and
others, and for the slain of the people. You have example for it too; To make
your couch swim with tears; your eyes flow like rivers; and to make the place
you stand in a Bochim Judge. 1. 5
, a place of weeping, for reasons many, from within, and from without; weep
and spare not.


A. To tell you the truth, I never thought of this kind of weeping; I asked
you leave to weep for company with the Kings and Merchants of the earth;
Because their gods are taken away, and what have they more?


B. O monstrous! weep for company with the Kings and Merchants of the earth!
This indeed is to weep with them, that weep; but it is to do as those women
did, who sat weeping for Tammuz. Ezekiel. 8. 14



A. That is Hebrew, is it not?


B. No nor Greek neither; It was an Aegyptian-god, a most abominable Idol: As
comely a posture now, for Kings and Merchants of the earth, to sit weeping over
the Hierarchy, amore abominable Idol than was that Tammuz.


A. I yield to you heartily. But truly I intended to weep in a merriment
only, as I have heard one did; and so I Will tell you a Story, to refresh you and
my self a little; A little man, but a great Tyrant, was ferrying-over to a
place, from whence he must never return: And a poor Cobbler, who was mightily
oppressed by that Tyrant, was in the same Boat with him; The Tyrant wept
heartily, for he was taken from all his gods, he should see them no more,
neither his Palaces, nor his Lordships, and so he cried lamentably. The
Ferriman, a merry fellow, would make the Cobbler cry too, and so he did; O me
poor Cobbler! I have taken Sanctuary now at the place, where the wicked cease
from troubling; where the weary lie at rest; They hear not the voice of the
oppressed. O me poor wretch! I shall mend shoes no more; I shall labor no
more; I shall feel neither hunger nor thirst any more.


B. I Will hear no more, not a word more, though I know it might be well applied.
You have made it pretty Christian, yet it is not for this place. I would have
you rejoice in all the peoples sight, and sing aloud for joy of heart, for so
the upright do. Certainly, there is the same cause now to rejoice, as the
Church had, when they went through the Psalm. 66. 6.
flood on foot: There did we rejoice in Him, (our Fathers went over, we
rejoice:) And for the same reason, for we say now, as they did then, Thy right
hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power, and so forth; for wonderful works
follow, as are the works of GOD now adays. Certainly, the Church has the same
cause of rejoicing, as it had, when the great Dragon was cast-out; Then was
heard a loud voice, saying, in Rev. 12. 9, 10.
heaven (in the Church) now is come salvation, etc. read it out. Certainly,
the Churches time is coming, nay, it is come, when Babylon must be thrown
down. Therefore we must now hear, a great voice of much Rev. 18. 21
people in heaven (the Church) saying, Hallelujah, Salvation, and glory, and
honor, and power, unto the Lord our God, Amen. Rev. 19. 1.



A. I thank you Sir, you have made good use of my fained tears, and fained
mirth; you have taught me how to do both in good earnest.


B. It is an hard lesson, hear me forth, I pray you, and The LORD grant I may
hear my self. (1) If you do weep indeed; if you are grieved indeed; then
your grief is more, That you have grieved GOD, than because His and your
Adversaries have grieved you, that is first. (2) If you rejoice indeed, then
you rejoice with trembling. (3.) If you praise GOD indeed for the works He has
done, (I cannot express how wonderful they are) then you live to His praise;
That is Selah; then you rise-high in praises, when your life praises Him, that
is, when your conversation is in heaven. If God, your God, is your strength;
then He is your Song: If He be your Salvation, He is your praise too. (4.) If
you long to see God appear in His Glory; To see Him worshipped according to
His Command, in a Church Way: Then you are fitting and making your heart meet
for such a worship; and you commune with your own heart upon your bed,
enquiring what holiness you have gained by the Ordinances you now have; for
they that are not good husbands, and thriving under these, I cannot tell
whether they shall be trusted with greater matters. (5.) And to shutt up this
matter; If it be with you as aforesaid, Then your heart is open, and your mouth
open, and your purse is open, and your hands hang not down; All you have, and
all you are, shall be expended, laid out for Him, for His Name, for His cause,
for His servants, All for Him, who has so laid-forth all His Attributes for
us, A falling, sinking, dying Nation; All for Him, (forget it not) who
remembered us in our low estate. All for Him. Amen.


A. I join with you heartily, and that is all the answer I can make to all the
forementioned. I must enquire further of you for resolution now; The
Government by Bishops, it is gone, it is fallen like a great Millstone; It shall
be found no more in heaven, the Church, Amen.

There are now two ways of Government, (I express it as I can, and as I
conceive it in the most popular way) The Presbyterian way; the Independent way.
The Adversary meets me in both ways, crosses me in the one, choakes me in
the other. I beseech you, Sir, for Gods sake, and His cause, be pleased to give
me satisfaction, that I may satisfy others, who finding me almost your
Conver^


B. I Will cut you short there. I pray you do not call your self my Convert. If
the Word of GOD has not turned you, hold you where you first were, for
Archbishops, Lord, or Diocesan-Bishops, hold you there.


A. God forbid. But I pray you pardon the Word; It relates to you, but as to an
instrument, and let me go on; My Adversaries finding me a Convert, hitt me
in the teeth with this; You are for the Scotts Discipline, the
Presbyteriall-Government, a Rigid Government, worse than the Bishops, an Iron
yoke.


B. Answer them thus, but in the Spirit of meekness; as you tender the Glory
of GOD, and the good of His chosen; show no heat in these matters; but tell
them, They are clean mistaken. The Scotts Discipline is as near, as their
light has carried them, close up to the Word of God; and as more light shall
appear, closer-up they will come. Tell them, God has appeared to that people
in that way, wonderfully, marvailously: And a great Reformation is wrought
amongst them, a great Reformation! And great things has the LORD wrought by
them, and marvailous! And if we trust not in them, if we lean not on their
arm, great things will they do for us. But for their Discipline, say again,
That, were not the Pillars out of course; and the Laws silent, because the
Trumpet is so loud; could their heads and leaders walk in the way with a right
foot Gal. 2. ^^. (...).
, as the word is, and as they desire to go: could they keep close, and keep
their people close, in this extravigant time, to their own rule, and
principles; Then your Adversaries now would agree with you, and acknowledge,
That they have, after their manner, blasphemed the Scotts, and their way. Tell
me now, Do you think that this I have said will not stop the Adversaries
mouth, so wide open against the Scotts Discipline?


A. No indeed; All this will not stop the mouth of the Adversary. The reason
is, Because some mouths will not be stopped, till they be wrapt-up in a
winding sheet, and stopped about with dirt. But you have answered me, and I am
satisfied at that point. My adversary will meet me at another point, and he
will b^fle me there, or choke me quite. He will tell me, You shall have
Lords in every place more absolute than was the Lord-Bishop, for they will be
more independent. That choaks me quite, I have not a word to reply. I entreat
you, Sir, help me here, and tell me, what you think of that way, what is
your judgment thereof, I mean judgment as we speak popularly.


B. You say well, else I should have said, who made me a Judge? Indeed you
should not have craved my judgment, which is so low and small, in so high and
great matters. But fith you crave it, take it, as it is, and make the best of
it: Thus I judge of the way; It is an excellent way, an heavenly way, a
Church Way, an holy way: And the excellent of the earth walk in that way, and
are for that way; and that is as much as I shall say concerning the way.


A. It is enough; but you must make good what you say.


B. That needs not, and yet it shall be made manifest and apparent to your
eyes, though I say no more; for what are words? The conversation of these men
who are for this way, in their own house, and in the house of GOD, this
holds-forth their way to be an holy, an heavenly, a Church Way, as was said;
there is the proof.


A. It is indeed, and The Church in thy house is the praise in the Gospel. But
is not the conversation of those men, who are for the other way, as gracious,
as holy, as Church-like, as is the conversation of these men who are for the
Independent way?


B. Indeed my spirit is stirred, I had best to stop a while, lest I fire upon
you, and word it with you, and so mar all -- I do bethink my self of the
way we are upon; I must do nothing unbeseeming that way; else you should hear
words sharp or cutting You would force Tit 1. 13
me to make comparisons, they are odious, The conversation of the one and the
other is Church-like, else they are not in a Church Way. I spoke not words, but
my heart before. I protest unto you, I do so honor the Scots, and their way,
that I can scarce keep my heart from idolizing them in their way: And certainy,
could it do them any good, I could wash their feet, and kiss them when I have
done, such love I bear to them and their way. You will give me leave now, since
it is for your satisfaction, to tell you my judgment touching this way, and so
I have done heartily: Now you would have me make comparisons: No but I will not.


A. Pardon me, Sir, and teach me I pray you, what I shall answer to my
adversaries, who tell me that the men you so commend, are Independent. men.
What shall I say to this?


B. Tell your adversaries, they are foully mistaken.


A. The men say so themselves, they call themselves Independents.


B. They do not sure. But you are a learner, believe me: The men that are for
this way, are the most (I had like to have exceeded in comparison) are as
Dependent men, as any are in the world. They lean upon their beloved evermore;
they seek counsel at his mouth evermore; they would not move a step, nor
speak a word without him: they hearken diligently what their LORD says: And
they will hearken what any man, though the lowest of men, any man shall say
unto them from their LORDS mouth. They independent! How independent? As you and
I are in our houses; low and weak men, we, and yet we will not suffer another
man to Lord it over us in our house: for the Cook, they say, will not abide it
in his Kitchen; so Independent we and the Cook are. And yet so dependent we
are, that our practices, our duties, our Doctrines, etc. are subject to the
Spirit of the Prophets, as they submit themselves to the Spirit breathing in
the Word, the Rule of all. I could wish heartily, a better and larger
explication of this word, then here is time, or place, or ability to make:
because it is so generally misunderstood, it should have a more free and full
explication.


A. What say you to the gathering of Churches? The language of the times, and
the practice of grave and learned Ministers; what say you to it? a Matthew. 24.
40. Luke 17. 34.



B. I will, in all meekness and submission to better judgment, boltout what I
have conceived; That this separating, this culling and gathering work, is
reserved for the Angels when GOD shall give them commission, b Hiphlah Psas. 4.
3. Then the Lord sets apart him that is godly for himself.
and then a marvelous separating shall be; for then Two shall be in one bed,
etc. the one shall be taken, the other left: so it will be then, a gathering, a
culling out one from another who stood before in the nearest relation, were
partakers of the same work and reward, then a separation, and not till then in
an orderly way. Now husband, wife, child, and servant, all should go together
to the same place, there to partake of the same ordinances.


A. Very well: But then the wife that is spiritual, may partake of the same
holy things with her husband, who is carnal: And the servant, that is the
Lords freeman, may break bread with his master, who is to every good work
reprobate. What say you to that?


B. Not much, let the Pastors or Ministers look to that.


A. But here is a leaven now in our congregation, which leaveneth the 1 Cor. 5 6
whole lump.


B. Search the Scriptures, and enquire we of our Teachers whether that be the
meaning, That another man's wickedness can leaven you: Enquire concerning that
matter, you will read, To the clean all things are clean ^. I cannot think that
unclean persons, whom the sacred Scripture calls Dogs and Swine, can pollute
childrens bread to children. I Will tell Tit 1. 15. (...). Luke 11. 41 All things
are clean unto you. Ne omnes Angelos, si Missa intersint, etc. Epist. 265.
you what Calvin says; My position is (says he) that a pious or sacred action
cannot be defiled by the fault or pollution of men: And thus I use to clear
it; If all the Angels in heaven were present at the Mass (that abomination)
they could not, with all their holiness, wash off the filth of that Sacrifice;
nor can all the Devils in hell (if present at the holy Supper) defile that
sacred Ordinance to me, received by me with pure hands, and a clean heart.


A. If this gathering of Churches be according to the express Word of GOD, why
should you or any man be against it?


B. According to the word of God, and against it! God forbid, only, I say, since
there is an if in it* let us, simple ones, stay a while, till further enquiry
be made at Gods mouth, and resolution given touching that matter, that so all
(ifs) may be taken away.


A. But in the mean time here are two ways.


B. Yes, seemingly, and no more: As two ways upon a great Common or Heath,
which anon will meet in one: or as two streams which break the bank a little,
and so run cross, but after a small circuit about, meet again, running into
the same channel. I leave these ways under hope, and full persuasion, that a
way shall be taken to clear this word and way, from a sure word, so as both
ways shall meet in one; and all that are seemingly divided there, shall kiss
and embrace each other as brethren: for they shall enquire, not each of other,
what is this m^ns way, or that man's way, but of GOD, and the word of GOD, they
shall enquire what is GODS way, and the way of his people, concerning which
they are charged, This is the way, walk in it. I have told you my hope, I will
show you the grounds of this hope. The first,

1. We have a promise, I will give them one heart and one way. A sure Ier. 32
39.
word; It is don; So The LORD speaks of things to be don in His appointed time,
the best time: God is one; The Lord Christ one; faith one; Church one; without
doubt the way shall be one, and the fool shall Isa 35. 8.
not err.

2. We see how the Assemblies both conspire in one, To unite hearts and
affections, and judgments, so to make all one! We see this, else we see
nothing.


A. Indeed I do not see it, I can tell you that there are in the Assemblies,
some for this way, and some for that, and very eager and hot-spirited they are
for their way, as was told me.


B. And you might tell your self; That Angels are not Assembled there, but
men, subject to the like passions as we are, and may declare them too openly
as men do. But this I can tell you, That these men who are indeed for a
Church Way (an holy way what ever it be) and do walk in it, have been greatly
humbled for that eagerness of spirit, if more than was fitting, which was
declared in their contention for that way: And before they came to their seats
next day, where they were a note too high, they were low in humiliation, they
afflicted their souls for being so high the day before; And they have made
their watch the stronger for after-time, and for ever. And this for mighty
reasons; (1) Because they are contenders for a holy way; All must be don in an
holy manner, Church-like. (2.) They know also, many there are, who watch for
their holting. It is enough for Caution.

3. There are mighty wrastlings, the wrastlings of GOD, strong prayers; His
servants will not let their Lord alone; They will give their God no rest. Jacob
weeps and he prays; God must answer him; Jacob will not leave His GOD, without
He leaves a blessing behind Him. Hear you what seeking, and knocking, and
praying there is, Lord, give the Nobles and Worthies in their Assemblies, to be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, for
this one way; That the LORD may be one, and His Name one in all Congregations.
It is don, seekers shall be obtainers. As Jacob, so the seed of Jacob never
sought God in vain. God is appearing in His Glory, for the destitute are
importunate with Him; Now I will arise, says the Lord. And indeed He Psalm.
102. 17.
does arise in all His peoples sight; and He has made bare His Arm, even His
Right Arm, and has done valiantly; Let the servants of the LORD say so, even
for what they have seen, though they should live to see no more. Their fathers
have sown prayers, and watered them with tears, and we have reaped. What a
return of prayers have we seen! O wonderful! Jacob has prayed, and the seed
of Jacob has prayed, and then He spoke unto us Hos^a. 12. 4.
; We have the fruit of their prayers; They prayed, Lord cast-out the vile, set
in their room the precious; Note, that they do cause all the trouble, who
have a 3d. way, the way of their own hearts, and that way they would go.
Lord purge the Temple, the services there; Lord give thy people pure
Ordinances; So they prayed; Then the Lord spoke unto us; and as He spoke, so He
has don in our Days, Blessed, blessed, blessed be His Name; Then He spoke unto
us. O what cause have we every one of us, To make our hearts Temples, our
houses Churches, our lives living monuments of His praise, That a Church Way,
and a Church-life, and Church-Ordinances, all holy, and pure, may meet
together, and kiss each other, Amen, and Amen.

To take a view of what is said, we have seen the Bishops way, the way of
Caine; Wasting and destruction is there, their foot stands, even at this
present, in the path of the destroyer; Yet the Bishops have their Advocates,
those, who plead for them and their way. The sober man has what to answer; And
is shown an excellent way, the old way. There is a parting in it, as we
observe, the same way compassing an hill, and meeting again in the valley, for
the ease of man and beast. [As a Beast Isa. 63. 14. Leniter et commode duxit ut
solet, jumentu^ duct in descensu mont is ardui. Isa 63. 1.
goes down into the valley, so the LORD will have his people lead] This way
is as it is called a Church Way, the way of Holiness. No Lion shall be there;
The unclean shall not passe-over it. And now that I have mentioned them, the
unclean, I come to the remainder of my undertakings, The casting-out of the
Bishops Curates, those unclean persons, for like Bishops, like Curates; called
so in a contrariety to their office, as a mountain is called in a
contrariety to what it does; It has its name from motion, they say, but moves
like a mountain: So these Curates have their names, as Bishops have theirs,
from cure and care, and oversight, when they care for nothing, nor did oversee
any thing, but their Rents, Tithes, and in comes: and to make provision for
their lusts. We cannot think, that Wren or Pearce, (these were called
Bishops) would endure, their Curates should be better than themselves, but as
themselves, as brutish men, as drunken sotts, as vile Priests, as treacherous
Prophets, as loose and swinish in their life, and then, more then probable,
they will be Naballs at their death. And what are the people now, that their
guides are blind and brutish; They must needs be so too; from the Prophets and
Priests is profaneness gone forth into all the Land; Jer. 23. 15.
They have leavened the Land with Atheism, abominable Idolatries, and
Heathenish prophanenesses. And now all ye beasts of the field come Isa 56. 9.
to devour; yea, all ye beasts in the Forest. And so it is according to the
good word of the LORD; for His watchmen are blind they are all ignorant, Ver.
10.
they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, lo^ing to
slumber. You see whom I mean by these Curates; I argue now for the
casting-of-them-forth.

They that have committed the same abominations, which others, It is argued for
the casting-out of Curates. Jer. 29. 2^
having committed, have been roasted in the fire, and then made a curse; These
ought to be thrust-out of the Land, by the Law of the Land: But these Curates
have committed such abominations. Speak, have you any thing to say for them.


A. Not a word, I must not plead for them, whom God condemns; You must make
proof, That so they have don, according to those abominations.


B. They have committed villainies in Israel, adultery with their neighbors
wives; They have spoken lying words, (God knows how many,) They have
blasphemed God, and the King; they have polluted God, and his Day, and his
House, and all the honors and services there.


A. You have said, you have not proved.


B. There is the clearest proof of all this that can be desired. A Century is
come-out already, where their names are upon everlasting Record, and their
horrible abominations registered: That one Century, (a hundred) implies nine
Centuries more, they make a Chiliad, a thousand. And certainly, had we the
names of those, and their abominations registered also, who are under the Kings
protection, we should have a book, as large as that we call the Centuries.


A. Now that their places, their wickedness rather, have spewed-them-out,
whither are they gone?


B. To the place where such men shall find favor, to Oxford. They have
proceeded to the highest degrees of wickedness in the countries, they are
Doctors in the Art of drinking, whoring, rioting, now they gone to Oxford, as
we say, to proceed Doctors of Divinity; and thence dispersed to those several
places, whence Gods faithfullest servants have been cast-out, where they will
drink the healths, for they cannot pray, of their good Lords and Masters, and
for the prosperity of their Armies, now in Array against the Lord Jesus Christ:
for as those Armies prosper, so the Curates shall prosper. But now we hear
they shall be all summoned to make their appearance at Oxford: for as they have
there a thing they call a Parliament, made-up as aforesaid, for the subverting
the Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom: so there must be an assembly of
Divines too, such as have been spued out of their places, for the establishing
of the religion so often protested for. Ah Lord! But I forbear. The poor
commit themselves to the Lord, Thou shall preserve Psalm. 1^. ^.
them from this generation for ever. The wicked walk on every side, when the
vilest men are ex^lted.

These Curates, as unsavory salt, are cast-out of the Church; Now the Devil
has admitted them into his Chapel: Let him take their Service too: For, as
like Bishops like Curates: so, like Curates like Service, abominable all. I
argue for the casting of it forth.

This service is Dogs-meat, it must be cast-out to the Dogs.


A. I could never think the Curates Service to be childrens meat, but never
heard I the Curates service called Dogs-meat before.


B. Yes, you imply as much your self, If not childrens meat, then whose meat?
Dogs-meat, I think. But I argue it, Torn flesh is Dogs-meat. The Curates
service is as Torn flesh.


A. Prove that if you can, That the Curates service is as Torn flesh.


B. The Curates Service is a torn, distracted service; here is a piece, and
there is a piece; here is the former part, and there is the latter; here the
first service, and there the second service; here read at the Desk; there said
in the Pulpit; thence drawn up to the Altar: here are saying prayers, there are
tooting prayers, upon the Cymball and the Organ; here they roared like Bears,
there they braied like Asses, and yet Divine service, they say: But hearken
what the LORD says; As torn flesh, Dogs Exodus 22. 38. Mal. 1. 13
meat, so is these Curates Service unto Me, Do you bring that which is torn
to me? Cast it to the Dogs. It is done, they have it at Oxford, and all over
the Land; yea all over the Christian world, where the Devil has his Chapel,
and where these abominable Curates and Priests are. Let them alone with their
meat, no man envies them; no good man but pittieth them, yet let them alone,
these Curates with their service together.

Now I must complete my undertaking, and argue against the Neuters.


A. I pray you explain your self, and tell us what these are?


B. What they are! They are Neuters, a cursed generation of men, seem not to
know their right hand from their left; not which way to Who are ^^uters.
turn. I can liken them to nothing so fit, as to a shadow of a man, a picture*
such as you may observe ordinary in Flanders; There is a thing they call a
Christ on the left hand; another thing they call the virgin Mary on the right
hand; and in the midst, a third thing called a Catholic, with this inscription
before him, Crime vortam nescio.


A. I Will hear no more of that; such a picture does not become your gravity, nor
is it proper to the matter in hand.


B. I like your plainness well, I spoke it but to try how you had profited by
all our discourse hitherto. True it is, such a picture gives us no instruction
touching the subject in hand; for which way soever the looker-on had turned,
death was on either hand. But now take things as indeed they are, not
represented to us, but indeed and in truth.

Here is the Living God, the Lord Christ, and his Truths on the right hand.
Here is the Devil, his Pope and his Bishops with all their blasphemies, on the
other hand; yet, cui me vortam nescio, the man is not yet resolved what hand to
take, he is a Neuter.

Secondly, here is on the right hand, a Parliament called together by the King
himself, acknowledged a Parliament, confirmed and established a Parliament by
his own hand: On the left hand there are Assemblies of (Robbers) which they
call a Parliament (in Oxford) made up of the refuse and garbage of the land,
and yet, cui me vortam nescio, to what hand he may turn, he cannot tell. This
is a Neuter.

Thirdly, here are, on the right hand, Nobles and Worthies, who have approved
themselves true Patriots, zealous of Gods honor, and faithful to their King
and Kingdom; who can have no other end, as is clear to all the Christian
world, but the peace of the Church, the honor and safety of the King and
Kingdom, no other end: On the other hand are, left handed men, robbers,
spoilers, murderers, unjust men, who know no shame, who are as roaring Lions,
and devouring Wolves, to the inhabitants all over the land; yet, cui me vortam
nescio, he knows not to which side he should join; he is a Neuter.

Fourthly, Here are a generation of Seekers, who seek God day and night, who
have commanded us as Q. Ester her people, Go, assemble your selves Est. 4. 16.
together, fast and pray for us, we also will do likewise, these are on the
right hand: On the left hand there is the Prince of Robbers, Murthetherers,
they that curse and swear, and blaspheme all the day long; yet, cui me vortam
nescio, to what hand to turn he knows not, He is a Neuter.

To speak yet more plainly, and according to the express word of God. They are
Neuters who come not out to help the Lord against the mighty; mighty Nimrods,
mighty hunters before the LORD, men skillful to destroy the Faith, Religion,
Laws, Liberties of the Kingdom; mighty hunters before the Lord; yet these
will not come forth to help the Lord at such a time as this; no though the Lord
calls to them now, Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? Or who will
stand up for me Psa. 94. 16
against the workers of iniquity? These will not, these are Neuters.


A. Possibly, nay probably these may not know that things are as they are;
things are represented to them otherwise, as they have heard it declared and
protested more than seven times; They may not know.


B. What may they not know? They do know that Ireland is destroyed. They do
know that this viperous generation is eating-out the heart and bowels of the
Kingdom; They do know that the Faith, Religion, Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom are destroyed under a color and semblance of maintaining the same.
They do know, etc. But I will tell you a story first; That notable murderer,
who stabbed K. Henry the 4th of France, was examined whether he did not make
known his purpose to his Ghostly Father, his Confessor; He answered, Yes; His
Confessor, a Jesuit, was examined at that point; he answered, he did not know
(that is, to tell them) but very likely, said he, the intention was made known
unto me, under the Rose, and I have a gift (of the spirit) presently to forget
what is told me under the seal of Confession. My Author is not at hand, nor
do I remember how they dealt with him; but certainly, they took a ready way to
quicken his memory before he was cut asunder: so it must be here, These men
pretend they know not this, and they know not that, They will not know, or they
will not know to tell us. But they dissemble in all that they say; They do
know that the Kings foot stands up to the knees in blood, in the path of the
destroyer. They do know, that he has cast forth all the precious Ministers of
Justice, and Ministers of the Gospel, where his hand could reach; and thrust in
the vile into their places; They do know what the Queen has done beyond the
seas, what Digby with her favorites (her Agents and factors for Babylon) what
these have done there, and what they are doing here; They do know what is in
design, how bloody the adversaries intentions are, and that they have slain
the servants of the Lord with a rage that reaches up to heaven so high must
their judgment reach: This they do know. They do know that the King has made
peace with his worst enemies, and is at wars with, and bids defiance to his
best friends. They do know, That the King is plucking down his own house; That
he has thrust away the great supporters of his Throne, Judgment and Justice.
They do know what the King has protested, proclaimed, declared to all the
world; And they do know what his Commissions have been, how bloody, how
destructive. They do know how that Bristoll is given into the enemies hands,
and they do hear that the Queen shall have a Chapel there: They do hear
the groans of the prisoners, and the cries of the poor because of their
Taskmasters: for their oppression is more grievous than is, or ever was, the
Turkish or Egyptian slavery. They do know, which way the Devil, and all his
ministers do draw, now, and yet they withdraw themselves as men that know not
which way to turn, They are Neuters. Hang them, cut them asunder. It is the
sentence from the law of Nature, of Nations, of Arms: It is the sentence from
the law of God too.

1. It is against the law of Nature, that they who are without natural
affection, should enjoy the common gifts of nature, light, water, fire. Against
the law of Nations and Arms, that those subjects should enjoy the privileges
and communities of subjects, who see with open face, the adversary and enemy
destroying all these, and hold their hands in their pockets the while. Against
the law of GOD, that they who see the Laws, Rights, Liberties of his kingdom
trampled upon by swine, and yet stand Neuters, that they should not feel the
sharpest punishment. I will argue these things in order.

They that are the same, and have done the same which he did, and for It is
argued for the casting-out of Neuters.
doing so was plucked a sunder with two Teemes of Horses, four Horses in a
Teeme, do deserve to be cast out of the land by the law of the land. But these
Neuters are the same as he was, and do the same as he did, for which he was so
punished. Therefore, etc.

2. To relate to a more known story, They that are the same, and have done the
same, and for doing whereof, others, their fellow-brethren, have had their skin
torn from their flesh, and their flesh from their bones, these do deserve to
be cast-out of the land: But these are the same, and do the same which they
did, who, in former time, were so punished. Therefore these ought to be
cast-out by the law of the Land.

3. They that are the same, and do the same, which they did, who were cursed
from Gods mouth, and commanded to be cursed by all the people these ought to be
cast-out of the land by the law of the land. But these are the same, and do
the same, which they did, who were so cursed. Therefore, etc.


A. Prove that these Neuters now, do now as they did in ancient times.


B. They do now the same thing: for they get to an upper-place (in Metius
Suffetius.
speculation) as he did spying which side is strongest, and likeliest to
prevail; and to that side they will wheel about anon. But that is too far
of; I will take that which is nearer the eye. These men do as the men of
Succoth did, therefore these are as the men of Succoth were, etc.


A. I can say nothing to that; I know not what the men of Succoth were; or
whether there were such a people in the world.


B. It is your ignorance, and not to be excused; you know not the Scriptures,
and therefore your works must needs be bad, and you must walk as a man in the
dark; It is a very famous story, touching the men of Succoth, I Will relate it as
briefly as I can.

Gideon and his three hundred men were faint, yet pursuing after Z^ba Judge. 8.
4, 5.
and Zalmunna, Kings of Median, Isreal's enemies: And he said to the men of
Succoth, give, I pray you, loaves unto the people that follow me, for they are
faint: Gideon told them also, (as is likely) That he would requite their
kindness when God had delivered his enemies-up into his hands, whereof Gideon
made no question. The Princes of Succoth, living at ease, and faring
deliciously, hearkened not to Gideon, nor regarded how faint his men were: They
mock and jeere at Gideon; Yes, say they, you will return us our bread when you
have your enemies in your hands; When will that be? That is a doubtful case;
we will not part with our bread upon such an hazard. You think your self as
sure of your enemies, as if you had them in your hands; you see not at what
disadvantage you stand, we do see it: Your enemies are Kings, Kings will
help one the other, They have power, you are weak and faint; You have not
supply of necessaries, and think you to overcome two Kings? There is a great
peradventure. We will see the business cleared, and the doubt resolved, then
we shall know what is best for us to do; If you have the victory over the
Kings, then you shall have our bread; If the Kings have victory over you, then
they shall have our bread. Goe-on now and pursue, faint you may, and fall
down, and starve for us; you get no bread of us; we will not part with it at
a peradventure; You question not the victory; It is a great question to us; Are
the heads of Zeba and Zalmunna Verse 6.
in thy hands, that we should give bread unto thine Army? This story is as
soon understood as read; and as easily applied to our neuters now adays.


A. Very well; But how prove you, That neuters were so grievously punished in
ancient days?


B. I prove it first out of the Roman Chronicle; The body of Metius Suffetius,
who stood neuter, to spy which fide was strongest, that thereunto he might
turn, was adjudged by a Council of war, to have his body tied unto two
teemes of four horses, which halled contrary ways; So his body was drawn
asunder, and plucked into two pieces accordingly.


A. What have Christians to do with what the Romans did? It was the first and
last punishment that ever the Romans executed with so little respect, or none
at all, To the Laws of humanity, says the Historian himself.


B. Well then, let it go, though it instructs us very well, what may lawfully
be don to neuters now adays. But we must not so lightly pass over what we
read in the sacred Text, upon which we were even now, and must set a mark.
We read, how the men of Succoth jeered and upbraided Gideon; Now read what
Gideon replies to them; Therefore when the Lord has delivered Zeba and
Zalmunna into mine hands, then will I tear your flesh with the thorns of the
Wilderness, and with briars. And as he threatened to deal with them, so he did
deal; He took the Elders of the City, and thorns of the Wilderness, and
briars, and with them he taught the men of Succoth. He taught them! A sore
Teaching! but very exemplary for these men in our days, They that will not be
taught with words, must be taught with pain.


A. Yea, but Gideons teaching is no rule for us so to teach; he taught with
briars and thorns, we must be more merciful.


B. More merciful! mercy to the wicked is cruelty to the good: pity to Gods
enemies is but a fruit of bitter hatred to His friends. But I will pass over
that too, yet we must not pass over, but observe with all observation, what
the LORD says; Curse you Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord; Curse ye bitterly
the Inhabitants thereof.


A. I pray you, what was this Meroz?


B. Surely, I cannot tell; An obscure people they were, they had no relation to
Israel, farther than that they were men, partaking of the same common nature,
near adjoining to Israel; and beholding the distress; lookers-on, when
mighty Adversaries were before them; Israel, Gods people, distressed behind
them, yet lookers on Isreal's affliction, in the day of their calamity;
beholding it with the eye, but not regarding it.


A. Was that all?


B. All! It was enough to bring a curse, and to make it cleave unto them for
ever; Therefore curse ye Meroz, never cease Indesinenter, Jun.
calling for a curse, till the curse come; In cursing curse ye him, because
they came not out to help the Lord against the mighty. The distress of a
person, or a people, is enough to command pity: If a person or people be
fallen into the hands The day of Jacobs troubles, is a discovering day. When
Jacob is fallen into the hands of thieves, (the prince of robbers) he shall
know who is his neighbor
of thieves: But I will not make an if of the matter; That, which was a parable
anciently, is a truth now, and relates to Ireland and England both, These two
Nations are fallen into the hands of thieves, God so disposing and suffering it
to be Now woe to the lookers-on, and passers by on the other side, woe to them.
Now is the distinguishing time, now we shall know our friends, who is our
neighbor and our brother; he that shows mercy, he is the neighbor, though
the adversary and enemy says, He is a Samaritan and has a Devil.


A. By this account now, which you have given of Meroz, and of Israel in
distress, fallen into the hands of Thieves, Zealand and Holland should come-in
now to help England.


B. That they should sure, stronger bonds and engagements are upon them, then
was upon Meroz. Stronger, said I? I should have said more: But I forbear.


A. What means it then, that they have shipped over their Artillery,
instruments of death, to furnish the enemy and adversary?


B. You must lay the blame of that -- upon the Devils instruments, ungrateful
wretches, there and here, and every where, lay that -- upon them, and not upon
the country, or people. The adversary prevailed there, and thrust forth a ship
or two fraighted as we know; but doubtless the Hollanders do know what the
English have done for them, to render them a free People: they will not send
over instruments of death therewith to cut English throats, or to make them
slaves; they abhor the thoughts of such a requital for old unrecountable
favors from the English: How much English noble blood has been shed to
maintain their cause! How much?


A. Ambassadors are now come to mediate a peace, they say.


B. A peace! What, etc. all the world knows what follows, God is making
inquisitio^ for blood: he will require it at the hands of them that shed it.
And now the Parliament cannot take it ill that they are not treated with about
the thing some call Peace: The GOD of gods, KING of kings, and LORD of Lords,
is not treated with. And yet when he gives quietness, who can make trouble?
And when he hides his face, who can behold him, whether it be done against a
nation, or against Job. 34. 29.
a man only? To shut-up all: Thus we have concluded from unquestioned
premises, That though Holland hold their peace, and stand-Neuters, as Meroz
did, Yet enlargement and deliverance shall arise to the Est. 4. 14.
Church of England from another place. It is a comfortable promise, He shall
send from heaven and save me. England shall be saved, the Church Psalm. 57. 3.
there shall have a glorious salvation, that it shall. But yet God and man
expects neighbors should show themselves neighbors. And who knows whether
all the kindness England showed to Holland, was not for such a time as this.
But if this move not, surely the curse upon Meroz (well thought on) will move;
A cursed generation, cursed from Gods mouth, and commanded to be cursed by all
the people of God, Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye
bitterly the inhabitants thereof, Judge. 5. 23.
because they came not to the help of the LORD, to the help of the LORD against
the mighty. So shall all thine enemies perish, O Lord, they shall leave their
names for a curse to posterity: But they that love thy Name, shall be as the
morning light, which increases more and more till the perfect day. So be it.
Amen.


FINIS.

