JOSEPH Paralled by the present PARLIAMENT, in his sufferings and advancement.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS, on their solemn day
of Thanksgiving, Feb. 19. 1645. For the great mercy of God in the reducement of
the City of Chester, by the Forces under the command of Sr William Brereton.

By FRA. WOODCOCK Minister of Olaves Southwarke, one of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order of the said House.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

Die Lunae, 23 Februarij, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master Rous do give
thanks to Master Woodcock and Master Case, for the great pains they took in
the Sermons they preached at the entreaty of this House on Thursday last
(being a day set apart for a day of public Thankesgiving for the taking of
Chester) and to desire them to Print their Sermons. And it is Ordered that none
shall Print their Sermons without license under their hands writing.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Christopher Meredith to print my Sermon.

FRA. WOODCOCK.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THE many successes of late vouchsafed you, has made you as frequent in your
solemn rejoicing, as in your solemn mourning, and for these several months
together, you have not oftener kept days of fasting and prayer, then days of
feasting and praises.

Formerly in so much hazard have mattes been, that not daring to tarry the
coming of the monthly fasts, you were glad to take up extraordinary ones
between; whereas now, not so much of necessity, as of course, you celebrate a
day of fast once a month.

Not long ago, the cry of every man was, what shall I do? now it either is or
ought to be, what shall I render? so mercifully has God changed your water into
wine, and taking away your sackcloth, girded you with gladness.

And now, what is your wisdom, but to endeavor to walk worthy these great
deliverances, and the God of them; which if you do, you may be confident, that
he that has and daily does deliver, will go on also to finish deliverance; but
if by doing any wicked thing you shall evilly requite him, how soon can he turn
you to your fasting again, or to something else that is worse, and instantly
blast all that smiling hopefullnesse of things already vouchsafed?

But I hope better things, and shall not fail to pray for better, you having a
right to challenge this and much more from

Your avowed servant for Christ, Fra. Woodcock.

To my dear and much Honored Contrymen, the well affected of the County and
City of CHESTER.
MY affection to my native place, now surrendered, together with my interests in
many of you thereto appertaining, will easily bear me out, in that I take the
boldness in a few words to congratulate with you the surrender of it: That a
mother City in England is this day preserved, cannot but be matter of rejoicing
to every good English heart, how much more must it be unto me (who being so
nearly related to it, am more especially concerned in its preservation. Give me
leave therefore, who sometimes have mourned with you, and for you, now to
rejoice also with and for you; and to endeavor to help forward your present
rejoicing, as in time past I have endeavored your mourning.

Surely God has wrought a great deliverance for you, a very great deliverance,
and I plainly perceive you shall need all the help and furtherance that may
be, to enable you to render to him according to the benefit. It Is true (I
confess) the matter looked upon with a carnal eye, will not perhaps appear so
great and considerable, and some of you beholding the ruins of the place, and
perceiving also your particular estates gone and your houses burnt to the
ground, may say, that as to you Chester is lost still: Yet notwithstanding,
considering what advantage the gaining of the place is to the public, and to
the most of you in particular; withal duly weighing the circumstances of time,
means, manner of gaining it, who is there will not be enforced to say it is a
very great mercy?

Me thinks in that it is Chester which is reduced, to me imports exceeding much
of mercy, that that place is gained, which was the only door of hope remaining
unshut against the bloody Irish, sure the Kingdom looks upon it as a very great
mercy, and who is not glad that Chester will no more let in those barbarous
Irish, either into it self, or into the Kingdom?

The time of its surrender has much also in it of mercy; for, was it when the
enemy was very high and prospering? was it at such a time as they could well
spare us such a place as Chester? or rather were they not very low, exceedingly
declined, even gasping for life? and with giving up the City, did they not in
those parts at least wise give up the ghost also? and having let go Chester,
will they be able to hold any thing after it?

I may not omit the means whereby you won the City, for there is much of mercy
in that also; and was not your spiritual militia the chief in gaining of it?
may I not be confident that 'twas your close beseeging Heaven did contribute
more to the surrender of it, then your close beseeging the place it self? and
did not your fasting starve the enemy out of Chester? that kind having seldom
been cast out of any place, but by prayer and fasting: and speaks not this a
great deal of mercy?

And though the Lord has long delaid you, and your hopes have suffered a
frequent defeazure, yet has he not hereby taught you to overcome your hasty
impatience, the overcoming whereof (in Solomon's judgment) is more then if any
of you singly and alone had conquered the City: Besides there is hope you will
come now weaned Prove. 19. 32.
to your comforts, you having been so long and so much weaned from them, and
the throwing you out of your place and habitation, has taught you not to look
for in the present life, an abiding City: and is not all this rich mercy?

And what though you come many of you to empty houses, yea to no houses, yet
finding all peaceable and quiet within, what a mercy is it: If you have not
saved your estates, yet if you can say (as he) I have saved the Sir Ralph
Piercie at his death, vide Speed.
bird in my breast: what a mercy is it?

If conscience be not wasted, though every thing else is, and though your state
is broken, yet that your peace is not broken, what a mercy is it? If you have
been kept free from those conscience wasting oaths, and those peace breaking
practices which others have been miserably entangled with, oh what a mercy.
And for your estates, how speedily can the Lord repair you: how quickly have
some I know among you got up their estates and trade again, which for owning a
good cause they have for a time been hindered of: And is not the promise the
same; If any man forsake father or mother, lands or houses, etc. and I make no
doubt of the same if not fuller performance.

So then, the mercy being great, great to the public and to your selves great
also, what remains, but that you consider how to render unto the Lord suitable
to the greatness of it. And for this purpose, give me leave first of all to
advise, that seeing God has surrendered the City into your hands, you would
deliver it up again into his hands, my meaning is, that you procure such a
Magistracy and Ministry to it, as may govern and watch over it for God.

In the Next place, sin no more; You know whose counsel it is, forget not to
repent of old sins, beware of committing new, either whereof may expose you
to new misery.

Be at one among your selves, Oh that Chester might Psalm. 122. 3.
be as Jerusalem, a City compacted together; A City divided against it self
cannot stand.

And you that are the Lords, serve him in that good old way, I mean in
humility, self-denial, in love, without dissimulation and faith unfeigned,
wherein I know some of you well experienced: The Lord in repossessing you of
your habitations, has shown you real kindness, requite him not with fancies,
serve him not with empty notions, which is but too too common every where at
this day.

And if in these you shall be careful, I make no question but you shall
quickly forget your former trouble, have your losses repaired, and find in
conclusion it was good for you that you have been afflicted: which that you
may, shall be the unfeigned desire of

Your true friend to serve you in Chrict Jesus, FRA. WOODCOCK.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of COMMONS, on their solemn day
of Thanksgiving, for the reducing of the City of CHESTER. February 19. 1645.
GENESIS 49. 23, 24. The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and
hated him.

But his bow ahode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong,
by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob: from thence is the shepherd, the stone
of Israel.


THE Patriarch Jacob perceiving his end now very near approaching, sends, and
calls for his children about him, intending before he dies to share a fathers
blessing and counsel among them: his father before he died had both blessed
and counseled him; and he now dying, is desirous to do the like also for his
children.

Wherein is held forth a pattern most worthy the imitation of all careful
parents, who, though they cannot on their deathbeds (as Jacob) prophecy a
blessing, yet may they pray for one; and may hope also the words of a dying
parent will leave impression on their children, although possibly they have
slighted whatever counsel has been given before.

In this chapter is recorded the whole carriage of the business, how the
Patriarch bespeaks his children, and what portions he leaves to each of them:
The whole chapter being nothing else, but (as Luther styles it) The last will
and testament of the Patriarch Jacob.

The verses that I have chosen out of it, do treat concerning Joseph; the elder
of the two darlings of Jacob, his beloved Joseph: And may either be looked upon
as entire and absolute, or else as they usher in the words that follow after.

Take them as they refer to that which follows, and so they are the preface to
that full and ample blessing, which Jacob was now ready to pronounce upon the
head of his dear Joseph.

The Patriarch fearing perhaps lest Joseph's blessing, being greater then that
of his other brethren, might therefore expose him anew to their envy, before he
proceeds to bless him, he therefore first prefaces something of Joseph's
goodness, as also of his brethrens former unkindnesse, if happily by the mention
thereof he might prevent their envy.

Look upon them as absolute, and incoherent (in which capacity I shall deal
with them) and so we shall perceive them to be Joseph in little, or, an
abstract of the life and (if I may say so) adventures of Joseph. And thus looked
upon, they offer to your view these particulars.

1. Joseph encountered, assaulted, in these words, The archers have sorely
grieved him, shot at him and hated him.

2. Joseph unconquered, not prevailed upon by any assault or encounter of his
enemies, in these words, But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his
hands were made strong.

3. Joseph not only not conquered, but prevailing and wearing the trophies of
his conquest, in these words, From hence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel.

4. The mean whereby all this is brought to pass, in these words, By the hands
of the mighty God of Jacob.

To open these particulars a little.

The archers sorely grieved him, shot at him, hated him. (...) Ad ver^um and
amarificaverunt cum, and jaculati sunt and oderunt.
The archers shot at him: By which are meant Joseph's brethren that hated him,
sold him; whom therefore the Patriarch might now in his last words glance at,
at once to leave a record of his abominating their cruelty toward their
brother, as also happily to beget in them a deeper sense of their faultiness
therein, of which they could not easily be over sensible.

Joseph's brethren, I say, are the archers that Jacob aims at, as also all
those others that did practice against the life or welfare of Joseph.

Nor is it strange in Scripture, for persecutours of the Saints to be accounted
archers, and their malicious practicing against them, either in word or deed,
to be reckoned a shooting arrows at them. Thus I am sure the persecutour is
described, Psalm. 11. 2. For lo (says he) the wicked bend their bows, they
make ready their arrow upon the string, that they may privily shoot at the
upright in heart. In like manner you find him described, Psalm. 64. 3. To which
purpose also, if need were, might be added several other Scriptures.

In the Hebrew it is, The masters of arrows shot at (...) ^omini sagittarum,
uti supra, cap. 37. (...) Dominus sumniorum, Peritus so^^iorum, ita Pro^. 22.
^4. (...) procl^^^^ ad iran
him, and hated him; The masters of arrows, that is, your prime archers,
subtle, wily enemies, accurate markes-men, such as know how to kill dead with
their malice: thereby intimating, The worse the persecutour is, he is the
better archer. Have thou therefore a malicious heart against the Saints, a bad
tongue, thou art then in Scripture language (although its no commendation) a
good archer. The archers sorely grieved him, etc.

It follows, But his bow abode in strength, and the (...) Ad verbum. Et habita
vit in forti ar^us ejus, and roberaverunt se brachia ejus. Chald. Contriti sunt
sortitud ne arcus little, and dissoluti sunt nervs brachij. little. Sed obstat
assixum textu Hebreo quod utrob^que est singular. Riv.
arms of his hands were made strong. The Patriarch continues the allegory, and
his meaning herein seems in short this: That neither could any endeavor turn
Joseph aside from God, nor yet any practices of his enemies, bring upon him
that destruction which they desired. His bow abode in strength, etc.

And this in the next place is ascribed to God, in (...) ^ manibus ^otentis
Jacob. Vul. Per manus. Sunt qui ex epitheto (...) mysterium Trinitatis
^i^antur, uti ^^. verbo (...) Genesis 1. 1. Sed ^ura. sunt hujusmodi caballistica.
these words; By the hands of the mighty God of Jacob: So that whereas Joseph
was preserved from sinning, as also, from sinking; from sinning, being
assaulted by most powerful temptation; from sinking, being persecuted with
bitterest malice; the Patriarch ascribes it all to the graciously over ruling
providence and hand of God.

From whence also, as it is in the last clause, Is the (...) Iud. Pastor lapi^
Israel.
Shepherd, the stone of Israel. That is, from which dispose of providence it is
also come to pass, that Joseph (for I conceive it is meant of him) I say, that
Joseph is become the shepherd of Israel, that is, the sustainer and Hinc
Iosephum appellat Syra. cides, (...),
feeder of his father Israel and his family, which otherwise by reason of the
sore famine then abroad in those countries, might have all perished: As also
the stone of Israel too, which although such sometimes as the builders had
refused, and his brethren had thrown aside (herein, as in other things he being
a type of Christ) yet now in regard he sustained them all, was become the
foundation and corner stone of the whole family. From whence is the Shepherd
the stone of Israel.

The sum of all is this much. Whereas Joseph was malign'd, and sold away into
slavery by his brethren, nevertheless God was with him and preserved him, and
in conclusion for a recompense, advances him to be both preserver and head of
them that sold him.

Thus you have an account of the words as they are calculated to the condition
of Joseph; which yet with little alteration will serve to represent the
condition of others also.

They show forth the life and story of our blessed Savior: and so I may call
them a little gospel; They clearly holding forth the chief occurrents of
Joseph's life, in all whereof Joseph was to be a type and forerunner of our
Savior.

They will in great measure serve to represent from first to last the various
state and changes of the Church: and so are an Epitome of Ecclesiastical
history.

And to come somewhat nearer, they lively delineate the present state of
matters in our own Kingdom, especially as they carry an aspect toward the good
people of it; and so I may call them, a brief Chronicle of the affairs of
England.

Yea, and which comes most full and home to the purpose in hand, they serve
most aptly to declare the several passages of the affairs wherein your selves
have been concerned (Honorable and beloved) your selves, I say, who stand for
the good people of the Kingdom, and are their representees; and so I may call
them, a complete, although a short Iournall of the present Parliament.

They show you Joseph low and in the wane: and has not this sometimes been
your condition? They show you Joseph supported: and have you even at the lowest
wanted your supports? They show you Joseph in the end prevailing, and advanced
far above the pitch of those that hated him: and are you less at this day? And
the same wise and gracious hand that wrought for Joseph, doing all this for you
also.

So that mutatis mutandis, how appositely may I say to you the present
Parliament, and in you to all the godly people of the Kingdom: The archers have
sorely grieved you, shot at you and hated you, howbeit your bow has abode in
strength, and the arms of your hands have been made strong, by the hands of
the mighty God of Jacob, from whence also you are become the shepherds and
stone of England?

Having thus cleared my way by opening the words, your selves perceiving by
this time they will not come altogether unsuitable either to time or persons; it
remains I observe something from them: from the first particular whereof, viz.
Joseph encountered, set upon, in these words, The archers sorely grieved him,
shot at him, hated him, you may please to take this;

It is incident to the best of men, to be infested with crafty malicious
enemies.

Joseph's unconquerednesse, notwithstanding any assault or encounter of his
enemies, in these words, But his how abode in strength, and the arms of his
hands were made strong;

Although the godly are assaulted by enemies, yet are they not wholly overcome
by them.

Joseph's advancement, in these words, He is the shepherd and stone of Israel.

The Saints being assaulted, are not only not overcome, but in conclusion
prevail, and become the head of their enemies.

Joseph is preserved and advanced, in these words; By the hands of the mighty
one of Jacob.

That the Saints are not overcome, yea, that prevailing they become the head of
their enemies, they owe it to the gracious hand, and wise dispose of God. The
archers sorely grieved him, shot at him, hated him, but his bow, etc.

I begin with the first of these; It is incident to the best of men, to be
insested with crafty malicious enemies.

And who is there of the Saints that has not had the experience hereof? and
which of them either now upon earth, or already in Heaven, that sometime or
other has not been endangered by malicious enemies? What Lamb of Jesus
Christ, whom never Wolf grind at? what Tuitle of his, which never any ravenous
bird attempted upon? You see it Joseph's case, the archers shot at, and galled
him exceedingly; nor is he alone, I am sure 'twas David's case also, whom ever
and anon thorowout his book of Psalms, you find either complaining of
multitudes of cruel enemies, or else supplicating the Lord to be delivered
from them.

I need not tell you 'twas the case of our Savior, herein the Antitype of
Joseph, whom Psalm. 22. 12. you find complaining of bulls, many bulls, yea fat
bulls encompassing of him, which bulls indeed never left pushing and goring at
him, till such time as they had gored him to the heart, till they had pusht him
into his grave.

And as it fared with the Captain of our salvation, so fares it with his
followers: as with him the head, so fares it with the Church his body, and all
the members of it. The Church in Egypt found a Pharaoh that Exodus 1. 8.
knew not Joseph, nor would know them neither: In aftertimes what hard things
did they suffer from Senacharib, Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus, and such like
barbarous and savage enemies? In the foremost times of the Gospel, they were
harrased out by Rome heathen: in these later days, by Rome Antichristian:
there being indeed this Law indispensible laid upon all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, They must suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3. 12.


And this suffering of good men from bad, comes to pass in part from that
immovable fewd, and irreconcilable distance that is between them: there is an
enmity put between the seeds, from whence it comes to pass, that he that is
after the flesh, persecutes him that is after the spirit, and by reason of
which malicious instinct, the hound does not more eagerly, cheerfully,
unweariedly pursue the fleeing hare, then these, although uninstructed by any,
as also unprovoked, do readily follow the chase of the people of God.

Sometimes it comes to pass through the fault and folly of the godly
themselves, who grievously miscarrying, are therefore delivered over into the
hands of those that hate them, to be chastened by them.

But never does it happen, that the Saints fall into the hands of such as hate
them, but it comes to pass by the wise and all-disposing hand of God: And he
has several great ends in it:

Sometimes to give wicked men thereby an opportunity of filling up the measure
of their sin. For as God has set every Saint a measure of grace, which he must
come up to before he dies; in like manner has he set to every reprobate a
determinate and fixed size and measure of sin, which that some of them may fill
up, they are therefore permitted to afflict and persecute his people.

Sometimes to prove the Saints, who by their sufferings from evil men, are
tried, as gold is tried by the fire, the tried Christian being the best
Christian, as the tried gold is the best gold.

Sometimes to purge them, so that look as the fan purges away the chafe from
the wheat, the furnace the dross from the good metal, so do the sufferings of
the godly, purge away what is drossie and bad in them also.

And as to purge them, so to make them more heavenly, that as it is observed,
the waters of the deluge raised the Arc nearer Heaven, so do these floods of
ungodliness and ungodly men, raise the Saints higher above the world, and so
nearer also unto Heaven. In short, that I stay not too long in common-placing
the point, my aim in this and the other that follow being especially
application; whatever other end the Lord designs, in giving his people over
into their enemies hands, this he fails not to bring to pass, assuredly to do
his people good in the later end.

Joseph? and has not this been the case of the good people of this Kingdom?
has not this been the hard lot of the present Parliament? yea, does face more
answer face then their condition and his do in this matter resemble one
another? Give me leave to produce an instance in a few things, to make out the
parallel: nor will it at all mar your thanksgiving this day, nay, it will
help and heighten it rather, that I mention some of that trouble and misery,
from which in good measure you are already delivered.

First therefore we read in some of the Chapters foregoing, that Joseph was
hated, maligned, so also Cha. 37. 4.
speaks the text, the archers shot at him, and hated him. And has not this
been the condition of the godly of this Kingdom? has not this been the hard
lot of the present Parliament? yea, tell me what thing in the world has been
so maligned as you have been? The malice of former times seems to be but
childrens play, in comparison of that is now adays: they were but children in
malice, to use the Apostles phrase, in comparison 1 Cor. 14. 20.
of the full-grown malignants of our times.

The Roman historian making mention of an encounter between Brutus the Consul,
and Aruns Tarquinius Florus lib. 1. cap. 10.
the ravisher of Lucretia, upon the fall of both of them in the encounter, has
this fancy, says he, Mutuo vulnere periere, quasi adulterum Brutus usque ad
inferos sequeretur: They both died together, as if Brutus had meant to pursue
the ravisher even to hell it self. This is but his fancy. But our days and
Climate has brought forth men of such incomparable malice, as (if they are not
belied) have professed a willingness to go to hell indeed, so that they might
carry but some leading men of Parliament along with them. And truly if
Malignants are archers, as my text says they are, for my part I know none to
be compared with the English archer.

But further, Joseph was scorned, derided; they called him Dreamer, says the
story, and they could not speak Chap. 37. 4. and 19.
peaceably to him. And are not both you and we herein become like Joseph? Oh
the spiteful scorns, contemptuous names, of Roundhead, Puritan, Anabaptist,
Rebel, etc. that have been daily cast upon us! Oh the scandalous, malicious
Declarations, invectives, Libels composed of the elixar and spirits of malice,
that have been set forth against us! Oh the desperate surmizes insinuated, the
horrid criminations the enemy has forged, in all whereof they have precisely
Calum^iare fortiter aliquid adhae^^bit.
observed their masters rule, calumniating with all their might, hoping that
somewhat at lest ways would stick upon us.

Again, Joseph was sold, sold into slavery, and this together with the former
done by his brethren. And Gen 37. 27.
have not we of this Kingdom been bought and sold? has it not been attempted,
yea effected in great measure, to bring us (as Joseph) into Egyptian slavery? I
beseech you what were your High Commission or Starchamber else, but those hard
taskmasters that Pharaoh had set over us? and what all the taxations,
monopolies, levies, illegal imprisonments we groaned under, save only the
apparent badges and demonstrations of our slavery? yea and all this done by our
brethren, our own flesh and blood, even the men of our own nation. I appeal to
you, beloved, were they not English Counselors that sold us into Egyptian
bondage? were they not English Prelates that conspired to sell their brethren
of the Ministry into Romish slavery? Genesis 39. 11, 11.


Again, Joseph was sold into the hands of a bad mistress, he happened to meet with
a very bad mistress. And do I need to speak out and say, how like in this we
have been to Joseph? Genesis 3^. 37. 18.


Further, Joseph's wanton mistress, when she could not have her will of him, she
practices to destroy him; adultery and bloodshed well cohering: And since ours
could not obtain her will upon us, oh the tragedies, oh the blood that she
has shed in the three Kingdoms!

Once more, Joseph was forgotten in his sufferings, Genesis ^0. ult.
and Pharaohs butler, who had received kindness from him when in like
condition, yet being himself at liberty, remembers not the affliction of
Joseph. And has it not so fared with us also? and have not some of our
beyond sea neighbors, your Low Countries I mean, have they not, I say,
forgotten our affliction? and instead of helping us forth of it (which had been
but paying the debt they owed us) have they not rather by continual supplying
the enemy, helped forward our affliction?

So that if because Joseph was reproached, hated, sold, etc. it is said, the
archers sorely grieved him, shot at him, hated him; how truly may it be spoken
of our selves also? we having seen our own and Joseph's condition in all the
severals forementioned, a clear, an exact parallel: which yet we ought not to
have been discouraged at, neither merely from hence to have grown jealous of
our own, or the goodness of the cause we have engaged in, it being abundantly
cleared both from Joseph's case, as also from several others, That it is
incident to the best of men, to be infested with dangerous and malicious
enemies.

Although the godly are infested and assaulted by enemies, yet are they not
wholly overcome by them.

This was Joseph's case: The archers (says the text) shot at him, etc. but it is
added, His bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong:
All his brethrens malice could go no farther then to sell him; and being sold,
and sold into the hands of a wicked mistress, he was neither overcome by her
solicitations to destroy his soul, nor for refusal of her, could she so far
prevail as to take away his life. 'Twas David's hard lot (as was before shown)
to be infested with cruellest enemies; Saul and his Courtiers shot many a
poisoned arrow at him: yea, so often was he shot at, and the arrows fell so thick
about him, as that he gives himself for lost, concludes he shall be hit at
last, makes account he should one day perish by the hand of Saul. But that it
was his weakness and mistake, the event abundantly cleers: for if you consult
the title of Psalm. 18. you find it expressly this, A Psalm of David, the
servant of the Lord, who spoke unto the Lord the words of this song, in the day
that the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand
of Saul. Observe it, David that fears that one day he shall perish by the hand
of Saul, one day gives thanks for an absolute deliverance, as from all other
enemies, so also from the hand of his enemy Saul.

The Churches condition has been alike also, as her self expresses, Psalm. 129.
1, 2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say,
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: what follows? but they have
not prevailed against me.

And no marvel; for although it well consists with Gods ends, that sometimes
his people be humbled and brought very low, yet does it not at all, that the
enemy should be lifted up over high: which yet they would be, if at any time
they could obtain an absolute conquest upon his people: To this purpose speaks
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. 26, 27. I thought (says the Lord) to have scattered my
people into corners, and caused their remembrance to have ceased from men: did
I not fear the rage of their enemies, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord
has not done all this. As if he had said, It very well sorts with my purpose
to bring my people very low, if so be the sinking of that balance over-low,
would not overmuch lift up the balance of their enemies.

Again, although it very well agrees with the Lords intent and meaning, that
his people be persecuted, and suffer from their enemies, that their enemies
thereby might be ripened for destruction, yet is it not at all his mind, that
together with their own, the enemy should bring destruction upon his people
also; which yet it is apparent they do, when they wholly over-overcome them. And
further, although it be the mind of God that his people should suffer by evil
men, to the intent that by those sufferings of theirs they might be both proved
and purged; yet is it not his pleasure, that either the furnace should be made
so hot, or they continue so long in it, till he lose his metal, which would
certainly come to pass, did the enemy wholly prevail: For if the rod of the
wicked should Psalm. 125. 3.
rest upon the lot of the righteous, would they not at last put forth their
hand and touch iniquity? From all which it is a clear case, That although the
Saints may be assaulted, infested by enemies, yet are they not wholly overcome
by them.

Honorable, beloved, it cannot be denied, but that the archers have sorely
grieved you, shot at you, hated you; nevertheless has not your bow abode in
strength, and the arms of your hands have been made strong, and to this day
they have not obtained a full conquest over you? Indeed crafty malicious men
have tried their utmost, have vomited upon you their most deadly poison, and
all to blast you, to make you infamous for ever: but have they prevailed? have
they by all their canker and venom belcht forth upon you, been able to deprive
you of your name and honor? or rather shall not you be had in honor, when
their memorial shall rot and perish, and be blotted out from under Heaven? I
say not but you have sometime been reduced to exigents and lowness, you have
been brought sometimes to the pits brink, if not thrown with Joseph into the
pit; but yet has ever the pit shut its mouth upon you, and rendered you hopeles
of recovering out of it? If (as the Apostle speaks) you have been troubled on 2
Cor. 4. 8, 9.
every side, yet have you been distressed? if perplexed at any time, yet have
you been in despair? if persecuted, have you been altogether forsaken? if cast
down, yet have you been destroyed? When were your affairs so lost, so broken as
now the enemies are? and when has your bow so much slugg'd, or your arms
grown so feeble? I mean, when was ever your condition so desperate, that when
the enemy in any of their expresses or Declarations, has shot Traitor and
Rebel at you, you might not, notwithstanding any lowness of your condition,
have shot back something else in answer, then your humble subjects?

The archers I must needs say, have shot some near shoots, that of Brainford
was a near one, and so was that of Bristow: our loss of Bristow went exceeding
near us; but (blessed be the Lord) never did any hit the heart to this day:
London, Westminster, whitherto the heads of the Tribes are gathered, and which
are indeed the very heart of the Kingdom, these have been safe, as if the Lord
had said of them, as sometime of Jerusalem, The enemy shall not shoot an arrow
into them. Isa. 37. 33.
Their aim has been indeed at us from the beginning, but they have either shot
short, or wide, or over, at least ways something or other has been the
matter, and they have not hit the mark they aimed at to this day. How many
days have they set themselves for their coming to London, boasting such a time
they would certainly come and divide the spoil of London, and satisfy their
rage and lust both together? but how may I say to them as our Savior to Peter,
says he, when thou wast young, thou girdest thy self, and went whither thou
would, but when thou art old, thou shall stretch out thy hands, and another
shall gird thee: So I to them, when they were joviall and prospered, how often
have they pointed themselves a day of coming hither, though in the winding up,
we see them glad to come in by a day of your pointing? they themselves have
often heretofore set themselves a day for their coming to London, now let them
look to it, if they come not in by the day of your setting.

So that in this also you perceive your condition alike to Joseph's, which
should exceedingly animate you in your work; your bow has abode in strength,
and the arms of your hands have been made strong, you neither being hitherto
so far prevailed upon as to forego a good conscience, nor yet to be ruined and
destroyed for keeping of it; God having made good to you this truth also, that
however the people of God may be assaulted, infested by enemies, yet are they
not wholly overcome by them.

The godly being assaulted, are not only not overcome, but in conclusion
prevail, and become the head of their enemies.

Thus it was with Joseph, who although sometime the most abject maligned one of
all Isreal's family, yet at last becomes both the shepherd and stone of Israel:
Thus it happened to our Savior, who although a stone despised and rejected of
the builders, yet in conclusion becomes the head of the corner. Psalm. 118. 12.


And this comes to pass, sometimes that the godly may be made amends unto for
their sufferings: Sometimes the Lord recompenses the services of wicked men;
thus had Nebuchadnezzar the conquest and spoil of Egypt for his service done
against Tire: and if Ezekiel. 29. 18, 19, 20.
he reward wicked men's services, will he not much more recompense his peoples
sufferings?

Sometimes to vex and torment their enemies, to whom what greater vexation,
then to see the men that they so much detested, advanced above them? What
greater torment to Haman, then that Mordecai should be the man whom the King
would honor?

Sometimes for the good of the enemies themselves, and this is plainly the case
in hand: For had not Joseph been sold into Egypt, and there advanced, both they
that sold him, yea and that whole family might have been lost and destroyed,
through want and famine. And had not our Savior suffered, that afterterward he
might be exalted, how had neither any of those from whom he suffered, or any
other been saved by him?

as Joseph's, but like the bow of Jonathan that turned not back, that returned
not empty: it has prospered so 2 Samuel 1. 2^.
of late, as if like that bow in the clouds, it did assure us we should no
more have a deluge, a deluge of blood in England. How every whit as like are
you become to Joseph in your prosperous condition, as you saw your selves like
him erewhile in your affliction and sufferings? and if in regard of the
likeness of your sufferings I said, erewhile, the archers have sorely grieved
you, shot at you, hated you: how truly for your alike prospering may I now say,
Your bow has abode in strength, and the arms of your hands have been
strengthened, and you are this day become the shepherds and stone of England?
Give me but leave a little to make out this parallel also.

First therefore, we find that Joseph after depression Gen 41. 41.
and sufferings for a while, is in conclusion made Ruler over all the land of
Egypt: And is not your condition parallel, who whatever your former
difficulties and troubles have been, and howsoever straightened and confined, yet
are now become Rulers even over all the Kingdom?

But further, it happened that upon Joseph's advancement and prevailing, his
brethren (those archers that shot at him and hated him) do now come crouching,
Genesis 42. 6.
yea prostrating themselves before him. And who sees not since your
prevailings, those archers that have shot at you, and sorely grieved you, now
that their bows are broken, and their arrows spent, I mean their estates
consumed, and their credits cracked, submitting themselves, and daily coming in
to compound and make their peace with you? and (as the Psalmist fully expresses
the like case) the beasts of the reeds, by which the companies of archers are
Psalm 68. 31. (...) Feras arundinis, vide Ai^sw.
meant, submitting themselves every one of them with pieces of silver. Only
herein I could wish the parallel came more home; Joseph when his brethren
presented themselves before him, spoke roughly unto them, told them they were
spies: and till he perceived from them Genesis 41. 7, 8, ^.
some sense of their faultiness and sin, he did not (says the story) uncase,
and discover himself to be their brother Joseph. And ought not you to do so
too? and is it sufficient that you accept from your malignant brethren a moiety
of their estates, and they pay down their price of blood, without expecting
from them any acknowledgement at all of their bloud-guiltinesse? and should not
some of them at least wise be taken and challenged as spies, which if done, how
think you, would it not prove truer of them then of Joseph's brethren?

Again, Joseph sometime dreamed that the Sun, and Genesis 37. 9.
Moon and Stars did obeisance before him, and it came to pass accordingly:
The Stars which were his brethren did so, in like manner did the Sun and
Moon also: And have so many of your brethren come in, and submitted to you, and
some of them stars of the first magnitude: and may it not be expected, the
Sun and Moon (which are next unto them) will do so too? If they do not, for
my part I think they may do worse, however, I am confident, it will be never
the worse for you if they do not.

Yet further, Was Joseph advanced to be the shepherd and feeder of Israel, and
are not you at this day become the shepherds of England, the whole family of
England, as far as under your command, depending upon you? yea and that little
life, that yet remains in bleeding and famisht Ireland, being by your care and
means sustained and preserved also.

Again, Did Joseph become the stone of Israel, and are not you become the stone
of England? Indeed a stone of offense and stumbling to Popery, Prelacy,
Tyranny, and against which both they and their abettors impinging, are stumbled
and fallen, and I hope shall never rise again: but yet a precious foundation
stone, for Religion and public liberty, and by means whereof, both of them are
sustained and upheld at this day in England.

Again, For the manner and way of Joseph's advancement and getting up; Had
Joseph ever become Lord over Egypt, had he not first been sold a slave into
Egypt? was not his selling into Egypt (intended indeed to his ruin,) that which
was the very occasion and vantage ground to all the great honor and favor
there bestowed upon him? And I appeal to your selves, Honorable and beloved,
had public liberties (which are the cause you own, and stand for) gained so
much ground as at this day they have upon arbitrary power, if arbitrary power
had not enterpriz'd the subversion of all just liberties? and had not some
Romish brokers, endeavored to barter away our Religion to Rome and Popery, had
it in any likelihood arived to that height of reformation and purity it is come
to at this day? We had been (as Issachar) content to have borne our burdens, if
so be our taskmasters had not so long added to their weight, till at last they
became utterly insupportable. And had your selves (Noble Patriots) been so high
as now you are, if it had not been endeavored to lay you in the lowest dust?
and tell me, are you not grown great, even by the success of those battles,
which were on purpose by the enemy stricken with you, to bring you to nothing?
So that though I say not of you, perijstis, nisi perijstis, ye had been undone,
if ye had not been undone; yet may I say confidently, Ye had not been made, as
now you are, if first of all it had not been attempted to undo you.

Once more, Joseph was not only lifted up to his own advancement and honor,
but thereby even those that hated him fared the better also: And is not your
case alike? For though at present your Malignants acknowledge no beholdingness
to you; yet if hereafter they shall begin to look toward Religion, or shall
have need to seek for succor from the Laws and rights of the people of
England, must they not be beholding sor preservation of them (under God) to the
present Parliament?

So that to sum up all. If therefore because of Joseph's advancement, his
brethrens submission, and his sustaining both them and that whole family, it is
said of him. His bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made
strong, and he is therefore called, the shepherd and stone of Israel; how truly
may the like be spoken of your selves? your case in all the particulars above
mentioned (as is apparent) coming up fully unto Joseph's; God having made good
to you this truth also, The godly being assaulted, are not only not overcome,
but in conclusion prevail, and become the preservers and head of those that
hate them.

That the godly are not overcome, but in conclusion prevail, they ow it to the
overruling power and hand of God.

So much is here acknowledged by the Patriarch in the behalf of his Joseph,
says he, his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made
strong: but how comes it to pass? he adds, by the hands of the mighty one of
Jacob. If Joseph's hands are made strong, it is by the strong hands of the God
of Jacob.

So much likewise is acknowledged by the Psalmist Psa. 118 22, 23.
in the behalf of himself, as a shadow and type of Christ; says he, The stone
which the builders refused, is now become the head of the corner: This is the
Lords doing. If Christ become a stone of rejection, this is man's doing; but if
he become a corner stone, this (says the Psalmist) is the Lords doing.

And to say the truth, That Joseph's brethren should pack him away into Egypt,
(as they thought,) for his destruction, but indeed for his advancement, and
that Joseph's advancement should become the means of their preservation: In like
manner, that Christ's abasement from his brethren, should make way for his
exaltation, and his exaltation, a means of both their and our salvation (I mean
Jews and Gentiles salvation) whose doing can this be but the Lords doing? and
when men bring any thing to pass, by endeavoring to prevent it, and
accomplish it, by making what opposition they can against it (which apparently
was done in the case in hand) what else can this be but the will and work of
God?

and hand of God? If you have counseled well, is it not because God was in the
assembly of the Judges, and directed Psalm. ^8. ^4.
you? If your Armies have fought well, is it not because God has taught their
hands to war, and their fingers to fight, yea, himself fought for them? If by
storm and scalado they have taken in the strongest pieces of the enemy, is it
not by their God they have Psalm. 18. 19.
leaped over the wall? And in this last mercy, which this day is set apart to
bless God for; the taking in of that strong and important City of Chester,
although they that had the conduct of work, have no ways been wanting either
in diligence or faithfulness, yet must not both they, and we say in the
Psalmists language, Who Psalm. 60. 9, 10.
has led us into the strong City? have not thou, O God?

I think but how it has been with us, when God at any time has withdrawn his
helping hand from us: When God has not presided in our counsels, what
weaknesses, what distractions have accompanied them? how slow has been their
motion, and perhaps in conclusion altogether to no purpose?

And for action too, who knows not that no sooner God has turned his back upon
us, but we have turned our backs upon the enemy? and when our mighty ones have
not found with them the Lords hand, neither have any of our mighty ones been
able to find their own Psalm. 7^ 5.
hands.

And had the Lord now of late withdrawn his hand, what had been the
consequence? what else, but your bows broken, your arrows consumed, your Towns
given up, your Armies defeated, your Cause (I mean Religion and Liberties)
triumphed upon, and your selves (though in a much lower posture) crouching and
submitting to the enemy, as the enemy at this day submits to you.

But that you have prevailed, your arm been made strong, and now are advanced
to be the corner stone of the Kingdom: that liberties are enlarged and
greatned, by endeavors to straiten and destroy them; that Religion is advanced
to greater purity, by ways made use of wholly to corrupt it, and that a
Parliament is become the main support of both, a Parliament I say, a thing the
master builders slighted, refused, and without which they told us they could
sufficiently consult the welfare both of Religion and Liberty, that a
Parliament is now become the head of the corner, this certainly is the Lords
doing, and ought only to be ascribed to the mighty hand of God.

And now the main of my task is over, which was to draw a parallel 'twixt you
and Joseph, and to show Gods dealing alike to both: Let me for a close of all,
beseech you in a few things to parallel Joseph in his dealing with God, and I
have done. You have seen the carriage of God alike to both; oh that the
carriage of both might be alike to God.

1. Joseph was very careful of giving all honor unto God; and therefore when
Pharaoh tells him, he had heard he could interpret dreams, and do strange
matters, Joseph would not own it; no, says he, it is Genesis 4^. 16.
not in me, God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. In like manner do you,
and now you have heard this day of all the great things done for you, dare not
you to assume to your selves any whit of the glory; mention not the least
syllable of your own goodness, wisdom, prowess, speak not of your sword, and
your bow, but let this only voice be heard among you, God has given England
an answer of peace. Genesis 39 9.


2. Joseph was very fearful of sining against God, and therefore though
tempted by his mistress, and every thing conspiring to heighten the temptation,
yet voids all with this, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? So you, whether singly considered, or as a Parliament, oh be you wary how
you sin against God, and when temptation of any kind presents it self to you,
use Joseph's guard, and say, Now shall we do this thing, and sin against God?
yea expose your selves to any hazards, rather then adventure to sin against
God, and (as Joseph, if need be) prefer the cruellest imprisonment, and bonds
of iron, to the most pleasing captivity and bonds of sin.

3. Joseph was very sollicitous of the agreement of his Genesis 45. 24.
brethren, and therefore upon their return out of Egypt to their father, see
(says he) that you fall not out by the way: Oh do you in like manner: Oh lay
your charge upon brethren, to agree; suffer them not so far as in you lies,
to fall out one with another: And whether we have peace abroad or no, if it be
possible lets have peace as home; and whether we can agree with our adversaries
yea or no, if it be possible lets agree among our selves, lets not fall out by
the way.

Would God you could light upon any expedient to satisfy all; For my part I
know none: I perceive if no indulgence be afforded, 'twill please some, but
withal 'twill come very harsh and unpleasing unto others. Again, If you do
indulge, here is a very great difficulty; For who can ponere terminum? where will
you be able to affix a boundarie? and on the other hand, to leave it
boundless, not to say to an indulgence, hither shall thou go and no farther;
but, to leave every man to do that which is good in his own eyes, it was indeed
the case of Israel while they had no King, Judge. 17. 6.
I hope it shall never be the condition of England while they have a Parliament.

However, endeavor an agreement, and that, if it be possible, before you make
peace with enemies; for if they come, and find us not one, I dread to think
what manner use will be made of it: Endeavor it therefore: and then that God,
who in so many other things has made you so like Joseph, make you like him in
his blessing also, even doubling and trebling Joseph's double blessing upon the
head of every one of you: And may it always be true of the present Parliament;
Although the archers have sorely grieved you, shot at you, hated you, howbeit
your bow abides in strength, and the arms of your hands are made strong, by
the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, by whom you still continue the shepherds
and stone of England.

FINIS.

