'EYLOGIA.

The Parents blessing their Children: And the Children begging (on their Knees)
their Parents BLESSINGS, Are pious Actions, warrantable by the Word of God, and
practictised by Gods Saints and Servants.

With a Model of private Prayers, or occasional Helps in retired Devotions.

Legibus Comparatum est; ut Charitas liberorum Parents Amiciores redderet
Reipublicae, M.T. Cicero ad Brutum. By Ed. WOLLEY, D.D. and Chaplain in
ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed ly T. R. for William Palmer, at the sign of the Palm Tree in
Fleetstreet, 1661

Jacob blessing his sons And Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it
upon Emphraims head, who was y: younger, and his left hand upon Manassehs head:
guiding his hands wittingly: for Manasseh was the first born.

Gen: 48. ver: 14.



TO THE READER.
KIng Solomon counseled to take the little Foxes Cant. 2.15.
that spoiled the Vines and tender grapes, but King David his father
passionately complained Psalm 80.13.
against the Boar of the Wood, and the wild beasts of the Field that did wast
and devour the Vine that was brought out of Egypt and had filled the Land. The
Royal Prophet gives the Reason of that Ruin and desolation, why the Vine was
cut down and burnt up with fire Psalm. 80.12.
because all her hedges and fences were broken down. This latter Age has
produced many such wild and savage bruits, who Infatuated with Avarice and
Ambition, have neither feared God nor honored their King; nor spared any thing
that was sacred or Sovereign. The Rise of their ungodly Principles and
proceedings was m^unted (doubtless) from Infid^lity or Impiety, pride and
disobedience which precipitate a carnal mind into all varieties of desperate
Attempts; And through a want of the fear of God and true humility, a man
(though a Rational Creature) is little better then an Incarnate Devil. It is
highly necessary therefore to build our House a good Foundation; that when the
winds and storms and waves arise and blow and beat Against it, the Fabric may
neither shake nor fall. This may be most securely done by Laying Humility the
basis of our structure, and obedience a Corner stone more securely to incement
and Unite us toward God and toward Man: And this most clearly will have
success when it springs genuinely from this Native Root. Thus the Juice and
Sap in the Winter courteously returns toward the Roots to comfort their
Mother, which in the Spring dutifully ascends beautifying each branch and bow
with Blossoms Leaves or Fruit, and so to make a thankful Present to the
beams of the Sun their Father. This duty of honor and respect to Parents, man
may learn from the very vegetatives which spread forth their branches as their
hands and fingers toward Heaven, and at Autumn return a thankful sacrifice;
the Fruit that falls from their loaded and yielding Arms on their mother
Earth. It were a great shame for man the noblest Creature to be guilty of
Ingratitude; and as it is a foul Error to be Accounted a harsh Parent, so it
is a heavy crime to be looked upon as a dishonouring or disobedient Child.

Now that the Duties of these Relations may reciprocate with greater Comfort
and advantage to all Parties Concerned; this Discourse adventures abroad first,
that Parents instructing their Children to practice the Duty of asking Blessing
may be the better satisfied in the Truth, fitness, Custom, and Innocence of
their just Commands. Secondly, That Children thus honoring their Parents, and
depending on their favor, and so daily craving their Blessings: may the more
cheerfully continue their Testimonies of honor in their humble and
affectionate Comportment toward them: And so by this meaues A mutual
Communication of of Love and Honor, and the duty of asking Blessing in a Moral
Civil and sober behavior, may more happily be derived to Posterity. Thirdly,
This may be as a Cordial to strengthen and settle some weaker stomachs: which
have been poisoned or infected with the Pharisaical Leven or New Doctrine of
this later Vertiginous Age, which in an Athenian humor or faction, has gaped
after nothing but News and Noveltie. Fourthly, The Conscientious and Innocent
practice of this Duty rightly set and stated (it is hoped) may prove as a
Pilot: after these Storms and Tempests of Vast Confusion; to guide all sober
minded Tempers into the Haven of Prudence and Peace, and that neither the
Parents nor Childrens souls may be longer tossed with every puff of new wind
and factious doctrine of humane and Temporizing faction. Lastly, as the
Occasion of this subject was given for better satisfaction, and to Remove all
scruple and scandal in some of more tender Consciences: so it carries with it
a Candid design toward all who shall read it, with some hopes that the
Parental and Filial Duty first observed; True honor may ascend more properly
and with plentiful Obedience toward the Civil and Spiritual Fathers of the
Kingdom and Country.

Farewell.
EYLOGIA.
The Parents blessing the Obedient Children, and the childrens asking a
blessing from their Parents, are pious exercises, warrantable by the Word of
God the Holy Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
NAture, though she seem Rude, and to govern by none but confused Rules,
guides Children to a dutiful respect of their Parents, as well as Parents in a
tender care toward their children. This mutual bond is twisted by the hand of
Providence, that Generations and Successions may be derived to Posterity. And
if Parents did not cherish and nourish their children, they were in a Degree
more irrational then Beasts. And if children should not reflect with duty and
kindness on their Parents, they were little better then unthankful Devils.

Chap. 2.
Homo homini Lupus. Man grows as savage as a Wolf.

He who is undutiful to his natural Father: can neither be faithful to his
Master the Aeconomical Father, nor loyal or obedient to the Supreme Magistrate
the King, who is the civil Father of the Country. Therefore it was the
determination of Seneca: (a rational Heathen) lib. 3. de Benef. cap. 3.
Parents non amare, Impietas est, non agnoscere, Insania est: That not to love
Parents, was Impiety, but not to acknowledge them, was brutish Madness. Thus
far Nature and Reason (though dim Lights) are able to Guide us.

Chap. 3.
But the Holy Scriptures send forth more bright Beams of Truth, and teach us
that these holy Exercises of the Parents blessing their children, and the
childrens begging a Blessing from their Parents, are warrantable, and consonant
to the word of God; Evidencing plainly their care and tenderness who Bless,
and their Honor, Reverence; and obedience who ask the Blessing. But that this
Truth may be more clearly discerned, it is very pertinent that it be rightly
understood what it is (first) Benedicere to bless, and (secondly) what it is
Benedictionem petere to beg a Blessing.

To bless is both attributed to God, and to his creatures:

God created man in his own Image, and blessed them, Genesis 1.28. Thus Christ our
Savior blessed his Apostles, Luke 24.50, 51. In which place, both the Manner,
and the measure of the Benediction is most remarkable: For, he lifted up his
hands and blessed them. And again, as he blessed them he was parted from them.
This Blessing of Christ's was attended with the Disciples Adoration, Luke 24.52.
(...) they fell down, they bowed their heads or bended their Knees: says the
Text, They worshipped. And as Baptism is commanded (...) in the Name; so the
blessing is pronounced (...): In the grace, love and communion of the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.13. Thus God blessed the creatures.

Chap. 4.
The Creatures they Bless likewise: so did the Angels bless Jacob. Genesis
32.26. And the Patriarch would not let him go, until he had blessed him. Man
also blesses man. Thus Solomon the King blessed his Subjects, 1 King. 8.55.
Aaron the Priest lift up his hand and blessed the people, Levit* 9.22.
Melchisedeck blessed Abraham; the King of peace blessed the Patriarch, that
mighty Warrior, Genesis 15.19. And as to the Paternal Benediction, Isaac blesses
Jacob, Genesis 27.4, 25. and Esau, Genesis 27.39, 40. and Jacob blesses Joseph and
his two sons, Genesis 48.9, 15. and Laban (though an uncircumcised Canaanite,
yet) had this spark of Grace in his heart, Genesis 31.55. Early in the morning he
rose up, and kissed his Sons and his Daughters, and blessed them. Yet if it
be objected this was a Legal rather then Evangelical practice; It is answered
that S. Luke presents Elizabeth pronouncing the Blessing to the Virgin Mary,
Luke 1.42. Blessed art thou amongst women. And Simeon, Luke 2.3. Blessing both
Joseph, and the Virgin Mary; and S. Paul seems to make Melchisedeck's blessing
of Abraham, Genesis 14.19. not only to be Legal but Evangelical, Heb. 7.1, 6. and
at the 7th. ver. plainly tells all Christians, both the Father and the Son,
their duty, where the Apostle puts it out of all doubt (...) without
contradiction: The Fathers duty is to bless, the Son's to beg the Blessing,
for the less is blessed of the Greater.

Chap. 5.
Now as the Scripture warranteth the Father in blessing his children: so it
directs the child how to beg his Fathers blessing. And therefore as we have
understood Who is to bless; so it is necessary to know what it is Benedicere to
bless. Benediction or Blessing has a great Variety of acceptions in the Holy
Scripture. 1. To Bless signifies to Praise, Ps. 103.21, 22. 2. To give thanks,
Genesis 14.20, 24, 27. 3. To consecrate or sanctify, 1 Cor. 10.16. 4. To wish
well to another, Gone. 47.7.10. 5. To offer a present or gift, Genesis 33.11. 1 Samuel 25.27. 6. To increase or multiply, Genesis 1.28. 7. To sanctify and
multiply, Matthew. 14.19. 8. To adopt, and Agnize, Mark 10.16. Christ's
proceeding there is an Example for the Parents tenderness to, and blessing of
their obedient children, for in that passage there are five remarkable
Circumstances: 1. Christ's command; Suffer little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not. 2. Christ's Declaration; of such is the Kingdom of God. 3. His
embracing, or Acceptance; He took them into his Arms. 4. The imposition of
his hands: he laid his hands upon them: 5. His Adoption of them; for he Blessed
them: saying, of such is the Kingdom of God. Now the Parents blessing has an
Influence, or an Effect on all, or most of these kinds:

First, the Parents bless the children when they Nourish them. This was
Jacob's care, Genesis 32.22,23.

Secondly, Education is the Parents Blessing, Genesis 18.19. Acts 7.21, 22. Moses
was made happy this way; being the Adopted Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and
Learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, and thereby made mighty in words
and deeds. S. Paul has made a Lasting Record of this kind of Blessing, 2 Timothy
1.5. of Lois and Eunice, who instructed Timothy in the Faith, though his father
were a Greek, or Infidel, Acts 16.1. And it is from the Ground of his Education
that S. Paul does so strictly charge his Disciple Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.14, 15.
Continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured of,
knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that from a child thou have known
the holy Scriptures.

Thirdly, Tender love and dear affection toward the children is a blessing of
the Parents; which appears eminently in those holy Patriarchs, Jacob, and
Joseph toward their children, Genesis 42.36. Genesis 48.9.

Fourthly, Protection Genesis 33.13.
Provision Genesis 25.5, 6.
Counsel Genesis 27.43.
Moderate Correction 1 Samuel 2.23. Heb. 12.7.
Care in their marriage Genesis 24.2. 4.
Pardon for their faults [f] and prayer for their good [g] are all Blessings
from the Father to their children. Job 1.5.
Job is a rare Example in this kind; who sanctified his Sons, Rose up early in
the Morning, and offered up burnt Offerings, according to the Number of them
all; For Job said, It may be that my Sons have sinned, and cursed God in their
hearts. Thus did Job continually, his sanctifying was doubtless his Blessing
of his Sons, wishing them well, and praying for them. By this it may more
easily be concluded: first, who is, and secondly, what it is to Bless. The
Parents Relation thus explicated, the Childrens will more orderly follow: whose
duty it is to Beg, or ask their Parents Blessing.

Chap. 6.
God having given Laws for his own Worship in the four first Commandments: In
the next words ordains Honor and Reverence to be exhibited to Parents, Exodus,
20.12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother. From which words and Law (when we
understand what is meant by Honor) the Childrens duty will more clearly
appear: Who, in order to the payment of that debt of Honor, they owe to their
Parents: will be the better encouraged to practice that Humble and Religious
duty, and not to think themselves dishonored, or disobliged if they beg, or
daily ask their Parents blessing on their Knees, when they first see, or salute
them in the Morning, or take leave of them at Night.

Most Writers and Expositors on the Fifth Commandment rather tell men what
Honor imports, then what it is: and describe the Concomitants or Consequences,
and Effects of Honor, but more sparingly, or less plainly set forth the
Nature and Essence of it. Therefore in this nice Point, it is highly Necessary
to know what Honor (due from the children to the Parents) is.

Some conclude that Honor imports three things in this Commandment.

Obedience to their lawful Commands: Col. 3.20. Ephesians. 6.1.2.
And to confirm this, they instance in the Example of the Recabites, obeying
the command of their father Jonadab, Jer. 35.8. Of Isaac, submitting to his
fathers Knife to cut his innocent throat, Genesis 22.10. Of Christ, who went down
with his Parents to Nazareth, and was (...), subject and obedient to them, Luke
2.51.

Honor imports Reverence; which is discerned either by Words or Deeds, Thus
King Solomon seems to comment on the fifth Commandment, Prove. 23.22. Honor
thy Father that begat thee, and thy Mother that bare thee, and despise her not.
And as he was a Teacher, so he was a Practiser and Example of this Duty, 1
King. 2.19. For, when his Mother approached near to speak unto him, the King
humbly saluted so dear a Subject; he rose from his Throne to meet his Mother;
he bowed himself unto her: First begging her Blessing, not adventuring to
return to his Throne until he had Reverenced her; and then as a dutiful Son,
he caused a Seat to be set for the Kings Mother, and she sat at his right hand.
Joseph is such another pattern of Piety, and Reverence toward his Father
Jacob. He was next to Pharaoh in Egypt, and the King commanded that the
Egyptians should call him Abrech, Genesis 41.43. Which word has a double
signification in the Original: either tender Father, or Bow the head, and kneel
down. The Militia of the Land was entirely in his Power, Genesis 41.40. At thy
word shall all the people be Armed: and at the 44. ver. No man was to dare to
lift up his hand or foot without his Order. Yet this mighty Prince in his power
and plenty, thinks himself most happy when he has but an Opportunity to Honor
and Reverence his aged Father, though but a mere Sphepheard, Genesis 47.4. and
ready like a poor beggar to starve for bread. It is most eminently and
passionately recorded, Genesis 46.29. how Joseph made ready his Charret and went
to Gosben to meet Israel his Father, and presented himself unto him, (most
probably first on his Knees) and fell on his Neck, and wept on his Neck a good
while: and Joseph who was styled and proclaimed Abrech, and had so many Knees
bended to him: certainly he bended to his aged Father to gain a Blessing from
him.

Chap. 7.
A third importance of Honor, Job, cap. 25.15.) is to be the Fathers Eye; if
lame, the child is to be his Fathers foot or staff: Christ himself is an
Example of this Duty, who (at his death) took care for his Mother the blessed
Virgin, John 19.27. The Philosopher thinks it reasonable ( Arist^t. Ethic. lib.
9. cap. 2. that children who have received life from their Parents, should (to
their uttermost) endeavor to preserve their Parents life. And some pious
Heathens are very famous even to these days, for their tender thankfulness to
their decrepid and aged Parents. By the help of these three Lights; Obedience,
Reverence and Maintenance, we perceive somewhat more, but not all that this
Command, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, does present.

Chap. 8.
The children are yet obliged to many other observant and dutiful Respects:
For, as a Father has the trust and charge of many excellent Relations and
Privileges, to be sometimes Actively, sometimes Passively manifested toward
his children: so are children reciprocally charged with many singular Duties,
which by the Laws of God they are bound to repay, and Retribute (on all
Occasions) to their tenderhearted Parents: as,

Love them with cordial affection; Thus Elisha beggeth of Elijah, 1 King.
19.20. when he had cast his Mantle upon him, Let me I pray thee go and kiss my
Father and Mother; (what may that otherwise signify then to beg their
blessing?) and take my leave of them: and then (said Elisha) I will follow
thee; and Elijah thought it fit and necessary: Go; Return.

cover their Infirmities. Thus did Sem and Japhet, Genesis 9.23. when their Father
was overcome with wine, they took a Mantle and put it on their shoulders, and
went backward, and covered the Nakedness of their Father with their faces
backward, so that they saw not their Fathers Nakedness. This bearing with, or
rather hiding of their fathers Infirmity, procured a blessing on Sem and
Japhet, Genesis 9.26, 27. But as a Father and a Prophet, he denounces a curse on
Cham and his posterity, who had so undutifully derided, and dishonored his
aged Father.

Thirdly, Honor signifies an humble submission to the fathers Will; and
Jeptha's daughter is such an Example of Obedience in this kind, that she rather
chooses to yield up her life at her fathers direction, then that he should
violate or once break his Vow, Judges 11.36, 37. Thus Samuel, though but an
Infant, no sooner was weaned and parted from his Mothers breast; but was
instantly removed from her company, 1 Samuel 1.24. And when his Mother had weaned
him, she brought him to the House of the Lord in Shiloh, the child was young,
as the original signifies, a very child when he ministered before the Lord,
girded in a linen Ephod, 1 Samuel 2.18. And no reason can be given of the
Mothers parting with Samuel, or of the tender Infant's parting from his dear
Mother, but that the child had as well an humble submission, as the Mother a
Resolution to make good her Vow, when she begged her Son from God, 1 Samuel 1.11.

Paul charge children to Recompense their Parents; Imposes this as a duty,
as a Debt, not as an Act of Charity to supply their Necessity, but as obliged
to this kind of Gratitude. If any Widow has children, let them first learn
piety at home, (...), 1 Timothy 5.4. that is, to requite their Parents: Now that
which is requited has been formerly merited; And Recompense is nothing but the
conscientious discharge of a spiritual or civil Debt, though it have no formal
or legal Obligation in foro judicii; or in the Courts of earthly Judges: And it
is Mr. Beza's Note on this place: 1 Timothy 5.4.
Natura ipsa docet Majoribus vicem rependere, and Deo gratum est hoc officium.
The requiting of Parents is a Lesson taught by Nature; A rational service, and
as a sweet smelling sacrifice, is grateful and acceptable to God.

Chap. 9.
These Beams will yet shine more brightly, and show the Nature of Honor to
Parents more perspicuously if they be distinguished from all other Qualities,
which seem to be of like Relation or similitude. For the word [(...)] whether
derived of the word (...), or (...), admits of great variety of significations.

Acceptance or Entertainment, John 4.44. A Prophet (...) is not without
honor: that is, as S. Luke explains it, Luke 4.24. (...): a Prophet is not
accepted in his own Country.

Romans 13.7. (...). Render to all their dues, Honor; to whom Honor: So Tit.
3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. In both places is pressed the duty of obeying Magistrates,
and honoring the King.

Value, rate or price of a thing. Thus the High Priest did use it, Mat. 27.6.
crying out in their Hypocrisy against Judas, and the Traitors money; It is not
lawful to put it into the Treasury, because it is (...) the price of blood.

Honor, Heb. 13.4. (...): Marriage is Honorable, or a Worthy Noble Relation.

Cor. 3.12. (...), a precious Stone, Revel. 21.11. That Honor which children
owe their Parents comprehends hendeth all these Parents may require and
expect, and the children are obliged (sine murmr) to pay all or any of their
duties, when Occasionally they shall require them from them.

Chap. 10.
The Schools endeavor yet more Exactly to instruct children in the Lesson of
their duty toward their Parents: Acquainting us that Honor is Testimonium
Excellentiae quae est in homine: A Testimony of that singular Excellency that
is in a Man. Tho. Aqu. 1^. 2d^ae. Qu. 2. Art. 1. And where can a child (though
never so great, rich or wise) reflect with more admiration, then on the
Excellency of his own Parents, from whom he has received Life and Being?

Laus, Gloria, Reverentia, and Honor. That Laus tantum est in Verbis, and est
respectu eorum quae sunt ad finem. That praise chiefly consists in verbal
commendations, and is but conversant about those things, that are only
conducing to a further end: Tho. Aqu. 2 a 2 d ae Qu. 103. Art. 1.

Glory is not so much Honor, as an Effect of it; So the Philosopher 1 Ethic.
cap. 12. By this the goodness, worth and dignity of another is more clearly
manifested, Clarescit Bonitas in notitia plurimorum. And thence some will have
Gloria, quasi Claria, or Clara cum Laud Notitia; A more bright and splendent
Knowledge. so S. Ambr. and S. August. gloss on the Word.

Reverence is rather a part of Honor, then Honor it self. For whether it be
performed in word or deed, by a venerable Estimation arising from the mind, or
an humble comportment from the Body: yet it is but as the branch to the Root,
as a way leading to some further End; Principium motivum, a principle Motive,
or preparation of him who Reverenceth, and not the complete Honor that is due
to him who is Reverenced, Tho. Aqu. 2 a 2 dae Qu. 103. ad Arg. 1.

Honor amongst all External good things is the chiefest: because it is Praemium
virtutis and Testimonium Excellentiae. Tho. Aq. 1 a 2 d ae quest. 2 d o Art. 2
d o. the reward of Virtue, and supreme Testimony of Worth and Excellency. Now
as the Objects do diversificate, and vary in their worth and praeeminency; so
do the Agents in their. Influences and dispositions. And therefore because none
do come in the Scales of comparison with Parents in their relation to their
children; therefore the Honor due unto them ought to be the sincerest, the
exactest, the Highest, and next to that which is due to God, the Almighty
Father of all. And hence it is that there follows another Valuation, which
the Learned put upon honor, before Love. For the child who truly honors his
Father, aymeth particularly at his Fathers good; but Love and Charity has a
more General Object, spreading its Grace Universally on all: Honor respicit
proprium Bonum honorati; sed Amor respicit Bonum in Communi. Tho. Aqu. 2 a 2 d
ae. qu. 25. Art. 1. Arg. 3. Christians love their Brethren as Christians; but
children honor their Parents not only as Christians, but as Christian
children; obliged to that singular Duty by God himself, Exodus 20.12. Now a the
beams of the Sun when they concenter in one point are more Energetical and
operative, then when the Rays of that glorious Body are in their diffusion: so
is it with children, who truly honor their Parents: Their dutiful affections
being terminated and fixed in a particular Object of honoring their Parents,
the Effect is of greater force; the duty better performed; the parents more
highly honored: and God who commands the duty, better served and obeyed.

Chap. 11.
Neither is it sufficient that children hounour their Parents in their heart
only, but likewise they are to perform it by their outward Signs, testimonies
and Gestures: The reason is, Quia honor, quoad Deum, potest esse in solo Cord;
sed quoad hominem, est in signis exterioribus. Tho. Aq. Quaest. 103. Art. 1.
God who is a Spirit, is the Searcher of the heart, and can fashion, and find
out all the thoughts and secret motions of the mind and soul; but Man is a
limited creature, and can only Judge by the visible or external Actions. So
then it is not enough for children only cordially, but corporally, and with
Reverential exterior Gestures to honor and respect their Parents. The
Propositions made so evident and plain, the Conclusion may the better follow;
That it is Warrantable by Gods Word, Expedient and Lawful, that children crave
and ask their Parents blessing. In which Religious Exercises these three
Advantages must needs follow: First, that God hereby is obeyed, and better
served. Secondly, the Parents more highly honored and Esteemed. Thirdly, the
children are more certainly Blessed and comforted.

Chap. 12.
First, The child asking his Fathers Blessing; by this pious duty God is
Glorified. In the primitive age of the World the holy Patriarchs and fathers of
Families, were constituted Kings, Priests and Prophets in their patenal
Jurisdiction: Kings, to rule and Govern; Priests, to pray and sanctify;
Prophets, to teach and Instruct their Families. These Offices were very
eminently performed by Abraham, who was King and Sovereign Commander, when his
kinsman Lot was taken prisoner and made a captive? armed his trained servants
born in his own house? three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them to Dan, and
he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by might, and smote them,
and pursued them to Hoba, which is on the left hand of Damascus, and he brought
back all the goods, and his Brother Lot and his goods, and all the Women also,
and all the people, Genesis 14.14, 15, 16. As a Priest, he refused not to
sacrifice his only Son; Senile pignus, and semen promissum; but (commanded by
God) laid his child on the Altar and stretched out his hand to have slain him,
had not the Angel of God restrained him, Genesis 22.9, 10, 11. verses. God is
pleased to acknowledge him a Prophet also, and to bless him; and tells man
why he blesses him: For I know that Abraham will command his children and his
household after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord to do justice and
Judgment, Genesis 18.18, 19. Now we are the children of the prophets, Acts 3.25.
the sons of Abraham, if we do the works of Abraham, John 8.39. Gal. 3.8. And in
this respect, when the child asks his Fathers blessing, and thereby
acknowledges a Royal, parental, and Sovereign power in the Father, who by Gods
Law is to rule and govern his children: he honors God, whose Image and
Authority (as a Vicegerent on Earth) the Father represents, by regulating his
children and servants. But the Father is not only to be honored, as having a
Natural Sovereign Trust from God, but as a Priest, who (after Jobs example) Job
1.5. rises up early every morning and offers burnt offerings, and every
night burns Incense; that is, prays with, or for his Family both Morning
and Evening. And therefore the children daily craving a Blessing from their
Parents, who pray for them, God is hereby glorified, and (this Law being more
exactly observed every morning and evening) He is better served. Again, Parents
are not only as our oeconomical Kings to govern us, and our Priests to pray
with and for us; but they are as our Prophets to instruct us. In this Relation
we owe them continual honor, and constant Reverence. The Argument is a minore
ad majus, from S. Paul's Doctrine of the Heir, who, as long as he is a child,
differs nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all jure haereditario:
but is under Tutors and Governors, until the time appointed by the Father,
Gal. 4.1, 2. Now if a fatherless heir owe such Exact duty to Tutors and
Governors; and a living child to the Commands, or Testament of a dead Father,
what Honor and Obedience does a child owe to a living Father or Mother, who as
Prophets teach and instruct them daily? So then to ask their Blessing, who have
such care of their souls and bodies, is a testimony of their care to keep Gods
Law; and hereby also God is more glorified. For if Heirs owe so much Reverence
and respect to civil Tutors and Governors, how humble and obedient ought
children to be to their Natural and tender Parents?

Chap. 13.
There is yet another Argument which seems very stoutly to press children to
the the Religious practice of asking blessing, because the holy Commandments
of God were primarily and chiefly recommended to the Fathers and the heads or
Masters of Families. This is evident in the Scripture; for Moses descending
from the Mount, he called for the Elders of the people, that is, the fathers or
chiefest of the Tribes and Families, Exodus 19.7. and laid before their faces
all the Words which the Lord commanded him: and at the 14, 15. verses Moses
prepared the people to receive the Law with a Blessing of Sanctification. See
and observe Gods own Order and Method. God blesses Moses, and Moses blesses
the Elders of the people, the Fathers; and the Fathers they are to bless their
children. This Argument is yet corroborated, and strengthened from the Moral
Law it self; where for Method, God having commanded our duties to him in the
first Table, immediately requires children in the first Commandment of the
second Table to honor their Parents: as next to God, or in Gods place on
earth, or because the neglect of this one Commandment might cause (infallibly)
Disorder, and Violation of all the rest. And as the fifth Commandment is
primary in the second Table for Order; so for matter. In all the Commandments
their observation seems chiefly recommended to the Exact care of the Fathers or
Masters of the Families, who are obliged to teach their children, and their
Childrens children from generation to generation. And the fourth Commandment
to this purpose is not only Imperative, but Authoritative in Parents and
Masters; where it is evident and plain, though the duties of the ten
Commandments are of Universal concernment to all Ages and people; Yet Parents
and Masters have a more particular charge flowing from the Words of that
Commandment. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Thou shall do no
manner of work, Thou nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy manservant, nor
thy maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy Gates. So
that, in some degree of Gods Trust: the Fathers and Masters of Families are
Custodes utriusque Tabulae, Deuteronomy. 6. v. 7, 8. the Conservators of Gods Laws;
which though commanding all, yet particularly are recommended to their charge,
as to those who are not only bound to give an account for themselves, but for
their children, their servants, their cattle, and the stranger that is within
their Gates. The Case thus stated, the Parents being in so high and Immediate
Trust from God; what duty can be too humble, or too often from the children to
their Parents? Who cannot but put a high Reputation in the presence of God,
Angels and men, on their Humility, when they Bow their bodies, and Bend their
Knees, and crave, as their daily bread from God, so a daily Blessing from their
Parents.

Chap. 14.
The Truth thus opened, it may without scruple or danger be applied to the most
tender conscience; and without any snares to sin, or juggling subtle sophistry,
that the Custom of the Church of England, where the Parents use to bless their
children, humbly, daily begging their Blessing; is a most Religious practice,
consonant, and not repugnant, expedient, and not forbidden by the Word of God.

Yet two sorts of Objections may seem to arise, and so first startle, and
amaze, then deter and diswade from this pious Exercise. To some this may appear
somewhat superstitious, or to lean and incline too much to Popery and Idolatry:
But to free all from such erroneous deluding opinion, doubts, fear or danger;
there is no spice of Idolatry, nor any such unclean drug, or ill ingredient in
this innocent composition of begging the Parents blessing. As to the Romanist:
First, It is a practice rarely used or known in some Roman-Catholike Countries;
Or rather cunningly not taught in the Church of Rome: so that the Italians,
Spanish, Germans and French (for the most part) use it not: And it may be very
probable for this Reason, that the Parents having less Reverence from their
children, and the Children less honor for their Parents; the Popish Priests
might more securely and craftily ensnare, and subjugate the mutual Relations of
both parents and children entirely to themselves: especially then, when they
are chained to them on their bended knees in their Auricular duties; and
answering to such Questions, as are proposed to them, when they are opening
their hearts in an humble and penitent Confession. The Doctrine of which
Confession (if rightly used, and as Christ has recommended to his Church) is
of as much comfort, as truth; founded on Christ's own Command, Matthew. 11.28.
which words Venite ad Me are explained, Matthew. 10.40, to Me: that is, in my
Absence to my Apostles, and their lawful and right Successors, the vigilant
Bishops, and faithful Pastors of Gods Church: whose Commission is large, and
will continue in force to the end of the World in haec verba; Verily I say unto
you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and what soever ye
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Matthew. 18.18. And it is an
Infallible truth, that the lawful Pastors only are Ministerially, and most
properly trusted with hearing penitent Confessions, and then giving and
pronouncing Absolution in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
to the quieting of the troubled spirit and wounded Conscience of the humble and
repenting Sinner. Yet there are Evangelical Steps which lead children to a
dutiful confession of their faults and offenses to their compassionate
Parents. This is most eminent in the poor broken hearted relenting Prodigal,
who first Resolves on his Confession: saying, I will go to my Father, and then
perfecteth his Resolution, by acknowledging his error, first accusing, then
proclaiming against himself, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy Son. Luke 15.18, 19, 20, 21. On
which words Mr. Beza (though no Patron of the Doctrine or practice of
Confession in the people, or absolution from the Venerable Pastor of Gods
Church) has this Note (of which some present advantage may be made) In vera
Resipiscentia inest sensus peccati cum tristitia and pudore conjunctus, unde
nascitur Confessio, quam sequitur Absolutio: that is, There is a sense of sin
in Repentance conjoined and mixed with shame and sorrow for it; hence springs
an Ingenious and free Confession, which is recompensed with the Act of gracious
Remission, or Absolution by compassionate parents. And as Confession of sins
to the Parents, craving their pardon, or begging their Blessing is not sinful,
whether the P^pists use it or use it not: So Quoad Rem, it is not
superstitious, and so praeter, or contra verbum Dei, that is, without Warrant
from, or against the Word of God. To make this more clear, it is necessary that
it be rightly understood, that Superstition is vitium Religioni oppositum
secundum excessum, quo quis divinum exhibet Cultum vel cui non debet, vel non
eo modo quo debet, Tho. Aq. 2a 2dae. qu. 92. Art. 1. that is, Superstition is
an error opposing true Religion in excess, giving or Attributing divine
Worship where it is not due or lawful, or a worshipping the true God after a
superstitious and false manmanner. But the honor that Parents may justly
expect, and children are obliged dutifully to pay, is so far from being an
Error, that it is a Truth, so far from being superfluous, that it is
necessary; and children seldom or never are found guilty of an excess of their
obedience to their Parents; and therefore the duty being commanded and required
by God, the children are obliged to honor their Parents; in which holy
Exercise there cannot be the least fear, or danger, or tincture of superfluity
or Superstition.

Chap. 15.
And whereas some may object, that the begging of the Parents blessing on their
Knees may Rob God of his Worship, or relish of Idolatry: (which is a most
heinous sin, as directly thwarting and opposing the very Letter of the first
and second Commandments of the Moral law:) Let such Inventors of dangerous
Opinions know, that he who commands the keeping of One, expects the keeping
and observation of all the Law; and he that is guilty of the breach of one, is
guilty of all. This is the Method of S. Paul himself; arguing with the Rabbis
and Doctors of his Age: Thou therefore that teach another, teach thou not
thy self? Thou that teach a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou
that say a man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? thou
that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege? Romans 2.21, 22. From all
these concluding Questions it may be Logically, and rationally resolved, that
he that lesseneth or Inhibiteth the childrens duty in the most Reverend and
humble manner toward the Parents: does either weakly err in Judgment, or
cunningly dawb with untempered mortar; hypocritically pretending zeal to God,
but not sincerely intending his Divine Worship; when, for Gods Commandments,
men dare to shuffle in their own Doctrines and Traditions, and (on pretense of
Idolatry) exempt, or discourage the children from their duties toward their
Parents. This was the Pharisees own Way long since, condemned by Christ, Matthew.
15.56. who taught the World a better Lesson, and concluded himself, that
honoring of parents is not Idolatry: which sin (if rightly understood) is an
exhibiting or devoting and giving that worship to the creature, which is only
and divinely due to God. So Tho. Aq. 2a 2dx. qu. 94. art. 1. Idolatria est
exhibere Latriam (id est) cultum Dei Creaturae. This is certainly an high and
most horrid sin: But children are not to honor their Parents as God, but as
Men, and not only as Men, but as Parents; and not so much because their Parents
expect, or require their Duty, as because God directs, and commands the
performance of it. God is to be loved and served with all our hearts, with all
our minds, with all our souls, and our Neighbors are to be loved as our
selves. And as to our Parents they are to be honored, as God has commanded;
which duty cannot be performed without the treble Observation of Natural, Civil
and Moral respects. Nature teaches to be affectionate, because the are our
Generators: Civility obliges us to them, because they are or have been
Conservators: And there is a Moral respect due to them, which strictly binds
the conscience because of Gods Commandments; All these ought and may be done,
without suspicion of the gross and horrid sin of Idolatry.

Chap. 16.
To others the practice of asking the Parents Blessing seems of Novelty, or
Work derogatory from the Worship and honor of God: And thus are some
separated, and have started aside from this holy practice, fearing or at least
resusing to give their Parents that honor, which God commands, out of a
singular, or self-opinion, that giving so much as is due to their Parents, they
may not Reserve, or so sufficiently Worship God as he requires. Our Savior
Christ seems to take notice of such humorous and Pharisaical and phanatick
conceits, arising from the heads of some schismatical Innovators, when he
lived on earth. The place is very worthy of singular observation, recorded by
Saint Matthew, from the first to the tenth verse Mat. 15.1.^
of the fifteenth Chapter, where the Scribes and Pharisees boldly make the
assault, or onset on Christ, demanding a reason, ver. 2. why do thy Disciples
transgress the Traditions of the Elders? for they wash not their hands, when
they eat bread. Christ suddenly makes a Reply by another Question, ver. 4. Why
do ye also transgress the Commandments of God by your Traditions? implying,
that as the God of Israel was above the Elders of Israel; so the Commandments
of God above the Laws of Men, and Traditions of the Elders. And then Christ
tells them of their sin, and Transgression, ver. 4. God commanded, saying,
Honor thy Father and Mother, Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16, and he that curses
Father or Mother let him die the death, Levit. 20.9. Prove. 20.20. Having set
down the Law, and detected their Hypocrisy and sin, he further argues, ver.
5. But ye say, whosoever shall say to his father or mother it is (...), or as
it is Originally in St. Mark, chap. 7.11. Corban, that is to say, a Gift by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me, etc. (as it follows Matthew.
15.16.) and honor not his father or his mother, shall be free. From these
observations and Objections Christ infers and presses this Conclusion;
Thus, or therefore have ye made the Commandments of God of none Effect by your
Traditions: and then accuses them, as dissembling Hypocrites, of whom Isaiah
prophesied, This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, but their heart
is far from me, Esaias 29.18. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the Commandments of Men, or Directories of mere humane Invention.
This Argument of Christ's, which so plainly accuses the Jews of their Impi^^y
toward their Parents, may Invite Christians to more exact performance of their
Reverence and Duty toward their Parents; Inasmuch as this Law is not only
proclaimed by Moses, and the Ministration of the Angels, nor only written by
the finger of God; but also often preached and published to the World by
Christ, the Eternal Word of God; greater then Moses, or Solomon, or all the
sons of Men.

Chap. 17.
It is remarkable in this Argument against the Pharisees, that Christ's method
and Moses's differ in the distribution of this Law (viz.) Honor thy Father and
Mother. For, when Moses delivered it to the people: it was accompanied with a
Promise, That thy days may be long in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives
thee: But the two Evangelists, both St. Matthew and St. Mark (in the places
cited before) present our Savior teaching the Commandment either strictly in
the Duty, ( viz.) Honor thy Father and thy Mother; or else (without mentioning
of the Blessing or Promise) threatening the disobedience thereof, positively
with a curse, Dominus hic Praemium praetermittit, ponit, quod terribilius est,
scilicet, Poenam; ut and ipsos stupefaceret, and alios attraheret. Chrysostom,
Hom, 12. Levit. 20.9. He that curses Father or Mother let him die the death:
as if Christ had said, He that neglects his duty, or despises or
dishonors his Parents, is so far from pity or pardon, that he deserves to
die the death. Thus Christ seems to prosecute with Indignation those who should
prove Violaters of this Law. And if there be any Branches of disobedience (as
it is probable too many) in this Pharisaical hypocritical Age; Christ has
discovered the bitter Root from whence they spring: that is, from the vain
Traditions of some Schismatical and pharisaical Directors seditiously affected:
or from Disobedient children, who (as the Scribes and Pharisees of old) prefer
the New and singular Opinions and Traditions of some Giddy-brain'd Teachers,
before the Commandments of God. Neither ought any to fear that God is lessened
in his honor, if the Parents are Revereneed by their children, but on the
contrary God is more abundantly, and highly Honored in the performance of this
Duty: because, first, his Commandment is observed: secondly, by this means
children are (as on a ladder or scale) to climb up the higher toward God, the
Almighty Father of Heaven and Earth: thirdly, by this humble deportment, taught
by Christ in his Gospel, they more Innocently avoid the censure and suspicion
of Hypocrisy: fourthly, they more securely keep and preserve themselves from
Gods curse and indignation: and lastly, they more happily obtain the Blessing
promised, both in this life, and that which is to come.

Chap. 18.
To all this it may be further added, and justly pleaded, that Honor and
Reverence is to be given from children to their Parents, not only because they
are Generators, but Parents, Patres and Matres: not only their begetters, but
their Fathers and Mothers, which are terms of kindness, and rather proper then
common Names in their Relations, sounding out nothing but sweetness,
tenderness, care, comfort and compassion. Thus the Learned comment upon the
words: Pater and Matter Nomina Pietatis; officiorum Vocabula, naturae Vincula.
St. Hierom de vita Eremit. ad Heliodorum. They are pious Relations, and Bonds
of Natural affection. A. mor and honor, love and honor chiefly differing modo
operandi, in the manner of Operation; Love naturally descends from the Parents
toward the children Descendit amor, ascendat honor, Love runs as the stream
from the Fountain, Honor, as an high and fruitful Tide, returns fully and
freely toward the Fountain. And therefore Honor should plentifully, and
supernaturally and spiritually commanded by God own Word and Laws. If yet any
enquire how, that is, in what manner, or how often, that is, at what times, the
Parents should bless their children, or the children beg their Parents
blessing? it may be easily answered, The Parents are first directed to have a
Preparation, and Inclination to bless their Obedient children at all times:
but (if there be convenience or occasion) to bless them particularly every
Morning and Evening, that the Sun of the Firmament may not set, or rise again
on the wrath, neglect, or Discontent of such near, and dear Relations. And this
blessing is not to pass slightly, or cursorily; but with great regard to what
is done. For the Fathers blessing is not only a Testimony of Love to his child,
but a prayer to God for him, a part of the Fathers daily Devotion for his child
to God; and a kind of Recommendation or Dedication of his child for Gods
further blessing. Therefore this picus Practice is to be performed with greater
care, that God may be more sincerely glorified, the Parents blessing may be
more truly honored, and the children receiving this grace and favor, may be
more certainly blessed. This Rule well observed, the Parents will not take the
Name of God in vain. For the Blessing thus imparted with Reverence and godly
fear; God is daily honored hereby, and whether the Blessing from the Parents
be a Prayer to God, or a Testimony of paternal affection; or an earnest and
pledge of future Kindness and Benevolence from the Indulgent Parents to the
Obedient children; God cannot but be well pleased, where parents are so tender
and careful first of Gods Honor, and then of their own.

Chap. 19.
Another, or second Question is, How, that is, in what manner, or how often
that is, at what times it may be expedient for children to make their Addresses
to their Parents. It may be answered to the first Quaere; (How?) that they are
to address to their Parents in the most Reverend gesture, and most humble
posture, and behavior. No Law or Reason Will, or Can assert the contrary, and
if uncovering of the Head, bowing of the Body, bending of the Knee; all of
these, or some of these be civilly allowed from Subjects to their Sovereigns,
from the people to their Magistrates (so that they are commanded to kneel at
their Bars) or from servants toward their Masters; Parents may expect as
much if not more, from their children addressing to them not only in a civil,
but a Conscientious and venerable Comportment, to beg their Blessing. And it is
very observable to this purpose, that as God restrained in the second
ommandement: saying, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, Thou
shall not Bow down and Worship: So affirmatively, or positively in the fifth
Precept of the second Table, he commands, Honor thy Father and Mother; and
this Honor is not to be performed but verbis, and Signis, in words, signs, or
exterior deeds: and therefore uncovering of the Head, bowing of the Body or
bending of the Knee, are commendable and expedient gestures in craving or
begging the Parents Blessing? And St. Paul setting forth to the whole world his
Ecclesiastical Canons, by his Apostolical Jurisdiction, amongst other things,
charged this upon the Church of Corinth; that they should be Reverend Hearers
of Gods Word, and Reverend Receivers of Gods holy Sacraments; plainly declaring
that every man ((...)) whether Father, or child praying or prophesying, his
Head being covered, dishonors his Head, 1 Cor. 11.4. On which Words Mr. Beza
has put forth this Note: Hinc Colligit viros, si operto Capite (quod tum
habebatur subjectionis signum) publicis caetibus ad audiendum verbum, and
concipiendas preces coactis intersint, sua veluti dignitate seipsos privare,
contra Dei Ordinationem. That is, * If men being present in the public
Congregation to hear the Word of God, or join in prayers, had their heads
covered: they did deprive themselves (ipso facto) of that Dignity God had given
them, against Gods Ordinance. As for the Parenthesis, though it be Translated
among the Authors Notes, yet it has not a Warrantable Testimony of Antiquity
to defend that Assertion. And Mr- Beza is very bold with St. Paul, to conclude
his Rule and Canon to be only Temporal and Politic, as it is his Note on the
same Words: but it is probable, that which S. Paul preached at Corinth for
Reverence, decency and Order in Gods Church, was not so well taught, or so well
Learned at Geneva. However, from this Doctrine and Order of St. Paul's
Constitution, children may learn to be uncovered, to bend their Knees, and to
be Reverent in their behavior; when they come to crave their Parents Blessing,
as being the Prophets and Priests of the Families, who Instruct them, and daily
pray with and for them. And if the sons of Noah were so exceedingly modest,
that they durst not so much as peep or look at their Fathers Infirmity, but
went backward with their * Quo ad unc habebatur subjectionis Signum.
Mantles upon their shoulders, Genesis 9.23. to hide his Nakedness, with what
great Reverence and humility, bending, bowing, or kneeling, may it be concluded
that Shem and Japhet came unto their Father, when they received his Blessing?
Gen 9.26, 27. From all these Arguments, it cannot but be allowable, expedient
and Warrantable, for children craving their Parents Blessing, to kneel and beg
it in the most dutiful and humblest gesture; The Parents being as Joseph's
Sheafe; their children round about their Table are to Bow and make obeisance to
them, Genesis 37.7. And though the children be as glorious as the Sun, the Moon,
or the Stars for Honor, Riches, Power, or any other Excellency: yet still
they are obliged to honor their Parents, and to Bow down themselves unto them
even to the Earth, Genesis 37. ver. 10. A Sir Tho. Moore, L. Chancellor of England
in K. Henry the eighths time.
Countryman of our own (as the History Relates) had this humility and honor
for his Parents, as he approached near to them, when he was in a far higher
Degree of civil Honor, then his Father, to fall down on his Knees and ask his
Blessing: And it was a very high Example; pious and commendable in those two
Princes, the one a Son, the other a Mother; the Son a King, the Mother a Queen,
yet a Subject: to see them strive which should be first on their Knees; the Son
(a King) to ask his Mothers Blessing; or the Mother (a Subject) to kiss her
Sons, a Kings hands; And it was no less admirable to observe which should be
longest and Last upon their Knees: the Mother stooping to perform her civil
Respect, or the Son to perform his natural and Moral Duty to his Mother. But
Gods Commandment is above Man's, and civil Relations bind not so fast, as Moral
and Eternal Statutes, Imposed by God himself.

Chap. 20.
The Direction now given, how children ought to address to their Parents in
asking blessing, it yet remains to discover when, or at what times, it is
proper: To this Quaere it is answered, that Honor and Reverence is always due
from the children to Parents; and this they owe them, as Requisites belonging
to their Persons, their Names, their Memories, but properly and chiefly to
their Persons. Yet this Right is most rationally performed, when it is done (if
possible) twice a day. As God commanded a Morning and Evening Sacrifice: so the
Parents (who bear Gods Image and Trust) may expect the first fruits of their
childrens duty in the Morning, and their Acknowledgement as thankful Incense
in the Evening. The Blessing in the Morning may cause a happier success to
their strength, their healths, their labors, their studies, their Lawful
desires, and Endeavors: The Blessings at the Evening may be as a Seal of the
Parents good Will, and cordial affection, liking or approving of what has
passed in the day. And by this means Parents and children may more securely and
quietly lie down, and take their Natural Repose; Both being first recommended
to God in their prayers, without whose Blessing neither Relation can Rest or
sleep in safety, Psalm 127. ver. 3.

Chap. 21.
The Action and practice of giving and asking Blessing being thus Warranted,
yet the Ignorant Parents or unskilful Children may demand, Quo stilo, in what
phrase, terms or words the Blessing may be craved, or Granted? (for the
Relations continue all along to both parties.) To this it may be answered, that
the children are not strictly obliged to any single form, or Mode of Words;
provided the Request made by the children to their Parents in this kind be
Regulated, and consonant to the Rules and Examples of Piety, and the practice
of Gods servants, whose lights have so shined on Earth that We beholding their
good Works, may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.16. To this
Purpose, the sons of Noah are Patterns of Modesty, lowliness and humility, Genesis
9.23, 26. when they obtained the Blessing from their Father; Isaac of Innocence
receiving the Blessing of his Father Abraham, Genesis 22.17. In blessing I will
bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee, thy Seed shall be as the
Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand on the Seashore: Plenty and Victory, shall be
Isaac's blessing; His seed shall possess the Gate of his Enemies. Jacob was a
great Example of Humility and Obedience * in harkening to his Mothers counsel
for the obtaining his Father Isaac's Blessing. He approaches with goodly
Raiment on his shoulders; (formerly his Brother Esau's, as Primogenitus) but he
having sold his birthright, justly lost his Fathers Blessing: The Scripture
thereupon brandeth him to posterity as one unthankful to God and Nature; ( A
profane person, who for one Morsel of meat sold his Birthright, Heb. 12.16.)
It was an Ancient custom in the Primitive Ages of the World, Primogenitos
habuisse vestem quandam Specialem, aut Spiritualem, quam in Sacrificiis tantum
induebant, e^usque in Solemnitatibus, and Conviviis benedicere solitos
fratribus natu minoribus, recepturos tandem Parentum benedictionem. D. Hiero.
de Authorit. Hebraeor. Scriptor. Super Genes. 27. and Isidor. in Genes. 26.
super illum Locum, Vende mihi Primogenita: That is, The Firstborn did wear
more costly Garments, a more special or Spiritual Raiment, which they did put
on when they were to offer Sacrifice; And thus accountred and attired, they
used to bless their younger Brethren, met together at their Solemnities and
Festivals; And thus arrayed they prepared themselves, approaching to receive
their Parents Blessing. Jacob had likewise pleasant Perfumes about his Neck,
and Came with a sweet, soft and humble voice when he begged his Fathers
Blessing. Elisha followed Elijah with zeal, affection and Resolution, and would
not leave him until he had blessed him: He craveth and calls for a double
portion of Elijah's Spirit, 2 King. 2.9. And when the two Prophets were parted
by the Chariot and Horses of fire, then Elisha cries out more passionately, My
father; my father, the Chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof: At those
words the Mantle of Elijah fell, wherewith he divided the streams of Jordan,
and passed over, 2 King. 2.14. The Shunamite (her son being dead) came with as
much have as humility, with as much Importunity, as affliction, hoping to get a
Blessing from the Prophet. She bended her knees, and bowed to his feet, 2 King.
4.27. She commanded her servant to saddle the Ass, and to drive on, ver. 24.
and in the anguish of her soul; she took an Oath and swear, As the Lord lives
I will not leave thee until I have gained a Blessing for my son, ver. 30. The
Convert Mary Magdalen begging a Blessing from Christ, came with Courtesy,
presenting her Box of Ointment; with modesty, she stood behind; with sorrow,
weeping for her sins; with humility washing Christ's feet with her Tears; with
Repentance, wiping his feet with those Locks that had vainly enticed others:
with affection, kissing Christ's feet with those tender Scarlet lips, that had
been formerly the deceitful Baits of sin, Luke 7.37, 38. Here was certainly a
Broken heart, and Bended knees, and all the Testimonies, and Circumstances of
Humility, and Reverence of a penitent sinner craving pardon and a blessing from
her Savior: Her Brackish Tears were her passionate Orators, her actions, and
affections were persuasive Eloquence to plead for her. The Cananitish-woman
came to Christ with outcries and Lamentation, and said, Have mercy upon me,
etc. Luke 15.22. At the 25. ver. she fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord
help me; at the 27. verse Christ discerns her constancy, her patience, her
perseverance, and then the blessing came, ver. 28. Be it unto thee as thou will. There is yet one Example of humility which exceeds all others, set us
by our Savior, and recorded by S. Matthew 26.39. who begging a Blessing from
his Father; humbly fell on his face and prayed, saying, Oh my father if it be
possible let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will; All these Examples in the Patriarchs and Prophets, the Disciples and
Christ himself, invite us to an humble and Dutiful Style, when we make our
Requests either for a blessing from God, or our Parents. And that which God
requires from us in a divine and spiritual manner when we make our prayers to
the Father of Lights, may be performed in a civil and moral Rite, to our
Parents when we crave their blessing. And it is St. Paul's Argument for Parents:
Heb. 12.9. If Children owe their Parents such Reverence and subjection under
their Correction; with what submisse Language, begging and entreating, With
what humble Gestures kneeling or prostrating themselves down to the Earth,
ought they to address to their Parents, expecting their Blessing, their
favor, their Benevolence, their Prayers to God for them, and their
reconcilement to them? If these Examples seem too General, and therefore of
weaker force, or less obliging, as not strictly directing which best to
follow: Children are to be instructed, that they are concerned as to them all,
on several occasions or respects, when they are to present their duties to
their Parents. So that the modesty of Shem and Japhet, the Innocence of Isaac,
the Obedience and Activenesse of Jacob, the zeal and affection of Elisha, the
Importunity of the Shunamite, the passionate tears of Mary Magdalen, the
outcryes and Lamentations of the Cananitish woman, and the humility of Christ;
falling on his face, and praying to his Father: These are all Warrantable
Examples, both works, and Words teaching the phrase, or Manner how to beg the
Parents Blessing; This difference only first reserved, God is to be Worshipped
as the Father of Spirits, Eternal and Immortal, and the Parents to be Honored
as the Fathers and Mothers of their childrens Flesh. God is to be called on
with Faith, with a divine and spiritual Invocation, and the Parents are to be
entreated by their children with civil and Moral supplications, when they sue
to them for their blessings. And hereby they honor God himself in honoring
those whom he commands shall be honored, by the express Order and words of his
Law.

Chap. 22.
Yet if all these Instances seem but as Lines that rest in the Circumference,
and stretch not so far as the Center of the Point, and Argument in hand; More
particularly, children may beg their Parents Blessing either per Lachrimas, by
their Tears, or per Verba, by humble Words, or else per Signa, some Actions
implying and representing the desires and Affections of their hearts. And in
this regard (as S. Hierom on another occasion speaking of the Priests) Omnia in
Liberis debent esse Vocalia. All circumstances in children should be Vocal, in
some degree or other speaking forth their Duty to their parents. Those who
cannot speak may Weep, as Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.38. of whom we read not, that
she spoke a Word. Little Infants (whilst they cannot speak) let them learn to
lift up their hands, or testify their Obedienee by some other Circumstances,
as of humbling the head, or using the Flexure of the Knees. This weeping is a
silent king of Begging, this bending an an obedient sign or Mode of entreating
the Parents favor. Now, that tears have Tongues appears in King David's
phrase; The Lord (says that Royal Prophet) has heard the voice of my Weeping:
(...): thus the Septuagint; It may seem more passionate from the Original:
(...) that is, he hearkened or listened attentively, or, he put his Ear into my
Weeping. Parents thus touched, thus Accosted, cannot but have compassion and
tenderness for their weeping children, though they crave not their Blessing by
any composure of Words at all. There is another way of obtaining the Parents
blessing, and that is per Signa, when the obedient children coming to their
Parents on this Religious Errand or Business, manifest the desires of their
hearts by some signal exterior gestures; declaring their affections by their
Actions, and speak the sense of their Minds by by the humble deportment of
their Bodies: as it is commonly and civilly performed sometimes by the
uncovering to the head, kissing of the hand, moving of the Leg; so making their
honor by Courchee, and so bowing the Bodies, or bending the Knees: which
Ceremonies if performed by Equals, whether acquaintances, kindred, strangers,
or friends: they pass only, and are so judged as mere civil Respects; as
Familiar amongst Heathens as Christians: But when they are balanced and guided
by the Conscience: as actions due to the several Relations of Magistrates,
Masters and Parents, ^^at is, Fathers and Mothers, they (...) not merely from
Custom or humane Civility, but from a better Foundation, that which God has
laid, on which a higher building is to be raised, Honor thy Father and Mother,
which is the first Commandment with promise; and such a one, as if not rightly
observed will cause a Breach or neglect of all that follow: And it is to be
feared, that he that takes the Liberty to dishonor his Parents, will make
little or no Conscience whom he does murder, from whom he Robs, whom he
defiles with his Lust, how false he is to his Neighbor, or how covetous of
his Neighbors goods. If then Kings and Princes or Supreme Magistrates may
expect duty and honor from their Subjects and people, not only for fear, but
as charged by a conscientious Obligation, Romans 13.3, 4, 5. not only for wrath,
but for conscience sake, If Masters are not only to be serve with eye-service,
but fidelity of the heart, and that their Eyes are to watch and wait on their
Masters and Mistresses business: What degrees of Duty are children to present
to their Parents? in whom these branches of honor and Obedience to Magistrates
and Masters are primarily and Originally founded.

Chap. 23.
There is yet another Way or Mode of Address to Parents per Verba, by Words;
which are to be accompanied and clothed with humility, Reverence and Honor.
And if a pious Christian Custom not offending Any, (if rightly understood) nor
opposing the Word of God, may Warrant Obedient children: They asking their
Parents blessing may lawfully say (as commonly taught by their Parents in haec
Verba) I pray you Father or Mother, pray to God to bless me: Or as some others
use it, I pray you Father or Mother Give me your Blessing. Thus God himself
directs King Abimelech to pray to Abraham, that Abraham a Prophet might Pray
for him, Genesis 20.7, 17. So Abraham prayed to God for him, and God heard his
servant Abraham, and God healed Abimelech. Pharaoh entreated Moses and Aaron to
pray for him, and his plagued Country, Exodus 9.28. The people cried out to
Samuel, pray for thy servants to the Lord thy God, 1 Samuel 12.19. St. Paul puts
life into this Religious Exercise by his own practice: Precor autem Vos
fratres. I beseech you Brethren for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the
love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for
me, Romans 15.36. Precum officium ab eis Postulat, ostendit quare in quibusvis
difficultatibus niti nos maxim oporteat: Mr. Beza Commenteth thus on the
Words: On some Occasions a conjunction and Community of prayers is very
Necessary. St. Paul was as earnest with the Ephesians as the Romans; pray for
me, Ephesians. 6.19. and with the Philippians as the Ephesians: I know that this
shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, Phil. 1.19. Thus the Apostle
entreats the Colossians, Chap. 4. verse 3. and the Thessalonians, 2 These.
3.1. and the Jews his own Nation, Heb. 13.19. After this manner God counseled
Jobs three friends, Eliphas the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuite, and Zophar the
Naamathite, and commanded them, Go unto my servant Job and offer up for your
selves a burnt Offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I
accept. And they did as the Lord commanded them, and the Lord also accepted
Job, and they god a Blessing, Job 42.8, 9, 10. Now if Kings and people beg a
blessing from their Prophets and Priests: Nay, if the Apostles entreat their
Disciples to pray for them: How earnest ought children to be with their parents
for their Zealous and assiduous prayers? to beg their Blessing, and to pray
their parents to pray to God for his Blessing on them? And if the fervent
prayer of a Righteous man avails much, Certainly the affectionate desires and
prayers of tenderhearted compassionate parents, (whose bowels yearn in them
for their children; either having erred ignorantly, or offended wilfully, and
afterward repenting heartily) cannot but receive good success, and Grace from
the Mercy-seat of Almighty God.

Chap. 24.
Some use a shorter style, and fold up their Duty in fewer Words, (viz.) I pray
you Father or Mother give me your Blessing: Which Kind is as pathetical, and
may prove as Effectual as the Other, there being no contradiction at all
betwixt them, but only a difference, or, modus Loquendi; Importing the same
thing: The children using this phrase, imply equally as much; and when they
say, Give your Blessing, it is the same, received by the parents, and intended
by the children, as, Give the Blessing of your prayers; give your affectionate
Testimony toward us, or assure us of the Continuance of your tender care and
goodness toward us, and of our hope and Expectation in You.

Chap. 25.
There are yet some who use a shorter and more Concise phrase then this Last:
when they appear in the Dutiful address of asking Blessing; Making the Text of
Scripture the Warrant, the Method and matter of their pious request, saying no
more then what Esau did to his Father, Bless me, O my Father or Mother, Genes.
27.38. where the vulgar Latin has it Pater mihi obsecro ut Benedicas which
imports as much, as, I pray or beseech you Father bless me: the Septuagint
coming nearer to the Original, translate the Words (...) properly rendered in
the English Translation, Bless me, even me, O my Father, Genesis 27.38. The
Patriarch Jacob uses the like Words craving a blessing from Isaac, and saying,
Let my Father arise, and eat of his Sons Venison, ut Benedicat mihi anima sua:
Genes. 27.31. that his soul might bless me. In all these varieties there are
differences, but not contradiction; and the children being thus taught and
instructed by their Religious parents how, and when to ask their Blessing, or
guided by these Examples of holy Scripture, are more exactly directed how to
honor, and after what manner to crave their parents Blessing.

Chap. 26.
The Children being thus Informed, it will be as pertinent that the parents be
advised how, or after what manner they are to bestow their Blessing on their
Obedient children. And to this Case it may be answered, that as the children
diversificate in the manner of their Requests, craving the Blessing: to their
parents may safely vary in the Distribution of their Benedictions, as to their
phrase, or Method of their Dispensations; and yet the Blessing be no whit less
in effect or Operation. Isaac in blessing his Son Jacob, prays to God, Deus
Omnipotens tibi Benedicat, God Almighty Bless thee and make thee fruitful,
Genes. 28.3. Joseph changes his style of Blessing into other Words, composed
of the rare Ingredients of pity and piety, and blessed his Brother Benjamin,
and said, God be gracious to thee my Son, Genes. 43.29. Frater natu major
minori Benedixit: Here the Elder Brother (being a Father to Pharaoh and the
Egyptians) blesses the younger, according to St. Paul's speech (mentioned
before) the Less is Blessed of the better or greater, Heb. 7.7. There is a
variety of Blessings recorded in the Book of Deuteronomy: when Moses Moses. v^r
Dei b^^dixit s^^is Israel a^te ^ort^m (...). Deuteronomy. 31.
received Jacobs blessings on his posterity, blessed his children; Let Reuben
live, Deuter. 33.6. Lord hear the voice of Judah, ver. 7. Let thy Thummim and
thy Urim be with Levi, thy holy One, ver. 8. The Lord shall cover Benjamin all
the Day long, ver. 12. As he blesses Joseph, he prays for the good Will of
him that dwelt in the Bush, Let the Blessing come on the head of Joseph, and
upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his Brethren, ver. 16.
Let Zebulon rejoice in his going out, and Issachar in his Tents, ver. 18.
Blessed be he that enlarges Gad; Dan is as a Lion; Nephali possess thou the
West and the South; let Asher be blessed with children, and Dip his feet in
Oil, Deuter. 33.22, 23, 24. Here were multitudes of Blessings variously
expressed from the Tender goodness of a loving and Kind Father of his people.
There is yet another more exact from of Blessing which God taught Moses, and
Moses taught Aaron and his sons; And that continues as a Moral or Eternal
Direction; teaching both Jews and Christians how the Priests should bless the
people, or the Parents their children; On this wise shall ye bless the children
of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, The Lord make
his face to shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee; The Lord lift up his
Countenance upon thee and give thee peace: and they shall put my Name upon the
children of Israel, and I will bless them, Numbers 6.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
verses. Such Language as this King David taught; The Blessing of the Lord be
upon you, Psalm 129.8. There are some other Circumstances and Concomitants,
which Parents use in the Blessing of their children, and their Childrens
children, Besides their Votal and Vocal Benedictions and prayers. Israel
calls for his Grandchildren, and says to Joseph, Bring them unto me and I
will bless them, Genes. 48.10. and he kissed them and embraced them: And
Joseph brought them out from between his Knees, and he Bowed with his face to
the Earth; And Joseph took them Both, Ephraim in his right hand, toward Isreal's
left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Isreal's right hand, and
brought them near unto him; And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid
it upon Ephraims head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasse's
head, guiding his hand, wittingly; and thus he blessed Joseph and his
Grandchilden, Genesis 48.15, 20. Heb. 11.21. Christ himself seems to Crown this
Way of Benediction, and recommendeth it by his Example to all Ages; who at his
Ascension led his Disciples out as far as Bethany, and he lift up his hands and
blessed them; And it came to pass while he blessed them, he was parted from
them and carried up into Heaven, Luke 24.50, 51. In this Farewell of our
Saviors; three passages are more highly remarkable: First, that Christ led his
Apostles to Bethany, Quae domus obedientiae dicitur; that is, as it signifies,
to the house or Village of Obedience: Vt qui propter Inobedientiam perversorum
descenderat, propter Obedientiam Conversorum ascenderet: That as he descended
in compassion for those who had been Disobedient, he might gloriously ascend
for the Consolation of those who were convered and become Obedient; so
Venerable Bede. Secondly, when he had led his Disciples to Bethany, he lifted
up his hands; forsan vim Conservativam influens eis usque ad adventum Spiritus,
and fortassis instruens nos, ut quoties recedimus; Benedictionibus Subditos Deo
recommendemus; Theophil. Either to influence them with a Conservative power,
and to strengthen his Apostles until a plenary mission of the holy Ghost: Or
to instruct them, and others, to Recommend those who were Obedient Souls, to
Gods Favor and further Blessings. Thirdly, Having led his Apostles to Bethany,
and having lifted up his hands, he Blessed them: Quod autem elevatis manibus
Benedixit eis, significat quod deceat Benedicentem cuiquam ornatum esse variis
Operibus, and arduis, respectu aliorum: The Elevation of his hands may rightly
signify the Transcendent Excellency of Christ's person, in whom Superlative
fullness dwelt, that he might be more able and complete to dispense and diffuse
his Heavenly Benedictions; whose Salutations were in peace after his
Resurrection; Peace be unto you, St. John 20.19, 21. But his Valediction were
in his Blessing of his Disciples at his Ascension, St. Luke 24.51. These
Examples of the Patriarch Jacob: and of Christ our Lord, may teach all Parents
the right Rules and Method how to bless their children: and (if there be cause)
to manifest their good Will and affections toward them, not only with the Word
of their Mouths, but with the imposition of their hands upon their childrens
heads, as Jacobs were on Ephraims and Manasses: or with an Elevation or
Expansion of them toward heaven to beg a blessing from God: and by this
Circumstance to teach their children to be Supernal and Spiritual in their
Thoughts, and more Celestial in their Conversations; By admitting them to come
unto them, as the Patriarch triarch Jacob called for for his Grandchildren, and
then passionately Kissed and Embraced them, and so blessed them. Yet the
nhildren may not expect a Blessing nor the Parents freely part with it, until
the children are brought to the house, and habit of Obedience: as Christ led
his Disciples first to Bethany, and then blessed them.

Chap. 27.
There is yet an Objection to be removed out of the Way, which may seem in some
degree to interrupt the practice of this Affectionate and Religious Duty;
raised from the Conceit, that the Patriarchs rather gave their Blessings as
Prophets, then as Parents: and that the Blessings were pronounced rather out of
prophetical praevision, then out of parental and fatherly Affection. To this it
is easily Answered, The Patriarchs are to be considered as to both Relations:
first as Prophets, who spoke of old as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost, 2
Pet. 1.21: and in this Respect, by Inspirations, Visions, and Revelations they
did foretell, instruct, and acquaint their posterities what Blessings were
likely to follow them or fall upon them. Secondly, The Patriarchs are to be
looked upon as Parents, Fathers, Mothers, Grandfathers or Grandmothers, or
other Superior degrees in Consanguinity and Blood; and in this Relation the
Parents Blessing rather rises from Affection, then Revelation; and rather from
the force of tender and natural Love, then the Spirit of prophecy: which
although they differ in their Subjects, (prophecy looking only after that
which is Verum, Truth, and the affections of the Parents only looking and
longing after that which is Bonum good for his Child,) yet it is not
inconsistent but that a divine Prophet may be a tender Parent, and as well
impart his Blessings to Obedient children, as to Reveal, and Foretell to them
Gods good pleasure concerning them and their posterities, and their future
Condition. And it is as true, that Parents (though no Prophets) may (as
warranted by the Rules and Examples of holy Scriptures) Bless their dutiful
children. To this purpose it is observed of Jacob Blessing the twelve Tribes,
Genesis 48.15. Jacob benedicit filiis Joseph, hoc est, oratione Precatur eis
benedictionem divinam, and Conferri eis Corporalia simul and Spiritualia Bona;
as Marlorat has it on that action of Jacobs: that is, The Patriarch Blessing
his Sons and Grandsons, did not only prophecy and foretell, but passionately
did pray for a divine Benediction on his children, and begged of God temporal
and Spiritual Benedictions for them. So then not only prophetical, but all
Natural Christian parents may, and ought (on just occasions) to pray for Gods
Blessing on their posterities, and their Childrens children; The one being only
the impulse and Motion of Gods holy Spirit, and extraordinary, the other being
the fruits of Natural and tender affection guided by the Word of God, and so
directed to a more holy End: and which freely and naturally streaming from the
head or Fountain cannot stop nor stay, but if interrupted, speedily swells;
or like an Inundation spreads and overfloweth; and the natural Channel being
stopped or dammed up casually falls into some other obvious Course.

Chap. 28.
These things considered, Parents ought to be exceeding Cautious how, or what
they teach their children, and what they practice on this Account; (viz.) that
the Patriarchs gave their Blessings not merely, and only as Parents, but as
Prophets: For, mis-guided by such mistakes, God may be dishonored, the
children unblessed, and the Parents (guilty both of the Breach of Gods Law, and
the childrens misery and unhappiness) liable to a more sad and heavy account:
and the Links and Bands of these near Relations once Cracked or Broken, great
mischiefs may ensue, which no Art can cure, nor Reason or Counsel cement and
repair. St. Paul therefore to bind this Cord the faster, and that the natural
Affections and inclinations of Parents might meet with no Obstruction, teaches
the parents their Duty, as well as their children, theirs. It is true, the
Apostle first begins with the children, commanding them, Children obey your
Parents in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. This precept is corroborated with a threefold
Argument: First, quia Deus sic sancivit, because God has so Ordained.
Secondly, Justissima est haec Obedientia, and rationi consentanea, this
Obedience is just and most agreeable to Nature and Reason. Thirdly, ab utili,
this Duty is the better to be observed because of the blessing and advantage
Got by it, Dominus hoc Praeceptum inter caetera peculiari benedictione dignatus
est, says Mr. Beza, ut been tibi si t, that it may be Well with thee, and that
thou may live long upon the Earth, Ephesians. 6.3.

Chap. 29.
The Apostle having first taught the Children, undertaketh the parents, and as
strictly charge them: (...), that is, And ye Fathers provoke not your
children: as if the Apostle should have said, Be not over severe, harsh,
Tyrannical and Cruel: for they are your children, not your slaves; your Sons
and Daughters, and not your Subjects: made yours and to be kept yours, not only
by a civil Compact, but a Moral and Natural Obligation. And there might be some
danger, least, if the Children observe their parents not inclined to give them
their Blessing, they may unreverently neglect to give that Honor that is due
to their Parents, and so (easily tempted with stubborn pride) refuse to Bow or
Beg their Parents Blessing. The Apostle considered this Duty of the Parents to
be so necessary, that he gives the like Canon to the Colossians, as he did to
the Ephesians; only changes (...), Ephesians. 6.4. into (...), the first
translated ne Provocate, provoke not, the latter ne irritate, do not stir up or
Irritate, or provoke not to Anger or Vexation. On both which places it is
observed, Patrum officium est; moderate, and ad Dei gloriam jure patriae
potestatis Vti, that is, It is the Fathers Duty to exercise his paternal power
with Moderation, Prudence and Discretion, that God may be the more Glorified.
Requiritur ut parents in liberos sint benigni: It is required that Parents be
Courteous, and tender toward their Obedient children. And it is (...)
I^fallible truth, where the Golden Reciprocal Union of parents blessing their
children, and the children Honoring their Parents is constantly kept and
observed; there cannot but be length of Happy days, or such as Lead to
Immutable and Eternal Happiness in Heaven. On the contrary, where the Parents
forgetting all Natural Affection, are over bitter, harsh, and Tyrannical to
their Children; they convert Honor to Neglect, Obedience to sturdinesse, and
Rebellion, and Love into hatred, contempt and scorn. And though the Parents on
no occasion or provocation whatsoever are to be requited with such unnatural
Taunts and returns: Yet these are the Familiar and common Effects of
incompassionate neglect, or injust, impious, and Imprudent provocations; And
from hence it proves oftentimes, that where the Parents ought to place and
expect their greatest Joy and Solace; even from thence, even from their own
Bowels, they reap and gather the sad Harvests of their own occasioned Sorrows.

Chap. 30.
But the Sin of provocation in Parents is more Rare and less frequent, by
Reason that God and Nature incline the parents hearts to Kindness and
Compassion toward their children; And Love Naturally descends and looks
downward. The more dangerous and spreading sin is Disobedience in children, who
(though never provoked at all) know too well, and learn too suddenly, by
natural depravation, to offend, dishonor and Disobey their Loving and
compassionate parents: And from this Root spring up many Shoots and branches of
Impiety, which, in conclusion, occasion much mischief, and much misery, often
attended with Temporal, Spiritual and Aeternal maledictions ledictions and
Curses. Cham and his posterity are miserable and sad Examples of Gods
Judgments in this Kind. The Scripture only tells, that Ham the Father of
Canaan saw the Nakedness of his Father, and told his two Brethren without,
Genesis 9.22. The Sin of his disobedience is not more largely described, but
rather gently remembered, then freely opened. Moses records, that Cham saw his
fathers Nakedness, and did not cover it, or, he did not only see with his
Eyes, but talk with his Tongue, he told his two Brethren without. At the first
sight: this sin of Chams seems to be but of a lesser size; yet it appears that
God was so highly offended at it, that it forced a curse to fall on Cham and
Canaan and their succeeding generations. For, whether it be construed a
prophecy, or a Fathers Wish and Imprecation; in both kinds it is very
terrible. And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had
done unto him, and he said, cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be
to his Brethren. In which Words, undoubtedly the Mouth of Noah, and the pen of
Moses (who wrote the History) were guided directly by the Spirit of God. Who,
to declare his Odium to the sin of Disobedience in children, makes Cham and
his posterity sad and miserable Spectacles to all future Ages of the World. The
Curse was not only denounced and inflicted on Cham, but the Lord does long
before point out as it were with his Finger where, and how this plague should
burn in the House of Cham; whose children and Generations being both
Egyptians, Genes. 12.15. and Aethiopians, Genes. 10.8, 9, 10. and Canaanites,
Numbers 13.28. Genes. 15.16. They and their Childrens children felt the bitter
smart of this plague and Curse for dishonor and Disobedience to parents. And,
what condition can be more miserable for children, then to be in the Scorn and
Curse of their Parents who begat them, who bred them, and would carefully and
tenderly provide for them, if they had but the Grace and Goodnessed to Honor
and obey them as God commands. And it is for the sin of Disobedience and
Undutifulnesse, that children prove their Parents greatest Crosses and
Calamities, and most Insupportable Grief. Thus David was afflicted and forced
to complain of Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.11. Lamenting his condition to Abishai, and
to all his Servants: Behold my Son which came forth of my Bowels seeks my
life. This Dart pierced more sharply, wounded more deeply then all the poisoned
arrows of his Enemies; in so much that the King extenuates Shimei his cursings
and Railings, as more tolerable; because such high Rebellion and Disobedience
rose from Absalom David's darling, and the fruit of his own Bowels. It was from
hence that this great worthy, Renowned Champion, (though in other Rencounters
of Invincible Courage) yet, Alarmed by his Sons disloyal Apostasy, and
Disobedient Conspiracy, a pannick fear possesses his Royal Soul, and the
Messenger had no sooner told the News, that the hearts of the men of Israel
were after Absalom, but incontinently without further debate or Counsel, 2 Samuel
15.13. the King quitted his Hold of Zion, and his Royal City, saying to his
servants that were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, let us flee, for we shall not
else Escape from Absalom: make speed to depart, least he overtake us suddenly,
and being evil upon us, smite the City with the Edge of the Sword. It was the
Disobedience of this Undutifull Son that forced more tears from his Fathers
Eyes, more sighs and Sobs from his Fathers heart, then all his Enemies: In all
his Enterprises, the King with his Attendants and Guards were never in such a
posture as was occasioned by this unnatural provocation. The Story is most
pathetical in the second of Samuel, 15.30. And David went up by the ascent of
Mount Olivet, and wept as he went up barefoot, and all the people that were
with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up:
Every Word does Emphasis Grief, and Echo Regrett: represent rather a Tragedy
already acted, then an Enemy to be Attacqued; rather a Funeral solemnized then
a Battle to be fought: Covering of the head, Weeping, and Walking barefoot,
being rather Emblems of grief, then preparations to fight, kill, or conquer.
But, see what strange Convulsions a Disobedient son forces into the heart of a
tender and compassionate Father! What a Tempest was suddenly raised in David's
Soul by the Breath of an undutifull child! and how Restless the Fathers Spirit
was, tossed with the Billows of fear, care, Love and grief: considering that
his own safety and his sons were not consistent: that the Killing of his
Enemy must be the slaying of his Son; that the subduing of the Rebels must be
the Destruction of his Subjects; That his Victories must be raised by the fall
of him, for whom his Bowels did Yearn, and had most affection; or by the Death
of some seduced and straying sheep, deluded by fair words, and sweet Baits; for
whom their true Pastor and Prince had the Designs of clemency, pardon and
gracious compassion: This was very Visible in the Kings pleasure or command,
who charged his three Generals, Joab, Abishai and Ittai, 2 Samuel 18.2, 5. Deal
gently for my sake with the young man, even Absalom my Son; Of whose death when
the King received News from Cushi; 2 Samuel 18.33. he was much moved, and as
overflowed with an Inundation of Grief; he went up to the Chamber over the
Gate, and Wept, and as he went thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom, would God I had died for thee, Oh Absalom my Son, my Son. By these
Examples and sad Effects, it is very easy to discern the unpleasant Fruits
that stubborn and Disobedient children occasion and produce to their grieved
and Afflicted Parents. But as to themselves their sins may prove much more
dangerous and damnable; for, whilst by their wilful Disobedience, their scorn
and contempt, they cause their Parents faces to Wither, their Cheeks to furrow,
their Hearts to ache, and their Eyes to weep, and (in conclusion) sooner hasten
their Gray Head to lie on a cold clod in their Graves; they may in the mean
time hasten heavy Judgments to fall on themselves; and after a short life of
Disobedience and unrepented Sins; hurry, and hasten themselves to Hell. As
then the love of Gods favor and Blessing, and the Hopes of a Gracious promise,
should invite children to be Gracious, Dutiful and Obedient; so should the
Terrors of Gods Threats, and the Vengeance of his Justice; with the fearful
Execution of many heavy plagues and punishments, teach and persuade children to
take heed of the horrid sin of unworthy and unnatural Disobedience.

Chap. 31.
It was pride and Disobedience that was the Cause, Epist. St. Jude ver. 6.
of Lucifers fall; and this sin suffered not Elyes undutifull Sons, Hophni
and Phineas to live out half their days, but they were slain with the sword, 1 Samuel 4.11. According to Gods Law, Deuter. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. If a man have a
Rebellious son, Judicial Law.
which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of his Mother, and
when they have chastened him he will not hearken to them: Then shall his Father
and his Mother lay hold of him, and bring him out to the Elders of the City,
and to the Gate of his Place: And they shall say to the Elders of the City:
This our Son is stubborn and rebellious: he will not obey our voice, he is a
Glutton and a drunkard: and all the men of the City shall stone him with stones
until he Die: so shall thou put the Evil from among you; and all Israel shall
hear and fear. The Judgments of God thus threatened against undutifull and
Rebellious children, cannot but terrify the hearts of all who have Natural
good dispositions, or any spark of Grace: to be of more meek, sweet and pious
Tempers and humble Behaviors toward their Parents: of which heavenly
Comportment Christ our Savior was pleased to be a Blessed Copy and Example to
his Church. Thus St. Luke writes, Luke 2.57. He went down to Nazareth with his
Parents, and was subject to them: and it is true, Omnis Actio Christi est
instructio Christiani. Christ's Actions are our best Instructions: and St.
Hierom speaks aptly to this purpose, Christus venerabatur matrem, colebat
nutricium. Hieron. Epist. de vit and. Susp. Connub. He Reveverenced his Mother
as her Son, and Honored Joseph his supposed Father, using (as many Learned
Authors affirm) and exercising Filial and oeconomicall Duties in their House
until the Thirtieth Year of his Age. Where Christ is the Example: Let no
Christian child refuse to follow the Pattern of his Obedience, nor vainly think
his Subjection to his Parents (as too many do) infirmitatis sed pietatis
officium, to be a Duty of Infirmity, but of Piety. Amb. in Luc. lib. 2. cap.
2. It is the Judgment of a Lord Bishop, and late more eminent Light of the
Church of England, that the Tenth or last Commandment is the Fountain from
whence all the rest of the second Table do proceed, as the streams from the
Conduit Head; and the streams admit a second division: for, they either
equally and generally reflect on all, as being our Neighbors; as the five
last; or else are restrained to a more particular and restrict Relation as the
fifth, Honor thy Father and Mother, as from whom thou have (by Gods order and
permission) thy very Essence and Being. Bishop Andrews Exposition on the fifth
Commandment, where the same Author Collecteth from Philo, that Honor due to
Parents is preferred before all other Duties due to Men; and it is placed as it
were (...) in Confinio, in the Confines of a Mortal, and an Aeternal Nature; in
the Middle of the first and second Table; for, take away this one Duty of the
childrens Honoring and Obeying their Parents, and then all Duties to God, and
man will speedily Cease and fall to the Ground. This is due to them not only as
a Reward of Excellency, the proper Object of Honor, (as the Schools speak)
but it is to be tendered and given to Parents though they be Aged, Ignorant,
infirm or Impotent; The duty of this Commandment being not directed in the
Word Dilige love, but Honora, honor thou.

Chap. 32.
If there be any nice Stomach that will not digest this Meat, or will cavil at
this Duty, pretending Scripture for their Warrant; Objecting, that None is to
be called Father on Earth, much less Honored as Father, from those Words,
Matthew 23.9. It is answered, that properly, and according to the Rules of
Divinity it is true, There is no other Father but God; for other Parents are,
as the Heathen say, (...): the Instruments of Generation under God; and
therefore Paternity being ascribed both to God and Man: It is in God
Originally, and properly, and in man derivatively and instrumentally: as it may
be seen in the Words of the Apostle Saint Paul, who makes God the first Father,
of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is Named, Ephesians. 3.17. as he is
the first, so he is the last: So David, When my Father and Mother forsake me,
the Lord takes me up, Psalm 27.16. Now, if all paternity or Fatherhood be
derived from God to men, who be Fathers by participation: Their Merit, or what
is due to them, signified in the Name [Father] must be drawn from God who is
the Fountain of that Honor, that falls and flows from Fathers. There is
yet something in the very Word in the Original, (...), Father, which is
derived, as Bishop Andrews conceives, from (...) to will and desire, because of
that tender and affectionate desire that Parents have of their childrens good.
Thus Job was Pater Pauperum, Job 29.16. And was the Father has a significant
Name from the Hebrew; so has the Mother from the Greek Language, (...) quaero
vehementer, quia victum partui quaerit, because she seeks to be a preserver of
her Children. And this was one end of her Creation, to be a Helper, not only to
her Husband, but to her children. So then, the very Terms of Father and Mother
may most justly force and require a Duty of Honor from their children. As the
Terms and Names of Father and Mother present the Excellency of those near
Relations: so the Duty commanded is pressed in a word of equal acceptance. The
Hebrew (...) which is translated to Honor, does first signify to be heavy, or
make heavy: Grave esse, aut aggravare; and by a Metaphor it is used for Honor:
Because as Gold and Silver the more weighty they are, the more they are of
price and Value; Thus our Parents as the most precious Relations, merit the
chiefest Honor and highest Valuation from their children. As the Hebrew, so
the Greek Word has as Emphatical a signification to oblige the children to
their Duty, (...), Honor seems to have a derivation from (...), pendo, to
weigh, prize, and esteem; And these two words are commonly used by Solon,
Plato, and the Roman Legislators, requiring Obedience to the Laws; Thus
Aristotle (...) are the same with (...) Arist. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 17. Et lib. 5.
cap. 6. Whether then the Terms of Father and Mother, or the Duty of Honor be
considered, it is very important, and most significant; that as Care,
Tenderness, Love, Provision, Education, and Maintenance is due from Parents:
so on the other part Honor, Obedience, a Submissive Gratitude, and humble
deportment in Word and Deed is due to the tenderhearted Parents: And what
Gesture more presents Honor in Approaches; then Uncovering the head, bowing
of the Body, or bending of the Knees? And what Words can so suddenly Conquer
compassionate Parents, as when they hear their children praying; and see them
humbly begging their Blessing on their Knees? This Way is so facile ad easy,
that it often Molifies the Rockie disposition of hard-hearted Parents, who,
provoked to Wrath and Unkindnesse by stubborn Disobedience, are converted, and
in a Moment changed to sweetness, tenderness and Love, by the Earnest Prayers
and humble Gestures of Relenting and Obedient children. It were pity then, nay,
a great and Imprudent Absurdity (if not an Impiety) that this Duty should not
be used amongst Christians, which is in it self so Innocent, to the Relations
so Commendable, and by the Word of God, and holy Examples, so Lawful and
Warrantable. The Son of Sirach, *: does both Counsel and Countenance the
whole Discourse with many Evincing Arguments, and powerful persuasions,
directing his Son, and telling him: Ecesiasti. 2.3.
The Lord has given the Father Honor over the children, and has canfirmed
the Authority of the Mother over the sonne^; whosoever honors his Father makes
an Atonement for his sins; And he that honors his Mother, is as one that
lays up Treasure; Whosoever honors his Father, shall have joy of his own
children; and when he makes his prayer he shall be heard: he that Honors
his Father shall have long life, and he that is Obedient to the Lord, will be a
comfort to his Mother: He that fears the Lord will Honor his father, and
will do service unto his Parents as to his Masters: Honor thy Father and
Mother both in word and deed, that a Blessing may come upon thee from them; for
the blessing of the Father Establishes the Houses of Children, but the Curse
of the Mother rooteth out Foundations: Glory not in the dishonor of thy
Father: for thy Fathers dishonor is no glory unto thee, for the glory of a man
is from the honor of his Father and a Mother in dishonor is a reproach unto
the children. My son, help thy Father in his Age, and grieve him not as long as
he lives. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him and despise
him not when thou art in thy full strength, for the Relieving of thy Father
shall not be forgotten, and in stead of sins it shall be added to build thee
up. In the day of thine affliction it shall be remembered; thy sins shall melt
away as the Ice in the fair warm Weather. He that forsakes his Father is as a
blesphemer, and he that angreth his Mother is Cursed of God. It is facile and
easy to Collect and Conclude from this divine Counselor, that an Atonement
for sins is made; that a Treasure is laid up; That Joy is added: Prayers are
heard; Long life is procured; Houses are Established, and built up: Afflictions
remembered, and sins are made to melt away as the Ice in the fair warm
weather; When Children rightly pay and render that Honor, Duty, Reverence, and
Obedience to their Parents, which God commands.

FINIS.
'EYDOIA.

A Model of private Prayers: OR, Occasional Helps in Retired Devotions.

(...). Damasc.

Composed by Edward Wolley, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and are to be sold by William Palmer, at the sign of
the Palm Tree in Fleet Street, and at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

'EYDOIA.

A Model of private Prayers, OR, Occasional Helps in Retired Devotions.

The Creed.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

The Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

TO THE Kings mos Excellent MAJESTY; Charles, by the Grace of GOD, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR,
GOd has made your Majesty not only a King, but Pater Patriae; the Father of
all your Kingdoms and Countries. In this Reflection All your Subjects owe you
Loyalty and Allegiance, and are (as dutiful Children) to render Honor and
obedience to your Sacred Person and Commands; They are (on all just grounds) to
supply your Majesty with Support and Maintenance, and to adventure, and hazard
their dearest lives and richest Fortunes in the Defense of your Royal Crown and
Dignity. This Truth has been Sealed in the blood of many thousand Loyal
Subjects of your three Kingdoms, who in your Majesty's, and in your Royal
Fathers Service of the Wars, chose rather to lose their lives, then their
Loyalty. Thus whilst others of looser Principles started from their Duty;
your Loyal-hearted People, as obedient Children, were faithful to the Death,
and the vigor of their Resolutions was (Probably) raised from the sure
Foundations of Piety, and Gods holy Law, which commands jure positivo
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. And had this Moral duty been well taught,
and well learned: It is very Possible this latter Age had not produced such
Black Rebellion; but that the Church might have had better Christians, your
Majesty better subjects, Masters better servants, and Parents more obedient
Children. To meliorate all which Relations, this Manual adventures into the
World under the Vmbrage of your Majesty's Grace and favor, which has
encouraged the Endeavors of

Your Majesty's Devoted and obedient Subject and Chaplain E. WOLLEY.

To the READER.
THis Model or Manuel of private prayers is adjoined to the Parents Blessings,
the rather, because it aymeth chiefly, at the begetting of true Honor and
Obedience to all Superiors, whether Spiritual, or Civil, or Natural: And what
help so good, what air so sweet, or Soars so high, as the breath and perfume
of holy and true Devotion, which reaches, and is quickly elevated from the
Altar of an humble heart to the Throne of God; yet it is possible that good
affections may want expressions, And weak and wandering Travelers require a
Guide; especially after the dismal storms of a bloody civil War, and the
confusions and distractions produced by that ugly Monster. But now the tempest
being over (thanks and praise to Almighty God) it may be seasonable to
endeavor to settle the minds of many: who, as Passengers at Sea, have had
their consciences shipwracked for many years, or carried away with the puffs
of strange Doctrine; And to refresh others, who have felt their share in the
late bitter storms, and are not yet securely Returned into the Haven, where
their souls may be at rest; to rectify whose stomachs, and comfort whose
spirits nothing Can be more Cordial and proper, then Private and Public Prayer.

Farewell.
A Prayer for a King, or a Sovereign Prince.
O Most Gracious Lord, who in great favor and mercy have set a Crown of pure
Gold upon my head, and a Royal Scepter in may hand; Psalm 21.
and have girded me with a sword of Power: make my honor great in thy
Salvation; Prevent me still with the blessings of goodness: keep my heart
upright in thy service, suffer not evil Counsel to Approach near mine Ears,
Nor wicked Examples to present themselves before mine eyes: Let not Liars abuse
Truth, nor Flatterers corrupt or Alienate my Love fromt it. Psalm. 101.
Strengthen then my Resolutions against proud looks and high stomachs, that I
may not suffer them, nor deceitful perpersons to dwell in my House, or those
who tell Lies to tarry in my sight: Continue me a Nursing-father to thy Church,
and a true Defender of the Faith; A gracious Sovereign to all my Subjects: And
that all my thoughts, Words and Actions may be so seasoned with Grace, and the
fear of God, that my eyes may look unto such as be faithful in the Land, and
that they may dwell with me: And that those who lead a Godly life may be my
servants. Above all things, let me have Understanding in the way of Godliness,
that I may walk in thy House with a perfect heart; And let Justice sit with me
on my Throne, and Prudence with me at my Counsels: Let Temperance be my
Companion, and Fortitude my Encouragement, and so adorn my soul with Moral
Virtue and heavenly graces: That whilst I live on Earth I may still grow in
favor with God and man: and when I shall be dissolved from my earthly
Tabernacle, I may receive an Immortal Crown of Glory: and all for Jesus Christ's
sake our Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Subjects Prayer.
ALmighty Lord, who Art the God of Order, and not the Author of Confusion; Give
me grace to reflect on my own condition, and to know my self that I may the
better perform my Duty toward God and toward man. Continue my heart Loyal
faithful and Obedient to my Sovereign, and make me dutiful and submissive to
the Laws. Let neither Ambition nor covetousness tempt my soul to sin, nor
Rebellion bewitch and Ensnare my affections from my Prince; Give me grace ever
cheerfully to Render unto Caesar those things which are Caesar's: and to God
those things which are Gods: that I may live and prosper under a happy
Government, and end my days in peace and the quiet of a good conscience: and
so may be in the End Eternally blessed, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Captains or Commanders Prayer.
ALmighty God, who art King of Kings and Lord of Hosts: and command all
things both in Heaven and Earth, make me truly Zealous and courageous in a good
cause. Let neither Death nor danger terrify my soul from thy service, nor the
force and rage of Enemies affright my Resolutions: preserve my heart in
obedience to my Superiors, and make them willing, cheerful and successful whom
I command: Cover my head in the day Battle, and let me dwell under the defense
of the most High: suffer me not to be afraid of any terror by night, or for
the Arrow that flies by day; Give thy holy Angels charge over me to keep me in
all my ways, And as a good Centurion, let Faith be my shield, Righteousness
my Breast Plate, Hope my Helmet, a good conscience my Comrade and companion:
That thus armed and fighting with the sword of the Spirit, I may gain Victory
over all my Enemies: and in the End may rest in Peace and Triumph in glory,
with Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Private soldiers Prayer.
MOst gracious and merciful Lord, look favorably on me thy poor servant, let
thy glory be the ground of my encouragement, and a good cause only occasion my
feet to march, and my hands to fight; make me truly Valiant in the day of
battle, and preserve me from death and danger; Arm me with patience in
distress, and with Resolutions of Fidelity in thy honor and service: let
neither a Babylonish garment nor a wedg of Gold, unjustly tempt my affections,
nor power and success make me fierce and cruel; let not plenty Lull me in
security, nor drown me in debauched intemperance; and let not Victory incline
me to pride or insolency, direct me that I may do violence to no man: Neither
accuse any falsely, and to be contented with my wages: And so dispose of me in
all my Thoughts, words and deeds, that in Peace and War, in life and death, I
may have the joy and comfort of a good conscience: And all this I humbly crave
for Jesus Christ's sake my Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Masters Prayer.
MOst blessed Lord, who do Rule and govern all things: I beseech thee that I
may walk humbly before thee, with a perfect and upright heart in my Vocation
and Calling: keep my lips from fraud and guile, and my hands from unjust
dealings: Let my conversation be just and innoent toward God and toward man;
give a blessing to my endeavors, and prosper the works and labors of my
hands: suffer me not to be harsh or bitter to those that serve me, nor to be
uncivil to my Neighbors, Let truth and honesty keep me company, and a good
conscience be my companion day and night: And so direct the whole Race and
course of my life that I may live all my days in thy fear, and die in thy
favor and love, for Jesus Christ's sake my blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

The Servants Prayer.
Holy, Righteous and blessed Lord, who do preserve and provide for those
that trust in thee, look graciously on the thine unworthy servant, Let thy
fear dwell ever in my heart, and the honor of thy blessed Name inflame my soul
with love of thee; keep my thoughts from Temptation to evil, my hands from
fraud and deceit, from picking, Purloyning or stealing; Restrain my tongue from
cursing, swearing or blaspheming, and from evil speaking lying and slandering
good Lord deliver me; let Diligence and Obedience to just commands, make me to
delight in my Emploiments, and to add a cheerfulness to my service, make me
sincere to my Masters trust, and to perform the Duty of my place with fear and
trembling in singleness of heart, as unto Christ; Not with Eie-service, as a
man-pleaser, but as a servant of Christ doing the Will of God from the heart.
And that all things under my care may prosper and have better success;
Influence the Graces of thy Holy Spirit upon my soul, that being guided by
thee I may ever serve thee in Righteousness and true holiness through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Guardians Prayers.
O Lord who art the God of Truth, and see and searchest the hearts of all
men, keep me upright and sincere in that trust that is recommended to my care:
suffer me not to be drawn aside with covetous lust, nor to be carried away with
the torrent of Prodigal expenses: confine my thoughts within the bounds of
Justice and Moderation, that I may give a happy account of my Stewardship, and
prove just and innocent before God and man: Let not oppression against the
Orphans cry against me, nor unrighteous dealing corrupt my conscience: If
riches increase, let not my heart be set upon them, but give me grace to keep
Innocence, and to do the thing that is right, that I may obtain peace at the
last. These are the blessings I humbly crave, (most blessed Lord) for Jesus
Christ's sake our Savior. Amen.

The Wards or Orphans Prayer.
MOst gracious God and merciful Lord, who art pleased to be a husband to the
Widow and a father to the Orphans, I beseech thee to look with pity and mercy
upon me; comfort me in the time of trouble, and relieve me in all distress.
Provide me food and Raiment, let thy goodness be my comfort, and thy Prudence
my Storehouse; help me to the benefit of a civil and Christian Education, that
I may in some degrees, grow in favor with God and man, let not my conversation
be corrupted with Vice, nor my soul poisoned with sin: Beautify my Resolutions
with humility, contentedness and Obedience, that I may be observant under
Tutors and Governors until the time appointed; Increase my faith in thee, O
Lord, and make me ever to depend on thy mercy: And so season my younger years
with grace, that all my days may be blessed and acceptable in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ my blessed Savior. Amen.

The Tutours Prayer.
OEternal and Immortal Lord, who art Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption, Enlighten my Understanding with the bright beams of thy Favor,
Rectify my Judgment and preserve it from Error, let not Schism, heresy, or
Atheism incline or direct my thoughts from the love of Truth, and so lead me by
the grace of thy holy Spirit into the paths of Righteousness, that I may be
able to guide others to the Knowledge and love of Learning, and Wisdom: And I
humbly pray thee (blessed Lord) that holiness may dwell so fully in my heart:
that all my life I may be a good Example to others, and make thy glorious light
so to shine before men, that in all things I may glorify thy holy Name through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Pupils or Scholars Prayer.
MOst gracious Father and blessed Lord, I do most humbly confess that I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, and that thou have preserved me ever since I
hanged about my mothers neck, be pleased still to be propitious to me, to give
me a wise Religious and Understanding heart, that I may the better learn to
know and fear thy holy Name: Let not perverseness or frowardness interrupt my
studies, nor Idleness benumbe, or childish wantonness disperse or startle my
affections from the love of Learning; keep me innocent from the Contagion of
evil company, and let not lewd Examples infect my tender Years, bend my heart
with true obedience to my Teachers, and make me diligent and active in the
performance of my Duty: and so regulate the whole frame of my Conversation,
that I may grow up as a young Plant, supported and propped with thy grace, that
in due time I may prove a polished corner of thy Temple, for Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

The Husbands Prayer.
MOst merciful Lord, who have admitted me to the holy state of Matrimony
instituted in Paradise; give me thy heavenly grace to live Reverently,
discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God in that holy Ordination;
Command my affections and guide them that I may love my wife, as my own body,
my flesh, and my bone; and as Christ loved his Church and gave himself for it.
Suffer not any Root of bitterness to spring from my heart, nor to spread in my
looks or language, or in any action toward my beloved, but let me so live in
love with her and dwell together in honor, knowledge, and the fear of the
Lord, that we may be heirs together of the grace of life, and that our prayers
may not be hindered: and so enjoying the comfort of a holy life on earth, I may
in the End obtain Eternal life in Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Wife's Prayer.
ALmighty Lord, who know best how to dispose of thy servants and Handmaids:
Assist me with thy grace and favor, that being joined in the holy state of
Matrimome, I may preserve it Honorable and Undefiled, keep my heart in an
humble submission to my husband as being my head, so that I may render him
Reverence honor and Obedience, make my Conversation to be chaste coupled with
the fear of God, my life innocent and inoffensive, and my spirit mild and
quiet, so that if any obey not the Word, he may be won without the word, by
the conversation of his Wife. Protect me (O Lord) from all Temptations of evil
Inclinations, and preserve me from the motions, looks, and Inticements of lewd
and wicked company; let modesty ever appear in my looks, and Chastity dwell
in my Thoughts, that I may be a comfort and delight to my husband, and in all
my Conversation an Example of grace and Virtue: All this I humbly beg for
Christ Jesus sake my Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

The Widows Prayer.
O God, who art Just in all thy works, and holy in all thy ways; look on me
thy poor servant with the tender eye of pity and mercy: Comfort me in my sad
and solitary condition; be my head and Husband, to direct me in all my
troubles: Protect me with thy Power; refresh me with thy Favor, Counsel me
with thy Wisdom, and be my Refuge in all dangers and extremities; Let not
Violence and oppression Injure my Innocent weakness, nor any wanton Thoughts
surprise me; preserve me from the Attempts of lascivious approaches: and let
chaste and modest Resolutions keep me company: defend me from the Rage and fury
of Ungodly and Unreasonable men, give me grace to dedicate my self both in soul
and body to thy service; And so to continue in thy favor and Protection, that
my life may have comfort, and my End may be truly happy through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

The Virgins Prayer.
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts: who dwell between the Cherubims,
and whose eyes cannot but with displeasure, look on any thing that is Impure,
preserve me in thy Faith and Favor, that I may glorify thee in body and
soul, keep my eyes from vain Objects, and my Ears from wanton discourse; let
not my senses be surprised, nor my Reason captivated with any lustful
inclinations: Purify my heart from all uncleanness, and defend and keep me
from the wiles and assaults of the World, the flesh and the Devil: let my
choicest delight be fixed in the honor and service of my God; And let my
Affections be set chiefly on those things which are above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of God; Let Holiness and Charity beautify my Conversation;
and let me be a Companion to those who lead a godly life, that thy Name may be
glorified, and my body and soul in the End Eternally saved through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

The Jaylors Prayer.
Almighty Lord, who art the Creator of Heaven and Earth, be pleased to touch
my heart with a true fear and Reverence of thy Holy Name; let not Asperitie or
fierceness raise a tempest in my soul, but give me grace that I may perform
the Duty of my place, with fidelity and a good conscience, let neither the
power nor the Treachery of those, who are committed to my Custody, be able to
do me any injury; Comfort with pity, and relieve with mercy all who are
innocent, and graciously deliver Joseph out of all his afflictions: show him
mercy and give him favor, Help those that are indebted to their Liberty,
inclining their Creditors to patience and pity, and so relieve them out of
thine abundant store, that they may owe nothing to any man but Love: As to
Malefactors and Offenders, Lord give them penitent and relenting hearts, that
the Laws being satisfied, and Vice punished, thy Name may be feared, Offenders
terrified, and their souls saved: And let thy Grace and Goodness so season my
soul, that I may as well Treat the Innocent with mercy and kindness as
Command the most mischievous, with Justice and Prudence; I Lord hear my
prayers, and let my Cry come unto thee, for Jesus Christ's sake my only Lord and
Savior. Amen.

The innocent prisoners Prayer.
O Lord, in whom we live, move and have our being; from whom we derive both
health and happiness, receive my sighs and groans: Consider my Tears, hear
my Prayers, and have pity on me, who am fast bound in misery an Iron: Suffer
not a dark Dungeon to be my chamber, nor the cold stones my Couch: Let not
Hunger, Thirst and nakedness devour me, nor Lice and nastiness destroy me;
Suffer not the stocks or shackles to hurt my hands, legs or feet, nor the Iron
to enter into my soul. O look graciously on my innocence; Preserve me constant
and faithful in true Zeal and love to thy Church; Strengthen my Loyalty and
Resolutions of faith and true Allegiance toward my King; And whilst it
pleases thee (O God) to make trial of me: let not any earthly torments
afright me from my true love to thy service; Make my face to shine with
cheerfulness, as thou did Saint Stevens; Amidst my greatest troubles, if it
be thy good pleasure deliver me out of misery, and from the hands of all my
Enemies: if not (blessed Lord) thy Will be done: let not cruelty tire my
patience, nor any earthly Advantage so corrupt my Conscience, but that I may
continue faithful to the death, so that in the End, I may receive the Crown of
life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Malefactors prayer in prison.
O God, to whom Justice, and Vengeance belongs: I beseech thee, let not thy
Wrath or displeasure further fall upon me, but have mercy on me and that right
soon; for now I am come into great misery; my sins have laid hold on me long
since, and now thy Justice has found me out. I have offended, and now am
punished, abused my Liberty, and therefore am Imprisoned: (O Lord) wash me
from my sins, and cleanse me from mine iniquities, Though they be Crimson and
Scarlet sins, yet be pleased to pardon and forgive them all. Give me grace to
look on my sins as the causes and provocations of thy Judgments: and to
consider my transgressions as the only occasions of my shame and sorrow: make
my stony heart to relent, and to gush out with streams of tears: that I have
so offended God and man. Strengthen my faith in my Savior Jesus, and save my
soul for his precious Merits sake: let not hardness of heart, and Impenitencie
bewitch, or benumme my soul, but have mercy upon me, and (if it be thy good
pleasure) that I must die for my offenses to satisfy thy Justice; Righteous
Lord, be pleased that my sufferings and example may deterr all others from such
notorious crimes, and let my poor soul be Eternally saved, through thy great
mercies in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Exiles prayer.
ALmighty God, who for my sins have forced me to forsake my Country, and
Kindred, and my Fathers house; give me grace to possess my soul in patience, to
submit cheerfully to thy heavenly Will, and ever to depend on thy mercy and
goodness; let not the sins of strangers entice me, nor their Errors ensnare
me to any wickedness; keep me sound and firm in the true Faith of Christ, and
suffer not subtle delusions to Infatuate my soul, nor evil Examples to corrupt
my manners. Preserve me from the poison of Schism, Heresy, Atheism and
Apostacy; let thy Truth be my Guide, and thy Mercy my Protection; let holy
and humble Resolutions to depend on thy Favor comfort me in my distress: and
in good time, If it be thy blessed Will, O Lord, deliver me from banishment and
restore me to my own Country, that I may yet live to praise thee in the great
Congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Captives prayer.
O Most Just and Righteous Lord; It has pleased thee to suffer me to fall into
the hand of cruel barbarous and bloody people, who deny my blessed Savior
Jesus Christ, and despise the Holy Gospel the Word of Life; I humbly beseech
thee (most gracious Father) to behold my sad condition with a tender Eye of
sweet compassion; and to strengthen my faith in all trials of my Enemies; let
neither the cruelty of men or Devil, or any else be able to separate me from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Give me courage to resist
all persuasions and force, that might Invade or remove my Resolutions from thy
Truth; let thy honor be my salvation, and the Name of my Savior Jesus my Joy
and comfort in all assaults and troubles: keep me constant and faithful to thy
service in my greatest extremities, and make me to rejoice in the cross of
Christ: And not to be terrified or ashamed, bearing about me the marks of our
Lord Jesus: Grant me (Lord) a speedy and happy deliverance out of my Enemies
hands: If it be otherwise determined, whether I die or live, whatever I do or
suffer, God give me grace to glorify his holy Name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

The poor beggars prayer.
MOst sweet and blessed Lord: who art the light of Israel and the comfort of
all who are in dist^ess and misery: look mercifully on my sad and low
condition, who am clothed with Rags, and pinched with poverty, which like an
Armed man is ready to seize upon me: Remember thine Accustomed goodness
(gracious Lord) and supply my necessities with thine Abundant Kindness; sweeten
my sufferings with heavenly supplies: and let not hunger and thirst, cold, and
nakedness Utterly Devour me, Mollify the hard hearts of those who behold my
misery, that they may have compassion toward me: and thou (O Lord) who make
the Lillies to grow, and feedest Ravens and Fowls of the Air; Provide food
and Raiment for thy poor servant, and for thy mercies sake Ransom and redeem me
from my sad extremities: An yet if it please thee to make further trial of my
patience and submission, (Lord) grant me a contented heart. And though I
continue poor and needy, yet make me rich in the gifts and graces of thy holy
Spirit, that though I find no compassion at rich men's doors, yet when I die, I
may (as Lazarus) be carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Amen.

The Seamans prayer.
O Almighty and Everlasting Lord God, Thou give us leave to go down to the
Sea in Ships, and to have our business in great Waters, to behold the Works of
the Lord, and to see the Wonders in the Deep. Preserve us when the stormy wind
Arises: and lifts up the lofty Waves: let not our souls melt with trouble,
when we are carried up to the Heaven or down again to the Deep; Though we Reel
to all fro and stagger like Drunken men, and be at our wits end: yet, hear us
graciously when we cry unto thee (O Lord) in our trouble, and deliver us out of
our Distress; make the storm to cease, that the proud Waves may be still and
calm, Deliver us both day and night from the dangers of the deep, and suffer
neither Pirates nor thieves nor any of our Enemies, to terrify or take, or hurt
us, to damage our ship or spoil our goods. Let our Voyage be prosperous, and
endeavors successful, and in the end, make us glad (O Lord) that we may be at
rest: And bring us to the Haven where we would be, that we may praise the Lord
for his goodness and declare the Wonders that he does for the children of men,
that his Name may be ever exalted, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Midwives prayer.
O Lord Eternal and Almighty, who command all thy servants to be useful and
helpful one to another, be pleased to give me both skill and Courage to assist
and help thy Handmaid in her labor and travail: let not my hands or heart fail
at her approaching danger, make my endeavors happy and successful, and
graciously answer the requests and desires of thy humble servant, who now
earnestly prays for thy Blessing: let this Handmaid have ease and comfort in
her greatest pangs and sorrows, that so by thy Providence and Goodness, being
delivered from death and danger, she may be made a joyful Mother by the fruit
of her Womb and birth of her Child. Grant Lord that the Infant may be received
into the world with comfort, and made thy servant by Adoption and Grace,
Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

The Woman's prayer in her labor and travail.
Almighty and most gracious God; I know and believe that strength and
weakness, danger and deliverance, life and death are in thy hands: I beseech
thee earnestly for Christ Jesus sake, to comfort me in this time of trial that
is now at hand: forgive my sins which have caused my sorrows, Mitigate and
assuage my pain and pangs, and though I approach near the doors of death, yet
recover me again, and suffer me not to faint or perish in so great a danger:
strengthen my faith and patience, and give me happy deliverance of the fruit of
my Womb: And graciously convert all my sorrows into Joy. O let my life be
precious in thy sight, that my preservation ever may oblige me to set forth thy
praise and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Aged persons prayer.
O Immortal and Almighty God, who art Eternity and the Ancient of days; be
propitious and merciful to me thy Aged servant; Though my face be furrowed and
wrinckled, yet be pleased to Renew thy graces daily in me, and let thy holy
Spirit breath afresh the gales of thy Love and Favor on my soul, forsake me
not in my old Age (O Lord) (seeing the evil days are come upon me, and the
years wherein I take no pleasure, Though the Sun grow dark and my Eyes dim,
the keepers of the house tremble, the strong men bow themselves, the grinders
cease, and all the frame of my feeble body be terrified and shaken, yet forsake
me not (most gracious Lord) in my old age; guide and keep me in the paths of
Righteousness to the end of my days: let no offensive Diseases overtake me,
nor my former sins find me out to detect me, or Accuse me, and suffer not the
frailties and Errors of my youth now to seize on my fainting spirits, but let
thy grace and goodness be my comfort, and thy mercy and pity, my deliverance,
from my sins, and thy displeasure: that I may End and consummate the few
days of my Pilgrimage in love, Joy and Peace both with God and man, though
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The young man's prayer.
BLessed, holy, and Righteous Lord; Teach me to remember my Creator in the
days of my youth, and train me in the paths wherein I ought to go, suffer me
not to walk in the counsel of the Ungodly, to stand in the ways of sinners, or
to sit in the seat of the scornful: direct me how I may so cleanse my ways,
that I may take heed thereto according to thy Word. Give me grace to seek thee
with my whole heart, that I may not wander from thy Commandments: make thy
Word the Treasure of my soul, so that I may not sin against thee. Allay all hot
and unruly passions with the dew of thy grace: sow the seeds of Virtue in the
garden of my soul, and Weed out of my heart all Inclinations to Vice and sin;
keep me zealous to the love and duty of thy Laws, and make me to stand in awe,
and to be afraid, more of displeasing thee then of all the world besides: Let
not my heart be tempted with evil thoughts, or the wicked devices of men or
Devils, nor my life corrupted and debauched with lewd and ungodly company.
Give me grace (O Lord) to keep my lips from guile, and my Tongue from cursing,
lying, swearing and all profaneness: let my body be a Receptacle and Temple for
the holy Ghost to dwell in, and my soul so filled with thy grace and heavenly
Benediction: that in the End both may be eternally saved, through the merits of
thy blessed Son, my blessed Savior Jesus. Amen.

The Fathers prayer.
O Most glorious God and gracious Father in Jesus Christ our Lord; let thy
goodness and tender compassion incline thy Ears to my prayers and
supplications: Teach my heart to belive in thee, and to love, honor, and fear
thee above all things: make me a holy and humble Example of Piety, Truth,
Righteousness and goodness, before my Children, whom thou have given me: Let
all my thoughts words and deeds savor of Grace and Virtue; let thy holy
Commandments be my path to walk in: Thy Word my light and Lanthorn to guide
me? Thy Sacraments my Refection and comfort, Thy strength my stay, Thy
Protection my Refuge: A good conscience my Cordial, and thy praise and glory my
chiefest End and aim: cloth me with Innocence, Truth and uprightness: and
so adorn me with thy Grace and Goodness, that I may bring up my children in
the true faith and fear of God, that I and they may in the End prove Heirs of
Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord thy bessed Son, O Lord; and our
Savior Jesus. So be it.

Amen.

The Mothers Prayer.
O Lord Holy and Righteous, be gracious and propitious to me thy humble
servant; and thou who dwell in Heaven above; Consider and hearken to the
devout prayers of thy Handmaid. As thou have made me a Mother, so make me a
grave and modest Matron; an Example of Holiness and goodness, in word and
deed, to my Children: let it be my chiefest care to breed and bring them up,
blessed Lord, in thy Commandments, that cleaving fast to thy Law even from
their tender years, they may never fail in their Duty toward God or man, nor
depart from it; Continue me tender and compassionate to my children, and let
not pride, covetousness, filthy lusts or Worldly Vanities withdraw or divert
my true love from them: make my children my delight and Olive Branches round
about my Table, whiles they are young: And when they grow into riper age, make
them the stay and comfort of my Age, and give me and mine thy holy Grace (O
Lord) that we may ever love and serve thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

The Childs Prayer.
A Lmightie God and loving Father, who have Grace and mercy for all thy
servants, who have pity and kindness for themselves. Continue thy goodness and
preservation over me, that I may believe in thee, and fear, honor and love
thee, with all my heart, with all my mind and with all my soul: make me Zealous
in thy Worship and thankful for thy mercies, and to serve thee truly and
faithfully all the days of my life. Teach me, (O Lord) to love my Neighbor as
my self, and give me a Tender heart devoutly to love, honor and succor my
Father and Mother: A Loyal heart to honor and obey my King and his Ministers,
an humble heart to submit my self to all my Governors, Teachers, spiritual
Pastors, and Masters: so Guide and Govern (blessed Lord) my whole life both in
body and soul, that in my younger and riper years, in my youth and age, I may
enjoy the comfort of thy holy Spirit, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

An Innocent Martyrs prayer, or, a Loyal subjects prayer dying for a good Cause.
O Lord, who know the thoughts of all men's hearts, and discernest the
secrets of the soul, be my guide and comfort in my Resolutions, and let my love
to thy Truth be the only Loadstone of my affections in this great Trial of my
Christian Faith and patience: let not the terror nor torments of cruel men,
not any temptations of Satan, divert my thoughts from thy service; And whether
I shall die or live, and end my days by a violent or a Natural dissolution,
Give me grace still to put my trust in thy mercy, and to be true and faithful
to the death: suffer me not to be ashamed of my chain; nor discouraged with
harsh unmercifull usage, and asad and cold Imptisonment. Though I be deprived
of competent food and Raiment, threamed with death and haled to execution: yet
be pleased (gracious Lord) to be my help and Refuge in all my misery. And so
strengthen my faith and affiance in thy mercy and goodness, that I may not be
afraid of the flame of fire or faggot, nor be dismayed at the sharpness of the
Ax or Sword, and though my garments be rouled in blood, yet let the glory of a
righteous and good cause invite and oblige my Resolutions to constancy and
perseverance, so that I may not be ashamed or afrighted, though I be forced by
bloody minded men to a Halter or a Gibbet, make me able by an innocent life,
and a Religious Death, to convert my very Enemies, nemies, as the noble Army
of Martyrs, and to be a faithful witness of thy Truth. In my greatest Agony
and Trial, give me grace to remember those great Worthies, who for their
Saviors sake were stoned, were sawen asunder, and were slain with the sword:
or rather, give me grace to look on my blessed Savior; who, for the Glory that
was set before him, despised the shame, endured the cross, and is now set down
at the right hand of God; and, if I must suffer and die, so it be for a good
cause and a good conscience, The Lords holy Name be blessed, who for this
light Affliction which lasts but for a moment, will reward his servants with
a Crown and weight of Eternal Glory, which was purchased, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.

The Travailers prayer.
MOst blessed Lord, who art the Protector of Heaven, and earth, and of all thy
Creatures, look graciously upon me thy humble servant, Defent and keep me in my
Journey: bless my going cut and my coming in, be with me at my rising up, and
at my down-sitting. Go with me and preserve me whilst I am in the way, and
succor and supply me with food and Raiment: comfort me when I am weary with
rest and refreshment, and let me abide under the shadow of the Almighty, that
I may be defended under his Wings; and safe under his Feathers: so that the
terrors of the night may be makee me afaid, nor the Arrow that flies by day
come near to hurt me: Suppress the Violence of wicked and ungodly men, that
they may not have any power to do me hurt or injury. And then (most gracious
God) who have such a tender care of the stranger, the Widow, and the Orphan:
Bless and prosper me in my Journe, as thou did Isaac's servant. O let me not
fall into the hands of Thieves and Robbers, as the unhappie Travailer, who
passed from Jerusalem to Jericho: nor to be ensnared or surprised with the
force or craft of cruel, deceitful and mischievous-minded men: Suffer me not
to be stripped of my garments, nor maimed or wounded in my body, but be pleased
to give thy holy Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my ways. And so to
bear me in their hands, that I may not so much as dash my foot against a stone;
Continue to me the Blessing of Health and strength, Peace and Liberty. And so
prosper my travail and endeavors, that I may go out and Return both in thy
fear and favor, and so receiving a good success in my Journey; may have ever
cause to praise thy holy Name for the goodness and mercy which endures for
Ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

A private Morning Prayer.
Almighty and most gracious Lord, who have detended me from all the terrors
of darkness this last night past, and have refreshed my body and soul with the
favor of sweet fleep, Rest and Repose: give me grace this day entirely to
devote and dedicate my self to thy honor and service: Let the beams of thy
goodness Radiate and shine upon me to dissolve the Clouds of Ignorance, and to
dispel and scatter from my heart the works of darkness, and all Inclinations to
sin and wickedness: Keep me from this Day as the Apple of thine Eye, and
suffer neither the World, the flesh or the Devil to ensnare or entice me to any
Evil: Set a watch before the door of my lips, that they may neither Utter
perversversness my eyes to be the windows of Iniquity, to delight in sin,
or to stare after Vanity. Keep my hands in innocence, and restrain my feet
that they may not be forward or swift to shed blood, or to Act any mischief:
Let not my Throat be an open devouring Sepulcher, nor my Tongue defiled with
cursing, lying or swearing: but so bless me (O Lord God) in Through, word and
deed, that I may like Zechariah and Elizabeth, be upright and blameless in my
conversation: I beseech thee (Heavenly Father) to prosper me in that Station
and Calling, wherein thou have placed me, and make me a light to others by my
good Examples. And so preserve me by thy Mercy and Providence, that I may
neither run into any sin, nor fall into any kind of danger. O let thy holy
Angels by my Guardian, thy holy Word my Guide, and thy holy Spirit my
Counselor and Comforter. And so direct and inflame my Affections, that I may
chiefly delight in Truth and Innocence, that my whole conversation may be
Heavenly, blameless and inoffensive; Let the fear of thy holy Name work so
powerfullie on my soul, that I may never swerve or Deviate from the paths of
Righteousness, but walk on still in them, that I may in the End obtain
Everlasting verlasting life, though Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen-

A Private Evening Prayer.
O Eternal and Almighty Lord, who art the Watchman of Israel, and whose Eyes
neither slumber nor sleep, be favorable and gracious, and continue thy
Protection and goodness toward me. As thou have blessed me this day past, so
be pleased to receive me into thy gracious preservation this Evening and night
ensuing: forgive my sins, that they may neither provoke thy wrath or
displeasure, nor terrify or wound my conscience; wash my stained soul in the
Crimson blood of Christ Jesus my Redeemer; Nail all my offenses fast to his
meritorious Cross, bury my iniquities in the Grave of his Humility; And so
strengthen may faith in Christ, that I may firmly believe that all my sins
are expiated, through the bitter death and Passion of my Lord and Savior; from
these inward persuasions raise true comforts to my conscience, and assist me
with the Grace that I may not offend thee, but Ever study and Endeavor to
please thee (O my God) in Righteousness and true Holiness: In this humble
confidence of thy future favor: (Lord) I recommend my soul and body unto
thine Almighty Providence and Protection; Earnestly beseeching, that as I have
received many Blessings and Tokens of thy Love this day: so I may this might be
safe under the Wings of thy tender goodness. Preserve me from the terrors of
darkness, and suffer me neither to be assaulted, nor afrighted with any Evil;
quiet my conscience with the assurance of the forgiveness of my sins, for my
Saviors sake; and let me not be scared with Dreams, nor defiled with lustful
Thoughts: send me sweet sleep and repose, that being thereby refreshed, I may
be the better enabled to walk before God and man in my Vocation and calling:
let not the hands of cruel men, nor any of thy Judgments surprise or overtake
me, but let thy Power be my Defense and thy Mercy my sure Deliverance, that I
may lie down and rest in peace, and by thy favor rise the next morning with
joy and comfort: And all this I humbly beg for the glory of thy Name, and for
thy tender mercy in Jesus Christ my blessed Lord and Savior.

Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. A private prayer for a sick person.
Almighty Lord, in whom we live, and move, and have our being; look down from
Heaven: Behold, visit, and relieve me thy sick servant; Let not my sins
increase my sorrows, nor mine offenses heighten thy displeasure; Strengthen me
in my greatest infirmities, and fortify my Resolutions to bear with patience,
whatever Load thou shall please to lay upon me: O forsake me not when my
strength fails me, and go not far from (O God) but in all my extremities make
have corrected me with sickness, and have brought great troubles and
Adversities upon me, leading me in thy displeasure, even to the very gates of
Death, yet be pleased (Graelens Lord) to turn again to refresh me with thy
mercy, and to bring me out of the Deep of all my sorrows. Comfort me yet on
every side after thy sharp chastisements, and give me grace to make a holy Use
of all thy fatherly Visitations. And whether my sickness comes upon me for
the exercise of my patience, a Trial of my faith, or a correction for my
finnes: (Blessed God) grant that I may give an humble and a hearty submission
to thy good Will and pleasure; and neither vainly to despise thy correction,
nor weakly to faint, being now rebuked by God himself, if it be thy heavenly
Will: Grant (O Lord) that I may recover my health and strength again before I
go from hence and be no more seen: if it be otherwise determined, whether it be
for health or sickness, for life or Death, Gods Will be done, the Lords Name
be praised. In the mean time (Blessed Lord) defend my sold with the shield of
Faith, Arm my Resolutions with the sword of the Spirit, and cover and comfort
my heart and conscience with the Brestplate of Righteousness, that I may be the
better able to resist the Temptation of Satan, and the Vanities of the World,
and not to shrink or to be swallowed up in the Gulf of my own infirmities or
carnal weakness; (O Lord) make my bed in all my sickness, and comfort me in
all my sorrows: discharge me from my disease, and restore me to health and
strength again if it be thy Will, that I may live to praise thy Holy Name, for
thy great and sweet mecies, and all this I humbly crave for Jesus Christ's sake
my only blessed Lord and Savior.

Amen.

A prayer for a sick person dying and departing out of the World.
MOst gracious and Immortal God, with whom the souls and spirits of all the
Saints departed in thy faith an fear do live Eternally, in Bliss and Glory;
show thy most Tender favor and mercy toward me, in this my greatest Agony
and Affliction; Behold now (O Lord) how my house is ready to fall, my Dust and
Ashes are returning to the Grave; my flesh trembles; my Boiling blood is
ready to cool; my Eyes grow dim, and the whole frame of strength and Nature
fails; my Tale is Told, my Glass is run, and the hour of Death is nigh at
hand; I beseenh thee (blessed Lord) to comfort and assist me in this juncture
of extremities, and inundation of sorrows: Inflame my heart with Charity and
love toward all the World: strengthen my faith against all Temptations: give
me a sure Hope an firm confidence in thy. Mercy and Goodness: continue to me
the Blessing of Patience, constancy and perseverance to the End: that when I
am dissolved and depart this life, my soul may be elevated to Everlasting Joys
in the company of the blessed Angels: And that my body, being reposed in a
bed of clay until the day of Judgment, may then receive a happy and glorious
Resurrection. Let the remainder of my Thoughts be fixed on my Redeemer, and be
Entirely coelestiallie disposed, that my passage may be more certain, sure,
and easy toward Heaven. And being purged from all my sins in the blood of
Christ, I may follow the Holy Lamb of God, and wait on my Redeemer in
Everlasting Happiness. Give me grace and courage freely to part with the World,
and all Transitory Vanities, and wholly to resign and recommend my body and
soul into thy hands, that so I may continue thy faithful servant and Soldier
to my lives End: and having fought the fight and finished my course, I may
receive the Immortal Crown of Glory, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior.

Amen.

A Prayer for the Universities and Schools of Learning.
LOrd, who art the Author and giver of all good things, I beseech thy fatherly
mercy, to be Ever favorable and Propitious to the two Universities, and to all
other Schools and Societies of Learning and pious Education, in this Kingdom,
and of all other his Majesty's Dominions: And as thou have stirred up the
hearts of many Worthies to become Founders, and Benefactors of those famous
Seminaries and Seed-plots: so let their Names and Memories be precious in the
sight of God and man, for their good and charitable works; make succeeding
generations to imitate, and to be in love with their Examples; that Learning
and Languages with Arts and Sciences, and the true Religion and the fear of
God, may every dae more and more prosper and flourish: Keep the Schools of the
Prophets from the Rapine and Ruin of covetous hearts, and sacrilegious hands;
Cleanse those Fountains and Well-springs of Life, from the commixture of
Ignorance and Impiety. Let not Schism, Heresy or Atheism, Lurk or shelter
themselves under the Roof of those happy Foundations, nor Boastingly set up
themselves against Unity, Peace and Piety (O Lord) let those Lamps never want
Oil: but that they may shine brightly abroad to the dispelling of Darkness;
the suppressing of Error, and to the Defense and Maintenance of Gods true
Religion and Virtue: Make them who are in power to be truly worthy, diligent
and faithful to their trust; and kindle the love of Wisdom and Learning in the
Affections of all the Sons of the Prophets: That the streams of Knowledge
plentifully flowing from those pleasant Fountains: the whole Land may be
refreshed, the People instructed, the Church Edified, and God Almighty
glorified in all things: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

A private prayer for the Church of England.
ALmighty God thou have cast us out and scattered us abroad: Thou have been
displeased at us: O turn to us again: And though thou have moved the Land, and
divided it, yet be pleased to heal the sores thereof, for it shakes: though
thou have showed thy people heavy things, and given them a drink of deadly
Wine: yet, at last, give a token to such as fear thee, that they may triumph
because of the Truth; be pleased (Gracious Lord) to be ever a help in the time
of trouble, bless the Catholic Church of Christ. And more especially the
Church of England; which like a Dove before the birds of prey, and a Lilly
amidst the Thorns, is environed on every side with mortal Enemies. Continue
this Church A pillar of Truth; and a Mother of many Blessings to all her
children. Preserve her in Doctrine and Discipline, that she may keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, in the Right Dispensation of thy Heavenly
Word, and in the blessed Use and Administration of thy holy Sacraments. Let
not sacrilegious hands make a prey of the Churches Patrimony: Nor covetous
minds Rob her of her Revenues: Suffer not the wicked to take the Houses of God
into possession. But (O Lord) think upon thy Congregation which thou have
Redeemed and purchased of old: Think upon the Tribe of thine Inheritance, and
of the Dust of Sion: And let not them who have done such Evils in thy
Sanctuary, continue any longer thy holy places to be Dens of Thieves, or the
Receptacles of mischief and profaneness. O let not heathenish minded men come
into thine Inheritance to defile thy Holy Temple, or to make Jerusalem an heap
of stones. Suffer not the men of Violence to smite down thy people, or to
trouble thine Heritage, to murder the Widow, or the Stranger, or to put the
Fatherless to Death, nor to shed the blood of thy servants, like water on
every side of Jerusalem: But (O Lord) As thou have been our Refuge from one
generation to Another, so become gracious to the Land: as thou have turned away
the Captivity, so forgive the offenses of thy people, and cover their sins,
that they may still rejoice in thy Salvation. Send (Blessed Lord) into this
Church faithful and holy Bishops, Pastors and Curates, that they may both by
their life and Doctrine set forth thy true and holy Word, and rightly and duly
administer thy holy Sacraments to the glory of thy holy Name, and the Churches
peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

A Subjects private prayer for his Sovereign.
O Lord, who have wonderfully delivered our Dread Sovereign ever since he was
born: And after many Trials and Dangers, have restored him to his Royal Throne
and Dignity; I earnestly beseech thee (merciful God) still to be Gracious and
Propitious to thine Anointed, and as thou have made his people to shout with
joyful Acclamations for the Kings return, so let him dwell securely in their
hearts and dutiful Affections. Preserve his Royal Person from all peril and
danger: Endue him with the overflowing Graces of thy Holy Spirit, and Adorn his
soul with Virtue and goodness, that he may have a long, happy, peaceable and
Prosperous Reign to the joy and comfort of all his Loyal Subjects: and to the
terror and Amazement of all his Enemies. And when it shall please thee (O
Lord) that he shall cease to Reign on Earth; Give him a Crown of Glory and
Eternal life which shall last for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

A Subjects private prayer for the Queen Mother, the Duke of York, and the
Royal Progeny.
MOst gracious Lord, who have made three Kingdoms happy, by the increase of a
Royal Offspring: be pleased to continue thy mercy and favors to Mary the
Queen Mother; to James Duke of York, and to all the branches of that Princely
Progeny; let their persons be ever precious in thy sight: Prevent them all with
the Blessings of thy goodness, compass them about with Songs of Deliverance
after their many sorrows. Let peace and plenty be their daily Attentants: and
let their Honor be Great in thy Salvation; Give them many happy days on
Earth, and in the End Crown them all with Eternal Glory, for Jesus Christ's sake
our Lord and Savior.

Amen.

(...). 1 Timothy 1.17. FINIS.
The Contents.
1. THe Kings prayer. Page 1. 2. The Subjects prayer. p. 3 3 The Captains
prayer. p. 4 4 The Soldiers prayer. p. 6 5 The Masters prayer. p. 7 6 The
servants prayer. p. 8 7 The Guardians prayer. p. 10 8 The Wards prayer. p. 11 9
The Tutors prayer. p. 12 10 The Pupils prayer. p. 13 11 The Husbands prayer. p.
14 12 The Wifes prayer. p. 16 13 The Widows prayer. p. 17 14 The Virgins
prayer. p. 18 15 The Jaylors prayer. p. 20 16 The innocent prisoners prayer. p.
22 17 The Malefactors prayer in prison. p. 24 18 The Exiles prayer. p. 26 19
The Captives prayer. p. 27 20 The beggars prayer. p. 29 21 The Seamans prayer.
p. 30 22 The Midwives prayer. p. 32 23 The woman in travails prayer. p. 33 24.
The Aged persons prayer. p. 34 25. The young man's prayer. p. 36 26. The Fathers
prayer. p. 38 27. The Mothers prayer. p. 40 28. The Childs prayer. p. 42 29.
An Innocent Martyrs Prayer. p. 44 30. The Travailers prayer. p. 47 31. A
private Morning-prayers. p.49 32. A private Evening prayer p. 52 33. A private
prayer for a sick person p. 55 34. A prayer for a sick person dying and
departing out of the World. p. 58 35. A prayer for the Universities. p. 61 36.
A private prayer for the Church of England. p. 63. 37. A Subjects private
prayer for his Sovereign. p. 67 38. A Subjects private prayer. p. 68

