Of FEAR.
The CAUSE The USE The CURE

OR, Strong Consolations (The Consolations of God) Cordial at all times, but
most comfortable now in these uncomfortable times, To fix, quiet, and stablish
the heart, though the earth shake, and make it stand still, To see the salvation
of The Lord.

Taken from GODS mouth, And Penned by HEZEKIAH VVOODWARD, That all His Servants
may have assured confidence for ever.

PSALM. 56. 3, 9. What time I am afraid I will trust in Thee: When I cry unto
Thee, Then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know, for God is for me, He
will save me, because I Trust in Him.

Psalm. 37. 40. Nil terribile, nisi ipse timor.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Bible in Woodstreet. 1643.

To the Right HONORABLE, Isaac Pennington, LORD MAjOR Of the City of LONDON.
BY the Blessing of God upon this treatise (containing His own directions
there) it can heal the heart and the hand palsied with fear: It will be no
dishonor then to take it into your hand, and to lay these directions (if it
can be) yet closer to your heart, whereby the City of God have been a quiet
habitation, Esaias 33. 20.
when, as now, The blast of the terrible ones have made the earth to shake and
tremble under us: And you now, with such as you, that love, fear, trust GOD,
doing your duty, and maintaining your watch, do maintain PEACE, and at such a
time. Ezra. 4. 17.


Peace is good at all times, but ever best in the worst times, perilous and
feirce, as are the times of Reformation, troublous evermore: when hands and
Dan. 9. 28. Jer. 20. 3.
Tongues are bent to make the City of GOD MAGOR MISSABIB, terror on every
side: Then peace is good; Then cordialls are so indeed, strong consolations
(they are the consolations of GOD) at such a time. Peace in and with the world
is good, if it could be had upon good terms: But that it not possible. The
world will love their own, And they shall have peace, such as the world can
give; They, who can comply with the world; can give out unto them the right
hand of fellowship, to thrust Christ from His Throne, and out of the world:
these shall have peace, for they are the worlds first born, and right hands of
the times, but you cannot do so. Such a peace, peace without truth is of vile
esteem with you, you abhor it at such a price, and upon such terms as the
world bids for it, and does purchase the same. You follow peace with all men,
and Holiness (That is a point of the highest wisdom) without which no man
shall see the LORD: you pursue Heb. 11. 14. (...).
this peace, as others persecute it: your zeal cannot boil higher then to
their As, as they persecute it. Pursue it so still, and if you overtake it not,
(for it flees from you (else you should not need to pursue it) if you cannot
establish peace in the City; yet, in that you have done your office, you have
peace in your soul, a peace, which passes all understanding; for whatsoever
things are true Phil. 4. 7. 8.
are henest; are just; are pure; are lovely; are of good report, these things
you have done, and will do, you have assured confidence now in this which
follows, and the peace of ver. 9.
GOD shall be with you. What a good word is this, and at such a time, when the
Adversary does, as in all times he has done (it is no new thing, when the
breaches of Jerusalems walls are making up) he sends, and writes, and lies, and
rayles, and blasphemes, what does he not, after his manner, to make the work to
cease Nehe. 4. and 6.
. You know your charge concerning him, Answer him 2 King. 18. 36.
not; you look to the answer from a good conscience, That, in zeal to you*
LORD, The Cities peace and crown of rejoicing, you have done and spoken
hitherto: And you are resolved so to do still, To stand up for Christ still, To
shoulder up His Throne still; And you have made up your reckoning, you know
what it will cost you, possible as much as it has cost All His faithful
servants in all ages at such a time; And having so wisely counted your Cost,
you can mock at fear; and laugh at your Adversaries, as the LORD does, seeing
their day is coming Psalm. 37.
: for their rage rises high, and their rising by steps that way, are but steps
and degrees to utter destruction, which shall rise as their rage does, unto
heaven, and be lifted up, even to the skies. Jer. 51. 9.
You cannot be deceived now, as, we think, good Jeremiah was; He heard the
defaming of many, fear was on every side, and he heard a cry: nay he cried out
himself, and said, Violence and spoil! Then says Jeremy, Jer. 20. 8. 10. ^^.
O LORD, Thou have deceived me, and I was deceived. He was indeed, but GOD did
not deceive him; He had set up Jeremtah, and made him so strong for Himself,
and for such a time as that, when the adversaries deeds and words would be as
hard as iron against the Truth and him; but Jeremiah should be hard enough for
them; The Adversary might, to as good purpose, strike his hand against a rock
as strike Jeremiah: shall iron break Jer. 15. 12.
the Northern iron and steel?

No, no, the Adversary was hard, and cruel, and violent against Jeremiah, but
God made Jeremiah too hard for them all, as He will all His faithful ones,
(standing up for Him) a defenced City and a strong brazen ver. 20.
wall: That was the promise to Jeremiah, and in him to all faithful ones, many
thousand years ago, and you have the comfort, and your fast standing from it
at this day; The blast of the terrible ones, what can it do? It was answered
long ago; As much as a blast of wind against a brazen wall, so the Spirit
slights what flesh can do against Him: ^^^say 2^ 4.
They shall sight against Thee (The Adversary will make an experiment, what
metal you are made of, so you must expect) but they shall not prevail ser. 1.
1^.
against Thee; There is the comfort, and it is yours, who will stand up for God
and at such a time. As your expectation from the World cannot deceive you
(after the experiences of all the faithful that have stood up for God) All
has been done against them, All shall be done against you, that Angry Nations
can do, Atheists and Papists swelled with wrath, and big with rage: So, nor
will The Lord, The Hope of Israel and Savior thereof in time of trouble, He
will not deceive you. Then you shall see your strength presently, that you are
better bottomed then are the perpetual Hills, and everlasting Mountains, a
sight worth the beholding and at such a time. And because your work is now to
read the times, not book^s; To get understanding in them, and what Israel ought
to do; and because you feel so many shocks and thrusts made against you to
make you fall, noman more; I will make bold to draw out this Epistle (against
my disposition and judgment) beyond its usual proportion to persons of your
rank; That I may make known not to you but to the world of ungodly men, where
your strength lies. Then past all question it will be said, their rock is not
as your Rock, the enemies themselves being Judges.

I have by the assistance of the great Physician written, I hope, from His
Mouth, touching the Cure of Fear, your Lordship may have the marrow of it here.

First, You magnify your Office, contending for Christ against His enemies, who
would shoulder Him out of His Throne and out of His Kingdom; These enemies are
in a rage, because you are a friend to Christ; they fight against you, and have
fair hopes too, they shall take revenge on you. Let them hope till their day
comes, when their flesh must consume away, and their eyes in their holes, and
their tongues in their mouth, Zech. 14. 12.
you have the answer of a good conscience within: A GOD to go to, His promise
to cleave to, which you find, in the place you were upon even now; They shall
not prevail against thee, for I am with thee, says the LORD, to deliver thee:
And not barely so, but a Mighty TERRIBLE one: There Jer. 20. 11.
you may read what follows, to your everlasting comfort, and confusion of your
Adversaries. This answers all that can be said or done against you, all hard
words and ungodly deeds.

GOD is with you; All His attributes, power, wisdom, goodness shall be laid
out for you, and for all like you, who lay out themselves, all they are and
have for Him.

You have now, as All His faithful servants have, written this down in the
Table of your heart. Now you may write what you will, for a Legion, now
marching on against the City of God, you can set down quickly (before fear
surpriseth the heart, for it has sudden and violent motions) and write, fifty:
what? froggs, lice, flies. So The Church despised her proud adversary, that
terrible one, laughing him to scorn, regarding his huge Host, not so much as 2
Kings 91. 2^.
a legion of froggs, an army of lice, or swarm of flies. These Egyptian,
these Northern Troops (the Armies of The Lord of Hosts have been a plague to
the Egyptians, and other Nations, as idolatrous as they, never so to a people
with whom God is, a mighty terrible One. Certain it is That he, who will search
into the records of time, shall never read, that an Army of Papists, a People
of Gods curse, ever did the Church hurt: They have annoyed it, that is granted:
For frogs, and lice, and flies in abundance, can do so, (and yet not so much
unless God pleases, but if so, then) for the Churches good. Idolatrous
Israel have pillaged Judah, and have taken away much spoil (sometime the Lord
made the Adversary vomit it up again:) their rage has reached yet higher, but
then their day hasteneth as now it does, and they come down mightily, this also
was forth Churches good. Indeed, and to contract; every thing, which we
commonly call evil, nay, what properly is so, (sin it self) is for the good
of those with whom the LORD is, a God in covenant, our God. You see your
stability now, your security, your exceeding comfort. It is good to look upon
it with all your eyes, well to consider on it at such a time as this, lest you
fainte in your mind, as a faithful servant of the Lord did, eying his
Adversaries, and not observing his standing, nor his strength where it was, and
then he speaks unadvisedly with his lips. Jer. 22. 14.


Truly I think it my Duty, being upon such a Subject, and at such a time, to
make some enlargement to my Epistle here, now that tongues and hands are so
busied to cause fear, which is so encroaching, you cannot keep it out with all
your power, unless you hold fast still-fast to this strong hold, I will be
with thee a mighty terrible One, blessed be His name for that promise.

You shall hear your self charged as Job, perhaps by Eliphas a friend, and
that, if you will observe it (a) you will think very strange, and nothing now
that is new. Job. 22. ^, 6, etc.
Your enemies, and they are many, all that are enemies to Christ, they will for
His sake defame you, speak all manner of evil against you, for they call you
by their Exulem me de suo nomine vocat. Cic. parad.
own names. While they reproach God in you, you feel a sword in your bones:
Psalm 42. 10
But in reference to your self, and that good thing within you, the souls
pillow, you go away rejoicing, bearing the reproach; and, being at peace Recta
conscientia culcitra animae.
with God, no more moved then the Moon is at the barking of dogs. Behold her
course, says one, Chrysostom.
the course of the Sun too, they run on like mighty Giants: such is the course
of a godly man, he is for God, God is with him, he breaks through all
difficulties in this way, as through spiders webs: he is above all, hard words,
and ungodly deeds, riding upon the high places of the earth. Esaias. 58. 14.


Again, you shall see the earth smitten terribly, that her blood may be
discovered, and her Idols there given up to the Moles and to the Bats; you
shall feel it shake under you, and the Kingdoms totter like a drunken man.
All the while you shall stand still, Exodus 14. 13.
calm in your mind, beholding the salvation of GOD, for you stand up for Him,
and He is with you as a Mighty Terrible One.

Again, you shall hear of War, and the desolations that it causes; Whether
you shall live to hear that GODS peace is concluded on, and established in the
land, I cannot tell, nor, perhaps, the best Seer in your City: But this I can
tell you, because you have the Answer of a good conscience, and can tell your
self, you fear GOD, and you stand for Him, and He is with you, a God in
Covenant, and a Mighty Terrible One, That you, and all such as you, who follow
peace, and holiness, shall have peace, not as the world gives, but peace in
God. Oh how sweet it is! and as sure, as it is sweet, in God; and yet sweeter
yet at such a time, when the Kingdoms totter, the gods there are all starved,
nay when the heart strings and eye- strings must break: O how sweet is Peace
then! sweeter then honey was to Jonathan, when his soul fainted. This peace is
yours, for you are Christ's, and Christ is GODS, Whose you are, and Whom you
serve. This peace is yours, and now it passes all understanding indeed, when
you shall hear the most comfortable word that ever was spoken, Well done good
and faithful servant.

This is the heritage of them that fear the LORD; hard words and ungodly deeds
cannot discourage you now, for God is with you, there is your security Christum
^sse cum Pa^^^ summa secu^itas: Paulum ass cum Christo summa foelicitas. 1
These. 4. 17, 18.
; you shall be with Him anon, there is your happiness; for ever with the Lord,
you can comfort your self in these words.

Hear me with patience one word more, touching the success of the great work
in hand, and the security of this great City, where the Lord has made you a
Watchman, and has found you faithful, which is your glory, but in The Lord.
Surely, surely, the work shall prosper, for it is wrought by God; your City
shall not be destroyed, for it is GODS City.

Surely a work carried on with so many hands and hearts; so much life, and
spirit, love, faith, patience, cannot be disappointed of its end. And for the
City Where are many thousands that cannot speak, yet is their language very
moving with their Lord. Jonah 4. 11.
, her filthiness is in her skirts Lam. 1 9.
; Ai and upon her forehead too: But yet a righteous people are there, and Gaius
mine Host Romans 16. 23.
, and many such as he: She is a refuge to the oppressed, a great Sanctuary at
this The day of Jacobs trouble. Jer. 30. 7.
time; and much good is found there: We do not boast of her goodness, but we
boast in The Lord, Who has instructed her to discretion, To stand up for Him
and His Cause above all the Cities, that are or ever were in the world, and at
such a time. Surely the Lord will watch over her; and her Watchmen think so
too, and pray for her night and day. And because they be such, as never sought
God in vain, they are bold and confident, That The Lord will watch over this
City for good, it shall still be said, The LORD helps them; The North shall
give in unto them, the south shall not keep back: the East and West shall confer
unto them the blessings of the Land and of the Sea. But this is the complement
of all, Salvations will God appoint for walls and Bulwarks. I will conclude
with the close of a Psalm, Let Ps. 48. 11, 12, 13
mount Sion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of Thy
judgments: walk about Sion, and go round about her, tell the towers thereof (A
goodly prospect, and at such a time) Mark ye well her Bulwarks, consider her
palaces, that you may tell it to the generation following. What shall they
tell? or what is this strength? wherein does it consist? or where is it? for it
is not visible. It follows, For This GOD is our GOD for ever and ever: He will
be our guide even Psalm. 41. 13.
unto death. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting and to
everlasting. AMEN and AMEN.

By way of Preface to the Reader.
INeed not tell thee what the times are, how hard, fierce, and perilous; nor
how we are distracted in them; so much thy very looks can tell me: The news,
now a-dayes, is so legible, that he who runs may read it, and in most men's
faces.

There is a passion now, quick and stirring within us, which may stand us in
great stead at this time, as it may be ordered and pointed; if in a right way,
and to the right object, nothing can do us better service to stay and stablish
us: but if out of the way, and from that object, nothing works us more
mischief: nothing more unsettles us. It will betray all our succor; it will
shake us, as a leaf with the wind, and make us flee as a Roe before the hunter.

It were seasonable now to read a Lecture upon this passion of fear, not as a
Philosopher, but as a Christian; I cannot say, so I have done; but I have
bestowed many sad (yet quiet) thoughts upon its uncomfortable and unquiet
motions; and here I have made them legible, That, though the adversary does all
he can to make us afraid, yet he may not have his will 1 Pet. 3. 6.
so far, as to make us afraid with any amazement, for we have made three
Conclusions, are fixed thereupon, and resolved to take the Product or Result
therefrom, That we will do our Duty, not disquieting our selves about what The
LORD will do hereafter, or what our foes are doing now. The first Conclusion.

1. That things stand at as great a distance from an honorable 2 King. 9. 22.
Peace, as Israel stood when the WITCHCRAFTS of their mother Jezebel, and her
whoredoms were so many. If one man sin against another, a third may take up
the difference, and make an agreement betwixt them: 1 Samuel 2. 25.
The case is not so here; Man has sinned against The Lord, and we have
provoked Him to His face by our Idolatries and bloodshed: Man shall not
determine this case, a case of blood, and betwixt GOD and Man. There may be
essays and overtures that way, to scab-over the matter, but it cannot be; the
wound is deep, much venom in the hottome, it has layne festring there these
by past years, three or four, and now The Lord is searching into it, making
inquisition for blood: and before He has done (for that is His manner) He will
find it out, and His sword shall not rest, till He has required and avenged
it. That is the first Conclusion. The adversary makes a second, That as

fraud, so he does and will do all he can by force, not to waste and destroy
only, not to out Israel short, but clean off from being a Nation: So the
Psalm. 74.
Adversary has concluded now. And now the Church makes a third Conclusion, and
thereon she will fix, and be established for ever.

God will make His Church a cup of trembling in the adversaries hand, as a
burdensome stone upon his Zach. 12. 2.
shoulders, as a torch of fire in a sheafe, or amidst stubble. The ver. 6.
Lord does open His eyes upon His people; He does plead His own cause. So the
Church has concluded.

I could set down some Premises whence she draws her Conclusion, but it is her
LORDS promise so; and that is enough, given long since, but written for the
generations to come. Psalm. 74. 22, 23.


The Result from hence is, That we do our duty, as the Church does, and not
trouble our selves with unnecessary quaeres, what, how, or when GOD will work:
He works wonders every day, and let Him work as He pleases, He will work all
for good, and all in the fittest season. Let us doeour duty, that is our work;
work out our salvation; and for the salvation of Israel, by all such means,
wherein GOD, Nature, Grace, have given us a capacity, and power of working. We
must lie on our face in deep humiliation, while the Joshuahs are searching the
tents, that the accursed thing may be cast out, for so they have commanded us.
We must do for the cause of Christ, as the spiritual Lords, Devils, and men
do against Christ, to shoulder Him out of His throne: This is to do our duty,
to do As, etc. and so doing, we do our duty heartily, and shall rejoice in
time to come; that is very comfortable, as we read it; but there is more
comfort in it then so, we shall laugh at the time to come Prove. 21. 2^. Ridet
ad tempera seq^^ontra.
: Not care so much for the Army in the north, as their forefathers did for an
Army of frogs, lice, and swarms of flies; nor for any other mountain in the
way, for he shall be made a plain: We have and will do our Duty; They that do
so may laugh and sing too.

But these are but words, the Lord knows not the speech, but the power of our
doing our duty. And He put it into our hearts, and keep it there for ever. We
can hardly set upon it, though we are set upon by the hand of violence, our
gods are taken away from us, I mean that we dote upon, which quickened a man as
dead in his body, as we in our spirits; For thus it was The Physicians knew no
way to quicken him out of his lethargy but by gingling his baggs before him
upon the table; then he awakened and stirred himself up, for he would hold
Hor. li. 2. S^. Satyr. 3.
his bags, as long as he could hold his breath. This god is taken from us, our
liberty too, and that is our god also; Nay our LORD Christ is taking from us,
Who gives all to us, He is GOD indeed. Now or never we will bethink our selves,
and lay out all we have and are to keep Him, the LIFE of our lives, and SOUL
of our souls, we will keep Him. There is but this that can discourage us (and
it is the greatest encouragement in the world, if we can contend for Him) we
may lose our estates and lives too. That is true; All may be lost, and most
happily lost in such a contention; Nay it is not lost, it is gained, and the
greatest gain, for He is worthy, for Whose cause we do expend all this, if it
be our dearest blood, and all: He became poor for us, to make us 2 Cor. 8 9.
rich; nay, a Curse for us, to make us a Blessing. If we think of this, goods
shall go and life too, and bless God with all our hearts, that He put such a
price into our hand, to lay out our selves for Christ, to suffer for Him:
Indeed it is as glorious a work as to believe in Him; we cannot do the one
without the other, but suffering has the pre-eminence, that no man may be
dismayed at his sufferings, if called thereunto, and for Christ, for unto you
it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on Him, but Philip.
1. 29.
also to suffer for His sake.

I have done prefacing, The Lord give us understanding in the times, and what
Israel ought to do.

PROVE. 29. 25. The fear of man brings a snare: but who so puts his trust
in The Lord, shall be safe.

IT is ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning Printing, this 22. day of December 1642. that this book Entitled
(The usefulness of Fear, etc.) be printed.

John White.

Of FEAR.
The Just Cause The True Use The Sovereign Cure


SECT. I.
The sum and scope of this Treatise; The kinds of Fear; The strange effects
there from; What the worst effect; What the great design of the Adversary; How
he prosecutes it; His advantage if he can effect it; His power and malice that
way gives us just cause of fear.

CHAP. I.
The Introduction to, and purpose of this Treatise.

OUr Affections do us the greatest service, or disservice, that well can be
imagined: and this they do, as we master them; or as they master us. If we
master them, they are the winds of the soul, carrying it so as it is neither
becalmed, that it moves not when it should; nor yet tossed, that it moves
disorderly: If they master us, they raise storms there, and we are storm-like,
sudden and violent, carried as a ship in a tempest. If we master them, they are
the very wings of the soul; A Prayer without them, (so we may say of any other
performance) is like a bird without wings: Oration sine malis, avis sine alis.
If I cared for nothing, (said Melancthon) I should pray for nothing: Si nihil
curarem, nihil Orarem.
If they master us, they are the clogs of the soul; or if they be as wings, it
is to make us flee away from God, and goodness; from our selves and Duty. Our
Affections are the springs of all our services to GOD: we are dry, and cold,
and dead without them; with them (well ordered) the soul is set on work, and
then the work will be done, when the heart is upon it: David had prepared much
for the house of GOD, himself gives the reason, Because I have set my
AFFECTION to the house of my GOD. 1 Chr. 29. 3.
Fear puts on the soul almost as fast as Love does, that great Centurion, or
puts it farther back: I cannot do this and sin; I must do this, and why?
Because I have set my FEAR upon GOD; and knowing the TERROR of the LORD, 2
Cor. 5. 11.
I must persuade men. In a word, wear as a dead sea without our affections;
and as a raging sea if they exceed the bounds: And no affection beats more
strongly upon the soul, (and more like waves against the banks) to exceed its
just bounds, and get over, then fear does: and when it has got over, no
affection sooner drowns the Spirits, sinks Reason, and so becomes a Passion
indeed, vexatious and troublesome: for where fear is (in excess) there is
torment. 1 John. 4. 18.
This tormenting Passion, the stilling its unreasonable motions, is the subject
of my Discourse now; but GODS work, To calm the Spirit, to make it stand
still, when the earth shakes, (f) Exodus 1^. ^^. Ne con^^(...). ^un.
and the kingdoms are moved; I say, His work, Who chid the winds, and
commanded the seas, and they obeyed Him, and presently there followed a great
calm. Fear, let alone to work its own effects, (for like water it has no
bounds of its own) is (g) (...). Math. 8. 20.
in the heart, as the tongue in the body, kindles a great fire Jam. 3. 5.
there from every little matter, quickly raises that little to a raging flame,
which no man can quench, only GOD can. And what way He commands and prescribes
us* (for we must keep to His prescriptions, the same, which the whole City of
GOD, All His People, have taken in all troublous times upward to this day) To
reason with this unreasonable Passion, To keep it within bounds of just
moderation, is the maine intendment of this Treatise, wherein, but in passage
only, I must make clear proof to them, who will be as are many now adays,
willingly ignorant That the Cities fear is just and Reasonable; That all the
Causes and reasons both, which can be imagined, from within, and from without,
commands the wisest men to fear, yea commends them so fearing, for they are
wise men, they can not be afraid with any amazement. But that I may begin in
order, I must distinguish first,

CHAP. II.
The Kinds of fear, The disquietings therefrom, and sharp effects; The worst
effect of all, is, It makes a man choose sin rather then affliction.

1. THere is a fear, which sinks Reason, then raises up unreasonable motions,
such which make a man fear where no fear is; hear a noise merely fancyed;
flee, when none pursues; so betrayeth the succors which reason offers. Wisdom.
17. 12.
This fear made the Syrians, and others, infamous in the sacred Writ, to fly,
2 Kings 7
etc. And the Papists, in their hour of Darkness, and Saint Mary's Church in
Act. and M^pa 1102.
Oxford, To shelter their heads against the scalding lead, melted in the
furnace of their own conceits, and guilty consciences: for they heard a noise
of fire only, could see none, and yet they thought they should be scalded to
death with the droppings of lead melted in a fancyed fire of their own
imaginary. This is a Panick fear, a fear where there is no cause of fear; a
noise, which GOD causes the wicked to hear, His enemies and adversaries to
feel: the effects thereof, as we heard.

2. There is a natural fear, which all partake of, that partake of the same
common nature: Nay all creatures that have sense, have sense of fear, fear of
suffering, It is natural; The Bears will roar; Ravens Cry; Doves Chatter;
Lambs Bleat; The Swine are troubled in a windy night, though I read of Pyrrhos
Hog, that eat his meat quietly in the ship almost covered with waves, while
the Passengers there were almost dead with fear: And I have known some men,
who seemed to have no other sense, but that sense of feeling, fearlesse men;
They feared nothing: But this fearlesnesse was not from any cleanness and
serenity of mind; not from a true security and peace from within: but from a
dead palsy rather, a stupor, a blockish stupidity upon their spirits.

3. There is a fear, which has a strong foundation in nature: so also must it
needs have the same foundation in sin: A corrupt, a sinful fear: And the more
or less sin is mastered and subdued in us, so will this fear be; so quieted,
or so disquieting: And this all men partake of, and in measure, according to
the proportion before mentioned. If sin bear rule in us, fear, when it comes,
will command in chief too, and be exceeding: Weakness and wickedness are the
very essentialls, whereof it does consist, the supporters of it; and when it
exceeds its bounds, it becomes a passion indeed: We suffer much by it, and act
or practice in it, I know not how, but as men forsaken of all, wit and reason
both. It causes strange and strong motions within, no passion stronger or
stranger then fear does. It is within us like foul weather upon the sea; It
no sooner rises and getreth mastery, but it cloudeth our Heaven, and sils the
soul^ with thick mists and smoke. The Apostle speaks all in one word, Where
fear is, there is torment. (...) 22. 2.
It is the very Rack of the soul; it slays without a sword: Thy slain men
are not slain with the sword nor dead (c) in Battle. How then were they
slain? with fear, that surprised (...) eye^ cove^ed (...) his death, and (...)
covered again tha^ he might ^ead his (...) dead upon the Scaf^old. (...).
them before the Battle, and did the part of an executioner before the sword
came.

But that is not the worst; fear can do a worse office to a man then slay
him; It can put us clean off from GOD and from Duty, and that is worst of all.
What base shifts will the soul use when fear possesses her? Fear of man's
wrath, fear of loss of goods, of good name, of liberty, of life, will put a
man upon the loss of all we properly call good; upon strange adventures, upon
devilish projects; It will dash his soul upon this rock and the other, till He
has split himself, and made shipwreck of those inestimable treasures, (which
render a man rich in the lowest estate, and secure in the greatest danger)
FAITH and a good CONSCIENCE: It will make a man seek for security from every
thing, but where it should: it will make him look to all means but one; in his
distracting ^eare, he will not look to God, and an upright conversation.

CHAP. III.
The design of the wicked ever was and now is To make the Godly afraid: The
advantage if they can effect it: Tongue and hand employed about it: Their
judgment from the Lord: Their pretense, and scarce that, for their works are
manifest.

THis the wicked know very well, they have learnt it of their Fathers:
therefore hear what they have devised anciently, to make the righteous afraid.
When the breaches of Ierusalems walls were making up, what was the great
design of the adversary then? To make the builders AFRAID. We read often
N^he. 6.
The adversaries sent and wrote Letters, raised false reports, hired light
fellows; All this they did, That they might make the builders ver. 13.
afraid. Could they have effected it according to their minds, then the hands
of the builders had been weakened from the work: it had not been done. ver. 9.
If you will do any thing for The LORD, keep up your spirits, and keep out
fear, that infeebling Passion, which cuts a Man's sinews, renders him unfit
for action. When the heart sinks, then the hands hang down, and the work
cease. If Nehemiah had given way to base and cowardly fear, he had done so
and so, and sinned. Besides, he had given matter for an evil ver. 13.
report, That the adversary might reproach him.

Thus The Adversary did anciently, So he does now, He takes the same way; his
design and end is the very same with theirs; still He sends, he writes, he
raises false reports, he hires light fellows (if there be any lighter then
himself:) what tongue or hand can do he does, to cause terror on every
side; Their tongue walks about the City, and all to disquiet the inhabitants
Psalm. 42. 4.
thereof. What shall be done unto thee thou deceitful and mischeivous tongue?
for thou love all devouring words: I cannot make full answer to that, but I
read; The Lord shall destroy thee for ever, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling
place, and root thee out ver. 5.
of the land of the living: here is also a prayer put up against these tongues,
these fiery flying serpents; Let the mischeife of their own Psalm. 140. 9. 10.
lips cover them; let burning coals fall upon them, The Church seeks not her
God in vain, she makes account it is done.

The hand is more rough and violent, and put forth as far as it could be, to
make both City and Country MAGOR-MISSABIB (...) 3.
fear on every side. What shall be done unto thee thou violent and bloody
man? Man cannot answer that; blood pursues him; the Destroyer shall be
destroyed; God has sworn by His Holiness, utter destruction shall come unto
them; He will UNDO all that asslict his people Zeph. 3. 1^.
Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet; and their
eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongues shall consume away in
their mouth; Zeph. 14. 12.
This is the portion of them that hate His Church; they shall be utterly
destroyed, in the close of this work (for there is a great work to be done upon
mount Sion) and about the close of the day they shall be utterly undon. But
first they shall be made a terror to themselves, and round about: As they
thought to do to the Righteous, so it shall be done to them: As they have
determined, so it shall be unto them, that shall be their lot and portion of
their cup from the Lord in his appointed Time.

But do we not wrong these harmless people, these innocent Lambs (some of
them were in sheep clothing, and they would Mal. 8. 15.
be accounted sheep till their cloak fell off, and the wolf appeared) what
have they done, or spoken to make the City afraid? They will tell us, Nothing
at all. We do but fancy our fears; we hear a rumor, we scarce know of
what, or from whom, and we are afraid, we know not wherefore. We conceit danger
only, as they, who took shadows for men: or Judges 19. 36.
as those, who, beholding at a distance, a field overgrown with tall thistles,
thought verily they had been so many spearmen. So the adversary says, and so
say they too, who should speakas the Oracles of GOD, for they speak from the
Pulpit. And what said they? As the Adversary before them, That there was no
cause of fear formerly, nor any cause now; A Phantasme, a conceited thing, a
Panick fear the City is possessed with, whereof they can give neither cause
nor reason for, neither is real nor visible. They have said; and so they have
forced themselves, as unjust men do. Now we will take leave to consider the
matter, and their words, and give no more credit to them then we do to such
men, who know no shame. Zeph. 3. 5.


Catholic men, bloody Papists, (universally, all the world over) brawned in
villainies, these fellows, that hate the Lord, make Tumults, lift up the head,
and yet no ground of fear, not any. The neighbors house is on fire, there the
fire rages, and the wind blows the flame directly hitherward; it began there,
to end here; yet no cause of fear, That our commonhouse may smell of the
smoke, or that it is time for every common man to look to his own: No reason
for that, none at all, speaks the adversary, but he is not so mad as to think
any wise man believes him. The vile Priests and the Treacherous Prophets, that
have polluted the Sanctuary, have done violence to the Law; Zeph. 3. 4.
These do rage, and are swelled with malice: The brutish people, almost as
much, make tumults; and they that sung forth their requests, roar like Bears,
and are as fierce as the she-beares, fearing their sweet morsels may be taken
from them, and their service ordered according to Rule, and yet no ground of
fear. The tumult of those, that rise up against The LORD, that would dethrone
Him, increases continually, and ^et no cause of fear. Indeed there is not; no
cause we should be afraid, when we look up to GOD, for it is the Tumult of
those that rise up against Him, and He will look to His own Cause and Glory,
That shall receive no loss, no diminution at all, but advantage a great deal:
But looking down to the Adversary, there is cause we should fear, after a
godly sort: so as to make provision against him, and then secure our selves and
the cause in GOD. This fear is a Godly fear: The Godly man's fear is his
humility, and casting away of Pride; his reverent care to walk in the ways of
God: A fear which drives out security, not a fear which takes away the
boldness of faith. More of this anon. This here, that there is just cause of
fear, but of such a fear that has been described unto us, which secureth the
soul, the godly man, and his cause in God; And great need of such a fear, for
whatever the Adversary says, no man that has his eyes in his head will
believe him; though his words were as soft as butter: and his deeds as smooth
as oil: much less now, when his words are as drawn swords, violence is in his
hands, and war in his heart. The Adversary is so mad with rage now, That he
casts firebrands, arrows and death, and cannot deceive his neighbor Pro. 26.
18.
now, saying, (...) not I in sport? No sure, no man is so senseless as ^^
believe that; for when he seemed to speak fair, we believed (...) not, ^
k^^wing there were seven abominations in his heart: He that hates, may
dissemble for a time, and lay up deceit within him; for words, which are
wounds, and lying lips and a wicked heart may be like a pot^^^ard covered with
silver dross for a time. But now his hatred (as active as fire) cannot be
covered by d^ceit, his wickedness is shown before the whole congregation.

These are Generals; That I may be more particular, I will quarter out this
Legion, the Adversary I mean, for he is many, and behold him as a man of War,
in his Ranks and Postures: doubtless, if we so behold him, and can look no
higher, he will seem terrible, as an Army with banners; or rather, as Goliath
before the Israelites; I said not, before David, for he laughed him to scorn,
and despised him: but this I may say truly, just cause we have to be afraid,
for consider the Churches enemies, how many they are.

CHAP. IV.
Without number for multitude. 2. Without reason for rags and cruelty. 3.
Boundless in malice, mischievous in projecting, and watchful in executing
thereof.

1. HOW many adversaries has the Church? It were well with the Church if she
could number her enemies, tell how many adversaries she has: We say, They are
but a few, that can be numbered. The Shepherd can tell his sheep, but he cannot
tell how many Wolves, nor Foxes there be: nor how many dogs, which do their
office the contrary way, hurrying the sheep, and are as bloody as the wolse or
fox, every whit. The Church can say, They are, as in former days, increased
that Psalm. 3. 1. Psalm. 22. 12. 13.
trouble me; Many Bulls have compassed me, strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me
round. They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and roaring lion.
Psalm. 31. 1.
She has heard the slander of many, fear was on every sicle. While they took,
counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life. The Church can
only answer, MANY, Many are my Adversaries, many my persecutors; Psalm. 119.
15^.
Many, that sight against my soul, because I seek the thing that good is. All
the lukewarm Protestants, these are not a few; and they are against the
Church, for they are not with her: All the light Prophets, and Treacherous
Priests, These are exceeding many, and their rage is exceeding, as is their
zeal to their ease, and filthy lucre, to their pleasure also boiled up to the
height: All the Devils in hell, and both their hands on earth, right and left,
Pope and Popelings, with the Atheists too, these swarm every where, such
multitudes there are. But thanks be to God, we know where they settle, and
fix, though a gadding company, yet we know where they are solden together as
thorns; and if their bodies Nah. 1. 10.
are not there, yet their hearts are, joined all together from all the quarters
of the world. And now we can give a guess how many they be, that band
themselves against the Church, as the sands by the Seashore for multitude: and
then it follows, That we may have just cause of fear, In the second place
consider we their

2. Cruelty. The dark places of the earth are full of it, where the light of
the Gospel comes not, is thrust out, or despised. Their Doctrine and
Discipline, their Laws, the best things with them are as the blood of a dead
man. What are their manners then? Bloody sure. These sons and daughters of men,
stand upon everlasting record, To be the most bloody enemies that ever the
Church met withal in this world: They are free of the Corporation of the
Malignant Church, and have purchased their freedom there: How? and at what
rate? By Massacres, outrages and villauies of all sorts and sizes. If any of
the company are not so cruel by nature, yet they must be so by command, and
warranted to be so, by Law. They may and must pursue their brother with the
sword, and cast off all pity: Their rage must tear perpetually, Amos 1. 11.
they must keep their wrath for ever. Keep wrath for ever? Yes, for ever; for
though they are but Mortal enemies, yet does their enmity manage an immortal
hatred against the righteous; for they pursued him to death; and when he had
got into his strong-hold, the grave, there they troubled him, that they did.

They have executed their rage and malice against the Sanctuaries of the dead,
the Graves, the place where Job was confident he should lie at rest: even
thither, to their Sanctuaries, the hand of Job 3. 17.
the oppressor reached; There the wicked did not cease to trouble the bones,
and sacred ashes of the Martyrs; there, at that Sanctuary, the dead were not
free from the oppressors, his anger did ^^are perpetually, he did keep his
wrath for ever. They have been cruel to the living and to the dead, and so are
they to this day. Histories Ancient and Modern, a cloud of witnesses would
crowd in here to give evidence to what was last said; but it needs not, all the
world is fully satisfied in that point, for in allusion to that which the
learned Knight says touching Henry the eight of England, I may say touching
the Papists; If all their Histories were lost; if all the massacres, outrages,
villainies of these merciless men were forgot and quite out of mind, they might
be renewed and described forth to their life, out of these three years story
concerning their practice in Ireland, where they have slain their brethren
with a rage that reaches up to heaven. They have made 2 Chronicles. 28. 9.
that Country a Land of wrath, a field of blood at this day. So they would
make this Land also, that is their design, we shall come to that presently,
for I will spend no more time, nor blot any more paper in making known how
cruel they are, how they breathe forth threatenings, and how exceeding mad with
rage: Papists are the executioners of wrath, we need not then add, They are
grievous as wolves, and fierce as she-beares: their Natures such, their Laws
such: their words and deeds, how hard and ungodly they are, all the Christian
world, the heathen people also, all know and seele. Observe we then,

3. The Adversaries Design; how mischievous and Divelish; the same which we
read of, Psalm. 83.
or as Hamans was, not to cut Israel short, but clean off from being a Nation:
Esther 3. 6
And his heart is bent upon this Design, now, Now he moves every stone, as the
Proverb is; now they put shoulder to shoulder, heaving at the Church, to
remoove and shoulder her down. Why now? Because he had brought the Church
once and again to the brow of the ^ill, but, as her Lord before her, she
passed through the midst of Luke 4. 20.
them she knows not how, and went her way; This admirable Rescue enrageth the
adversary; Now he has them in the open field, he says, as their fore
fathers, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will devide the spoil, my lust
shall be satis sied upon them, I will draw my sword, mine hand shall destroy
them Exodus 15. 9.
But see the Adversaries COLORS, under which he marches, I mean his
pretenses, for though he pursues the enemy with open face, yet (...)
he puts a vizor over it, and that makes the face more ugly: it putts an
accent upon the design, making it above measure horrid, sinful and
abominable. The Adversary fights (I take him single though he be many)
against God, under a pretense of being for Him: he fights against the life and
soul of our lives; he sheds innocent blood to his Power; he treads the
Righteous as mire in the streets: does what he can to lay the Glory in the
dust, and all this he does under a color (but blood has quite washed off the
varnish) of Advancing Religion and the glory: he has engaged himself to
subject our consciences, our laws, our liberties, our estates, to a perpetual
slavery: but observe the manner how he prosecutes all this, for there is the
abomination, pretending liberty to conscience; establishment to laws; property
in our goods; and a free enjoyment of all unto us, as to free men. Never was
there such a thing as this heard of since man was upon the earth: nor was there
ever an Hypocrisy so pellucide, so transparent, that every child laughs at it,
sees through it, as through the clearest glass. But The LORD sees it, He
beholds iniquity and wrong, and has taken it into His own hand to Require it:
which speaks comfort to the Righteous, as it should terrors to the ungodly.

Now we will look over the Premises, and conclude, The Adversary is a Legion,
and more, without number for multitudes; without Reason for rage and cruelty:
Boundless in their malice, bloody designs, and mischievous Projects: restless
continually, watching thereunto (that I should have added) for their sleep is
taken away unless they cause some to fall. Prove. 4. 16.


We conclude: There is just cause of a just fear, which makes the city stand
upon their Watchtower, gird on their Armor, and, when they have done all,
stand fast in the faith* To maintain it, and a good conscience, To do this with
all their strength, and To do it continually, praying and watching thereunto:
As Rome said once touching her Adversary Carthage; she would never forbear to
watch against Carthage, till they saw that City quite demolished and laid even
with the ground: So this City will never forbear to keep watch and ward and
her self in a Posture of Defense against Rome now, and her vassals, till she
sees them, as the Israelites saw the Egyptians, dead before her upon the sands.

This City stands as much engaged to Watch and Pray too, (so they gird up their
loins) as David did, when Saul pursued him, for The City may say as David did
at that time, my soul is among Lions; I lie even among them, that are set on
fire, Psalm. 57. 4.
even the Sons of men, whose Teeth are spears and arrows and their tongue a
sharp Sword: fiery Adversaries, who sent and watched the house to kill him. It
was even so with the City as we read in the title of the Psalm. 5^
Psalm: Oh! great Reason of fear! I mean such a fear, as puts a man upon
Duty, To pray and watch too. Why? The Adversary, as we may remember, did, when
time was, watch and guard his Cross, that Abominable pile of images, stocks
and stones, such despicable things: much more will the wise in heart, in tender
compassion to their lives, and just liberties, keep watch night and day over
themselves, and this great City, where are so many thousand persons, that
cannot discern between their Right hand and their Left, and also much Cattle.
And so (Blessed be God) they can sanctify The Lord God in their hearts, and
are ready always to give an answer to every man, that asks them a Reason of
their fear, and hope also, that is in them, with meekness. So we have seen a
just account given of our fear, how just it is, no Phancied thing, but Real
and visible: we will see now what use GOD makes of this affection, in the
hearts of the Righteous. And indeed it is very notable to observe the wisdom of
God in planting His People there, where they must look for disquietings; And in
Implanting in them such an affection as fear is; When we have observed this,
then I shall set down the means how the Righteous have had power, and been
able to command over their fears, deporting themselves calmly in such shaking
times: And this will make much for the settling our minds in our disquietments,
and so I shall bring it down and make it useful for the present time.

SECT. II.
The wisdom of God in planting His Church in the world, not the place of their
rest: And in implanting in them, This Affection of Fear; The True use thereof;
The advantage His people get by it.

CHAP. I.
This world no paradise: The Church expects her heaven above, her Purgatory
here: It is her Lords pleasure so, and she is content, and thankful.

SEE What a place the Church lives in! where she has no rest, nor must look
for any. They who were disquieted yesterday, must look to be disquieted again:
They that suffered, must suffer, and perhaps unto blood. Last years were
vexatious and troublous; so are these: the next following may be worse: If
better, The Church will be very thankful: if much more troublous, The Church
has counted the cost, she cannot be deceived, but she can be very thankful
too. We see the Changes and Turnings in the world: They, who sat at rest as we
do, two years ago, They sit as a widow now: at five a clock all was peace,
(for so I heard a Minister of their own say) and before six, behold War, and
the terrors thereof on every side. This world now answers to the Israelites
Wilderness once, variety of fears and troubles here. Our life is as a
Checquer work, interwoven with black and white, here Good, there Evil, but the
Evil takes up the greatest part: Blessed be God, that it is so, else even His
own People would be much in love with the place, where their Rest is not; They
would build Tabernacles here, never think of removing hence. If the cloud of
fear and discontent did not sometimes overshadow them; if there were not
unsettled times, we would settle on our lees; if there were not a want, when we
are at the fullest, we would be so full of earth, that there would be no room
for heaven; If we had no fear, we should have no Care; But we are still in
fear, for something is still wanting, and we fear and are troubled lest that
want should not be supplied: That want is supplied, and then we are in more
fear then before, lest we come to be at a loss again. To explain this: We
have a full estate, and health is wanting; we have plenty of all things, and
health withal, but now the fear is, That the spoiler may come, men skillful
to destroy, and take away all, goods, life, and all. But suppose now we could
be secure, That none of this could happen to us; our estates could be secured
to us, and our health too, suppose it so, for we may suppose impossible things:
then Abraham's Genesis 15. ^.
fear troubles us, we have not a child to inherit: and then, WHAT is all our
fullness unto us? We make but a [What] of all the rest of our enjoyments,
because a child is wanting, for so that good man did, though God be there as a
portion: Then A child is given us, but what a fear there is lest the child be
taken away again? why then, if we would keep him, we must sacrifice him. That
is true, but that is a death too; we cannot think of the withering of that
Gourd, (such a thing as that was, a child, is quickly withered) and so the
goord withers, and we dye: That we fear is come upon us; It grows up as a
flower, and is cut down like the grass. And all this That Gods people may not
fix and fasten upon such reeds, which, if you lean and bear upon, they break
and pierce too: And yet we will lean upon them, we will be very glad of our
gourds; then The LORD knaps them asunder, Jonah 4. 6.
withers them, and then we are troubled exceedingly.

In the last place, suppose we have health, and wealth, and peace withal, and
children round about our table, yet there is a fear That we may be taken away
in the midst of all our fullness. What is our life? We know what the Apostle
answers, and every day James 4. 14.
says as much, It appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. A man
is well to day, and dead to morrow, and this fear (if there be not a hand over
it to subdue it) holds us in bondage all our life time. Heb. 2. 15.


But Blessed be God, so He unbottomes His People, drawing the heart to
Himself. If it were not for these fears, Faith would have no mastery: but so
it is, we are in such fears often, and that is almost to be in death as often:
so in this our wilderness, and God bears with our manners here; weaneth His
people Acts 13. 18. (...).
from drawing so hard at the breasts of the world: Assures them, This is not
the place of their rest, but there remains a Rest to his people, which shall
last as long as Eternity is long, for ever. Therefore they may bear patiently
their disquietings, their changes here below, for a moment, a little, a small
Esaias 26. 20. 54. 7.
moment, quickly over, and then they shall see evil no more. Zeph. 3. 15.
Shortly they shall be above in the heaven of Heavens, where all is peace for
evermore. And their disquietments and fears make them work more strongly after
this place now: so God makes all work for their good, whereof in the close This
here must be considered, even

CHAP. II.
The wisdom of God in planting this affection of fear in His People.

BLessed be God, we are in fears, often it is best for us so to be; we
should surfeit every day of our sweets, if the fear of loosing them did not
allay the lussiousnesse of the same: we should bottom our selves too strongly
upon our mountain, if we were Confident (we are too consident) it cannot be
removed. Daily experience tells us so much therein, That we cannot stand
fearelesse upon the strongest and best bottomed comfort, that has its bottom
upon the earth. And Blessed be God for all this, even for this affection of
fear: So also, and that The Lord has put a vanity and vexation into the
Creature, and fears many; fear make us all pull up our feet, and walk more
warily; fear feeds us with food Convenient: So it clothes us: fear is our
watch keeper: It is the most wakeing affection, most serviceable of any, if it
does Its office. It is the house-porter, the bodies Spiall: and the souls too,
still keeping watch: It is, next to love, the most Commanding affection: our
keeper, and Truths keeper also; It is the best King in the world, (the great or
little) for it keeps both tables. I should speak more of it, but I find my
self prevented here in a Book called The Child's portion, Page 1^2, 163.
whereto I would referr the Reader, if please him, I would rather speak
somewhat more touching the usefulness of this affection, God sanctifying the
same.

It makes the people of God to put no confidence at all in the flesh: I mean
by [Flesh] All things under the moon: They cannot fear now the changes of
things here below, and vexation from them, for they have been so used to it,
That, which they feared from the creature so often came upon them, That now
they expect no stability in the creature at all, but changes, and troubles, and
vexations from it evermore. They can now suffer the spoiling of their goods
with joy. They did indeed put some confidence in such things, They thought such
things to be a HIGH WALL, (a) but it was (and they see it now to be) a mere
conceit Prove. ^^. ^^.
only, and no more. They know now, and they are fearlesse about it, That the
thief and the robber breaks in upon these treasures every day; therefore it is
nor their treasure, they account not of it so: they have laid up their treasure
in a safe place, where they fear not the thief nor the moath, and it is well
they are so well instructed to discretion.

I remember a Story worth the noting, of Paulinus, Bishop of Nola: he had
abundance of wealth, but no affection to it; bags Aug. deciv. De^ lib. 1. c.
10. V^l^^^ate pauper^imu^ ^^ c^p^o s^^me sanct^^.
full, and coffers full, but his heart was not set upon that fullness, but on a
better treasure, and full of the same. It was well for him that he had a
Treasure, which Man could not give, nor take away: For, though he was a very
rich man but as yesterday, yet was he stripped of all presently, and as poor as
Job. The Goths, a barbarous people, almost as any we can see or hear of, brake
into that City Nola, like so many Devils, and did flee upon the prey, flee
presently upon all the Bishop had in this world, and took it Cum ab cis
^eneretur, si^^ cord suo, ut ab co postea cogno ^imus, p^^cabatur: Domine, non
excrucier propter aurum and argentum: ubi e^^m sunt omnia mea tu s^is. ibid.
etc.
into their possession, and the Bishop prisoner also. Now mark his Prayer, for
that was all the refuge he had now, being in the hands of Robbers: LORD GOD,
Let me not be greatly troubled for my silver and gold: Thou know, Lord, it
is not my Treasure, That is laid up according to Thy Commands, Who did tell
us long before, That this would happen, These barbarous people would break in
upon us for our sins: therefore, Lord, I was warned, and laid up my Treasure,
as Thou have charged me, and as Thou know. What a wise man was this! Truly
all his neighbors counted him so; for though they were not so wise
beforehand, yet now they had learnt by sad experience, Si non praedente
sapientia certe consequente experientia didicerunt.
(an after-wisdome, that comes too late) That so they should have done too;
They should have laid up their Treasure where their Teacher did, and charged
his people so to do. For mark how it happened to those after-wits, They counted
the wedge of gold their Treasure, and all their care and fear was To secure
that, so they hid it in the ground. The Robbers came, they knew there was
silver and gold both, and they would have it, and by torments the enemy forced
the distressed Captives, To tell where they had hid their treasure. Nay the
Adversaries cruelty was such, That they tormented some poor wretches, that had
neither silver nor gold, upon supposition that they had both, and dissembled
the having of it. Other some, the richest men amongst them, were so hardy, That
they would die upon the rack rather then discover where their gold was; and so
they were admonished (says the Author) by suffering such Si autem to^queri
quam aurum prodere maluerunt admonendi crant, qui tanta patiebantur pro auro,
quanta essent sustinenda pro Christo. ibid. etc.
things, rather then betray their gold, WHAT THEY SHOULD HAVE SUFFERED FOR
CHRIST. Other some again, the fewest of them, could not be forced to betray
their Treasure, or forgo the same, for, indeed, they had not laid it upon
earth, but in heaven, where Robbers could not break-in, and steal: So well
they had profited by their fear about such uncertain things, that now they
were not careful about them at all. They could take joyfully the spoiling of
such goods, knowing in themselves, That they had in heaven a better and
enduring substance. Heb. 10. 34.
And so the Father concluses, No man kept his gold but by denying In e^
tormenta nemo Christum confitendo amisit: nemo aurum nisi negando servavit.
it: that is, by taking off his love and fear from it: and no man kept Christ,
but by confessing him, (that is) by giving up his love and fear unto him.

2. It is so with and about their children too; Their discreet fear has
taught them, not to be careful about children neither: The Lord gave them, He
may take them; They can bless His Name in all: They did not set their hope,
nor their hearts on such perishing things, and then, when God takes them away,
their hope is where it was, and heart also, even in heaven, where their Love,
and JOY, and TREASUREIS: And they can submit to their FATHER in heaven; It is
He, The LORD, He has done it, and they are silent; It is His will so, thereto
they resolve all, and there they rest, saying, The will of the LORD be done. So
their fear (the Lord sanctifying it) has taught them touching their Children.

3. They have brought their hearts to the same point touching their life also;
that is a precious thing: skin after skin, a man will part withal to save his
life: And yet, they are not now fearful about it; it is of small continuance
here below: and, while it does continue here, it is full of changes and
sorrows. They are the less careful about it. They that have been most afraid,
and so would save their life, have sooner lost it, and upon the greatest
disadvantage. They, who have loved their life more then Christ, Who is the life
of their life, have lost their life, and Him too: and They that have hated
their life in this world for His sake, have made no account of it in reference
to Christ, and their love to Him, have kept it unto eternal life. John 12. 2^
That is the life they think upon, of being BLESSED FOR EVER; That is a life
indeed. This here, in comparison, abides but a moment, a small, a little
moment, not worth the setting our fear upon, ever since we could look through
it, what a life it is. They make no account of any thing, but what sets them
backward or forward toward eternity, where they shall live blessed for ever in
eternity: (...) nitas facit bonum infinite melius; malum infinite pe^us.
The thought where of makes that which is good, infinitely better; and that
which is evil, infinitely worse. Thereon, upon Eternity, they place their
fear now, and concerning this life they are fearlesse. We have seen what use
the righteous make of fear, they work good out of it: and by these unquiet
motions here below, they get an establishment in God. I come now in the third
place to the means whereby the righteous Nation can and do master their
fears, keeps them under so, as they are a quiet habitation, when all about
them are full of stirs, a tumultuous people.

SECT. III.
The means of the righteous man's establishment, and how his fear, the disease
of it is cured.

WE see the righteous are a people that are not afraid with any amazement. They
fear, but with a godly fear; They fear, but nothing so much as sin, and the
frown of their God; They fear, but so, as they can look up with confidence, and
down to the means of their safety with comfort; They fear, and yet they can
gird up their loins, and put on their armor; They fear, and yet do trust
perfectly; They fear, and are disquieted, but not greatly. Their hearts may
shake, and their heads ache with fear, and yet then they can calm their
hearts, and rest their heads in the lap and bosom of their everlasting Father,
there laying their selves down quietly, assured they may rest in safety, and
the end will be peace. How comes this to be so? The Answer is, They expect
troubles in the world, afflictions there; and they expect, nay they know God
will deliver them out of them all: For they LOVE God heartily, so they FEAR
HIM, so they TRUST IN HIM, so they OBEY HIM, even from the heart, walking in
His way, doing His work; They keep continual watch against their Adversary,
and over themselves. All this must be considered on distinctly and apart, and
so we shall learn the way how to settle the heart in the most unsettled times:
The chief scope and mark we would carry all level unto.

CHAP. I.
The righteous man's expectation from the world, and from his GOD, shall not be
deceived: He expects all the evil the world and their god there, can do
against them; And from His GOD all that is truly called Good, or is made so:
All this he is sure of, therefore he waits patiently for God. He will come
surely and in season, Blessed are all they that wait for Him.

THe righteous are in continual expectation: Of what? Of troubles in the
flesh, of afflictions in the world: Ever since they understood themselves, they
sat down to consider what it would cost them, To do their Masters work; To
serve Him in sincerity and truth; and Their brethren, in love to their souls,
and faith of the Gospel: In this great work now, (whereunto evermore Christians
stand so engaged) the building themselves up, and Ierusalems wall in faith and
love, They have counted their cost, and they know what they must find at the
bottom of their reckoning, troubles from within, disquietings, persecutions
from without, of all sorts and sizes: And it was well, and they bless God with
all their hearts, Who has instructed them to discretion, To count their cost
so soon as they thought of Temple-work, The edifying (the building up)
themselves and others in their most holy faith. This was the use they made of
their Rest and Peace, GOD was graciously pleased to afford unto them: They knew
this Temple-work would cost them dear, Labor and Trouble both: They expected
all this, and whatever it be it is but answerable to their expectation: they
looked for it, and now it is come, it is welcome: They are fit to entertain
it, they are fitted for it, as the burden is fitted for the shoulder, and the
yoke for the neck.

I will tell a known and sad story of a man that lived in prosperity all his
life long, God spoke to him once and again, and every day by every mercy he
gave unto him; but he would not hearken, and that was his manner Jer. 22. 21.
from his youth, he would not obey Gods voice, what cared he what God said, he
was inprosperity, had no changes, and expected none; Toward the end, as the
manner is, The Lord made a breach upon him, sorrows overwhelmed him like a
mighty flood. O, said he, I never looked for this: Ai, that was true enough;
and therefore his sorrows pressed his soul we know not how low. We looked for
peace, said they. Jer. 8. 15. ver. 19.
Why did they so? For first, They had provoked GOD to anger with their Images,
and strange vanities: Secondly, (for I hasten here) The word is gone forth of
His mouth, Who cannot lie, In the world affliction: Yet say they, We looked for
Peace, what follows? No good came; we looked for a time of health, and behold
trouble. A miserable case to be so deceived, and in point of Peace.

The righteous not so, They are not deceived; They expect trouble, what the
gates of hell can do against them. All this is done against them, they are not
troubled at it; They had their masters word, it would be so, and so it is.
Where is their comfort now? In ME PEACE; Trouble round about, and War at the
doors, making breaches upon them; That which upholds them is, and fully to
their expectation, IN ME PEACE.

I will ask a Question, and resolve it in two Answers; when I have cleared
them, then I will conclude this point.

Is the Church never deceived in her expectation?

No, never deceived in the world, in her expectation therein;

2. Nor shall their expectation in GOD be frustrate; and there is the comfort.

I will clear these premises, and then conclude.

1. The Churches expectation from the world is never deceived. What does she
expect? As aforesaid, Affliction and Persecution thence; Her Lord has bid her
expect it, for the world love their own, not His people, as they love not Him;
and they must not look to fare better then their Lord: Affliction in the world,
Persecution from the world, is a part of the Churches Dowry. See what a Ioynter
her Good Lord has made His Church and People! He has given to her All,
Himself and All, the world and All, ALL THINGS 1 Cor. 3. 21
ARE YOURS, you shall profit and receive benefit from all, even from all that
is called evil in the world: All is yours. There we read the particulars of
her Dowry, and amongst them, DEATH, afflictions, persecutions, pains, sorrows,
troubles in the flesh, (that is Death) and all this is in the Churches Dowry:
no Part or Parcel of it is so large as this, for it contains necessities,
distresses, stripes, imprisonments, tumults, labors, watchings, fastings; all
this a very DEATH to a man's sense, and present feeling. Is it not think you
Death to be as the Church is in some of her people always? 2 Cor 6. 4, 5.
In journyings, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by her
own Countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in
the wilderness, in perils amongst false brethren, 2 Cor. 11. 26.
in weariness, and painfulnesse. That was Paul's case you will say. Nay it is
the Churches case with some of her sons and daughters, and it will be their
case unto the worlds end. And certainly all this is a very death: To sojourne
in Mesech, to dwell in the tents of Kedar, amongst them that hate peace, a very
Death all this, working Psalm. 120.
indeed graciously and gloriously, through GOD, that orders all for Good; but a
very death to sense, to flesh and blood. But it is her portion in this life
(and no longer, but durante vita, a span, a little moment, in comparison to
eternity, in the heavens, where God has time enough to do them good, and
refresh their hearts after their hard labors here, with joys there
unspeakable, and long-lasting pleasures, lasting as long as eternity is long,
for ever: but I say their sorrows last no longer but durante vita) and
disposed to her as a Legacy by her EVERLASTING FATHER, and she is content.
Content! A poor and beggarly expression; she rejoices in her portion: for all
that, which went before comes in at last with advantage, adding very much to
the weight of her crown: so she blesses God for all, but for nothing so much
as for death, for it makes the world nothing to her while she lives, and when
she dies, sets her clear of all, that we call Evil; makes her complete
throughout, FITTED and (...). Col. 1. 11.
Meet for after -Glory. Death in some sort is like the Whale, which swallowed
Jonah, a terrible thing; but it wastes the man to Land, sets him clear
from all winds and storms.

But Death is Part of the Churches Dowry; her lot To be made the portion of
foxes; To be persecuted in this world: she has so much of Heaven in her,
that she must fare the worse in the world, which knows none, favors none
heartily but its own; Without controversy, persecution is the note of a True
Church, There is God or something of God, some plain character of His Image,
against whom the Assemblies of violent men, The Nimrods, The Esaus, The Neroes
of the world do bend themselves.

But can this People endure all this hardship? are they able to

Yes, no doubt of that, for God has fitted them for shocks, and Esaias 1. 5, 7.
Jer. 1. 18.
can the Adversary do now? The blast of the terrible ones, what can it avail?
It is answered; As much as a storm against a brazin Esaias 25. 4.
wall: so the SPIRIT scorns what flesh can do against Him. Greater is He That
is in you, Then he that is in the world. 1 John 4. 4.
These people are resolved upon that, and they have overcome the world; should
then such men as they fear, when they hear the Defaming of many, (which they
look to hear) and crying out violence and spoil? Should such men as these
fear? Jer. 20. 8, 10.
No, They cannot be afraid with any amazement, for I am with them says The
Jer. 1. 19.
LORD, they are assured of that. What then? Then what They will follows, for
They will ask nothing, but according to His will. If they have written down
that, as one says, then they may write what they will, for GOD is with them,
then all is with them, That can make for their provision and protection; They
shall dwell on high, their place of Defense shall be the munitions of Rocks;
BREAD shall be given them; their WATERS shall be sure Esaias 33. 16 Ac si
dice^et p^ris and integ^is Dei culto^ibus nihil defuturum panis ^nim and a quae
nomine significat omnia, etc. Call. Jer. 20. 11.
God is with them, Then All That is in God, His Goodness, wisdom, Power, All
shall be laid out for them, to make all that is needful for them, sure unto
them. And then touching their Adversary, though he be a Legion, this
follows; he shall fight against them, but he shall not prevail against
them: The LORD IS WITH ME as a MIGHTY TERRIBLE ONE, therefore my persecuters
shall stumble and be greatly ashamed; his everlasting confusion shall never be
forgotten. Nay, the adversary shall be so far from hurting them, that he
shall do them good, and they shall hurt him; for now that God is with them,
they have Arms of steel, and feet of brass, and they shall thresh the
mountains like straw, and the hills like Chafe, and come upon Princes as
Esai. 41. 15. 25.
upon mortar.

2. Are the Righteous people assured of all this?

Yes, for the Lord has said it, as we have read, He has given His word for
their security, they take it, are secure, fixed and Rest thereon. As their
expectation from the world never deceived them since the world was, and they
were in the world; So, nor shall their expectation from God fail them, they
have an assured confidence of That. Shall the expectation of the Righteous
fail? No, the Lord forbid, nay the Lord forgive u^ to them any such misgiving
thoughts within them. The hope of the Righteous shall be gladness: but the
expectation of the wicked shall perish. 2 Pro. 6^. 10. 18.
Can the Righteous fear this, That their hope shall fa^le them? No; It cannot
be, for they have set their hope in God. The hope of the wicked shall be cut
off: they shall be afraid and ashamed o^ (the word) their expectation; and of
(the Content^^ents there) their Glory, Esai. 20. 5.
And now, LORD, what Psalm. 39. 7.
wait I for? says DAVID. As if the servant of The LORD had said; do I wait,
do I expect, do I look for Peace, Comfort, establishment and satisfaction
from the world? do I seek great things for my self therein? Thou know,
LORD, what I wait for, none of all this from the world; But, as it follows, my
hope is in Thee. What an unreasonable thing were it, how unworthy of GOD, The
God not of some but of all consolations, how unworthy a thought of Him, To
think, That a poor creature, who has set his hope in GOD, expects all from
Him, from The world nothing at all; how unworthy a thought, That This GOD will
deceive this poor creature, that waits for Him; though He hides His face,
yet looks for Him: He frowns upon him, answers him Roughly, yet this soul
expects from Him; notwithstanding what is said or done, the poor soul will
not return to vanity, he will not look to the world, he will wait, he has
set his hope in GOD, he will look for Him; Will the LORD deceive this Man,
that expects all from Him, has set his hope upon Him? It is sure enough, He
will not; The needy shall not be always forgotten; the hopes of the afflicted
shall not perish for ever: Psalm. 9. 18.
The poor and needy man's expectation (set upon God) is not delayed, but
deferred, and strained. Why? To open the mouth and heart wider, that the more
comfort may come in at last; and that their heart and JOY there may be Joh. 16.
24. Psalm. 40. 1. Esaias 8. 17.
FULL. They have waited patiently for The LORD, they waited upon Him. They,
When He hid His face, then they looked for Him: They waited the time, when He
would be gracious. Now hearken, Therefore will The LORD wait that He may be
gracious unto you: and therefore He will be exalted, That he may have mercy
upon you: for The Lord is a God of judgment, Blessed Esaias 30. 18.
are all they that wait for Him.

Ai, but hope deferred makes the heart sick. That is true, but Pro. 13. 12.
there is a time coming, when the heart shall recover, be made every whit
whole, and perfectly well again: and it shall be the more hail and comforted,
the sicker it was: for When the desire comes it is a tree of life. Therefore
though The Lord tarry, the soul will patiently wait for Him, because He will
surely Hab. 2. 3.
come, and will not tarry. And when He, That was so long expected,
waited-looked-for, when He comes (and then He comes, and Tarries not, when
the Churches season is come) then He makes amends for His long tarrying (as the
world thought, and sometimes the Church also, and in her haste counted it
slacknesse) He tarryed so long, that He might come in season, that His peoples
joy might be brim-full: when their hearts, wearyed with long waiting, shall the
more rejoice, and their withered bones Esaias 66. 14
shall flourish like an herb: For it shall be said in that day, (after their
long waltings) Lo This is our GOD, we have waited for Him; This is The LORD,
we have waited for Esaias 25. 9.
Him: and we are glad He is come; with all our hearts do we rejoice in His
salvation, for it is His, a marvailous, great, exceeding salvation, the
greater, the longer it stayed: And now these waiting people shall renew their
strength, they shall mount up with Esaias 40. 31.
wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not
faint.

We are concluded now upon these Points,

1. That the righteous man's expectation from the world will not deceive him;
what the world and the god therein can do against him, shall be done, he
expects it, therefore they shall not be able to do him hurt.

2. His expectation from God cannot deceive him; for GOD is faithful: They
that wait for Him, (do expect all from Him, and from the world nothing but
affliction thence) shall not repent of their waiting, for GOD will come in
season, and not tarry, when they shall be most glad of His coming, and say, It
is best of all that He came not sooner: for now their hearts are brim-full of
joy: So they have concluded: In assured confidence hereof, these people are not
afraid now with any amazement: As their hope is in GOD, so is their heart and
love set upon Him also. This follows,

CHAP. II.
The Righteous love God: That Love casts forth Fear: Sad objections cleared
to the hearts of the righteous: God comes-in to succor and rescue those, whom
He loves, not always when they call, but always in season, and fittest time:
Seldom to their will, but ever to their weal, when they shall see least in
themselves, and most in God: The persons, whom God loves, shall be afflicted,
but for their good.

THe Righteous love GOD: And Love to the soul is like the Rudder to the Ship,
it turns about all the powers and faculties of the soul, and all to God; It
lades and unlades all the goods there, all for GODS glory; it receives all in,
and gives all forth for that same great end: so Love does. I have said all,
when I have said, The Righteous love GOD. It forms every work they do; and
nothing forms a man or his work so dexterously as Love does, Love to God, Love
to His Truth, Love to His People, Love to their peace; This inflames men's
minds, works them suddenly to great perfection, facilitates the work, makes it
slide on. Nay farther, as one observes truly, That all other Affections, though
they raise the mind, yet they do it by distorting, and uncomelinesse of
ecstasies, or excesses; but only Love does exalt the mind, and nevert^elesse,
at the same instant, does settle and compose it: So in all other excellencies,
though they advance Nature, yet they are subject to excess: only Charity
admits no excess. The righteous love God. I have said all.

Why, but all will say as much: No man in the world, but will I love GOD: he
dares not, nay he is ashamed to say otherwise.

True, I will reply shortly to this, and once for all, for all will fear too,
and their trust also, etc.

As the Kingdom of God, so the love of God is not in word, but in power: GOD
does know (that is, approves) not the speech of them, that say 1 Cor. 4. 19, 20.
so, but the power of them, that do so: That love The Lord, not in word, but
in deed. We have all, I verily believe it, a kind of faint, weak, waterish
love, which indeed the Scripture calls an hatred, when the creature has the
strength, and as I may say, the firstborn of our love: and God the
afterbirth, which is of no account with Him, but counted as aforesaid. The
righteous people love God; They see an excellency in God, a transeendent
goodness. As it was said of Peter and John, when they saw their boldness,
They took knowledge of them that they had Acts 4. 13.
been with Jesus: So, do we observe the Saints love to Christ! We must take
knowledge, That the City of God do know The Lord Christ, they have and do see
His Goodness; They are with Him by their graces of love, and faith; they
converse with Him day and night. Therefore they so love God, even as they
glorify Him, As Romans 1. 21. Exodus 15. 11. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
GOD, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders: The only
Potentate, The King of Kings and Lord of Lords. They Love GOD as they are
thankful to Him, as To GOD, in Whom they live, move, and have their Being: in
Whose hands is their Time, their Breath, and all their ways: from Whom they
have all things richly to enjoy, to whom He communicates Himself: so they
glorify Him, so they are thankful, and so they love HIM with an exceeding
love, a love that commands in chief; the great Centurion, it commands all
within and without, to speak, to do, to strive for God, for so they love HIM
with a predominate love, which carries the soul on high. And where this love
of God rules, there peace rules, be the earth never so unquiet. Get we this
love rooted in our hearts; it is the fittest of any thing to expel fear, to
keep down the workings of it, for it maintains and guards Reason, and raises
the soul above the world, so as it can bid defiance to death, and then to
unreasonable men, and devils too. If I bear a true love to God, stronger then
death, if so, then I can bear any thing; I can go through fire, and water,
all along before the face and nose of the adversaries, (if I am called to do
it) and fear nothing. The love of GOD constraines me, yea commands me, and, as
the peace of Phil. 4. 7. (...).
God, keeps and safeguards me also; It keeps my heart and mind, my soul and my
spirit, through Christ Jesus: It keeps my understanding, that there be no
defilement there through the errors of wicked men. It keeps my will, that there
be no perverseness there, not subdued and brought under: It keeps my
affections, that they be clean and holy; that my hatred be to all iniquity,
and my love to righteousness, for I love God, how then should I think or do
thus and thus, and so sin against him? The love of God keeps me in perfect
peace, so far as that love is perfect in me. If a man can resolve himself (by
the Spirit) That God loves him, That he is in Christ reconciled unto Him, This
is enough To dissolve the thickest cloud of fear, overcasting the soul;
enough to take off the edge, and blunt that eager and keen passion, which so
cuts, and lanceth the spirits: for then, he can say also, He loves GOD with a
CHILD-like love, as a child loves the father; so as he can repose himself in
his fathers lap or bosom, in assured confidence He cares for him; and then he
can be as bold as Paul was, and as well persuaded, That neither death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, Romans 8. 38, 39.
etc.

The work then of a Christian is to clear this point; for when that is done,
all is done; he lives as a man in the upper Region of the world, riding upon
the high places of the earth, above the winds Esav 58. 14.
and storms, which infest and trouble us here below. I remember I have read of
one, who being upon a tempestuous sea, and his ship almost covered with waves,
and the passengers there almost dead with fear, was, not withstanding, very
cheerful and comfortable, calm and quiet in his mind, rather inclined to sing
then to mourn: Being asked the reason of his settlement, and so quiet repose
of spirit, answered thus: My Father is the Pilot of the ship; He is at the
stern, holds the helm: He loves me, I love Him, The winds and storms
fulfilling his word, Psalm. 148. 8
He bids them rise, and they are up, and so blustering: then (He chideth) He
rebukes them, then they fall and are still. I know and am well persuaded, Mat.
8. 26.
whether storms or calmes, I shall get to my Heaven, and in passage thither
nothing shall do me hurt, every thing shall do me good from His hand that
loves (...), etc. Chrysostom. Facile impetratur semper quod filius postulat.
Ter^ul. de po^n. c. 11.
me. And this makes me fearlesse, this calmes me within, what unquiet motions
soever are without. Oh of what mighty concernment is this, in these times! when
the commandment is gone forth to restore and to build Ierusalems wall,
(evermore TROUBLOUS TIMES) Dan. 9. 25.
That every man should labor to clear his spirit (by the Spirit) at this
great point, The love of GOD toward him, his love to GOD; for this makes fair
weather within, however tempestuous it is abroad. Here comes in an Objection, I
will resolve it at the first, and once for all.

A man may love GOD, and fear Him too, (which follows love, and faith too,
and yet have a great deal of fear; he may love, and fear God above many, and
yet fear the creature more then is meet.

1. Jacob, a very good man, he loved God with all his heart, yet Jacob was
GREATLY Genesis 32. 7.
afraid. [GREATLY,] Mark that.

2. David, a man after Gods own heart, yet hear him what he says,
Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and terror has overwhelmed me.
Psalm. 52. 5.


3. Iehoshaphat, a very good King, yet he feared. 2 Chr. 20. 3.


4. The Disciples, choice men all, such as loved their Master with all their
heart, and with their whole soul, yet fearful. Mat. 8. 26.


Before the Answer, note this: A man may love God much, and yet fear much hurt
from the creature. And a man may have no love to God, and yet no fear of the
creature: so stupefied his spirit may be. Now I answer, indeed the Context
answers it for me.

Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed; how then? his fear Genesis 32. 7, 8, 9,
etc.
all his upon GOD, wraps up his soul, and all his concernments in a promise,
and there is an end of the matter, and enough for Jacob.

2. David's case was extraordinary, a thick cloud was over his spirit, and the
face of God was clouded toward him too. He (...) exe^^et Deus, ^^^la est tenta
s^^t^tudo quae (...) ^^bescat. Cal^. in Psalm. 55.
had troubles within, and storms without; whether Saul pursued him, or his own
son, it is not resolved, but he was in the straits, and God was not so present
to sense, and then we must give the stoutest heart leave to quail, says
Master Calvin. The Conclusion is sure and certain; Clear your evidence, That
God loves you, and you shall clear your spirits of these thick fogs which
fear raises. Nay, if you cannot clear your evidence, but God will keep you
humble all your days, in a hanging, and doubtful estate, yet cast your self
upon Him; though He kill, yet trust in Him. But more of this a little after.

3. Iehoshaphat feared also, for he heard that which would quicken any man
that had life in him: There comes a great multitude against thee. 2 Chronicles.
2^. ^.
Then he FEARED. ver. 3.
But take the following words, And set himself to seek the Lord, etc. His
Fear put him upon Duty. Then be remembered God, in Whose hand is power and
might, Art not Thou God in heaven? ver. 6.
Then he pleads his interest in his God, Art not Thou OUR GOD? ver. 7.
Then he calls to mind the right hand of the Almighty, what He had done of old.
O blessed be God for that fear, (as was said before) you cannot have too much
of that fear, which renders you much in seeking, which makes you love much,
fear much, obey much.

4. The Disciples were fearful, but they were prayerfull; They would not let
GOD alone; they would give Him no rest. GOD seems to be (for he speaks to
our capacity) as Jonah, asleep, when the Ship of the Church is covered with
waves. Nay The Lord Christ was, at that time, as clothed with our flesh, so
subject to our infirmities, and was asleep: And then the Disciples are
fearful, All will be cast away, Christ and all. Indeed they that fear the
Church will be drowned, do fear that Christ will be drowned too: for if the
Body drown, the Head must drown; and if the Head drown not, the Body cannot
drown: it may be overwhelmed with great waters of affliction. While the Head is
above, the Body is safe enough. But such was the Disciples infirmity at this
time, and such was our Lords infirmity at that time, that then He was asleep.
What then? They awoke God with their prayers, as we know the manner is. A
blessed fear then (as was said) which makes a man a wake Christ by his
importunity; which puts a man upon duty, makes him more prayerfull, makes him
love more, and cling to his Father the faster, so Jacob, so David, so
Iehoshaphat, so the Disciples feared, so as they did their Duty the better.

But much may be said touching this love of GOD: It is not Cure of fear, not
such a buckler to a person; we see here how the forementioned were terrified,
yet they loved GOD. Look I pray you and it is a sad sight, Thou art become
cruel to me, with Thy strong hand Thou opposest Thy self against me. Thou
liftest me up to the wind, Thou causest me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my
substance. Job 30. 21, 22.
I will defer the Answer to this till anon. The Objection now runs thus: Not
how the Lord has dealt with particular persons, whom He loves dearly: nor what
those persons have said, when they walked in darkness, and saw no light, [We
must take it for granted, That there are sad expressions breaking forth of the
lips, when there are grievous apprehensions within the soule] But How he has
dealt with a whole Nation, and that the dearly beloved of Hi^ soul; He has
delivered such a Nation into His enemies hands: Jer. 12. 7.
So that they who hated them, have Lorded it over them, have dealt hatefully
and despitefully with them. Ezekiel. 23. 28, 29.


This cannot be denied, and since His Judgments are manifest, and the Reasons
of them also are written and made legible for Lord to proceed in wrath against
His dearly beloved, and to cast them out of their own Land, and into the hands
of them, from whom their mind was alienated first.

1. When GODS People do not walk As His People; when He takes them near unto
Himself, and they walk loose with him; not as a separated and peculiar people
to Him, whom He has separated, and bestowed upon them special and peculiar
mercies. When His people walk so contrary to Him, and their own Protestation,
Then His manner is to walk contrary to them. He may go out of that path when
He lists, and exempt a Nation from the general rule: But this is His manner;
He may d^al^ with us according to His Prerogative Royal, which is ever in
showing mercy: He may do so, but it is extraordinary, as we have cause to
observe above all the Nations in the world.

2. When His People do not do according to the CHARGE, Deuteronomy. 25 19
utterly to root out the name of Amalek, that old and ancient enemy to His
Church, and the very same to this day: when this charge is neglected or
slighted, and the contrary is done; Amalek is countenanced, encouraged,
fostered, suffered to get head; Then it shall come to pass, That these
Adversaries and enemies shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your
sides, and shall v^xe you in the Land wherein you dwell, Number 3^. 35.
says the Lord. They shall be snares and traps unto you, until ye perish from
off the good Land, which The Lord your God has given you. Jo^. 23. ^^
It is the good word of The Lord, which is the same for ever.

3. When the Rulers, the Princes and Judges of the earth are like the evening
wolves, ravening the prey: (...) 22.
What then? Then, for their sakes, Zion must be plowed as a field. Mich 3. 11
Z^ph. 3. 3. ^zech. 22.
When the Priests violate the Law, profane the holy things, devour souls,
hide their eyes from the Sabbath, put no difference between the holy and
profane: What then? Then peace is taken from the earth: When the Sabbaths are
gone, when the people Mic. 5. 12, 13.
oppress, exercise tyranny, and vex the poor and needy: When the Priests
are become brutish, the people no better: when they that are good, and have
power, sit still, and contend not against the stream: Then we read this, All
ye beasts of the field, come to Esaias 56. 9.
devour, yea all the beasts of the forest. Jer. 12. 9.
His Watchmen are blind, and the Pastors are become brutish: Jer. 10. 2^.
what then? Then all their flocks shall be scattered. Behold the noise of the
bruit is come, and a great commotion to make Cities desolate, and a den of
dragons.

In these cases, The Lord is provoked very much, even til there be no remedy. 2
Chr. 36. 16. Jer. 12. 7.
And then He forsakes His house, leaves His heritage, gives up the dearly
beloved of His soul into the hands of her enemies, lets in judgments like a
flood, and it carries down all, good and bad, with the impetuousnesse of its
stream. What, good and bad together? Will the LORD destroy the righteous with
the wicked? Yes, No man knows either love, or hatred by all that is before
the eye. Eccles. 9. 1.
All things come ali^e to all; The same Common destruction takes away all
together, makes no difference: And there is a great reason for that, which we
must take in, in passage, for,

The Righteous did comply too much with the time, went along with the stream,
sided with the strongest in sight, or looked on heareing Blasphemies, beholding
iniquity and wrong, In the mean time, said and did nothing; Jure istam ^^^am
quando di^ initus affliguntu^, cum eis ^maram s^ntiunt, cupus amando dul^edi^em
peccan^ib^^ eis amari esse nolue unt. Aug. d^ civ. l. 1. c. 9.
stood not up in the gap; And therefore now he is thrust down also, hurried
along with the T^rrent and breaking in of mighty Waters: he is overwhelmed in
the blood, even these good Men for the reason aforesaid: No difference at all
in the suffering, for the manner and time thereof; but in the fruit, issue and
end, an infinite distance, and inequality. Where we note, That this difference
between the good and bad, in a Common Calamity, is not visible, not discernable
by the Eye, and yet a great, wide, and an ever-lasting difference; the good are
delivered in it; The bad utterly destroyed by it; The good Manet dissimil^tud^
passo^um etiam in ^^^il^tudine ^assionum, and licet in eodem tormento non est
idem ^^tus and vitium. Nam sicut sub uno igne aurum ru^^lat, pal^^ fumat, etc.
Aug. de ci. l. 1. c. 8. Am^s 9. 9.
pur^^ed; The bad consumed. Good and bad are in the same calamity, But as the
Gold and Chafe are in the same fire, The one shines there, the other smokes,
As the stubble, and the wheatcorne are under the same flaile, the one is
bruised there, the other cleansed; freed of its Chafe, and fitted for the
s^ive, not a Corn shall be lost. So also one and the same violence carries
away all the good and the bad all together; destroys, wastes the one with an
utter destruction: ^ut tries, purges, purifieth the good.

It is good to note this with all observation; for here we have a Clear
difference betwixt the good and the bad, betwixt the persecuted now, and the
persecutors afterward, The good may fall, but they shall be helped with a
little help: And their faling by the sword and by spoil many days, shall be
to them as of old it was, To try them, and to purge and make them white. Dan.
11. 33
But for the wicked it is not so with them, but as we heard. It is a
comfortable speech; Rejoice Micah 7. 8.
not against me O mine enemy: When I fall I shall arise; But when thou fallest,
Thou shall fall; Thy casting down shall be like the fall of a millstone Rev.
18. 21
into great waters, Thou shall rise no more: When I fall, I shall arise; This
is the heritage of them that love The Lord: when their Adversary falls he
shall rise no more, This is the portion of his measures for ever.

The conclusion is, It shall be well with them that love The Lord. Nay it is
well with them now, though not to sense, yet to faith. The case of David was
not ordinary; Jobs case extraordinary: That which follows will give some light
and some satisfaction to both.

It is a most prevailing argument, which the sister used in behalf of her
brother Lazarus; LORD, behold he whom Thou love John 11. 3.
is sick. This will prevail sure; It is the mightiest argument in the world,
LORD, The Person, whom Thou love; The Cause, the Faith, the Truth, the
Religion, WHICH THOU LOVE is now in jeopardie; The Malignants oppose it,
oppress it, they would thrust it out of the world, and the professors of it;
That which THOU LOVE, these sons of the earth do hate; Those whom Thou
love, these men would cut off from being a Nation. Certainly GOD will come in
for rescue now, and work a glorious Deliverance. And yet perhaps not at the
just and set time of our overhasty expectation: Before Deliverance comes, this
person, whom Christ loves, may be surprised with fearfulness; trembling may
come upon him, and horror may over-whelme him, that it may. The Cause, the
Truth, which GOD loves, may seem to be delivered up into the enemies hands, so
as they may lay the Glory of it (for a time, and in the eye of man) in the
dust. Let us consult with the context once more, and with good consideration.
There we read; Lord, he whom Thou love, is sick; when Jesus heard that He
abode two days still in the place where He was. John 11. 3.
That is a strange matter; we should think, and so the sisters thought too,
That when Jesus heard, That The man, whom He loved was sick, He would have made
haste away, and come with all speed to His sick friend; But it was not so,
when He heard THAT, He abode two days still in the same place. ver. ^.
Was this His kindness to His friend? Jesus loved Martha and her sister and
Lazarus: But His abode two days longer, and when He heard that Lazarus was
sick, made no clear proof of it unto them at that time. Jesus came indeed,
but when Martha, and Mary, and the Jews also thought it was too late, when the
breath was departed, the body laid in a cave, and a stone ver 38.
laid upon it four days before Jesus came. Then, and then when the case was
so helpless, and hopeless, then Jesus came. Truly, that is His manner now,
but see mighty reason for His so long tarrying then. Had He come quickly, as
soon as He was sent unto, and called for, possible it was, That He, who opened
the eyes of the blind, might have caused even this man Lazarus should not have
dyed: ver. 37.
so some there reasoned at that time, and so we have reasoned (in such cases)
ever since. The Persons, or the Cause, which Jesus loves, have been in
jeopardy; to the eyes of man, in an helpless and hopeless condition; If God
had come in to his servants and their cause so soon as they called for Him,
then their hopes had flourished, but staying till the case is desperate to
sense and reason, their hope is perished. Surely, so the servants of God have
reasoned many a time. But let the servants of The Lord well observe The Lords
coming in to these two sisters, at that time, and they can never distrust The
Lord at any time. Had their Lord come in unto them, when they called for Him,
He might have caused that even Lazarus should not have dyed. But then what
singular thing had He done? A Physician, an ordinary man, had done many a time
as much as that before Him. But when as He abode two days longer in the same
place, where He was, when He heard of Lazarus sickness; and stayed yet two
days longer by the way (of set purpose to let the last enemy alone to complete
its conquest, to close the pits mouth upon Lazarus, and to role a stone over
him) and now coming in for rescue, and taking the prey out of the hands of the
terrible one; This made Christ admired in all, that did believe: for now, they
must needs see, The Glory of GOD, whereas, had Jesus came at their call,
before Death had made its conquest, they had seen no more but the mere
exercise of power, and skill, which might be put forth by a mere man. Jesus
said plainly (without a figure, for he called death a John 14. ^.
sleep before) Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your sakes. Why glad that
His friend Lazarus was dead? and glad for their sakes? They were all very sorry
that Lazarus was dead; and it grieved them to the heart, that Jesus came not
sooner, for if Jesus had been there, their Brother had not dyed, said the
sister: Then why was Jesus glad that he was not there? Because, that they
presently beholding His glorious work in raising a putrified carkesse, they
would then believe, and rejoice with an exceeding joy, If any thing (...) to
the advantage of His people (...) (^peaking to our capacity) is glad, and there
is joy in Heaven even new.
which they had not done, had Jesus been there before, and caused that Lazarus
had not dies. We may conclude now; That the lord ^ill come in for the safeguard
and rescue of His people, whom He loves, of His Cause, which He so favors,
in season, the fittest time, when His beloved people shall most admire His
coming, beholding the exceeding glory thereof. When is this time? Then, when
the Righteous man's hopes are dead to the world, sense and reason* and when the
malignants hopes flourish, Then The Lord comes in, That is His Time, when the
wicked think they have their hope in their hands, and when the Righteous are
emptied of all creature-confidence, they set no hope there, but all in God:
Then The Lord comes in, when they are to sense, as dead bones, then they shall
flourish like an herb, for then the hand of the Lord shall be known toward
His say 66. 4.
servants, when they are Orphans, poor, peeled, helpless, comfortless
people, then the Lord comes with His comforts, and how does he comfort? As one
whom His mother comfort. Then they shall be comforted indeed, For as a
mother comfort her ver. 13.
child, so will I comfort you, and you shall be comforted: From these premises
the conclusion is worth the repeating, and recalling again and again. The Lord
comes in ever to His beloved people most seasonably, in the fittest and best
time, when they can see the most of God that can be seen, and the least of the
creature. He will come in them, when His people shall say, if He had come
sooner, it had not been so well, we had not loved Him so much, admired Him so
much, we had not seen so much of His Glory, we had not so rejoiced in His
salvation. So they love God, and so they are beloved of Him, therefore they are
not afraid, at no time greatly troubled. If there be a cloud of fear, there is
an eclipse of Gods Love, only we must remember we make an allowance to the
best man, when we weigh him upon the balance, for he is supposed ever in a
Christian. Homo supponitur in Christiano.


Before we close, let us note this from the premises, That The Lords manner
is, To exercise the persons whom He loves, with the sorest afflictions; Jesus
loved Martha and her John. 11. 3.
sister and Lazarus: therefore He would try their patience; He would not come
to them at their call, till the case was desperate; till, that they feared, had
taken hold of them, and overwhelmed them; whom the Lord loves He chasteneth,
and scourges every Heb. 12. 6.
^on whom He receives. It is the manner of Parents so to do, not scourage
strange children, but him, whom they love they will scourge. The Lord has
delivered up The dearly beloved of His Soul; whither? As we have read, Into
the enemies hands. It was ever so, it is so at this Day; he, whom GOD loves,
is spoiled, robbed, pillaged; the enemies bend all their malice against him,
whom GOD loves; And God suffers them so to do, for excellent ends spoken of
before, for these here To hide pride from their eyes by hiding the creature
from them, To try their patience; To raise up their hope after an enduring
substance; To try them, I said, and to pu^ge them to make them white even Dan.
11. 35.
to the time of the end. To make them Meet for the inheritance of the Saints in
light. Colos. 1. 12.
It is notable, The Lord uses these vile wretches, as scullions, To purge and
whiten His vessels, oppointed for honor. Indeed the rod of the wicked may be
so heavy upon the back of The Righteous, and may raise within them such a thick
cloud, that he can hardly discern a Fatherly love and Hand through it (for
there are strange apprehensions and tremblings within the heart, when there is
a cup of trembling in the hand:) But it will be fair weather anon; The thick
cloud shall be dissolved, and The FATHERS love will shine forth the clearer,
the thicker the cloud has been, The FATHERS love overrules the Adversary,
binds him, measures out the effects of their fury and malice, orders all as
He did that long captivity, FOR THY Jer. 24. 5.
GOOD, whom He loves; That is the comfort and the conclusion of this point,
for their Good, whom He loves, And who make Him their fear.

CHAP. III.
The Righteous fear God, as God; they that do so, cannot fear the creature.

THe Righteous fear GOD; what then? I have said all. They fear GOD, then they
fear neither men, nor Devils. If we observe, we meet with this expression
often, I FEARED. what? The Creature, what he could do against me; I was
afraid of a Man, and then he deserted his Duty, ran away from GOD and from
himself. We read again, I know not how often, I fear GOD; And then he
fears nothing, he goes on, as bold as a lion, the enemy is behind him, a
mountain of straits on each hand, a sea of troubles before him, yet he goes on
with the more courage: he sets GOD before his eyes, Whom he serves, Whom he
fears, His Cause, His Glory, and goes on, breaks through the straits, as you
will do through a spiders web. He fears God, of whom should he be afraid? He
fears God, he keeps himself from every evil work, though he might commit it
in secret, Levit. 19. 14
no eye upon him, His Lords eye, Which runs through the world, 2 Chronicles. 26. 9.
That is upon him, That awes him, even to the observing his thoughts, and
bringing them into subjection, and them most of all. So he fears GOD, And the
Armies of men, or Devils, not so much as the wicked have feared an Army of
flies. Let Esai. 33. 14.
sinners in ZION, who seem to maintain the established Religion with their
mouth, and persecute it with their hand, let them be afraid, fearfulness must
surprise the Hypocrites, those that profess one thing, and do another: But
this man fears God, that is, He walks righteously, speaks uprightly,
despises the ver. 15.
gain of oppressions, shakes his hands from holding of bribes, stops his
ear from hearing of blood, (Oh how far is he from shedding of it) shuts his
eye from seeing evil. Read on. He shall dwell on high, his defense shall be
the munitions of rocks, bread shall be ver. 16.
given him, and his waters shall be sure. And he is sure of all this, for he
fears GOD, and all we read before is but the result of that fear. Why then,
Lions, and Bears, and Wolves, and Foxes, I mean (for so the Scripture does)
by these, bloody and treacherous men, these may be hungry and starved too, they
may fear famine. The righteous, who fear God, they fear it not; In famine,
Fides famem non metuit. Hieron.
that is, in every extremity, they shall be provided for, they shall have
enough, for they have God, and he is All. I will contract. Indeed, and in
truth, the fear of GOD (for it contains the whole Duty of man) is excellent.

Now I know what All will say; for I know their hearts and their language there
by my own. I and every man will say for himself, I fear GOD too, that I do:
he that fears not an oath, (that is too paticular) he that fears not to sin
before The Lord; nay, he, that does violence to the law, and sheds blood to his
power, the Man that neither fears God nor reverenceth man, will say, I fear
GOD too. It is as commonly said as any thing in the world, for every man says
it, as was said, and answered before. It is not considerable then what men say,
but what men do; not what they profess with the tongue, but what they act
with the hand. They profess, says Paul, that they fear GOD, (for they that
know GOD, fear Him) but in works they deny Him, being abominable, Titus 1. 16.
and disobedient, and unto every good work, reprobate. They walk clean
contrary to that man, that fears God, (we heard how he walks, and how he
speaks) and yet they fear GOD. It is but a bare profession so, with the
mouth only. But observe what their case will be when their Jer. 2. 24.
month comes, and they must cast-out their sorrows, they will be afraid; then
fear fullness will surprise them, and hear them what they Esai. 33. 14.
say; Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall
dwell with the everlasting burnings? And so much be spoken to my own heart,
and to theirs, who profess to fear GOD, yet walk so notoriously contrary to
what they do profess.

We also, who, not perhaps so notoriously wicked, yet are pretenders to this
HOLY AFFECTION, (professing we fear GOD, when indeed it is not so) we do not
fear Him in Power, which appears thus: When danger presents its self, where
are we then? Almost dead with fear, which could not be, if we feared GOD in
Power. When trouble shows it self, we shake at it as at some new and strange
thing, never looked for, nor feared till it come: And these shaking fits
declare, That we, whatsoever we say and pretend, do not fear GOD: fear will
not be concealed no more then folly can; when he that is afraid, Eccles. 10. 8.
walks by the way, his wisdom fails him, and he says to every one he is
afraid: And he can give a Reason for his fear, which is this, That hell is
let loose now, and Devils are broke-in amongst us, in the shape and likeness
of men. Grant it to be so, as so it is, yet the Righteous he that fears God
in Power) fears not, (that is) he is notvoid of fear, but he is above his
fear, he is as bold as a Lion, for he fears GOD; how? As God: That cal^es
and quieteth his spirit: we do not as the Righteous do, maintain the fear of
God; Set up God ruling as chief over all. Certain it is They that fear God
indeed as GOD do so: do set Him up in their hearts, and so ruling in the world.
They that fear the Creature, do set the Creature above God: they make God the
Vial, and Man the pourer forth of the wrath: whereas it is clean contrary.
And, Oh! the torment they feel within (if their hearts be not as Nabals was,
like a stone) when terrors is round about! They showed themselves gods against
GOD: and row they show themselves slaves toward men, whose bodies and
consciences are alike rotten. Who art thou that thou art afraid of a man? Esai.
51. 12.
Read and resolve that Question. He that forgets The LORD his Maker, makes
no more account of Him, then of a mere man, nor so much neither, though He
stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth: and makes a
mere man a God, heightens that low and diminutive thing (for, in Comparison,
he is a very small thing, very little more then nothing, not so big as a drop
of water, or the small dust of the Balance) Esaias. 40. 15.
that shall dye, and be made as grass; A goodly thing, if we observe it well,
to make our object, to set our fear upon. O wonderful Ignorance of our
selves, and of God! Ai, It is want of knowledge, therefore we set our fear
upon perishing things, and we perish with them. Truly upon due consideration,
who would not fear Thee O Lord? He has said ten times, fear not; Esai. 41.
10.
I am thy God: I am with thee, I will uphold thee, etc. I am God, and Thy God,
It is enough. He created the Smith Esai. 54. 1^.
that blows the coal. He is The Lord General of all the forces of Heaven,
Earth, and Sea; Master of the Armoryes: Jer. 50. 25.
There is not a Sword, not an instrument there, but it is for His Work, He
gives it forth, stamps His Commission upon it, Go so far, do this, and no more;
not an inch farther, not to the loss of a hair more; no marvel, The
Righteous are as bold as a Lion, they fear nothing, for they fear GOD: They
Sanctify the Lord of Esaias 8. 13.
H^^^s Himself. What then? Then He will be a Sanctuary, The Righteous know it,
they are assured of it, and it is enough to qui^tand calm the spirit, when the
Earth is moved, and the Nations are an^ry.

This will seem strange, which follows, THE RIGHTEOUS ARE NEVER SO SAFE AND
SECURE AS IN AN EARTHQUAKE. And yet, why should it seem strange? It is
demonstrated and made evident to sense and reason. In a shaking Time, when the
Kingdoms are moved; Nay in that time, which is not yet come, but hasting and
coming apace, when there will be a great earthquake, such as was not Revel.
16. 18.
(...) m^n were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great, The
Righteous then will cling the faster to The Arm of The Almighty, (there is
security you will say) And then, at such a time as that, The Arm of the
Almighty holds them the faster: We parents do so; If my child be in danger,
If my child shake, I will hold it fast, if I can, perhaps I cannot, It is not
f^r want of love, but for want of strength: GOD can hold them fast, for none
can take His children out of His Hands, There is no want in Him, neither of
Love nor Power, Therefore it follows, cleared to sense and reason both, That
when the Kingdom is moved, when it totters like a drunken man, nay, when that
Earthquake shallbe, then the Righteous shall stand most steadfast, secure, and
steady, even then when that Earthquake shall be, so mighty an Earthquake and
so great, never so secure as then, then they shall lift up the head, for then
they hold fast by Gods Arm, and they ^inde by good experience, that he holds
them fast.

I fear GOD, said Joseph Genesis 42. 28.
I am an Hebrew said Jonah Jonah. 1. 8.
and I fear The Lord God of Heaven, Who has made the Sea and the dry land.
This put in security for them both, That, though they might be overcome through
infirmities, yet willingly they would do no wrong. But that is not the point
we are now upon, This is it, which is clear from hence, That the true fear of
God secureth the servants of The Lord, against the wrong and injurious dealing
from man. Man (for his mercies are cruel) will do the faithful what wrong he
can, but he cannot hurt them, nor are they careful concerning that.

I remember a short Answer from a true servant of GOD to an over-hearing and
tyrannical Lord, Am not I your head and Commander? (...) The need has an
Head; All things shall be done (...) w^l have it, (...) thou n^^st ^^^mand as
God will have it. Ch^^s^st.
Yes said the faithful servant, but your headship has an Hea^ That is over
you and me both, I FEAR HIM. Cannot I thrust thee into prison? Yes, if God
will give you leave, and I FEAR HIM: And if He permits you so to do, yet His
Word is not bound, nor can His influence be restrained any more then can the
influence from the Sun. I fear GOD, said he: and this was all the answer
this domineering Lord could get from this good man: For he professed, That no
man's terror could make him afraid: The terror of The LORD, that could do it;
none could daunt his spirit, but He, Who could cast body and soul both into
hell. Him indeed he feared with all his heart, his CREATOR, therefore he could
not fear his creature. We have here our lesson, if we do thereafter, we may
read our comfort, Be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled, 1 Pe^.
3. 14.
but sanctify, etc. We have proceeded in our Cure thus far; Expectation of
evil from the world, and of good from a Good God, works a great Cure of Fear:
Love to Him, fear of Him, is very sovereign also. We proceed now to Trust in
God, and that is sovereign indeed: it establishes, it fortifies a man
mightily, it makes a man stand like Mount Sion, he cannot be moved, for he
stands better bottomed then are The everlasting hills or Hab. 3. 6.
perpetual mountains.

CHAP. IV.
The Righteous are faithful, they trust God: He never deceives them, that
trust in Him: They commit all to Him, secured in His faithfulness.

THe Righteous, they Trust GOD, and They know Whom they have trusted, To whom
they have committed their lives, liberties, and estates, their children, all
they have; and they know He is faithful and true, and now they are fearelesse,
now they hear of robbing, and spoiling, and pillaging; nay, though it come
home to their own houses, they can suffer the spoiling of their goods with joy:
They Trust God, He is their Guardian, they are not careful, they are, as was
said, fearelesse. Master Dearing has an excellent Speech, indeed he was an
excellent man; Commit your health, your sickness, your body, Let. 13.
your Soul, your life, and your death to the protection of Him, That dyed for
us, and is risen again: A sick body (let me say with reference to the present,
a person, an house marked out by the spoilers) with such an aid, has a greater
treasure then the Queens Iewell-house. It has indeed, a greater treasure then
has the Kings Iewell-house. That house may be emptied of the treasure there:
He may make an hole in all our Cisterns, and let-out all our comforts. All
succors from earth may fail, nay the heart, and that is the strongest Fort,
may fail, but God never fails. Trust in the Lord for ever. Why for ever?
There Esaias 26. 4.
is a mighty reason or ground for everlasting Trust, because in The LORD
JEHOVAH is EVERLASTING STRENGTH. Psalm. 23. 4.
I will fear no evil, says David. A very bold and confident speech. Fear no
evil! He might sit in darkness, walk in the shadow of death, the rod might be
sore upon his back, much evil might be toward him, and much might be upon
him, and yet fear no evil? No, for whatever befell him, it was The Lord,
from His hand, His rod, and wherever he sat, and wheresoever he walked, God
was with him, Thou art with me, Thy rod and Thy staff, they comfort me. WHAT
TIME I AM AFRAID, Psalm. 56. 3.
I WILL TRUST IN THEE. Ai, it was a point of great discretion, To trust in The
Lord. Truly in vain is salvation hoped ^er 3. 23.
for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains: Truly in The LORD our
GOD is the salvation of Israel. Then truly, says the Godly man, When I am
afraid, when I see all things out of course, I will trust IN The Lord; He will
do all things well, and all those contrarieties of wills, and workings, shall
work together for the good of all them that Trust in Him, (whereof anon.)
Therefore I will trust in The Lord for ever: I will commit life and livelihood
all to Him, A faithful Creator, and I know Him to be so. When I am afraid, I
will trust in Thee. So the godly man has made his conclusion, thereon he
rests his soul, and is confident, as bold as a Lion, for he does Trust in
The Lord. I will say of The LORD, HE IS MY ^^^l ^1. 2.
REFUGE, and my FORTRESS, MY GOD, in Him will I trust. Will he so? Is the good
man resolved upon it, That he will trust in GOD? Yes, that is plain in the
Text. Now mark, God will not deceive this Trust. Indeed an honest man will not,
he will not deceive me, if I trust in him; much less will GOD do it, a
faithful Creator. Now The Lord will deliver this man, how often? as often as
he falls into the straits. ^ob. 5. 1^.
In six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil come unto him: (That is)
Neither devils, nor men, neither their counsels, nor their strength, neither
sword, nor pestilence, nor devouring beasts, shall be able to do this man any
hurt. If the devouring pestilence, if the oppressing sword, if famine, if wild
beasts, Jer. 46. 16.
(those four sore judgments) come into the Land, (a noble Scholar calls
these plagues, the great winding sheets of the world) these shall do this man
no hurt. Observe what you read, The terrors by night shall not affray this
man, nor the arrow by day, nor the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor
the destruction Psalm 91.
that wastes at noon day.

True, you will say, none of all this shall hurt this man, for all this is more
immediately the Sword of the Lord 1 Chronicles. 21. 12.
the very Hand of God: ver. 13.
and The Lord will order it so, That His Sword shall not slay this man; His
Hand shall not hurt him. But this man must look that the sword of the enemies
will overtake him; he must look to fight with men after the manner of Beasts,
they will hurt him sure, for they are Adversaries, and for their might and
cruelty called Lions, and Adders, and Dragons, these will hurt this man sure
enough.

No, all these, with all their might and malice too, shall not hurt this man:
But he shall hurt them, he shall wound them in the head, which is the seat of
life; He shall tread upon the Lion Psalm 91. 1.
and the Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou TRAMPLE under foot.
And why shall this man be so delivered, and be so victorious? That is worth the
enquiring unto; it is answered; Because this man made The LORD his refuge, even
the most HIGH his habitation: Therefore shall no evil befall ver. 9.
him; because this man has set his LOVE, his Heart, his Delight, his Hope, his
Trust, he has set All upon GOD, Therefore God will deliver him: This man has
ex^l^ed GOD above all gods; He has set Him on high, he has known His Name,
(that is) he has trusted in Him; Therefore will The Lord set this man on
high; he shall ride upon the high places of the earth, over the heads of his
Adversaries, Because he has known My Name. O Blessed man, and in a blessed
condition! for he had covered himself with the Arms of the Almighty, and
under that shelter he does trust. What then? It follows; His Truth shall be Thy
Shield and Buckler. A weak and foolish Question will thrust in here, I will
quickly resolve it.

May we not trust in the creature? in means, they may be fair

No, Be these instruments or means never so excellent and Some trust in
charets (...) in horses. Psalm. 20. 7.
And what of them? how speed they? They are brought down and faden. ver. 8.
nay, there is a curse upon the^ that trust in man, and make flesh their Arm.
Jer. 17. 5.
And this cu^^e must neede^ ^vertake them, For their heart departs from the
LORD: Then ^o resolve the question, we may esteem honorably of the
instruments, but we must set GOD above them; We must set Him on high, as we
read before; we must praise GOD for them; we must not Idolize them: we must use
the means; we must not trust in them: we must give the instrument his due
praise, but all the glory to GOD. There is another Question more worthy the
resolving.

It is commonly said by every man, I do trust in GOD. But will thou know, O
man, whether thou do as thou say? Try thy self by this, and deal truly
with thy own soul. Where art thou when the LORD takes away the stay and the
staff, Esaias 3. 1.
the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water (that is) every thing,
that thy soul took delight in, being but flesh, where art thou then? upon the
ground, a dejected man, thy spirit is quite fallen; why then assure thy self,
thou did make flesh thy foot and thy arm too, thereon thou did trust, and
not on GOD: Flesh upheld thee, and not spirit: had thou trusted in GOD, He
had upheld thee now, never more firmly then when the stay and staff of the
creature is taken away: Then The Arm of the Lord upholds most gloriously, when
it sustaines alone, made bare of flesh. I know some sudden disaster, some
unexpected breach (yet nothing is sudden or unexpected to a faithful man) may
make his confidence quail, and his spirit fall: but if he fall flat, and there
lie with his face upon the ground, and upon serious considerations, cannot
raise himself and get up his spirit, then certain it is, The creature was his
stay and confidence. I mean thus, If when the stay and staff is taken away,
the heart faints away and dies. If the spirits be sunk then, they will not
up again, then certain it is, That stay and staff, be it the wedge of gold,
husband, wife, or child, that was the prop that stayed the heart up: but now
these bearers, these supporters are taken away, the person is down, his spirit
flat and sunk.

But thou may say, Thou wast never put to that strait yet; God never yet
took from thee the stay and staff. Say, Blessed be His Name. And yet do not
trust to this trust, do not be confident of this strength. It is not tried
yet as gold in the Furnace. That which holds thee up now, may not be sufficient
in the day of Trouble. Thou think now, That Thou do trust in God, and He
upholds thy Spirit, whereas perhaps the creature is thy stay and thy staff;
Examine the truth of this betimes, and take all advantage of experiences from
what GOD has done, and from promises what He will do, and all to make
improvement of this Trust in God. Till our strength be tried, till we have some
experience, we cannot tell how great the rebellion of the flesh will be under
Gods afflicting hand. It is an easy thing to be valiant before the combat, to
dream of a good courage before the heart be tried,: but indeed To be unshaken
in the mi^st of a tempest; and To stand upright, when the ground under us does
tremble, This is to know assuredly That we are strong indeed, That we have
boldness and can trust perfectly.

Surely never was there more cause then at this time, To set our hope in GOD,
To make good our confidence, To exercise this grace of says and trust, To
look back to what God has done, how wonderful He has wrought for those that
put their trust in Him: And so to gather experience, that is a great means to
support the heart, and to engage it to trust in God.

I remember a passage, which surely is worth the noting, this it is. David
comes hastily to Abimeleck, and after some greeting, 2 Samuel 21.
and some other passages betwixt them, demands of the Priest, Whether he could
help him to a sword? Yes, said the Priest, here is in my keeping The sword of
Goliath the Philistine, whom verse 9.
THOU SLEWEST: If thou will take that, take it, for here is no other. No other,
thought David, (for so he said) if thou had all the swords in the world, yet
there is none LIKE THAT, give it me. And why so? There were other Giants in the
world, and other swords as great as that, why none like that? The Text resolves
it, That was the sword where with David slew Goliath the Philistine. None like
that sword, That revived David's spirits (indeed they were fainting) with the
sense of experience of GODS faithfulness: He had wrought wonderfully for
David, a weakling, and yet He gave him strength to slay the Giant with his own
sword; none like that; a double weapon with a double edge, it had slain behind
him, it would slay before him: God had delivered him from such a death, and
there was the sword now in his hand, a memorial of such a deliverance, He
would put his Trust in GOD for after-time. This is the Point then we are
engaged upon, even To put our Trust in GOD: and, that we may do so, To Consider
well what God has done, and then To exercise our faith upon it, for the better
improvement of our Trust in Him.

Surely the very set time is now come, That so we should do, improve our Trust
in GOD, live by faith now, (that is) live upon God, with God, in God, to God;
to make up a life in Him alone. Therein is assurance, and strength, strong
confidence: Pr^. ^4. ^^.
And The LORD will reject all other confidences, ^^^ ^2. 3^.
so as man shall not be held up by them, nor prosper in them.

You will say, you must have FAITH first before you can

True, and before you have it, you shall know how you got it. admirable grace,
and wrought by the operation, (c) effectual Col^s 2. 12. (...).
working of God, (the great Work of God) but we must work too, use all
diligence, and all the means God has sanctified for the getting of the same;
use the means faithfully, and you shall get the Tr^asure, a Treasure indeed,
such as we heard. A man may live upon it, if he have nothing else. Cry after
this grace, life up thy voice for it, as for hid treasure, (it is the gift of
God) but so it must be sought for, or it will never be had; it is the
principal thing, with all thy getting, get faith.

You will say, There is need of Patience too. Yes, and that it has a perfect
work to calm, quiet, and silence the reasoning of our spirits. There is no
possessing of a man's soul without patience, specially now in such a perilous,
and exceeding (e) feirce time as this is, now the Devil is loose, and rages
amongst us; (...) Mat. 8. 28.
great need of Patience. Yet, I say, we stand in more need of faith, for there
is no grace like that at this time. Thou shall forgive Thy Brother seven and
seven times, says the LORD CHRIST. Luke 17. 4.
We would think this would follow now, LORD INCREASE OUR LOVE; let that have a
perfect work, that we may forgive an offender even so often; But the Apostles
said, Lord increase our faith: Yes, That is the mother grace, get that,
strengthen that, all is done. She is a mother in Israel, never alone, but
honorably accompanied still with her children, Patience, Meckenesse, Love,
Hope, Joy, all these. Would I then rest quietly in a stormy night, when the
winds blow, the rain and hail beat upon my house; would I be secure when
terror is round about; would I stand still, unmovable in an earthquake? Then
I must say when I close mine eyes, and when I awaken, Lord increase my faith.
You have need of faith; It is impossible to do or suffer any thing without it,
but, by it, All things are done and suffered, that we think impossible and
most terrible: but nothing is impossible to faith: Therefore we must cry after
this grace, and lift up Prove. 3. 22.
our prayer for it; it is life unto the soul, and grace to the neck: Thereby
we walk in our way safely, and at the end, we lie down, and are not afraid:
for faith makes The LORD our confidence, and therefore we will say evermore,
Lord increase our faith, it is the only necessary thing: For, Job 18. 14.


First, it purifieth the heart, it subdues iniquity, it overcomes the world,
nay it gives you victory over the King of terrors: I do not mean Death,
though that is a most terrible King, but Sin, which is the strength and sting
of death, which makes a man seek for death as for hid treasure, that he might
be rid of those thoughts of eternity, which is are the poison of vipers, and
gall of Asps. It sets an edge upon our fears and our sorrows. This evil, a
pure evil, Faith subdueth and mastereth through Christ, in the power of His
might, and so we are made more then Conquerours, by laying hold-fast on Him,
The Rock of our salvation.

Secondly, Faith bottomes the heart upon GOD, which was said before, and Faith
encourages the heart to duty (which follows) To live to God, To improve all we
have and are To His Glory; so assures the person, as He walks before Him here
now, so he shall live in Glory for ever with The Lord. Faith then is the
principal thing, that excellent, that admiring grace, get that, and we have
all things completely fitted both to do or to suffer as good soldiers of Jesus
Christ. I will shut up this with the words wherewith the righteous have
concluded their Psalm. 33. 21, 22
Psalm, and closed up their hearts against fear, Our heart shall rejoice in
Him: because we have trusted in His holy Name. Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon
us, according as we hope in thee.

CHAP. V.
The Righteous obey from the heart: True sound and sincere obedience is never
found but in keeping to Gods Work, and in His way: They meet with Lions and
Bears there, but they have a safeguard over them, and are not afraid: They are
sure they are in their way, and upon Duty, which must be done, and the work
prosper and increase with the increase of God: And all this in the fittest
time, when the Adversary shall be most confounded, and God most glorified.

THe Righteous obey from the Romans 6. 1^.
heart. An hearty obedience, that is obedience indeed, and it is ever found in
GODS way and Work. Such an obedience then, a walking in GODS way, an engaging
the heart to GODS work, is a sovereign means To quiet and calm the spirit,
when here is trouble on every side. For thus The righteous man reasons; Some
Lion, some Esau, some fierce Adversary, some great trouble or cross may meet
me in my way: Yes, but I am in GODS way, I am doing my duty, let GOD alone for
the rest; He will work for my comfort. As the valiant Roman said (I allude to
it) when it was told him, That the enemy would be upon his back quickly, ^go
autem Sacrifico.
Let him come, said he, I will keep to my service, I will do my duty for all
that. I would rather instance in Nehemiah; he saw and heard enough to have
daunted any man's spirit, that was not such a man as himself, That had not
another spirit, and could set his face like a flint: And yet he was not
careful, he was not afraid, should such a man as he fear, employed in GODS
work, and in His way? Should he fly? No not he. Let the adversary rage, and
roar, and send, and write, and flatter, and lie, and slander, and blaspheme,
(the adversaries did all this, and more) yet he would to his work, and abide
by it, for he was upon Templework, a sworn Man to do his Lord service; And
this Lord has sworn to protect that man. Truly it is so. Let a Lion, a
she-beare, or the devil meet such a person, cross him in the way, he need not
be careful nor afraid, being groundedly resolved of this, I am in Gods way,
upon His work. O let me be still found so doing. What? GODS work, and in His
way, a mighty comfort this. It is as a Cordial to the heart, when we suffer
from the hand there; That there and then we have done our duty, Gods work in
Gods way, so obeying from the heart. The Angels are a safeguard about us; They
bear us up: what would we have more for our security? The case is evident, it
is an exceeding comfort, a marvailous establishment to a man surrounded* with
terrors, That he is in GODS way, upon His work. It is a Sovereign Cordial
now in these perilous and exceeding feirce times; It stays and chears the
heart, and silenceth the reasoning of the Spirit. What? That I am in Gods way,
and upon His work; the heart may meditate terror now, when the Nations are
angry, and Esa. 33. 18.
the Kingdom totters like a drunken man. We will consider with all our hearts
the case that Nehemiah was in, and his courage, for it is very notable; his
case is the case of our Worthies, even of all that are able to stand in the gap
for the help of the Church: And this time runs parallel with that then, after
the very same Line: Therefore we will hear what Nehemiah says, and reason the
case about him. What says he? Should such a man as I flee? And Who is there,
that being as I am, would go into the Temple Neh. 6. 1^.
to save his life? A very bold speech; I pray you, since it is not too late,
and it may be of much use now, let us examine this man's confidence.

Why might not such a man as he flee? what manner of man was he? A faithful
man; one that feared God above many: There is the Answer for that. A faithful
man cannot be fearful; a man full of faith cannot be full of fear: BEING AS I
AM; In what a case was Nehemiah in then? In a very sad and perplexed case sure;
All the reason he had, if he had no more then we have, could not tell him,
which way to take; for he had heard no less then ten times, That from all
places the Adversary would be upon him: Nehe. 4. 12.
And when The Lord brought that counsel to naught, they fell upon another,
(The devils mint * Fabricator. Prove. 6. 14.
is still going, his servants are still hammering there) The Ad-Adversary sent
to Nehemiah no less then FOUR TIMES to procure a brotherly conference about
an an Accommodation forsooth (but they thought to do him Chap 6. 2. 3. 4.
mischief) And when Nehemiah returned the Adversary still the same Answer,
Four times together, I AM DOING A GREAT WORK WHICH MUST NOT CEASE, while I
come down to you to Parley about an Accommodation, (which was never in the
adversaries thoughts, for they THOUGHT to do him MISCHIEF:) Then the
Adversary sent his servant the fifth time, with an open ver. 5.
letter in his hand, and a loud lie, a Blasphemy rather, in his mouth, which
was as we find it written: (a) And all this to ver. 6, 7.
make the Builders afraid, and the work to cease; which prevailed so far with
Shemajah, (I will mention no more of the false brethren;) ver. 10
That he pent himself up (like a wise man, who was resolved to save one) in a
place, which had gates, Doors, and Bars (which the City had not at that
time:) and he persuaded Nehemiah so to do also (by a Spirit, as he said, of
Revelation) To slinke aside from the work, letting that cease till the brunt
of opposition were over, and in the mean time provide for his life, Let us
meet together in the house of GOD within the Temple, and let us shut the
doors of the Temple, for they will come to ver. 10.
slay thee. And Nehemiah said, No man, being as I am, would go into the Temple
to save his life, I will not go in. No truly, being as ver. 11
I am I will trust to an open place, that has neither Walls nor Bulwarks; I am
doing my duty; upon my Masters work; in His way, I am doing a great work,
which must not rest, It is not necessary that I must live (though I know my
times are (my life is) in my GODS hands, not at the dispose of the Adversary)
but the work must be done, that is necessary at this time: Being as I am upon
This work, and in This way, I will not go into the Temple to save my life,
not I. Should such a man as I flee? and being as I am? No, I Will do my Work,
my Duty, I will walk in the way boldly (wherein never man miscarried yet) and
for my poor life (well hazarded in such a work and such a way) and all my
concernements about it; all these I have committed into His hands, Who is as a
strong City; Salvation will Esaias 26. 1.
GOD appoint for walls and Bulwark.

There is an end of that dispute, That I am in Gods way, and upon His work,
answers all doubts, silenceth all gainsayers. A man may be reproached and
persecuted, etc. in this way, but he cannot be distressed there, nor forsaken.
The experience of all times, and of all the faithful in all times will give
clear evidence hereunto.

The practice of Luther runs parallel with this of Nehemiah; Hell gates opened
upon him, when he opened his mouth for God, and for His cause, and to promote
His Glory. It is notable to read how Luther encouraged Melanchthon against his
oppressing fears, and himself also in The LORD: The enemy lives said
Melanchthon and is strong: GOD lives for ever, answered Luther, and is
Almighty. We cannot bear up against the tide of such opposition, said
Melanchthon, an excellent man, but his spirit was fallen at that time quite:
Nor men, nor Devils can hinder now we are in Gods way, and upon His work, said
Luther; We carry GOD along with us, His cause is in our ship, though the storm
rises high, yet God is above; The floods of ungodliness shall not make us
afraid: That God is with us, (He is with us while we are with Him:) that it is
His cause we are engaged upon, answers all doubts, silenceth the reasoning of
a timorous spirit, and fortifies it mightily against all disputes and debates
from within the soul or from without.

The great question is now, will God restore Jerusalem? shall her breaches be
made up? shall her wall be raised even now? This is the question, and it is
much doubted, and the very best have careful thoughts about it. But surely
they do not well to be so careful, neither do they wisely inquire into the
matter. It is true; Jerusalems wall and her breaches there, should take up the
firstborn of our thoughts; but not the time when, nor the manner how these
breaches shall be stopped, and the walls set up. The times and seasons for the
accomplishing hereof, the means too, and the manner how, The Father has put
in His own power. The work goes on a pace; Blessed be His Name for all those
that have offered themselves willingly to this work; I say it, goes on with
the increase of God; and the times are TROUBLOUS, Dan. 9. 25.
which is a good sign too. But whether this be the SET time, when GOD will
perfect this work, it is not for us to enquire; Think we of doing our duty, and
upon our COST; It shall be done and perfected in GODS time, and that is the
best time: and for the Church, the very season of Time, and that we may resolve
upon. The LORD is wise in counsel and mighty in work; and there the Church
rests. He may not do all this, this year, or the next, or the third year; for
This work, Temple-work, the restoreing the Kingdom of Israel, goes on surely,
but slowly; mighty Adversaries set themselves against it, and decree against
it, and will hinder as long as God pleases, till His set time comes. Truly we
wonder He has done so much for a people at this time, who have done so much
against Him now and in all times: But Now sets a mark upon our frowardness,
and makes it exceeding sinful. And yet His patience is not wearied, though at
every difficulty, and cross way, we are at a stand. He works gloriously every
day, and reviveth still his servants hopes: And yet He may not make the earth
to bring forth in one day, nor a Nation to be ^sa^. 66. 8.
borne at once; and what are a few years in His account? not so much as a few
minutes in ours. The earth shall bring forth, even to our largest expectation,
That is certain; And the manchilde shall be borne perfect and complete, that's
out of doubt: perhaps not so soon as we would have it, we are too hasty. It
may seem to stick even at the birth so long, that the Adversary may lift up
his horn with fair hopes, That it will never come forth: But it shall come
forth in due time (that's Gods time, and it is His promise) when they that see
it shall the more rejoice, the more their sorrow and anguish was because it
stuck at the birth so long: And the bones of the Righteous shall flourish like
an Herb. ver. 14.
Why like an Herb? Because they were dried like an hearth with long
expectation: for now The hand of the Lord shall be known (the more gloriously the
longer the stop was) toward his servants, and His Indignation toward His
enemies; for God has given His servants leave to make this conclusion from His
own words, kind and gracious, He has brought to the Birth, He will give
strength to bring forth (in his appointed time) And there His people set up
their rest, doing their Duty, walking in Gods way, and doing His work. And this
sustains them in their fainting fitts; quiets and settles them in troublous
times, They do their duty, They are upon their work, This I say, for it cannot
be said too often, is as comfortable to them, and cordial as this remembrance
was to the good king, when he heard the sentence of Death, Behold Lord I have
walked before Thee in Truth and with 2 Kings. 20. 3.
a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in Thy sight.

I may not conclude yet, for there is a great difficulty behind; but Let every
man, according to his measure, and proportion of gifts, and power God has put
into his hand, offer himself with a willing mind, wholly up to God in His way
and work, so doing his Duty, and committing the issue and success to God, in
assurance hereof, That The Lord does all things well; orders all for the
advancing His own Glory, and His Churches good: He will, in His own good time,
perform His whole work upon mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, and then He will
punish the Esai. 10. 12.
stout-hearted, and bring down the Glory of their looks. And, in the mean
time, for this man, that attends his Duty, minds that wholly; is only careful
at that point, The Lord will guide him with His eye, will uphold him with His
hand, so as he shall not dash his foot against a stone. Now the difficulty
follows, and that will make us dash and fall too, if we look not to our
bottom, and our standing there upon. We shall hear now of sad and grievous
things that befell them, which have stood to the cause of Christ, and done
their duty: But blessed be God, though we shall hear such things, which shall
make some ears tingle, yet we shall not hear, That the righteous have
forsaken their way, or their duty, though they have been sore broken in the
place of dragons, and covered with the shadow of death: YET, no not YET shall
we hear, That their heart turned back, nor that their feet have declined from
THY WAY: No, though all this, which we (b) Psalm. 44. 17. 18. 19.
shall hear, is or may come upon them, what though? YET they are resolved, as
their Fathers before them, The resolution of a gracious spirit ever, To keep
close to GOD, and to Duty, To stir ^p themselves against the hypocrite; Job.
17. 8. 9.
To hold on their way, for they have clean hands, and clean hearts, washed
white in the blood of the Lamb. What follows? We need not make it a Question,
They shall be stronger and stronger. Having now premised this, I come to that,
which is said against it, to scare the fearfull-hearted, mentioning only that
first, which occasioneth it; I had said, rather The Lord has said it for me,
He that keeps close with GOD, holds on his way, does his duty, is resolved at
that point, The LORD has sworn by His holiness, He will uphold this man, he
shall not dash his foot. I will be bold to say, This is good Divinity, and as
comfortable as any you can meet with in all your readings. Now hearken what is
said to scare the Israel of GOD out of it, all His Antipasses that they may
let-in fear, and let go Duty. The Adversary shall never effect this while he
breathes; with Gods help I shall be able to beat him with his own weapons, and
fetch comfort, and light, and glory for the righteous, from out of his
darkness, and most ignominious usages of Gods people, doing their duty, and
holding to His way and work.

But the fearful have looked upon all this already, and they object,

He that does his duty, keeping to Gods way and work, may 1 Cor. 11.
cloud of witnesses in the little book of Martyrs, they walked in Gods way
and did their Duty, and did they not dash upon danger? To come nearer to our
own times. Look upon those TWO WITNESSES, those few Vocatur Antipas non ficto
sed vero nomine: tot pene literis and syllabis Martyrs hujus temporis declarat
fore Antipapas. Revel. 2. 13.
Antipasses, faithful Magistrates; and faithful, Ministers, and faithful
people, opposing, in all ages of the world, upward to this day, and so will all
their Days, Room and their abominable Idolatries, and then you will say they
do their Duty and are in Gods way; But see I pray you, and mark well how they
are used, you would not use a Dog so; And see where they lie, A goodly
recompense for doing their Duty, and walking in Gods way, will the world say.

No matter what the world says, not a pin matter, nor how they God: They are
vile and refuse with the world, because they do their Duty, and are the
excellent there, not of the world: A sure Testimony of perdition to the world
of ungodly men, whose superstitions may be out of ignorance, but their cruelty
is out of malice. But to the point. It is granted, That if ever the Devil,
(that Legion, for I mean with him, all his servants) stand with open mouth and
outstretched arm against a man; it is then, when he walks in GODS way, and
does his Duty. The wicked are carried with an indignation against no way, no
work but that, only because it is an holy way, and a godly work. Therefore a
way of suffering it may be, a way of perishing it cannot be.

Not a perishing way! See yonder, The Beast shall make war against them, shall
overcome them and kill them; Then see where Rev. 11. 7.
their bodies lie, and how long, and how merry the Adversary is over them, very
jocund and glad when he has done such an exploit upon those that tormented
them.

We have a proverb, he that laughs after laughs too, and more witnesses shall
have their time again to laugh, when the Adversaries shall gnaw their tongues
for pain. But to the point. We have seen the worst that can befall the men of
GOD in GODS way and upon His work; and how small a thing do we see? Some Dead
bodies. I must take leave now, To speak according to my understanding and to
his capacity, also who, if he meets with a Dead body, takes it to be a
Carkesse, all life is gone: Doubtless these are not carkesses, for if so, They
had not layne so long above ground, in the street of the great City: nor had
the Adversary any Cause to rejoice over them (indeed he has not, but I speak
with respect to the offense of a dead body, lying uncovered) or hinder their
bodies to be put in the graves. Rev. 11. 9.
They were mystically dead sure, for such also is their resurrection, their
coming to life again: I think thus it was, and yet I cannot express it in
words what Antichristian Rome, far more cruel then heathenish Rome: (She was a
Dragon fell and Cruel, but not so Cruel, as a Lamb with horns, as She is,
that looks like a sheep, and is so in her clothing, but inwardly is a greevous
wolf: O beware of her, and her Religion: she is MYSTERY BABYLON the GREAT, The
mother of Harlots, And abominations of the earth, Rev. 17. 5.
and has no more good in her, then what can be found in the bottomless pit,
from whence her Power and Authority ascends.) Rev. 11. 7.
I was saying, That death there is not properly so called; but mystically; thus
I think it was, Rome with her sworn servants, has done (and will do) all
the indignities, that are Imaginable against these witnesses, suspending,
putting out of office, Defaming, Defacing, Degrading; Truly I know not what,
but what Rome (that delights in proud wrath) could do, she has done, and
will do against these witnesses. And how far does their malice reach? To the
Body, no farther: And that was Dead in law before (the Body is dead because of
sin) The Body, It is GODS building, we must think and esteem honorably of
it, for it shall be a Glorious body: but as it is here, and in comparison, the
people of GOD put little or no account upon it, and it is according to the
Spirits allowance; The Body is not mentioned in the Scripture, but with this
addition, a Dead, a vile, a corruptible Body: The Soul stands for All, and
indeed it is All, that we might put esteem upon it more then upon all the
world. We see Bodies and dead bodies there, then the Adversary can but kill the
Body, their proud wrath can reach no farther: They can but take down that
Tabernacle, which, had it stood a little longer, would have fell of its self;
God has never given a man His security, That his Body shall be kept from
perishing. The stream of the promise runs still toward the Soul; I was in
the very mouth of Danger, says Paul, almost swallowed up there: I was
delivered at that time: Nero (he was the Lion) had not power over me at that
time: And the 2 Timothy 4. 17.
LORD shall deliver me, there is his security: from what? from Nero? No, he
says not so; for at length (when Paul had finished his testimony) he was given
up to that devourer: The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work: An evil
work, a complying with the workers of iniquity, and with their wicked ways,
that is worse then the Devourers mouth, a thousand times worse: so nor Paul nor
the witnesses did do. Now take all, will preserve me to His heavenly Kingdom,
That's all indeed; and makes amends for all, will preserve me to His heavenly
Kingdom, where the dead bodies now, that have all the dishonours put upon them,
that are conceivable, shall be glorious Bodies. We have viewed the Bodies, now
we consider where they lie.

2 Where lie they? In the street, All the disgrace that can be imagined shall
be put upon them, that will do their Duty, if they come into their Adversaries
hand, and it shall be done against them in the openest place, where the
Adversary may glut his eye in the exercise of proud wrath, wherewith his heart
is filled. To express it as we read, The Adversary having made himself drunk
with blood, will make these witnesses a GAZIMG-STOCK, by reproaches and
afflictions; a spectacle to the world, Angels and men. Heb. 10. 13. 1 Cor. 4. 9.
Why then, who is on Gods side, who? he that is resolved to take Gods part must
expect such usage, but then he may expect such an exceeding and superlative
comfort as will countervail and make amends for all. If all the comforts in the
world were distilled into one elixir, and put into these witnesses hands, it
would not be so cordial as this which follows; All this villainous usage upon
these Bodies shall be done; where? where also our LORD CHRIST was Crucified.
That was without the Gates of Jerusalem. True; and without the territories too,
by a Law not their own, for the Jews could put no man to Death, but from Caesar
Tiberius, he was the Emperor in Rome; It is very comfortable: what follows?
There also our Lord was Crucified: But rejoice in as much as ye 1 Pet. 4. 13.
are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when His glory shall be revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding joy. Who would not rejoice to be put to open
shame for Christ, where Christ was put to open shame for him? A great Commander
refused a Crown of gold in that place, where the Lord Christ had put upon him
a Crown of thorns. There is a continual spring of comfort from thence, which
abundantly makes amends for all the proud wrath, put forth against these
Bodies, in the street of the great City: There also our Lord was crucified.
They shall suffer no more, but what their Lord has suffered before them; and
in that He has 1 Pet. 4. 13.
suffered that shame, He suffered it for them, that their shame now might be
their glory. Truly there is a comfort contained in these words, that is not
expressible but by the mouths of these witnesses; And they felt it then, even
a joy unspeakable. I say then, when that wicked woman, that abominable
strumpet, with her Rev. 11. 10.
lovers, were so jocund and joyful over them, making merry and sending gifts
one to another: for this is a conclusion of experience, That GOD leaves not His
Servants (Orphans) comfortless: John. 14. 18. (...).
At such a time as this, when they are in the eyes of man, fatherless,
friendlesse, helpless, in the hands of proud wrath, exercising all the
indignities, that are imaginable upon them, and glutting their eye therewith,
then they are orphans, (you will say) for all have left them, and there they
lie as you see. But now mark the promise, I will not leave you (Orphans)
comfortless: I will come to you: nay He is come, it is in the present tense,
now He is come in, for all the creature comforts are gone forth, then God comes
(...).
in, in that season and nick of time: And if there be any comfort in His
presence, as sure there is, for He is The God of comforts, and God speaks to
His people most comfortably in a Wilderness. The sweetest comforts come forth
of the greatest straits.
the Father, not of some, but of all consolations: then they are sure to find
it at such a time, when they are, in the eye of the world, comfortless, free
among the dead, put to open shame, and the Adversary, jocund and merry over
them. Then is Gods time to come-in, and that is His Promise, and it is comfort
enough for the present: For after-time read on, how these faithful servants
have concluded, That, after the rate of their sorrows and sufferings, shall
their comforts and consolations be: And by the measure of their shame and
reproach for Christ here, shall their robe of Glory be cut-out hereafter,
wherewith they shall be vested in heaven. So they have concluded, and cannot
faint in their minds.

Thirdly, Consider how long the Bodies shall lie there; how long shall they be
so dispitefully used? Three days and a half. They are long days, as we
account length of time, who account GODS Patience a sl^cknesse; But were they
three thousand years, yet that length of time makes no difference in eternity.
Their souls are safe enough; Souls and Bodies shall meet again, The spirit of
life from GOD shall enter into them: and then they, that were so merry and glad
over them, shall be sad enough, for great fears shall fall on them: And
quickly after these turmoiles they shall be for ever with the Lord, more
glorious then the sun when he shines in his strength; for their bodies were put
to open shame for Christ, and where He was crucified (Oh it was a sweet
consideration) and so long, three whole long Days: now they shall have such a
length of Glory, that we have not a thought to measure it. He that has
observed this, has let it sink down into his heart, and he will hold to the
way and work of The LORD, and his countenance will be no more sad: He may hear
sad things, and observe cross ways, and cross wills; he may smart under the
execution of proud wrath: But he has resolved all into this, The will of The
LORD be done. He is most content, That GOD should go that way, which shall
make most for His Glory, Who will make, as we shall see anon, all cross ways
and wills meet at that highest point; and in a sweet harmony, consent, good
agreement, and a full answerablenesse to His most Holy will. In the mean time
he does, and by the grace of God, is resolved to do his duty, and to hold to
the way, all the faithful have gone in before him, maintaining his watch over
his enemies, himself also, and his own ways, so finding abundance of Peace.
This follows.

CHAP. VI.
Now Gods Work goes on, and His Servants do their duty. The Devil rages and
watches to do mischeife: Therefore the Righteous maintain their watch and
guard also; but specially over themselves, Considering the manner of their
Adversaries, and of their Masters coming.

VVAtchfullnesse over the Enemy, and a man's self, is the great duty of a
Christian, renders him Blessed, highly honored of GOD; and secure against his
Adversary;

First, Blessed is he that watches, Rev. 16. 14.
for he will keep his garments, so that the shame of his nakedness shall not
appear: And (b) Rev. 3. 18.
The LORD will honor those Servants, whom He finds watching, with the greatest
honor that can be imagined: He will gird himself, and come forth and serve
them. Luke 12. 37.


Secondly, Secure. They who are found watching, are secure against their
Adversary; he comes like a roaring Lion, thinking to do mischief, (for that
is the purpose of his heart) but he can do them no hurt, for he finds them
waking in their watchtower.

So we come to the Duty; we have seen the honor of it, the security in it: now
see the nec^ssitie, to be now, as in all times, the servants of The LORD have
been, WATCHFUL. They are bold and fearlesse, because they make their watch
strong: They maintain a wakefull eye over the Adversary, to prevent his coming
against them, To hinder the work. What needs that? you Nehe. 4. 1. Jer. 31. 28.
will say, The Watchman of Israel keeps His servants, I will watch over them to
build and to plant, says the Lord: And His Angels are a guard about them.
True, But all this does not make them carnally secure; but indeed the more
watchful: Gods watching over His servants, His giving His Angels charge over
them, does not give them license to snore in the daytime, or to sleep in their
harvest: No, they are in Gods way, and upon Gods work, then, as The Lord Christ
said to His Disciples, Mat. 26. 45.
Sleep on now and take your rest. He knew that could not be, No time for
sleeping then: So these servants of The Lord cannot sleep now, now they are in
Gods way and work, for they must look for all the opposition the devil and his
Angels can make against them, but the fruit of all that old enmity, that is in
the Spirit, which rules in and amongst the children of disobedience. There is
no enemy in all the world, but, if you do meet him, it will be in GODS way,
and when you are upon GODS work, Church-work, Temple-work, making up the
breaches in Jerusalems walls: there the Adversaries are, there, etc. then they
will appear in their likeness, the Lion, the Adder, and the Dragon, Sanballat
and Tobiah, and the Arabian Nehe. 6. 1.
too, and the rest of your enemies, there they will meet you upon That WALL,
and perhaps be upon you before you are aware. If the Adversary may have his
will, ye shall neither know nor see. And behold a strange greeting; you Neh. 4
11.
had as good meet with a Bear robbed of her whelps, for you will find that
Adversary, the very same he was, very Nehe. 4. 1.
wroth, taking great indignation against the work, and the way; perhaps he will
now, as then, mock too, and grin like a dog.

So it has been ever since the first restoring of the Church; When Moses came
into Egypt, and made his demands, very peremptory, (for such are the demands of
GOD touching His service) he would have all to an hoof, not leave so much as a
hoof in Egypt: Then we read what followed. How it was after their return
from Babylon, Ezra and Nehemiah have told us. It was so in latter times toward
the close of the former Centurie, and beginning of this, when Luther appeared
in Germany, spoiling the Pope and his Merchants of that great gain and
in-come by Indulgences, (It was an ordinary Merchandise with those cunning
Merchants, for amongst their wares they have the precious souls of men. Rev.
18. 13.


So I say, it was when Luther appeared in Germany, that glorious instrument,
confounding the Pope and his cunning Merchants, rescuing the cause of Christ,
and advancing His Glory; Then, and not till then, Germany was full of stirs, a
tumultuous Nation; Hell seemed to be let loose, and the devils roaring upon
him; But then Luther was as bold as a Lion, yet as wise as a Serpent; He was
upon GODS work, and in His way, that made him bold and confident; and so he
would have Melanchthon then to be strong in The Lord, (his encouragements are
notable;) he did live amongst Lions, his soul lay amongst those that were set
on fire, that kept him waking and watchful; but thus he did encourage himself
in The LORD, he was in Gods way, and upon His work. A mavelous comfort, and
which commands an holy security; his heart might meditate terror, but it
commands watchfulness too, even to do as the Builders or Reformers did in
ancient days, Make your prayer unto God, and set watch against them day and
night, because of them: For, as the Adversaries said then, so they say now; and
therefore what the servants did then, so they must do now, Set the people in
their courses with Nehe. 4 89.
their swords, their spears, and their bows, and the builders every one gird
his sword by his side, and so build. And though they do put off their clothes,
which the builders then did not, (saving that every one put them off for
washing) yet they must keep a strong watch, and their sword under their pillow.
Read M. N^wcemens Sermon upon Neh. 4. 11. wherein, by the good hand of God with
him, he has discovered the adversaries skirts upon their face; he has shown
the Nation their nakedness, and the 3. Kingdoms their shame; he has cast
abominable filth upon them, and made them as they are, vile.


This is watchful^nesse, and as needful now as then (for now the breaches are
stopping up) now the enemy says, The builders shall not know neither see till
we come in the midst amongst them and slay them. We are assured that all the
enemies in the world, are now setting themselves against this way, and
consulting how they may hinder this work: It is temple-worke, the restoring
and building Ierusalems walls. There is need of watchfullnesse then, mighty
cause to maintain a continual watch over this Legion (for he is many and full
of wrath) as great cause to watch as David had, when Saul sent, and they did
watch the house to kill him. (* title of the 59 Psalm.)

It is observable, That where the servants of The Lord have their warrant for
their greatest security, there they may observe cause enough why they should be
exceeding watchful. A vineyard of red wine is My Church, My people, unto Me,
most pleasant and most Delightful: I The LORD do keep it: I will water (d)
Rev. 18. 13.
it every moment lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. ver. 3.
There is security. Observe now what a mighty Adversary the Church has (not to
speak of the little foxes, and other grievous Beasts, wherewith Gods vineyard
is annoyed) Leviathan, ver. 1.
the peircing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked serpent; The spirit means,
All the devils in hell, and all his servants on earth, their force and fraud
both: And how prevailing by these ways, This Adversary is, we may collect by
the instrument. The LORD brings forth against him, His sore, and great, and
strong sword; very comfortable to the Church all this, but it is very stirring
and commanding to keep their watch strong, their garments white and close girt
unto them. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil, as a
roaring lion, walks about seeking whom 1 Pet. 5. 8.
he may devour. The conclusion is, The Righteous must be full of eyes; They
had need to set a Thousand eyes over this Adversary rather; that is first; And
then

Secondly, Then thousand eyes over themselves, even that every man maintain
over himself now, a double watch, considering they are the soldiers of Jesus
Christ, engaged in the war with the Lamb, and going out against the Lambs
enemies, and must keep themselves, according to the charge, from every wicked
thing: therefore had they need (as the devout Spaniard said) to Deuteronomy. 23. 9.
set ten thousand eyes over themselves: then again, consider, A man's enemies
are those of his own house; enemies also, and those the strongest within his
own breast.

Thirdly, Add to this; That we know not the day, nor the hour; but the
coming of the Lord will be at midnight, in the midnight of the world, when
they say all is peace, and think they may be secure, and so fall all asleep,
then He comes as a thief. Put all this together, and it will command
watchfulness; we shall double our watch, we shall make it strong, That we may
be in a readiness, with our loins girt, our armor at hand, for, as we said,
we know not at what time danger and trouble may come. We know not the hour,
when the general Judgment, nor when the particular shall be; we know not the
hour; when we lie down, we know not how we may be awakened, with what cry,
nor what noise we may hear at midnight. What lies in the womb of a day, is
darkness unto us; and what a night may bring forth, lies in the same womb of
darkness also: We cannot see into an hour before us. Happy is that man that
makes his watch strong, that fortifies himself in The Lord his God, That keeps
himself in His fear all the day long, and night also; That closes his eyes
with GOD, and makes his Christ the end of his thoughts: so sleeps, as in the
lap or arms of The Almighty. This man is prepared, and what ever the cry be,
with which he is awakened, he is in a readiness, his loins girt, his lamp
burning, and oil for supply. So he goes forth to meet, and if he meet with
enemies, nay, with devils, he is in a readiness, and as bold as a Lion: But if
he go forth to meet his LORD and CHRIST, O how joyful is he! Him he served
all his life long, with Him his last thoughts closed, when he fell asleep:
therefore in the morning of his awaking, he is bold, and confident, joyful and
glad; all his days he watched for this time, as the Watchman for the morning.

To draw to a conclusion. Truly this Mother-City, the City of God, have done
even thus as we heard, and as we all should do so they wait for GOD, so they
love GOD, so they fear Him, so they Trust in HIM, so they obey: And, to make
clear proof that so they do, so watchful they are over the Adversary, And
themselves. And so, they thank their GOD, they have profited very much by all
the hatred, the hard words, and ungodly deeds from the adversary: his violent
dealing has made their love the hotter, their fear more refined, and fixed,
their confidence better bottomed, more settled upon the rock, their obedience
more pure, more single, and more hearty, and their watch a thousand times
stronger, against their enemies, and over themselves. Thus all things tend to
the advantage of His people, and work together for their good, which must be
considered on, now in the last place.

CHAP. VII.
We must not judge hastily of Gods works, These are wrought in an excellent
Method, though they seem confused to us, and do work together for the good
of them, that love God; whereunto the present time gives clear evidence.

GReat are the works of The Lord, Sought out of them that take pleasure
therein; SOUGHT OUT with diligent inquiry, not with a curious prying into them,
much less with an overhasty censuring and judging of them; here we must walk
softly, taking leisure.

We must not judge of the acts of GODS providence by pieces, here a part and
there a part; as we do not a piece of Arrace, not half unfolded: stay till GOD
has done His whole work, has accomplished it upon mount Zion, then unfold
the work, and behold a glorious symme^try and uniformity all together workeing
for the good of those, that love Him. If we look upon GODS works apart and
alone, here one piece and there another, they will be as unpleasing to the eye,
as are the members of a body divided, and lying apart from the head: They will
seem fearful and terrible, wondrous cross to the mark they tend to.

Joseph must be a prime and chief man in Egypt; look you how cross all things
go! he is sold for a servant, and it was well he escaped so; when he had gained
no little favor, and became a great master, then his feet were put in the
stocks.

Things went as cross with David too. How long? To the very day (I reckon
within a few hours) he was to be King, that very day the people spoke of
stoning of him. 1 Samuel 30 6.


GODS providence seemed as strange, and as cross toward Mordecai; and as
favorable to Haman, That Enemy and Adversary; Mordecai must ride in state
through the city, and Haman must lead the horse, and lacquie by; and so it was.
But before that day came, Haman was very confident, That he should see Mordecai
set on high upon a gallows, which he had provided for his purpose. Truly the
admonition is seasonable; Judge nothing before the time, but remember these are
GODS works, and He will work like a GOD, His providence, what ever they seem
to be now, they will appear to be admirable, exceeding glorious; Little can we
by the beginning of any action, guess at Gods intention in the conclusion.
Now here is a piece of providence, and it seems terrible; here is another
piece and causes distractions; A third piece, and that causes a sword; here
is a fourth piece, and Oh how cross it is to the high mark it tends to! for
there be thoughts of accommodation, of compounding the cause of Christ, and
that is a cross way indeed: so we judge before the time, stay a little while
and we shall see all these cross ways meet, and kiss each other: so as we
shall say, in the close of the work, All was carried on in a curious Method;
things seem to be carried very confusedly in our eye, up and down, and then a
cross as upon wheels: But there is a wheel within the wheels and eyes,
(providence) Ezech. 1.
round about. If we could see we would say; All things are carried in an
excellent Method. The lines of Gods providence drawn in the circumference of
the world, seem no less confused then the moaths in the sun.

But we shall see one day, That not one line could be spared; And that all tend
Directly to the great center, The Glory of the Workman and The rest of His
people. We think we see crookedness, an unevenness in the lines and ways of
Gods Providence; But we are deceived; man's ways are unequal, Gods ways are
equal: stay a little, we shall say so too. I said well, stay a while, as those
that live by faith, and do not make haste, until GOD has wrought His whole
work, till we can put all together; Then we shall discern plainly, That all
together worked gloriously for the promoting the great, supreme and sovereign
ends, GODS Glory and HIS Churches peace, in the exalting His people, plucking
down and confounding the Adversary.

Nay GOD has not wearied out His people, with expectation; Though He has not
yet accomplished His whole work, yet He gives His people leave to behold some
pieces thereof; And see how wonderful and admirable they are, what strange
providence, cross ways, as was said, has he made to meet; contrary natures,
and wills have wrought effectually toward the settling of Truth and Peace, that
these might meet in a sweet agreement. Take a view of it at once, and behold
the poison of Aspes, viperous tongues, embalming; wounds, healing; weakness,
strengthening; temptations, fortifying; straits, enlarging; perverse counsels,
ensnaring (the perverse counselors:) fears, supporting; distractions,
uniting; troubles, quieting; stops and pressures to bear down the spirits of
men, heightening the same. Thus the LORD has done in this short time. What
then may the people of GOD expect to see in after time, when the work is done,
and they can put all together, who have seen such strange providence, and
glorious workings thereof already? He that has wrought so gloriously, and has
given His people such a discerning, will work much more, and will be admired
in the close of His whole work when His people can put all together.

Now we are to consider with more enlagement what The LORD has done, making
cross ways meet in a good agreement, and cross spirits to stand in a
posture for the safeguarding His Kingdom; And what a good GOD do His people
serve! who would not fear Him? who would not serve such a God? who would not
trust Him now? He makes all work for good; All that we call evil; and to sense
it is so, is good to them; never any thing in the world fell out to The people
of GOD whereof they could not say, this is good now, for it works thereunto;
and which is yet more comfort, they can say confidently, it will be better
anon, within an hour, a minute, a little minute. GODS Hand is with them, and
through Him they improove all, good and evil, all is good to them; they find
it so or they make it so: or, rather against the nature thereof, it is made so
to them: things disagreeing are made to agree very well, and impossible things
to be possible, for so we read, if we read the History of these last months.
Can a man imagine, (who walks by sense) but that the noise of swords, and
staves would silence the laws, and daunt the spirits of men utterly? yet it
was not so, This noise wakened the laws, and raised the spirits the higher:
would we not think that the sword would make divisions? It was taken up for
that end, and so it works most naturally. But so it shall not do, It shall
work contrary effects: it shall cement and sodder men together: It shall make
many to be as one man, of one mind in a house, and so to seek the peace of
Israel.

Yea but the sword draws blood, makes havoc in the Land, It robbs, and
spoils, etc.

Very true: but it had made more havoc, had it come upon us, and found us
sleeping: then it had cut all our throats. It had raged all the Land over with
a rage reaching unto heaven, as now in Ireland. Blessed be God, we know our
friends now, we see our enemies, the Papists and Atheists all the World over.
It is not a Kingdom divided against it self, but one Kingdom divided against
another: The Kingdom of CHRIST against the Kingdom of Antichrist. And this
Antichristian kingdom will rage as they can, to their power to shed blood, But
The LORD has them in His chain, and has caused His people to set a watch
over them: and has sent forth His Host against them: There is this good in it
now, and it is a great good, The enemies of the Church are in part manifest
now: they shall be more manifest anon. So are her friends, she knows now and
can resolve her self in the question, Who will rise up for me against the
evil doers? or who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? Psalm.
94. 16.
The Church cannot forsake her confidence now in her GOD; He that has wrought
HITHERTO will work: He that has discovered the Adversary: He that has made
their madness so manifest, will go on to do yet more: what will He do? The
Church can answer, That which shall be best for her sons and daughters both for
the time, manner and means of doing it, though all this they leave in their
LORDS hand, let Him work as He pleases, if in the dark, and His footsteps are
upon the waters, and no print of them, yet, as Master Bradford said, so says
the Church, She will follow her LORD in the dark. Though he seem to go by
compass, by the bow, as we call it, yet He goes the straightest, and nearest
course to His GLORY, carrying all level thereunto. The Church is marvailously
contented with this, (That all works for her Lords Glory) her spirit shall work
after Him, even the strength of her spirit, in that way He goes, though clouded
and over-shadowed with da^knesse: for she is confident, This very way wherein
she sees not the prints of all his footsteps, (she sees very much) tends most
directly to her full comfort here, and her glory hereafter.

The Church has seen so much of God, such sweet experiences, so many
providence, so strange, so wonderful, such commings-in of God unto her, when
in her Egypt, in her wilderness, that she cannot distrust him now. Psalm. 22. 4.
Our fathers trusted in thee: What follows? Thou did deliver them: They cried
unto thee, and they were delivered. Though we are full of changes, yet God is
the same to His Church for ever: And to distrust now after all this, were a
provocation as was theirs (by unbelief) at the SLA, even at the RED Sea. The
Church cannot question Gods love to her, nor dare she question His Power; He
is GOD, The King of His Church, He reigns in the midst of His enemies, and
then like Himself, most gloriously. He brought along Captivity upon His people
for THEIR GOOD. He has Jer. 24 5.
ordered our distractions so, that they have been for our good. How so? GOD
will have it so, and we need not ask a question, when we see it to be so,
distractions for GOOD. They have tended to union, and joining together, the
good with the good never faster, the bad with the bad never closer, like the
scales of the Leviathan, they stick together that they cannot be sundred.
Cross spirits, who will be opposite, and spurn against the pricks for their
hurt, these shall be suffered and countenanced for the good of His people, To
make them more in love with Truth, to contend for it more earnestly, in a more
orderly and unanimous way, now that they see all the wicked, all the Malignants
of the world are bent and do contend against them: Then we must conclude, All
tends to advance GODS glory and His peoples good; Their fears have wrought for
GOOD; it has made them wait patiently for God; it has made their love more
perfect, their fear more refined, their dependence more glorious, their
obedience more sincere and hearty, their watch ten thousand times stronger
against their adversaries, and over themselves. Blessed be GOD who has done
all this, made their fears and disquietings to pull down and spoil their own
strongholds, Nature and Sin, and to build up and fortify their impregnable
Forts, Love to God, Fear of God, Confidence in God, Obedience unto God, and
Watchfulness in all.

To shut up all. The Righteous wait patiently for God; they love Him, they
fear Him, they stay themselves upon Him, they obey from the heart, (if their
Obedience were not hearty, their Trust were presumption) they make their watch
strong over themselves, and against their adversaries: Go thou thy way now,
thou art in Gods way, and do likewise, and be no longer sad: if thou stand
alone now, and there be none that will take thee by the hand, unless to thrust
thee down, yet fear not: Though an Host encamp about thee, thou art in Gods
way, and upon His work, fear not: He will hold thee by His hand, He will be thy
Arm every morning, thy salvation also in the time of trouble.

Only keep to your strong hold, (i. e.) hold fast your confidence. Let sinners
in Zion be afraid, fearfulness must surprise the Idolatrous Nation, they have
no God to look unto, no chambers Esaias 26. 20.
to enter into, while the indignation passes over: They are now like a
tottering wall, and a broken fence; they are falling and dashing to pieces like
a potters vessel. The Lord sees their day is coming, for they are very proud,
their rage rises high, and so many steps and degrees to their utter ruin, and
everlasting confusion. As the righteous work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, so do the wicked work out their destruction with joy and gladness
over the ruins they have made in the world: you can wait upon God, you love
Him, you fear Him, you trust in Him. We have concluded. Our fathers trusted in
Thee: they Psalm. 22. 4, 5.
trusted, and Thou did deliver them. They cried unto Thee and were delivered.
For the arms of the wicked shall be broken, but Psalm. 37. 17.
The Lord upholdeth the righteous.

FINIS.

