THE TRIAL, Of Lieut. Collonell JOHN LILBURNE, By an extraordinary or special
Commission, of Oyear and Terminer at the Guild Hall of LONDON, the 24, 25, 26.
of October. 1649.

Being as exactly penned and taken in short hand, as it was possible to be done
in such a crowd and noyes, and transcribed with an indifferent and even hand,
both in reference to the Court, and the Prisoner; that so matter of Fact, as it
was there declared, might truly come to public view.

In which is contained all the Judges names, and the names of the Grand
Inquest, and the names of the honest Jury of Life and Death.

Unto which is annexed A necessary and essential Appendix, very well worth the
Readers, careful perusal; If he desire rightly to understand the whole body of
the Discourse, and know the worth of that never enough to be prised, bulwork of
English Freedom, to be tried by a Jury of legal and good men, of the
Neighborhood.

Published by THEODORUS VARAX.

Esther 4. verse. 13. and Isa. 12. v. 2, 3, 4. Then Mordecai commanded to answer
Esther, Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the kings house, more
then all the Jews. Behold, God is my Salvation: I will trust and not be afraid,
for the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength, and my song, he also is become my
salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation. And in that day shall you say, Praise the LORD, call upon his Name,
declare his doings among the people, make mention that his Name is exalted.

Printed by Hen. Hills in St. Thomas's Southwark.

THE TRIAL Of Leiut. Colonel JOHN LILBVRNE.
At the Guild Hall of London the 24, of October. 1649. being Wednesday.
THe Commissioners Names of the extraordinary Commission of Oyer and Terminer,
for the Trial of Lieut. Col. John Lilburne, thus follows.

Thomas Andrews Lord Mayor. Richard Keble, L: Commissioner. Phylip Jermyn,
Justice of the upper Bench. Tho. Gates, Baron. John Puleston, Justice of the
Common Pleas. Francis Thorpe, Barron and Member. Rob. Nicolas, Member Justices
of the upper Bench. Richard Ask, Justices of the upper Bench. Peter Warburton,
Justice of the Common Pleas. Alexander Rigby, Barron, but absent. Sir Thomas
Fowler. Sir Henry Holcroft. Sir Will. Row. Sir Richard Saltonstall. Sir Richard
Sprignall. Sir John Wooliston. Sir William Roberts. John Green. Sergeants at
Law. John Clarke. Sergeants at Law. John Parker. Sergeants at Law. William
Steel, Recorder. John Fowke, Aldermen. Thomas Foot, Aldermen. John Kendrick,
Aldermen. Thomas Cullum, Aldermen. Simon Edmonds, Aldermen. Samuel Avery
Aldermen. John Dethicke, Aldermen. Rob. Titchburn, Aldermen. John Hayes,
Aldermen. Henry Proby, Common Sargeant. Thomas Brigandine. Nathaniell Snape,
Edward Rich. Owen Roe. Tobias Lisle. Austin Wingfield. Richard Downton. Daniell
Tailor. William Wihend. Silvanus Tailor.
At the Guild Hall of London the 25. of October 1649. being Thursday, at the
Trial of Lieut. Col. John Lilburne.
O Yes made, All persons that were adjourned to the Court required to make
their appearance.

The Lieutenant of the Tower of London Col. Francis West called, to bring forth
his prisoner according to the precept.

Whereupon Col. West Lieut. of the Tower, brought up the prisoner out of the
Irish Chamber, where he had been some time before the sitting of the Court, and
was guarded by the said Lieutenant, and a special Guard of Soldiers besides.
And being brought to the Bar, the Sheriffs of London were directed to take
the prisoner into their Custody.

Silence Commanded. Crier. John Lilbnrne, hold up thy hand.


Lieut. Col. Lilburne Directed himself to Mr. Keble one of the Keepers of the
great Seal as the President of the Court, and said to this purpose, Sir will it
please you to hear me, and if so, By your favor thus. All the privilege for
my part that I shall crave this day at your hands is no more, but that which is
properly, and singly the Liberty of every Freeborn Englishman; viz. The
benifit of the Laws and Liberties thereof, which by my Birthright and
Inheritance, is due unto me; the which I have fought for as well as others have
done, with a single and upright heart; and if I cannot have and enjoy this, I
shall leave this Testimony behind me, that I dyed for the Laws and Liberties
of this Nation; and upon this score I stand, and if I perish I perish. And if
the fact that I have done, cannot be justified by the Law of England, let me
perish; I mention none of this for the gaining of mercy, or by way of merit, no
I scotne it; for mercy I crave from none but from the hands of my God alone,
with whom I hope, and am assured one day to rest; whom I have set before my
eyes, and so walked, as believing I am always in his presence, in whose power
my confidence is fixed, whom I take and own to be my stay, my stafe, my
strength and support, and in whom I rest as the life of my life, and whom I
hope to meet with joy, when this fading and uncertain life shall have an end,
to live with him in glory and blessedness for evermore. And therefore, because
I would not willingly trouble you with many words, to cause you to spend your
time impertinently; therefore Sir, in reference to the Court, I shall crave but
so much liberty from you as was given to Paul, when he pleaded for his life
before the Heathen Roman Judges, which was free liberty of speech to speak for
himself, the which I now humbly crave as my right, not only by the Law of God
and man, but also by the Law and light of Nature; And I shall do it with that
respect, reason and judgment, that does become a man that knows what it is to
plead for his life. I hope God has given me ability to be master of my own
passion, and endowed me with that reason, that will dictate unto me what is for
my own good and benefit.

I have several times been arraigned for my life already. I was once arraigned
before the House of Peers for (sticking close to the Liberties, and Privileges
of this Nation, and those that stood for them) being one of those two or three
men, that first drew their Swords in Westminster Hall against Col. Lunsford and
some scores of his associates. At that time, it was supposed, they intended to
cut the throats of the chiefest men then sitting in the House of Commons; I say
for this, and other things of the like nature, I was arraigned by the Kings
special Command and Order, the 1. of May 1641. I mention it to this end, that
when I came before the House of Peers, where was about three or fourscore
Lords then sitting at the beginning of the Parliament; (who then were supposed
the most arbitrary of any power in England) yet I had from them free liberty of
speech, to speak for my life at their Bar, without check or control in the
best manner, all those abilities God had given me would enable me; and when I
was at Oxford, I was again arraigned as a Traitor before the Lord Chief Justice
Heath, for levying War at the Command of the then Parliament against the
person of the King; and when I came before him in the Guild Hall of Oxford, he
told me (there being present with him (as his fellow Judge) Mr Gardener
(sometimes Recorder of the City of London) now Sir Thomas Gardener, and others
that sat by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer from the King; the which
Commission I did not so well then understand, as I hope I do now. And my Lord
Chief Justice Heath stood up, and in the face of all the Court, and in the
face of all the Country present there told me, Capt. Lilburne you are brought
here before us for High Treason, for leavying War in Oxfordshire against your
Sovereign Lord and King; and though you be now in a Garrison, and were taken
in Arms in open hostility against the King (yea Sir, and I must now tell you
in such hostility, that we were but about 700. men at Branford that withstood
the Kings whole Army in the field, about five hours together, and fought it
out to the very Swords point, and to the Butt end of the Musket; and thereby
hindered the King from his then possessing the Parliaments Train of Artillery,
and by consequence the City of London, in which very act I was taken a
prisoner, without Articles or capitulation, and was by the King and his party
then looked upon, as one of the activest men against them in the whole company)
yet said Judge Heath, we will not take advantage of that, to try you by the
rules of arbitrary Marshall Law, or any other arbitrary ways; but we will try
you by the rules of the good old Laws of England; and whatsoever Privilege in
your Trial the Laws of England will afford you, claim it as your Birthright
and Inheritance, and you shall enjoy it, with as much freedom and willingness,
as if you were in Westminster Hall, to be tried amongst your own party; and
this we will do for that end, that so at London your friends shall not have any
just cause to say, we murdered you with cruelty, or denied you the benefit of
the Law, in taking away your life by the rules of our own Wills. Nay, further
said he, Capt. Lilburn, it is true, I am a Judge made by my Sovereign Lord the
King, according to his right by See the 27. of Hen. 8. chap. 24.
Law, and soin a special manner am his Servant and Councellor, and am to act
for his good, benefit and advantage; And yet notwithstanding, it is by the
known Laws of this Land my duty, to be indifferent and free from partiallity,
betwixt my Master and you the prisoner, and I am specially bound unto it also
by my Oath; and therefore you shall have the utmost Privileges of the Law of
England, which is a Law of mercy, and not of rigor, and has the life of a man
in tenderest, and highest See the 2. part Inst. fo. 28. 30. 42, 43. 53. 315.
316. 591, and 3. part, fo. 34.
estimation; and therefore, it is the duty of a Judge by Law, to be of Council
with the Prisoner, in things wherein by his ignorance, he falls short of making
use of the benifit of the Law, especially when he is upon the trial of his
life. Yea, and to exhort him to answer without fear, if he perceive him
daunted, or amazed at the presence of the Court; yea it is my duty, to carry my
self with all fairness and evenness of hand toward you; And wherein that there
shall seem any mistakes to appear, in circumstances or formalities, to
rectify you; For it is my duty to help you, and not to use any boisterous, or
rough language to you in the least, to put you in fear, or any ways prevent
the freedom of your defense: and according to the Laws of England this is my
duty, and this is the Law. And accordingly he gave me liberty to plead to the
errors of my Indictment, before ever I Pleaded not Guilty, yea and also became
willing to assign me what Council, I pleased, to nominate, freely to come to
prison to me, and to consult and advise with me and help me in point of Law;
This last he did immediately upon my Pleading to the Indictment before any fact
was proved; all which is consonant to the Declared Judgment of Sir EDWAD
COOK, that great Oracle of the Laws of ENGLAND, whose Books are Published by
special Orders Which Orders are dated May 12 1641. and June 3. 1642. you may
at large read at the last end of his 2. part. Institutes.
and Authority of Parliament for good Law, who in his 3. part Institutes, Chapt.
Of high Treason, fol. 29. 34. compared with fol. 137. 230. asserts the same.

Truly, Sir, I being now come before you to answer for my life, and being no
professed Lawyer, may through my own ignorance of the practick part of the Law,
especially in the Formalities, Nisities and Puntillios thereof, run my self
with overmuch hastiness, in snares and dangers that I shall not easily get
out of. And therefore being all of a sudden bid to hold up my hand at the
Bar, I cannot choose but a little demurre upon it, and yet with all respect to
you, to declare my desirablenesse to keep within the bounds of Reason,
Moderation and Discretion, and so to carry my self as it does become a man
that knows what it is to answer for his life.

And therefore in the first place, I have something to say to the Court about
the first Fundamental liberty of an Englishman in order to his trial, which
is, that by the Laws of this Land, all Courts of Justice always ought to be
free and open for all sorts of peaceable people to see, behold, and hear, and
have free access unto: and no man whatsoever ought to be tried in holes or
corners, or in any place where the gates are shut and barred, and guarded with
armed men: and yet, Sir, as I came in, I found the gates shut and guarded;
which is contrary both to Law and Justice.

Sir, the Laws of England, and the Privileges thereof, are my Inheritance and
Birthright: And, Sir, I must acquaint you, that I was sometimes summoned
before a Committee of Parliament, where Mr. Corbet and several others have had
the Chair; and there I stood upon my right by the Laws of England, and
refused to proceed with the said Committee, till by special order they caused
their Doors to be wide thrown open, that the people might have free and
un-interrupted access to hear, see, and consider of what they said to me,
although I think the pretense that I am now brought before you for, be the very
same in substance, that I was convened before Mr. Corbet for, which was about
Books: and I am sure there I did argue the case with him and the rest of the
Committee soundly out in Law, proving that they were bound in Law and Justice,
freely to open their Doors, for the free access of all sorts and kinds of
auditors: And I did refuse (as of right) to proceed with them, till by special
order they did open their Doors. For no trial in such cases, ought to be in
any place, unless it be public, open and free; and therefore if you please
that I may enjoy that Legal Right and Privilege which was granted unto me by
Mr. Miles Corbet, and the rest of that Committee, (when I was brought before
them in the like case that now I am brought before you:) which privilege I
know to be my right by the Law of England, I shall, as it becomes an
understanding Englishman, (who in his actions hates deeds of darkness, holes
or corners) go on to a trial. But if I be denied this undoubted privilege, I
shall rather die here than proceed any further. And therefore foreseeing this
before hand, and being willing to provide against all jealousies of my escape,
the fear of which I supposed might be objected against me as a ground to deny
me this my legal right; and therefore before hand I have given my engagement to
the Lieutenant of the Tower, that I will be a faithful and true prisoner to
him.

And I hope the Gentleman has so much experience of my faithfulness to my
word, that he does not in the least question or scruple it; I am sure he has
often so declared to me that he does not.

Nay, I have not only engaged to be a true prisoner in the Tower to him, but I
have also solemnly engaged to him, that I will come civilly and peaceably with
him; and that I will go civilly and peaceably back with him again. And that if
any tumult or up-roare shall arise in the crowd, of which I lose him, and he
me; or in case I should be any ways by force and power rescued from him, I
have also faithfully engaged to him, that I will come again to him (by the
assistance of God) as soon as ever I can get away from that force or rescue.
And all this I entreated him to acquaint you with, that all jealousies and
disputes might be avoided.


Judge Keble. Mr. Lilburn, look behind you and see whether the Door stands open
or no.


L. Col. Lilb. Well then, Sir, I am satisfied as to that. But then in the next
place, I have read the Petition of Right, I have read Magna Charta, and
abundance of Laws made in confirmation of it; and I have also read the Act
that abolisheth the Star Chamber, which was made in the year 1641. which last
recited Act expressly confirms those stratures that were made in Edward the
thirds time, which declares all Acts, Laws and Statutes that were made against
Magna Charta, to be null and void in Law, and holden for error.

In the reading of which Laws I do not find a special Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, to be Legal and warrantable. I beseech you Sir, do not mistake me;
for I put a vast difference betwixt an ordinary and common Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, for holding ordinary and common Assizes and Sessions, and betwixt
an extraordinary and special commission of Oyer and Terminer to try an
individual person or persons, for a pretended extraordinary crime; the Laws I
last recited; and the fundamental or essential Basis of freedom therein
contained, knows no such names or Commissions of special Oyer and Terminer.

And those Statutes in Edward the first, and Edward the thirds time, that does
erect those special and extraordinary Commssions, and warrant the usage of them
are merely irrational And excellent to this purpose is Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburnes Argument, in his second Edition of his Picture of the Council of
State, page 8. against the erection of extraordinary Courts, which thus
follows: He granting that the Parliament has power to erect a Court of
Justice to administer the Law, provided, that the Judges confist of Persons
that are not Members of Parliament; And provided, the power they give them be
universal, that is to say, to administer the Law to all the people of England
indefinitely, who are all equally borne free alike, and not to two or three
particular Persons solely: the last of which for them to do is unjust, and
altogether out of their power, etc. which Argument or Reason is most notably
illustrated and enlarged in the second Edition of the legal fundamental
Liberties of England, revived of the 8. of June, 1649. page 72.
innovations upon our indubitable Rights contained in Magna Charta, and mere
Court and Prerogative devices to destroy the best of men, by extraordinary
Court appointed and prejudge proceedings that should manfully stand in the way
of the Prince, or any of his great favorites, for sure I am from the Petition
of Right, no ground or foundation for any extraordinary or special Commission
of Oyer and Terminer, upon any pretended, special, or great occasion cannot be
founded; but rather the absolute quite contrary, as to me clearly appears by
the very plain letter of that most excellent Law, and therefore such a special
Commission upon any pretended special occasion, being expressly against our
undubitable Rights contained in Magna Charta, And the Petition of Right,, viz.
that no Englishman shall be subjected to any other Trial, but the ordinary
universal and common Trials at ordinary Assi^es, Sessions, or
Goale-deliveries, and not in the least to be tried by extraordinary and
special prejudged, packed, over-awing Commissions of Oyer and Terminer: and
therefore all such extraordinary and dangerous Trials are absolutely
abolished, by the late excellent ^cts that confirms the Petition of Right, and
all and every of the Clauses therein contained, and abolisheth the
Star Chamber, both made Anno. 1641.

And Sir, with your favor, the then Parliament that made the lastre cited
Laws, were so far from countenancing any special Commissions of Oyer and
Terminer, upon any special or pretended great occasions whatsoever that I can
read of, That I rather find and read the Parliaments proceedings in the year
1641. An extreme Outcry of the House of Commons, against special Commissions
of Oyer and Terminer, with a great deal of bitterness and vehemence, as may
fully and clearly be read in that excellent Argument of Mr. Hide, April 1641.
Printed and published in a Book, called Speeches and Passages of Parliament,
page 409. to 417. which I have here at the Bar to produce which Mr. Hide, was
then the special and appointed mouth of the House of Commons before the Lords,
who unto them in conformity to his Commission from the then House of Commons,
complains to the house of Lords extremely of a special Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, that was exercised in the five Northern Counties of England, and
earnestly in the name of the house of Commons, craves the special assistance of
the house of Lords, to pluck up that Court by the very roots, founded upon a
special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, being so illegal and unjust in the
very foundation of it, as it is inconsistent with the peoples liberties, and as
that which destroyed and disinherited all the people that were tried, both of
their Birthright and Inheritance, viz. Their Liberties and Freedoms contained
in Magna Charta; And this Sir, was the declared and avowed judgment and
opinion of the house of Commons in April 1641. in their primitive purity and
none-defilement, when they acted bravely and gallantly for the universal
Liberties and Freedom of this Nation (and not selfe-interest) when they were in
the Virginity of their Glory and Splendour, as he there fully and most
excellently declares, and yet he there gives an extraordinary reason for the
original erection of that Court founded upon a special Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, as can be rendered.

The original reason or occasion of which he there declares to be thus, that
by reason of the suppression of the Abbeys in the 27. of Henry the eights time;
In the North of England (through discontent thereat) there did arise from the
said 27. year to the 30. no fewer then six grand insurrections, most of them
under the Command of some eminent man of those Countries, which Insurrections
and Rebellions occasioned the leavying of great Armies which had like to have
set the whole Kingdom in an universal flame; for the suppressing and
preventing of which in future times King Henry the 8. caused a special Court to
be erected, by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, which Court also
continued in Edward the sixth time, Queen Mary's, and first and seventh of K.
James; The Basis of which Commission, was founded upon those forementioned
innovating Statutes, made in Edward the second, and Edward the third's time
Which were Westminster, the second being the 13. of Ed. 1. c. 29. and 2. Ed. 3.
c. 2. and 34. Ed. 3. c. 1.
; which special Commission of Oyer and Terminer was several times renewed by
the late K. Charles, as in the fifth, eighth, and thirteenth year of his Reign.
And the said M. Hide there in his Argument or Speech which I have here in
print, names several of the Presidents of that illegal Court of special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer; and he there also declares in what an
extraordinary manner, and upon what an extraordinary occasion it was granted,
which was so great, as that a greater could not be imagined, and yet
notwithstanding he declares, that this extraordinary Commission, which being
granted to suppress and quiet those many extraordinary Insurrections and
Rebellions, which do not admit of so long delay as times of ordinary Trial, in
times of Peace, when the Ordinary, Legal, and common Courts of Justice are open
and free will do, when peace and quiet is in the Nation, as now it is; and yet
for all that he condemns it for illegal.

And therefore Sir, admit my actions in their tendancy to be as dangerous and
heinous as any of my adversaries can imagine or declare them to be, yet they
are but in the ashes, but in the harth, they are not broke out into visible and
violent hostile actions; and therefore I say, if special Commissions of Oyer
and Terminer granted in such special and transcendent cases as those in Henry
the 8. time were illegal, much more must a special Commission of Oyer and
Terminer granted to try me barely for words, or at most, for pretended Writings
or Books, at such a time when there is no burning flame of Insurrections or
Rebellions in the Kingdom, but all in visible peace, and all the ordinary
Courts of Justice open, and I and my Friends have often sought to enjoy the
benefit of the Law in a Legal Trial, from first to last, but could never enjoy
it in the least measure, although many Sizes and Sessions have past over my
head since my first Commitment, now seven months ago, at the first of which,
in the County where my pretended crime was committed, I ought by Law and
Justice either to be tried or acquitted; so that Sir, by what I have already
said, you may see the judgment and opinion of the House of Commons upon
special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer in their first purity, when as a full
House, there being constantly 400 or 500. of them siting in the House as the
deputed and chosen Trustees of the People of England, whose opinion was to dam
them, and pluck them up by the roots, as unjust and illegal in their original
Institution, which they have accordingly done, and declared to the whole Nation
in the Act that abolished the Star Chamber; where that Court spoken against by
M. Hide, is totally dammed and pulled up by the roots: So that now in Law I
cannot see how special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer can be legal at this
present, admit the Power never so just from whom it comes, but abundantly much
more seeing there is no actual Wars, nor popular Insurrections; which if lately
there had bin any, and yet were overcome, Of which judgment Sir Edw. Cook is
positively, in part 2. Instit. f. 48. and part 3. f. 52. in Th. Earl of
Lancasters case, which is singular well worth the reading. See also part 1.
Instit. f. 13. a.
there is no pretense of ground by the good old Laws of England, for any
extraordinary proceedings against any man, although he had bin in Arms against
you, but he ought to have the benefit of the ordinary accustomed and common
trials at the Common Law, as clearly appears by the express words of the
Petition of Right. * But I was never in any hostile manner against those that
are the present Governors of the Nation, but have bin under their command in
several battles in the Nation, and have hazarded my life for them, and never
yet in the least changed my original or first Principles, nor never was engaged
in the least in any hostility against them, but have always, since I five
years ago gave over my command, lived in peace and quietness in mine own house
and abode, and was the same day at the House of Commons door, that their Votes
passed against me, declaring me in general (which in Law signifies nothing) to
be a Traitor; and spoke with a Gentleman that is now a Judge amongst your
selves ( viz. M. Rigby) at the House door, who in some great Ones names
proffered me large matters if I would do as I should be directed by them; after
this I went home to mine own house in Southwark, where I stayed in peace and
quietness, well enough knowing the Votes that that day past against me, without
either particular accusation, or accuser, or any such thing; where I stayed,
when as I might easily have escaped the hands of mine enemies, and bin gone;
but having the sweet peace of a good Conscience within me, which did assure me
that I had done nothing that was against the Welfare of the Nation of England
in general, nor against the welfare of any one particular man in England, but
really wished it well, and all its well-wishers.

I say that notwithstanding my certain knowledge of all that at the House had
past against me, and although I also knew that the further design against me,
which was, that the Council of State (as they are called) would take me away
thereupon with armed force the next morning; yet notwithstanding all this, I
stirred not out of my House, but remained there till about five a clock the
next morning, at which time 200 or 300. armed Horse and Foot (without so much
as one Civil or Magisterial Officer with them) came by force of Arms, and haled
me out of bed from my Wife and Children, not according to the Law of England,
as is expressly provided in two several Statutes, viz. the 1. of Edw. 6. Chap.
12. and the 5. and 6. of Ed. 6. Chapter 11. by which rules of the Law, and no
other, they ought to have proceeded against me from first to last; and I am
sure they both expressly provide, that if any man be accused of Treason, that he
shall be accused first to one of the Kings Council, or to one of the Kings
Justices of Assize, or else to one of the Kings Justices of the Peace, being of
the Quorum, or to two Justices of the Peace within the Shire where the same
offense or offenses shall happen to be done or committed. See also to this
purpose part 3. of Cooks Instit. Chapter High Treason, f. 26. 27, 28. and part 1.
Parl. Declar. in the case of the L. Kimbolton, and the 5. members, p. 38, 39,
76, 77


But contrary to these and other wholesome and good Laws (although there has bin
an eight years War in England (pretendedly) for the preservation of the Laws
and Liberties of England, yet I say, contrary to the express Tenor of these
Laws, as also of the Petition of Right, yea and also of the express Letter of
that excellent Law that abolished the Star Chamber this Parliament) was I by
force of Arms (that never fortified my House against the present Power, nor
never disputed any of their Summons, though sent by the meanest man that ever
appertained to them, and who if they had sent their Warrant for me by a child,
I would have gone to them) I was fetched out of my bed in terror and
affrightment, and to the subversion of the Laws and Liberties of England, and
led through London streets with hundreds of armed men (like an algier captive)
to their main-Guard at Paul's, where a mighty guard stayed for the further
conducting me by force of Arms to White Hall: Now Sir, if I had committed
Treason, I ought not to have bin apprehended and proceeded against by armed
mercenary Soldiers, but by Civil and Magisterial Officers, and no other;
according to those excellent privileges that the Parliament themselves in the
year 1641. in their own book of Declarations, p. 36, 37, 76, 77. did claim for
those six Members, viz. the Lord Kimbolton, M. Pym, M. Hollis, M. Stroud, Sir
Arthur Hasleridge, and M. Hamden; I say and aver, I ought to have had the
process of the Law of England, due Process of Law according to the
forementioned Statutes and Presidents, for I never forceably resisted or
contended with the Parliament, and therefore ought to have had my Warrant
served upon me by a Constable, or the like Civil Officer, and upon no pretense
whatsoever, ought I to have been forced out of my bed and house by Mercenary
armed Officers and Soldiers. But Sir coming to White Hall, I was there also
kept by armed men, contrary to all Law and justice, and by armed men against
Law, I was by force carried before a company of Gentlemen sitting at
Darby-house, that look upon themselves as Authorized by the Parliament, to be a
Committee or Council of State, (who by the Law I am sure in any kind had
nothing at all to do with me in cases of pretended Treasons) where I was
brought before M. John Bradshaw, sometimes a Councellor for my self before the
House of Lords against my unjust Star Chamber Judges; who there in my behalf
Feb. 1645. did urge against the Lords of the Star Chamber as the highest Crime
against the liberties of the people that could be, as being Illegal, Arbitrary,
and Tyrannical, that the Lords in Star Chamber should censure me to be whipped,
pillared, etc. for no other cause but for refusing to answer their
Interrogatories against my self; and when I was brought before the said
Council of State, I saw no accuser, no prosecuter, no accusation, nor charge,
nor indictment; but all the Crime that there was laid unto my charge, was M.
Bradshawe's very seriously examining me to questions against my self; although
I am confident he could not forget, that himself and M. John Cook were my
Councellers in Feb. 1645. at the Bar of the House of Lords, where he did most
vehemently aggravate, and with detestations condemn the Lords of the
Star-chambers unjust and wicked dealing with English freemen, in censuring them
for their refusing to answer to questions concerning themselves, and yet
notwithstanding, walked with his dealing with me in the very steps that
formerly he had bitterly condemned in the Star Chamber Lords; yea and there for
refusing to answer his questions, (for any thing he declared to me to the
contrary) committed me to Prison for Treason in general; and you know very
well, better then I do, that by your own Law, generals in Law signify nothing.


Judge Jarmen. M. Lilburne you very much abuse and wrong your self, for you
very well know M. Bradshaw is now denominated by another name, namely, Lord
President to the Council of State of England, and it would well become you in
your condition so to have styled him.


Lieut: Col. Lilburne. And although no crime in Law (which ought to be
particularly expressed) was laid unto my charge, yet when I was first
imprisoned, there were thousands of my friends (well wishers to the freedoms
of England, and to the common cause in which they had been engaged in for these
eight years together) both old and young, both masters of families, young men
and apprentises, and abundance of others of the feminine sex too, with
abundance of cordial honest men in several Countries, joined in several
rational and fair petitions, and delivered them to the House in the behalf of
my self and my three fellow Prisoners; in which they most earnestly entreated
them, that they would not prejudge us before we were heard, and knew our
accusers and accusations; but rather that they would release us, and take off
their prejudgeing Votes against us, which they had caused to be proclaimed in
all the public places of the Nation against us, and let us have a fair and
Legal Trial according to the Laws of England, and according to the
undeniable Privileges of the due process of the Law from first to last, and
they would put in any security that they would require of them, that we should
be forthcomming at all times, to answer whatsoever in Law could be laid to our
charge; unto all which petitions which were very many, they could get no manner
of satisfying answer, but slights, abuses, and scorns.

But besides this Gentlemen, that you may see that I am rational, and that you
may see I have an innocent and quiet Conscience within me, that does not accuse
me nor rerrifie me, therefore I must acquaint you that I again and again
proffered my chiefest Adversaries, and sent often to them, being earnestly
desitous to choose two Members of the House of Commons, and let them choose two
more whom they pleased, and I would withal my heart freely refer all manner of
difference betwixt them and me, to the final determination and judgment of
four of their fellow Members; but all this would do no good, and yet they would
not in the least let me understand what was the thing they desired of me, but
by their Power and Will, I had my pockets and Chamber searched to find out
advantages against me, and also locked up close Prisoner, with Centinells night
and day set at my door, and denied the access and sight of my Wife and
Children for some certain time, and for about twenty weeks together in the heat
of summer, kept close Prisoner, and denied the liberty of the Prison, and my
estate with a strong hand taken away from me, without any pretense (or due
process) of Law, to the value of almost three thousand pounds, that was Legally
and justly invested in me, and in my possession, but being I will avoid (at
this time especially) provocations as much as I can, I will name no person by
whose Power and Will it has been done, although he be notoriously known, but
the Gentleman that took it away by his pleasure, without all rules of Law or
justice, told my Father to this purpose, that I was a Traitor and under the
Parliaments displeasure, and therefore he would secure it from me, although I
were not in the least convicted of any crime, neither in Law, then, or for many
months after, had I the least pretense of crime laid unto my charge: And
although my own estate by force against Law was taken from me, yet was I also
denied in my close imprisonment that Legal allowance that should have kept me
alive; for in all this miserable condition I never yet received a penny of my
Legal allowance, but was positively denied that restimony and Legal Right
that the late King constantly allowed to all the Members of the Parliament that
were committed in the third of his Reign, and several other times; unto whom
for their diet he allowed three, four, and five pounds a week, according to
their quality, although they had great and large estates peaceably in their
possession: And one of them that is now beyond the Seas, a Colonel, I have
forgot his name, (but it was Colonel Long) confessed in the Lieutenant of the
Tower's own Chamber the last year, that the King was so bountiful to him and
the rest of his fellow Prisoners, that he let them enjoy the allowance of about
four or five pounds a week for diet, and that while he was Prisoner in the
Tower, he spent the King about 1500l. for his own particular self in provision;
but notwithstanding I was denied all this, and to fill up the height of the
insufferable provocations put upon me, abundance of my own and ancient
acquaintance were set upon me to callumniate, bespatter, and reproach me; yea,
and to endeavor to become instruments to take away my life, some of them
confessing they were underhand set on by some Parliament men; all whose base
and wicked petitions, papers, and books preferred and published against me,
were hugged and embraced, althongh for my own part I do not know of any man in
this world that can justly tax me with any action, or maintaining any
principles or tenants but what does become a man that does believe all that is
contained in the Law and the Gospel, and does believe the Resurrection of the
dead and life Erernal; nay, that does believe that I my self shall arise and
go to the Lord of Glory: Yet notwithstanding all these unparaleld provocations
put upon me, especially by diverse of my old acquaintance, whom I had upon all
occasions faithfully served, but never wronged, injured, nor provoked; being
instigated (as they themselves confess in some of their own Congregations) by
Parliament men so to do.

Truly sirs, I appeal to your own judgments and to your Consciences, and to
all the people that hear me this day, whether all these provocations laid upon
a poor man which is but dust and ashes, as well as other men, be not too
insupportable a burden, and too much for the causers of them to take advantage
of the fruits produced by them, to destroy me, and take away my life.

And therefore Sir, in the first place I shall humbly crave that favor and
right, seeing I am brought before you by a piece of parchment that truly I
could not read, neither could he do it that shwed it me, (I mean the Lieutenant
of the Tower) for admit that if I did well understand Latin, as indeed I do
not, only some ordinary words, yet was it in such an unusual strange hand that
I could not read it; and therefore being I am brought before you implicitly,
and not as I conceive an Englishman ought to be, who ought to see and read the
Authority by virtue of which he is convened before any power: Its true, I know
some of you Gentlemen that I see sit before me, yet not many of you, and truly
I have nothing but a piece of un-legeable Parchment, which cannot satisfy my
understanding of the Legalnesse of my convention before you, but being I am not
able to dispute that Power that compulsively brought me, but here I am, and
therefore in order to the declaring of my self to be a true Englishman, I most
humbly crave (and that I think is consonant to reason, and I hope to Law too)
that I may see and hear read, the Commission by virtue of which you sit here
this day, and convene my Person before you, that so I may compare it to the
Law, and consider whether or no that by my pleading before you by virtue of it,
I do not betray my liberties; and rherefore I humbly crave that you would let
me hear your Commission read; for this Court is no ordinary and common Assizes,
Sessions, or Goaldelivery, the only proper Courts for trying me for all
criminal faults, yea and those also ought to sit where the Crimes are
committed; and I was imprisoned for a pretended Crime, pretended to be
committed in the County of Surry; where by the common Law of England, and
express Statutes, I ought to be tried therefore, and no where else.

And therefore being brought in an extraordinary manner to such an
extraordinary place as this, which is no ordinary Assizes nor Sessions, no nor
yet in mine own County, therefore I again humbly desire that you will be
pleased to let me see and hear your extraordinary Commission, that so I may
consider whether the extent or latitude of the Commission be consonant or no to
the Petition of Right, and other the good old Laws of England, for those that
now sit at Westminster, exercising the Supreme Power, by two special
Declarations, the one dated the ninth of February last, and the other the
seventeenth of March last, have positively declared, and called God to witness,
that they will maintain, preserve, and defend that excellentest of Laws, the
Petition of Right, as in the seventh page of the last Declaration they call it;
and that the people of England shall enjoy all the benefit therein contained,
whether to Life, Liberty, or Estate, with all things incident thereunto; and
therefore I humbly beg and crave that favor from you, that seeing to me you
appear to be sent in an extraordinary manner, not according to the ordinary
Customs of the Laws of England, that you will be pleased to let me hear your
Commission read, that so I may consider of the consonancy thereof to the
Petition of Right, and other the good old Laws of England; and after the
reading of it, I hope I shall return you such an answer as does become a
rational and ingenious man; who though he has right to all the Privileges of
the Laws of England, and has read all the declared and plain Laws of England,
that are to me the fundamentals of all, yet the practick part of the Law, which
are in other Tongues besides the English, I cannot read, know, nor understand;
and in the Petition of Right, and other the good old Fundamental Laws of
England, I can find no Foundation or Bottom for such an extraordinary Court as
this before my eyes seems to be; and therefore I again make it my most humble
suit to hear your Commission read.


Judge Kebell, M. Lilburn you are fully heard.


M. Prideaux Attorney Genesis My Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar nor none else
have cause to complain that he has wanted your patience in being fully heard.
My Lord, that which at the beginning of his Arraignment you expected from him,
which was to hold up his hand, he denied, and upon his denial, desired liberty
of speech to speak, and he has enjoyed it: But my Lord, how pertinent his
discourse is, to what was proposed to him, the Court and all that hear him will
judge; My Lord, I am not here to justify the actings of those that here he
has complained against; but they are a Court, they are a Council, and my
thoughts are (and so ought his to be) honorable of them, and what they have
done (my Lord) toward him in ordering this Court to try him, is but justice:
My Lord, there is no special Commission of Oyer and Terminer but a general
Commission, and upon that general Commission, here is a special presentment of
M. Lilburn here at the Bar, the general Commission is according to the Law of
the Land, and upon that special presentment it is expected he may be proceeded
against according to Law. And for your Commission, my Lord, that has been read
and published to the Court, before M. Lilburn came to the Court, and the Court
is satisfied with it, that it is in the ordinary way, and I hope the judgment
you will give, will declare it to be according to the Law, in the ordinary way:
And as for the Commission it self in the form of it, it is not a tittle varied
from the ordinary accustomed form. But my Lord, the Petition of Right, Magna
Charta, the Statutes, and all Declarations that have been spoken of, they are
all confirmed in this, and all do confirm it, for in that ordinary tract that
has been practiced in this Nation for five hundred years is M. Lilburn now to
be tried, and that by the old good Laws of England, M. Lilburns Birthright
and every man's else; he has his Trial, the beginning of which has been M.
Lilburns presentment, which is already found by the Grand inquest, who are men
of Integrity, men of ability, men of knowledge. My Lord, he is now to come to
his Trial, not in an extraordinary way, but by a Jury of good and Legal men of
the Neighborhood, by men that do know my Lord, and understand what is fact,
what is Law Mark that well, for Judge Jermane caled it a damnable Doctrine,
when Mr. Lilburn declared, the Jury were Judges of Law as well as of fact.
, and to do justice indiffer ently between both.

And my Lord, I do know, and publish to all that now hear me, that the
Commission for Trial of M. Lilburn this day, for those differences that
arebetween the State and M. Lilburn is free in Law from all those exceptions
that he is pleased to put upon it, and is unquestionably Legal, and used for
these many hundred years together. And as for M. Lilburns declaring the fact
for which he was Originally imprisoned, for to be committed in Surry, and
therefore there in Law he ought to be Tried, and not here in London, being
another County: As for M. Lilburns Crimes committed in Surry, his own
Conscience best knows what they are; but M. Lilburn at most can but yet guess
at what we intend to Try him here for, or lay unto his charge.

But my Lord, if M. Lilburn will please to put himself upon his Trial,
according to Law, my Lord I hope the Court, and all that hears and sees their
proceedings will receive full satisfaction in the legality and fairness of
their proceedings against him, and himself the benefit of justice and Law.


Lieut: Col. Lilburn. Sir, by your favor, in two words, I shall not be
tedious; I now perceive who is my accuser and prosecuter, the Gentleman that is
a very inequal one, for he is one of the Creators (being a Member of the House)
of you that sit here this day to be my Judges, and therefore an overawing and
unfit accuser or prosecutor.


Lord Keeble. M. Lilburn, I pray you hear me a word, for now you speak not
Rationally nor discreetly, you have had a fair respect and hearing, what you
speak of liberties and laws, we come here to maintain them for all, and for
you too; and we also come for to vindicate our actions; and as for that you
speak of in reference to the Commission, I must let you know, the Commission is
warrantable by the laws of England for this five hundred years, nay and before
five hundred years in substance: The second thing that you speak to, is, that
you were apprehended in such an hostile manner, understanding by law you should
have been taken in an ordinary way by an ordinary Officer: But M. Lilburn, in
all apprehensions of Traitors, Fellons, and Murderers is not the Power of the
County to be raised, and the Sheriff is to call and take what Power he pleases.


Lieut: Col. Lilburn. By your favor Sir, not unless I resist, which I did
not, and besides, there was no Sheriff nor no other civil Officer at my
Apprehension.


Lord Keeble, M. Lilburn spare your felf, it is as they are informed of the
danger of the man, they may do it before ever they see him. The next thing you
are upon, is the wrong and injustice that you received by the proceedings in
the Star Chamber against you, you see the proceedings there have been
questioned, and you justified; if there be any thing else that has been by
others in the North or elsewhere acted, there is no man here that will justify
them in their evil, but for a private man as you are to tell us of them here,
and to come and tell us to our faces that we are Created and constituted by the
Atturny General, we will not suffer it, nor further hear of it; and therefore
M. Lilburn although you have spoken fair words, (and happily more then your
friends expected from you) I must tell you that words are but words, and it
were well that you would do as well and as Rationally as becomes a Rational
man, as you have declared you will.


Lieut: Col. Lilburn, With your favor but one word more.


Judge Jerman. M. Lilburn, pray spare a word, and hear the Court, this Court
sits here by lawful Authority, and that is from the Parliament, that are the
Supreme Authority of England, so that our Power is not derived from those that
have no Rightful Authority to constitute us, but our Power is from the Public
Authority of England, which is now by an Admirable act of Gods providence,
lately, but truly revived, and settled by God upon them. By that Authority this
Court does now sit, and you are brought here before them that are most of us
Judges of the Law, and we are sworn to do you and every man justice and right
according as his cause requires; according to Law, Judgment, equity, and
reason. And it was said truly, that which my brother Heath (who now is dead)
did say, Its the the duty of the Judges to be of Council with the Prisoner, at
the Bar before him, and to do that which they are sworn to do, and that you
shall have; and accordingly you have received more favor then ever I heard, of
a Prisoner that was accused of Treason in my life ever had. And as for the
Commission, I must tell you, it is usual to have Commissions of Oyer and
Terminer, and that even in Term time for high offenses, and such as tend to
the destruction of the Nation, as Overburies did; and those that tend to
Capital Treason, whereof you are now accused by a Grand Jury of London, that
are Freemen of London, Citizens, able men, men of Religion, men of Estate, men
of Conscience, men of quality, these are your accusers; who have found you upon
their Oaths guilty of Treason, and cry out to us the Judges for justice against
you; and it is they, not we that proceeds against you: And as for our
Commission, it is according to the good old Laws of the Land, founded upon the
Statute made in Edward the firsts time, called Westminster the second: That
Statute Authorizeth Commissions, according to that Commission we sit by here
this day; and Edward the first was a wise and a good Prince, and consented to
the People, to let them have such Commissions as ours we sit by is, which the
People had fought stoutly for, in the Barrons wars in his Fathers time, and
also in his, for he himself was taken Prisoner at Jews in the County of
Sussex; and being a wise Prince, he knew that the love of the people was not
more to be got then by wholesome and safe laws; that every man's life, and every
man's estate, and every man's liberty might be preserved by, and not be subject
to any Arbitrary Will or Power, but that the sober and discreet and wise Laws
of the Kingdom, which our Ancestors won by their swords, might be their
protectors; a special, one of which was this Statute of Westminster the second
made in Edward the Firsts time; by virtue of which Statute is this Commission
directed to the Justices of the one Bench and the other, and they be all here
this day; but only those that of necessity must attend at Westminster, only
to preserve the Term. Nou you are come to answer to that Charge, which has
been the greatest opposition to the settlement of Government that can be, I
mean, the settlement of the Supreme Authority of the Nation, in the Commons now
assembled in Parliament, not newly erected but revived into the right place and
hands, for it is the Law of England revived, that the Supreme Authority is in
the But by his favor never before practiced nor used without both King and
Lords, a president of which he is desired to show and produce out of any of his
Law Books.
Commons assembled in the Parliament of England: For so it was in the Saxons
time, and in the Romans time, and in all times But there was before the
Conquest neither Innes of Court, Lawyers, nor Term Judges in England, but only
twelve good and legal men, chosen in each Hundred, finally to decide all
controversies; which lasted till William the Conqueror subdued that excellent
Constitution, and instead thereof, introduced by His Will and Sword (contrary
to His Solemn Oath three several times taken) the intolerable bondage of
Westminster Hall, or Term Judges, and their Outlandish or Norman Law Practice
in the French Tongue; as all the English Chronicles universally and truly
declare.
it has bin as it is now; which will sufficiently justify our present
Proceedings against you; and therefore I say, for the Commission it self, it is
in general for the Trial of all Treasons what-soever: But the grand Inquest
have found out no other Traitor that they may accuse, but Master John Lilburn,
who is now here at the Bar; But it is not a bare accusation, but it is the
solemn Verdict of almost a double Jury that has appeared upon the Roll, and
upon their Oaths do conceive those crimes of Treason that are laid against you,
to be of so dangerous consequence against the State and Commonwealth, that
they do call for Justice against you as a Traitor, already found guilty: And
therefore I do require you as you are an Englishman, and a rational man, that
you do conform your self, and tell us plainly what you will do, as in reference
to the putting your self upon your Trial by the Law, and hear with Patience
those Offenses of Treason that are laid to your Charge.


Lieut. Col. Lilburn. May it please you Sir, by your favor, I shall not now
trouble you with many words.


Lord Keeble. You go improperly to work.


Lieut. Colonel Lilburne. That Gentleman I do not know his Name, (pointing to
Judge Iarmen) you were pleased to say that I have had more Favor then ever you
have heard of any before ever had in the like case: But Sir, by your Favor, I
shall tell you of some that in the like case have had as much, if not more, and
that was Throgmorton in Queen Mary's time, who was impeached of higher Treason
than now I am, and that in the days of the commonly accounted bloudiest and
cruellest Prince that this many hundreds of years has reigned in England; and
yet Sir, I am sure in this very place, and that by special Commission of Oyer
and Terminer; who was accused for being one of the chiefest Confederates with
Wyat in his Kentish Rebellion; which Wyat marched with an Army against the
Queen to London, for which actual War or Rebellion, Throgmorton was in this
place arraigned as a Traitor, and enjoyed as much, if not more favor then I
have now enjoyed, although his then Judges and Prosecuter were bent to take
away Whose remarkable and excellent Defense, you may at large read in
Hollingsheads Chronicle, in the life of Q. Mary, which discourse is excellently
well worth the speedy Reprinting, especially seeing men are made Traitors for
words; which cruelty Q. Mary abhorred, as may clearly be read in that excellent
Statute of his, made in the first year of Her Reign, Chap. 1.
his life, right or wrong; and therefore Sir, by your favor, it is no
extraordinary favor that you have afforded me, it is but only my right, by
law, Justice, and common Equity: But Sir, I shall be short, and put my business
to a plain issue, which is this.

I have here at the Bar given in many strong Arguments against the validity and
legality of a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and supposing that to be
such an one by virtue of which you sit, and intend to try me for my life; and
therefore I have humbly desired (as in reason, and I think in law I may justly
do) to hear your Commission read; But you have positively denied me that, and
therefore I desire all my Friends, and all the people that hear me this day, to
bear witness and take notice, that you contrary to Reason and common Equity,
denied me to let me hear read your Commission by Virtue of which you go about
to take away my life; which I cannot choose but desire them to take notice, I
declare to be very hard measure.

But Sir, to save my self from your fore-lay'd shares, and desired advantage
against me, I will come a little closer to the business: You demand I should
hold up my hand at the Bar, and I know not what it means, neither what in law
it signifies; Its true, I have read the most part of the laws that are in
English, which I take to be the Foundation of all our English legal
Privileges, and in them I cannot find any thing that does clearly declare unto
me the full signification or meaning of a man's holding up his hand at the Bar;
Therefore if you please but to explain what the meaning and signification of
holding up the hand at the Bar is, I shall seriously consider of it, and I
hope return you a Rational and discreet answer; for truly in those laws which
are in the English Tongue that I have read, although I find mentioned maid of
holding up the hand, yet I cannnt find much of the full signification of it,
only I find it to be of a large extent; and as for those laws, or rather the
practick part of the law, that are in French and Lattin, I cannot read them,
and therefore much less understand them; in which regard, for me to hold up my
hand at the Bar, before I understand the true signification of it in law,
(which tells me it is in it self a ticklish thing) were for me to throw away
my own life upon a puntillio or nicity, that I am ignorant of; and therefore
truly I think I should be a very fool in my own ignorance to run that danger,
and therefore Sir., I humbly desire the clear explination of the meaning of it
in law, and after that I shall give you a fair and rational answer.


Lord Keeble. M. Lilburn, you shall see we will deal very Rationally with you,
(and not ensnare you in the least manner) if that be all. The holding up of
your hand, we will tell you what it means, and signifies in Law; the calling
to the party to hold up his hand at the Bar, is no more but for the special
notice that the party is the man inquired for or called on, and therefore if
you be M. John Lilburn, and be the man that we charge, do but say that you are
the man, and that you are there, and it shall suffice.


Lieut. Col. Lilburn. I am John Lilburn, son to M. Richard Lilburn of


Lord Keeble, M. Lilburn, what you have to say we will hear presently, only
take notice, that we will take your acknowledging of your name to be
sufficient, if you will say that you are the man; you are called by your name,
you have come and answered to your name, in order to your answering, the Charge
to be read against you; do but this and it shall suffice, without holding up
your hand: therefore let us have no more discourse as to that.


Judge Jerman. M. Lilburn, pray spare me a word, for you have been heard with
patience, you have desired to have the Right of the Law of England, and yet you
do question a Fundamental thing that has been always used in case of Criminal
offenses. By the Law of England, that you desire to have the meaning of it, is
but just but you must know that the Law of England is the Law of God, and if
there be any thing in the Law of England but what was by admirable Constitution
and Reason, we would not meddle with it; but I pray know this, that the Law of
England is no written Law, it is the Law that has been maintained by our
Ancestors, by the tried rules of Reason, and the prime Laws of Nature; for it
does not depend upon statutes or written and declared words But says M. Hyde
in his forementioned Argument, against the Northern special Commission of
Oyer and Terminer, page 411. Misera servitus est, ubi jus est vagum aut
incognitum. That is to say, It is a miserable servitude, where the law is
uncertain or unknown: And the very same says that great Oracle of the law, Sir
Edward Cook, in the Proem to the third part of his Institutes; and in the
fourth part fol. 332. and in several places besides. But the people may easily
see hereby, that these present Judges drives to have no other law in being in
England, but what is in their own and their masters breasts, (that so by
pretense of law, they may give away all the liberties and proprieties of the
people of the Nation, as their brother Judges did lately to the King, in the
case of Ship money) and then woe and woe to the people to be brought back again
to that Faith, that ignorance is the Mother of devotion or obedience.
, or lines; and this is our Laws that have been maintained by our Ancestors,
and is subordinate to the law ^. Will of God; therefore I say again, the Law of
England is pure, Primitive Reason, uncorrupted and unpolluted by humane humors,
or humane corruptions, Wits, or Wills; that's the Law of England. There be two
reasons why holding up the hand has been used always. First for notice that
those that are called for Capital and Criminal offenses, that they hold up
their hands, is, to declare that they are the men. My Lord has given you this
one reason already, which I say is, that he be notified by holding up thet hand
to all the beholders and those that be present and hear him, that he is the
man; but besides this, there is more in it, that's thus; a pure innocent hand,
does set forth a clear unspotted heart, that so the heart and hand put together
might betoken Innocence. And therefore hold up your hand, that thereby you may
declare you have a pure innocent heart; if you refuse to do this, you do
wilfully deprive your self of the benefit of one of the main proceedings and
customs of the Laws of England: Now for this do what you think fit.


M, Lilburn. Well then Sir, (applying himself to M. Keeble as the President of
the Court) I take your Explanation of it, and lay hold of that.


Lord Keeble. You must answer Positively Sir, for you have had advice enough,
yea good advice if you embrace it, it is good advice to you, but the Court does
not expect an answer from you to what has been already said to you, but they
expect that without any more dispute you apply your self to answer according
to that which you are advised unto, do it if you will, and if you will but
answer to it so as has been declared to you, it shall suffice; but so far
you must go to this, as to declare whether you be the man or no before you go
away; and therefore dispute it no more, lest you deprive your self of the
benefit of the Law.


Leut. Col. Lilburn. Well then Sir, according to your own explanation, I say my
Name is John Lilburn son to M. Richard Lilburn, of the County of Durham, a
Freeman of the City of London, and sometimes Lieutenant Colonel in the
Parliaments Army; and if you will not believe that I am the man, my Guardian
the Lieutenant of the Tower there (pointing to him) will aver that I am.


Lord Keeble. So then you are the man.


Judge Jarmen. Ask him again, hearken M. Lilburn, hearken what he says, and
use that moderation, and temper, and discretion that you have promised.


Lieut. Col. Lilburn. One word more, and I shall have done, and that is by the
law of England, (but being interrupted he cried out) with your favor Sir, I
will come to the main thing, I hope you do not go about to Circumvent me,
therefore hear me I beseech you.


Lord Keebel. Hear the Court M. Lilburn, there shall be nothing of
Circumvention or interruption, but as you have professed to be a Rational and
understanding man in words, let your deeds so declare you.


Lieut. Col. Lilburn. Sir, I beseech you do not supprise me with puntilios, or
nicities, which are hard things for me to lose my life upon, I tell you again,
my Name is John Lilburn, son to M. Richard Lilburn.


Lord Keeble. Talk not of puntilios with us, nor talk not of Judges made by the
laws, you shall not want law; but if you talk of puntilios here in this room,
we will stop that language.


L. Col. Lil. Truly, Sir, I am upon my life, and shall my ignorance of the
formalities of the law in the practicke part thereof destroy me, God forbid!
therefore give me but leave to speak for my life, or else knock me on the head,
and murder me where I stand, which is more righteous and just then to do it
by pretense of Justice. Sir, I know that Mr. Bradshaw himself, President to
the high Court of Justice, as it was called, gave Duke Hamilton (a hostile
enemy) leave to speak to the punctilltos of the law; yea, and to my knowledge
again and again made an engagement unto him and the rest tried with him, that
the Court nor he would not by virtue of their ignorance of the meeties or
formalities of the law, take advantage against them to destroy them; but did
declare again and again that all advantages of formalities should be totally
laid aside, and not in the least made use of against them to their prejudice,
and I hope you will grant me, that have often been in Arms for you, but never
against you, as much favor and privilege as was granted to Duke Hamilton,
never of your party, but a General of a numerous Army against you.


Lord Keble. Take it as you will, we have had patience with you, and you must
and shall have patience with us; we will pass over all that is by past, but
take heed by your surly crosnesse you give not advantage in the face of the
Court, to pass sentence against you, without any further proceedings, or
proof of your actions, but what our own eyes see. The ceremony is for your
advantage more then you are aware of: but if you confess your self to be Mr.
John Lilburn, we have done as to that.


Judge Jarman. Mr. Lilburn, at the beginning you talked of moderation, and that
you would carry your self with rationality, which methinks in your actions you
fall short of, for you have said that Mr. Attorney general was a very unequal
prosecutor of you, because you say he was the creator Mr. Lilburn here
endeavoted to speak, and show the Judge his mistake, for he did not say that
Mr. Prideaux was the creator of the commission, but that he was one of the
creators of all the Judges, and thereby was judge of his Judges, and in that
regard he was no compotent accuser or prosecutor, but they would not suffer him
to speak but cried out, hear the Court, which thing also they frequently did
afterward.
of our Commission. Pray hear me, I heard you; and do not you think to put
affronts upon us undisserv'd: And as for that man that you call M. Bradshaw, I
tell you again he is L. President of the Council of State of the Commonwealth
of England, and why you should so much neglect him, does not so much savor of
rationality and moderation, as you pretend your self to be possessed with.


Lord Keble. Come, will you read the Indictment?


Mr. Broughton reads. Hold up your hand John Lilburn, and hearken to your
charge.

Thou standst indicted of high Treason by the name of John Lilburn, late of
London, Gentleman, for that thou as a false Traitor, not having the fear of God
before thy eyes, but being stirred up and moved by the instigation of the
Devil, etc. as it follows verbatim, in the second days proceedings, to
which the Reader is referred.


Mr. Broughton. What say thou John Lilburn, art thou guilty of this Treason
whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty.


L. Col. Lilb. Gentlemen, I require the favor that I may be heard, and I shall
desire nothing but that which may stand with reason and justice.


Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, We shall deal with you according to reason and
justice, and after such a manner as you your self shall judge rational and
right.


L. Col. Lilburn. Gentlemen, I shall speak but a few words, I beseech you hear
me, for it is upon my life.


Lord Keble. You say you will deal rationally in those ways; that is to be
expected from you the first in reason, is to answer, and plead, and before you
so do, you cannot be heard.


L. Col. Lilburn. Give me leave to speak, and I shall not speak 6 lines (which
with much struggling being granted, Mr. Lilburn went on and said to this effect.)

Then Sir, thus, By the laws of England I am not to answer to questions
against, or concerning my self.


Lord Keble. You shall not be compeld.


Another Judge. Mr. Lilburn, is this to answer against your self, to say you
are not guilty, by the laws of the Land you are to plead to your charge, and
it is no accusing of your self to say guilty, or not guilty.


L. Coll. Lilb. Sir, by your favor. --


Judge Keble. To answer that you are not guilty, is no great matter, nor definit
in law.


L. Col. Lilb. By the law of England I am to be tried by a Rule, but I do not
know by the rules of the law, what benefit, in reference to my exception
against the illegality of my Indictment, I may deprive my self of, in case I
should answer before I except.


Lord Keble. The law is plain, that you are positively to answer, guilty or not
guilty, which you please.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, By the Petition of Right, I am not to answer to any
Questions concerning my self; therefore I humbly entreat you to afford ^^e the
privileges of the laws of England, and I will return a positive answer to it,
if you will but please to allow me Counsel, that I may consult with them, for
I am ignorant of the formalities of law in the practick part of it, although I
here declare I own the good old laws of England, and a legal Jury of 12. men,
yea, and a trial by a jury of legal men: and I do humbly crave (Sir) a copy
of the Indictment, or so much of it as I may ground my plea upon it, and
reasonable time to consult with my Council, although it be but 8. or 9. days.


Lord Keble. You speak well, but you must do well, it is that we come for, the
rationablenesse of it is this, that you should shortly answer (Sir) to that
question, and in a rational legal way: when you have answered it, you shall
have liberty to make your defense, to maintain that you say; but this that we
speak now of, is a thing in your own breast, in your own knowledge, whether you
be guilty of this that is laid to your charge, or no: And if you be clear, you
cannot wrong your self, nor your conscience; for in saying not guilty, you
know better what you say then any other does.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I am ignorant of the formalities of the Law, having no
books in English wherein I can read them: and as for other tongues I
understand none, and therefore for you to take away my life for my ignorance,
when the practick part of the Law, or the formalities thereof is locked up in
strange language, that it is impossible for me to read or understand, is
extreme hard.

It is true, in those English plain laws which I have read, I find something
spoken of it; but must aver that I find there is a great deal of nicity and
danger in locking a man up to single formalities, in answering guilty, or not
guilty, and therefore I beseech to assign me Council, to inform my ignorance,
and give me but leave to consult with my Council, and I will return you an
answer according to your desire, without any demurre, as soon as it is
possible for me to know what gro^nds I go upon.


Mr. Broughton. John Lilburn, what say thou, art thou guilty of the Treason
laid unto thy charge, or art thou not guilty.


L. Col. Lilb. But under favor thus, for you to come to ensnare and entrap me
with unknown nicities and formalities, that are locked up in the French and
Latin tongue, and cannot be read in English books, they being not expressed in
any law of the Kingdom, published in our own English tongue: it is not fair
play according to the law of England, plainly in English expressed in the
Petition of Right, and other the good old statute-Lawes of the Land: Therefore
I again humbly desire to have Council assigned to me to consult with what
these formalities in law signify, so that I may not throw away my life
ignorantly upon forms.


Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, we cannot grant you that favor, it is not consistent
to the law, whatsoever you say to the contrary?


L. Col. Lilb. I hope you will not go about to ensnare me, and take away my
life for punctillios.


Another Judge. Well then, you will not plead?


L. Col. Lilb. Yes, if I may be allowed that which I conceive to be my birth
right and privilege, to consult with counsel, or that you please to make the
sameengagement to me that Mr. Bradshaw, as the President of the high Court of
justice made to Duke Hamilton, which was, that the Court would take no
advantage at all at his ignorance in the nicities and formalities of the law in
his pleading; let me but enjoy this engagement from you, and I will plead.


Lord Keble. You shall have that which is according to the law, therefore Mr.
Lilburn I advise you for to plad, and you shall have fair play, and no
advantage taken against you by your ignorance of the formalitie of the law?


L. Col. Lilb. Well then, Sir, upon that engagement, and because, I see you are
so positive in the thing -- This is my answer, that I am not guilty of any of
the Treasons in manner and form, as they are there laid down in that
indictment, pointing to it, and therefore now Sir, having pleaded, I crave the
liberty of England, that you will assign me counsel.


Mr. Broughton. By whom will thou be tried?


L. Col. Lilb. By the known laws of England, and a legal jury of my equals,
constituted according to law.


Mr. Brought. By whom will thou be tried?


L. Col. Lilb. By the known laws of England, I mean by the liberties and
privileges of the laws of England, and a jury of my equals legally chosen:
and now Sir, I again desire Counsel to be assigned me to consult with, in
point of law, that so I may not destroy my self through my ignorance; this is
but the same privilege that was granted at Oxford unto me and the rest of my
fellow prisoners arraigned with me.


One of the Clerks. You must say by God and your country, that is the form of
the law?


L. Col. Lilb. Why must I say so?


Another Judge. This is the form and law of the Land, will you plead Mr.
Lilburn, according to the laws of England?


L. C. Lilb. Truly I ^^ver read it Sir, in the laws of England, what it is to
plead in this nature.


Lord Keble. You say you will be tried by the laws of the Land, then it is by
the Country, and so you may plead and do your self no harm; for by the
Country is meant a Jurie of your equals?


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I am doubtful of my ignorance in the Laws, yet I will
return you an answer, you making good your already engaged promises, that you
will take no advantage against me, if through my ignorance, and your
importunity, I plead in any form, that in strictness of acceptance may
deprive me of any real benefit the law will afford me.


Judge Thorp. Mr. Lilburn, you will be tried by the law, and by the rules
thereof, when you say so, you do reallie declare it to be by your country, so
that the true signification of being tried by the law, is the same thing in
substance with being tried by the rules of the law.


L. Col. Lilb. Then I hope my answer is clear and fair, Sir.


Judge Jermin. The formalitie is shortly this, to be tried by God and your
country, no more is meant by it but thus, by God, as God is every where
present, yea, in all Courts of Justice, and sits and knows all things that are
acted, said, and done; the other part of it by your country, that is, by your
country or neighborhood; the Country is called Patria, because your
neighbor and your equals which you are willing to put your self upon the
trial of; by force of that word, the Country, a Jurie of the neighborhood for
trial of you are summoned, now do what you will.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, under your favor thus, then in the negative, I say God is
not locally or corporally here present to try me, or pass upon me; but
affirmative I return this answer, that I desire to be tried in the presence of
that God, that by his omnipotent power is present every where, and beholds all
the actions that are done upon the earth, and sees and knows whether any of
your hearts be possessed with a premeditated malice against me, and whether any
of you come with so much forethought of malice against me, as that in your
hearts you intend to do the utmost you can, right or wrong to destroy me, and
before this alseeing God I desire to be tried, and by my Country, that is to
say, by a jury of my equals, according to the good old laws of the Land.


Justice Thorp. You have spoken very well.


Lord Keble. You have done like an Englishman so far as you have gone, and I
do assure that in any formalities (as you express, orcall them) there shall
be no advantage againsty ou, if you mistake in them. Now what you have the next
to think upon, is your Jurie of your countri-men, or neighbors of your
equals, and I promise you we will take ^are of that, that they shall be good
and lawful men of England?


L. Col. Lilb. I thank you Sir, but under your favor thus, your indictment is
extreme long, and of abundance of particulars, it is impossible that my
memory, or of any one man's in England, can contain it, or carry it in our
heads, and therefore that I may make my defense so as becomes a rational
English man: I earnestly entreat you that now you will be pleased to give me a
copy of my indictment, or so much of it, as you expect a plea from me upon, or
an answer unto, and Counsel assigned me, and time to deba^e with my Counsel,
and subpoena's for witnesses.


Lord Keble. For ^ouncell you need none, Mr. Lilburn, for that not guilty which
you have pleaded, is that which lies in your own breast, which rests in your
own counsel, and you know how it is, and can best plead that your self,
Council lies in matter of law, not of fact.


L. Col. Lilb. Under favor I desire Council, for matter of law, and not for
matter of fact: My indictment I believe in law, is all matter of law, and I
have something to say to it in law.


Lord Keble. If matter of law do arise upon the proof of the fact, you shall
know it, and then shall have Council assigned to you.


L. Col. Lilb. I my self have before this been upon some trialls, and never
before this was denied Council, no nor so much as ever disputed whether I
should have it or no. I also was at a great part of the Earl of Straffords
trial, who was supposed a most notorious Traitor, and yet if my observation
and memory do not exceedingly fail me, he had Council assigned him at his
first desire, and they were continually with him, not only at the Bar when he
was there, but also had continual and free access to him in prison.

Besides Sir, I being accused of Treason in such an extraordinary manner, and
being but an ordinary man my self; no eminent experienced Lawyer, dare well
meddle with my business, no nor so much as bestow a visit upon me; but he runs
a hazard of being undone: and truly my estate is in an extraordinary manner
taken from me, so that I have not money to send messengers up and down
privately to their chambers, and therefore that I may be freely and allowedly
able, without danger of ruin to any man that shall advise me, I shall humbly
crave as my right by law, and I am sure by common equity and justice, that I
may have Council and Soliciters also assigned me.


Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, speak rationally for your self, when there comes a
matter of law, that you are able to say, this is for matter of law, arising
from matter of fact, that has been proved or endeavored to be proved, when
you come beyond that, you shall have it as willingly as you can desire, and
withal, this that you say concerning your Memory, which you say is not able to
carry away, or contain the particulars of this Indictment. The Indictment so
much as will charge your memory will be very short, for it is the publishing of
those books charged upon you in the Indictment, that will be the matter which
will stick, and that matter will be very short, which we must prove against
you, which is only matter of fact, and not of Law, And therefore for fact of
Treason you can be allowed no Counsel, but must plead it your self.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, under favor, you expect from me impossibilities, for
seeing I have been seven months in prison for nothing, and could not in the
least know perfectly what would be laid to my charge, nor after what manner I
should be proceeded against (considering all proceedings against me
hithertoward) have been so absolutely arbitrary, that it was impossible for me
in Law exactly to come provided) and therefore seeing I am now here, and you
pretend to proceed with me according to the due course of Law, and seeing the
form of the proceedings in this manner with me is not expressly and exactly
declared in print in English, which tongue only I can read and understand, and
seeing by the Law which is in English, which I have read, and clearly
understand, that there are a great many snares, and a great many niceties in
the practick, that are formal proceedings of the Law, and seeing I know not
certainly, whether if I proceed to matter of proof, before in Law I make my
exceptions against your Indictment, as to matter, time, and place, I be not in
Law deprived of that benefit, which I principally aim at for the preservation
of my life, therefore I beseech and most earnestly entreat you, to assign me
Counsel to consult with, before I be too far ensnared, and if you will not
do it, and give me some reasonable time to prepare my plea and defense, then
order me to be knocked in the head immediately in the place where I stand
without any further trial, for I must needs be destroyed if you deny me all
the means of my preservation.


Judge Jermine. Mr. Lilburne, It were reasonable to give you satisfaction, if
you would receive it, you say you were present at my Lord of Straffords Trial,
and you say he had Counsel assigned him, not only to stand by him at the
Bar, but to repair to prison to instruct and advise, but that was not a
Trial in such a way as this is: It was a Trial by way of Impeachment before
the Peers assembled in Parliament, and his Attainder was made up into an Act of
Parliament, but that is not a Trial at the common Law, per pares, which is,
that which your self have desired, a Trial by lawful men according to the
Liberties of the Laws of England, After your Answer to your first question,
that is to say, whether you be guilty or not guilty of the things whereof you
are accused, no Counsel in the world can follow till the Fact be proved, and
matter of Law do arise thereupon. So that the first thing that must be done,
the matter of Fact must be proved against you, and then if it shall appear
thereupon to the Court, that matter of Law does arise, and you do expect
Counsel, we must and will perform it, the Court are of your Counsel so far
as to fact. And then in that case, that Law arise thereupon, you may and ought
to have other Counsel assigned, and do not you doubt but the Court will be as
careful of you, as you can be of your self, and allow you more favor, it may
be, then your friends do expect.


L. Col. Lilb. Under your favor, and by your good liking; I was once Arraigned
at Oxford for my life, upon the matter of Treason, for leavying war in
Oxfordshire against the King, as their Indictment then said, and my Arraignment
was by virtue of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, that was (and in Law I am
sure of it) as legal and as just as yours is, and my Lord Chiefe-Justice
Heath, the chief Commissioner or President who was in the eye of the Law, as
legal a Judge as any of you, and yet he --


Lo. Keble. Mr. Lilburne, we do remember it.


L. Col. Lilb. I beseech you give me leave to speak for my self, and to go
on, for my life lies upon it.


Lo. Keble. Hear me one word, and you shall have two.

This that you did speak but even now, do not you think that we have such
bad memories, as that we have already forgot it, your life is by Law as dear
as our lives, and our souls are at stake if we do you any wrong.


L. Col. Lilb. I wish you may be sensible of that Sir.


Judge Jarman. Mr. Lilburne you need not to say so, our souls are upon it, and
we are to stand or fall by Justice and righteousness as well at your self is.


L. Col. Lilb. I say my Lord Heath, and the Court at Oxford, proffered me
Counsel before any one witness was produced to my face, or any matter of fact
came to the proof, yea, and gave me Liberty to make my exceptions to the
insufficiency of the Indictment, which was very short in comparison of yours;
I crave the same privilege from you (the nations pretended friends) that I
found at Oxford, amongst its declared pretended enemies, against whom in
several battles I had fought; And I hope you that pretend to be the
preservators of the Liberties of England will not be more cruel, and
unrighteous then the declared destroyers of them, if you will not allow me
Counsel as I had there, I have no more to say to you, you may murder me if you
please.


Judge Jerman. You were pleased to mention some presidents of those that have
been accused of high Treason, that have had Counsel assigned to them, and for
one you mention, that of my Lord of Strafford, whose T^iall I told you was
Parliamentarie before the House of Peers, upon the impeachment of the Commons
of England in Parliament assembled, and so it went on in a Parliamentarie way,
their proceeding is in an ordinary course of the ordinary qundam Court of
Justice according to the common law. Now for my L. of Strafford, give me leave
to observe this; he had no Counsel assigned him until such time as questions
of the law did arise, which required Council, and then he had Counsel
assigned him, but not before; for that my Lord does not say, that you shall
have no Counsel, but that you shall have that which the law allows: and as for
that which you speak of counsel at Oxford, it could not be; but when upon the
proose of matter of fact, it appears to the Court, that there is any Question
or matter of law arising upon the fact: And when it does so appear unto us,
then you shall have Council for that; but (I beseech you) hear me on, You are
now come before us according to the common law, to be tried by your Country,
there is now nothing in question, but whether that matter, that thing, those
words contained in the Indictment read to you, be true, yea, or no; that is,
whether they be done, or no, for we will not give Counsel to plead to the
matter of fact contained in your own books, which you remember very well.


L. Col. Lilb. Those books supposed mine: pray let me have sair play, and not
be wound and scru'd up into hazards and snares.


Lord Keble. If they be not yours upon good grounds proved before you, you are
in no danger: and if upon the proofs of the words and deeds done, there do
appear matter of law, you must and shall have counsel; stay till that be done,
in the mean time the Court will take care that a Jurie shall be returned of
honest and sufficient legal men to judge of the proofs.


L. Col. Lilb. There was arraigned with me at Oxford Colonel Vivers of Banbury
now alive, and Capt. Catesby who is dead: I will bring Coll. Vivers to depose
here upon his Oath, that my Lord Heath and the rest of the Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer proffered me Counsel, and allowed me and him Counsel before
ever so much as any witnesses were produced, to prove the least matter of fact:
and if you will not be so just toward me as the Cavalliers were, and allow me
Counsel as they did. I have no more to say, but resolve upon this score, to
stand, and here to dye upon the principles of an Englishman: If you will not be
so just as the Cavalliers were, with whom you and the Parliament set us
together by the ears to fight with, pretendedly for their injustice, let God
and all righteous men judge betwixt you and me.


Judge Nichols. If you will not be led by the proceedings of law, it will be
worse for you, and you are to know this is not Oxford.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, by what better rules of the Law can I be led by, then those
that I have before my eyes: I am sure at Oxford, as my right by Law, I was,
before any fact was proved, proffered Counsel by my Judges which were my Lord
Heath, and Mr. Gardener. Now Sir Thomas Gardener, who is now in London, if you
please I will produce him to this Bar, to justify it upon his Oath, that the
Lord Chief Justice Heath in his presence proffered me Counsel upon my
Arraignment for Treason there, as my right by the privileges of the laws of
England, before the fact came to be proved; yea, and also gave me liberty to
alsign the errors of my indictment. He is now in London, and I will produce
him here at this Bar (if you please) to justify what I say, if you will give
me time, and enable me with ability to summon him in.


Judge Nicolls. Mr. Lilburn, whether Mr. Gardener will justify it or no, it is
nothing to us, for we are not to walk by Oxford presidents, but by the rules
of the law, and the law will afford you no Counsel, but in points of law
arising upon proof of the fact What a lying Judge is this Mr. Nicols, when as
he himself with Mr. John Minard the Lawyer, was assigned by the President,
Lord chief Baron Wild, to be of the Council with Major Rolph upon his desire,
and that before ever the grand Jurie found his indictment of Treason, as is
fully declared in the next days following plea of Mr. Lilburn.
.


L. Col, Lilb. Under favor thus: I conceive the presidents at Oxford, so far
as they are righteous, are fit for your imitation, and whether it be a
righteous thing for you, when I am tried for Treason before you, to be more
cruel toward me, who have fought for you, then the Cavalliers at Oxford, in
the like case were, against whom I fought: and I must tell you, I further
conceive it the most unequal and unjust thing in the world, for me to have to
do, upon the trial of my life, with all the Judges of the Land (who are all
engaged men) that have had above 6. months time to beat their brains together,
with the assistance of diverse of my Adversaries, who are Parliament Men, that
were the creators of their power, and for one of them to be my prosecutor: And
in this sxtraordinary case, for me to be denied to consult with Council, I tell
you Sir it is most unjust, and the most unrighteous thing in my apprehension
that ever I heard of, or see in all my life. O Lord! was there ever such a pack
of unjust and unrighteous Judges in the world? Sir, in plain English let me
tell you, if I had thought you would have bound me up to a single plea, and not
have given me in my plea the just latitude of law, equity and reason, but hold
me thus close to your single formalities contrary to your promises, I would
rather have dyed in this very Court before I would have pleaded one word unto
you, for now you go about by my own ignorance and folly to make my self
guilty of taking away my own life; and therefore, unless you will permit me
Counsel, upon this lock, I am resolved to dye.


Lo. Keble. This is not the rational way you said you would go in.


L. Col Lilb. Sir, my life is before you, you may murder me, and take away my
blood if you please.


Lo. Keble. I will not be out-voiced by you, our lives and our souls are upon
it, therefore you shall have equity and Justice, yea, such as you desire your
self; but you are now going to fly into extravagancies and heats, which will
manifest the rancour of the distemper'dnesse and invenom'dnesse of spirit which
is within you: And besides, if we should enter into it, we might agravate your
crimes by your own words at the Bar. Take heed of it, that you give not
advantage against your self to your own ruin.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I am in no heats, I am but with earnestness pleading for my
life, when you deny me all the just means of my preservation, which is my right
and due by your own law.


Judge Thorp. Mr. Lilburn, I desire to correct a mistake of yours in the law:
You were pleased to condemn it as unjust; for the Attorney Generals speaking
with me, when your Indictment was a reading, you are to know, he is the
prosecutor for the State here against you, and he must confer with us upon
several occasions, and we with him, and this is law.


L. Col. Lilb. Not upon the Bench (Sir) by your favor, unless it be openly,
audibly, and avowedly, and not in any clandestine and whispering way: And by
your favor, for all you are a Judge, this is law, or else Sir Edward Cook in
his Whose words there fol, 29. 30. are so plain and express to prove what Mr.
Lilb. said to be good law, as nothing in the world can be plainer, see also to
the same purpose the 2d part Inst. fol. 49. 03. 104.
3d. part Inst. Cap. high Treason or petty treason, has published falsehoods,
and the Parliament have licenced them; for their stamp in a special manner, is
to that book.


Judge Thorp. Sir Edw. Cook is law, and he says the Attorney general or any
other prosecutor may speak with us in open Court, to inform us about the
business before us in open Court.


L. Coll. Lilb. Not in hugger-mugger, privately or whisperingly.


Judge Thorp. I tell you Sir, the Attorney General may talk with any in the
Court by law, as he did with me.


L. Col. Lilb. I tell you Sir it is unjust, and not warrantable by Law, for him
to talk with the Court, or any of the Judges thereof in my absence, or in
hugger-mugger, or by private whisperings.


Lord Keble. No (Sir) it is no hugger mugger for him to do as he did: spare
your words, and burst not out into passion, for thereby you will declare your
self to be within the compass of your Indictment without any further proof;
look to it, that you behave your self according to the bounds of reason and
law, and hear me, for we must cause the Jurie to be returned.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, under favor I crave but one word more, hear me out; I
know very well, and I read in your own law books such a prerogative, as that in
cases of Treason no Counsel shall plead against the King, has been sometime
challenged to be the Kings Right by Law; but let me tell you, it was an usurpt
prerogative of the late King, with all other arbitrary Prerogatives and unjust
usurpations upon the peoples rights and freedoms, which has been pretended to
be taken away with him: And Sir, can it be just to allow me Counsel to help me
to plead for my estate, the lesser, and to deny me the help of Counsel to
enable me to plead for my life, the greater. Nay, Sir, can it be j^st in you
Judges, to take up 7 years time in ending some suits of law for a little Money
or Land, and deny me a few days to consider what to plead for my life? Sir,
all these pretenses of yours, were but all the prerogatives of the Kings will,
to destroy the poor ignorant and harmless people by, which undoubtedly died
with him, or else only the name or title is gone with him, but not the power or
hurtful tyranny or prerogative in the least. Therefore, seeing all such
pretended and hurtful prerogatives are pretended to be taken away with the
King, by those that took away his life, I earnestly desire I may be assigned
Counsel to consult with, knowing now especially no pretense why I should be
denied that benefit and privilege of the law, of just and equitable law of
England, having put my self upon a Trial according to the privileges
thereof: And it was declared to me at Oxford, upon the Trial of my life there,
after I was taken prisoner, fighting against the King and his party, even
almost to handi^gripes, and to the sword point, and to the but^ end of our
Muskets, being in person one of that little number that for many hours
together at B^^inford fought with the Kings whole Army, whers in the manner,
without any Articles or composition I was taken a prisoner, and immediately
thereupon arraigned at Oxford, where notwithstanding all this, it was declared
to me by Judge Heath to be my right by the law of England to have Counsel
assigned me to help me in point of law, and I had it granted: I confess he is
my best Authority that I have, and I am sure he was a Judge of the law, or else
I had never pleaded to him, and he was upon hisoath to do justice and right,
and he was an able and understanding Lawyer, and yet did allow me (an hostile
enemy) counsel to help me army right by law, before ever any proof to matter
of fact was produced and I beg but the same legal privilege from you, from
whom I have more cause to expect it^


Lord Keble. Were you there indicted for Treason?


L. Col. Lilb. Yes, that I was, and for the highest of Treasons by the letter
of the law, for actual levying war against the King.


Judge Thorp. And yet for all that you know it was no Treason, and so did he
too, for you know that you had committed no Treason at all in obeying the
Parliaments command; for what you have done, was done by the Parliaments
special authority and command, and you had your commission to justify you in
your hostile actions, and he knew it well enough your Act was no Treason,
though he did offer you counsel, or else he durst not allow you counsel.


L. Col. Lilb. I had nothing to justify me in that Act but the equitable sense
of the law, the letter of it being point blank against me, and on the
Cavalliers side, by which if they had prevailed, they might have hanged both
you and me for levying War against the King, notwithstanding ou^ Parliament
Commissions: and this I know Sir, you know to be law in the letter or
punctillioes of it.


Judge Thorp. It was no Treason in you, and he that assigned you counsel knew
it was no Treason, and this arraignment of you was as illegal as his assigning
you counsel.


L. Coll. Lilb. Sir by your favor, he was a Judge of the law by legal
Authority, being made by the King, in whom by law that power was invested, and
he looked upon himself as a legal Judge, and so did I too, and as a legal Judge
he arraigned me for doing that act, that by the express letter of the law was
Treason, and as a legal and honest Judge according to his duty in law he
allowed me Council.


Judge Jerman. For that matter that you talk of, they knew it was no Treason,
and therefore gave you more privileges th^n was their right by law, very well
knowing, that whatsoever was done to any of you that did fight for the laws,
religion, and liberties of their Country, there might be the like done to
others that were prisoners in the Parliaments power, and this was the truth of
it, and you know it very well, and therefore it is nothing to us, nor in law
his willingness.


L. Col. Lil. Upon my letters after the first day of my Trial, that
Declaration of l^x tal o^is was made, as clearly appears by the words and date
of it now in print, which the Reader may peruse in the 1. part of the
Parliaments Declarations, p. 802, 803.


Judge Thorp. I wonder they did not proceed in the prosecution of the
Indictment, and find you guilty of Treason, and so to execution.


L. C. Lil. Vnder-your favor thus, I appeared at the Bar, I pleaded to my
indictment not guilty, I made exceptions against my indictment, and my self
and the other 2 Gentlemen arraigned with me had Counsel assigned us as our
right by law: And the Judges most fairly and rationally further told us,
Because we will not surprise you, we will give you a weeks time to consider
(with what Counsel you please in Oxford to choose to come unto you) what to
plead for your lives, and whatsoever other privileges you can claim by the
liberties of the law of England, you shall enjoy them to the utmost: Upon which
premise I spoke in open Court to the Judge, showing him the irons upon my hands,
in which I was arraigned, and told him: My Lord, by the laws of England, no
prisoner for any crime soever, that behaves himself civilly and peaceably in
his imprisonment, ought to be put in irons, or to any other pain or torment
before he be legally convicted: and therefore I desire as my right by law, that
my irons may be taken off. And I said further, My Lord, I am shut up a close
prisoner in my chamber, denied the use of pen, ink, and paper, which is
contrary unto law, especially in the time of my Trial. Why says he, you shall
be released from your irons, from your close imprisonment, and have the use of
pen, ink, and paper, and Capt Lilburn, I tell you, you shall enjoy whatsoever
other privilege you can challenge as your right by law; for the law of England
is a law of mercy, and I hope we shall appear just Judges of it: and therefore
you shall freely have either Lawyer, or whom you will in Oxford, to come unto
you to help you and advise you. And says he, because you shall see that law and
justice is of the Kings side against the Parliament, and because they shall
have no cause to calumniate us at Westminster, and to say we are unrighteous
and unjust Judges, that surprise you, and thereby go about to murder you, the
Court is freely willing to give you a weeks time to consider with your Counsel
in the mean time what this day sev'^ight to plead for your life, in which time
being freed of my irons, and of my close imprisonment, and enjoying pen, ink,
and paper at my pleasure, by special order from the other 2. Gent. I writ a
letter to my wife, and in it enclosed another to your Speaker and another to
young Sir Henry Vane, then my familiar acquaintance, all which I sent in post
have away to my wife by the hands of Capt. Primroses wife, which Cap. Primrose
was prisoner there; and his wife who brougt up the letter to my wife, is now in
London, which letter my wife delivered to the Speaker, etc. and by her
importunate solicitation, procured the Declaration of lex talionis, the
substance of which, in a letter from Mr. Speaker, my wife brought down to
Oxford, and delivered to the Lord Heaths own hands, upon the Sunday after the
first day of our arraignment, and the 3d day before we were to appear again, my
Wife arrived at Oxford with the Speakers letter which she delivered to Judge
Heath himself, which letter taking notice of our trial, threatened them with
lex talionis, to do the like to their prisoners that they did to us, or any of
us: and they having many of their great eminent men prisoners in the Tower, and
in Warwick Castle and other places, did induce them to stop all further
prosecution of Col. Vivers, Capt. Catesbie, and my self. And if it had not
been for this threatening letter, in all likelihood we had all 3. been condemned
by a commission of Oyer and Terminer, and executed; for my wife did hear Judge
Heath say to some of his Associates at his reading of the letter, that as for
all the threatening part of it, as to his particular self, I value it not; but
said he, we must be tender of the lives of the Lords and Gentlemen that served
the K. and are in the custody of those at Westminster, and that clause of lex
talion is put a stop to our proceedings and further trials at law.


L. Keble. It was well for you, by your story that you do tell, that you had
so fair play; you shall have with us, who are upon our lives and oaths, as much
as the law will afford you, and so much as our judgment and consciences can
lead us to, without doing injustice in granting more then the laws of England
will afford: what was done there, is nothing to us here, for we are not to walk
by their president, but by our own Judgments, according to the aules of the
law: and here it is thus far just, that upon the proof of matter of fact, if law
do arise you are to have counsel, if not, you are to have none. By your
allegation, you say, you had counsel assigned you before any matter of fact
came to be proved, when as a Judge of the law he could not but do it; but if he
did it is nothing to us, we cannot do it; yet we have in this place proceeded
legally hitherto with you, and when that matter of law does arise from the
fact, as you had counsel there assigned you, so shall you have here, and you
shall have fair dealing, and fair play according to law, which is absolutely as
I tell you.


L. C. Lil. Sir, by your favor I crave but one word more, and that is this;
here is a Gentleman that is a by-stander, a friend of mine, and my Solliciter,
who by law as well as any other by stander may Cook in his Inst. 3. part. c.
petty treason, fol. 29. is express in this particular, so is he in c. 63.
being his c^p. of counsel, learned in pleas of the Crown, fol. 137.
speak for the prisoner at the Bar, in case he perceive things urged against
him contrary to law, and therefore I desire he may speak two or three words.


(Mr. Sprat beginning to speak.) Lord Keble. Spare your self, when your time
comes you shall speak.


Mr. Sprat. He asked leave for me first: And Sir it is easy to prove the whole
indictment to be matter of law.


Judge Jerman. What impudent follow is that, that dare be so bold as to speak in
the Court without being called. Mr. Lilburn, by your own words you say you were
told at Oxford, that by law you were to have counsel: that is as true, that
the Court is of counsel for the prisoner arraigned at the Bar, and so we ought,
and shall permit you other counsel, if matter of law upon the proof of the
fact do arise; but for any other counsel to be assigned you before that
appear, is not by law warranted, we shall tread the rules of justice: and we
shall do wrong to the whole commonwealth, if we should allow you counsel
before matter of law does arise from the proof of the fact, and to allow
counsel in any other case, the Court commits injustice.


Lord Keble. And this Mr. Lilburn I will promise you, that when there comes
matter in law, let be a Lawyer or your self, he shall speak in your behalf,
but before he cannot.


L. C. Lil. Sir, the whole indictment under favor is matter of law, and the
great question that will arise (admit the fact should be true, and admit it
should be granted) is, whether the words be Treason in law, yea, or no, and
also it is matter of law in the indictment, whether the matter in the
indictment be rightly alleged, as to matter, time and place. And it is matter
of law in the indictment where there diverse several pretended treasons
committed in diverse and several Counties, put into one and the same
indictment, be legal yea, or no.


Lord Keble. Upon proof of the matter of fact, you shall hear and know whether
matter of law will arise, and till the words be proved, we cannot say whether
that be the law that you suppose.


L. C. Lil. Truly Sir, you promised me a fair Trial, and that you would not
take advantages of my ignorance in the laws formalities; but the Lord deliver
me, and all true hearted Englishmen from such unjust and untighteous
proceedings as I find at your hands, who go about I now clearly see, by my
ignorance in holding me to a single and naked plea, which is purely as bad, if
not worse then all the prerogatives: and for the worst and grossest of his
prerogatives in a more rigorous manner then they were used in his life time, to
be thus pressed upon me at this day, after be has lost his life for pretended
tyranny and injustice, liberty and freedom in public Declrations declared to
the Kingdom, I say if there be justice and equity in this I have lost my
understanding, and the good Lord God of heaven deliver me from all such
justiciaries.


L. Keble. M. Lilb. you have bin arraigned before us for high Treason, and we
bid you forbear those terms of yours, long ago, speak that you do
rationally, and you shall have fair and christian answers and replies, as ever
any man-had at a Bar, and go on, you shall have it still, if you will be fair
and rational, and not break out into extravagancies and bitterness of spirit.


L. Col. Lilb. For my part, Sir, I must look upon my self as a lost and dead
man, if I have not counsel to help my ignorance to pitch upon those things
that tend to my preservation: and therefore if you willl not assign me
Counsel to advise and consult with, I am resolved to go no further, though I
die for it, and my innocent blood be upon your heads.


Justice Jermin, You have alleged part of the Law of England for your own
advantage; but every one that says so, does not prove it to be so: you have
said you will be tried by the Laws of England, and yet against the Laws of
England you have utterly refused, in that you would not hold up your hand,
which I do not know any English that ever refused so to do, but your self:
you have been told by the Court what the Law of England is, and yet you will
not be satisfied. We are upon our Oaths, and therefore will discharge our
consciences, and that in, or more eminent manner than my brother Heath did,
although we do not deny your liberty to speak for your self. But now you who
would have Counsel assigned before any matter of Law does appear upon the
proof of the fact, which we cannot do: for it were to do injustice, and to
dee against the Law, which the Court cannot justify.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, under favor, whether or no I have transgrest the Law, I
will not judge; but I am sure the Law in the equity and intention of it, would
have all trials to be equal, and not prejudicial. My prosecutors have had time
enough to consult with counsel of all sorts and kinds to destroy me, yea and
with your selves, and I have not had any time at all, not knowing in the least
what you would charge upon me, and therefore could provide no defense for that
which I knew not what it would be: And if by the law of England I cannot have
counsel, then upon your own grant, which is, That the Laws of God are the
Laws of England, I desire to have the privilege of the law of God; which you
your self said is the law of England; and I am sure the law of God is, that
you should do as you would be done to: now it cannot be according to the law
of God, for my adversaries to have the helps of all manner of councels, by
snares, tricks and provocations to take away my life, and for me to be denied
the benefit to consult with any to preserve my innocent life against potent
Malice.


L. Keble. You say well, the law of God is the law of England, and you have
heard no law else but what is consonant to the law of Reason, which is the best
law of God. and here is none else urged against you.


Another Judge. The Laws of God, and the Laws of Reason, and the Laws of the
Land, are all joined in the Laws that you shall be tried by.


Justice Iermin. The question is but this, Whether the Law of God and the Law
of Reason, and the Law of Man may be consonant to each other, and whether the
Court or John Lilburne shall be Judges thereof, that is the question.


L. Keble. And that which you said Mr. Attorney has had so much time against
you, and opportunity to consult with all manner of Counsel to destroy you,
your secret actions, though they are now come to public view, are so heinous,
as that they do require time to put them into the most sure way of trial, we
have proved the clandestinesse of them; you did this in secret, now it is come
to the face of the world. Now this being matter of fact, no matter of law can
appear till proof pass upon it; you have had times to complot your
treasonable venomous Books, which shall be proved upon you, and till this be
done there is no matter of law to be looked at. This is the law of God, when a
man has done such treasonable things, he shall answer directly and positively,
whether he be guilty of them or no; and if he answer, Not guilty, and they be
not fully proved against him, there needs no more to be said.


Justice Thorp. Mr. Lilburne, there fell some words from you even now, wherein
you think you have this hardship put upon you, when you say the Judges and your
persecuters have had 6 months time to meet together and consult together how
to destroy you: First, I would not have you to believe, nor the rest that hear
it, That that is true that you say: for I speak it for my own particular,
that I never saw your Indictment till this time that I came here, and yet you
say we have had six months together to frame it. These are your words, this
was not rightly done of you: for it is not true, I speak in my own particular.


L. Col. Lilb. I am sure the substance of it you might see many m^^^hs ago,
and though all you Judges have not at one time met about (...) yet the greatest
part of you have that commonly carry the domination of the whole, and at
Sergeants Inn with Mr. Attorney General, the most of the Judges of England
have had several meetings, 6.5. and 4. months ago, for I have had friends
there that have seen it, and who have enquired into the Cause of such solemn
meetings, and your own Servants have told them it has been about me and my
Trial.


Justice Thorpe. I speak as for my own particular that I was never there, and
that I never see your Indictment till this time.


Justice Termin, Why Mr. Lilburne, might we not have such meetings as those,
your businesses being a matter of this importance as this is, through the
haynousnesse of your offense, and that it might be so grounded as the Warrant
of the Law is, the Judges did meet, and they ought to meet But Cook in his
Chapter of petty Treason, in 3. part. instit. fo. 29. expres^y says, and to
the end, that the Trial may be the more indifferent, seeing the safety of the
Prisoner, consists in the indifferency of the Court, the Judges ought not to
deliver their opinions before hand of any criminal case that may come before
them judicially, and he there cites Humphery Stratfords Case, that arch
Traitor, in which Hussy chief Justice, besought H. 7. not to demand of them
their opinions before hand, and in 4. part. institutes, Chapt. High Court
Parliament, fo. 37. he fully shows the evil of asking Judges Opinions before
hand.
to consider of it, that nothing should be done against you, or any man else,
contrary to the Law; but-yet for my part, my dwelling is out of London, I heard
not of it so soon as you speak of, but after I came to Town, I confess I
heard of it, and have been present about some debates about it.


L. Col. Lilb. Only this I say, if by your prerogative you will destroy me as
Nebuchadnezer did endeavor to destroy Daniel by his prerogative, I am as
willing to dye, as he was to be thrown into the Lions Den, and if you will
not allow me Council to consult with, what Plea to make for my life, I have no
more to say, Sir, it is but a vain thing to spend any more words.


L. Keble. These are but words, and flourishes Sir, that you are so willing and
ready to die as you declare you are; but if you be, it is the better for you:
And also it is well you have not to do with Judges, that would be austeare upon
you, for you to term us to be men that come hither to destroy you as
Nebuchadnezzar went about to do Daniel, you may judge of what is within you,
but of us, what is within us, you cannot judge; you shall have justice here in
the face of the Country, and of all that hear us, these shall be Judges of
our proceedings toward you: take heed, Mr. Lilburn, this language is but the
sparks of that venomous heat that is within you, and they may burst out to
prove you guilty before us, and in our presence, of that you are charged with,
without any further proof or proceedings; for you may do it, you may do it
where you stand, and therefore be advised, and take heed what you say.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I have cast up my Account, and I know what it can cost me,
I bless God I have learned to dye, having always carried my life in my hand,
ready to lay it down for above this 12. years together, having lived in the
favor and bosom of God, and I bless his name, I can as freely dye as live.


L. Keble. You shall not now lay it down, if you do not destroy nor cast away
the Commonwealth; but if you go about to destroy the Commonwealth, the
Commonwealth will spue you up and destroy you.


L. Col. Lilb. I desire nothing but Council, and a little time to consult with
them, and to produce my Witnesses, and a Copy of my Indictment; if not, I am
willing to die as the object of your Indignation and malice, do your will and
pleasure.


L. Keble. We are willing to die too.


Mr. Attorney. What is agreeable to the Law of England, the constant settled
practice of trying Prisoners, will not be denied Mr. Lilburne; but as for that
privilege that was granted unto him at Oxford, is no tie in Law to us, neither
was it ever heard of in England, that any that did understand the Law, did ever
as Mr. Lilburne now desires, allow Council to a Prisoner for such an Act as
this is, or had the Copy of the Indictment, it shall not be denied Mr.
Lilburne, which is his right by Law in its due place: But to make new
Presidents and new Laws, which my Lord when done by such a Bench as this is,
most of the Judges in England being present, runs to all crimminall cases
whatsoever, whether in treason, murder, or other fellonies; its true, Mr.
Lilburn is now only concerned in it, but if granted to him, it would be a
president to all future times, by means of which, there would never be an end
of Trials in crimminall Cases. And it is a wonderful strange thing to me,
That when the Prisoner has pleaded the usual way, you proceed not immediately
to trial, its true Mr. Lilburne has pleaded his own ignorance, and therefore
desires longer time; but my Lord, to make a President of this nature that never
was known by the Laws of England is very dangerous, very perilous. My Lord,
the things that I press is not in relation to time, but in relation to the
public Justice; for by the same reason its granted him, it ought not to be
denied to any man that asks it, neither for Treason or Felleny, and of what
evil consequence it would be, I leave your Lordship and the Court to judge.

My Lords, I do humbly desire that Mr. Lilburn may be dealt with all legal,
just, and fair proceedings from the Court. My Lord, I do desire accordingly,
that proceedings may for the Commonwealth be so too, and that Mr. Lilburn may
be without delay according to Law, proceeded against for his notorious treasons.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, with your favor I shall crave but one word, this Gentleman
declares unto you what an evil President it would be to give me a little time
to consult with Council, to frame a Plea for my life, and yet that Judge was
pleased to say the Law of England is founded upon the Law of God, and the Laws
of Reason, unspotted, uncorrupted, or undefiled, I am sure the Law of God, and
the Law of uncorrupted Reason is to do as you would be done to, and not to lay
snares for your Neighbors life, I am sure the Law of God would have all
Trials indifferent and no man's life surprised or taken away by nisities or
formalities, though never so notoriously accused. And Sir, for Mr. Prideaux and
others of you, so often to call me notorious Traitor as you do: I tell you Sir,
you reproach me, for though I am never so notoriously accused, yet in the eye
of the Law of England, I am an innocent man, yea as innocent as any of those
who call me Traitor, till such time as I be legally convicted of the fact or
crime laid unto my Charge, and therefore Sir, I beseech you cease your
calumniating of me, for you thereby deal not fairly nor segally with me. And
Sir, I confidently hope, I shall appear in the eye of the Law, in the eyes of
you, and in the eyes of all men that hear me this day, an innocent, a just, and
a true Englishman, that really loves the welfare of his native Country, if I
may have fair play, and the scope of the Law. And therefore Sir, blemish me
not in the ears of the auditors, till the Law, and a conviction by it do
blemish me; for I tell you, I am in the eye of the Law, as innocent as any of
your selves till I be justly convicted; and therefore I pray cease the calling
of me Traitor in this manner.


L. Keeble. What need we any more when we are of your opinion, we wish you may
come as ^lerly off as you say you hope to do?


Mr. Attorney. My Lord, and that it may be so declared, and that the world may
know whether Mr Lilburne be an innocent man or no, I pray put it to the final
issue, and let the Law udge.


Leiut. Col. Lilburne Under favor, for me to be denied Law, which I conceive
is done unto me, when I am denied Council, and to put the nicities and
formalities of the Law upon me, the signification of which are writ in such
language and tongues as I cannot read, much less understand; and would you
destroy me for the not knowing of that which it is impossible for me to know.
Sir, I beseech you be not so extreme toward me, that Gentleman says, the Law
of God is the Law of England, and it would have no snares laid to take away a
man's life; I pray let me have the benefit of that?


Mr. Attorney. Once you had, and it is but just you should, and I am sure it
will be granted unto you.


L. Keeble, Mr Lilburne you say well, the prisoner loath not know the Law, you
do not, and many others do not; but I tell you again, you know so much of the
Law as is suitable to this Plea, you your self know, whether your Conscience
accuse you guilty of the fact laid unto your charge or not; for our parts, we
say no more then 21 men upon their Oaths have informed us, upon sufficient
testimony of Witnesses, that what they had said, we should further informour
selves of, before your life be taken away; yea such is the Law of England, the
tenderest Law in the world of a man's life. I say again, that no such trials
for life, is to be found in the world: as in England -- in any place but in
England. A man's life may be taken away upon two or three Witnesses, but in
England two or three witnesses do not do it; for there is two Juries besides,
and you have 24 men returned, you have 21 men upon their Oaths and Consciences
that have found you guilty; and yet when you have done that, it is not enough
by the Law of England, but you are also to have 12 rational understanding men
of your Neighbors to hear all over again, and to pass upon your life. This
is not used in any Law in the world but in England, which has the righteousest
and mercifullest Law in the world, and this we sit here to maintain, and let
all the world know it, that according to the rules thereof we have proceeded
against you.


Judge Michel. Mr. Lilburne, you were speaking of the Laws being in other
Tongues, those that we try you by, are in English, and we proceed in English
against you, and therefore you have no cause to complain of that.


L. Col. Lilb. By your speeches you seem to bind me up to a single plea. Truly
I conceive that is not equitable by the law of God and the Laws of Reason: No
man's life is to be destroyed by nicities and formalities; yet contrary to your
solemn promises, you take all advantage against me by them, (and make my
ignorance in the ticklish formalities of the law, to be the means of my own
destruction,) although before I pleaded you engaged unto me you would take no
advantage by my ignorance in your formalities, and my mistakes in them, should
be no disadvantage unto me, and yet now I have pleaded, you seem to hold me
close to a single plea. Truly, Sir, I think that is not just nor fair so to
break your promises, and by fair words to smooth me on into nets and snares,
and to make use of my willingness to be tried by the Law of England, to drill
me on to my own destruction: Truly, Sir, had I ever thought or believed, I
should have been denied counsel, I would have died before ever I would in any
manner have pleaded to your charge, or have yielded to your smooth insinuations.


Justice Iermin. Those men that know the Laws of England, know well, that it
takes away no man's life but upon clean proof, and upon manifest contempts of
the Law: The Law is, Whosoever shall go such a way in a Court as evidently
gives affront to the Law, that such one takes away his own life; The facts
that you are charged with, if they had taken effect, would have taken away the
innocent lives of many. Therefore you are now before us charged with the fact,
and every man's conscience knows whether he committed the thing charged upon
him, or no, and your self does know whether you be guilty of that you are
accused of, or no. But the Court must not spend any further time: For Mr.
Attorney General has returned the Writ of Veneri facias For the calling or
summoning of a Jury of life and death.


L. Keble. Mr. Lilburn, you say you well understand your self: you knew of your
coming, and you knew of the fact that you have committed.


Leiut. Col. Lilburne Truly Sir, six months a go I heard much of my Trial,
and I longed for it, but could not have it, but was still kept in prison, and
abundance of provocations put upon me, to make me cry out of my oppressions and
then to hang me, therefore by a Law made after my pretended crime was committed
is not just; and truly Sir, I heard by uncertain common fame of my Trial now.
But Parliament men told my wife and friends, that my chiefest crime was
corresponding with the Prince; and to defend my self against that, I fitted my
self, never dreaming that only books should be laid to my charge; and
therefore I could not, as to that come prepared; and therefore do humbly desire
Council, a Copy of my Indictment, and time to bring in my Witnesses.


L. Keeble. Hear what is said to you, for your Witnesses, you should have
brought them with you, we'll give you leave to send for them, we will give you
time to do, to consider with your self, what to say for your self, you shall,
till to morrow 7 a clock.


Leiut. Col. Lilburne Sir, some of my witnesses lives, abides 100. or 80 miles
off, and yet I must bring them to morrow morning, how is that possible; and
therefore I desire time to bring them in, and also Subpeanas, for some of them
are Parliament men, and some of them Officers of the Army, and they will not
come in without compulsion.


L Keeble. That Is the time, we will give you no longer, you knew of your
coming long ago, and therefore ought to have come provided.


Leiut. Col. Lilb. Sir, I beseech you give me a convenient time 8 or 10. days
that so I may get them together, for how could I be provided before hand for
any thing, but for that for which I was at the first imprisoned for, nothing of
which is now laid to my Charge. Could I devine upon what you would proceed
against me; but Sir, I have that within me I bless God, that will be a portion
of comfort to me, to carry me through all your malice and injustice.


L. Keble. Never talk of that which is with you; God is in us as well as in
you: never make a flourish of what is in you; for the fear of God is before
our eyes as well as yours, and what we do we shall have comfort in, in that it
is according to the Laws of England, the Rules of which we are sworn to
observe, and every man will do righteous things as well as you.


L. Col. Lilb. Pray will you give me but 8 days time then.


L. Keble. We will give you no more, you ought to have brought them with you,
you knew of it long ago; and the Court cannot, nor will not wait upon you.


L. Col. Lilb. By your favor, Sir, thus, then let me have a little time to
consult with counsel.


L. Keble. I tell you, That if the matter be proved, there needs no counsel.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I shall not much insist upon that, but the question is,
whether the matter be treason in Law or no, and whether in Law it be rightly
expressed in the Indictment, as to time and place, with other circumstances
thereunto belonging; and I question the legality of the Indictment, and that
ought in Law to be disputed before the matter of fact come to be spoken to.


L. Keble. Sir, you said at first, you would speak as a rational and moderate
man, and yet you will not be answered. If matter of Law do arise out of your
fact, that we have told you again and again, you shall hnue counsel and time.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, by your favor, it may be too late to desire counsel after
the fact is proved. And besides, having legal exceptions against the
Indictment, why should you run me upon the hazard of my life, by ticklish
Nicities and Formalities; and as my prosecutor Mr. Prideaux says, -- (but
being interrupted, cried out) Sir, I beseech you, do but hear me.


L. Keble. Your distemper will break out, your heart is so full of boiling
malice and venom, you cannot contain your self.


L. Col. Lilb. Mr. Prideaux is pleased to urge, thar the granting of me of my
defire in reference to counsel, will be so inconvenient a president, as will
destroy the Commonwealth, therefore to avoid the danger of such a destroying
president, as he is pleased to call it, I desire to have some time assigned me
to get my witnesses together, and then I shall, I doubt not, but convincingly
show you the hazard and destroying misciefe of that desperate president in
denying men liberty to consult with counsel, when they are upon trials for
their lives. For my own judgment, my own conscience does tell me, that it is
my undoubted right by the Law of England, by the Law of God, and the Law of
Reason; and if it be totally denied me, I can but die, and upon that score, by
the assistance of God, I am resolved to die.


L. Keble. You speak great words of your own judgment, your own conscience,
your own zeal, and the like: And I tell you, our Consciences, and our
Religion, and our Zeal, and our Righteousness, I hope shall appear as much
as yours: you would make your self Judge in your own cause, which you are not,
and so make Ciphers of us, but all your high words of Conscience and
righteousness is but a flourish, to make the pleople believe or be
apprehensive as though we had none, you had all; but you shall know, here we
sit with as much tenderness and integrity as you stand there, and to do that
uprighty which is according to Law and justice.


L. Col: Lilb: I shall not in the least make any comparisons, neither do I in
that particular, I only speak of my own particular, in reference unto that God
in whom I have believed, and in whom I enjoy content, peace and quietness of
mind, and yet for my part I shall rather die then willingly go any further,
except I have Council first.


L. Keeble. Well Mr Lilburne, the Court is very tender not to take up any of
your time, you have heard what was declared to you there, that Mr Attorney has
made process against you returnable, to morrow at seven of the clock, and
therefore to spend more time will be but your loss and damage, the Sheriffs of
London are to take care to return the Jury to morrow morning, and therefore the
Court does adjurne til seven a clock to morrow in the morning, and in the mean
time they do commit the prisoner at the Bar, to the Lieutenant of the Tower
again.


L. Col: Lilb: Sir, I did not hear you the first words.


L. Keeble. You shall not be denied to hear it again, the Court desires to be
good husbands of time for you, we could have sat long enough, to have trifled
away your time that you may spend your meditations, and take your friends
advice, do not stand upon and destroy your self by words; Mr Lilburne, all that
are here, are Just Jermin take notice the Judge stood up and spoke out an
appeal to the people.
to take notice of it, that the prisoner at the Bar tath had more favor
already, then ever any prisoner in England, in the like case ever had; for by
the Laws of England, in the matter of Treason, whereof you are indicted, you
ought to have been tried presently, imediatly; but because all the world shall
know with what cander and Justice the Court do proceed against you, you have
till to morrow morning, which is the Courts extraordinary favor, and the doors
are wide open, that all the world may know it.


L. Col: Lilb: Sir, I can show one hundred Presidents to the contrary in your
own Books, to disprove what you say.


L. Keeble. Adjurne the Court.


L. Col: Lilb: I humbly thank you for what favor I have already received.


The Court adjurned till the next morning, and the Prisoner remanded to the
Tower.

Guild Hall, 26 of October, 1649. being Friday.
At the Trial of Lieut: Col: JOHN LILBURNE the Second day.
THe Prisoner being brought to the Bar, spoke as follows: Sir, I pray hear me
a word or two.

L. Keeble, Mr Lilburne, I am afraid something troubles you, I will have no
body stand there That was in the Bar, where his brother Col: Robert Lilburne,
his Solicitour Mr Sprat, and other of his friends stood.
let all come out but one man.


L. Col: Lilb: Here Is none but my Brother and my Solicitor.


L. Keeble, Sir, your brother shall not stand by you there, I will only have
one hold your papers and books, and the rest not to trouble you, wherefore the
rest are to come out.


L. Col Lilb: Sir, I beg of you but one word, though I do not know any
reason why of my self I should not have the privilege of the Law, as well as
any man in England; yet besides, what yesterday I alleged for my self, for to
have Council assigned, yet to day give me leave to mention an unquestionable
President for my purpose, and that is Major Rolfe, who being an Officer in the
Army, and being lately indicted for High Treason (before the Lord Chief Barron
Wild, that now is at Hampshiere Assizes, for conspiring to poison and pistol
the late King, which by Law was the highest of Treasons) did conceive himself
in regard of his ignorance, unable to defend himself singly, against his
enemies design, which was to take away his life; whereupon he becomes an
humble suitor to the Lord Chief Barron Wild, that he might have Council
assigned him, and the Court before ever the Grand Jury received any testimony
against him to find the Bill, assigned him Council, who as I understand were
one Mr Nichols, now a Judge of this Bench, and sitting there; and Mr Maynard of
the Temple, they were both assigned his Council, and from Mr Maynard himself I
have it, yea, from his own mouth: who being assigned his Council, they came
into the court, where the grand Jury was called before the Judge: M. Maynard
and M. Nichols, now a Judge here, had liberty there to be in the open Court,
where the witnesses before the Indictment was found, was called and in open
Court was sworn, and in open Court gave in their Evidence before the Grand
Jury, Major Rolfes Council being by in open Court, to hear all the Evidence
that was given against Major Rolfe, who in his Indictment was Indicted for two
matters of fact, the first was that he had declared that in such a month, and
at such a place, he had an intent to Pistol the late King; which by the letter
of the Law of the 25 Edw: 3. chap: 2. was Treason: then there was another
Charge, that such a day he had so said or declared to Poison Him, in the
presence of such a one, and they were both put into one Indictment; whereupon
Mr Maynard, being assigned by the L: Chief Barron Wild, that now is, to be of
Council for Rolfe in the same Case (but with abundance of more advantage to
him, that I am now in) Mr Maynard was then of Council to the prisoner, and had
liberty to hear what the witnesses swore against him, and to make his best
advantage of it, and that in open Court, before the Indictment was found by the
Grand inquest; and although there were two express witnesses against him, yet
but one of them swore to one thing, and another to another; Mr Maynard being
one that knew the Law better then Major Rolfe did himself, he applied the two
Statutes of Edward the sixth, viz. the 1 Edw: 6. chap: 12. and 5. and 6. of
Edw: 6. chap: 11. to Rolfes Case, which Statutes do expressly declare. That no
man ought to be convicted of Treason, but by two sufficient witnesses upon
plain and clear evidence to each fact of Treason, which evidance, as Sir
Edward Cook says in third part of his Institutes, ought to be as clear as the
Sun at noonday, and not upon one single witness, and upon conjecturall
presumptions, or inferences, or strains of wit: Now Sir I am an Englishman as
well as Major Rolfe, and I have been an Officer in the Parliament Army as well
as he, and there fought for them as heartily as ever he did in his life, and he
was accused for the highest of English Treasons; and therefore I humbly crave
that in regard there are many particular errors in the Indictment, as to
matter, time and place: that therefore in reference to the illegality of the
Indictment according to this President, by one of your own fellow Judges, that
you would according to my birthright, declared in Major Rolfes Case, assign
me Council as he had, to help my ignorance, that so I may not be destroyed by
surprisall, and illegal, and unjust prerogatives.


L. Keable. You see with what a great deal of favor, in stead of a few words,
we have heard you many, this is a privilege; but this that you say upon it, it
may be it was done, but that we do, shall be according to that, you and we,
shall find to he according the Laws of the Land, and our conscience, and the
privilege of the Subject: that that they did before the Grand Jury, and the
witnesses, the witnesses are here sworn in Court in presence of the Grand Jury,
so far we go with them; that of M. Maynard and M. Justice Nicholls, being
assigned Council, for what cause it was then they best know, it is nothing
that does now concern us, though the Treason was against those Laws that then
were in being; we must come to proof, it may be he confessed his fact; if you
will do so too it alters the case.


L. Col. Lilb. No Sir, he never confessed it, for if he had, he had been found
guilty; but he was saved merely by the skill and honesty of his Council M.
Maynard, and his Indictment nuld an evaded, before ever the Grand Jury found
it, and that upon this point of Law, because by the two Statutes of Edward 6.
there ought to be two plain and clear witnesses, to every part of Treason; and
though Rolfe, was accused by two witnesses, yet there was two facts, and but
one witness to the proof of each of them.


L. Keable. When you come to trial, if we see there be need of Counsel, the
Court will be instead of Counsel to you; nay, the Court if they see any matter
of Law for Counsel, though you do not ask it, they will give you it; and
therefore set your heart at rest, for if there be any thing rational in Law
that we can spy out, as well as your Counsel, we will help you in it.


L. Col. Lilb. Sweet Sir, I crave but one word more, I am upon my life, and if
you deny me what the Law affords me, and that which has been granted to be
Law, by Cavalier Judges, yea, and by your fellow Judges, who are now in power
at this day; the Lord deliver me from standing in need of you to be my Counsel.
Iers.


L. Keable. We are upon our lives too as well as you.


L. Col. Lilb. No, by your favor, not in so iminent a manner as I am.


L. Keable. We are upon our lives and our souls to all eternity.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I beseech you hear me one word.


L. Keable. I will hear no more.


M. Pridiaux, My Lord, I desire the Court would proceed, and not prolong time,
seeing he has pleaded not guilty, and confessed something.


L. Coll. Lilb. No Sir, you do me wrong, and abuse me, I never confessed any
thing, neither did I plead not guilty; for my Plea was conditional, grounded
upon your promises, not to take any advantage of my ignorance in your
formalities.


L. Keable, Go on, be silent M. Lilburn.


L. Coll: Lilb: If you take away my life without affording me the benefit of
the Law, my innocent blood be upon your heads.


L. Keable, Sir, These passionate words will do you no good, you had better
forbear them.


L. Col. Lilb. Pray hear me then.


L. Keable, Do you say that we do offer to take away your life, Sir, if we
do take it away contrary to law, we are liable to smart for it; but we shall
judge what you have done (the Lievt^nant Collonell pressing to speak was not
suffered, but bid be silent) Sir, I advise you, Sir spare your self with
patience and hear the Court.


Just. Jermin: Be quiet Sir.


L. Col. Lilb. I beseech you Sir, let me hear but the grand Jury speak, for I
understand from some of themselves, they never found me guilty of Treason, but
do conceive themselves wronged by some words yesterday, that passed from some
of the Judges; I pray let me hear them speak.


L. Keable, M. Lilburn, You said you would be rational, you would be moderate;
you do break out, you will do your self more hurt then any here can do you;
you must be silent and hear the Court, we can lose no more time to hear you:
Crier call the Jury.


Crier -- The Jury called (and M. Lilburn earnestly pressed to be heard, but
could not) Crier -- Miles Petty. William Wormwell.


L. Col. Sir, I beseech you let me but see these gentlemen's faces.


L. Keable, You Master Sprat, you must not talk to the Prisoner; you may stand
and hold the Books; you did offend yesterday, but you shall not do so to day,
for you shall not stand near the Prisoner to talk to him.


L. Coll: Lilb. My Lord, the Law says a stander by, may speak in the prisoners
behalf at the Bar, much more whisper to him, but especially if he be his
Solicitor.


Crier -- John Sherman, Thomas Dainty, Ralph Ely, Edmund Keyzer, Edward
Perkins, Ralph Packman, Francis woodall William Commins, Henry Hanson, Roger
Jenkenson, Josias Hamond, Richard Allen, Richard Nevill, John Mayo, Henry
Jooley, Arther Due, Roger Sears.


Clerk, You good men of the City of London appear.

Steven Ives, John Sherman, Ralph Ely, Roger Ienkinson, Iofias Hamond, Richard
Allen, Richard Nevill, Roger Seares, John Mayo, Nicholas Murren.


Clerk. You prisoner at the Bar, these good men that are here presented
before the Court, are to be of your Jury of life and death, if therefore you
will challenge them, or any of them, you must challenge them before they go to
he sworn, and then you shall be heard.


Crier, Every man that can inform my Lords the Justices, and the Attorney
General of this Commonwealth, against Master John Lilburn prisoner at the
Bar, of any Treason or felony committed by him, let them come forth, and
they shall be heard, for the prisoner stands upon his deliverance; and all
others bound to give their attendance here upon pain of forfeiture of your
Recognisance, are to come in.


L. Col. Lilb Sir, I beseech you give me leave to speak.


Lord Keable, You cannot be heard.


L. Coll: Lilb Truly Sir, I must then make my protest against your unjust and
bloody proceedings with me, before all this people, and desire them to take
notice, that yesterday I pleaded to my Bill, conditionally, that no advantage
should be taken against me, for my ignorance in your formalities, and you
promised me you would not.


L. Keable, We give you too much time; you will speak words that will undo you;
is this your reason? you shall talk in your legal time, and take your legal
exceptions, we will hear you till midnight.


L. Coll. Lilb. Then it will be too late Sir.


Justice Jermin, You have given a great slander, and that does not become a man
of your profession; you speak very black words.


L. Col: Lilb. I beseech you do but hear me one word; I do not know the faces
of two of the men that were read unto me, I hope you will give me time to
consider of them.


Lord Keable, No Sir, you ought not to have it.


L. Col. Lilb Will you let me have some friends by me that are Citizens of
London, that know them, to give me information of their qualities and
conditions, for without this, truly you may as well hang me without a trial,
as to bring me hear to a trial and deny me all my legal privileges to save
my self by.


Lord Keable, If you be your own judge you will judge so, go on.


M. Sprat, or Col. Robert Lilburn, Whispers to the prisoner, to challenge one
of the Jury, which the Judge excepted against. L. Col. Lilb Sir, by your
favor, any man that is a by-stander may help the prisoner, by the Law of
England.


Lord Keable, It cannot be granted; and that fellow come out there, with the
white cap, pull him out.


L. Col. Lilb You go not according to your own law in dealing thus with me.


Justice Iermin. Your words were never a slander, nor never will be, hold your
peace Crier go on.


Crier. Stephen Blyth, look upon the prisoner.


Abraham Seal, John King, Nicholas Murren, (Thomas Dariel) the prisoner
excepted against him) Edward Perkins, Francis Peale. Justice Iermine, was he
recorded and sworn before he spoke or no?


Crier, No my Lord.


Justice Iermin, The let him continue if he be right recorded.


Crier, The Oath was not given quite out.


Justice Iermin, Then he has challenged in time; let him have all the lawful
favor that may be afforded him by law.


William Comins sworn, Simon Weedon sworn. L. Col. Lilb. He Is an honest man,
and looks with an honest face, let him go.


Henry Tooley sworn, Arther Due (excepted against.) L. Keeble, Take away Mr
Due, let him stand a little by.


Henry Hanson put by being sick, one that could not hear excepted against, John
Sherman, Ralph Head, Roger Jenkinson, Josias Hamond, Richard Allen, John Mayo,
Roger Seares, Henry Hanson, excepted against, Edmund Kinyzer sworn. The Jury
Called. Clerk, Twelve good men and true, stand together and here your Evidence.


Just: Jermin, Crier of the Court, let the Jury stand six of the one side and
six of the other.


Clerk, 1 Miles Petty 2 Stephen Iies 3 John King 4 Nicholas Murrin 5 Thomas
Drinty 6 Edmund Keyzer 7 Ed: Perkins 8 Ralph Packman 9 William Comins 10 Simon
Weedon 11 Henry Tooley 12 Abraham Smith.
of the Jury, six lives about Smithfield, one in Gosling-street, two in
Cheap Side, two in Bred-street, and one in Friday-street.


Just: Jermin. Its well done.


Crier, The Lords, the Justices, do straightly charge and command all manner of
persons to keep silence, while the prisoner is in trial.


Mr Broughton, John Lilburne, hold up thy hand.


L. Col: Lilb: As I did yesterday, I acknowledge my self to be John Lilburne
Freeman of London, son to Mr Richard Lilburne, of the County of Durham, and
sometime Lieutenant Colonel in the Parliament Army.


Just: Jermin. You refuse to hold up your hand, and though you break the Law of
England, the Court will not break it.


L. Col: Lilb: I do what the Court declares what is my right and duty to do, I
do no more then declare my name to be so as it is.


L. Keeble, Read the Indictment.


Mr Broughton Reads, Hold up thy hand John Lilburne, thou stand here
indicted of high Treason by the name of John Lilburne, late of London
Gentleman, for that thou as a false Traitor, not having the fear of God before
thine eyes, but being stirred and moved up by the instigation of the Devil,
did endeavor not only to disturb the peace and tranquillity of this Nation,
but also the Government thereof to subvert: now established without King or
house of Lords, in the way of a Commonwealth, and a free state, and happily
Established, and the Commons in Parliament assembled being the supreme
authority of this Nation of England, to disgrace, and into a hatred, base
esteem, infamy and scandal, with all the good true and honest persons of
England, to bring into hatred, That is to say, that thou the said John Lilburn,
one the first day of October in the year of our Lord 1649. and in diverse other
days and times, both before and after, in the parish of Mary the Arches, in
the ward of Cheap London aforesaid, of thy wicked and devilish mind and
imagination, falsely, maliciously, advisedly, and traitorously, as a false
Traitor, by writing and imprinting, and openly declaring that is to say, by a
certain scandalous, poisonous, and traitorous writing in paper entitled A
salva liberate; and hy another scandalous, poisonous and traiterous Book,
entitled An impeachment of high treason, against Oliver Cromwell, and his son
in law Henry Ireton, Esquires, late members of the late forcibly desolved House
of Commous, presented to public view by Lieutenant Colonel John LiIburn close
prisoner in the Tower of London, for his real, true and zealous affections to
the liberties of this Nation; and by another scandalous, poisonous and
traitorous Book, imprinted, and entitled, An outcry of the young men and
apprentices of London, or an inquisition after the lost fundamental laws and
liberties of England, directed August 29. 1649. in an Epistle to the private
soldiers of the Army, especially all those that signed the sulemn Engagement at
Newmarket-heath, the fifth of June 1647. but more especially the private
Soldiers of the Generals Regiment of Horse, that healped to plunder and destroy
the honest and true hearted Englishmen, traitorously defeted at Burford, the
fifteenth of May 1649. and also by another scandalous, poisonous, and
traitorous Book, entitled The legal fundamental liberties of the people of
England, revised, asserted and vindicated, did publish that the Government
aforesaid, is tyrannical, usurped, and unlawful; and that the Commons
Assembled in Parliament, are not the supreme Authority of this Nation: and
further that thou the said John Lilburn as a false Traitor, God before thine
eyes not having, but being moved and led by the instigation of the Devil,
endeavoring, and maliciously intending, the Government aforesaid, as is
aforesaid, well and happily established; thou the said John Lilburn, afterward
(that is to say) the, the aforesaid first day of October Note, that Mr. Lilburn
was imprisoned by the Counsel of State as a Traitor, the twenty eight of March
1649. and they there came and after arraign him as a Traitor, for actions done
above five months after, waving all the pretended crimes for which they first
imprisoned him.
in the year of our Lord 1649. aforesaid, and diverse other days and times, as
well before as after, at London aforesaid, that is to say, in the parish and
ward aforesaid, London aforesaid, maliciously, advisedly, and traitorously
did plot, contrive and endeavor to stir up, and to raise force, against the
aforesaid Government, and for the subverting and alteration of the said
Government, and to do those wicked, malicious and traiterous advisement to put
in execution; etc. and thou the said Jo. Lilburn, afterward, that is to say,
the aforesaid first day of October in the year of our Lord 1649. aforesaid, and
diverse days and times as well before as after, at London aforesaid, that is to
say, in the parish and ward aforesaid, of thy depraved mind, and most wicked
imagination, in and by the aforesaid scandalous, poisonous, and traiterous
Book, entitled An Impeachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his
son in law Henry Ireton, Esquires, late members of the late forcibly dissolved
House of Commons; presented to puhlike view by Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburn, close prisoner in the Tower of London, for his real, true and zealous
affection to the liberties of his native Country; falsely, maliciously,
advisedly, and traitorously, did publicly declare, amongst other things in
the said Book, those false, scandalous, malicious and traiterous words
following: but my true friends (meaning the friends of the said John Lilburn) I
(meaning the foresaid John Lilburn) shall here take upon This passage you may
read in that Book page 5.
me the holdnesse, considering the great distractions of the present times, to
give a little further advice to our friends aforesaid, from whose company or
society, or from some of them, has been begun and issued out the most
transcendent, clear, rational and just things for the peoples liberties and
freedoms, That the foresaid John Lilburn, had seen or read in this Nation, as
your notable and excellent Petition of May the 20th 1647. burnt by the hands of
the common-hangman, recorded in my Book called Rash Oaths unwarrantable, page
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. with diverse petitions of that nature, and the
Petition of the 19th of January 1648. recorded in the following discourse, page
45, 46, 47, 48. and the Masculine Petition of the eleventh of September 1648.
so much owned by Petitions out of several Counties, yea, and by the Officers
of the Armies large Remonstrance from Saint Albones, the sixteenth of November
1648. page 67, 68, 69. the substance of all which I ( thou the foresaid John
Lilburn meaning) conceive is contained in the printed sheet of paper, signed by
my fellow prisoners, Mr William Walwin, M. Richard Overton, and M. Thomas
Prince and my self, dated the first of May 1649. and entitled the Agreement
of the free People of England; which false, scandalous and traitorous Book,
called the Agreement of the people of England, tends to the alteration, and
subversion of the Government aforesaid; the principles of the foresaid
Agreement, I (meaning your self the said John Lilburn) hope and desire you
(the friends of the foresaid John Lilburn meaning) will make the final center,
and unwavering standard of all your desires, hazzards and endeavors, as to the
future settlement of the Peace and Government of this distressed, wasted, and
divided Nation, the firm establishing of the principles therein contained,
being that only which will really, and in good earnest marry, and knit that
interest, what ever it be that dwells upon them, unto the distressed or
oppressed Commons of this Nation.

But the principles of the foresaid Agreement, being so detestable and
abominable to the present These lines are in page 7.
ruling men, as that which they know will put a full end to their tyranny and
usurpation, and really ease and free the People from oppression and bondage;
that it is something dangerous to those that go about the promotion of it; yet
I shall advise and exhort you, (meaning the friends of him the aforesaid John
Lilburn vigorously to lay all fear aside, and to set on foot the promotion of
it (meaning the said Agreement) in the same method we took for the promotion of
the foresaid Petition of the ninth of January 1647. laid down in the following
discourse, page 23, 24, 25. and write to all your friends in all the Counties
of England, to choose out from amongst themselves, and send up some agents to
you (two at least, for each County, with money in their pockets to bear their
charges) to consider with your called and chosen Agents, of some effectual
course, speedily to be taken, for the settling of the principles thereof
(meaning the aforesaid false Agreement (devised by your self, the aforesaid
John Lilburn) and to set up the promoting of (the aforesaid fained Agree.
meaning) as that only which in an earthly Government can make you (the
aforesaid friends of the said John Lilburn) happier, at least to know one
another minds, in owning and approving the principles of the foresaid false
Agreement, that so it may be come to you (meaning the foresaid friends of the
foresaid John Lilburn) and all your friends, your center, standard and banner,
to flock together to, in time of those foreign innovations, and domestique
insurrections, that are like speedily to bring miseries enough upon this poor
distressed Nation (the aforesaid Nation of England again meaning) and
uanimously resolve and engage one to another, neither to side with, or fight
for, the chimaera's, fooleries, and pride of the present men in power (the
aforesaid Parliament of England meaning) nor for the Prince his will, nor any
other base interest whatsever, the which if you (the aforesaid friends of the
said John Lilburne meaning) should fight for, it would be but an absolute
murder of your brethren and Countrymen you know not wherefore) unless he or
they will come up to those just, righteous, and equitable principles therein
contained, and give rational and good security, for the constant adhering
thereunto.

And upon such terms, I do not see but you may justifiably before God or man,
join with the Prince himself, yea, I am sure, a thousand times more justly,
then the present Ruling men (upon a large and serious debate) joined with
Owen-Roe-Oneale, the grand bloody Rebel in Ireland; who, if we must have a
King, I (meaning he the aforesaid John Lilburne) for my part I had rather have
the Prince (meaning CHARLES STUART, Son to the late KING, then any man in the
world, because of his large pretense of Right, which if he come not in by
conquest, by the hands of forraigners (the bare attempting of which, may
apparently hazard him the loss of all at once) by glewing together the now
divided people, to join as one man against him, but by the hands of
Englishmen, by contract upon the premises aforesaid (which is ealy to be
done) the people will easily see, that presently thereupon they will enjoy this
transcendent benefit (he being at peace with all farraign Nations, and having
no Regal pretended competitor) viz. The immediately disbanding of all Armies,
and Garrisons, saving the old Cinque Ports, and so those three grand plagues of
the people will cease, viz. Free Quarter, Taxations, and Excise, by means of
which, the people may once again really say, they enjoy something they can in
good earnest call their own; whereas for the present Army to set up the
pretended false Saint Oliver, (or any other) as their elected King, there will
be nothing thereby from the beginning of the Chapter, to the end, thereof, but
Wars, and the cutting of throats, year after year; yea, and the absolute
keeping up of a perpetual and everlasting Army, under which the people are
absolute and perfect slaves and vassals, as by woeful and lamentable experience
they now see they perfectly are, which slavery and absolute bondage is like
daily to increase, under the present Tyrannical, and Arbitrary new erected,
robbing Government, and therefore rouse up your spirits before it be too late,
to a vigorous promotion, and settling of the principles of the foresaid
Agreement, as the only absolute and perfect means to carry you off all your
maladies and distempers.


Here Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne in the first days reading the Indictment,
taking notice of the Judge Thorpe, and Mr Prideaux to whisper together, cried
out and said to this effect.

L. Col: Lilburne, Hold a while, Hold a while, Let there be no discourse but
openly, for my adversaries or persecutors whispering with the Judges, is
contrary to the Law of England, And extreme foul and dishonest play, and
therefore I pray let me have no more of that injustice.


Mr Attorney, It is nothing concerning you (let me give him satisfaction) it is
nothing concerning you Mr Lilburne.


L. Col: Lilburne, By your favor Mr Prideaux, that is more then I do know, but
whether it be or not, by the express Law of England, it ought not to be,
therefoe I pray let me have no more of it.


Mr Broughton, And further, thou the said John Lilburne stands Indicted, for
that thou the aforesaid first day of October, in the year of our Lord, 1649.
and diverse days and times, as well before as after, in London aforesaid, and
in the Parish and ward aforesaid, did maliciously, advisedly, and
traitorously publish another false poisonous, traiterous, and scaudalous Book,
Entitled, An outcry of the Young Men and apprentices of London, Or an
inquisition after the lost fundamental Laws and Liberties of England: having
these Traiterous and scandalous words (amongst other things) following; that is
to say, we (meaning the Young men and Apprentices of London) considering what
is before premised, Which words are in page: 11.
are necessitated and compelled to do the utmost we can for our own
preservations, and for the preservation of the Land of our Nativity, and never
(by popular Petitions) address our selves to the men sitting at Westminster
any more, or to take any more notice of them, then as of so many Tyrants, and
Usurpers; and for the time to come to hinder as much and as far as our poor
despised interest will extend to) all other whatsoever from subscribing or
presenting any more popular Petitions to them, and only now as our last Paper
refuge, mightily to cry out to each other, our intolerable oppressions, in
Letters and Remonstrances signed in the behalf, and by the appointment of all
the rest, by some of the stoutest and stiffest amongst us, that we hope will
never apostatise, but be able by the strength of God, to lay down their very
lives for the maintaining of that which they set their hands to: And further,
that thou the aforesaid John Lilburne afterward, that is to say, the aforesaid
first day of October, in the year of our Lord, 1649, and diverse other days and
times as well before as after, not being an Officer or Soldier, or member of
the Army aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, as a
false Traitor did maliciously, advisedly and Traitorously endeavor to stir up
a dangerous mutinous, and Traiterous distemper, Mutiny and Rebellion in the
Army, now under the Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax, and did endeavor to draw
Thomas Lecoies, John Skinner, and John Top from their obedience to their
superior officers, etc. and further, did deliver unto the three Soldiers
before named, the said Book, entitled an Outcry of the Young men and
Apprentices of London; having these words following contained therein; Surely
all sense and compunction of conscience is not totally departed from you, hear
us therefore in the earning bowels of love and kindness we entreat and beseech
you with patience, and do not abuse us, for complaining and crying out, for
the knife has been very long at the very throats of our liberties and
freedoms, and our burdens are too great and many for us, we are not able to
bear them and contain our selves; our oppressions are even ready to make us
despair (or forthwith to fly to the prime laws of nature, viz. the next
violent remedy at hand, lite where it will, or upon whom it will) they are
become as devouring fire in our bosoms ready to burn us up, rendering us
desperate and careless of our lives, prising those that are already dead,
above those that are yet alive, who are rid of that pain and torment that we
do and must endure, by sensiable seeing and beholding, not only the dying, but
the daily burial of our native liberties and freedoms, that we care not what
become of us, seeing that we are put into that original estate or Chaos of
confusion, wherein lust is become a law; envy and malice are become laws, and
the strongest sword rules and governs all by will and pleasure; all our ancient
boundaries and landmarks, are pulled up by the roots, and all the ties and
bonds of humane society in our English Horizon totally destroyed and
extirpated; Alas for pity we had rather die then live this life of a
languishing death, in which our Masters possess nothing (to buy themselves or
us bread to keep us alive) that they can call their own, therefore its no boot
for to serve out our times, and continue at our drudging and toylingtrades,
whilst these oppressions, cruelties, and inhumanities are upon us, and the rest
of the People, exposing thereby the Nation, not only to domestique broils,
wars and bloud-sheds (wherein we are sure our bodies must be the principal
buts) but to foreign invasions by France, Spain, Denmark, Swethland, etc. as
was well observed by an endeared and faithful friend of the forementioned late
treacherously defeated party at Burford, in their Book of the twentieth of
August 1649. Entitled the Levellers vindicated, or the case of the twelve
Troops truly stated; Page eleven and twelve, which we cannot but seriously
recommend with them, to your serious perusal and judgment, and desire to know
of you (but especially the private Soldiers of the Genesis Regiment of horse, who
we understand, had a hand in seizing upon and plundring our true friends at
Burford) whether you do own the abominable and palpable treacherous dealings
of your General, and Lieutenant General Cromwell, and their perfidious
Officers with them or no? (that so we may not condemn the innocent with the
guilty, and may know our frinds from our foes) as also to tell us, whether you
do approve of the total defection of your Army, under which it now lies,
from their faith and fallen Engagement, made at Newmarket-heath, June the fifth
1647. not one of those righteous ends, in behalf of the Parliament and people,
on which your Vow was made, being yet fulfilled or obtained, but on the
contrary (as we have before rehearsed) a whole floud-gate of tyrannies are let
in upon us, and over-whelme us, and whether you (the aforesaid private
Soldiers meaning) justify all those actions done in the name of the Army,
upon your account, and under the pretense of that Engagement, since the
Engagement it self was broken, and your Council of Adjutators disolved? And
whether you will hold up your Swords to maitain the total dissolution of the
People choysest interest of freedom; viz. Frequent and successive Parliaments,
by an Agreement of the People, or obstruct the annual succession? Whether you
do allow of the late shedding the blood of War in time of Peace, to the
subversion of all our laws and liberties? And whether you do countenance the
extirpation of the fundamental freedoms of this Commonwealth; as the
revocation and nullity of the great Charter of England, the Petition of Right,
etc.? And whether you do assent to the erection of Arbitrary prerogative
Courts, that have or shall overruled, or make void our ancient way of trials in
criminal cases, by a Jury of twelve men of the neighborhood? And whether you
will assist or join in the forcible obstruction of this Martial and
tyrannical rule over us? Also, whether you will fight against and destroy
those our friends that shall endeavor the composure of our differences
together, with the procurement of our freedoms and settlement of our peace
(your plenty and prosperity) according as it was offered by the four Gentlemen
prisoners in the Tower of London, upon the first day of May 1649. as a peace
offering to the Nation, by the Agreement of the People, (the aforesaid fained
Agreement meaning) lastly, we (the aforesaid young men and Apprentices of
London meaning) earnestly beseech you, (the aforesaid private Soldiers again
meaning) to acquaint us whether from your hands, to your power, we may expect
any help or assistance in this our miserable, distressed condition, to the
removal of those Iron bonds and yokes of oppression (the aforesaid Government
in way of a Commonwealth and Council of State meaning) that have thus enforced
us to complain and address our selves thus to your consideration; for we (the
aforesaid young men and Apprentices again meaning) cannot choose but acquaint
you (the aforesaid private Soldiers again meaning (that we are seriously
resolved through the strength and assistance of God, with all the interest we
have in the world, to adhere to the righteous things, contained in our
treacherously defeted forementioned friends vindication, (the aforesaid
traitorous Book, entitled, The Levellers vindicated, or the case of the twelve
Troopers truly stated again meaning) And further, thou the said John Lilburn as
a false Traitor, by most wicked traiterous conspiracies, designs and
endeavors of thine aforesaid, afterward, that is to say, the aforesaid first
day of October in the year of our Lord 1649. above said.

And diverse other days and times, as well before as after, did in the
parish and ward of London aforesaid, in and by the aforesaid scandalous,
poisonous and traitorous Book, entitled An Impeachment of high Treason against
Oliver Cromwell, and his Sonin-law Henry Ireton, etc. most falsely, maliciously
and traitorously publish, and openly declare amongst other things, in the said
Book, these following, scandalous, treacherous, tumultuous and traitorous
clauses and words following, that is to say, But I (meaning thy self the said
John Lilburne) and many other persons (meaning the foresaid friends) inteat you
seriously to consider that I cannot advise you to make addresses to him
(meaning the aforesaid THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, Captain General) as the General of
the Nations forces (the Forces of this Natieon of England meaning) for he (the
aforesaid Captain Genrall meaning) is no General, but is merely a great
Tyrant (meaning the aforesaid Capt. General) standing by the power of his own
will and a strong sword, borne by his vassels, slaves, and creatures (the
Soldiers of the Army aforesaid meaning) having no Commission to be General,
either from the Law or the Parliament, nor from the prime laws of Nature and
reason. For first, when he was made General by both houses of Parliament, it
was expressly against the letter of the Laws. And secondly, when he refused to
disband etc. he has rebelled against his Parliament Commission, and thereby
destroyed, and annihilated it, etc.

The Reader is desired to take notice, that in the Indictment it self, there
was a great many other things then in this is expressed, as particularly,
diverse passages out of a book called Mr. Lilburnes, Entitled, The Legal
Fundamental liberties of England revived, etc. as also out of another book
Entitled, A preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerigg, etc. as
also out of The Agreement of the People of the first of May 1649. with several
other remarkable things in matter and form, that was more neglected to be
taken then the pleadings, because it was not supposed, but the Indictment
(being a Record) a true Copy of it might easily be had, considering that by
Law, all Records ought freely to be used by any freeman of England, and Copies
of them to be denied to none that desire to take them; but that Privilege
being already in this Cause disputed and denied, in which regard, the Reader
must at present accept of the best imperfect notes the Publisher could pick up,
but to go on.

And further, that thou the said John Lilburne, as a false Traitor, all and
singular the clauses and English words abovesaid, and many other traiterous,
poisonous and malicious expressions, in and by the aforesaid writings, and by
the aforesaid several books, as aforesaid recorded, and by thee the aforesaid
John Lilburne, published and openly declared in the several books so as
aforesaid printed, and by the aforesaid wrightings, and by thee the aforesaid
John Lilburne, in manner and form aforesaid, published, and openly divusged
and declared diverse other scandalous, malicious, tumultuous and treacherous
clauses, and words in the said (...) contained, falsely, maliciously, advisedly
and traitorously, have publ(...) and openly declared, to the intent to stir up,
and raise forces against (...) Government aforesaid, in the way of a
Commonwealth, and free (...) as aforesaid established, and for the suppressing
and alteration of the (...) Government, and to stir up mutiny in the Army
aforesaid, and also (...) withdraw the said John Took, Thomas Lewis and John
Skinner, and (...) other Soldiers from their obedience to their superior
Officers and (...) Commanders, and to set them in mutiny and rebellion against
the public peace, and to manifest contempt of the Laws of this Commonwealth,
and free State, and against the form of the Statutes in this Case made and
provided.


The Indictment being reading, and the noise of the people in the Hall great,
the Prisoner said he could not hear, and had some few lines before read over
to him.

L. Col. Lilb. Pray hold your Peace Gentlemen, I beseech you, be quiet.
(speaking to the people)


L. Keeble. Quiet you your self, we will quiet them for you.


Braughton. Which Country are you? so that you are to find whither he is
guilty or no, he having already pleaded, Not Guilty. If you find that he is
Guilty of any of the high Treasons laid to his Charge, then you are to enquire
what goods, Lands, or Chattels he stood possessed of, when he committed the
said high Treasons; but if you find him not Guilty, you shall then enqnire
whither he did not fly for it, and if he did not fly for it, Then you are to
say so and no more, therefore hearken to your evidence?


L. Col. Lilb. May it please your Honor,


Crier. If any man can give any Evidence to my Lords the Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, against Mr. John Lilburne, let him come in and he shall be heard.


L. Col. Lilb. I desire to be heard to speak two or three words. I humbly
desire the favor to speak two or three words. I humbly desire the favor to be
heard two words.


L. Keeble. It is not a fit time, you shall be heard in your due time, but hear
what the Witnesses says first.


L. Col. Lilb. I conceive I am much wronged, in saying that I pleaded not
Guilty, for I pleaded no such Plea, I appeal to the Court, and to all that
heard me, whether I pleaded any such Plea; for before I pleaded, the Court
became engaged to me, to take no advantage of my ignorance of the formalities
of the Law, and promised to give me as much privilege as my Lord Duke of
Hambleton, and others enjoyed, before the Court of (...).


L. Keeble. We know all this.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, by your favor, I pleaded conditionally, and now I (...) my
absolute Plea to the Indictment, which is this; That I except (...) the matter,
and form of it in matter, time and place, and humbly crave (...) to assign and
plead to the errors thereof.


L. Keeble. You must hear us, we hear you, a word is a great deal, these
things we have taken perfect notice of, the Court is not ignorant of them.

Therefore they need not so suddenly be repeated to us again, you need not
repeat these things; for I tell you agan^, they are all fresh in our memories,
and that we have done we must maintain, or we have done nothing.


L. Col. Lilb. Truly, it is requisite for me to say, that I am wronged, I had
no such single Plea; I plead a Plea at large to the errors of the Indictment,
and first now crave liberty of the Law of England, to have time and Council
assigned me.


L. Keeble. You shall have the Laws of England, although you refuse to own
them, in not holding up your hand; for the holding up of the hand has been
used as a part of the Law of England these 500 years, go on.

My Lord, Mr. the Council that was an assistant to Mr. Prideaux.
The prisoner at the Barstands Indicted as a Traitor, for that he contriving,
and maliciously intending not only to disturb the public Peace; but also to
bring the Government of the Nation happily settled in a free State, or
Commonwealth, without a King, or an house of Lords, and the Commons in
Parliament assembled, to bring in disgrace and contempt amongst all good men,
he did the first of this instant October, and diverse times before and since in
this City, falsely and maliciously, advisedly and traitorously by writing,
printing and openly derlaring, in and by one Paper of his called, A Salva
liberate, and by diverse other papers and books, whereof one he calls, An
Impeachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell and his son in law Henry
Ireton, and another book of his Entitled An Outcry of the young men, and
Apprentices of London, directed to all the private Soldiers of the Army, etc. a
third, A preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerigg, and a fourth
The legal fundamental liberties of the people of England revived, that he did
in these books publish, that the said Government is tyrannical, usurped and
unlawful; and that the Commons in Parliament assembled, are not the Supreme
authority of this Nation; he stands further indicted, that he as a false
Traitor did maliciously, advisedly and traitorously plot, and contrive, to
raise force against the present Government, and for the subversion and
alteration of it, and for the fulfilling of his most malicious and traiterous
designs, he did in and by the said traiterous Books, falsely, maliciously and
advisedly, utter and declare several most false and scandalous, malicious and
traiterous words and writings, that in the Indictment are particularly named
and expressed. And thirdly, that as a Traitor not being an Officer, nor a
Soldier, or a member of the Army under the Command of the now Lord General
Fairfax, he did most maliciously and traitorously endeavor, to withdraw
certain Soldiers of that Army from their obedience to their superior
Officers, which are particularly named in the Indictment, and that for the full
accomplishment of his contrivances and endeavors, he did maliciously,
advisedly and traitorously publish, and deliver the poisonous book called An
Impeachment, and in particular directed by the Title of the book, to all the
people of England, being for that end published by him to public view; in
which Book are contained, most false and scandalous, malicious, mutinous and
traitorous expressions as in the Indictment are set forth; And further that in
the said book which he called An Impeachment, that the present Government is
tirannicall and usurped, and that the Commons of England in Parliament
assembled, are not the Supreme Authority, And he further stands indicted, and
the Jury further finds, and presents, that all these and other expressions
written by him, and published by him in written Papers and printed books, he
has falsely, maliciously and traitorously stirred up strife on purpose, and to
the intent, to stir up and raise force against the present Government, settled
in the way of a Commonwealth and free State, without King and Lords, on
purpose, it to subvert and destroy. And further, he has also most traitorously
endeavored to withdraw the private Soldiers from their obedience and
subjection to their superior Officers; and all this in manifest contempt of
the Laws of this Commonwealth, in that behalf made and provided, and to the
hazard of the overthrow, and utter subversion of the said Government.

To this Indictment the Gentleman has pleaded not guilty, and has put himself
upon his Conntry, and if we can prove this against his Plea, it is at an issue.


L. Col. Lilb. I deny that Sir, I never pleaded any such single Plea as not
Guilty, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I beseech you take notice be extremely
wrongs me in saying so, for my Plea was a conditional Plea, as a Plea at large.


Mr. Attorney. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, You have heard the
Indictment read unto you, and you have heard it opened unto you, and you have
heard what Mr. Lilburne says, that he did not plead not Guilty, and I hope he
is ashamed of his Plea, now he hears the Indictment opened unto him. My Lord,
in this Indictment there is contained these several Grand Treasons.

The first is, that he has advisedly, traitorously, and maliciously published,
that the Government that is now established, by way of a free State or
Commonwealth, without either King or house of Lords, is tirannic all, usurped
and unlawful; and further, that the present Parliament now assembled, arr not
the Supreme authority of the Nation.

The second is this, that he has plotted, contrived and endeavored, to stir
up, and raise forces against the present Government, and for the subversion and
alteration of the same.

The third is this that relates to the Army, you have heard what his
expressions have been, and they have been read unto you, concerning them and
the rest, that he, not being an Officer or Soldier or member of the present
Army, has offered to stir up mutiny in the Army, and to withdraw the Soldiers
from their obedience and subjection to their superior Officer, and thereby to
stir them up to mutiny and discontent.

These are the maine parts, and substance of what I intend to Charge him with
in the evidence, to prove that which was contained in the Indictment. My Lord,
you have heard in what has been read out of the Indictment, what expressions
they are, those that are traitorous to the public, and have been so declared,
so judged, so executed, these are here Mr Lilburns engaged true friends; the
Parliament, the Government, the Authority, of both Parliament and Army, they
are Tyrants, Usurpers, Mercenaries, Janisaries, Murderers, Traitors, standing
by their own power and swords, and ever-ruling all by their Wills; these are
the expressions that he has used. My Lords, I shall not trouble you with any
thing of agravation; for my Lords, I do conceive, that the reading of the
Books themselves aggravates every thing against him; and I think there is no
English- man ( as Mr. Lilburn so often styles himself to be) will own such
words or acts as these are.

And truly my Lord, if I had read the Books, and not known the person, I should
not have thought he had been either a Christian, or a Gentleman, or a Civil
man, to have given such base and bitter language; but my Lords, and you of the
Jury, I stall hold you no longer the evidence being so plain, and the matter
so foul, that it will not admit over much stand in need of any dispute, and to
make it plain and clear to your judgments, and Consciences, there is
Witnesses in the Court evidently to prove every thing that will stand in need,
to be proved for the Indictment.

My Lords, the words are maliciously, advisedly and traitorously, I shall not
catch at words, but as himself says, what he prints is of mature, and
deliberate consideration, and such are his books in print; that himself has
either printed, or caused to be published.

The first that he is Charged withal, is that which is called An Outcry, it
has a very dangerous Title, and in the Direction especially to the Soldiers
of the Army, but especially to the private Soldiers of the Generals Regiment
of horse, that helped to plunder the true hearted English- men, traitorously
defeated at Burford, so that the Rebels at Burford were Mr. Lilburns dear
friends. My Lord, it has not only a dangerous Title, but was published at a
dangerous time; yea and for a dangerous end, which was to stir up the great
mutiny that was in the City of Oxford. My Lord for the proof of this, we shall
offer this, That Mr. Lilburn himself was Capt. Jones associate in the
publishing that Book; For Mr. Lilburn and this Capt. Jones brought this Book
to the press to be Printed, we shall offer unte yon where he has published it
to Soldiers of the Army, to engage them in a mutiny, and discontent against
their superior Officers; therefore in the first place call Thomas Newcombe.


Thomas Newcombe sworn. Just. Iermin Before you speak look upon the prisoner
first, whether you know him or not.


Mr. Attorney. My Lord, if you please, he may take the book in his hand, and
see whether he printed it, and when he printed it, and who brought it to the
press?


Mr. Newcombe. I Printed of this Book only the last sheet, not knowing where
the former part of it was done, which Book was brought to me by Leiut. Col.
Lilburn, and Capt. Jones, which Capt. Jones did agree with me in the price, I
was stopped in the proceedings in it: I say, that Capt. Jones together with
Leiut. Col. Lilburn did bring it to me, and that Capt. Jones did agree with me
in the price, but I was taken before I did perfect it, but Capt. Jones did
indent with me for the price; but this I must say, Leiut. Col. Lilburne came
alone with the Copy, and afterward at night he came again, and had a proof of
it, and that he was present when it was corrected.


Mr. Attorney. And when the first sheet was printed, then they came at night
again, and examined the proof with Capt. Jones, and his Corrector.


L. Keeble. And he brought the Copy of the whole draught of the Book unto you.


Leiut. Col. Lilb. Sir by your favor, if Mr. Prideaux have done with the
Witness, I crave my right by Law to ask him some questions. In the first
place, I desire he may be asked, whether I was either reader of the Original
Copy, or the over-looker of the printed proof?


Mr. Newcombe. You had a printed sheet of it and that was all.


Leiut. Col. Lilb. I desire to know, whether I was either the reader of that he
printed, or the looker upon the written Copy?


Mr. Newcombe. You looked upon the sheet that was printed, Capt. Jones read the
manuscript.


Leiut. Col. Lilb. Ask him the question thus, whether was I the Corrector of
the thing printed, or the looker on upon the printed Copy? And whether or no he
can swear, That that printed sheet that he says I had, was corrected and
revized, and was a true and perfect sheet according to the Original?


Mr. Newcombe. It was a Copy of the sheet before it was corrected or revized.


Mr. Attorney. And Mr. Jones did read the Original, and Leiut. Col. Lilburn
corrected the Copy.


Leiut. Col Lilb. Under favor you are mistaken, he says, that I cast my eye
upon the Copy; but does not in the least say, that I corrected it; and
therefore Sir, you do abuse me, in going about to make him say more then his
own Conscience tells him is truth.


L. Keeble. While the examination was, he says you read the proof.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, he says no such thing by your favor.


L. Keeble. Mr. Newcombe, was not Mr. Lilburne there the second time at night,
and did he not look upon the Copy?


Mr. Newcombe. That he did my Lord, but my Lord I shall tell you the manner of
our Trade in this particular, the manner is, that after we have set a form of
the letter, we make a proof of it, which proof we have a Corrector does read,
my Corrector he had one being he Corrected it, and Capt. Jones looked upon the
Manuscript, and L. Col. Lilburne had a Copy of the same sheet uncorrected, but
he did not correct it, nor read to the Corrector; there was two pulled off, the
Corrector had one, and Mr. Lilburne had the other, and Capt, Jones looked upon
the Manuscript, and read it to the Corrector.


Leiut. Col. Lilb. He has declared unto you, That he was taken printing the
thing before it was perfected, I desire to knw, whether I was at his house to
give any further directions at all after it was taken?


Mr. Attorney. That Is no thanks neither to you nor him.


Leiut. Col. Lilb. I pray let him answer the thing, let me have fair play
above board. Sir, I beseech you let me hold him close to the question, he says
he was taken before the sheet was perfected, truly I think they are his very
words.


Mr. Newcomb. I said in my examination, that it was a proof of that printed
which you had.


Leiut. Col. Lilb. I desire again to know this of him, whether before he had
printed or perfected that sheet, he had doing, he was not taken, and both the
forms?


L. Keeble. Mr. Lilburn, you must desire to ask him the question, and not you
to demand it of him your self.


Mr. Lilb. I shall Sir,


Mr. Newcombe. It was before the forms were taken.


Leiut. Col. Lilb. I ask you, whether before the things were complete and
perfect, your forms were not both taken, and your person seized upon?


Mr. Newcombe. There were only some few Copies printed, and then I was seized
upon, and the forms taken away before I had perfected the sheet; but this I
say, he did not indent with me for the price, neither had I the Copy from Mr.
Lilburns hands, but from Capt. Jones his hands.


Just. Jermin. You say that he had one proof, and Jones another, when was this
you speak of? give us the time as near at you can?


Mr. Newcombe. I can not say justly the time, but as I remember, it was about 7
or 8 weeks since.


Mr. Attorney. Stand you aside, and call John Took, John Skinner, Thomas
Lewis, John Hawkins and John Merriman, Witnesses sworn.


Mr. Attorney. John Took, Do you declare now your knowledge. That which I call
him for, is to this purpose, that Mr. Took being a Soldier of the Army, one
of them mentioned in the Judictment, Mr. Lilburne delivered him one of the
Outcries, on purpose to draw him from his obedicence to his superior Officers.


L. Keeble. Show him the Book.


Mr. Took. I have seen the Book, but I had not the Book in my hand before.


Mr. Attorney. Tell what you know, that is all we ask you.


Mr. Took. About seven weeks ago, being at dinner with Thomas Lewis and John
Smith, all Soldiers, after dinner we met with Leiut Col. Lilburn in Ivy-lane,
and Thomas Lewis knowing of him, took acquaintance of him.


Just. Iermin. All Soldier under my Lord General Fairfax?


Mr. Took. Yes Sir.


Just. Iermin. Go on.


Mr. Took. Mr. Lilburn asked me to go and drink a cup of beer; we did so,
and so when we went in, he asked, whether we had seen such a book as the
Apprentizes Outcry? And Mr. Lewis answered, that he had seen it in a man's
hand, then Leiut. Col. Lilburn, said, he had one in his packet that was given
him, and if he pleased to accept of it he would give it him; so told him he had
thought to buy one of them; for he heard they were sold in the City, but he
would accept of his; So Mr. Lilburn delivered it to Mr. Lewis.


Mr. Attorney. What did Master Lilburne say further unto you?


Mr. Took. He said, that you Soldiers keep us all in slavery.


Leiut. Col. Lilburne I beseech you, let me ask him one Question.


Mr. Took. There was some to be sold, bat I forgot the place.


Mr. Aturny. Did he name a place and person to you where you might have some
of them.


Mr. Cook. He did name a place, but I have forgot it, where there were more
books to be sold.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir I beseech you let me ask you one question. --


Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, for your direction you must make your question to us,
and require us to ask him the question, and then if your question be fair, it
shall not he denied you. --


L. Col. Lilb. Then thus: whatsoever this Gentleman says of meeting him in Ivy
lane, and desiring him to go to drink with me, yet I desire you to ask him
whether I did take notice or cogniz^^ice of any of them first, or whether they
did speak to me before, before ever I said any thing unto them. --


Lo. Keble. To what end do you ask this. --


L. Col. Lilb. Because in your Indictment I am charged that I went among the
Soldiers to seduce them from their obedience to their superior Officers, when
I have made it my endeavor to shun them as much as I can, and not to come nigh
the place where I know they are, if I can avoid it, no although I meet with
them, not to discourse with any of them, unless they begin first. --


Lord Keble. I tell you this which may direct you afterward, whosoever began
to discourse first, if you did give them the book afterward, it is all one.


L. Col. Lil. But shall please you I am upon my life, and by law I ought not to
be denied, to ask the witnesses that swear against me any question that I
please, that I my self judge pertinent for my advantage.


Mr. Aturney. Call Thomas Lewis.


Thomas Lewis. And it shall please you, I am upon my oath to speak the truth,
and I shall desire by the hlpe of God so to do, and no more. One day which I
conceive to my remembrance, was the 6. day of September. last, we being upon a
Guard at Paul's, went to an house to refresh our selves, and when I came forth,
I met with Lieut. Coll. John Lilburn, whom I had formerly known, and sometimes
visited in his imprisonment, and whom I was very glad to see, having a little
before heard as though some sudden accident or mischance had befaln him, and I
did ask of him how he did, he said unto me he was well; and so with that says
he, what are you upon the guard, to my best remembrance this was his
expression, yet see whether it was he, or another that said it, as I take it.
These were his words, says ^e, I have almost forgotten you: Sir, I was known
to you formerly, having sometimes been with you in the Tower; says he, will
you go drink? if you please we will, and so upon that we went to a place
called the Red Cross in Newgatemarket: and there were sitting down to drink,
having not much discourse for the present, we sitting still, he asked me at
length, have you heard of a book called the Outcry of the Apprentices? Sir
said I, I have heard of it, and have a louging desire to buy one of them to
rend it, and my reason why I so said, was because I did underst and it was to
be sold at the Exchange, there I intended to go to get one of them: Says he, I
had one given to me, and if you will, I will give it unto you, so I received
the book with thankfulness, and further expressing, which was something
mean, it would save me a penny in buying of it. And I further entreated him,
if he could direct me, where I might buy some more of them: I have a friend
says be in such a place, if you would go to him, and tell him that I am here,
I should think my self beholding to you; Now the places name was Martins
lane, bub the man's name whether I went, I have forgot, and the man too, I
never heard of the man before nor since, so I told Mr. Lilburn. Now he said to
me, peradventure when you find that man, you may have some more of the books;
now these were the words to my best remembrance and knowledge, as I desire to
speak with a pure conscience.


Mr. Aturny. Mr. Lilburn gave you one of those books.


Mr. Lewis. Yes Sir, and I put it into my pocket, and when I had done, Mr. --
he will deliver him. --

Whether there was any Books or passages betwixt them; and upon which he told
him, yes, There is a book that Mr. Lewis has, that has such a title.


Mr. Atturny. What did you with the book. --


Mr. Lewis. I delivered it to the Lieutenant. --


Mr. Atturn. The same book that you received from Mr. Lilburn, you delivered
to the Lieutenant.


Mr. Atturny. What did L. Col. Lilb. say to you concerning your pay, did not he
ask you, etc.


L. Col. Lilb. I pray Sir do not direct him what to say, but leave him ^o his
own conscience and memory, and make him not for fear to swear more then his own
conscience freely tells him is true.


Mr. Lewis. The discourse was thus; says he, you soldiers (to my best
remembrance) are the men that keep us all in slavery; now what to conceive of
that expression I must leave that unto you: And as concerning our pay, he asked
us, how is your pay? these were the words, or to that effect, but there was
money come for us, and ready to be delivered out unto us.


Mr. Atturn. Call John Skinner, (...) was one of those that was in companies
and can speak to it.


Mr. Skinner. To my best remembrance, and it shall please you, 'twas the
beginning of September. I cannot justly tell what day, that I met with Mr.
Lilburn in Ivy-lane, near unto Paul's, and meeting with him, I was going
toward the Guard, and so was Mr. Lewis with me, being walking forth of the
Lane, having been refreshing our selves; and near the end of the Lane, we met
Lieu. Col. Lilburn, which Lieut. Col. Mr. Lewis very well knew, and knowing of
him, asked him how he did, and how it went with him, in regard he had heard
before he was in prison; and so I did not take any heed what he said further,
neither do I know whether Mr. Lewis asked Mr. Lilburn to go with him to
drink, or Mr. Lilburn asked him; but to the Red Cross in Newgate-market we
went to drink, and Mr. Lilburn did ask Mr. Lewis whether or no he had seen
the book which was called the Apprentices Outcry: Mr. Lewis answered him that
he had not seen the book (as I remember) but he had heard of that book that
it was forth, and he did intend to buy one of them in regard they were
publicly sold abroad; says Mr. Lilburn, I have such a book in my pocket,
which was given me even now, and I will give it you if you will.


L. Col. Lilb. I pray let me hear two or three lines before.


Mr. Skinner. Whereupon you answered, and said, I have the book in my pocket,
and it was given me, and I will give it you, and Mr. Lewis received it, and
that was all, and presently I went away.


Mr. Atturny. You hear Gentlemen of the Jurie, that it is the same book that he
received from the hands of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn.


L. Col. Lilb. My Lord, I beseech you hear me before the Witnesses go, and he
that was sworn before, I desire to ask him this question, whether or no that
this is the very book that is mentioned in the Indictment, and whether or no
they have examined the words of it with the Indictment.


Mr. Prideaux. You need not, that shall be proved presently.


Mr. Atturny. That book which Mr. Lilburn gave you, what did you with it Mr.
Skinner: It was delivered unto my Lieutenant, who stands there.


Lieut. It was delivered unto my Captain upon the Guard.


Capt. Meriman. Took the book in his hand, and said, this individual book,
signed in several places by me, I delivered to Mr. Frost, Secretary to the
Council of State, and Mr. Frost caused me to sign it in several places,
whereby it could not be mistaken, and that is the very individual book.


Mr. Atturny. My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, we have thus far gone
in the Evidence, that Mr. Lilburn brought the last sheet^ of it to the Press,
the first time he came with Captain Jones, and he came the second time with him
to examine it, that is, he had a printed Copy that was then printing, to be
printed, and was the Corrector for the Press, reading the Original copy: so
far he is privy to the printing of the book. In the next place three
witnesses, (Soldiers of the Arm^^) swears, he gave them one of these books,
and one of them gave it to his Lieut. and the Lieut. to the Captain, and the
Captain swears this individual book is that which Master Lilburn gave into
the hands of Mr. Lewis; what can be more plain then this, I pray you Judge;
for here is plain testimory of Mr. Lilburns delivering this O^^ery to the 3.
Soldiers, and one of them to his Lieut. and his Lieutenant to his Captain, and
his Captain to Mr. Frost, with maks upon it, so this is by consequence proved
unto you, this is the individual book, that Mr Lilburn, prisoner at the Bar
gave to the 3. Soldiers, and which is to be made use of, when you have
occasion upon the evidence, to read it as now it is in the Court with you.


L. Col. Lilb. By your favor I have had no answer to the question that I
humbly craved an answer to, whch is, whether the Soldiers are positively able
to swear, that this is the individual book which they say they had from my
hands, and whether they are able to swear that this individual book is a
true and exact copy without addition or subscription of that original
manuscript that the Printer says Captain Jones delivered to his hands, which
he says I had an uncorrected sheet of.


Mr. Attur. We shall clear that to you, when we come to make use of it.


L. Col. Lilb. I beseech you Gentlemen of the Jury to take notice of my
question, and what I am denied.


Mr. Prideaux. The next thing that is charged upon him, is a paper writter, and
irtituled, a saly and liberate, my Lord shall open the thing to you being
direct a (my Lord) for the prosecution of Mr. Lilburn: and having things of
very high concernment that are charged against him, I did by word of mouth send
to have him come to me, which I understood he did decline, because he had no
warrant; The Liut. of the Tower was pleased to acquaint me with it, and I
thereupon directed my warrant to the Lieutenant to being him before me: and Mr.
Lilburn, etc.


L. C. Lilb. My This was the first or second time that Mr. Lilburns tongue
slipped in calling him Lord.
Lord, and please your honors, thus, if we be upon matter of fact, let us come
to it, let us have no introduction to teach the witnesses what to say, beyond
what their own consciences dictates unto them.


Mr. Atturny. I shall go no further in it, let the Lieutenant of the Tower
speak himself.


The Lieutenant of the Tower sworn. Mr. Atturny. Lieut. of the Tower you are
questioned about the falvo liberate that Mr. Lilburn delivered unto you, have
you the original?


Lieut. Tower. Yes Sir, I have.


Mr. Atturny. How come you by it?


Lieut. Tower. I shall be short in what I say, because I will not trouble the
Court.


L. Coll. Lilb. Let me hear you then.


Lieut. Tower. Being abroad, there was a message left with my servants, that I
should bring up Lieut. Col. Lilb. to Mr. Atturneys chamber in the Temple, and
when I came in, I had notice of it: I did then send to Lieut. Col. John
Lilburn, to let him know what command I had reciived from the Attorney
general, the next day to carry up Lieut. Col. John Lilburn to the Attorney
Generals chamber: But Lieus. Col. Lilburn not well understanding whether I had
a written warrant or no; but before he came at home he recalled himself, and
came back, and desired the sight of my warrant, I told you before I had no
warrant, but by word of mouth; why says he, do you think I will go upon a
verbal Warrant? says he, I will not go unless you force me; but the next
day Mr. Attorney General was acquainted that he refused to come without a
warrnnt. When the Warrant was made, I met with Lieut. Col. Lilburn about 10. of
the clock in the Tower, who entreated me to let him see it. I showed it him,
he read it, he desired a copy of it, takes it; which when he had, he went from
me, and about two hours after he came to me about one of the clock, and said
I -- pray receive this from me, for says he I do intond not to own the
Authority and power of that Gentleman that sens me the Warrant, whereupon I
told him I would show this same to the Aturny General, why sais he, I give you
it to that purpose.

When the time came, Lieut. Col. Lilourn did go along with me in an orderly
civil way: I had no body but my man, for I told him I will take no body but my
man, if you will engage your self to me that you will return peaceably, which
be did, and so we went very orderly to Mr. Atturnies Chamber, which is all for
that I can say.


Mr. Aturny. If you please that the Lieutenant may upon his oath declare
whether that be the true Original he had from Mr. Lilburn's own hands or no?


Lieut. Tower. It was never out of my custody since he gave it me.


Lord Keble. Mr. Lilburn, you do acknowledge it to be your own handwriting,
show it him.


Lieut. Col. Lilb. Sir. I am too old with such simple ginnes to be caught, I
will cast mine eyes upon none of your papers, neither shall I answer to any
questions that concern my self; I have learned more law out of the Petition of
Right, and Christ's pleading before Pilate, then so.


Mr. Atturny. Would you had learnd more Gospel.


Judge Jermin. You may answer a question whether it be true or false, and
confess, and glorify God.


L. Col, Lilb. I have said, Sir, prove it, I am not to be caught with such
fooleries.


Lord Keble. You see the man, and the quality of the man, this is the paper
that he delivered into his own hand, and that is sufficient, as well as if it
was of his own handwriting.


L. Col. Lilb. Good Sir, your verbal Bench-law is far short of your written
Text in your own law books.


Judge Jarman. Put it into the Court.


Lo. Keble. Your writing or not writing is nothing, you delivered the book.


L. Col. Lil. Sir, I desire to know in what place, whereabouts in the Tower of
London, the Leiut. of the Tower says he received this paper.


Lord Keble. Let him name the place where it was delivered.


Lieut. Towr. The place was at the steps, at the bottom of the narrow passage
at my Garden end, in the Cart way where the carriages comes up.


L. Col. Lilb. Whether is that place in the Liberties of London, or is it part
of the County of Middlesex.


Lieut. Tower. The Tower is in But it is sure that place is in Middlesex, as
was resolved in Sir Thomas Overburies case, see Cooks 3d. part Inst. fol. 130.
Chap. Indictment.
London some part of it, and some part in Middlesex; but unto which place that
part of the Tower belongs, I am not able certainly to say, but it has commonly
been reputed in Middlesex.


Mr. Atturny. My Lord, you may see the valiantness of this Champion for the
peoples liberties, that will not own his own hand although I must desire you
Gentlemen of the Jury to observe, that Mr. Lilburn implicitly confesses it.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I deny nothing: and what now can be proved mine, I have a
life to lay down for the justification of it, but prove it first.


Mr. Attorney. My Lord, the next thing to prove the charge against him is a
very high one, it is styled Master Lilburnes, and his name is to it: It is
entitled, An Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his
Son in law, Henry Ireton, Esquires, late members of the late forcibly
dissolved House of Commons, presented to public view by Lieut. Coll. John
Lilburn, close prisoner in the Tower of London: My Lord, I doubt he will not
own it, but yet my Lord he may be asked the question.


L. Coll. Lilb. I shall deny nothing I do: And yet I have read the Petition of
Right, Sir, that teaches me to answer to no questions against, or concerning
my self, and I have read of the same to be practiced by Christ and his
Apostles.


Mr. Atturny. You will not own it, the book you have read?


L. Col. Lil. You may make your advantage of it.


Mr. Atturny. We shall prove it, call


Witnesses. Thomas Daffern, Richard Lander, Marshall, Major Hawksworth,
Governor of Warwick-Castle, all sworn. Mr, Attorney. Mr. Daffern, if you
please, he may be asked where he met Mr. Lilburn, the time when, what book
was given him, and to what purpose it was given him.


Mr. Daffern. Why, it was upon the 12. of August last; having been in
Southwark, I met with Lieutenant Col. Lilburn upon the Bridge, I went back
with him to his house at Winchester-house in Southwarke, he had leave to visit
his Family at that time, being very sick, and I told him I was going into
Warwickshire the next day: and he having heard that Coll. Airs was then
removed from Oxford to Warwick-Castle, he gave me a book to carry to him, and I
delivered it to him at Warwick-castle.


Mr. Aturny. The book that he gave you, you gave to the Governor, did you see
any more of them.


Mr. Daffern. I never saw any of them but that, which was both the first and
the last I have seen of them.


Mr. Atturny. Lander the Marshall was present at that time, was he not?


Mr. Lander That I was, and I had it from him, and I delivered the book to
Major Hawksworth the Governor.


Mr. Attorney. Major Hawksworth, what did you do with the book?


Major Hawksw. I sent it to Colonel Purfrey, in a paper sealed with three or
four seals.


Mr. Attorney. Call Col. Purfrey: Col. Purfrey sworn.


L. Col. Lilb. I heat not one word; under favor but one word, I crave but one
word, I have an exception. First, Col. Purfrey is one of those that call
themselves the Keepers of the Liberties of ENGLAND, and for committing crimes
against them I am indicted, and he i^ one of them, and therefore a party, and
in that respect, in law he can be no witness against me; it would have been
very hard for the King to have bin a witness against that man that was indicted
for committing crimes against him; such a thing in all his Reign was never
known.


Col. Purfrey. I received this book, sealed in a letter from the Governor of
Warwick-Castle, Major Hawksworth, I know his hand, and I know the day he sent
me this very individual Book, and my hand is at it, and the Governor who
sent it up to me, which I declare to be the very individual book that I
received from him.


Mr. Atturny. Mr. Lilburn, you are mistaken, Col. Purfrey is a membee of
Parliament, he is none of the Keepers of the Liberties of England; but why will
you put us to all this trouble, to prove your books, seeing your hand is to
them; my Lord, I had though the great Champion of England would not be ashamed
to own his own hand.


L. Col. Lilb. I have answered once for all, I am upon Christ's terms, when
Pilate asked him whether he was the Son of God, and adjured him to tell him
whether he was or no: he replied, thou say it: so say I, thou Mr. Prideaux
say it, they are my books; but prove it, and when that is done, I have a
life to lay down to justify whatsoever can be proved mine.


Judge Jerman. But Christ said afterward, I am the Son of God, confess Mr.
Lilburn, and give glory to God.


L. Coll. Lilb. I thank you Sir for your good law, but I can teach my self
better.


Mr. Attur. Here Mr. Lilburn makes a book which was given to the hands of Mr.
Daffern, by Mr. Lilburn himself, Mr. Daffern he swears that the same book he
gave to Col. Aires: Mr. L^nder the Marshall of the Garrison of Warwick, swears
that the same book Daffern gave to Coll. Eyres, he had from him, and gave to
Major Hawksworth the Governor; the Governor swore that that book he received
from the Marshall, he sent sealed up in a letter to Mr. Purfrey, who also
swears that that same book he set his hand to it to know it again by, and that
the individual book that is now given into your hands, is the same book that
was delivered to him; The Title is an Impeachment of high Treason against
Oliver Cromwell, Esquire.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I wonder you are not ashamed so far to press the
testimony beyond that they themselves swears, Mr. Daffern does not name the
book at all that was given to him, neither does he swear it to be mine, and
therefore Sir you abuse your self, the Court, the witness, and me too.


Mr. Atturny. Master Lilburn, I have done you right in it, and no wrong at all;
for Colonel Purfoy does name it; The next is a very dangerous book of his,
called A preparative to the Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerig. Mr.
Lieutenant of the Tower, you are upon your Oath, I pray you speak your
knowledge to that.


Lieut. of the Tower. My Lord, it is true, Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne gave me
in the Tower such a book, but I cannot say, whether that be the same Book
that he delivered to me, or no, I have such a book also at home, but I am not
able to say that is the very Book he gave me, and whether this be the same
book, I know not.


Mr. Prideaux. Call Mr. Nutleigh and Mr. Radney.


Master Nutleigh sworn. L. Col. Lilb. I pray let the witnesses stand here, the
Jury say they cannot hear them.


Edward Radney called and sworn. L. Col. Lilb. I pray you let me know what
these Gentlemen are, I do not know them, neither can I remember at present
that ever I saw them before.


Lord Keble. You see they look like men of quality.


Mr. Prideaux, They are my sorvants Mr. Lilburn.


Mr. Nutleigh. My Lord, and But Mr. Lilburn has been heard to profes, he see
not those Gentlemen in the Chamber that he discoursed with Mr. Prideaux in,
although he looked diverse times about him.
please your Lordship, the 14. of September. last, the prisoner at the Bar,
Lieutenans Col. John Lilburn, being before Mr. Atturny General: And I being by
in the chamber, I did see him deliver this Book to Master Attorney General,
this specificall book, and he did own it, and called himself the Author of
it, save only the Errataes of the Printer.


L. Gol. Lilb. The last Clause, I beseech you Sir, the Jury desires to hear
the last Clause.


Mr. Nutleigh. My Lord That is an errant lie; for diverse that heard the words,
aver them to be thus: it is my book, and I will (...) it, and so it might be,
although he had bought it.
, he said he was the Author of that Book, the ERRATAES of the PRINTER excepted.


Lieut. Col. Lilburne. Let him be asked this question, whether in that
expression, saving the Errataes of the Printer, there did not follow these
words, which are many: I desire to know whether there were not such words or no.


M. Radney. I was present, my Lord, when the prisoner at the Bar presented this
book to Mr. Attorney, and owned it, saving the Errataes of the Printer.


L. Col. Lilb Were there no more words?


Mr. Radney. Not to my remembrance, and so said they both.


Lieutenant of the Tower. My Lord, I was present at the same time, wh^^.
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne did present a book to M^ster Attorney General,
with such a Title as this: And truly if I be not much mistaken, there was used
by him these words, which are many: Thus it was in the whole; Says he, here
is a book which is mine, which I will own, the Errataes or Errors of the
Printer excepted, which are many, if I mistake not very much, those are the
very words Master Lilburne said.


Mr. Attorney. My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, you see that here are
th^e^ Witnesses, and they do all agree, and they do all agree in this, that
Master Lilburne the prisoner at the Bar did deliver this Book to me, owning
it as his So is an Ox, a man buys with his money, it is his own, and so is a
gold ring he finds, after he ^ath found it, it is his own, and yet it does
not follow, that the owner either begot the Ox, or made the gold ring.
own, the Errors or Errataes of the Printer only excepted: And as for that
Clause which are many, only the Lieutenant of the Tower swears to that singly,
and therefore I desire it may remain in Court, as that individual Book that
they see Master Lilburne give me. But my Lord, there is another Book in the
Indictment, entitled the legal fundamental Liberty of the people of ENGLAND
(...) and asserted: Or, An Epistle written the eight of June, 16^9, by
Lieutenant Colonel JOHN LILB^RN, to Mr. WILLIAM LENTHALL, Speaker to the
re^^^^^er of those few Knights, C^^^z^ns, and Burgesses, that Colonel THOMAS
PRIDE at his late purge thought convenient to leave sitting at Westminster. My
Lords, for this Book it ownes Master Lilburn, if be will own it, it has his
(...) to it; but I have my lesson from him: My Lord, he will own nothing, he
will publish enough, but my Lord ^e will not own it (...) q^^stioned for it;
that is not the true principle of a true Christian, nor an Englishman, nor a
Gentleman.


L. Col. Lilb I deny nothing by your favor.


Mr. Attorney. And confess as little: My Lord, for this you have two books in
proof before you: The preparative to the Hue and Cry and the Salva Liberate
ownes these very individual books; for the Preparative to the Hue and Cry in
the Marginall note, at the second page, ownes and avowes this book, called The
Lagall Fundamental, etc. to be Master Lilburns: And Master Lilburn himself
did own the Preparative to the (...) Cry before three Witnesses to be his: and
therefore the Salva Libercate, M. lieutenant of the Tower has sworn that he
received it from his own h^nds.

My Lords, as for this book, the Salva, which he does not acknowledge, We
shall read the words in the Indictment, although it had been as ingneuous for
Master Lilburn to have confessed it, as for us to have proved it, and for the
proof of it read the Title.


Clerk. The Title read. A preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur
Haslerig a late Mumber of the forceably dissolved House of Commons, and now the
present wicked, bloody, and tyrannical Governor of Newcastle upon Tyne.


Mr. Prideaux. Read the Marginall note in page 2.


Clerk. Page 2. in the Margent.

That those men that now sit at Westminster are no Parliament, either upon the
principles of law and reason; see my argument or reasons therefore in my second
Edition of my Book of the 8. of June, 1649. Entitled, The legal fundamental
liberties of the people of ENGLAND, revived and asserted, page 48, 49. to 63.


Mr. Attorney. This Book has Mr, Lilburns name to it, and here in this his
Hue and Cry he ownes it, and the third page in the margent has it again.


Clerk. Page 3. Peruse carefully I entreat you, the quotations in the 6. and
8. pages of my formentioned Impeachment of High Treason against Cromwell. At.
also the 12. and 15. pages of the second Edition of my forementioned Book,
dated the eighth of June, 1649 Entitled, The legal fundamental liberties,
etc.


Mr. Attorney. Read the (...) in the body of the book.


Clerk. Page 4. At which Trial by strength of arguments, I forced the Judges
openly to confess, that Generals were nothing in Law, see also the second
Edition of my book of the eighth of June, 1649 Entitled, The legal
fundamental liberties of the people of England, revived, asserted, and
vindicated, page 49.


L. Col. Lilb. Let him speak whether it be 29. or 49.


Clerk. Forty nine (but there is not so many pages in the book.)


Mr. Atturny. My Lord, here is a Salva Liberate, which is his own Book,
though he will not own it.

My Lord, I had thought the great Champion of England for the peoples
liberties, would never have been so unworthy as not to have owned his own
hand; but read in the 24. page of the Salva in his own written hand.


Clerk. Page 24. I have by almost 8. years dear-bought experience, found the
interest of some of my forementioned Judges to be too strong for me to grapple
with, and the only This was brought in by head and shoulders.
cause to my apprehension, that all this while keep me from my own: and in
the Margent he says; see also the second Edition of my forementioned book,
entitled, The legal fundamental liberties of England revived, etc.


Mr. Aturny. Now my Lord, there is the Salva Liberate that was given from his
own hand that ownes it, I mean this Book, called The legal fundamental
liberties, etc.


Mr. Aturney. Read the Title of it.


Clerk. A Salva Liberate sent to Colonel Francis West, Lieutenant of the
Tower of LONDON, on Friday the fourteenth of September. 1649. by Lieut. Col. John
Lilburn.


Mr. Prideaux. Read where it is marked.


Clerk. But if you would produce unto me a written Warrant which has some more
face of legal Magistracy in it, then verbal command^, and according to my
right and privilege let me read it, I would go with you either by land or
water, as you please, because I was in no capacity to resist you, although I
then told you I judged a paper-Warrant (although in words never so formal)
coming from any pretended power, or Authority in England now visible, to be
altogether illegal, because the intruding General, Fairfax, and his Forces,
had broke and anihilated all the formal and legal Magistracy of England; yea,
the very Parliament it self, and by his Will and Sword (absolute Conqueror
like) had most tyrannically exected, set up, and imposed upon the free people
of this Nation a Juncto, or mock power sitting at Westminster, whom he and his
Associates call a Parliament, who like so many armed Thieves and Robbers upon
the high way, assume a power by their own will, most traitorously to do what
they like.


Mr. Atturny. That Is not the place, look toward the latter end.


Clerk. Then here it is; sure I cannot choose but acquaint you that I have long
since drawn and published my plea against the present power, in my second
Edition of my Book of the 8. of June, 1649. entitled, The legal fundamental
liberties of the people of England, revived, asserted, and vindicated, which
you may in an especial manner, read in the 43, 44, 45. to the 49. page, which
by the strength of the Lord God omnipotent, my large experienced help in time
of need, I will seal with the last drop of my blood.


Mr. Aturny. My Lord, for the Book, called the legal fundamental liberties of
England, his name is to the Book; but I shall not put much weight upon that;
but in others of his books, as in his Preparative to an Hue and Cry, which he
owns, and which is proved he owns by 3 witnesses. In several places of that
book he owns this as his book, viz. The legal fundamental liberties of Engl.
revived, etc. He calls it mine, and his ferementioned book: and in his Salva
Liberate, he owns it again, gives it the very date, and the very Title that is
in this Book: my Lords, we have done with this. My Lords, now I shall go on
to make use of it, and to show my Lord out of these books, his words and
language, to make good the Charge that has been read in the indictment against
Mr. Lilburne. My Lords, if you please for that I shall begin first, in reading
to the Jury the very Act it self, which makes the fact to be Treason.

My Lord, for that, here is the Act, that does declare the Common wealth for
the future to become hereafter a free State, and the other declaring that fact
to be Treason, that shall say it is tyrannical or unlawful, these are
general Acts which need not be proved; but if the prisoner does desire it, we
shall prove it.


Clerk. Die Lunae, 14. of May, 1649. Ordered by the Commons assembled in
Parliament.


L. C. Lilb. Hold Sir, prove your Act first, whether it be an Act of Parliament.


Mr. Attorney. My Lords, I shall not struggle with Mr. Lilubrn in plain
terms; but I thought when Acts were published, the Courts of Justice were
bound in duty to take notice of them; but if it be so he will have it proved,
we will, although it be but a slender cavil, for this is one of the published
copies.


L. Col. Lilb. But under your favor Mr. Prideaux, as there may be counterfeit
money (which we see there is every day) so there may be counterfeit Statutes
too, and this may be one for any thing I know, therefore I desire it may be
proved to be a true Statute or Act of Parliament.


Mr. Nutleigh. This is a true copy of the Act of Parliament, which I examined
with the Record.


L. Col. Lilb. The record, where is that to be found?


Mr. Nutleigh. At Westminster, with the Clerk of the Parl.


L. Col. Lil. Is this Gentleman able to depose it to be a (...). Law in all the
parts of it; for by the Laws of England, the people are not to take any notice
of Acts made, but by a Parliament: neither are they to take notice of those
Acts that are not proclaimed: Sir, I beseech you let me know where the Record
and Rolls are, and where he examined this, and whether he is able to swear
whether they have been proclaimed in every Hundred and Market-towne, according
to the old, and not yet repealed law of England.


Lo. Keble At Westminster he tells you.


L. Col. Lilb. I beseech you where, at Westminster.


Lord Keble. The Clerks of the Parliament are known to the City of London here,
you know it well enough.


L. Col. Lillb. That is no answer to my questions, I pray let me have fair
play; for it is a question to me whether the books of the Clerk of the House
of Commons be a And w^l might he for Mackwel -- in his manner of passing of
statutes, in his preface thereunto, says, that the Commons had no journals at
all before Edward the sixths time.
record in law or no.


Lord Keble. Read, Cerk.


Clerk. An Act of the 14. of May, 1649. Declaring what offenses shall be
adjudged Treason.

WHereas the Parliament has abolished the Kingly Office in ENGLAND and
IRELAND, and in the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and has
resolved and declared that the people shall for the future b^^ governed by its
own Representatives, or National meetings in Council, chosen and entrusted by
them for that purpose, has settled that Government in the way of a
Commonwealth and free State, without KING or House of LORDS. Be it therefore
enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, that if
any person shall maliciously, or advisedly publish, by writing, printing, or
openly declaring, That the said Government is tyrannical, usurped, or
unlawful; Or that the Commons in PARLIAMENT assembled are not the supreme
Authority of this Nation, or shall plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir up,
or raise force against the present Government, or for the subversion or
alteration of the same, and shall declare the same by any open deed; That then
every such offense shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged by the Authority of
this present PARLIAMENT to be High Treason. And whereas the Keepers of the
Liberty of ENGLAND, and the Council of state constituted, and to be from time
to time constituted by Authority of PARLIAMENT, are to be under the said
Representatives in PARLIAMENT. entrusted for the maintenance of the said
Government, with several powers and Authorities limited, given, and appointed
unto them by the PARLIAMENT. Be it likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that i^ any person shall maliciously and advisedly, plot, or endeavor the
subversion of the said Keepers of the Lebertie of ENGLAND, or the Council of
State, and the same shall declare by any open d^^d, or shall move any person or
persons for the doing thereof, or (...) up the people to rise against them, or
either of them there, or either of their Authorities, that the every (...) and
off^^^s shall be taken, deemed and declared to be (...) Treason,

And whereas the PARLIAMENT (...) their just and lawful defense, (...) under
the Command of THOMAS, LORD PAIRFAX, and are at present necessitated by reason
of the manifold distractions within ^word Commonwealth, and invasions
threatened from abroad, to continue the same, which under God must be the
instrumental means of preserving the well-affected people of this Nation in
peace and safety. Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any
person, not being an Officer, Soldier, or member of the Army, shall plot,
contrive, or endeavor to stir up any mutiny in the said Army, or withdraw
any Soldiers or Officers from their obedience to their superior Officers, or
from the present Government as aforesaid, or shall procure, invite, aid, or
assist any Foreigners or Strangers to invade England or Ireland; or shall
adhere to any Forces raised by the Enemies of the PARLIAMENT, or Gommon-wealth,
or Keepers of the Liberties of ENGLAND. Or if any person shall counterfeit the
great Seal of England (for the time being) used and appointed by authority of
Parliament: That then every such offense and offenses, shall be taken, deemed,
and declared by the authority of this Parliament, to be high treason: And every
such person shall suffer pain of death, and also forfeit unto the Keepers of
the Liberty of England, to and for the use of the Common wealth, all and
singular his and their Lands, Tenements and hereditaments, goods and Chattels,
as in case of high Treason, has been used by the Laws and Statutes of this
Land, to be forfeit and lost, provided always that no persons shall be
indicted and arraigned for any of the offenses mentioned in this act, unless
such offenders shall be indicted or prosecuted for the same within one year
after the offense committed.


Mr. Prideaux. Read the other statute.


Clerk. Tuesday, 17. July, 1649.

Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament that this Act be forthwith
printed and published. Hen. Scobel Cler. Parl.

An Act declaring what offenses shall be adjudged Treason.

Whereas the Parliament has abolished the Kingly Office in England and
Ireland, and in the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and having
resolved and declared, that the people shall for the future be governed by its
own representatives, or national meetings in Counsel, chosen and entrusted by
them for that purpose, has settled the Government in the way of a
Commonwealth, and free State, without King or House of Lords; Be it enacted by
this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, that if any person
shall maliciously or advisedly publish by writing, printing, or openly
declaring, that the said Government is tyrannical, usurped, or unlawful, or
that the Commons in Parliament assembled are not the supreme Authority of this
Nation, or shall plot, contrive or endeavor to stir up, or raise force against
the present Government, or for the subversion or alteration of the same, and
shall declare the same, by any open deed, that then every such offense shall be
taken, deemed and adjudged by Authority of this Parliament to be high Treason;
and whereas the Keepers of the Liberties of England, and the Counsel of State,
constituted, and to be from time to time constituted, by Authority of
Parliament, are to be under the said representatives in Parliament, entrusted
for the maintenance of the said Government with several Powers, and
Authorities limited, given and appointed unto them by the Parliament; Be it
likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person shall
malliciously, and advisedly, plot or endeavor, the subversion of the said
Keepers of the Liberties of England, or the Counsel of State, and the same
shall declare by any open deed, or shall move any person or persons for the
doing thereof, or stir up the people to rise against them, or either of them,
their, or either of their Authorities, that then every such offense and
offenses shall be taken, deemed and declared to be high treason. And whereas
the Parliament for their just and lawful Defense, has raised and leavied the
Army and Forces now under the Command of THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, and are at
present necessitated by Reason of the manifold distractions within this
Commonwealth, and invasions threatened from abroad, to continue the same which
under God, must be the isntrumental means of preserving the well affected
people of this Nation, in peace and safety; Be it further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that if any person not being an Officer, Soldier or
Member of the Army, shall plot contrive or endeavor to stir up any mutiny in
the said Army, or withdraw any Soldiers or Officers from their obedience, to
their superior Officers, or from the present Government as aforesaid; Or shall
procure, invite, aid or assist any Forraigners or Strangers to invade England,
or Ireland, or shall adhear to any Forces, raised by the Enemies of the
Parliament, or Commonwealth, or Keepers of the Liberty of England; Or if any
person shall counterfeit the great Seal of England, for the time, being used
and appointed by Authority of Parliament, that then every such offense and
offenses shall be taken, deemed and declared by Authority of this Parliament to
be high Treason; And every such persons shall suffer pains of death, and also
forfeit unto the Keepers of the Liberty of England, to and for the use of the
Commonwealth all, and singular, his and their Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattles as in case of high Treason has been used by
the Laws and Statutes of this Land, to be forfeit and lost, provided always,
that no persons shall be indicted and araigned, for any the offenses mentioned
in this Act, unless such offenders shall be indicted and prosecuted for the
same within one year after the offense committed; And be it further enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, that if any person shall counterfeit the money of this
Commonwealth, or shall bring any false money into this Land, counterfeit, or
other like to the money of this Commonwealth, knowing the money to be false,
to merchandise or make payment in deceit of the people of this Nation; Or if
any person shall hereafter falsely forge, and counterfeit any such kind of Coin
of Gold or Silver, as is not the proper Coin of this Commonwealth, and is or
shall be current within this Nation, by consent of the Parliament, or such as
shall be by them authorized thereunto; or shall bring from the parts beyond the
Seas into this Commonwealth, or into any the Dominions of the same, any such
false and counterfeit Coin of money, being current within the same, as is above
said knowing the same money to be false and counterfeit, to the intent to utter
or make payment with the same, within this Commonwealth, by merchandise or
otherwise; Or if any person shall impair diminish, falsify, clip, wash, round
or file, scale or lighten, for wicked lucre or gains fake, any the proper
moneys or Coins of this Commonwealth, or the Dominions thereof, or of the
moneys or Coyns of any other realm, allowed and suffered to be current within
this Commonwealth, or the Dominions thereof, that then all, and every such
offenses above mentioned, shall be and are hereby deemed and adjudged high
Treason; and the offenders therein, their Councellers, Procurers, Ayders and
Abetters, being convicted according to the Laws of this Nation, of any of the
said offenses shall be deemed and adjudged Traitors against this
Commonwealth: and shall suffer and have such pains of death, and forfeitures,
as in case of ligh Treason is used and ordained. Provided always and be it
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that this Act touching the moneys and
Coyns aforesaid, or any thing therein contained, nor any attainder of any
person for the same, shall in any wise extend or be judged to make any
corruption of blood, to any the heir or heirs of any such offender, or to make
the wife of any such offender to lose or forfeit her dower, of, or in any
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or her Title, Action or Interest in the same.


Mr Attorney, My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard these
laws read unto you, the clauses that we are to make out in proof against Mr
Lilburne are these, That if any person shall maliciously or advisedly publish
by writing, Printing, or openly declaring, that the said Government is
Tyrannical, usurped or unlawful, or that the Commons in Parliament assembled
are not the Supreme authority of this Nation, are Traitors; these we shall
join together with his books; My Lord you are here in Court, and have received
the proofs against him, and we shall now make it out, that he has done what
this Statute forbids out of his own books that have come from himself, as the
Author of them; My Lord, we shall begin with that charge against him, in
declaring the government Tyrannical, usurped and unlawful, and for that end,
see his Impeachment of Lieut: Gen: Cromwell, etc. page. 8.


Just: Jermin. Mr Lilburne, Does your Paper of the 17 of May agree with that
which was read, or no.


L. Col: Lilb: No. Sir, I conceive Sir, you asked me whether this Act I have in
my hand do agree with that which was read.


Just: Jermin. Yes Sir I do.


L. Col: Lilburne, It does not.


Just: Jermine, Then you will make use of it by and by.


Lieut. Col: Lilb: I Sir, I intend so, if you will let me.


Mr Atturn: My Lord, The first is, that Mr Lilburne has declared the present
Government to be tyrannical, usurped and unlawful, and that in ipsissimis
verbis, that he has so declared, in a very high way, in the very words; so his
book entitled, an impeachment of high treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his
Son in law, Henry Ireton, etc. Read fol:


Clerk. Fol: 8. Yea and the absolute keeping up of a perpetual and everlasting
Army, under which the people are absolute and perfect Slaves and Vassals, as by
woeful and lamentable experience, they now see, they perfectly are, which
slavery and absolute bondage, is like daily to increase, under the present
Tyrannical and Arbitrary, new erected, robbing Government.


Mr Attur: And so My Lord, it is here expressed to be a tyrannical and arbitrary
Government, which are expressly within the word of the Law, for they are a
tyrannical Government. My Lords, we shall not stick, here with him, but you
shall see the whole Course of all his pens writing, has been to this purpose,
that goes very far, My Lord, see the Title page of the last book.


Clerk. Title page. Before a legal Magistracy, when there shall be one in
England, which now in the least there is not.


Mr Prideaux. See fol: 1.


Clerk. Page 1. I have fully both by Law and Reason, undeniably and
unanswerably proved, that the present Juncto sitting at Westminster, are no
Parliament at all in any sense, either upon the Principles of Law or Reason,
but are a Company of usurping Tyrants and Destroyers of your Laws, Liberties,
Freedoms and Proprieties sitting by Virtue of the Power and conquest of the
Sword.


Mr Pride: Read the Title page of the same book.


Clerk. An impeachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his Son in
Law Henry Ireton Esquires members of the late forcibly dissolved House of
Commons, presented to public view, by Lieut. Col: John Lilburne, close
Prisoner in the Tower of London, for his real, true and zealous affections to
the Liberties of his native Country. In which following Discourse or
impeachment he engages, upon his life, either upon the Principles of Law (by
way of indictment, the only and alone legal way of all Trials in England) or
upon the Principles of Parliaments Ancient Proceedings, or upon the Principles
of Reason, (by pretense of which alone they lately took away the Kings life)
before a legal Magistracy, when there shall be one again in England, which now
in the least there is not.


Mr At: Indeed, My Lord, and you of the Jury, Mr Lilburne is a very great
Rooter, not a Leveller, but a Rooter, to root out the Laws of England by the
Roots.


J: There is not.


Lieut. Col: Lilb: By your favor, Mr Prideaux, I knew the time, when others
said it as well of you, and it is not long since, you were penned down, in a
black bill to my knowledge, as unsavory Salt, with many others to be thrown out
of the House of Commons; I pray, Sir, whether were those Rooters, that went
about to root up that House, by force of Arms, or Mr Prideaux and others to
give them cause, at least in their apprehensions.


Mr At: My Lord, A legal Magistracy in England as now, he says in the least
there is not, if there be no Magistracy, I will conclude, there is no
Propriety, My Lord, left in this Nation, but Mr Lilburne says, there is no
Magistracy, and if so then no Propriety.


Lieut. Col: Lilb: It would be a very strange Argument, that you would infer,
I wish, you and I were to dispute that in point of Law for our lives, that to
deny a Magistracy legally constituted, according to the Formalities of the Law,
does not destroy Propriety, for indeed Sir, propriety is an antecedent to
Magistracy, and is first in being before it, but Sir to end the dispute, he
that ownes the Law of England, (as I do) that distinguishes meum and tuum, can
never be a Destroyer of Propriety; I wish your practice were as consonant to
Propriety as my Principles.


Mr Pride: Read the 2 Page at the mark.


Clerk. Now I say considering that which is before declared, I cannot upon any
terms in the world, either with Safety, Justice, or Conscience, as things
stand with me at present, give my consent, but hinder (as much as I am able)
all addresses from me or any other, that shall own the usurping Tyrants, as a
Parliament, especially by Petition, (which was a course, (says the pretended
Parliament Sollicitour, against the King, in his case stated page 24.) which
Gods people did not take with Reboboam, for they never petitioned him (although
he was their lawful supreme Magistrate) but advised him, he refusing their
Counsel, and hearkened to young and wicked Counselors, and they cry out, to
thy Tents O Israel, and made quick and short work of it.


Mr Pride: My Lord, here is words again to make good as aforesaid, that the
Parliament are usurping Tyrants, read also Page 28.


Clerk. Read on. Page 23. in the margent of the said book: And if those very
things should now be judged Treason, as they are and were in the Earl of
Strafford; I wonder what should become of all our present Juncto at
Westminster, and their new thing called a Council of State, undoubtedly, the
most if not all of them, must go to Tiburne, or Tower Hill, there by a halter,
or axe, to receive their just deserts, Amen.


Mr At: There is an Amen pronounced to us, let him have it that deserves it,
but to go on: Read the 11. page of his book, called the Apprentices Outcry.


Clerk reads 11. page. We say, considering what is before premised, we are
necessitated and compelled to do the utmost we can, for our own Preservation,
and the Preservation of the Land of our Nativity, and never by popular
Petitions, etc. address our selves to the Men sitting at West-minster, any
more, or to take any more notice of them, then as of so many Tyrants and
Usurpers; and for time to come to hinder, (as much and as far as our poor
despised interest will extend to) all others whatsoever from subscribing, or
presenting any more popular Petitions to them. And only now as our last Paper
refuge mightly cry out to each other, of our intolerable Oppressions in
letters and remonstrances, signed in the behalf, and by the appointment of all
the rest, by some of the stoutest and stiffest amongst us, that we hope will
never apostatize, but be able through the strength of God, to lay down their
very lives for the maintaining of that, which they set their hands to.


Mr Pride: Read page 2.


Clerk reads on, page 2. But even our Parliament (the very marrow and soul of
all the peoples native Rights) put down, and the name and Power thereof
transmitted, to a picktparty of your forcible selecting: and such, as your
Officers (our Lords and Riders) have often and frequently styled no better then
a mock Parliament, a shadow of a Parliament, a seeming Authority, or the like,
pretending the continuance thereof, but till a new and equal representative,
by mutual agreement of the free people of England, could be elected, although
now for subservancy to their Exaltation, and Kingship, they prerogue and
perpetuate the same, in the name, and under color thereof, introducing a privy
Counsel, or as they call it a Counsel of State, of Superintendency and
Suppression to all future Parliaments for ever, erecting a martial Government,
by blood and violence, impulsed upon us.


Mr Pride: Read page 3. at the mark.


Clerk. Page 3. Trade is decayed and fled, misery, poverty, calamity,
confusion, yea, and beggary, grown so sore and so extreme upon the people, as
the like never was in England, under the most Tyrannical of all our Kings,
that were before these in present Power, since the days of the Conqueror
himself, no captivity, no bondage, no oppression like unto this, no sorrow and
misery, like unto ours, of being enslaved, undone and destroyed by our large
pretended friends.


Mr Pride: Read page 4.


Clerk. page 4. And yet nothing, but the groundless wills and humors, of
those forementioned men of blood rages and rules over us, and is this all the
return and fruit, that people are to expect from your hands?


Mr Pride: Take his preparative to an hue and cry after Sir Arthur Haslerigge,
and read page 2.


Clerk reads on. The Preparative to the hue and cry after Sir Arthur Haslerigge
at page 2. in the margent, that those men that now sit at West-minster, are no
Parliament, either upon the Principles of Law or Reason.


Mr Pride: Read page 3.


Clerk page 3. They promise to amend, and to proceed according to the form of
the Law, as fully appears in their last forementioned Declaration, and
several others, as particularly the present Declaration, of this present
Juncto against Kingship, dated the seventeenth of March, 1648.


Mr. Pride: Read page 4.


Clerk. page 4. But the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge etc. more arbitrarily, and
more traitorously the Strafford, having no pretense of regal, legal, or
Parliamentary Commissions, or Authority, no not so much as from the present
nothing, or illegal Juncto, or the present illegal thing called the Council
of State, Mr John Jordan now member.


Mr At: My Lord, he does declare who he means by Juncto: Mr Jurdon, a member
of the present Juncto, the pretended House of Commons, in the third place, for
the proof of this first particular, I shall produce his book entitled, the
legal and fundamental Liberties of England revived, etc. Read page 41.


Clerk reads, page 41. But Sir, I say, no wonder, all the things foregoing
rightly considered, they do own you now (as Thomas Pride has made you) for the
supreme Authority of the Nation, although before they would neither submit to,
King nor Parliament, when (it was a thousand times more unquestionable, both in
Law and Reason then now you are, but fought against both King and Parliament,
their setters up, conquered them, repelled them, subdued them, and brok them
both: and so pulled up by the Roots, all the legal and visible Magistracy and
Authority in the Nation, and thereby left none but themselves, who stand in
parallel to none (as they have managed their business) but to a company of
murderers, thieves and robbers, who may justly be dispossessed, by the first
force that are able to do it, no pretended Authority, that they of themselves,
and by their Swords can set up, having in the fight of either God or man,
either in Law or Reason, any more just Authority in them, then so many Argier
Pirates, and Robbers upon the Sea have.


L. Col: Lilb: You read as I take it a second Edition, whether is that a second
Edition or no?


Mr At: No No: It is not so in the Indictment, it is no second Edition, but
the first. Read page 56.


Clerk. page 56. To which I answer, first, That, that Company of men at
Westminster, that gave Commission to the High Court of Justice, to try and
behead the King, were no more a Parliament by Law, nor a representative of the
people, by the Rules of Justice and Reason, then such a Company of men are a
Parliament, or representative of the people; That a Company of armed thieves
choose and set a part, to try judge, condemn, hang or behead any man, that they
please, or can prevail over by the power of the sword, to bring before them by
force of arms, to have their lives taken away upon pretense of Justice,
grounded upon Rules merely flowing from their wills and swords.


Mr Pride: Read the Title page.


Clerk. The legal fundamental Liberties of the people of England, revived,
asserted and vindicated, or an Epistle written the eigth of June 1649 by Lt.
Col: John Lilburne, ( Arbitrary and Aristocraticall prisoner in the Tower of
London,) to Mr Will: Lenthall Speaker, to the remainder of those few Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, that Col: Thomas Pride, at his late purge, thought
convenient to leave sitting at Westminster, ( as most fit, for his and his
Masters designs, to serve their Ambitious and Tyrannical ends, to destroy the
good old Laws, Liberties and Customs of England, the badges of our Freedom (
as the Declaration against the King of the 17 of March, 1648. page 23. calls
them) and by force of arms, to rob the people of their lives, estates and
properties, and subject them to perfect vassalage and slavery, as he clearly
evinceth in his present case, etc. they have done) and who ( in truth no
otherwise then pretendedly style themselves, the Parliament of England.


Mr Pride: Read page 2.


Clerk. Sir, For distinction sake, I will yet style you Mr Speaker, although it
be but to Col: Prides Juncto or Parliament sitting at Westminster, (not the
Nations, for they never gave him Authority, to issue out writs to elect or
constitute a Parliament for them,) and a little below in the same second page,
I accused Oliver Cromwell for a wilful murderer, and desire you there to
acquaint your House therewith, (who then had some little hand of a Parliament
stamp upon it.)


M. Prideaux, Read page 28.


Clerk, page 28. The like of which Tyranie the King never did in his Reign,
and yet by S. Olivers means lost his head for a Tyrant; but the thing that I
principally drive at here, is to declare that Oliver and his Parliament now at
Westminster (for the Nations it is not) having pluck up the House of Lords by
the Roots.

page 44. So that if it be Treason to call this a -- a Mock Parliament, yea and
to say- and if this be true, for true it is, These words cannot be found in
page 44. but are in the Book it self, which time will not permit to read all
over, and therefore at present it passes lame and imperfect.
then there is neither legal Justice, nor Justice of peace in England.


M. Prideaux. Read page 37.


Clerk page 37. For if they ever had intended an Agreement, why do they let
their own lie dormant in the pretended Parliament ever since they presented it;
seeing it is obvious to every knowing eye, that from the day they presented it,
to this hour, they have had as much Power over their own Parliament now siting,
as any Schoolmaster in England had over his boys.


Clerk page 45. Four Yor Interest and the Kings, both being Interests of Trust,
as your Declarations do plentifully and plainly declare; but especially your
present Iuncto's late Declaration against the late beheaded King, and Kingly
Government.


M. Prideaux, Read page 58.


Clerk page 58. And let the present generation of swaying men, that under
pretense of good, kindness, and friendship, have destroyed and trod under foot
all the liberties of the Nation, and will not let us have a new Parliament, but
set up by the Sword their own insufferable, insupportable, tyrannical Tyranie.


Lieut. Col. Lilburn, I pray Sir, are all these quotations in the Indictment
verbatim? I do not remember that I heard them there.


M. Attorney. No, We do not offer any Book but what is charged in the
Indictment; for we do say, that he published those things among other clauses
and things in those Books; so that we bring in no Book that is not contained in
the Indictment. Read page 64.


Clerk, page 64. That so that might rule, direct and counsel their
mock-Parliament.


M. Prideaux, Read page 68.


Clerk. page 68. That that High Court of justice was altogether unlawful, in
case these that had set it up, had been an unquestionable Representative of the
people, or a Legal Parliament; neither of which they are not in the least, but
as they have managed their business in opposing all their primitive Declared
ends, are a pack of Traiterous self-seeking Tyrannical men, usurpers of the
name and Power of a Parliament.


M. Attorney. Read page 72.


Clarke page 72. Then with much more confidence say I, this that now sits is no
Parliament, and so by consequence, the High Court of justice no Court of
justice at all.


M. Attorney. My Lord, that which we shall offer you next, is the salva
liberate, which the Lieutenant of the Tower had from M. Lilburn himself, read
at the mark.


Clark. A salva liberate, although I then told you I judged a paper warrant,
(although in words never so formal) coming from any pretended Power or
Authority in England now visible, to be altogether Illegal; because the
intruding General Fairfax and his Forces, had broke and annihilated all the
formal and legal Magistracy of England, yea the very Parliament it self; and by
his will and sword (absolute Conqueror-like) had most Tyrannycally erected and
set up, and imposed upon the free people of this Nation, a Iuncto or mock-Power
sitting at Westminster; whom he and his Associates call a Parliament, who like
so many Armed Thieves and Robbers upon the Highway, assume a Power by their
own wills, most traterously to do what they like; yea and to fill the land with
their mock or pretended Magistrates, amongst the number of which is the
pretended Aturney General; in perfect opposition of whom; to the utmost of my
might, Power, and Strength; I am resolved by Gods graious assistance to spend
my Blood and all that in this World is dear unto me, supposing him not really
and substantially worthy the name of an English freeman, that in some measure
in this particular is not of my mind.


M. Attorney My Lord, in the case of this Charge what M. Lilburn is pleased to
say concerning me, I shall say no more but only this, I shall not do so by
him, I shall not spend my blood against him, you see what he says; that the
present Government is Tyrannical usuped, and unlawful; that the Commons of
England in Parliament assembled, are not the Supreme Authority, but a Iuncto, a
mock-Power, a mock-Parliament, a company of Traitors that rule merely by the
dictates of their own will; I could allege more of his books unto you, which
have words in them very notorious, and very public, he does in express words
say, that the Government is Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and a new erected ruining,
inflaving, robbing Government: To style them Tyrants, Usurpers, Traitors,
parallel to none but Murderers, Robbers, Thieves, no Parliament at all, but
Thomas Prides Iuncto and Scool-boyes, destroyers of the laws and and libertyes
of the Nation, the present Iuncto (Chimaeraes, fooleries, and the like) all
these expressions and many more, which I am sorry I have occasion to repeat to
you, that so much dirt should be thrown into the face of any Magistrates of
England, My Lords, these are now the best which do rule; My Lords, I hope you
and the Gentlemen of the Jury will take notice of it, as to be very clear,
pregnant, evident proof, that M. Lilburn has thus published; and thus faid;
and besides this you see what he does go too, he denies all Magistracy That's
false, he does no such thing, but at most says the Army, has destroyed all
the legal Magistracy of the Nation, and they are the men that thereby are the
real levellers and rooters.
, so that now we are all alike, a Chaos, a confusion and this he has brought
us too, or would have endeavored it; My Lords, I shall not aggravate, and if I
did say no more it were enough, but I come to the second general head of the
Charge, which is; That he has plotted and contrived to levy or raise Forces to
subvert and overthrow the present established Government, in the way of a free
State or Commonwealth; My Lords, if I should say nothing more to the Jury,
this that has been already read is evident proof of that, for certainly those
that shall say that the Governors be Tyrants, that the Parliament is
Trannical, that they are men of blood, destroyers of laws and liberties; this
cannot be of any other use, but to raise force against them, for subverting and
destroying of them, as he himself says, as so many Wesels or Pole-cats In
calling Tyrants Wesels and Polecats, he has said no more but what he has
learned out of Saint John's own Argument, of law against the Earl of Straford;
at which you have no cause to be angry, because they are the words of one of
your own brother lawyers.
, especially if you consider to whom these words were declared, to the Army in
General, especially to the Generals Regiment of Horse, that helped to plunder
and destroy M. Lilburns true Friends defeaetd at Burford, and some of which
were most justly as Traitors executed.

My Lords, if I would say nothing more to the Jury but this, there is full and
pregnant proof already; but yet my lord further to show the malice of M.
Lilburns heart, and that he did intend to raise Force, to incite and invite
them to help him to subvert and destroy the Parliament, and for the proof of
this, read the fifth page of his impeachment of high Treason against Oliver
Cromwell.


Clerk reads page 5. But my true friends, I shall here take upon me the boldness
(in regard of the great destractions of the present times) to give a little
further advice to you, from whose company or society (or from some of them)
has begun, and issued out the most transcendent, clear, rational, and just
things for the peoples liberties and freedoms, that I have seen or read in
this Nation; as your notable Petition of May 20. 1647. burnt by the hands of
the common hangman, recorded in my Book called Rash Oaths unwarrantable, page
29, 30, 31. 32, 33, 34, 35. with diverse other Petitions of that nature, and the
Petition of the nineteenth of Ian. 1647. recorded in the following discourse
page 45, 46, 47, 48, etc. and the Masculine Petition of the eleventh of
September, 1648. so much owned by Petitions out of several Countyes, yea and by
the Officers of the Armies large Remonstrance, from Saint Albans of the
sixteenth of of November, 1648. page 67, 68, 69. The substance of all which, I
conceive is contained in the Printed sheet of paper signed by my fellow
Prisoners M. William Walwyn, M. Thomas Prince, and M. Richard Overton, and my
self, dated the 1 of May, 1649. and entitled, An agreement of the Free people
of England etc. The principles of which I hope and desire you will make the
final Center and unwavering standard of al your desires hazards, and endeavors
as to the future settlement of the Peace and Government of this distracted,
wasted, and divided Nation; the firm establishing of the Principles therein
contained, being that only which will really and in good earnest marry and
knit that interest what ever it be that dwells upon them, unto the distressed
and oppressed Commons or people of this Nation; yea, the settling of which
principles, is that that will thereby make it evidient and apparent unto all
understanding people in the World, that the real and hearty good and welfare of
this Nation, has Cordially and in good earnest been that, that their souls
have hunted for, and thirsted after, in all the late bloody civil Wars and
contests, all the contests of the Kings party for his will and Prerogative,
being merely selfish, and so none of the peoples interest, and the contest of
the Presbyterians, for their makebate dividing hypocrytical Covenant no better
in the least, and the present contest of the present dissembling interest of
Independants; for the peoples libertyes in general, (read the following
discourse page 27, 28, 29. merely no more but self in the highest) and to set
up the false Saint, and most desperate Apostate, Murderer, and Traitor Ol.
Cromwell, by a pretended election of his mercenary Soldiers, under the false
name of the Godly interest, to be King of England, etc. (that being now too
apparently, all the intended liberties of the people that ever he fought for in
his life) that so he might rule and govern them by his will and pleasure, and
so destroy and envassalize their lives and properties to his lusts, which is
the highest Treason that ever was committed or acted in this Nation in any
sense or kind; either 1. in the ey of the Law, or 2. in the ey of the ancient
(but yet too much Arbitrary) proceedings of Parliament; or 3. in the ey of
their own late declared principles of reason (by pretense of which, and by no
rules of Law in the least) they took away the late Kings head, which if there
were any law or justice in England to be had, or any Magistrates left to
execute it (as in the least there is not) etc.


M. Prideaux. Read page 7.


Cler. pa. 7. But the Principles of the foresaid Agreement being so detestable
and abominable to the present ruling men, as that which they know will put a
full end to their Tyranny and usurpation, and really ease and free the people
from oppression and bondage; that it is something dangerous to those that go
about the promotion of it; yet I shall advise and exhort you vigorously, to lay
all fear aside, and to set on foot the promotion of it, in the same method we
took for the promotion of the foresaid Petition of Jan. 19. 1649. laid down in
the following discourse, p. 23, 24, 25. and write to your friends in every
Country of England, to choose out from among themselves and send up some Agents
to you, (two at least from each County, with money in their pockets to bear
their charges) to consider with your culled and chosen Agents of some effectual
course speedily to be taken, for the settling the principles thereof, (as that
only which in an earthly Government can make you happy) or at least to know one
another minds in owning and approving the principles thereof; that so it may
become to you and your friends, your Center, Standard, and Banner to flock
together too, in the time of these foreign invasions and domestic
Insurrections, that are like speedily to bring misery enough upon this poor and
distressed Nation; and unanimously resolve and engage one to another, neither
to side with, or fight for the Cameroes fooleries and pride of the present men
in Power; nor for the Princes will, or any other base interest whatsoever (the
which if you should fight for, it would be but an absolute murdring of your
brethren and Countrymen you know not wherefore) unless he or they will come up
to those just, Righteous, and equitable Principles therein contained, and give
rational and good security for the constant adhering thereunto; and upon such
terms I do not see but you may justifiably before God or man, join with the
Prince himself; yea, I am sure a thousand times more justly than the present
ruling men (upon a large and serious debate) joined with Owen Ro^ Onale, the
grand bloody Rebel in Ireland; who if we must have a King, I for my part had
rather have the Prince, then any man in the world, because of his large
pretense of Right, which if he come not in by conquest by the hand of
Foreigners (the bare attempting of which may apparently hazard him the loss of
all at once, by gluing together the now divided people, to join as one man
against him) but by the hands of Englishmen, by contract upon the Principles
aforesaid (which is easy to be done) the people will easily see, that
presently thereupon they will enjoy this transcendent benefit (he being at
peace with all foreign Nations, and having no regal pretended competitor) viz.
the imediate disbanding all Armies and Garrisons, saving the old Cinque ports,
and so those three grand plagues of the people will cease, viz. Freequarter,
Taxations, and Excise, by means of which, the people may once again really say
they enjoy something they can in good earnest call their own, whereas for the
present Army to set up the false pretended S. Oliver (or any other) as their
elected King, there will be nothing thereby from the beginning of the Chapter to
the end thereof but wars, and the cuting of throats year after year, yea, and
the absolute keeping up of a perpetual and everlasting Army, under which the
people are absolute and perfect slaves and vassals, as by woeful experience they
now see they perfectly are; which slavery and absolute bondage is daily like
to increase, under the present tyranical and arbitrarie new erected robbing
Government.


M. At. He has blown the Trumpet for all that will to come in, he has set up
his Center, he would have it to be a Standard for all his friends to flock to
him, and to make them the more quick in betaking them to their Arms, he has
falsely and maliciously there said, that the Parliament had joined with Owen Roe
Oneale, which I can assure all that hear me this day, the Parliament always
detested, abominated, disavowed, and declared against, and never had any
thoughts that way My Lord, the false imputations of his laid upon the
Parliament, are almost numberless. But in the second place, I come to that
pretty bauble that's of his own making, The Agreement of the People, dated at
the Tower, 1 of May, 1649 and shall desire your Lordships to judge whether this
Agreement of the People which he made, and his friends then in the Tower, and
entitled it, The Agreement of the People, as signed by them, for they called
it, An Agreement of the Free People of England: strikes not at the very root of
all Government.


Lieut. Col. Lilburn. Pray Sir look whether it be licensed or no, according to
the Law of the Nation, and if it be licensed by public Authority, how comes
it to be Treason, that's very strange.


M. Attorney. It is so.


Lieut. Col. Lilburn. Pray Sir go and question the licenser then.


M. Attorney. We must question the Author, the licenser will not excuse it,
read page 2.


Clerk reads page 2. This agreement being the ultimate end and full scope of our
desires and intentions concerning the Government of this Nation. And a little
below after the long and tedious prosecution of a most unnatural, cruel,
homebred War, occasioned by divisions and distempers amongst our selves, and
those distempers arising from the uncertainty of our Government, and the
exercise of an unlimited or Arbitrary Power, by such as have been trusted with
Supreme and subordinate Authority, whereby multitudes of grievances and
intellerable oppressions have been brought upon us; and finding after eight
years experience and expectation, all endeavors hitherto used, or remedies
hitherto applied, to have increased rather then diminished our distractions;
and that if not speedily prevented, our falling again into factions and
divisions, will not only deprive us of the benefit of all those wonderful
victories God has vouchsafed against such as sought our bondage, but expose us
first to poverty and misery, and then to be destroyed by foreign enemies.


M. Attorney. Read page 3.


Clerk page 3. Agree to ascertain our Government, to abolish all Arbitrary
Power, and set bounds and limits, both to our Supreme and all subordinate
Authority, and remove all known grievances, and accordingly do declare and
publish to all the World that we are agreed as follows. page ibid. That the
Supreme Authority of England, and the territoryes therewith incorporate, shall
be and reside henceforward in a Representative of the People, consisting of
four hundred persons, but no more.


M. Prideaux, The manner of the choice of whom, etc. they leave to this
Parliament. Read a little below.


Clerk, All things concerning the distribution of the said 400. members
proportionable the respective parts of the Nation, the several places for
clection, the manner of giving and taking, of voices, with all circumstances of
like nature, tending to the completing and equal proceedings in elections; as
also their salary is referred to be settled by this present Parliament, in such
sort as the next Representative may be in a certain capacity to meet with
safety, at the time herein expressed; and such circumstances to be made more
perfect by future Representatives.

We agree this present Parliament shall end the 1 wednesday in Aug. next, 1649,
thenceforward to be of no Power or Authority; and in the mean time shall order
and direct, the election of a new and equal Representative, according to the
intent of this our agreement; and so as the next Representative may meet and
sit in Power and Authority, as an effectual Representative upon the day
following; namely, the 1 Thursday of the same August, 1649.

Page ib. We agree, if the present Parl. shall omit to order such election or
meeting of a new Representative, or shall by any means be hindered from
performance of that trust, that in such case we shall for the next
Representative proceed, in electing thereof in those places, and according to
that manner and number formerly accustomed in the choice of Knights and
Burgesses; observing only the exceptions of such persons from being electors
or elected, as are mentioned before in the 1, 3, and 4th. heads of this
agreement; it being most unreasonable, that we should either be kept from now
frequent and successive Representatives, or that the Supreme Authority should
fall into the hands of such as have manifested disaffection to our common
freedom, and endeavored the bondage of the Nation. And for preserving the
Supreme Authority from falling into the hands of any whom the people have not
or shall not choose. we are resolved and agreed (God willing) that a new
Representative shall be upon the 1 thursday in August next aforesaid, the
ordering and disposing of themselves, as to the choice of a Speaker, and the
like circumstances, is hereby left to their discretion; but are in the extent
and exercise of Power, to follow the direction and rules of this agreement; and
are hereby Authorized and required according to their best judgments, to set
rules for future equal distribution and election of Members, as is herein
intended and enjoined to be done; by the present Parliament.


M. Attorney. Read page 8.


Clerk page 8. And all Laws made, or that shall be made, contrary to any part
of this Agreement, are hereby made null and void.


M. Attorney. My Lords, hear by this agreement of the People, that M. Lilb.
has published to the World, in which my L. he has designed how many the
Supreme Authority shall consist of the time when the Parl. shall dissolve, as
also the time when his own Parl. shall meet; this Parl. to be dissolved the
first wednesday in Aug. 1649. all Laws contrary to this to be null and void;
and in it you shall find some expressions of Treason in the height, that
whosoever shall do contrary to it, shall be most severely punished: In the next
Book before this, it is desired by him, that this agreement of the People may
be the Center the Banner and Standard of all his friends, and that they go on
vigorously with it; which is my Lord, to dissolve this Parliament, and to put
on this new one of M. Lilburns appointing: This we conceive which is of M.
Lilbs. appointing, would (if effected) be an absolute subversion of this in
being, and this is high Treason. My Lord, we shall go on with more yet, and that
is, with his outcry; my Lord, if you please to see the title, and see to whom
it is directed, what was intended to be done with it; it is entitled, An
outcry of the young men and Apprentzes of London, directed (August 29. 1649.)
in an Epistle to the Private Souldery of the Army, especially all those that
signed the solemn engagement at New-market-heath the 5 of June, 1647. but more
especially, to the private Soldiers of the Generals Regiment of Horse, that
helped to plunder and destroy the honest and true-hearted Englishmen,
traitorously defeated at Burford the 15 of May, 1649.


Mr. Atturny. A good encouragement, they were Traitorously defeated at Burford;
but we are Rebels and Traitors, and our Army murderers, and Butchers, for
giving some of those declared Traitors their due deserts, but that you may see
his tendency by this book read, page, 11.


Clarke, page 11. We say, considering what is before premised, we are
necessitated, and compelled to do the utmost we can for our own preservation,
and for the preservation of the land of our Nativity, and never (by Popular
particulars) address our selves to the men sitting at Westminster any more, or
to take any more notice of them then of so many Tyrants, and Usurperes, and for
time to come to hinder (as much and as far as our poor despised interest will
extend to) all others whatsoever from subscribing or presenting any more
Popular petitions to them. And only now as our last Paper-refuge, mightily cry
out to each other, of our intolerable oppressions in letters, and
Remonstrances signed in the behalf and by the appointment of all the rest, by
some of the Stoutest and stiffest amongst us that we hope will never
apostatize, but be able through the strength of God to lay down their lives
for the maintaining of that which they set their hands to.

You our fellow-Countrymen (the private Soldiers of the Army) alone being the
isntrumental authors of your own slavery and ours; Therefore as there is any
bowels of men in you, any love to your Native Country, Kindred Friends or
relations, any spark of Conscience in you, any hopes of glory or immortality
in you, or any pity, mercy, or compassion, to an inslaved, undone, perishing,
and dying People; O help, help, save and redeem us from total vassalage and
slavery, and be no more like brute beasts, to fight against us, or our friends,
your loving and dear brethren after the flesh, to your own vassalage, as well
as ours.

And as an assured pledge of your future cordialness to us (and the true and
real liberties of the Land of your Nativity) we beseech and beg of you (but
especially those amongst you that subscribed the Solemn Engagement at
Newmarket-Heath, the 5. of June, 1647.) speedily to choose out amongst your
selves two of the ablest, and constantest faithful men amongst you in each
Troop and Company, now at last (by corresponding each with other, and with your
honest friends in the Nation) to consider of some effectual course (beyond all
pretenses and cheats) to accomplish the real end of all your Engagements and
Fightings, viz. the settling of the Liberties and Freedom of the People, which
can never permanently be done, but upon the sure foundation of a popular
Agreement; who (viz. the People) in justice, gratitude, and common equity,
cannot choose but voluntarily and largely make better provision for your future
subsistence (by the payment of your Arrears) then ever your Officers, or this
pretended Parliament intends, or you can rationally expect from them; witness
their cutting off three parts of your arrears in four, for free quarter; and
then necessitating abundance of your Fellow Soldiers (now cashiered, etc.) to
sell their Debenturs at two shillings six pence, three shillings, and at most
four shillings per li.


Mr. Attorney. See my Lord, here we are styled Tyrants, Usurpers, introducing
Government, oppressions of the people, and Mr. Lilburn is resolved with his
friends to join together, and to lay down their very lives for this: This I
think is a Trumpet blown aloud for all the discontented people in the Nation,
to flock together, to root up and destroy this Parliament, and so the present
Government: but read also in the same book, page 9.


Clark. page 9. For the effectual promotion of which said Agreement, we are
necessitously compelled to resolve in close union to join our selves, our
Commissioners (chosen for that end) in Council, with our foresaid
Burford-friends, or their Commissioners, and to resolve to run all hazards to
methodize all our honest Fellow-prentices, in all the Wards of London, and the
Out-Parishes, to choose out their Agents to join with us, or ours, to write
exhortative Epistles to all the honest-hearted freemen of England, in all the
particular Countries thereof, to erect several Councels amongst themselves;
out of which we shall desire (and exhort them) to choose Agents or Commissioners
(empowered and entrusted by them) speedily to meet us, and the Agents of all
our (and the Agreement of the people) Adherents at London, resolvedly to
consider of a speedy and effectual method and way how to promote the Election
of a new and equal Representative, or Parliament: by the Agreement of the free
people, seeing those men that now sit at Westminster, and pretendedly style
themselves the Parliament of England; and who are as they say (although most
falsely) in the Declaration for a free State, dated March 17. 1648, page 27.
entrusted, and authorized by the consent of all the people of England, whose
Representatives they are, make it their chiefest and principallest work,
continually to part and share amongst themselves, all the great rich, and
profitablest places of the Nation; as also, the Nations public treasure and
lands, and will not ease our intolerable oppressions; no not so much as of
late receive our popular petitions, having upon Thursday last, Aug. 23. 1649.
rejected that most excellent of petitions ready at their door to be presented
to them by diverse honest men (our true-hearted Neighbors of Surrey) the true
Copy of which, for the worth of it, although it be at large already printed in
Friday Occurrences, and the Tuesday Moderate, we desire here to insert.


Mr. Attorney. My Lord, this is a loud one, whom does he join us withal, but
only with those very men that justly suffered death, many of them for it? My
Lord, now its resolved that these men shall be closely joined with them, and
what to do? still to promote The Agreement of the People, that which Mr.
Lilburn has hatched, and that must be the baby that those declared open
Traitors and Rebels, that Mr. Lilburn will join with, must nourish up. My
Lord, we shall go on further to show what Mr. Lilburn drives, at which is not
much differing from us, for he would have a free State, but, my Lord, this that
is now in being, it does not go in Mr. Lilburns way, and therefore it must be
overthrown by force and Arms, that so way may be made for his new And yet a
few days before his Trial, several principal leading members of the house
and Council of State told his wife, and several other of his friends, that
Mr. Lilburne was turned Cavalier, and had joined with the Prince, and they had
several letters under his own hand to prove it.
Commonwealth, we shall go further on my Lord, and in the next place quote his
book entitled, The legal Fundamental liberties of the people of England
revived, asserted and vindicated, etc, Read page 57.


Clark reads page 57, And the present setters up of this Tyrannical new
Commonwealth, considering their many Oaths, Covenants, Promises, Declarations
and Remonstances to the contrary, (with the highest Promises and pretenses of
good for the people and their declared liberties, that ever was made by men)
are the most perjured, perfideous, false, faith and trust-breakers, and Tyrants
that ever lived in the World, and ought by all rational and honest men, to be
the most detested and abhorred of all men that ever breathed, by how much the
more under pretense of friendship and brotherly kindness, they have done all the
mischief they have done, in destroying our laws and liberties.


Mr. Attorney. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you see Mr. Lilburne
has been pleased very often to give the name of Tirants to the Parliament; I
would give no other instance, nor show no other example but Mr. Lilburn
himself, to disprove himself, and with much confidence affirm it, that never
State had before (neither King nor State) since the foundations of it: so much
enmity, nor have endured with so much patience any man whatsoever, as they have
done Mr. Lilburn, who notwithstanding all his traiterous provocations, and
traiterous designs, undertaken against them, is yet alive at this day and now
has fair play to plead for his life, I would take him for his own confuter,
and see by all that has been done by him, and see if he could make good his
actings, and make good the Parliaments dealing with him therefore, can be
demonstrated by him, to prove them Tyrants. My Lord, I can hardly forbear to
see, and hear his dangerous and desperate expressions, to invite all people for
to take up Arms against the Parl. to cut their throats like Pole-cats and We
asels. My Lords, here to style them the most perfideous, perjured, false,
faith, and trust-breakers, and Tyrants that ever lived in the world; and to be
the most abhorred and detested of all the people, above all men that ever
breathed, O insufferable, and the highest of Treasons!


Leiut. Col. Lilb. Sir, all the wit of all the Lawyers in England, could never
bring it within the compass of high Treason, by the old and just laws of this
nation, that abhors to oppress men contrary to Law, and then if they seem but
to cry out of their oppressions to make them traitors for words.


Mr. Attorney. I am confident the least Lawyer in England, would have brought
this within the Statute of Treason of the 25. Ed. 3. chap. 2. My Lords, you
shall see there is none escapt, the Parliament with him are Tyrants Traitors
and Usurpers; and therefore he stirrs up the people to destroy them. But in the
third place, you shall see what Titles he gives to my Lord General Fairfax,
and his chief Officers, that, my Lord, he that reads the books and does not
know the parsons, he would think that they were monsters and not men, although
they are so famous and glorious, that all the world have rung of them to their
praise But, says he, never was there more glorious Declarations made by men
than by them, and yet never performed any of them; Nay, he does not only call
them also Covenant and engagement-breakers; but he calls the Lord General,
Tyrant, Murderer, and what not: and the Officers, perfideous Officers. My
Lords, what I observed in the last clause of the Act is, that whosoever goes
about to draw the Soldiers from their obedience to their superior Officers,
or from their obedience to the present Government, that is high Treason, and
this likewise we shall find him guilty of, in his Legal fundamental
liberties of England inserted and vindicated, it is in the first side of the
Epistle that in the first place I pitch upon, read it.


Clark. page 1. of the Epistle, I positively accuse Mr. Oliver Cromwell, for a
wilful murderer, (and desire you to acquaint your house therewith) for
murdering Mr. Richard Arnold near Ware


Mr. Attorney. Which man my Lord was condemned for a mtinier by a Counsel of
War, where the Lord Leiut. of Ireland was but one member, and the Parliament
gave him, and the rest of that Council thanks, for shooting that mutinous
Soldier to death. and yet Mr. Lilburne calls him murderer therefore; and this
is laid to my Lord Leiuts. charge for his part,


L. Col. Lilb. Does not the Petition of Right absolutely condemn all such acts
in time of Peace; when the Courts of Justice are open, and the judgment of the
Earl of Strafford does abundantly condemn it, who lost his life for a
Traitor, for doing the very same act in kind and likeness, at that time, when
he in the eye of the law, was as legal a General, as the General was that
condemned that man.


Mr. Attorney. My Lords, --


L. Col. Lilb. I pray Sir, hear me out; and sure I am, the Declarations of all
the powers extant in England, ever since, has been to maintain the Petition of
Right inviolably; yea, even those that are now in present power; and if the
Petition of Right be true, to shoot soldiers, as Arnold was, is absolute
murder: Nay further, if the judgment of the Parl. upon the Earl of Strafford
for such an act be legal; then all those that had a hand in shooting that
Soldier, are Traitors, and ought to die for it, as well as Strafford.


Clark reads on the second side of the Epistle, Of all which crimes and
charges, and all your others against the King, contained in your foresaid
Declaration, I know not three of them, but Cromwell and his confederates, in
your pretended House and Army, are as guilty of the like in kind, though under
a new name and notion, as the King was of the forementioned, if not more
guilty. Mr. Prideaux, Read page 35.


Clerk. page 35. But alas poor fools! we were merely cheated and cozened, it
being the principal unhappiness to some of us, as to the flesh, to have our
eyes wide open, to see things long before most honest men come to have their
eyes open; and this is that which turns to our smart and reproach, and that
which we Commissioners feared at the first, viz, that no tie, promises, nor
engagements were strong enough to the grand-juglers and leaders of the Army,
was now made clearly manifest; for when it came to the Council, there came the
General, Cromwell, and the whole Gang of Creature-Colonels, and other Officers,
and spent many days in taking it all in pieces, and there Ireton showed
himself an absolute King, if not an Emperor; against whose will no man must
dispute: and then Shuttlecock, Roe their Scout, Okey, and Major Barton (where
Sir Hardress Waller sat President) begun in their open Council, to quarrel
with us, by giving some of us base and unworthy language, which procured them
from me a sharp retortment of their own baseness and unworthiness into their
teeth, and a challenge from my self into the field; besides, seeing they were
like to fight with us in the room in their own Garrison, which when Sir
Hardress Waller in my ear reproved me for it, I justified it, and gave it him
again, for suffering us to be so affronted; and within a little time after, I
took my leave of them for a pack of dissembling juggling knaves: amongst whom in
consultation, ever thereafter I should scorn to come (as I told some of them;)
for there was neither faith, truth, nor common honesty among them; and so away
I went to those that chose and entrusted me, and gave publicly and effectually
(at a set-meeting appointed on purpose) to diverse of them, an exact account how
they had dealt with us, and cozened and deceived us; and so absolutely
discharged my self; from meddling or making any more, with so perfideous a
Generation of men, as the great Ones of the Army were; but especially the
cunningest of Machavilians, Commissary Henry Ireton.


Mr. Attorney. Read page 37. at the mark.


Clark. page 37. Which the General and his Council knew well enough: and I dare
safely say it upon my conscience, that an Agreement of the People, upon
foundations of just freedom, gone through with, is a thing the General, and
the chiefest of his Council, as much hates, as they do honesty, justice, and
righteousness (which they long since abandoned) against which, in their own
spirits, they are absolutely resolved (I do verily believe) to spend their
heart-bloud, and not to leave a man breathing in English air (if possibly they
can) that thoroughly and resolutely prosecutes it; a new and just Parl. being
more dreadful to them, then the great day of judgment, so much spoken of in
Scripture; and although they have beheaded the King, yet I am confidently
persuaded, their enmity is such at the peoples liberties, that they would
sooner run the hazard of setting the Prince in, to reign in his Fathers stead,
then further really a just Agreement, or endeavor a new Parliament rightly
constituted.


Mr. Attorney. Read page 38.


Clark. page 38. When as alas! it is as visible, as the Sun when it shines in
its glory and splendour, that Korah, Dathan, and Abyram, of old, were never such
rebels against authority, as the General and his Council are; nor the
Anabaptists at Munster, with John of Leyden, and Buperdullion, were never more
contemners of Authority; nor Jack Straw, nor Wat Tyler; nor all those famous
men, mentioned with a black pen in our histories, and called Rebels and
Traitors, can never be put in any skale of equal balance, for all manner of
Rebellions and Treasons, against all sorts and kinds of Magistracy, with the
General and his Council.


Mr. Attorney. See my Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, you see Mr. Lilburn
gives the General and his Officers, as bad titles, as he can give the worst of
Rebels and Traitors, or the worst of men; but we go on to his Out-crie, read
the Title of it.


Clark. An Outcry of the Young men and Apprentices of London, page 8. where it
is thus: Sure all sense and compunction of conscience is not totally departed
from you.


Mr. Attorney. If it please you, my Lord, because the Jurie may observe it, The
book is directed to the Soldiers of the Army, and that in an Out-crie, etc.
now read page 8.

Page 8. Sure all sense and compunction of conscience is not totally departed
from you; hear us therefore, in the earning bowels of love and kindness, we
entreat and beseech you with patience, and do not abuse us for complaining and
crying out; for the knife has been very long at the throats of our liberties
and freedoms, and our burdens are too great and too many for us; we are not
able to bear them, and contain our selves; our oppressions are even ready to
make us despair, or forthwith to fly to the prime laws of nature, viz. the next
violent remedy at hand, light it where it will, or upon whom it will: they are
become as devouring fire to our bones ready to burn us up, rendering us
desperate and careless of our lives, prisoning those that are already dead,
above those that are yet living, who are rid of that pain and torment, that we
do and must endure, by sensibly seeing and beholding not only the dying, but
the daily burial of our Native liberties and freedoms; that we care not what
becomes of us, seeing that we are put into that original state, or chaos of
confusion; wherein lust is become a law, envy and malice are become laws, and
the strongest Sword rules and governs all by will and pleasure; all our ancient
bondaries and bondmarks are pulled up by the roots, and all the ties and bonds
of humane Society in our English Horizon totally destroyed, and extirpated;
Alas for pity! we had rather dye, then live this life of languishing death, in
which our Masters possess nothing (to buy themselves or us bread, to keep us
alive) that they can call their own: therefore its no boot for us to serve out
our times, and continue at our drudging Trades, while these oppressions,
cruelties, and inhumanities are upon us, and the rest of the people; exposing
thereby not only the Nation to domestic broyls, wars, and bloud-sheds (wherein
we are sure our bodies must be the principal buts) but to foreign invasions,
by France, Spain, Denmark, Swethland, etc. as was well observed by our
endeared and faithful friends, of the forementioned late treacherously
defeated party at Burford, in their book of the 20. of August, 1649. entitled,
The Levellers vindicated, or, the case of their 12. Troops truly stated, page
11, 12. which we cannot but seriously recommend (with them) to your serious
perusal and judgment; and desire to know of you (but especially the private
soldiers of the Generals Regiment of horse, which we understand had a hand in
seizing upon, and plundering our true friends at Burford) whethet you do own
the abominable and treacherous dealings of your Genesis and Lieu. Genesis Cromwell,
and their perfidious officers with them, or no, that so we may not condemn the
innocent with the guilty, etc.


Mr. Attorney. Read page 11.


Clarke page 11. You our fellow Countrymen (the private Soldiers of the Army)
alone, being the isntrumental Authors of your own slavery and ours; therefore
as there is any bowels of men in you, any love to your native Country, kindred,
friends, or relations, any sparks of conscience in you, any hopes of glory or
immortallity in you, or any pity, mercy or compassion to an enslaved, undone,
dying, perishing people; O help, help, save and redeem us from total
vassalage and slavery, and be no more like brute beasts, to fight against us
or our friends, etc.

And as an assured pledge of your future cordialnesse to us, (and the true and
real liberties of the Land of your nativity) we beseech and beg of you (but
especially those amongst you, that subscribed the solemn engagement, at
New Market the 5. of June 1647.) speedily to choose out from amongst your selves
two of the ablest, and constantest faithful men amongst you, in each Troop and
Company, now at last (by corresponding each with other, and with your honest
friends in the Nation) to consider of some effectual course (beyond all
pretenses and cheats) to accomplish the real end of all your Engagements and
fightings, viz. the settling the liberties and freedoms of the people, which can
never be permanently done, but upon the sure foundation of a popular Agreement,
who ( viz. the people) in justice, gratitude, and common Equity, cannot choose
but voluntarily and largely make better provision for your future subsistence,
then ever your Officers, or this pretended Parliament intends, etc.


Mr. Attorney. Real the Title of his Impeachment.


Clarke. An Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver Crumwell, etc.


Mr. Attorney. Read page 2.


Clark page 2. But I shall rather desire and advise you, by letter like your
selves, to address your selves to the Lord Fairfax, by the sword of whom and
his Soldiers, I am now in prison for my honesty and innocence, and nothing
else, and demand my liberty of him; if he refuse, print it, and do as God and
Reason shall direct you; for it was his and his Soldiers force, that fetched me
out of my bed the 28. of March 1649. without all shadow of Law or justice; and
against the tenor of all their own Declarations, the particular pages of
which you may read in my following letter to Mr. Holland, page 5. and by force
of Arms carried me to White Hall, and then to Darby-house, before a Company of
men that in Law had no more power to commit my body to prison, then so many
thieves and robbers upon Suitors hill have, who by the Rules of their own
wills, (as in the second edition of the picture of them, I have fully declared)
sent me by force of Arms to the Tower: for all my short eternity in this
world. But I entreat you seriously to consider, that I cannot advise you to
make address to him as the General of the Nations forces, for he is no such
thing: but is merely a great Tyrant, standing by the power of his own will, and
a strong Sword, born by his vassals, slaves and creatures, having no Commission
to be General, either from Law, the Parliament, or from the prime Laws of
nature and reason.


Mr At: Read. An outcry of the young men and apprentises, page 3.

Page 3. Your heart seems to us as obdurate, as the flinty Rock, as savage and
inhumane, as if the flesh and blood, the bones and marrow of the people were
become your meat.


Mr Attur: Stay, Mr Broughton: The Jury will take notice, that this is directed
to the Soldiers of the Generals Regement, this speaks to them.


Clerk reads on. Directed ( August 29. 1649. in an Epistle to the private
Soldiery of the Army especially,) all those that signed the solemn Iugagement
at newmarket heath the fifth of June 1649. but more especially to the private
Soldiers of the Generals Regiment of horse.


Mr At: Now read page the 3.


Clerk page 3. Your hearts seem to us as obdurate, as the flinty Rock, as
savage and Inhumane, as if the flesh and blood, the bones and marrow of the
Peopple were become your meat, as already it is in effect, and instead of
Encouragement and support to our true friends, and real relievers, (as least
in faithful desire and endeavor) as shall stand in the gapp betwixt out
destroyers and us, always and means are used to impoverish destroy and
suppress them, and in them to break and vassalage the spirits of all the
English, which in all ages have had the preheminencies of other Nations, that
their may not be so much of gallantry or courage left amongst the people, that
one amongst them shall dare to assert or maintain their Freedoms. And a little
below, if any do but murmer and complain, presently their houses as with
furies, are beset, with armed mercinary Jannisaries, Guards and Sentinels set
upon their doors and passages.


Mr At: My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you hear, what stuff this of
Mr Lilburns is, yea, such stuff as that it would make any man loath to hear it:
The last clause of the Act is, if any person not being an Officer, Soldier, or
Member of the Army, shall plot, contrive or endeavor to stir up any mutinies
in the Army, or to withdraw any Officers or Soldiers from their Obedience to
their superior Officers, or to the present Government; It is high Treason, you
have here the several books read to you, and the Calumniation laid upon the
chiefest of them to stir the rest up to mutinies against them, but they are
very well known, and therefore nothing that Mr Lilburn can say will stick upon
them, to their prejudice. But my Lord, you see here and you of the Jury, how he
appeals from the Officers to the Soldiers interrogates, to know what they
could do, and whether they will acknowledge they will own them, and not fight
against them, and what aid and assistance they will give to him and his
friends, against their own General, and the rest of their Superior Officers;
You see also what he calls that noble General, that all the world does honor,
and his fame wrings through the world, and yet he calls him a grand Tyrant,
standing by the power of his own will, and a strong sword, a destroyer of the
Parliament, of the Laws and Liberties of England, you see what he calls the
common Soldiers: Furies and Mercinary Jannizaries, which none but Turks have.
You have heard the several charges proved unto you, for my part I think it is
as clear as noonday. We have not raised any advantage upon any slipping words
that have slipped from him, which we might have done, and I could I have urged
some more witnesses, to have proved his books, published by him, to public
view, though when he comes in the face of the public Court of Justice, he will
not own them, which shows his design to be the more dangerous; he will writ,
print, publish be sputter, and reproach: yea, and raise Tumults and Rebellion
in a Clandestine way, but if we chance to question him therefore, he will not
own it, you see we have been fain to fetch it out of the fire, and yet this is
one of Englands and its Liberties valiant Champions.


L. Col. Lilb. You have done no more to me then the Scribes and Pharisees did
to Jesus Christ, and in my dealing with you, I have but walked in the steps of
my Lord and Master, Jesus Christ and his Apostles. For I am sure of it Jesus
Christ, in his pilgramage on earth, freely, openly and publicly taught and
declared himself to be the Son of God, the Messiah or Savior of the world,
that was prophesied of, and yet when he came amongst the Scribes and Pharisees,
and Pilate the Roman Governor, who by questions went about to ensnare him, he
confesses nothing but says, I speak openly to the world, I ever taught in the
Synagogues and in the Temple whether the Jews always resort, and in the Secret
have I said nothing, why ask thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have
said unto them, behold, they know what I have said; and when Pilate adjured him
to answer him, whether he was such a one or no, well says he, thou say it:
So say I, thou Mr Prideaux say it, they are my books, but prove it.


Mr At: But I think here are enough, and to many, and therefore Gentlemen of
the Jury, if you respect the Government of the Parliament, the Honor of the
Counsel of State, the Honor of the Nation, or of the Army, or the preservation
of the Law of the Nation, you cannot say but that the prisoner is guilty of
such Crines and Treasons, as he is now accused of and accordingly find him so;
for it cannot be supposed that you will lay him in a single Balance, against
the Honor of all the powers in the Nation, and also the peace thereof.


Foreman. We desire the Act of Treasons to make use of.


L. Col: Lilb: I beseech you, hear me a few words, they desire to have it along
with them. Sir, with your favor, I shall humbly crave Liberty to speak a few
words, I shall keep me close to that, which is my right and my duty, and that
is to the matter of Law in my Indictment, there are many things put into the
Indictment by the Testimonies of Witnesses now sworn, that are pretended to be
acted in several Counties, whether that be according to Law or no, I do not
know, whether you will judge it so or no, but sure I am, if either those
express Statutes, that I have already cited to the Jury, or the third part of
Cooks Instituts be Law, I ought not to be tried for Treason, but by a Jury of
the next Neighbor hood, in the self-same County, the fact is pretended to be
committed in, and therefore it is very questionable to me, whether my
Indictment be legal, for that it charge me with facts of Treason, committed
in three several Counties, and that being matter of Law, I desire Counsel to
argue that point in the first place, there are also a great many other
exceptions I have to make against the Illegallity of the Indictment, and having
particularised one, I humbly crave that which is my Right by Law, that I may
have Counsel assigned unto me, you have said, you will do what shall become
ingenious and understanding men, and just Judges in it, and therefore I crave
leave according to my undoubted Right, to have Counsel assigned to plead in
matters of Law to the insufficiency of the Indictment, and particularly, to
that point I have nominated. There are also a great many things arises out of
the matter of act, that will be points of Law likewise, and some of them appear
to be so, there was never two clear and positive witnesses to one fact sworn
against me, but to most of the particular Treasons, there is but one a piece,
and I cannot yield that to be legal but questionable in Law which I desire
Counsel to dispute: I know not any of all the books fixed upon me, but the
outcry that has two plain witnesses to it, and yet it is not sworn that I am
the Author of it, the State of the first is this, that I was at the Printers
before the Copy was taken away, and that I gave one of those books to a
soldier: to sum up the Notes of the matter of fact, that thereon has been
endeavored to be proved, is to hard a task to be done by me imediatly, and
therefore I conceive is but just for you, to assign and me counsel, to agree
with the Counsel against me, what are the points of fact upon the proof, from
which the points of law are to be deducted, and whatever you, that call your
selves my Judges, may think of this, yet I hope and verily believe, that these
my honest fellow Citizens, that are the Gentlemen of my Jury, who have (there
by) as men, the the issues of my life and death in their hands, and will think
it but a just and rational motion and request, and therefore before them again,
I desire to have Counsel assigned to plead in Law, to the errors of the
Indictment, and also to the law arising upon the fact; this with a larger
privilege, was granted by one of your own brother Judges, to Major Rolfe last
year, as his right by law; and I do again appeal to Mr justice Nichols, then
one of Rolfs Counsel for the truth of this, I pray speak Sir, is it not true?
but the Judge sitting as if he had neither life nor soul, Mr Lilburn further
said, I hope Sir, it does not enter into your thoughts presently to put me to
an undigested, extemporary answer, to so large an Indictment as that is that
has been read against me, that it is impossible for any man's brain, if it were
as big as the biggest Magazine in London, to carry it in his head; and Sir, I
hope you do not conceive that my memory is of a greater largeness then the
greatest Magazine in this City; you engaged unto me when I pleaded first to my
Indictment, that you would not take exceptions nor advange against me, for my
ignorance in the fomralities of the law; I desire you to make good your promise
now unto me, and assign me Counsel to help my ignorance, that so the Counsel
against me and my Counsel may agree, as I have seen it done heretofore in the
case of Duke Hambleton, upon the points of fact, from which law is to be
deducted; and if you please to grant me this legal and equitable favor, I
shall think my self very much obliged unto you; without which justice, I
cannot conceive upon what ground it can be apprehended I can go on, for my time
and strength now it is so far spent, that I conceive you cannot think my body
is made of steel, to stand here four or five hours together spending my spirits
to answer somany as I have to deal with, and be able after all this, to stand
to return an answer to above five hours charge, and that upon life, when it
seems you will suffer me to mend no blots; I hope you do not lie upon the
catch to weary and tire me out, by putting more upon me then a horse is able to
endure, and then go about to hang me, because I through tirednesse, want
bodily strength and abilities to make and pronounce my defense.

Sir, to my apprehension, there does arise upon the matter of fact diverse
disputes in law; I beseech you therefore allow me my right in law, by assigning
me Counsel to help me where I am ignorant, and you shall see I shall do that
which shall become an ingenuous and rational man, and I will put my self
clearly upon the Trial of the Country or my Jury according to the law.


Lord Keeble. Lilburn, This that you have heard, and that we have patiently sat
to hear, and prepared a stool for you to have sat upon, to have given you that
liberty that no body should interrupt you more then us, you have heard the fair
course that has been taken in it; the Books, the charges upon the matter they
are but three, they are not hard for your memory; the particulars of those we
do not expect that the Jury should remember them; the Books are here, they
have of them; but amongst them there are many more, but free your self from
the matter of fact, if you can, and these Books, and when you have freed your
self from the matterof fact charged upon you, and then make it appear that from
the matter of fast law arises, and then if you can when the matter of fact is
clear, and law does arise, you shall have Counsel; and you shall have no defact
in us to interrupt you, but to help you in what we may properly know as our
right to do; but if you do not first clear and make out this which is the
issue upon the point, to answer the matter of fast; we cannot allow you any
Counsel: the thing that is to be disputed cannot possible be much one your
side, it will be but very short; for it is not possible I say, to be much in
time, or confusion of your memory, to give an answer to this particular matter
of fact: the first is the publishing of those Books, and the owning of them;
and the next is the Books of themselves; but this must be first cleared, before
you can have any Counsel assigned you at all.


L. Col. Lilb I must confess it is a very hard task for me to contest with the
present power, whose Agents have free liberty to say against me what they
please, and I am denied and that upon my life, all the privileges of an
English man, and with your insinuations and great words, drawn on by my
ignorance to ensnare my self; and notwithstanding all your promises to take no
advantage against me for my ignorance in the formalities of the Law; yet are
the punctillioes and nicities thereof, more urged against me then they have
been against hostile enemies; and yet for my part, no man can tax me for being
in hostility at any time against them in present power; and yet opon my life, I
am denied that which I had from these as my right by Law against whom I have
been in arms, and fought against in the field, yea, and that which in a higher
nature then I desire, has been acknowledged just and legal, by some of your
own brother Judges, but the last year, which they have granted to some of my
own Contrymen, Freemen of England, but this last year in a higher nature by
many degrees, then I plead for; There is Judge Nichols, that I understand was
one of Major Rolphes Counsel, and I understand from Mr Maynards own mouth,
that he and Mr Maynard was by Baron Wild, assigned of Rolphes Counsel in case
of the highest Treason, that the Law of England ever knew, and that before the
grand Inquest found the Indictment, and that Mr Maynard etc. had Liberty as
Major Rolphs Counsel by Baron Wilds order, to stand in the Court, not only to
hear the witnesses sworn, but also to hear the words of their Testimony, then
caused by the Judge to be given in open Court, and there being but two
witnesses to two Fact contained in the Indictment, Mr Maynard upon the
Allegation of the two Statutes, of Edward the sixth, that requires two
witnesses to the proof of every Fact of Treason, and that to be plain and
clear, overthrew Rolphs Indictment in Law, that it was never found, and so
saved the poor Man's life, who in likely hood had perished, had it not been for
the Ability and Integrity of his Counsel: And all this Mr Justice Nichols
knows, is very true, and that I have told you nothing about it, but what is
just; It Is true, I have read part of the plain Law of England, that is in
English; but I am ignorant of that part of your Law, which is three times so
much, as that which is in English, and that Law, or the practick, part of the
Law is in French and Latin, which I have truly told you, I can neither read
nor understand, therefore I humbly crave my privilege and undoubted Right by
the Law of England, (which in a higher nature was granted to Major Rolph as his
unquestionable Right) to have Counsel assigned me, to help me in those things,
I am ignorant of, I mean the Formalities and bottom of your Law. I beseech you
Sirs, do not put me upon Extremities, and upon extraordinary things, but
consider among your selves, that righteous Rule of Jesus Christ, and of the
Scripture, to do as you would be done to: and do not put Impossibilities upon
me, by overruling by your power all my just Claims and pleas in Law, and
require more of me then I am capable to perform. And therefore I beseech you,
as you would approve your selves, to be as righteous Judges before the eye of
that God, that sees your heart, and knows whether malicious and fore thoughts
of malice harbers the^in against me his faithful servant: do not cuningly and
designedly destroy me for my Ignorance, in the essential or circumstantial
matter or form of that huge Indictment, that has so much matter of Law in it,
as it has, and to take away my life by denying me, that which is the
unquestionable legal Right of the Freemen of England, the which if you will
but allow me, I do not doubt but to come off clearly and freely.


Lord Keeble. Mr Lilburn, You are now at a full point, and this you have said
now, you have said often and we have heard it, and that which you say now was
answered before.


L. C. Lil. Sir, It Is your own Law, Sir Edw. Cook declares, I ought to --


Lord Keeble. Mr. Lilburn, I shall add this more to it, that you at this time,
have here such a Court, which never any of your condition ever had in England,
so many Grave Judges of the Law.


L. Col. Lilb. Truly I had rather have had an ordinary one Sir, I mean a legal
and ordinary Assisses or Sessions.


L. Keeble. But this you have, and this is to take off or prevent, that which
you would do now, if there had been one Judge and no more, and if you had not
had this great presence of the Court, you would have been malepart, and have
out talked them, but you cannot do so here.


L. Col. Lilb. Truly Sir, I am not daunted at the multitude of my Judges,
neither at the glittering of your scarlet Robes, nor the Majesty of your
presence and harsh, austere deportment toward me, I bless my good God for it,
who gives me courage and boldness.


L. Keeb. That your Trial is so public, as your offense, is for this end, that
all men may take notice, that you have fair play, and therefore according to
Law, you ought to make your case in matter of fact clear, for that I must tell
you again and once is as good, as if I had told you a thousand times over,
unless you can clearly do that, you say nothing to it, if you will take that
for clear proof that has been alleged against you, you may shorten your
self: but otherwise make that defense that you judge most sufficient to
disprove the Fact, for till that time, you are clear gone in Law, and no
Council must or can been assigned you.


L. Col. Lilb. I have been a great while yesterday pleading my Right by Law,
for Council, and now I have stood many ^oures to hear your proofs to the
Indictment. I hope you will not be so cruel, to put me to a present answer,
when bodily strength is spent.


Lo. Keeble. We know it as well as your self, you were here and stood diverse
hours yesterday, and to day you have done the like, but we came before you, and
stand after you.


L. C. Lilb. Sir, will you put a man to more then a horse is put to, or is able
to go through with, therighteous man is merciful even to a very beast.


Lo. Keeble. We have been as long as you have.


L. Col. Lilb. But under favor, you have sat.


Lo. Keeble. You had that Liberty to, dispute no more, we must go on.


L. Col. Lilb. I desire but a weeks time, to return you ^n answer to your
large Indictment: and if not so long, then give me leave but till to morrow
morning, to consider of my answer. I am upon my life.


Lo. Keeble. No you must dispatch it now.


L. Col. Lilb. Then give me leave but to withdraw into any private room, for
an hour to recollect my thoughts, peruse my notes, and refresh my spirits: and
here abouts Judge. Jermin did whisper the Lo. Keeble in the ear, and presently
said Judge. Jermin, It Is against the Law to allow you any more time, the Jury
stand here charged, the Evid^nce is given, you must immediately go on, or yield
that for truth which has been proved against you


L. Col. Lilb Well then, if it must be so, that you will have my blood right or
wrong, and if I shall not have on hours time to refresh me, after my strength
is spent, and to consider of that which has been alleged against me, then I
appeal, (which he uttered with a mighty voice) to the righteous God of heaven
and earth against you, where I am sure, I shall be heard and find access, and
the Lord God Omnipotent, and a mighty Judge betwixt you and me, and requier and
requite my blood upon the heads of you and your posterity, to the third and
fourth generation: immediately after the uttering of which the Scaffold fell
down, which was on the left hand, which occasioned a great noise and some
confusion by reason of the peoples tumbling, but silence being made, the
Prisoner was buisie at his Papers and books, being invited by Sheriff Pack to
come out of the Bar, for fear he should have fallen with the rest, and so he
might have lost his prisoner.


Lo. Keeble. How came the prisoner there?


L. Col. Lilb. I went not thither Sir of my own accord, but by Mr Sheriffs
Invitation, and if I am in a place where I ought not to be, blame Mr Sheriff,
and not me.


Lo. Keeble. Dispatch Sir.


L. C. Lilb. Sir, if you will be so cruel as not to give me leave to withdraw
to ease and refresh my body: I pray you, let me do it in the Court. Officer, I
entreat you to help me to a chamber-pott; which whilst it was fetching, Mr
Lilburne follows his Papers and books close, and when the pott came, he made
water, and gave it to the Foreman.


Lord Keeble. Proceed Mr. Lilburn; but he pressed for a little r^spit, which
was granted him with much ado, as also a chair to sit down upon, but within a
very little space the Lord Keeble said:


Lord Keble. The Court cannot stay for you, proceed on to answer.


Li. Col. Lilburn. Good Sir, Would you have me to answer to impossibilities,
will you not give me breath? if you thirst after my blood, and nothing else
will satisfy you, take it presently, without any more to do. But the Prisoner
strugled out a little respit.


Lord Keeble. The Court can stay no longer, take away his Chair, for I cannot
see the Bar, and plead what you have to say, for it grows very late.


Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne. Well, seeing I must to it, the will of God be
done; but his brother being next to him, was heard to press him to pause a
little more, No brother, says he, my work is done, I will warrant you by the
strength of God, I will knock the Nail upon the head; and so he went into the
Bar, and set the Chair before him, and laid his Law Books open upon them, in
order as he intended to use them, and being ready, said, Sir I humbly crave the
favor, since it is my hard lot and fortune, at least in my own apprehension,
to have so much hard measure and injustice as I have, to know whether or no you
will permit me, after that I have pleaded to a matter of Fact, according to the
Law of ENGLAND, that has been allowed to the highest Traitors in all the
Books that I have read of, that I may speak in my own hehalfe unto the Jury,
my Countrymen, upon whose consciences, integrity, and honesty, my life, and the
Lives and Liberties of the honest men of this Nation now lies, who are in Law
Judges of Law as well as Fact, and you only the pronouncers of their Sentence,
Will, and Mind, I say, I desire to know when I have pleaded to matter of Fact,
whether you will be pleased to give me leave to speak to them a few words
besides.


Lord Keble. Master Lilburne, quietly express your self, and you do well, the
Jury are Judges of matter of Fact altogether, and Judge Cook says so, but I
tell you the opinion of the Court, they are Judges of matter of Law.


Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne. The Jury by Law are not only Judges of Fact,
but of Law also, and you that call your selves Judges of the Law, are no more
but norman intruders, and indeed and in truth, if the Jury please, are no more
but Cisers, to pronounce their Verdict.


Judge Jermin. Was there ever such a damnable blasphemous heresy as this is,
to call the Judges of the Law Cifers? Sir, I entreat you give me leave to read
the words of the Law then, for to the Jury I apply, as my Judges both in the
Law and Fact.


Lord Keeble. We will not deny a tittle of the Law.


Judge Jermin. Let all the hearers know, the Jury ought to take notice of it,
That the Judges that are sworn, that are twelve in number, they have ever been
the Judges of the Law, from the first time that ever we can read or hear that
Law was truly expressed in England, and the Jury are only Judges, whether such a
thing were done or no, they are only Judges of matter of Fact.


Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn. I deny it, here is your own Law to disprove you,
and therefore let not me but read it; it is a hard case when a man is upon the
trial of his life, that you will not suffer him to read the Law to the Jury,
for his own defense; I am sure you have caused to be read at large those Laws
that makes against me.


Lord Keeble. But I shall pronounce to clear the righteousness of that Law,
whatsoever others will pretend against it, that know it not.


Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn. Sir, under favor I shall not trouble my self
with any thing, but what is pertinent to my present purpose; here is the first
part of Cooks Institutes, it is owned by all the Lawyers that I know, or ever
heard of in England, for good Law.


Lord Keeble. If you can canvince us, that matter of Law does concern you the
Jury, you say something.


Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn. Sir, I have been shuffled too much out of my
Liberties already, give me leave to read but the Law to the Jury, I will make
use of nothing now to them, but your own words, and when I have done, I will
leave my self to them, and the guidance of God upon their conscience; and
having the book open in his hand, he said in the first part of Cooks
Institutes, sect. 366. fol. 226. 227. 228. in his Exposition of Ployden, has
these words.


Lord Keeble. Have we dealt so fairly with you all this while, Pray be
confident, those that are quotations there, are not for your purpose; but I
thought how good a Lawyer you were, for to set Cooks Commentaries upon Ployden;
when there is no such Book or Commentary: go to your matter of Fact, which is
clear, but for this, let it fall down, and spare your self, and trouble your
self no more with Cook; he has no Commentary upon Ployden. But Master
Lilburne pressed to speak.


Justice Jermin. Hold Sir.


Lieut. Col. Lilburn. What will not you allow me liberty to read your Law? O
unrighteous and bloody Judges!


Judge Jermin. By the fancy of your own mind, you would puzzle the Jury, we
know the Book^ a little better then you do, there is no such Book as Cooks
Commentary upon Ployden.


Lord Keble. Sir, you shall not read it.


Judge Jermin. You cannot be suffered to read the Law, you have broached an
erroneous opinion, that the Jury are Judges of the Law, which is enough Yes but
there was at Redding, when Colonel Martin after they were sworn, caused all
the Jury before the Judges sitting upon the bench, to put on their hats, as
their right; being they were then the chief Judges in the Court, and the other
inferior to them.
to destroy all the Law in the Land; there was never such a damnable heresy
broached in this Nation before.


The Crier, Cries out, Hear the Court. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne. Do your
pleasure, then here I Will dye; Jury take notice of their injustice; but seeing
they will not hear me, I appeal to you, and say, It is an easy matter for an
abler man then I am, in so many interruptions as I meet with, to mistake
Ployden for Littleton; I am sure here is Cooks Commentaries upon Littleton,
and these be his words, In this case the Recognitors of the Assiz^ may say and
render to the Justices their Verdict at large upon the whole matter, which I am
sure is good Law, forasmuch as we see it continually done in all actions of
trespass or assault, where the Jury does not only judge of the validity of
the proof of the Fact, but also of the Law, by assigning what damages they
think is just.


Lord Keeble. I am sure you are in an error, in a gross one, as possible a
man can be in, this is so gross, that I thought it could not have come from
Master Lilburne, that professes himself to be a rational and knowing man.


Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne. And in another place he says: For as well as
the Jurors may have Cognizance of the Lease, they also as well may have
Cognizance of the Condition. And further there Cook says, Here it is to be
observed, that a special Verdict, or at large, may be given in any Action, and
upon any Issue, be the Issue General or Special. And in Section 368.
Littleton has these words, Also in such Case, where the Inquest may give their
Verdict at large, if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law, upon
the matter they may give their Verdict generally. Cooks words upon it are
fully to the same purpose, who says, Although the Jury, if they will take upon
them (as Littleton here says) the knowledge of the Law, may give a general
Verdict. I am sure this is pertinent to my purpose, and now I have done Sir.


Lord Keble. You have spent a little time, but you have done your self no
good, I thought you had understood the Law better then I see you do.


Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne. Now Sir, as to matter of Fact, according to your
own desire, seeing you will have broke your promise, and will allow me no
Counsel, but lie at catch with me, I shall come to it without any Preamble.
The Statute of the 1 Edward 6. Chap. 12. (I desire the Jury may take notice of
the Statutes) and the 5. and 6. of Edw. the sixth, Chap. 11. here is the Statute
Book, which does expressly declare, That no man shall be condemned for Treason,
petty Treason, nor any such like Crime, but by the Evidence and clear proof
of two legal and sufficient Witnesses. Sir Edward Cook in his third part
Institutes, Chapter of High Treason, is absolutely of the same opinion, fo. 12.
in this branch, says he, 4 things are to be observed. First, this word
(provablement) proveably, that is upon direct and manifest proof, not upon
conjecturall presumptions or inferences, or strains of wit, but upon good and
sufficient proof of two Witnesses, and this is Folio 12. And here in the
adverb, (proveablement) prove^bly has a great force, and signifies a direct
and plain proof.

And secondly, This word (attaint) necessarily implies, that he be proceeded
with, and attainted, according to the ^u^ course and proceedings of Law, and
not by absolute power, or by other means, as in former times it has been
used,

And Folio 24. Chap. Pe^ty Tre^son, he says, It h^th been holden, that upon
the Try^ll of misprision of Treason, there must be two lawful Witnesses as
well upon the Trial as the Indictment, as it was resolved by the Justices in
the Lord Lum^eyes case. Hill, 14. Eliz. reported by the Lord Dier under his own
hand, and in the margent he has this note upon it, That this is the last
resolution of the Judges upon it: And a little below, in the same folio, and
folio 25. he says, Therefore upon the Indictment, which is in manner of an
accusation, by the Statutes of 1. Edward 6. Cap. 12. and 5. and 6. Edward 6.
Cap. 11. Two lawful Witnesses are requisite. And in follio. 240. he has the
same, his words are these: Attainders of TREASON etc. ought to be upon plain
and direct evidence (as before is said) for if the party be executed,
restitution may be had of his lands, but never can be had of his life: now I
have done Sir.


Lord Keble. I hope the Jury has seen the Evidence so plain, and so ^ully,
that it does confirm them to do their duty, and to find the P^^s^ner guilty
of what is charged upon him.


Judge Jermane. This that you have said makes much for the Jury.


Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne. We shall see that by and by; but I shall
proceed on to answer your proof to the Indictment, and that in the same
method that your Witnesses swore: And therefore Sir, in the first place, to the
first, which is THOMAS NEWCOME, the PRINTER, he swears in these words: That I
was present with CAPTAIN JONES, from whose hands he he says he received the
last sheet of the Book, called the Outcry of the Young men and Apprentices of
LONDON; but he says Captain Jones agreed with him for the printing of it,
and not I; for in that particular he does not in the least accuse me, neither
does he in the least accuse me in any manner in the world of being the
Author of it: and that I did any more at his house, but take away a single
sheet of it before it was corrected, which says he, I brought away with me:
In answer to whose Testimony I return this, and I earnestly entreat you,
Gendemen of the Jury, to observe it well, and therefore in the first place he
is but a single Testimony to this: But secondly I answered, that he confesses
moreover, that before he had completed that sheet that he received from
Captain JONES, he was taken, and not only he, but his Forms also was taken
from him: so that by his own confession, that Copy that was brought by
Captain JONES when I was present with him, proved abhortive, it was never
wrought. For he says it was taken before he had perfected it, and to my
knowledge they had it in their possession: so that it clearly appears, it was
never perfectly wrought off, and therefore the books were never perfected;
Therefore I hope that it will not be Treason in me, being a free man of
ENGLAND, to walk the streets with my friend, and to go into a house with him
where he has business to do, admit it be a Printing house, where he
intends to have a sheet of paper printed, his affairs, business, or actions
are nothing to me, neither are they now in the least laid unto my Charge: And
if they were, as they are not, yet that sheet miscarried, and was taken before
is was perfected: so that truly Sir, you may go seek the Printer of it, for
you see that miscarried that Captain JONES delivered to the Printer in my
company, and that sheet which he says I had away, was an uncorrected one,
which could serve me for no other use, but wast paper, and cannot be adjudged
to be a true Copy of that which was contained in the Indictment; neither does
he or any other swear, that at the Printers they see, or know where was done
the Tule of that OVT-CRY, contained in the Indictment: So that for any thing
the Jury knows, the first part of that Book has no dependence upon the
sheet that was spoiled, and not brought to maturity in Master Newcomes hand,
as he himself upon his Oath declares: so that truly Sir, in Law Mr. Newcomes
Testimony proves nothing at all against me, as to that book mentioned and
contained in the Indictment, and therefore you Gentlemen of the Jury, my life
is in your hands, I beseech you take notice, that in all his Testimony, there
was not one word that he declared to accuse me to be the Author of that Book,
or that my name was to it; for you shall find the names of ten that own it,
so that I think his Testimony is gone, and is not worth a straw.

In the next place there were three Soldiers, viz. John Took, Thomas Lewis,
and John Skinner, that swears against me, the substance of all their
Testimonies centers in one: and John Took in the first place says, about
seven weeks ago he met with Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne in Ivy-lane,
where Lewis knowing of him, gave him a salute: and they being glad to see him
that he was well in health, and the like, out of friendship went to drink a cup
of beer together at the Red Cross in Newgate-market, where he saw a Book
called the Apprentices Outcry, given unto Master Lewis, and he heard these
words uttered by Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne, You soldiers are those that
keep us in slavery. The second witness being Thomas Lewis, says, That the 6.
of December, or September, for so was his words, he met me in Ivy-lane, and
took acquaintance of me, asked me how I did, and I thanked him: and he
further declares, that he was very much refresht to see me, that I was well,
and in health, and was glad to see that those things that were given out of me,
by common fame, (that I was killed or dead, that they were not true, therefore
he being my old acquaintance as he says, we went to drink a cup of beer
together; and says he (as he remembers) Lieu^^nant Colonel Lilburn asked
him if he had seen a Book called the Apprentices Out-crye, and he said no, he
had not seen it, but he had heard of it, and was thinking to go and buy one
of them, for that he longed to read it, and heard it was publicly sold, and
says (...), Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn said, he had one which was given him,
and if he^ pleased he would give it me, which he thankfully received, and
afterward^ we staid a little time to drink a cup of be^^e, and had some
discourse; but he does fix no evil upon me, that fell from me in that
discourse, neither does he say, that I did stir him up to mutiny, or to make
division in the Army, only he says, I told him, that if he went to such a
man, whose name he has forgot, it is possible he might buy some more of
them, for they were publicly sold all over the City; so that you Gentlemen of
the Jury may take notice that he declares the things by common same were
publicly sold, and one of them he ayes was given to me, and I gave it to
him. Truly I hope the Jury has more conscience in them, th^n to go about to
take away my life for giving away a single sheet and an half of paper, tha no
man swears In was the Author of, or the causer of it to be Printed and
Published; B^t the most that can be fixed upon me, is, that I had one of them
given me, and I gave it to a Soldier, my familiar friend, who had a great
desire to see it, and was going to buy one of them, being public up and down
LONDON at that time, which is all that he does charge upon me; only he
says further, that there was a little discourse: but his Testimony does not
reach to accuse me of any evil or malicious Counsel given them, or any
aggravations of spirit, as though I did incense him of them against their
Officers or fellow soldiers, thereby to stir them up to mutiny and
Rebellion. For truly I have made it my work, for to be as sparing in my
discourse as could be, in the company of any belonging to the ARMY; yea, and
to shun coming nigh the place, if I can avoid it where they are: and he says
I had no aggravating spirit within me, nor uttered any provocations to make
them rise in mutiny against their Officers, and there is none of them all that
does in the least fix that Book upon me, to be mine, as the Author of it.

Only he says further, that upon his declaring he longed to see the Book,
that Lieutenant Colonel LILBVRNE told him that such a man, whose name he has
forgot, might possibly sell them some of them if they had a mind to them or to
get some of them, and truly I dee not believe that Treason.

Further he says, all the worst discourse I had with them, was, that I asked
them a question, which was, when they had any pay, and they told me they had
not had any pay in 5. weeks, and that was the worst of all; there proceeded
from me no aggravating expressions upon it, or mutinous provocations, but
truly that this discourse should come within the compass of Treason, to ask
my old acquaintance a question, that had often times visited me, when I was the
Lords prisoner in the Tower, or to drink a Cup of beer with him, or give a
sheet and a half of paper, that was publicly sold; Truly I hope there will be
no righteous Jury in the world, that will give a Judgment against me for
Treason therefore, no, I hope for more righteous Justice, from a Jury of
Citizens of London, whom I hope to find men of Consciences and Judgment, yea,
of such righteous Judgment, as that they will abhor to go about, to take
away my life, and my blood, and lay the blemish and stain of Treason upon --
me and my posterity for ever, upon such a thing as this is, and this is all,
and the utmost of all, that the Evidence does witness against me. Then in the
third place, there was John Skinner, who was the third: and he says the same
in effect and no more, and therefore I need not to go upon that any further,
but shall leave it I hope to the inlivened Consciences of my Jury, my fellow
Citizens of London: in the next place, the second thing laid to my charge, is
the Salva Liberate, delivered to the Lieutenant of the Tower as he says; The
Lieutenants of the Towers Testimony.
Now truly the Lieutenant of the Tower is but a single witness to this, and
the Law says positively, there shall be two legal witnesses, to prove every
Fact of Treason, whose Testimony or evidence ought to be as clear and evident
as the Sun at noonday, without any conjecturall presumptions or inferences, or
strains of wit, and truly the Lieutenant is but a single witness at most. I
should be loath to reproach or bespatter the man, yet I must say this, being
upon my life, that he is not only a single witness, but a Gentleman, in whose
Custody I was prisoner contrary to Law; who kept me prisoner in times bypast,
above 12. months together at the house of Lords illegal command, contrary
unto Law and Justice, for which above a year since, I did commence at the
Common Law an Action of four or five thousand pound against him, as I did also
against Collonell Tichbourn, that I have seen upon this bench, sitting as one
of my Judges which I think, is not equal nor just, nor legal that he with
whom I have a suit of four or five thousand pound depending, when thereby my
professed adversary should be one of my Judges, and therefore I desire he may be
commanded off the bench, and withdraw as being my professed adversary, and
therefore in Law incapable to be my Judge, and truly having the same Action
depending still against the present Lieutenant of the Tower, before the Judges
of the Kings Bench, for his detaining me in prison, above a year together,
contrary to Law, he is thereby in the eye of the Law, my proefssed Adversary,
and therefore in Law cannot be admitted, as a compitent witness against me,
upon my life, yet the Lieutenant of the Tower does not in the least swear that
the hand is mine, or that he did see me write it; but only he says that I did
deliver such a Paper to him, but he is but a single witness, and so I say by
the Law of the Land, not vallid or good, but his Testimony is clearly gone, and
wiped off, as also all things that does depend thereupon; There is besides five
or six witnesses produced to several charges; but the Law expressly says, that
there must be two plain and clear witnesses to every particular Charge, or Fact
of Treason, that must take away my life, and this is your own Law, and
therefore he is but a single one, and therefore invalled and altogether not
satisfactory, or binding; and then beside, which is considerable, truly I think
the Tower of London, in the place where he says, I gave him those Papers, is
not within the Jurisdiction of the City of London, and how I should come to be
arraigned by a Jury of fellow Citizens here in London therefore, against whom I
must confess that for my part, I have nothing for their Honesty and Integrity
to object, I know not, for I know not the faces of any two of them, and
therefore impossible for me to say any thing against them; I say, I know not
how by a London Jury I can be tried for a Fact fixed upon me, to be committed
in Middelsex. I beseech you Gentlemen of the Jury, mistake me not: for I have
nothing to accuse you of, and I hope you will be so conscientious and tender in
the Trial of me for my life, that you will put your case as my case, and do by
me as you would be done unto by me, if you were in my case and condition. And
the righteous God of heaven and earth direct you so to do: and therefore the
Lieutenant of the Tower being but a single witness at most, and in Law not a
compitent, one neither, being my professed Adversary, that has most illegally
kept me in prison, for which I have commenced long sense my action at law for
my legal reparations against him; I say, therefore in the eye of the Law, his
Testimony sticks not; and I pope in the righteous Opinion of my Jury, can do me
no harm; and if so his Testimony be invalled, then the Salva Liberate can not
reach me, to do me any hurt, but it and all those my pretended books called by
my name, are all washed away and gone, and my Adversaries must go seek new
Authors for them, or at least procure new and better Testimony to prove them
mine, for that which they have produced hither to, is worth nothing. Then the
next is Thomas Dafferne, and he says that the twelfth of August 1649. Thomas
Dafferns Testimony.
he met with Lieut. Col. Lilburne upon the Bridge, as he was going home to
visit his sick and distressed Family, and he went back with him, to his house
in Southwark, at Winchester House, which I am sure is not in London; And
therefore at Guildhall in London, by a London Jury in Law cannot be tried; for
he positively says, that at Winchester house in Southwark, which is in the
County of Surry. Lieut. Col. John Lilburne gave him a book, to carry to Coll:
Aires, a Prisoner at Warwick Castle; but he does give in no Testimony at all
that it is mine, or that that book was Lieut. Colonel Lilburnes book, of his
making or penning: but a Book he gave him: and that is all he says, which is
no more but that he received a Book at Winchester House in Southwark, from the
hands of Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne, so carry to Colonel Airs, now a
prisoner at Warwick Castle. Now truly he is but a single Testimony, and he
swears nothing particularly as to me, and besides, what he swears is to a
Fact done in another County, and therefore his Testimony is not worth a straw;
it is gone, it is invallid in Law, it signifies nothing, it is not so good as a
spiders webb; by Viritue of which the Marshals Testimony and the Governors of
Warwick Castle, as also Col. Purfroyes need no other answer from me, but to
pity them for the long journey, they have made to no purpose.

The next thing charged upon me is the Preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir
Arthur Haslerige, The Lieutenant of the Towers second Testimony.
to which the Lieutenant of the Tower says, that Lieut: Col: John Lilburne
gave him one of those Books in the Tower: which truly I am confident is in
Middlesex, and truly I conceive under favor, it will be a point disputable in
Law, that I should betried for my life in this place, admit there were a
thousand witnesses to make it good, that the Lieutenant of the Tower had one of
them from me, either in the place he formly named, or at his own house: for
that Fact was done in the Tower, that is out of the County of London, and so
not tryable by a Jury of Citizens of London; but he further says, whether the
Book that he now has, be the same that he received from the hands of L. Col.
Lilburne, that he is not able to depose. Then the rest of the witnesses that
do depose against me in relation to the Hue and Cry, and James Nutley, and
Edward Raddon, both of them Mr Prideaux servantts; and the most that they say,
The Testimony of James Nutley, and Edward Raddon.
is that when I was before their Master, upon the 14. of September. 1649. at his
chamber in the Temple to be examined by him, they say, they saw me deliver a
preparative to an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerige to this masters
hands, and tell him, that that was mine, and I would own it, saving the
Printers Errata's, which says the Lieutenant of the Tower upon his oath, I
expressed to be many.

In answer so which I say, I do not know whether the Temple be with in the
Liberties of London or no, and if it be not, I know no ground in Law, wherefore
a London Jury should try me here: but more fully, I say, for any thing the Jury
knows, or for any thing the witnesses swear, the Printers Errata's, which are
many, are all and every of those clauses that offense or exceptions are taken
against, for not one of those clauses which you except against, are not proved
to be the Prinetrs Errata's, and therefore there is no validity or weight in
those Testimonies also, for they do not prove in the least that any six lines
of the Book is mine, all of them say that I owned no more of the Book then was
free from the Printers Errata's. And the Lieutenant of the Tower swears that
the clause was added, which are many: And therefore you the Gentlemen of the
Jury, I I appeal to your Consciences, and to your Judgments, and the Lord set
it home to your understandings, that you may not be guilty of the blood of an
innocent man, by partiality, fear or offrightment of spirit, for in law, Equity
and Justice all their three Testimonies put together, has no validity, no
strength, nor force in them, and so much for that.

The next thing fixed upon me, is the legal fundamental Liberties of the
people of England, revived, asserted and vindicated, and truly all that is
brought to prove the legal fundamental Liberties of England to be mine, is but
mearly the relations that are in the forementioned Books, for I do not
remember, (nay I am sure of it,) that there is so much as a single Testimony
that does give in any Evidence against me that it is mine, and therefore I can
answer to that nothing, more then what I have said already. The Testimonies all
being invalled at least in the eye of the Law; and therefore that is gone too,
and blown away as chaff before the wind.

Lastly, for the Agreement of the people, truly that is dated the first of May,
1649. And truly for ought I know, and I am sure of it too, it is before the
date of any of those Acts upon which I am indicted for my life, and therefore
not within the compass of it: for Paul that great Apostle said, and he that
spoke by the spirit of God that dwelt within him, and to whom it was given in
an extrarordinary manner, that so he might thereby be enabled to write the
infallible truths of God, said where there is no law, there can be no
transgression, but that Agreewent was in being and publicly abroad with a
legal Imprimatur to it, before any of the Acts, upon which I am arraigned, had
a being, and therefore admit it should be granted to be mine, yet it can be no
transgression or any thing prejudicial in the eye of the Law unto me, but
besides, there is not any Testimony at all, that so much as lays it to my
charge to be mine, and therefore it pinches me not, nor does any of all the
rest of your charges, and besides all that I have already said in my own
behalf, to show in Law the invalidity, and insuffiencie of all the Testimony,
you have produced against me; I add this, by way of addition to it, that there
has not been so much as one single witness or Testimony to prove that the
Books laid to my charge, are rightly and truly dated, and not post dated, which
if any of them or all of them should be, admit the proofs were sufficient in
law, yet unless the days of them be firmly proved to be exactly according to
the original copies, and not post dated, for any thing the Jury knows, they
might be made and write before ever the Acts, they are said to transgress, had
a being. And therefore if there were so many Testimonies in Law, to prove the
books mine, (which there is not in the least) yet, I say admit, there had been
a thousand witnesses to the proof of every one of those books, yet not
withstanding in the eye of the Law: I leave it to the Consciences of my Jury,
whether I be not free in that particular, seeing there is none swears
punctually and positively to the dates of them, but to put all out of danger,
as I deny nothing, so in that particular, I do not own a jott, a line, a word,
a syllable, of any of them. Now Sir having done so far as I have, and clearly
discovered to the Jury, and all that hear me this day, that all the proofs
alleged against me, does not stick in the least any guilt upon me, truly I
have clearly answered, and invallodated all the verbal proofs, according to
the clear letter and true intention of the Law, I have no more to say to all
the evidences, that have been read in books against me, I leave it to the
consciences of my Jury, believing them to be a generation of men, that believe
in God the Father, and believes they shall have a portion in the resurrection
of the dead, and stand before the tribunal of the Lord Almighty, to give an
account unto him the Lord of life and glory, and the Judge of all the earth, of
all there actions done in the flesh; I leave it to their judgments and
consciences to judge righteously, between me and my adversaries; and the Lord
of life and glory, to judge right between me and you, that in all those things
in your long scrowl you pretend me guilty of; I hope I have so clearly and
fully answered all and every of your proofs, that not any one thing sticks; and
to their consciences I cast it; hoping that they do look upon themselves, as
standing in the presence of him that sees their hearts, and knows now whether
there be any malice in them toward me or no, which for my part I do not
believe there is, for I profess I know no wrong I have particularly done them
as men, or generally as English men; my conscience is free and clear as in the
sight of God, and I hope of all unbiassed men; and to my knowledge I never see
the faces of any two of them before this day, and therefore entirely as an
English man, that loves and honors the good old laws of England, and earnestly
desires and endeavors, and struggles for the preservation of justice and just
Magistracy, which I wish with all my soul may be preserved; and therefore
having suffered much for the preservation of the common, and, just liberties of
England, to their consciences, and to their judgments, I lealve both this
matter, and the constant series of all my actions in this my pilgrimage, and
vail of tears here below.


Lord Keeble. Mr. Lilburn.


L. Col. Lilb. Your pleasure Sir?


Lord Keeble, Nothing Sir but this, our consciences are befare God as well as
yours, and therefore you need not speak thus.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, I have only two or three words more, which I have spoken to
you, but these men that are my Jury and judges, in whose hands only are the
issues of my life, have not as yet heard them, I pray you give me liberty
according to your promise, to go on without interruption: You Gentlemen of the
Jury, I have many material things to produce witnesses unto for my
justification, but no time in the least will be allowed me, as you see, to
produce them, which I ought by law to have had, especially considering I have
been locked up so long close prisoner, and have nothing for which I was first
imprisoned laid unto my charge; and have so high, potent and mighty advarsaries
as I have; that truly every man is shy of me, for fear he may come in trouble
for coming near me; and therefore I have but two or three words more to speak
to the Jury, I beseech you let me freely go on.


Lord Keeble. Make them thirty to your defense, and you may speak them.


L. Col. Lilb. I shall by Gods assistance, I shall keep close to my defense:
Now Gentlemen of the Jury, I think I have sufficiently pleaded for my self at
this present, and that to clear up fully unto your judgments, and to your
understandings, that by the law of England there is not so much as any one fact
proved against me; for the law is express, that to every particular fact of
Treason, there must be two sufficient witnesses, not by constructions or the
like, upon which score and plea, that Gentleman Master Nichols that sits there
as a Judge, and Master John Maynard, saved Major Rolphs life, being to be
arrained for the highest of English Treason, before Barron Wild: Now Gentlemen,
if notwithstanding what I have said, any thing shall yet stick upon your
spirits, I shall entreat you to consider the intention of the law of England,
it is repeated several times in Sir Edwards Cooks Institutes, it is a maxim in
the Law, I have it here in the third part of his Institutes fol. 6. and actus
non facit reum, nist meus sit rea; Sir, if you please to do me the favor but
to English it, and explain it for the Jury; for though I understand the
substance of it, yet I am not exactly able to English the latin, but only to
understand the sense of it; I conceive the sense of it is this, it is not the
act, but the intention of the mind, that declares guilt; but therefore as in
reference unto that I shall say no more but only this to them, that the
constant series of all my actions from my youth hitherto, have manifested that
I have with an affectionate and compasionate English spirit within me, that
has put me forth for many years together, really to endeavor the prosperity
and good of the land of my nativitiy; and not its mischief and destruction:
and that hitherto-ward, in all my contests, I have had the law, and the
declared public justice of the Nation of my side; having never done any
mischief to my Country, unless it be a misChief to oppose great men's wills; I
have now been seven months in prison I know not wherefore, although originally
I was committed to prison pretendedly for Treason; and both the Acts upon which
now I am indicted, has been made long since my first commitment, there is not
any one syllable of all those things for which I originally in general,
without accuser or prosecutor was Voted a Traitor by the present power, and for
which I was proclaimed a Traitor throughout all the Market and great Towns in
England six months a go; there is not now J say, any one of those things laid
to my charge; but truly J have been laid inito prison for nothing; as by this
days work clearly appears, by the men in present power, unto diverse of whom J
have often sent to know what it is they require at my hands, and have also from
time to time, declared my readay willingness to compose and end all
differences that concern me, having proffered again and again, to re^er my
self unto the final determination of four of their own Members, finally to
end and determine all differences betwixt them and me, whereof J was willing
that Judge Rigby should be one of them, a Gentleman (though now a Judge) I have
found very honest and faithful, and to whom I have been much obliged to, for
many hearty favors I have from time to time received from him; I say I have
sent to him and Colonel Martin and abundance of the members besides, from
time to time; to some of whom I have written, with some of whom I have spoken
to; I say, I have sent many messages with the earnestes desire in the world,
that if I had offended any man in the House, that if he would be pleased fairly
and friendly, to refer it to the final judgment and determination of four
Members of their own House, and would stand to it; and let all the world judge
whether or no this proposition was not suitable to a Christian, and suitable to
an honest man, yea, to a man that judged himself in the strictest scrutiny of
is own conscience to be free and innocent in his own soul, and in his own
conscience, from all guilt, crimes or Treasons, or else if I had not, I would
not have put my felfe upon the judgment of those that were engaged in interest
and selt-preservation against me; and yet for the things that they imprisoned
me for as a Traitor in general which I bear nothing of this day, which is
wonderful strange law and proceedings to my understanding: But besides Sir,
under favor, I have not only done this, but I have ^e thousands of my
friends: I will undertake, I could produce ten thousand of old and young, Males
and Females, Citizens and Countrymen, men of honesty and integrity, that have
in the common cause always adhered to the freedoms of the Nation, that have
petitioned the Parliament several times; yea, from time to time, with abundance
of rational and fair Petitions, and truly stated my case to them, and
acquainted them with my condition, and with the rest of my Fellow prisones, and
earnestly begged and entreated of them that they would not be hasty in
condemning and destroying me, before they heard me and afforded me a legal
trial, from first to last, according to the due forms and process of the law
of England; and yet for all this, till I came before you, I never saw accuser,
or prosecutor, nor Indictment, nor Charge, nor nothing in all the earth,
legally to demonstrate me so much as a supposed offender; and yet for all this,
no satisfaction in the world would be recieved; notwithstanding in one Petition
they desiring, that they would be pleased, seeing they were incensed against
us, and that they had taken indignation against us, they did not desire to
justify us in any thing we had done; but in regard to their own knowledge, we
had been all four faithful, zealous, and setviceable Instruments in the common
Cause of the Nation; in which to the hazard of my life an hundred times over, I
have engaged for them, with my sword in my hand, with as much resolution, and
as much faithfulness, as any man on earth ever served a Generation of men,
having never betrayed my trust, or ever given any suspicion in the least that I
would, or ever so much as staggered in my principles, nor ever so much as
disputed any Commands, though never so desperate that was laid upon me; no, nor
ever turned my back in the field of their enemies in any of their services, so
long as it was possible for a man that had any brains left him to stand; but
was one of those 700 men at Brainford (my self being there a voluntier without
any particular command) that with dint of sword stood it out against the whole
body of the Kings numerous Army for many hours together, and never stirred off
the ground, till both horse and foot had as it were incompast (...) round, and
till we came to a readiness to beat out one another brains with the but end of
our muskets, where I was taken a prisoner, and led captive in a most barbarous
and disgraceful manner to Oxford, where I suffered abundance of unexpressable
hardships, and underwent the shock and rid the storm as stou^ly as any man
there; although I believe I was as much courted by messages from the King
himself, as any, or all the Parliament men that were there my fellow prisoners;
for there I have had no less then four Earls and Lords in one day sent unto me,
by Him, to draw me over unto them; but I bless God that kept me upright, and
entire unto my integrity and principles, and suffered me not to turn my back
upon them: But Sir, notwithstanding all this (I say) our friends desired of the
Parliament, that they would be pleased to take sufficient security according to
the law, for our forthcoming at all times, to answer such things as shall be
laid to our charge; but their Petitions were contemned, themselves slighted and
abused, and by no means could get any satisfactory answers to them. Sir, I
speak here to you, and to my fellow-Citizens the Jury, as in the sight and
presence of God, that knows I lie not: and if you find me to be in a lie, in
the least, in what I have said, then never credit man of my profession again
for my sake: Truly Sir. I say they desired them, that we might be released from
our imprisonment, putting insecurity to answer whatsoever legally could be
charged upon us, only they craved, that we might have the same legal
privileges, that they demanded at the hands of the King, when he impeached the
Lord Kimbolton, and the five members of High Treason; which privileges is
easily and plainly to be read, in their own first primitive Declarations, page
38, 39. and 76, 77. Now abundance of the free people of this Nation, in my
behalf, having craved the same privileges that was demanded for the L.
Kimbolton, and in the behalf of the five members, and the like, all that they
desired was no more, but the same privilege that they craved for them, which
was, that I might have the due process of the law, from first to last; and I
and my accusers come face to face at the beginning before an ordinary
Magistrate; and if they had any thing to lay to my charg, that they would
legally according to law proceed with me; but I say none of these would be
granted, although themselves in several of their Declarations, have declared
all these things to be the common right of all or any of the people of England,
as well as Parliament men; yet notwithstanding all this, they continued in
their incensed condition against me, and would come to no legal nor fair Issue
with me; nor let me in the least know what was the end or thing they required
of me; or what was the thing that would satisfy for the extenuation of their
indignation against me; but contratiwise dealt harder and harder with me, in
laying new and fresh insupportable burdens and provocations upon me: For after
all this they caused me to be locked up close prisoner in the heat of Summer,
set Sentinels night and day at my door, denied me the access of my wise and
little babes; for a certain season neither wife nor child could so much as set
their feet within the Ca^es of the Tower, to see me, or comfort me in my
distress.


L. Keable. Mr. Lilburn is this your defense?


L. C. Lilburn. I beseech you, as either the law, or fear of God, conscience or
common honesty dwelt within you, let me have a little fair play to go on to
speak for my life without interruption, I shall not trouble you long, for I
have almost done.


L. Keable. When your matter of fact is to defend your self, and to answer the
proof upon that, and that is it we are to hear, and not to hear you tell the
story of all your life; and then if we should reply to these particular things,
they will be such as most of them will vanish, and do you no service, but take
up a great deal of time: do not tell us a story, but go on to finish the matter
of fact.


L. C. Lilburn. It has been your favor to give me leave to tell it over to
you, I pray give me leave to declare it to my Jury, who has not heard it
before, and it is very material to my preservation, and my life lies upon it;
therefore do not deal with me as Proctors. and engaged men, with those that
thirst for my blood, and laying aside that evenness of hand betwixt both
parties, that ought to be in all just and righteous Judges.


L. Keable. It Is nothing to this; if it be any thing in the world to do you
good, in the way of your course of defense, you should have it.


L. C. Lilburn. Well if you let me go on no futther to make my defense, I
cannot overruled you, though you overruled me, my blood be upon your heads, and
the Lord God of heaven and earth reward you for all your bloodthirsty cruelty
toward me his innocent Servant this day; and so I have done with it; and what
I have said I have done with it, and leave it to the Jury, earnestly begging
and entreating them to take notice of your cruel and unjust dealing with me,
in denying me all the privileges of an Englishman, when I am upon my life.


L. Keable. What is material, you shall not be debarred in it.


L. C. Lilburn. O Lord Si^! What strange Judges are you, that you will neither
allow me Counsel to help me to plead; nor suffer me my self to speak for my own
life? Is this your law and Justice Sir? I have no more to say but this, seeing
you straiten me; although you said you would hear me till midnight: I hope I
have made it evident to all rational men, that all or any part of the
testimony given in against me, does not in the exact eye of the law, in the
least, touch me; although I have been most unjustly imprisoned, and most
barbarously used and tyrannized over; yea, and my estate by will and power
taken from me, that should have kept me and mine alive; and the legal and
customary allowance of the Tower denied me to this day; and although I have
used all Christian and fair means, to compose my differences with my
Advers^ries; but nothing would serve their turns, but I must have oppression
upon oppression laid upon me, enough to break the back of a horse; and then if
I cry out of my oppressions in any kind, I must have new Treasonsnares made to
catch me, many months after their oppressions were first laid upon me, that if
I so much as whimper or speak, in the least, of their unjust dealing with me, I
must dye rherefore as a traitor: O miserable servitude! and miserable bondage,
in the first year of Englands Freedom! I have now no more to say unto you, but
only this; your own law tells me, Sir Edw. Cook speaks it three or four times
over, in his 3 part instituts, That it is the Law of England that any by
stander may speak in the prisoners behalf, if he see any thing urged against
him, contrary to Law, or do apprehend he falls short of urging any material
thing that may serve for his defense and preservation. Here Is your own Law for
it, Sir, Cook is full and pregnant to this purpose, in his 3. part Institutes,
fol. 29, 34, 37. But this has several times been denied me, in the case of Mr.
Sprat my Soliciter; and now I demand it again, as my right by law, that he may
speak a few words for me, according to his often desire, both to ^he, and the
Court: I have almost done Sir, only once again, I claim that as my right which
you have promised, that I should have Council to matter of law; and if you give
me but your own promise, which is my undoubted right by your own law, and I
fear not my life: But if you again shall deny both these legal privileges, I
shall desire my Jury to take notice, that I aver, you rob me of the benefit of
the law, and go about to murder me, without and against law; and therefore as
a freeborn English man, and as a true Christian, that now stands in the sight
and presence of God, with an uprighs hear^ and conscience, and with a cheerful
countenance, cast my life, and the lives of all the honest freemen of England,
n^o the hands of God, and his gracious protection, and into the care and
conscience of my honest Jury and Fellow-Citizens, who I again declare by the
law of England, are the Conservators and sole Judges of my life, having
inherent in them alone, the judicial power of the law, as well as fact; you
Judges that sit there, being no more, if they please, but Ciphers to pronounce
the Sentence, or their Clarks, to say Amen, to them, being at the best, in your
Original, but the Norman Conque^ours, Intruders; and therefore, you Gentlemen
of the Jury, my sole Judges, the Keepers of my life; at whose hands, the Lord
will require my blood, in case you leave any part of my indictment to the
cruel and bloody men: And therefore, I desire you to know your power, and
consider your duty, both to God, to Me, to your own Selves, and to your
Country; and the gracious assisting Spirit, and presence of the Lord God
omnipotent, the Governor of Heaven and Earth, and all things therein
contained, go along with you, give counsel, and direct you, to do that which
is just and for his glory.


[ The People with a loud voice, cried Amen, Amen, and gave an extraordinary
great hum, which made the Judges lo^k something untowardly about them, and
coused Major General Skippon to send for three more fresh Compani^s of Foot
Soldiers.] Mr. Attorney. Gentlemen of the Jury, You have heard the Evidence,
in behalf of the State; You have heard the insinuations of the prisoner upon
them, as calling you his Fellow-Citizens, and the like: He has said, and
spoken; we have proved, and it is in your consciences to believe proof, before
saying: the prisoner begun to cite you two Acts of Parliament: the one in the
1. of Edw. 6. and the other the 5 and 6. of Edw. 6. and by those two Acts he
would signify to you, that you should have two plain and evident Witnesses to
every particular fact; yet he did forget to cite another Statute, made in the
first and second year of Philip and Mary, that overthrows and annihilates those
two Statutes that would have two plain witn^sses to every fact of treason, and
in all cases of treason will have them freed, according to the common course of
law the common law for the try all of them: if that must ^s material, or if
that stick with you, that you cannot determine it, my Lords the Judges will
direct you in it, and in all other points of law: But certainly that exception
was a little vain too; for we did not insist with one particular witness in
nothing at all: For that of Newcome, the prisoner did not repeat fully what he
said: for I remember he said this, that Mr. Lilburn, and Capt. Jones, came
together, and brought the Copy of the last sheet that was to be printed: if one
come with him, and the other del^vered it to the Printer, they are both equally
guilty alike: they came again the same day at night, and when the first sheet
was printed, to be sure, it was true and right, that Mr. Lilburn did take the
pains to take one of the Copies into his hand, and corrected it.


Lieu. Col. Lilb. By your favor Sir, he urged no such thing; by your favor
fir, they are the express words of the testimony, to the quite contrary; and I
wonder Mr. P^id^aux you are not ashamed, to aver such notorious falsehoods, as
you do, in the open face of the Court, before thousands of Witnesses; for
Newcome said no such thing, as you fasly affirm; neither is there any such
Statute in Queen Mary's time that does abolish those two Statutes of Edw. 6.
that I insist upon for two Witnesses; name your Statute if you can, her^'s the
Statute-book, let the Jury hear it read, and do no^ abuse them with your
impudent falsehoods.


Mr. Attorney. Well Sir, I leave it to the judgment of the Jury Sir: My Lord,
as for all the rest, and particularly for that of the salva liberate, it is
true, there is but one witness which is sufficient enough by the
forementioned Act of Queen Mary; but my Lord, it is under Mr. Lilburns own
hand, he will not deny it.


Lieu. Col. Lilb. By your favor, there is no man so swears, in the least, that
it is my hand, Jesus Christ denied none of his accusation; yet when they went
about to ensnare him by questions, he answered Pilate, etc. Thou say so, go
to those that heard me, they know what I said, why ask you me? Sir, I beseech
you, produce your Act of Parliament in Queen Mary's time, to prove, in cases of
Treason, there ought to be but a single Witness.


Mr. Attorney. Do not interrupt me Mr. Lilburn.


L. C. Lilburn. I pray you then do not urge that which is not right nor true,
but notoriously false; for if you persevere in it, I will interrupt you, and
tell you of it to the purpose.


Just. Jermin. Though you do recite many things; yet I must tell you, the Law of
the Land says, the Council for the Commonwealth must be heard.


L. C. Lilburn. I beseech you then, let there be no more added to the
restimony, then right and truth; for my life lies upon it, and I must and will
declare the business, and the falsness of it.


Mr. Attorney. I would not do the tenth part of the hair of your head wrong;
but being entrusted, I shall do my duty, and discharge my cons^^once in my
place, which is fully and plainly to open that unto them, which in my
conscience I think is right and just.


L. C. Lilburn. I do repeat it thus, as in my conscience, that he did say, when
the Copy was first brought, Capt. Jones gave him the Copy, and Cap. Jones did
agree with him for the printing of it, and Cap. Jones did read the Original to
his Corrector; which Correctar amended the Printers faults, and that I had an
uncorrected sheet away, and that his forms were taken before he had perfected
that.


Mr. Attorney. And Mr. Lilburn came the second time.


L. C. Lilburn. Will you spend all day in vain repetitions? you would not give
one leave to breath, nor freely to speak truth, without interruption, although
you were laying load upon me for 5 hours together: I pray sir, do not now go
about to tire the Jury with tedious repetitions, nor to sophisticate o^
adulterate their understandings with your fal^hoods and untruths.


Just. Jerm. Mr. Lilburn, the law of the land is, that the Council for the
State must speak last.


L. C. Lilburn. Sir, your law is according to the law of God, you said, and
that law I am sure, it will havo no man to bear false witness; why does Mr.
Prideaux tell the Jury such falsehoods, as he does, and takes up six times more
time to take away my life, then you or he will allow me to defend it.


Mr. Attorney. For the Salva, that it was delivered in the Tower which is not
in London, I hear not one witness to prove that.


L. C. Lilburn. That is a disputable point in law, whether it be in London or
Middlesex.


Mr. Attorney. And then, my Lord, as for the Agreement of the People, Mr.
Lilburn says it was dated the first of May, 1649. and it was before the Act
was made; that is dated May, 1649. and it is before the law was made in July,
1649. We do not question him for that; but when he comes to bring in those
books in August last; then he does new publish that Agreement of the People, he
incites them to set it up, as their Center, Standard, and Banner.


L. C. Lilburn. Let me not thus be abused; that book was never fixed upon me, I
was never taxt to be the Author of it, or so much as the disperser of one of
them; what baseness is this in you Mr. Prideaux thus falsely to use me.


L. Keeble. He does you no wrong, but all the fair play that can be; he does
fix that Agreement no otherwise upon you, then by your books it is.


Mr. Attorney. I do acknowledge the Agreement of the people that you are
charged with is dated the 1. of May, 1649 and that the evidence may allow this;
as also, that that Agreement of the People that was then published, and which
you in your books did own, was and is signed by Mr. Walwit, Mr. Prince, and Mr.
Overton, your fellow prisoners, as well as your self.


L. C. Lilburn. There is no book yet proved mine, and if that Agreement were
mine, yet it is dated before both your Acts, and was in print before they had a
being; and therefore in the eye of your own law, can be no transgression; and
you your self does not so much as accuse me for publishing or dispersing one
of them, since your Acts were publicly declared.


Mr. Attorney. That which you owned and signed Mr. Lilburn.


L. C. Lilburn. By your favor sir, I never owned or signed any book that is
proved against me yet; and no book in the eye of the law can be accounted it
mine, until it be legally proved mine, or voluntarily confessed to be mine by
my se^f.


Mr. Attorney. My Lord, that is owned to be so printed, when he must come and
incite the people, and stir them up upon those particulats therein contained,
to insist with particulars, are the dissolving of the Parliament, the having of
anew, and such other particulars therein contain^d; and that this Agreement
shall be the Center, the Banner, and the waved Standard, unto which they shall
flock, and to send Agents into several Countries to put this into execution.
Note that the Indictment charge no such thing upon Mr. Lilburn; neither was
there any proof at all brought so much as to accuse him of any such thing.
Now my Lords, for this book it is not doubted, but that there are two
Witnesses, that the Preparative to the Hue-and Cry was owned by Mr. Lilburn to
be his own, the Errataes of the Printer only excepted, and that the Lieutenant
of the Tower likewise joins in it. My Lords, I think there was not a clause
read to you out of it, but what is full and home to the purpose; and as for the
Outcry, the Printers test imony is complete, and the legal fundamental
liberties, is owned by him in his Impeachment of High Treason against Lieut.
Genesis Cromwell, and his Son in law, Commissary Ireton; and he does there also
sufficiently own the Agreement of the first of May: And my Lords, I do not know
there was any thing, that was effered here in that book, but was first proved
in the Court: We do not offer any thing of error that was past, to take Mr.
Lilburn upon any speeches that fell from him unawares, although he has
sufficiently done it; but in much speaking, there wants not effence; it falls
out here in this: Mr. Lilburn has been very free in his writing, in his
speaking, in his printing, and it now rises in judgment against him, and the
law must now give him his due, which you my Lords, are sole Judges of, and from
whom the Jury, and the Prisoner both must receive, for all that which Mr.
Lilburn has said to the contrary. And the Jury answers to the matter of fact,
and they are upon their Oaths sworn to do the things that are just and right.
My Lords, I shall leave the Evidence to them, with this note or observation
upon it, that notwithstanding all Mr Lilburn has storished and said; I will
not say as he has done, and seek by glossing speeches or insinuations, to
wind into the affections of the Jury, as he cunningly and smoothly has done,
by calling them his fellow Citizens and the like; you Gentlemen of the Jury,
you are to answer now according to your own consciences, betwixt God and you;
your oath is that you are not to respect, favor or affection, nor to meddle
with him upon any respect, then in justice; and as it is already clearly
witnessed and proved before you: My Lords, you have heard the several charges
he is accused upon, you have heard a great deal of foul matter and dirt, that
is fit for nothing but to be cast upon the ground, and returns to Mr Lilburn
again; for truly when he cast it upon the purest Marble or Brass, it falls off
again; God he thanked that it returns to Mr Lilburn the right owner; the
prisoner has cast these accusations, and these blemishes upon others, but now
they are upon the ground they will fall off, and does retort and return upon
his own face; he has taken a great deal of pains to dig deep for mistakes,
nay for notorious and gross calumniations, had he the ingenuity to remember the
words of the Scripture, that the pit he has dug for others, he is fallen
into himself, he would have some remorse of conscience in him; but all the
mischiefs and all the evils that, can be thought upon, which he imagined to
heap upon others, is now most justly fallen upon himself: It is said of those
slies, whose matter is corruption, they always light upon sore places, upon
galled backs, upon carrion, other birds when they sly upon fair meadows,
will not touch these: Certainly the Parliament of England, the Army, all the
Officers of it (whose fame both as Parliament and Army, all men know in an
extraordinary manner) are now put in a balance against Mr Lilburn; but for the
Army and the Officers of it, no man can say but they have been faithful and
true to their trust, gallant and courageous, and extreme succesfull, to the
peace and happiness of this Nation; and God is pleased at this instant to own
them, and bless them in a miraculous manner.


L. Col. Lilb. And yet notwithstanding did not you help to vote them Traitors
once? I am sure I was in a chamber in White Hall last year, when their
Commissioners (now Members of your House) put your name down in their black
bill, for a Malignant; but it seems you have recanted your errors, and engaged
to be a good acquiessing creature, or else you had not been here this day in
the condition you are in; but for all their faithfulness etc. have they not
rebelled twice against their Creatours, Lords and Masters?


M. At. Never Army has done greater things, and yet they have not seaped Mr
Lilburns tongue and pen, they have not escaped it my Lords, but he has lashed
them to the purpose: I shall be as good as my word, not to aggravate the
offenses, for they are fo vile, they aggravate themselves enough, and therefore
I leave it thus, the naked truth, and the worth of it, as the Books themselves
have offered themselves; but I shall say thus much more, the honor of the
Parliament of England, all the Magistracy therein, the honor of the
Government; the honor and renown of the Army, that has done such great and
wonderful things, is now at stake against Mr Lilburn; and there being a law
published that did give warning; and Mr Lilburn had been tried for his life
sooner, upon my knowledge, I say, Mr Lilburn had been sooner tried, and sooner
condemned and executed, if the law had been sooner made and published; but as
he says right well, where there is no law, there is no transgression, and
therefore there being a law against which he has offended, he must smart for
it.


L. Col. Lilb. I am sure I was imprisoned most unjustly, without any the least
shadow or couller in law, many months before your Acts were made, and
extremely oppressed; and now you go about to hang me as a Traitor, for at
most, but crying out of your oppression: O unrighteous men, the Lord in mercy
look upon me, and deliver me and every honest man from you, the vilest of men.


M. At. And that law was published and proclaimed in this City, by means of
which Mr Lilburn and others, had timely notice that they should not do such
things as are there forbidden; it also told them the penalties of it, which are
those that are due for the highest high Treason; and yet notwithstanding you
see with what boldness, with what confidence, in despite of all Law and
Authority, these Books have been made and published by Mr Lilburn; and whereas
he is pleased to say many times that many men have petitioned for him to the
Parliament; he will not affirm to you, that ever he petitioned himself; but in
all his discourse here, he calls them, the present men in power, the Gentlemen
at Westminster; nay my Lord, he has not so much as owned the power of the
Court since he came before you; but has often called you ciphers and the like.


L. Col. Lilb. That Is no Treason Sir, they entitle themselves the present
power; and would you hang me for not giving them a better style, then they
themselves give to themselves? I think the style of present power or present
Government, is a very fit style for them.


Mr. At. My Lord, I have told you long, it is the Jury that are Judges upon
the fact; and to you I must appeal for law, if you do believe, the evidence is
plain and full against him, for which he stands indicted, and so Gone direct all
your judgments, I have done.


L. Col. Lilb Sir, by your favor, I shall desire to address my self in one
word to you, which is to defire that the Jury may read the first chapter of
Queen Mary, in the Statute book, and the last clause of the Chapter of the
thirteenth of Elizabeth, where they shall clearly see, especially in the
Statute of Queen Mary, that they abhorred and detested the making of words or
writing to be Treason, which is such a bondage and snare, that no man knows how
to say or do, or behave himself; as is excellently declared by the Statute of
Hen. 4. v. 2.

I have done Sir.


Lo. Keeble. Gentlemen you of the Jury, you are sworn, you are men of
conscience, gravity and understanding to tell you of the duties of your place,
that have gone through it so often, is a vain thing, the sacredness of an Oath
which a man must not transgress in the least, not to save the world; you have
gone so often through it, and understand it, that I need say no more, the
charge you have heard, and the proofs; but for proof single or double, or
treble, as some of them do amount unto a witness in this, yea, that does
double another man's witness; if I swear this thing, and another swear the
same, a third the same, that is doubled upon all their testimonies: Mr Lilburn
has cited two Statutes of Ed. the sixth, to prove there must be two witnesses;
but I must tell him, were there but one to each fact, it were enough in Law;
for as for that which was cited of King Ed. the sixth, you have had it fully
answered by a later Law of Queen Mary, which does overruled that, and also in
acts that the common Law of England shall be the rule by which all Treasons
shall be tried, which reaches to this case too, that there need no more but
one witness, and this is Law; and therefore Gentlemen of the Jury that must
not stick with you; that which you have heard, to concern you of the truth of
the matters is this, you are not bound affirmatively to have two witnesses, but
in that one witness with the circumstances concurs, that is sufficient; that
which should prevail with you, is to consider the strength of the accusation,
which rests in the Books, and does consist of three heads, which are laid down
in the Books themselves, which does in the first place, so firmly express, and
so far vilify the Parliament and state as it is now established in England;
the second, does look unto the Counsels and incitations of him for the stirring
up of tumults, commotions and wars in this Nation; and the third, are the
things cited in his Books to that end and purpose to divide the Army; and then
the otherwill take the better effect: these are the three main charges, and
these the Books that come from him, do so plainly testify; that the Books are
proved to be his, you are fit Judges of; but it clearly appears by those his
Books that these things were in his intention.

For that he says, it is men's that does make a man guilty, the mind, that is
intended as it is expressed: Actus non faci^ reum nisi men's sit rea.

Now that mind is rea, when there is faith published, but I tell you this,
these Books being admitted true; I say that never man, that acted the highest
of Treasons as he has done, has had so much liberty as he has had, and as I
said before, never man of his condition nor any condition in England, that was
indicted in such a case, ever and a Trial in such a Court, in such an
Auditory, such a presence as he has had.


Lieut. Col. Lilb. The mores my sorrow.


L. Keeb. The mores your sorrow indeed, you have good cause to be sorrowful
indeed, for this Act of yours thus declared, if your intentions had taken
effect, your plot was the greatest, that ever England saw, for it struck at no
less then, the subversion of this Commonwealth, of this State, to have laid,
and put us all in blood, your plot was such, that never such was seen in the
world before, to proceed from a private man as you are, therefore it must needs
be heavy upon your Conscience, therefore my Masters of the Jury, look into your
Conscience, and see what that says unto you, which he stands so much upon the
witnesses Testimony, are now plain and good in Law, in this cause they are
multiplied, I do not know in one particular, that there is a Testimony single,
but it is aggravated with many Circumstances, therefore let not that trouble
you, you are the proper Judges of the matter of Fact, being of the Country,
and if you have fully apprehended, the dangerous things plotted in those boooks
of Mr Lilburns, you will clearly find, that never was the like Treason hatched
in England, and so in Gods name, as the Prisoner does lead to your Consciences,
so go and do.


Lieut. Coll. Lilb. I desire your favor, that there may be a course taken,
thot neither my Prosecutours, nor any belonging to them, may have access unto
the Jury, till they have done.


Just. Jermin. You Gentlemen of the Jury, I did expect it, it was expected by
the Court, that some matter of Law, or some question of Law, might arise upon
the evidence, which if it had, it was the duty of the Court, to have cleared
it, but there does not appear, and therefore there is an end, as to the dispute
of the Law.


Foreman. We are no Lawyers indeed my Lord.


L. Col. Lilb. I have begged it, and you have promised it, that I should have
Liberty to plead in Law, to the Illegallities of the Indictment, but you have
denied me that legal right, yea, you will not permit my Sollicitour, to speak
a few words for me, I dare undertake, there was never such a Trial upon English
ground as this has been, where a man has been denied, all the legal Rights
of an English man, as I have been; You Gentlemen of the Jury, who now are my
sole Judges, I pray, you take notice of it.


Just. Jermin. There was never any such kind of abuse offered to a Court as you
have given, nor never was such Language used to any Court of Justice before,
that I did hear of as you have given, and certainly, the Behavior at the
Bar, does set forth what the humors and character of the man is, for in this
case, if any such dangerous thing of Acting of Commotion or Mutiny in the Army
or in the Nation should have followed, it had been too late then, to have
thought of the remedy; therefore the wisdom of the Parliament has declared,
that whosoever shall by writing, prenting, or by openly declaring, publish,
that the present Government of England is usurped or tyrannical, it is
Treason, there is the Fact, upon which all the evidence does depend, and you
are to judge, whether in all those books there be not by Mr Lilburne, a
traiterous Fact committed, and how clearly this does appear unto you, withal
Circumstances thereunto belonging, I leave you to judge, and how short his
pretended replies are to be seen, or invalidate the strength of the witnesses,
I also leave you to judge. I say, I might easily show you, how short his
prevented answers are of real satisfaction, but I leave it to your Judgments.


L. Col. Lilb. Sir, my answers are real answers, not pretended ones, as you
are pleased to call them.


Just. Jermin. But in this business the evidences are sufficient to make a man
guilty of Treason, for here was not simply a passionate Act, or inconsiderate
speech, but what he has done, he has done deliberately, and advisedly, which
is sufficient to make him or any man, that so does, guilty of Treason. All this
that was published was in August, the Act is in July preceding. Now it is very
true, and I will english it. For Mr Lilburne, Actus non facit reum nisi men's
rea: The Act of a man does not make him guilty, unless his mind be guilty; But
I pray, how shall any man know the guilt of a man's mind but by those polluting
and poisonous words that comes out of his mouth? that is the mind, what I hear a
man say, I may lawfully say, he thinks; and it is a rule in Law, that the
outward Acts do show forth inward intentions, that very rule I will not speak
it in Latin, because I speak to one that does say, he does not understand
Latin; otherwise I could speak more Latin; now here is the matter, whether or
no upon the whole Evidence that you have heard, there does not appear
sufficient matter to make this Prisoner guilty, not of rash but of advised and
deliberate Treason, and as plainly of plotting and contriving to raise Mutiny
and Sedition in the Army, thereby totally, to subvert and destroy the present
Government, and truly, I have not heard more of skill has been used, and more
Attempts made then I think you have heard, and do remember, I doubt not, but as
you will take care of the life of a man, that you must not take away the life
of an innocent, so you will be as careful of your own Souls, and the public
Safety, and that is all that I desire, and I pray God to direct you for the best.


L. Col. Lilb. If you will not let me have Counsel, let my Sollicitour speak
matter of Law for me.


Just. Jermin. Mr Attorney, you must take some care to suppress this, he will
not be answered by us, I pray demand Justice of the Court against him.


L. Col. Lilb Well Sir! then I have done.


[The Foreman desires the Act for Treason, and one of the Jury desired to
drink a Cup of Sack, for they had sat long, and how much longer the debate of
the business might last, he knew not, and therefore desired, that they might
have amongst them a quart of Sack to refresh them.] Just. Jermin. Gentlemen of
the Jury, I know for my part in ordinary Iuries that they have been permitted
to drink before they went from the Bar, but in case of felony or Treason; I
never so much as heard it so, or so much as asked for, and therefore you cannot
have it.

But one of the Judges moved, they might have it.


Just Jermin. I may not give leave, to have my Conscience to err. I dare not,
and thus if the rest of the Judges be of Opinion, you shall have a light if you
please, the fellow that keeps you shall help you to it, but for Sack you can
have none, and therefore mithdraw about your work.


L. Col. Lilb Sir, I understand the Officer that is to keep their door has
declared some thing of bitterness of spirit against me, I desire therefore, he
may have some indifferent man joined with him to see, I have fair play, which
was granted, and he sworn.


The Jury go forth about 5 a clock, the Court adjourned till 6 a clock, and
the Court commands the Lieutenant of the Tower, and the Sheriffs to carry the
Prisoner into the Irish Chamber, which they did. The Prisoner stays about 3
quarters of an hour, and the Jury being come into the Court again, the
Prisoner was sent for, and after the Crier had caused silence, the Iuries names
were called, viz.

1 Miles Petty 2 Stephen Isles 3 Abraham Smith 4 John King 5 Nicholas Murren 6
Thomas Dainty 7 Edmond Keysar 8 Edward Perkins 9 Ralph Packman 10 William
Commens 11 Simon Werdon 12 Henry Tooley.
Clerk. Are you agreed of your verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Clerk. Who shall speak for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Crier. John Lilburn, hold up thy hand, what say you, (look upon the Prisoner,
is he guilty of the Treasons, charged upon him: or any of them, or not guilty?


Foreman. Not guilty of all of them.


Clerk. Nor of all the Treason, or any of them that are laid to his charge?


Foreman. No, of all, nor of any one of them.


Clerk. Did he fly for the same?


Foreman. No.


Which No being pronounced with a loud voice, immediately the whole multitude of
People in the Hall, for joy of the Prisoners acquittall gave such a loud and
unanimous shout, as is believed, was never heard in Yeeld-hall, which lasted
for about half an hour without intermission: which made the Judges for fear,
turn pale, and hang down their heads; but the Prisoner stood silent at the
Bar, rather more sad in his countenance then he was before, but silence being
made.

Clerk. Then hearken to your verdict, the Court has heard it, you say, that
John Lilburne is not guilty of all the Treasons, laid unto his charge, nor of
any one of them, and so say you all, and that he did not fly it.


Jury. Yes, we do so.


Clerk. Gentlemen of the grand Inquest, the Court does discharge you.

And you Gentlemen of life and death, the Court does discharge you also.

Lieutenant of the Tower, you are to carry your Prisoner to the Tower again,
and Major General Skippon is to guard you, and all whom you shall desire, are
to assist you.


The Prisoner withdrawn, and the Court adjourned till Wednesday following.

And extraordinary were the acclamations for the Prisoners deliverance, as the
like has not been seen in England, which acclamations, and loud rejoicing
expressions, went quite through the Streets, with him to the very gates of the
Tower, and for joy the People caused that night abundance of Bonfires to be
made all up and down the Streets; and yet for all his acquitall by the Law, his
adversaries kept him afterward so long in Prison, that the People wondered and
began to grumble, that he was not descharged, and diverse of his Friends went
to the Judges, the Parliament, and Council of State, by whose importunities,
by the seasonable help of the Lord Gray of Groby, Col. Ludlow, Mr. Robinson,
and Col. Martin, his Discharge was procured, a Copy of which thus follows.

Whereas Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, has been Committed Prisoner to the
Tower, upon Suspicion of high Treason, in Order to his Trial at Law, which
Trial he has received, and is thereby The Jury justified in their Verdict by
the Council of State.
aquitted. These are therefore to will and require you upon sight hereof to
discharge and set at liberty the said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, from
his imprisonment, for which this shall be your sufficient warrant.

Given at the Council of State, at White Hall, this 8. day of November, 1649.
Signed in the name and by the Order of the Council of State appointed by
Authority of Parliament. JOHN BRADSHAW President.

To the Lieutenant of the Tower of London, or to his Deputy.
An Appendix annexed by the Publisher.
JUdicious Reader, I have been as upright, and indifferent in writing and
transcribing of the foresaid discourse, as possibly I could, without
maliciously, designedly, or wilfully, wronging either the Court, or Mr.
Lilburne the Prisoner, as possibly a man could be, at least in my apprehension,
and if any thing be amiss, the second Edition may peradventure mend it, if
more exacter Copies can be got: then I was necessitated to go by many more
notable observations in the eye of Law and Reason, by way of marginall notes
might have been made, then are, but time straightened me much, and fear of
giving too much distaste, which might much prejudice the Printers and
Booksellers, in vending of the Copies, and also I do desire all honest men,
that have any interest amongst the able and knowing Lawyers of this Nation, by
what name of distinction soever they are distinguished, that they would improve
their interest in them, to get them to write their observations and opinions in
Law, of the legality, or illegality of every particular of the whole
proceedings of the Judges with Mr. Lilburne, that so when he has been ignorant
of his right by Law, the next that comes after him, may be helped by their
information: there is come unto my hands in print, two Copies of two of his own
Letters, sent abroad a little before his Trial, as also a Petition of diverse
of his friends, and two Copies of his Wives, and his Brothers Petitions, which
have diverse rational remarkable and fair Propositions in them within their
Orders, according to the day of their dates, I thought good here to insert for
that end, that he and his friends abroad, may see the height of that malice
that was intended toward him, and so the more be engaged to bless God, for
his miraculous deliverance from the jaws of death, and the hands of ^^uel and
merciless men, who by the rejecting of all his and his friends fair proffers,
very much consirme me in the belief of that common report, that he was judged
and condemned, before he was tried or heard, and that the next morning after
his Iuries saving of him, should have been the time for hanging, drawing, and
quartering him as a Traitor; in order unto which my Belief t^lls me, was Major
Genesis Skippons fetching three fresh Companies of mercinary Soldiers, after the
peoples first ^^m, who were to guard him to Newgate (in case he had been
condemned, which his Judges never doubted) the Jailer whereof was sent for by
Col. Whaley, etc. to come and take charge of the prisoner, and he accordingly
came into the Court, and stood by the prisoner, being ready to receive him, in
case the honest truehearted English Jury had brought him in guilty: But now to
the things themselves, the first of which thus follows:

The innocent Man's first Proffer. OR. The Proposition of Lieut. Col. John
Lilburn, Prerogative-prisoner in the Tower of London, made unto his present
Adversaries, and to the whole Nation of England, October. 20. 1649.
For William Hevenningham Esquire. of Hevenningham, in Suffolk, these present.
Honored Sir,
HAving sometimes the opportunity to discourse with you, there appeared that in
you unto me, that gives me encouragement to pick you out above all men that now
remain sitting in your house, to write a few lines unto in as moderate a way,
as my condition and provocations will permit me; I have now within very few
days bin 7. months a prisoner, the legallity or illegallity of which I shall
not now discourse, having already of late said so much in my own Defense See my
Salva Liberate sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower in September. last, and my
Discourse with Mr. Prideaux, entitled, Strength out of Weakness.
grounded upon the Law, your own Declarations, and the Armies; which with other
things (it seems) has occasioned your house to pass a special Commission of
Oyer and Terminer, to try me, which whether such a special Commission, made by
never so unquestionable Authority, be not contrary to the Petition of Right
(which you have so often sworn, and particularly declared to maintain
inviolably) I shall for brevities suke not now dispute; only give me leave
(and I hope without any offense) to put you in mind of that excellent and
printed Argument (in speeches and passages of Parliament, 1640, 1641. page 409,
410, 411, to 417.) of Mr. Hides, your quondam fellow-Member, before the Lords
in Parliament, as the then Mouth of the Commons-house, in April, 1641. upon the
special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, that was exercised in the five
Northern Counties at York, in which argument, besides many excellent and
observeable passages about the midst of it, he interrogates and says; What
has the good Northern people done, that they only must be disfranchized of
all their privileges by Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; for to what
purpose serve these Statutes, if they may be fined and imprisoned without Law,
according to the discretion of the said Commissioners (of special Oyer and
Terminer) what have they done? that they and they alone, of all the People of
this (then) happy Island, must be dis-inherited of their Birthright, of their
Inheritance?

I shall at present make no application for my self, only I shall add a few
more of his lines toward the conclusion of his Argument, in page 415. which I
hope cannot be offensive, being spoken by him that was so eminently authorized
thereunto, where he says to the Lords:

Truly my Lords, these vexed worn people of the North, are not suitors to your
Lordships, to regulate this Court (of Oyer and Terminer) or to reform the
Judges of it, but for extirpating these Judges, and utterly abolishing this
Court: They are of Catoes mind, who would not submit to Caesar for his life,
saying, he would not be beholding to a Tyrant for injustice; for it was
injustice in him to take upon him to save a man's life, over whom he had no
power: which Court of special Oyer and Terminer, was absolutely and totally
abolished, by that excellent Act that abolished the Star Chamber, being the 17.
of the late King. Anno. 1641.

But Sir, if it shall be objected against me, that you are necessitated to take
such an extraordinary course with me, as a special Commission of Oyer and
Terminer is, because I will not own your Authority: yea, and if you so
continue, to deal with me as you dealt with the late King. Unto which at
present I answer, first, the Kings Case and mine is different; for he refused
to answer to his Charge, principally out of this consideration, because he had
inherent in him an old received principle (as appears in his Answer to the
Petition of Right, Anno. 1627. and in many of his Declarations made since the
beginning of the late Wars, and by his Speeches at his death; by virtue of
which, he judged himself as not liable or capable of being judged by any power
on earth, but only by God alone, and as being in any sense not in the least
for any action he did (though in it self never so vile) subject to the
punishing part of the Law.

Now for my part, I do not in the least refuse to be tried out of that
consideration, for I acknowledge my self but a bare Englishman, subject to the
Laws thereof, as well in the penal, as in the directive part of them; unto
the ordinary rule of which, with all my heart, I am willing to stoop, and I
wish my adversaries would do the same, and then I believe the controversy
would not long last betwixt us.

But seeing, betwixt my adversaries and my self, there is a difference about
the legality and justness of power, which in some late printed papers and
popular discourses, is made use of against me, as though I had a self
conviction in mine own Conscience, of my own guilt, and therefore do ayoid, as
much as in me lies, a Trial.

To take off which, and to lay my self and my adversaries nakedly, and fully
open, to the judgment and censure of all ingenuous and rational men in
England, I do hereby under my Hand and Seal (for that end it may be showed to
your house) proffer you, beside what I lately proffered Mr. Prideaux, which is
contained in the 18. and 19. pages of the substance of that discourse now in
print, and here enclosed, that I am willing and ready, if they please, to choose
one of your own twelve Judges, that sit in one of the three public Courts at
Westminster, and all or any of my adversaries shall choose which of the eleven
remaining they please, and I will freely and voluntarily oblige and bind my
self under my Hand and Seal, before Witnesses, to stand to their final and
absolute determination, (upon the principles of Law, for all differences
betwixt them (or any of them) and me, although it reach to banishment, loss of
estate, limb or life; so my adversaries will do the like.

Provided, the hearing may be open, public, and free, indifferently for both
parties, and that the Judges give their judgment in writing under their Hands,
with their reasons for their so doing, to every point of their judgment. And
provided, I may for my own benefit, use, or advantage, choose two friends
freely to take, as well as their pens will enable them, all that passes pro
and con, without danger to their persons, liberties or estates; or without
hazard of having their papers (by force or Authority) taken from them, and this
I think is as fair as any rational man under Heaven can desire, and which I
cannot believe, you can judge to the contrary; especially considering it is so
consonant, to that righteous rule of the Son of God, (Jesus Christ) contained
in the Scripture (the volume of truth) viz. to do as you would be done to,
which is the sum of both the Law and Gospel, and of all righteousness amongst
men.

And I hope this is so fair, that those that most thirst after my blood,
cannot, nor will not, refuse it; but to make it more fair, if they judge it
inconvenient, to fix upon two of your own Judges (who in interest are
positively engaged against me) I will be content they shall choose one Scholar,
commonly called a Clergyman, and I will choose another; or a Citizen, or a
Countryman, (which they please) and I will do the like.

So with my humble service presented to you, craving pardon for my boldness in
troubling you, with whom I have had so little face to face acquaintance,
earnestly entreating your utmost interest, speedily in acquainting your house
herewith, in the publikest manner you can: I commit you to the Lord my God, my
Protector and Preserver, and rest,

Yours (desirous particularly to be engaged yours to serve you,) JOHN LILBURN.
From my captivity, and bodily bondage, in the Tower of London, October. 20.
1649. The Postscript, to the Reader.
SInce I sent the foregoing Epistle, I understand that Wednesday next being
the 24. of October. 1649. is positively resolved by my Adversaries, to be the day
of my trial; and therefore I cannot choose but publish this in Print; and
because a late Pamphlet-scribler, and pretended Vindicator of Sir Arthur
Haslerig, said to be Mr. Thomas May, the Council of States Pensioner, renders
me in his late false and lying book to be an Atheist, a denyer of God and the
Scripture, and given up to all licentiousness, and an absolute Confederate with
Prince Charles, to set up his absolute Will and Prerogative in this Nation; And
therefore not knowing whether my life will be mine so long, till I am able to
publish a vindication at large, against his base calumniations, I shall desire
you to take this at present, and if I dye before more come, let the constant
Series of my Actions and Writings be my future Testators, That if to believe
constantly all that is contained in the Law and the Gospel, and to have
confident hope of the resurrection of the dead, and the life to come, and
particularly of my own, and to live conscienciously in all good conscience, as
in the sight of that God that searches and knows the hearts of all the Sons
of Men, both before God and Men, be sufficient cause to be judged an Atheist,
then I am one; and if to oppose with all my might and strength all interests
whatsoever that would set up a single man, or more, to rule and govern by Will
and Pleasure, without bounds, limits, check or control, be sufficient cause to
be judged a Cavalier, and for Prince Charles, then must I ingeniously coufess,
I am such a Cavalier, and I hope so to dye; for which I bless God, I am ready
and fitted, let it be by what butcherly hands it will.

JOHN LILBURN.




The second thing in order, is his brothes, and his wifes Petition; the Copy of
which thus follows:

To the right honorable the supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons of
England, in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of Col. Robert Lilburn, and Eliz. Lilburn, in the behalf
of Lieu. Col. John Lilburn, prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.
Shows.
THat although Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, your Petitioners brother and husband,
by his late actings has incurred the displeasure of this honorable house; yet
since God has so ordered humane affairs, that it is incident to his people,
though of real integrity, and of hearty desires of good to the Nation, to
differ about the means, times, and seasons requisite, for the accomplishing
thereof, we hope your wisdoms will put the most favorable interpretations to
such differences, and not to attribute them to any evil intention or design,
but an over-earnest longing for such a perfect settlement of this
Commonwealth, which time only, and further opportunity can afford us.

We humbly conceive, he has formerly given sufficient proof of his faith and
fidelity to his Country, by his former sufferings, both before this Parliament
when he bore testimony against Regal and Episcopal tyranny, and since also, in
the frequent exposing his life to the utmost of dangers in your service; in all
which, he did manifest, that the temptations of this world were not able to
shake his integrity, and that for the enjoyment of any outward emoluments, he
could not forsake the dictates of his own conscience; and though we could
heartily wish he had forborne those things, which have drawn upon him his late
sufferings, yet are we well assured, and that upon the nearest and strictest
scrutiny we can make into his heart, that no indirect ends, or worldly
allurements, have engaged him therein; a manifest argument whereof, we humbly
conceive to be, for that neither the urgency of his necessities, which have
been very great, and which are usually very persuasive to men not guided by
conscience; not yet the importunity of dear friends, which have not been
wanting, and yet not any whit restrained therefrom; and therefore we hope this
honorable house will distinguish betwixt weakness and design, and think of
some way of moderation toward such, as instigation of conscience, and error
of judgment, have brought into your displeasure.

And though the obligation of our particular relations, cannot but move us to
this address on his behalf; yet we humbly conceive, it will not only occasion
much sadness to many of your friends, but much more joy to the common enemy to
see his ruin: Yet considering his principles are a burden to this State,

We do therefore most humbly present our assurance and confidence of his
purpose, to withdraw himself into some foreign Country, desiring he may have
his money, which is necessary to his and his Families subsistence in their
transplantation, and convenient time to prepare himself to go, and he will
wholly betake himself to his particular duty and Calling, and that those of his
judgment who are free to go along with him, and have arrears due to them from
the Parliament, may have their arrears paid unto them, and be permitted
accordingly to transplant themselves, humbly imploring this honorable house to
take the premises into speedy and serious consideration, and laying all his
former merits, faithful services, persecutions, stripes, bonds and
imprisonmets, with hazard of life, and loss of estate, in opposition to Regal
and Episcopal tyranny in balance to his late miscarriages, to do therein (out
of your wonted mercy and clemency) as may be most for the glory of God,
frustrating the longing desires of the common enemy to see his ruin, rejoicing
and satisfying the Spirits of many of your friends; and for answering the
humble and most earnest request of your Petitioners, whereby they shall be for
ever engaged

This was delivered the 22. of October. 1649. but was altogether fruitless; the
next thing in order thus follows. To pray, etc. Robert Lilburn, Eliz. Lilburn.

The innocent Man's second Proffer, Made unto his present Adversaries, October.
22, 1649. and communicated unto them, by his loving Brother Col. Robert Lilburn.
BROTHER,
IN answer to your late Letter, I can make no other Proposition, besides what
is in my Letter to Mr. Hevenningham of the 20 present, then this; That seeing
my self, and the principles I profess, are a burden to the men in present
power, therefore (for peace and quietness sake only) I will engage (enjoying my
money and my immediate liberty) that I will within 6 months time transplant my
self into some part of the West Indies; provided, that all those that are free
and willing to go along with me of what quality soever, may have free liberty
at their pleasure to go, and provided, seeing many of those I know willing to
undertake the Journey are made very poor by reason of their sufferings in the
present distractions, may have all such moneys justly paid unto them, as is
owing them, either upon arrears, for faithful service already done, or for
moneys lent to the Public, that so they may be the better enabled for their
Journey, they engaged thereupon to go; and provided, that other that are
willing to go, and are so very poor, that they cannot transplant themselves,
may have from the Public some reasonable allowance for that end, this being
the Land of their Nativity, where by the Law of Nature, they may challeng a
subsistence; and therefore it is but just, seeing their company and principles
are a burden and trouble to the men in present power, that they should make
their willingness (for peace sake) able to transport themselves inte a Desert,
where, with industry, and the blessing of God thereupon, they may expect a
lively hood, and this, with the engagement of the present Power, for a
peaceable protection while we stay here in England, and for their assistance
for a reasonable Convoy in some part of our Journey, I will engage in security,
I will not act against their Power, during my stay in England, directly or
indirectly; but for me to engage singly to go alone, seeing I know no
Plantation already planted; but I would sooner choose, to be cut in pieces in
England, then engage to go to it: therefore particularly I shall not engage,
without the terms abovesaid, come life, ^ome death, to which I shall stand:
Witness my hand,

Tower, October. 22. 1649. JOHN LILBURN.


This was sent to Col. Rob. Lilburn, who showed it to several Parlimen, but all
in vain, for nothing would serve their turn but his blood. The next in order,
is that notable Petition of his Whalebone friends, already in Print; the Copy
of which, for its worth, I judge fit here to insert, which thus follows.

To the Commons of England, Assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the
well-affected, in and about the City of London, Westminster, and parts adjacent;
Presenters, and Approvers of the late Petition of the 11. of September, etc.
SHOWS,
THat as the Wisdom and Goodness of God is the best example to all Authorities
in the World; so those in Authority can in nothing more resemble God, then in
their readiness to hear and receive the complaints and Petitions of any that
apply themselves unto them: And who in cases of dissatisfaction willingly
condescend to a reasoning out of all doubts and differences, for so his
goodness daigned to commune with his Servant Abraham, and even to a sinful
and gainsaying People he says, come let us reason together.

And surely, if ever here were need of such a goodness, now is the time, when
not only complaints and distractions abound in all places, but multitudes of
cordinall friends to the Parl. are exceedingly grieved and sadned in their
spirits, as not seeing the Commonwealth in a condition of freedom, or
exemption from grievances and burdens (in any measure) answerable to the many
promises of the Parl. to the affections of those that have assisted them, or to
the endeavors, engagements, intentions, and desires of the Army.

Every one believing, That in a very short time after the expulsion of the
greater number of the Members of this honorable House (as betrayers of their
trust) A new Representative should immediately have been ordered, according to
that Moddell of an Agreement of the People, tendered by the Council of the
Army, or in some other way: And that because that honorable Council in their
Declaration of December last, Declared, That they should not look on the
remaining part as a former standing power to be continued; but in order unto,
and until the introducing of a more full and formal Power in a just
Representative to be speedily endeavored, by an Agreement of the People.

And we were the more confident hereof, because they had formerly declared
also, That where the Supreme Authority was fixed in the same Persons during
their own pleasure, it rendered that Government no better then a Tyranny, and
the People subject thereunto, no better then Vassals: That by frequent
Elections men come to taste of subjection as well as Ru^e (and are thereby
obliged for their own sakes to be tender of the good of the People) so that
considering those expressions, and those extraordinary things done (declaredly)
for a speedy new Elected Parliament; how it should come not only to be wholly
deferred, but to be matter of blame for us, or any of our friends earnestly to
desire what is so evidently just and necessary in it self, and so essential to
the liberties of the Nation, perplexeth us above measure; and we entreat some
satisfaction therein.

And truly when you had voted the People under God to be the original of all
just Power, and the chosen Representatives of the People, the Supreme
Authority, we conceived that you did it to convey those Righteous Principles
(which we and our friends long labored for) to the next full and formal
Representative, and not that you intended te have exercised the supreme
Lawmaking Power.

Much less, that such ensnaring Laws should ever have issued from a house of
Commons, so often and so exceedingly purged, (intentionally by the Army) for
the freedom of the Commonwealth, as is your Act against Treason, wherein
contrary to the course of former Parliaments, and to Magna Charta, so many
things are made Treason, that it is almost impossible for any to discourse with
any affection for performance of promises and Engagements, or for the liberties
of the Nation, but he is in danger of his life, if Judges and Juries should
take it for good Law, which God forbid.

Also your Act for continuance and receipt of Excise (which every one hoped
upon the prevailing of the Army, would have had a final end) to Trade more
oppressive then all the Pattents, Projects, and Shipmoney put together.

Also your Act for continuance and strict receipt of Customs was exceeding
cross to expectation, that and the other for Excise, being esteemed most
destructive to all kind of Commerce, Shipping and Navigation, and are so
chargeable in the Receipt, as that if what is disbursed to Offices and
Collectors were raised in an ordinary way of Subsidies, it would go very far
toward the public charge, which it was hoped you would have seriously laid
to heart, and have prepared a way to have eased the Nation of both, and to have
raised all public moneys by way of Subsidies.

It was hoped also, That you would have done something toward easing the
People of the long complained burden of Tithes, rather then to have enforced
the same upon treble damages.

It was also expected upon the prevailing of the Army, and the reducement of
this honorable House, That the Printing-Presses should have been fully opened
and set at free liberty, for the clear Information of the People, the stopping
of them having been complained of as a great oppression in the Bishops times,
and in the time of the late unpurged Parl. rather then such an Act against all
unlicensed Printing, Writing or Publishing, as for strictness and severity was
never before seen in England, and is extremely dissatisfactory to most People.

And truly when you had declared so highly and resolvedly for the maintenance
of the Law of the Land, as to the defense of every man's Liberty and Property
according to that excellent Law of the Petition of Right, you may soon
conceive what heartbreaking and torment of spirit was occasioned by, your
seizing in an hostile manner such constant cordial Promoters of those excellent
Maxims forementioned, by the commitment of them in an extrajudicial manner to
an Arbitrary Prison, where they have been long time Prisoners, and most of that
time close prisoners, their Chambers and Pockets searched more then once, to
find matter against them (things altogether unparliamentary) yea, denied a
legal Trial, no legal Crime being laid to their Charge, nor Accuser or Witness
ever seen by them face to face, as Law requires; and this to the Ruin of
themselves and Families, as to temporal subsistence: We profess we are not
able to express the grief and amazement that seized on us thereupon, and which
is daily renewed upon us, in that, now after extreme provocations, you seem
Resolved to take away the life of our dear friend Mr. Lilburn, and others, not
by any ordinary way of Trial at the usual Assizes, but by a special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, the Judges being composed of such as whose
interest he has long opposed; a way much complained of in the corrupt times
before this Parliament, and which we hoped we should have heard no more of in
this Nation

And although this is too too lamentable, yet would this were all; but if we
understand the Petition of Right truly, the putting of Soldiers to death, or
to other reproachful and painful punishments, by Martial-Law, in time of Peace,
is not agreeable thereunto, and if we are deceived therein, the express words
of that Law have deceived us.

But that such as have ventured their lives for you, and thought nothing too
dear to be spent in defense of a just Parliamentary-Authority, should yet be
imprisoned (as some such there are) in remote Castles, and used more
barbarously then Mr. Burton, Mr. Prinne, and Dr. Bastwick, in the Bishops time,
and how soon intended to be proceeded against, by special Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, (we cannot but fear:) This makes our very hearts to bleed, and
our Bowels to earne within us; insomuch as if no Reason, Conscience, fear of
God, or sense of Religion will put a speedy stop to these proceedings, but our
most dear Friends (because ever faithful to their Country) must thus be
ruined and slaughtered, under pretense of Trials; we shall not desire to
breath longer in this World, as seeing nothing but misery and slavery like to
follow after them.

What a sad thing, we beseech you is it, that it should be thus in this Nation,
in the first year of Englands liberty (as you would have it esteemed) which in
our apprehension exceeds in misery and thraldom, the worst of Englands bondage.

For besides what has been mentioned, what is more frequent then to txamine
men against themselves, to imprison men by Votes of Committees, to seize upon
men's persons by Pursuivants and Messengers, to swear men against themselves;
Taxes and Impositions never so high, and Soldiers (not civil Officers) set to
gather them, to the terror of the people; and upon the least denial, either
violence or an Imprisonment certainly ensues: Lawyers in effect are said to
rule all, the Laws are trod under foot by them, and wrested to what sense they
please, and Law suites extended beyond all reason, in respect of time and
charge, then (as is verily supposed) having m^dded the clear intentions of this
House, and perverted the just intentions of the Army, poor impotent Prisoners
for debt, and (mall offenses abound, and starve in prisons, through poverty and
the cruelty of Lawyers and Goalers, and the poor abroad even perish for want of
employment, and through the excessive price of food, and few or none lay these
things to heart: And if any do, and become passionately affected there with,
and but speak their minds freely thereof, or (as has been usual and
commendable) endeavor to get People together in meetings, and propose
Petitions for redress, the Puritans were never more reproached in the Bishops
times, nor the Independents and Anabaptists in the late defectiou of Parl. then
now all such are, with more odious Titles (or the same in a more odious form,
as Atheists, Levellers, Libertines, Introducers of Monarchy, Anarchy, and
Confusion; which are poisoned Arrows shot principally at us and our Friends,
though must unjustly, none hating or abhorring either the Principles or the
Practice more then we or our Relations.

To our understandings, this is truly our mise rabble condition, and the sad
condition of the Commonwealth, and which is the more grievous, (because in a
time when upon promises made in the presence of God and with appeals to his
m^st righteous judgments, we justly expected the clea^est and largest Freedoms,
with even a total redress of all grievances, and which is no small addition
to our sorrow, that we are wounded thus sorely, by the hands whence we expected
our most perfect Cure.

So that what to say or do, either to help our selves or our Friends that are
both in misery and danger, and the Commonwealth that lies in no small degree
of thraldom, we are exceedingly to seek, and therefore as in fit condition for
his help only, that is a present help in time of trouble, and who makes man's
extremity his oppertunity, we most humbly and ardently beseech his divine
goodness to vouchsafe you a true Christian like Spirit of Condescension,
whereby you may be inclined to appoint some impartial persons to inform our
understandings aright, of many things here complained of, that if we be, we may
appear to have been mistaken, professing from our Consciences, that as yet we
are confirmed in these our apprehensions of things, not only from our own
Reasons, but from the Declarations, Promises, and Engagements of Parliaments;
and we trust, this way of reasoning out of differences will appear more like
unto the ways of God, then by force or threats to stop our mouths, or
suppress our understandings.

Also that he will both test fie and moll^ fie your hearts, that you may
instantly look back from whence you are fallen, To the just ends, for which the
Army reserved you together, and then not despairing, but the hand that may
heal (it being Gods way) we would beseech you to render up unto the People
their long detained right of new Elections, and a new elected Parl.

To fulfill your promises concerning Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right,
to unbind every burden, and to break every yoke; to give bread to the hungry,
when you see the naked to cover him; and not to hide your selves from those of
your own flesh (your present humble Petitioners) though never so much
scandalized and reproached: To deliver the Captive and set the oppressed free,
and if for a testimony of your real intentions herein you shall release unto
us ours and the Nations true Friends, though pointed unto death or continuance
in bonds, we shall rejoice above measure at so blessed an alteration, and then
shall your light break forth as the morning; you shall finish your Course with
joy, all we have shall be ever ready to preserve you; and we shall ever pray
that the Lord our God may be your exceeding great reward.

REader. This foregoing Petition was ( October. 23. 1649.) offered unto the
House, with most earnest and importunate solicitation to have it received, but
such a face of denial and opposition appeared amongst them, that neither the
Sergeant at Arms, nor any Member would so much as touch it, telling the
Petitioners that the House would not receive any Petition in L. C. Lilburnes
behalf, Notwithstanding they have Declared, That it is the Right of the People
of England to petition, and their duty to receive Petitions, though against
Laws established, part book declar. page 720. The fifth and last of which in
order is his Brothers single Petition, the Copy of which thus follows.

To the Right Honorable, the supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons of
England, in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of Col. Robert Lilburn.
Humbly shows,
THat although of late presenting an humble Petition to this Honorable House,
in my own and my Sisters name, in behalf of my dear brother, I had not the
happiness to have the same considered; yet so strong are my affections toward
him, not only as a brother, but as confident of his integrity, and that he
has been very serviceable formerly in his Generation, though possibly
accompanied with humane fra^^ties, but also exceedingly afflicted with the long
continual sufferings of his faithful, dear, and now almost distracted wife.
Hereupon, and for that it grieves me above measure, that he whom all former
powers sought to destroy for his affection to the present members of this
honorable house (which powers you have abolished) and out of whose hands he (as
it were) miraculously escaped, should come to receive his sad doom under your
Authority, when as I verily believe, that upon good grounded assurance, that
could I but obtain so much favor of this honorable house, as to suspend, all
proceedings against him for some reasonable time, I should be able to convince
him of the evil, of any thing that is really evil of it self, and whereby
possibly upon a mistaken conscience, he may unwillingly have incurred your
displeasure: or if I should fail thereof, yet then that I should prevail with
him to betake himself to some for^aign habitation, and whilesthe shall remain
under your government, or elsewhere, for my engagement sake, not in the least
measure to disturb you in any your proceedings. And therefore as an humble
Servat and faithful Soldier of yours, for whose safety and preservation, I
have often readily adventured my life, I have taken the boldness again to
presume upon your serious affairs, and most humbly and earnestly to entreat, as
the only favor, that ever you intend toward me, that you would be pleased to
vouchsafe upon this my humble suit, that my said dear brothers trial, may for
some reasonable time be yet suspended. In which time, I do hereby become bound
unto this honorable house, upon all the ties and bonds of Christianity and
sincerity, to prevail with him, to do what shall be in one respect or other to
the full content, satisfaction and honor of this honorable house, and cannot
but be full of hope, that you will yet incline unto, and grant this my humble
Petition, whereby I shall ever be more strongly obliged, to

Pray for your eternal peace and prosperity, ROBERT LILBURN.
This was delivered the 23. of October. 1649.
Upon the delivery of all which, Mrs. Lilburn perceiving that nothing would
serve their turn, but absolutely her husbands life; and being extremely abused
by the reviles and threats of several of the me ubers, but especially old Mr.
Valentine, that used her most unworthily and basely; in a distemper^d and
half-distracted condition, she came home to the Tower to her husband, and with
much opportunity in the bitterness of her spirit, besought her husband to stoop
as low as possibly he could for the safety of his life: in the preservation of
which, he^s was locked up, who upon her bitter mourning and crying, and the
beholding the anguish of spirit of her that had been so faithful and hazardous
a yoak-fellow to him in his above 7 years sorrow, wrung from him with much ado
the copy of these lines following.

To the Honorable Will. Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses assembled in Parliament, to be communicated to the House.
Honored Sir,
AS a man being somewhat at present confounded in my self, through a strong
confidence of my own innocence (having sustered above measure, but
intentionally done injury unto none) and pressed under with the importunity of
friends, especially with the heartbreaking sighs of my dear but even
half-distracted wife, as when my late children lay in a most disconsolate
condition (which ended their lives) your house did me the favor to grant me my
liberty to visit them, which I think was the saving of her life: So now
greater importunities lying upon me from diverse, and her that is dea^er to me
then many lives, I as earnestly entreat you to move your house in the most
effectual manner you can, that my trial (so suddenly intended) may for some
reasonable time be suspended, that so I may have time to hear and consider what
many of them say they have to offer by way of reason and argument, to persuade
me to what at present my conscience is not convinced of. And I should likewise
be desirous, if your house should judge convenient, that some competent number
of Gentlemen of your house might be permitted to debate with me those
particulars, wherein I have appeared most to differ with other men's judgments:
whereby possibly rational arguments may be so strongly urged, as peradventure
may give such satisfaction as may tend to the reconciling many differences and
distractions: upon the knowledge of the acceptance of which during all that time
of suspension of Trial, I do hereby faithfully promise, not in the least to
disturb those that shall grant me this favor, being not so apt to make
disturbance, as is conceived: and herein you will exceedingly obliege

From the Tower of London, this 24. of October. 1649. Sir, Yours to serve you,
JOHN LILBURN.


Which yet availed nothing at all, but added to her sorrow; which being very
great, he got his friends to entice her into the City, under pretense to go
look after his Jury, and there to keep her, till his intended bitter portion
were over; but although many have said, he used foul play toward his Jury,
which was of his Adversaries own calling, viz. Col. or Sheriff Wilson, who is
both a member of the House, and also of the Council of State, and who had not a
dram of affection or compassion toward him in the least, in the pannelling
either of his Juries, whose affection to his life may easily be discerned, by
his pannelling the grand Inquest, a copy of whose names by an extraordinary
strange providence, is within these few hours come to my hands, after all the
ordinary ways were despaired of, as being impregnable by the forceable Engines
of Gold or Silver; which Inquest are most of them, if not all, engaged persons,
the names of which as they are come to my hands, thus follows.

1. Robert Manwayring. 2. Alexand. Bormington. 3. Simon Greenhil. 4. Thomas
Landal. 5. John Stone. 6. John Allen. 7. Anthony Webster. 8. Francis Woolly. 9.
John Hind. 10. Rob. Kendish. 11. Rich. Young. 12. John Brett. 13. Robert
Sweet. 14. Jesper Clayton 15. Francis Ashhurst. 16. Philip Meade. 17. Thomas
Smith. 18. Matthew White. 19. William Rowel. 20. Samuel Ravenscraft. 21. Rich.
Gibbs, bro to Al. Gibbs.
A little time will produce very notable things about some of (...) principal
engaged men of the aforesaid grand inquest, that may be very fit for public
view, as also about Mr. Prideaux, the Attorney Generals Carriage toward them
in the Business, which may prove good soundations for able and f^^thfull
Lawyers, (...) draw their results in Law against them, as the foundatione of
good and sound actions in Lavy for Mr. Lilburn to render good damages against
them for their illega^ unjust malicious and blood-thirsty prosecuting him for
his life.

And also there is more then bare hopes of the publishing an exact Copy of the
Lord Kebles Charge to the grand inquest, which I understand just now is
complete in Short hand, and has as many remarkable things in it, as is in
either of the two days Passages that followed it, all which rightly
considered, might make ingenuous men blush by force to take from, and by force
^et to detain Mr. Lilburnes Estate from him, as he avowedly yet says, Sir
Arthur Hazde^^g has done and yet does, considering so much injustice and
malice has been used toward him as has been done: the detention of which can
be upon no other grounds, being his all; but to necessitate the honest man
again to cry out of his oppressions, by means of which Sir Arthur, etc. might
either by a Council of VVar^^, or a pretended le^^islative ^ill of attainder,
take away his life without any more Trial, by a sury, and so accomplish that
which many letters out of the North declares, was Sir Arthurs avovved and
declared end o^ his last j^urney from Nevv^^stly, and if this were not still
the design against Mr. Lilburn, without doubt Sir Arthur would not suffer a
day to p^sse over his head before he had put Mr Lilburn in the full possession
of his money, as by Law and equity he ought to do without any more out^cries
from him, or any of his friends for him.

Nec lex est instior ulla,
Quam nens artificem art perire sua.
It Is just he should be tangled in the snare,
Which for another man he did prepare,

November, 1649.
FINIS.

