A New CONFERENCE Between the GHOSTS OF King CHARLES AND Oliver Cromwell.

FAITHFULLY Communicated by Adam Wood.

LONDON, Prin^ed for Robert Page, living in Barbican. 1659.

A Conference between the Ghosts of King Charles, and Oliver Cromwell.
King. HOw now! Who Is this that disturbeth my dust, at Rest now some years?


Oliver. I am one that gave thee no Rest when we lived together upon the Earth.


K. What? Is it Oliver Cromwell, that grand Enemy of mine?


Ol. The same.


King. What? have thou left thy station on Earth, and durst thou here also to
own thy self my Enemy?


O. What is it that I ever wanted Impudence to do?


K. It Is true; neither did thou ever want a base Hypocritical Temper to
color thy most absurd Actions.


O. Oh Sir! I did no other then Imitate most of our Rank, which, according to
our Creed, viz. Nicholas Machiavell's Prince, who says, A Prince or Tyrant
ought never to want good Pretenses, to color the worst of Actions with.


K. What do thou Rank thy self amongst Princes? Did thou usurp the Kingly
Office, after thou did me that Ill Office?


O. I made a shift to gain the Supremacy; and because the Nation was under age,
I made my self their Protector; and would have made my self King, but that I
durst not accept of the Title, because I had a Hand in your death; the which
the People all knew: therefore I could not find a colorable pretense: for
besides that, I often Imprecated and protested against the Government of a
Single Person, in the hearing of the Officers of my Army, who had somewhat
tender Consciences, in regard I had not a Crown for every one of them to harden
their Consciences with, they obstructed it once whilst it was under
Consulation in Parliament, to bestow upon me that Bauble which only serves to
cheat People.


King. What? Would that Parliament that took the Crown from my head, put it
upon thine, and not upon one of my Childrens heads?


O. Alas, Sir, that Parliament, I turned them all out of Doors, after they had
declared England a Commonwealth; and then I became a Seeker, took the
Fifth-Monarchy people in to aid me in the turning them out of their Reputation;
in which work several of that opinion did me good service, by defaming,
railing, and abusing the Parliament, in the ears of the people, which made the
work more easy and secure: So soon as that was done, I turned them to grass
together, with the Eel-skin, Aqua-vitae, or Lamb-skin Parliament, what shall I
call it? and then I was made Lord Protector, forsooth.


K. Then you were made Protector! who made you Protector, I pray?


O. Who? It was my Scullion, and Grooms, and Butler, and some other Nobles and
great men, besides Sir Thomas Viner then Lord Mayor of London.


King. Sir Thomas Viner! Why, who made him a Knight?


Oliver. Who? I did, with many more doughty ones.


K. Thou have played a mad Game; it is strange that a Halter never caught thee:
Did thou not come out of the World by the Rope, or the Ax, or by the hand of
some Felton or other?


O. No; but I came by the Immediate hand of God, who never suffered that worm
of Conscience to die within me, but it still lay Gnawing and Tormenting of me,
brought an unusual Fever upon me, that dried up all my blood, that at my
departure not one drop almost was left within me.


King. What did thou do with the Sectaries, when thou came to that Power?


Ol. I served them all alike; I made use of such of them as were as sound
Trowts as my self; and turned off all that I thought had any principles; and
made choice of such only as would serve me in any undertaking?


King. How could thou secure thy self against so many sturdy and lofty
spirits, as was raised in the War between Me and the Parliament? or, how
could thou charm them to quietness?


Ol. Thus: If any stirred against me, I at once struck off their heads; I did
not Nibble about their Ears, as you did about Burton's, Prynne's, and
Bastwick's.


King. Alas! At that time I could do no more, and it had been better I had
never done that; for it discontented the Puritans so much, that they sought all
means to work me Ill and Mischief, for my suffering that, and the Innovations
in the Church in point of Worship, together with the Patentees and Monopolies;
all which discontented my People so much, that it made way for that Cursed
War, in which I lost my self and Friends; by which you did arrive to what
greatness you were at: These and such like follies I was guilty of, by being
advised by none but a vicious Nobility, that spent their Estates in a Riotous
and voluptuous manner, never minding Justice or Policy, Exhausting my Exchequer
to support them, which brought me into want, which necessitated me to lay
Burdens upon my People; the which discontented them. They would not submit to
be ruled, but I must have a Parliament to prevent popular Insurrections: the
which I was forced to do, in regard the Scots had their Arms in their hands;
and the Forces that I raised, would not sight: and when the Parliament
assembled, I lost my self, by not condescending to what ever they desired,
according to the advice of my Gravest Council; and by my hearkening to such
Counsel that advised me to Insist upon my Prerogative; which at length
occasioned that War. And after the War was ended, that I should at all Refuse
to submit to any Terms, when they offered me my Crown again; I having lost it
in the Field, being a prisoner, and having no Forces to stand by me; that I
should stand upon Terms. Alas, alas, I acknowledge I played a foolish Game; if
I had not Refused to condescend to those Propositions at the Treaty in the Isle
of Wight, I had kept my head on my shoulders, in despite of thee and all the
rest of my Enemies. But, I prithee Oliver, now I have told thee how I played
the Fool, tell me how thou did play the Knave after my decease; part of which
thou have already discoursed to me.


Oliver. Let me tell you, now I do intend to be real to you, and cast off
those pretenses I have hitherto cleathed my Actions with. The order of my
underhand dealing is in manner thus; First, when the Presbyterians were so hot
for you, and intended foolishly to re-establish you, I began to be a zealous
Independent, and promoted that Faction or Opinion above all other in the Army,
and sent Cornet Joyce privately, ordering him to secure your Person, (though
afterward I denied it with all the Imprecations I could devise) to bring you
into the Custody of the Army. That I might make the better terms for my self,
I set afoot a Treaty with you at Oatlands; afterward I propounded to my self,
That I could not possibly thereby attain to the End that I aimed at by that
Action; then I contrived to foment a Jealousy in you of a surprise intended by
the Levellers, to seize you, and bring you to Trial. Upon this, you went into
my Trap in the Isle of Wight. After I had taken off your Head, before I went to
Ireland, I had to do with designing the destruction of the Levellers; the which
I effected in this manner. They being in a Body, and likely to have sent me
after you (before I had tasted of the fruits of Sovereignty); I employed some
amongst them to be Confederates, who betrayed all their Resolutions to me, and
promised to obstruct their designs; for which I gave them Additional Honors:
and I employed others to treat with them, and engage, that the Army should not
advance upon them until the Treaty was over; which cast them into a security
at Burford: Thereupon I advanced the Army, and fell in to their Quarters, slew
many, and hanged others. After which, I went into Ireland, with an Army. I
furnished it with all the Anabaptists I could find fit to say Bo to a Goose,
both in Ireland, Scotland, and England. Then my Lord Fairfax tamely, upon a
scruple of Conscience, laid down his Commission; which act of his made my work
easy to attain the Supremacy; else I must have picked some holes in his Coat to
have taken him out of the way by death or otherwise; the which was not easy to
be done, he walking so circumspectly: If he had not done it, I should have
suborned some that would have done my work effectually; the which Art I always
found to serve my designs to good purpose, in taking away whomsoever I designed
to destroy, unless it were one Dozen or thereabouts of subtle fellows, whom I
fear will be revenged on my simple Son Dick, who has not the spirit of
Government upon him.


King. What have thou gulled my People, so as to leave any of thy Brood behind
thee in the Government?


Oliver. Yes, I left him Protector, and left my Secretary to protect him; but I
doubt he will not be able to hold it long. Well, but to the business in hand, I
am upon Confessing my villainy; I say, when I had furnished the Armies with
Anabaptists, I was able to deal with the Parliament, who for the most part were
Independents: I by my self and Emissaries in the House, together with some of
your Friends, did impede settlement by way of a Commonwealth, obstructed
Justice in the House, promoted and countenanced all Villainies in Committees,
thereby to render them odious to the people. Now some of the Anabaptists served
me to good purpose, who were all for a Fifth-Monarchy; the which Opinion I
fomented all that I could: The Parliament stood in their way when they became
considerable, by whom they were defamed, abused, and slighted, their credit
much weakened by such like means in the opinion of the People, I thereupon
dissolved them.


-- Oliver, -- Oliver, -- Oliver.


Ol. What! who is that that disturbeth us?


Genius. I am thy Son Richard's Genius, that come to tell thee, That he is
Reduced to a private Capacity, and the Long-Parliament has again Reassumed
their Authority, and he is little better then a prisoner; He cannot stir our
of doors either to Hawk or Hunt, for fear of Common Varlets and Sergeants;
There Is one that intends to have him by the back for money for thy Wax Nose
that belongs to thy Effigies; another for this; and others for that.


Ol. What strange fate turns the Wheel of the English affairs!


King. Ha, ha, ha! Is it come to your own door, Sir? Well, certainly they will,
like David, give thy sons to the Gibeonites, to be hung a Sun-drying, for all
the Indignities thou have done them?


Ol. It Is strange! I ventured Body and Soul to get three Dominions, to leave
him Lord of, and he would not sell his to keep them; he is not to be pitied. --
To our former discourse; I then called together a parcel of Gentlemen from
Goatam, and other parts of the Nation, which were the Tinder-box, Lambskin, or
Small-coal Parliament I mentioned before. I made a show of Devolving the power
upon them; made use of them to raise money, and do some other Jobbs of
Journeywork. Then I procured one half to dissolve the other: Afterward, I
designed War with Spain, for several Reasons; one was, to keep the Active
spirits in the Army employed; and to waste them there, whom I desired to be rid
of here. Another was, That a War with Spain would be least Hurtful to me,
though it was the most hurtful to the People of England; It would Impoverish
them, and reduce the more of the needy sort of People to a Necessity of taking
up of Arms to serve me, and render the other to be less Hurtful: But it so fell
out, that the Design came off with ill successes; My great preparations were
Expensive, and drove me to Necessities: I was forced to Invent some Plots, and
I employed some of my cunning Gamesters, which drew in many of your party
several times; them I sequ^stred, which served me to stop many Gaps. I
repaired so often to that kind of practice, that every one suspected the
secrecy; the last of which I intended to be put in Execution a little in Doctor
Hewytt's Plott, to the lighting of some Fires in the City, by the Heat of which
I thought to have Illuminated the City and Nation with a belief of the Truth
and Reality thereof, it being much like unto what our Brother Nero did at Rome;
but I feared it might have gone too far out of my Reach, and the Effect might
have been dangerous to my Person and Estate: therefore, forasmuch as they would
not believe it, without some dyed, I gently sprinkled the City with the Blood
of that Malignant Doctor, and some other silly Souls; by which means I came off
believed by most, though suspected by the Ingenious.


King. Oh horrid Villainy? But why should I much wonder? since if it be well
considered, other than this, and much worse, could never be expected from thee.
We^l, go on.


Ol. Stay there, Sir! I have discovered enough at once; yet if you had not
Interrupted me, I should at this time have Imparted more; but we will forbear
until another time; But it does trouble me much to think, how that That
Parliament should be again upon the Stage: I fear me now, neither your
posterity nor mine shall ever attain the Supremacy: they will secure the Arms
of the Nation from falling into the hands of one person. I have done them some
good, in teaching them that Lesson. Next time we meet, we shall discourse of
these things farther.


King. Let it be so.


FINIS.

