A CONFERENCE OF Some Christians in Church Fellowship, about the way of Christ
with His people, and the Result therefrom.

This serves only by way of Introduction to take off the Reproaches, that are
cast upon Pastor and people, whose earnest care and Endeavor is to walk with
a right foot in that Holy way.

Which is held forth here by the light of the sacred Scripture, as it appears
unto them, and how Curious and Circumspect their walk should be, who pretend
to it, and to walk therein.

The scandalls in and against the way are removed as they could be.

For our selves Brethren, our Conscience suffices, but for you our Name also
had need to be precious, and honorable; for we would have our words savor
sweetly with you, then so must our name also. Augustine. Stand in the ways,
and see, and ask for the old paths, which is the good way, and walk therein,
and ye shall find rest for your souls; But they said, we will not walk
therein. Jer. 6. 16. He that does Truth comes to the Light that his deeds may
be made manifest that they are wrought in God, Joh: 3. 21. LONDON; Printed
according to Order for Henry Cripps, in Popes-head-Alley. 1656.

A RESVLT Of a Serious Debate first with our selves alone and apart, seeking
God in these matters; to Whom Interpretations do belong. Then altogether
taking our Pastor with us to seeke-out the truth of the matters in order to a
clear resolution to those four Questions, before specified in the Epistle to
the Reverend Ministers, proposed to us by a reverend and godly Minister,
requiring a Reason from us of our way and practice therein.
The Introduction, Shows in the Entrance into it, and close of it, the
occasion and scope of this Conference; It serves also to vindicate our Pastor
from the Reproaches of wicked men, and jealousies of the Godly against him. And
to justify the Truth of the way, and of our walk therein to be according to
the mind of God expressed in His Word; our desire also and endeavor to walk
therein in all pleasing before Him.

SECT. I.
Honorable;
FOr so you are, if you are precious in our Lords eyes; You were pleased to
stoop very low, and so an humble person can do; and yet lower if need be, when
you turned in to me, less indeed, then the least of all Saints, which, is as
little as can be; And yet I hope, as I pray, not less in any ones eye, than I
am in my own. But whatever I am, by the grace of God I am what I am. Now to the
business you were pleased to propose to me, and require resolution from me
thereunto. These, to my best remembrance, you called Circumstantials only,
matters of fact, rather than of faith, of an inferior nature and degree, which
may be done or left undone, and yet therein walking up to our light, the
Command of God is not broken, nor the bond of love with men: And yet to speak
a word to this in passage only, I humbly conceive even in these matters
decency and order must be observed, and if we look our work should find
acceptance with the Lord, it must be done in faith also; for howsoever the
work be, we suppose it relates to God, and his service, and but a
Circumstance about the work, rather than of the nature, essence, or substance
of the same, yet all this falls under a command, and failing herein, our
worship is marred, being not performed after the due order: We may say of
Circumstances as of Relatives, these have the least entitie, but they have the
greatest efficacy.
Circumstances carry much in our matters with men, much more in war, they
carry all with God, these make all or mar all; these overthrow our actions,
if they be not rightly and duly observed; For the Lord stands as much upon
Circumstances, as he does upon duties. He will have them done, and well done,
after the due manner, and order, by himself prescribed, or else as well
undone; because the same Lord, that commanded the matter, commanded also the
manner of our service; indeed the manner is all. But to let this pass for the
present.

The things you charged upon me to give you an account of, as to my faith
therein and practice about them, were to my thinking, Lord howsoever in common
account, and thoughts of others, highly relating to the glory of God, the
beauty of his holiness, the peace and welfare of his people, such like or the
same with these, mentioned in the title page, and in the Epistle to the Rev:
Ministers.

SECT. II.
TO these things you desired me, yea you charged me to give you my opinion;
and if in the Negative, then to give you the reason of my Contrary Judgment
unto yours; I took this at the first hearing, and so do still, to be, a
matter too high for me; and indeed, at that present was minded, how ever you
charged me, not to meddle in it; least, as was said of one, you know by whom,
A good cause should have a weak Defendant: Yet upon after-thoughts, and taking
Counsel with God, upon whom the Creature depends every moment for his being,
and for all his good he has; and quickly after communing with my brethren, in
Fellowship with me, about it, as I believe your intent, and I am assured my
duty was to do; and taking our Minister with us, and seeking to God again
altogether, we resolved by the help of his grace, to endeavor to give you an
account of our matters, according to your demands; and, as our God should be
pleased to give in to us, to give forth to you, keeping all along as close to
Him, and His Word, as possibly, through the supply of His grace, we can; So
you see now what is done, and we are full of hope, since it was our full desire
and endeavor, you will find our words so ordered all along, how weakly
soever, and our matters so disposed in the strength of his grace, which we
have sought for, as that you will conclude of us, That we are as unwilling to
give any offense to your worthy self, or any other of your brethren in office
with you, as much honored by us as well you can think, as we would be to
offend the Apple of our Eye; and rather break our own bones, then be a
means, or just occasion to break the peace of the Church, or of any good man
there: so you will not account the whole Nation with every Parish a Church; and
the rich man, the good man, and best amongst them there: If these or any one of
these are pleased, God is infinitely displeased. We seek not to please men, but
God. And pleasing Him, we cannot think we can displease any good man. The
words we read, Caent: 2. 7. together with the Note on the side, we observed
thereupon, was very pressing upon us; I charge you by the roes and by the
hindes of the field, that ye stirre-not-up nor awaken my Love until she
please. The Note upon the side is (we doubt not but Interpretors give other
Notes upon it; but this is for our use) Christ charge them, who have to do
in the Church, as it were by a solemn Oath, that they trouble not the
quietness thereof. And this we thought fit to put as in the front and
beginning of our business.

SECT. III.
WE have yet before we come to our maine work, further matters to Preface
before-you by way of Apology for our Pastor (such he is to us, what ever he
is to others) and for our most unworthy selves. And surely this is lawful to
be done, and more than expedient, it is necessary we should do it. The glory
of God and the Gospel of His glory, and the good of his poor people. All
this and more then all is concerned in it. A Name says the Wise, he means a
good name, a precious name, for an ill name has an ill savor, the Good do,
as we may say, stop their noses at it, not like the name of the wicked, but
the very same, which rots above ground: A good name then is rather to be chosen
then great Riches: and a very sweet thing it is, and better then precious
ointment; And being such it deserves to be kept so; and, what possible, to be
kept as we do our choycest things, in sweets, all the year long. Now in doing
this we shall not sweat to rescue his name from off the tongues of wicked men,
who speaking good of evil, cannot possibly, but speak evil of good. You know
better than we, what a good man said (in common repute in those days) hearing
a bad man commend him, What evil have I done, said he; It is possible, nay it
was almost ordinary when time was, to hear the Devil himself and his nearest
and dearest servants speaking excellent things of the Lords excellent servants,
as of their Lord and Master himself sometimes: But then the Devil has a
design, so have his servants also. O it is a foul disgrace to the Good to
hear the wicked speak good of them. You remember that old preacher Bernard
coming out of the pulpit and through the throng had the general applause of
the people (and generally they are stark rotten, and stinking as is the
Carrion that lies in the ditch, The good man went home weeping, and up to his
closet pitifully mourning before his God; Lord, said he, I have pleased the
people to day and my self, which assures me, I have displeased Thee my God;
whereas I should rather displease the whole world then Thee my God; so up to
the pulpit again the very next day, having scarce slept the night before,
remembering the applause of the people, etc. For you know what follows; It is
as good a sign of a good Minister as we can readily think of; Wicked men
reproaching him, will not come at him; belch-out their spewing upon him, do
all they can against him, to thrust him away. A good man sure, and some good is
done; The Devil is pinched; his servants rage; Now Gods work goeson; The
Gospel is on the thriving hand; It never gains more than by opposition from
the flesh within, and the wicked without, contradicting and blaspheming: That
is excellent sure the very wisdom of God and power of God unto salvation,
which the damned world with the rulers of the darkness there, do so mightily
oppse, contradict and blaspheme: so now we are careless what the wicked say
of our Minister, or of us, how can they speak well, that are accustomed to do
ill? and make it their work all the day long, to take away the righteousness
of the righteous from him; Let them go on; their night is coming, when they
shall receive according to their measures, pressed down, running over (O that
they could consider!) It fares well with the Gospel and all true Gospellers:
what care we though we suffer a little: The Truth and the Church cannot be
crushed no more then a Rooke can, says our second Rainolds: And since it is so,
we cannot be harmed.

But now, though we are as careless as can be what the wicked say or what
they do, for they do but after their kind as thorns and briars and
Scorpions use to do. Yet do we much regard what the godly-wise (amongst these
we reckon your self) may think speak or do, in reference to him or them,
who may deservedly be numbered with your selves, and accounted as they may have
approoved themselves, godly and wise also, for thus the case may be, and it is,
as we have cause to say, an ordinary case: Godly and wise men may entertain
prejudices and jealousies against those, yea and take-up a report against them,
and too readily all this, and as groundlesly, especially where there is not so
sweet an accord in point of judgment and practice betwixt them, as were to be
wished; and so it falls out too often, that where there is no closing in opinion
(we will call it but so) there is as little closing in affection with those of
a different opinion, and possibly must be so. And now let a report come, it is
to the defaming of him or them, that differ from me in judgment, I examine
not the report or reporter, but, being to the desaming of him that is not of
the same mind with me, how welcome is the report, and the reporter! the
defamer and the defamation! Let nature speak here for grace will be silent. And
now, Dear Sir, we take leave to be more particular in these matters, being, as
we hinted hefore, of that high concernment, that we may vindicate our
Minister as we can, and put in a Caveat against that, which is so common we
would we could not say among the godly, rash judging and censuring before the
time, when matters should be well sifted first, the party or parties heard,
what they can say for themselves. O it is good to hear all before we judge
any thing at all, else we may do as preposterously as they did, who, as you
find it written, hanged a man in the forenoone, and enquired into his crime in
the afternoon, whence Lidford law: and so we, and worse, if so we do, for
judging the man before we have heard him, or how true that is, which is spoken
of him, we may judge him, whom God accepts; and in that which God allows,
and commands; yet we lay a blot upon his name which haerebit will stick do
we what we can; And taint a man once in the opinion of the world, and he lies
open to any usage; And so we come to speak for him, who has spoken to God so
much for us; and from God so much to us; that thereby we may undeceive your
self, and then we shall with the same Labor undeceive others to the half of
our parish and more, for you are the lazying or leading man, the You have heard
it objected against him, nay if it be not your own objection, yet it is your
jealousy, Godly we would call it, for so you have expressed your self once
and again, That whereas he should deal in substantial and fundamental
truths amongst his people, he troubles them with matters of an inferior
nature, which might be forborne rather than spoken, and might wait their season
serving only at present but to engender strife, and doubtful disputation, not
tending at all to edification.

To this we answer according to our knowledge, calling God to record upon our
souls, as to the truth of that we say, and we do appeal to the consciences
of every person that has an eye heavenward, and applied to him the ear, and
is not a right Gallio, that cares for none of those things, whether he or they
have ordinarily heard in our Country villages (for we hate comparisons) more
pertinent texts chosen; more fully and with life followed, more feelingly
pressed, and all impertinences avoided, as if it had been in the man's heart
(and surely there it is for God put it there) to endeavor his utmost to
declare unto us all the counsel of God, and so to keep back nothing that was
prositable to us. And this little is as much as we will say to that urged
against him, his not insisting upon substantials; which yet had been in our
judgments, too much, had it not, as that also which follows, been forced,
and, as we may say, sqeesed from us; for Pudet hac oprobria nobis Et dici
potuisse and non potuisse refelli.

Whereas it is further said, That he deals in matters that engender Bubo is a
Nightingale, to use our Jewel's words. He deal in matters ingendring strife!
If we can possibly understand the Genius of the Man, he abhors it with his
heart. We cannot forget the time, when your neighbour-Ministers, Learned and
Godly indulged two days to those horrid enemies and adversaries to Gods free
grace through Christ, (which they make nature making it as common as nature,)
and advancers of free will, that does more in order to the workingout our
Salvation, then the supply of grace does; and so Dunghill-man is set in a
Throne, and the Lord of Glory (we should tremble to speak it, as you to hear
it) on a Dunghill that so these men of the earth might have advantage ground
of Him, and call him, as some have don, satis pro imperio, to give an account
of His matters: We were saying, These proud men had two days for hearing what
they could say, and so honored they were by these Godly Ministers, to dispute
it with them. We remember withal we found our Ministers spirit not a little
stirred at this, knowing as he said, That Truth would have no Glory by that
Mouth-disputation; for that these enemies having espoused themselves to these
errors, will stand like the bound-stone, which you know had this Motto, Cedo
nulli. And besides they have a marvelous advantage against all good men, and
the greater, the better and wiser they are, in the carrying on a dispute with
their tongues: for the Godly Learned and wise, have Faith and a good
Conscience, whereof they are as tender as of their eye; they are civil and
modest withal, and cannot but deal as becomes Godliness. But these enemies
have made Shipwreck of all -- And you know what follows: Now this we must not
forget neither, That our Minister observing all this, for he was present one
day, and what a Concourse of people there were and some of his own charge,
presently after his return, he chose these Scriptures which we think it our
duty to set down, thereon to treat three or four Lords days, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
Secret etc. Psalm. 25. verse: 4. The secret of etc. John 17. 6. I have. These
Scriptures by divine assistance he so handled, That they whom God had
instructed to discretion might clearly see, That Lambs may wade over those
Depths where Elephants must drown; He deal in matters tending to make strife
or cause doubtful disputation! No, he deals not in matters too high for him,
and declines those, as a Serpent in his way, that may cause strife; therefore
we will say to this Cujus contrarium verum est.

Only we must appeal to your self, before we leave this matter; have not
you said more then once and lately twice in one day and before others, which
caused all this, That you have been urging him these three years almost, to
dispute with you, or to give you in vvriting the reasons of his judgment and
practice as to the matters of his God, and Discharge of his place, and yet you
could not gain so much at his hands: which tells you plainly, what naturally
he declines, and what mainely becomes him as every good Man to do, by
doctrine to clear his practice; and by practice to adorn his Doctrine; as
grace may advance gifts, and gifts beautify grace, this to his power he has
done as one that studyes to be quiet, and to live-up to the Truth, rather then
to dispute it; for being clearly known to him, through Grace, to be the Truth
as it is in Jesus, Disputation is but the Calling it into question, which is a
debasing of it, as to mix Gold with Copper. Therefore till needs must he did
forbear; Therefore Sir, take your self for one witness in this matter, and
you are instar omnium, and believe not what others say, who care not much what
they say, That he intends not so much Edification, as to promote doubtful
disputation; we say it again, and we say it clearly, It is a forged
Cavillation, and a most false accusation, for he accounts it more then a fault,
a Crime so to do.

But we desire not you should trust to what we say; we will take leave to
proceed and make good what we say, holding it not impertinent to the matters in
debate betwixt us; for, hinc illa lathryma, the very rise of all these
clamours, Nec ad-huc finitus Orestes scriptus and a tergo, Good Ministers know
full well what an evil people (such we are all in the state of nature) will
require of them, Give out the Sacraments to them and hold-in the word, and they
are satisfied; This he observed full well but took no notice; did as we have
heard a good Minister should do; hold on his course (Chrysostomes words) as
the Moon in her Orb, wholly careless of, and neglecting the barkings and
clamourings here below; and pressed all along substantial Truths, thereby to
drive us out of our selves, and up to God; But when they would take no way, but
the Sacraments they must have; he opened unto us the Doctrine of both the
Sacraments; of Baptism, from Math: 28. 18, 19. Rom: 2. 28, 29. Gal: 3. 27.
Col: 2. 11, 12. Of the Lords Supper, from 1 Cor: 10. 16. Matthew: 26. 26. Mark.
14. 22, 23. Joh: 6. 50, 51, etc. 63. 1 Cor: 11. 26. Surely it tends to our
scope, thus to set them down, whence matters were so handled, and with that
clearenesse of Evidence, Who were to be admitted to the Table of the Lord, and
who not; that some were taken off from their eager pursuit that way; And
others, the most, having nothing else left them, went on after their manner,
Contradicting and blaspheming. Now, which must be added, though we need not
tell you what was done in this place before, (for indeed we spare you,
because we revereuce you) yet it is known all the Country over, what is done
in those matters within a Mile and less from this place, where the Sacraments
are given to him, and them, who are as ignorant as Ignorance it self, as
rebellious as Rebellion it self -- Et illud quod dicere nolo. Now then that
Ministers practice, is so contrary to the light shining forth from the
Scriptures forementioned, after which, through Grace, our Minister orders every
step of his way; as that his way is as contrary to that man's way (for we
delight not to call him a Minister) as light is to darkness, Christ to
Beliall, the Temple of God to Idols; Then what agreement betwixt these two,
who stand as opposite, as to their judgment, at least to their practice (for
possible, video meliora) as do the two Poles, North and South. Therefore it is
strange to us to hear it said by you from him, and we believe you, That our
Minister returns from him very well satisfied. It was answered before; be
pleased to take this more; That our Minister can no more come down to his
practice, then a Mountain can come down and throw it self into the Sea, or
the two Poles meet.

We proceed to another thing which, as is said, does but cause

He observed, as who does not, the Lords day presumptuously slighted, and
profaned, and Christmas Day highly honored; now to show the iniquity of this,
he preached up the one, and almost with the same breath he cast down the
other. Be pleased to take his Scriptures here also, Gen: 2. 2. Exodus 20. 8.
Isa. 58. 13. and to lay his Batteryes against the other Idol-day, he chose
these Scriptures, Ioh: 4. 22. Gal: 4. 9, 10, 11, 12. This will fall to be one
chief part of our work anon, and so we leave it; Only the reproaches cast
upon him for. this his Faithfulness tohis Lord, puts us in mind of what we
have heard, That there was a good man accused for preaching a seditious Sermon,
as was suggested, but proof failing, and not a word thorough the whole Sermon
giving the least evidence thereto, The accuser spoke openly and as impudently,
If the Sermon was not, then the Text was seditious.

And the same is urged against him opening the Lords Prayer, tantum non
compelled thereunto, so unwilling, sometimes, a man may be to do his duty, yet
being pressed to give his reasons for his not using of it, as others do, he
set upon it, and not rushing on it but after he had delivered the doctrine of
Faith in a Catechisticall way from several Scriptures, taking them much
afterthe order, as they are in that, we commonly call, the Creed. And truly he
gave such reasons why he says not that prayer at the end of his; and why
aGodly Minister should not so do; nor a godly man take it into his Closet,
where he is seeking the face of his God, as that we are fully satisfied
thereby, that so it ought not to be said as commonly and cursorily it uses to
be; And withal, he gave us such reasons why a wicked man ought not to say that
prayer at all, that we have concluded ever since we heard them, That a wicked
man has no more to do with the Lords Prayer, then he has with the blessed
Cup and body at the Lords Table; The one is as uncomely for his unclean lips,
as is the other for his filthy hands. But this will be the work of the fourth
Section.

Now if it be asked by the way what is all this to the preaching Christ
Crucified, the preachers Text, and so he opens the whole Counsel of God? To
this we shall humbly reply, much every way: It is true nothing but Christ is
to be preached unto Men as an object of their Faith, or as our learned Rainolds
and holy Sibbes says, a necessary Element of Salvation; Nothing but Christ
Jesus the Lord is the sum and Center of all divine revealed Truth: But there
are other matters, which are to be preached, being reductive to Christ, and
which meet in him. And whether those things forementioned, 1. Relating to
Admission to the Sacraments. 2. To His only holy day; and 3. To His prayer,
are not reductive to Christ, and meet in him, is left to the Judgment of the
Godly-wise. Thus far as duty bind; us -- more there is, but it is left to
the Closet. He, as every good Man, in matters of this Nature, appeals to Gods
judgment, and to that we must stand, and we shall do well to mind those
Scriptures well, we read Rom: 14. 4. and 10. Who art thou etc. and why do
thou etc.

And so much for our Minister to vindicate him And give us running thereof
amongst us, as have the Differences betwixt you two, The nearer the conjunction
should be, the more dangerous the discord is; we may allude to it; for the
Divisions betwixt you, there are great thoughts of heart, amongst those that
seem godly, we hope they more then seem: Now whence the rise of these? or
what has caused them? The Lord be Judge, and help you to judge your self
about it. He does not do as to sacred administrations, as you did, why should
this Cause a Difference? You walked according to your light, so does he
according to his light; He cannot do as you did, the word of his God, to his
seeming, standing like the Angel with a sword in his way, and speaking aloud
unto him, if thou go that broad way I Will slay thee; Why should this make a
difference? Would you have him rush upon the drawn sword? God forbid. But you
have said he makes shrewde reflections upon you and your way: who can help
that? But if so, which yet he knows not of further then thus; The truth is
Judex sui and obliqui, he has done it most unwillingly: And you have it but by
hearsay neither, and that is commonly a loud liar; and you must consider
your insormers, whether enemies or friends to the Gospel? We never heard you
charge him but with that, we humbly conceive, you should have Commended him
for: we must take leave to set it down, because that brought him upon the
stage, where he at this time stands covered-over with as much filth as unclean
Mouths, most nasty and filthy hands, and some pretty clean too in comparison,
can possibly cast upon him. You must remember what you cannot forget, nor we
neither, the Town and Country taking notice of it, so visible it was, being
not done in a corner, when he preached first your Lecture at the Chapel near
him, we thought, and think so still part of his charge, Not to mention the
affronts against him at that time before he came to the Pulpit. His text you
know was, Hos: 12. 10. I have also spoken by the Prophets, -- having cleared
the known Doctrine of the text, and grounded it, and coming to make
Application of it, A Consectary two or three he pressed first; and this for
one, That the Minister of Christ, being the Mouth of Christ, and standing in
his stead, must speak and do in the matters of Christ, as the Lord Christ
would speak and do, if he were here upon Earth. You know and we know, he
spent but few Minutes upon this, indeed he spoke feelingly (as one that felt
the weight of his charge) and smartly, and was there not a cause? being in his
own place, and knowing full well the horrid doings there? Sir, we make bold
to tell you, and in as much love as you can conceive is due to you from us; had
your force been right, and your way good, and not complying too much with the
Ministers way of that Chapel. You had commended our Minister, given him the
right hand of fellowship, and taken him at that time into your bosom. But what
agreement? when your ways lie so cross (which will appear, we conceive,
through-out the following discourses) to the way of Holiness, you and we are
charged to walke-in. Till you shall take this into your thoughts, and muse upon
it, things will be, as they are, carried on headlong to the great dishonor of
God, reproach of His Word, and scandal of His people, as we suppose: for the
close of this, in much love we entreat you to examine what an affront was put
upon the Word, when at your earnest request our Pastor took a turn in that
Lecture, you know when and where, examine we pray you, what the man did you
commonly call the Clerk, but might as truly call a Beast, If he turn his
back upon the Word, as he more than seemed so to do then, going forth of the
place, as others did, at the time when the said Minister went up into the
pulpit. And upon your examination of the matter, we know what is your duty to
do, if you will do it. For Sir (it is our persuasion) did your Brethren, whom
we honor, we think, as much as you do, understand well and thoroughly how
matters are carried there, how unbecoming the Gospel, and cross to the
prosperity of the same, they would have things corrected, or they would not, we
think they should not, unless they be of your persuasion, take their turn
there. Look to it, Sir, and be persuaded, that for the Glory of God and our
Dear Savior, and that His Gospel may run and be glorified, and that you may
correct what is amiss, and have peace at the Last, have we spoke hitherto, and
shall speak, for, God forbid, we should be silent in such matters as these,
being called upon to speak and give our opinion.

SECT. IV.
IN the next place we come to speak a little for our selves, our matters so
requiring, yea constraining; for we are as unwilling to do it as you can
think us, in some respects; but, in some other, most willing. We are, Sir,
and you know it, and we bless God from our hearts, He has made us know it
too, most unworthy ones. Truly Sir, our inward thoughts are (all thoughts are
inward, but these are closest unto us, and most fixed there) that we are such
unworthy ones, in and of our selves confidered, that we cannot think we have
thought our selves low enough, till we have thought our selves to nothing, yea
worse than nothing, as in our selves still; and if such nothings now, now that
He has pleased to reveal His Son in us, to pluck us out of our blood, to
wash us thoroughly, and so to sloud it away, looking upon us and accepting of us
in Him, in Whom to be accepted is our Labor, our ambition, the topp of our
glory, and crown of rejoicing; we were saying, If such Nothings now, what were
we then, when we lay-in Evil, like a Carrion in the Ditch, but more corrupted
and corrupting: being under the power of a lust within, and that wicked one
without; What were we then better than others? Children of wrath so soon as we
were the Children of men. And had not Grace withheld us, and an All-mighty-Hand
raighned us-in, we had been as mad with rage against the Saints, and stood as
cross to their way of Holiness, as once Paul was, before he came to his right
mind; And in every mire of sin, we could have reached unto, we had wallowed
with great delight, as a swine does, and as they now do, who lie with the
world in wickedness, for thitherto our will hurried-us, driving us as fast
from God, as does the most impetuous stream run from its fountain. And all
this while (pertaking, by privilege of our Infant Baptism, of all Gospel
Communions) we should have thought our condition unquestionably blessed, taking
Sanctuary under the shadow of a Church, whose height, like that Tree, reaches
unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the Earth. But He, from
Whom we were running, by His Spirit in His Word laid-hold-on us, and so being
merciful to us, delivered us out of our own hands, and from our selves, as Lot
out of Sodom (the greatest Enemies to our souls we know in the world, the God
or Spirit of the world not excepted) and gave us an and gave us an hand of
faith, whereby we laid hold on Him; And now He will hold us fast, and give us
power to hold Him, and to walk in all pleasing before Him. And now, what
shall we say? Even so Father, because it pleased Thee; Who at first spoke light
out of Darkness, and caused it to shine into our hearts, even the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. The thoughts of this
coming strongly upon us at the time when we were seeking His face, engaged
us, being so pressed unto it from without, to give an account of the Truth of
the way, our walk and practice in it. And so having believed, we shall speak.
This then was the prime and chief prevailing motive to make further enquiry
into these things, and to give our experiences about them, as we are persuaded
duty binds us, and our engagement is to do, for

If these things be so, as even now we have spoken; and the Lord God has laid
His hand upon us, and by His Finger His Holy Spirit, written the Law of our
Relation upon our hearts, as He Upon Gal. 2. 20. page 36.
stands to us, and we to Him in Jesus Christ [we borrow this expression from
that Man of God M Bridge, who to us, spoke much in that little; and surely it
contains much, and we have made, through Grace, much of it, as may appear
throughout our seventh and last Section) Not doubting but whosoever shall
enquire at that Law of Relation, what is to be done, as to Church.
Administrations, shall have full resolution therefrom, and so end the matter:
Therefore here we shall be very brief, making mention of it only in Reference
to our selves, our way, and walk, and this we were saying] If the Lord has
don thus with us, as having believed, we have spoken, then we humbly conceive
these things must follow.

1. We must follow the Lord fully, as dear children, by the guidance of the
Holy Spirit of Faith and Adoption, which the Sons of God have, another from
that of the world, which rules in the darkness thereof. We must walk by rule,
even as He walked. 1 John 2. 6. If children of the light we walk in the light,
even as He is in the light, 1 John 1. 7. Else (1) we should clean cross the
end of our Election, chosen in Him that we should be Holy, and without Blame
before Him in Love, Ephesians: 1. 4. And (2) we should else cross the end of our
Calling; As He who has called you is holy, so be ye Holy in all manner of
Conversation, 1 Pet: 1 15. 2. 9. And (3) we should else cross the end of Gods
Discovering to us His Gospel and way of Holiness, It was that we should walk
thereafter, having a Conversation as becomes, Phil: 1. 27. least our unholy
practice should give our holy profession the lie -- but we hasten.

2. If we can say, Truly our fellowship is with ths Father, and with His Son
Jesus Christ, 1 John: 1. 3. Assuredly then we can not but seek after, and bend
toward a Communion and fellow ship one with another, that we may watch over
each other; help to bear each others burden; supply each others wants;
partake of each others Graces; do all things as becomes a Communion of
Saints on earch (which is says that Learned Man, Upon Job 16. page 25 4.
the Lower heaven of the Saints) serving each other in Love; For thus we have
concluded, That as it is with lines in a Circumserence, the nearer to their
Center, the nearer one to another; So nearness to Christ cannot possibly
consist with a strangeresse or distance one from another, for we are members
one of another.

3. If, as He is so are we in this world, 1 John: 4. 17. That is, as we have
heard it expounded: If we have His image in us, and stamped upon us, if His
Love be shed abroad in our hearts; If He be in us by His Blessed Spirit; we in
Him by our faith; If he dwell in us, and walk in us, 2 Cor: 6. 16. Then ought
we to walk even as He walked, which was said before: But from hence we humbly
conceive these two things will follow.

1. We must come out from among them, and be separate from the world so far
as is possible, and not go out of the world, 1 Cor: 5. 10. in all times and
places, specially at the Lords Table; for so says the Lord, Be ye separate and
touch not the unclean thing, if ye expect that I should receive you, and be a
Father unto you, and ye Sons and Daughters unto Me, 2 Cor: 6. 17. Surely they
that walk with God as friends, cannot walk with the world, be companions with
the men thereof upon choice, their affairs not requiring, and when they
plainly see, they can give no good unto them. But if they could have the least
hope, they could by conversing with them, communicate good unto them, they
would most willingly do it; yet then not as companions with them, but
Physicians to them; for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? what Communion has light with darkness? and what concord
has Christ with Beliall? And

2. We must meet often in some place, besides the common meeting place, else
how can we speak often one to another? so making full proof that we fear the
Lord, Mal: 3. 16. Surely it is clear from that place, That that was the manner
and practice of the Saints of old. And M. Rogers in his fifth Treatise page: 109.
gives us a famous Instance of some brethren with their Pastor that met
together in the year 1588. privately in one house, there to complain to each
other of their sins and wants; and to find out the remedies against the
same. That holy man in the same place, gives us to know the good of that
Conference, which he brancheth forth into many perticulars, if we well
remember, but we find them contracted into three.

1. This meeting was a great whetting-on to them to frequent the public
Ministry more carefully, and fruitfully afterward.

2. These two kinds of meetings, publicly in the Church and privately in their
houses thus carried, did knit them together in that bond of brotherly love,
which, during life, could never be broken.

3. It was a means to make them have Christian conference and godly communion
in greater account.

We will take leave to add hereunto that holy Man's words, Mr. Tilling:
Serman, p 200.
now with Him, whose he was, and whom he served. The reason why there is so
little of the Spirit given forth, though it be the great New Testament promise,
is this, Because Saints are no more in assembling together. Saints are not
found, as they should be, in their work of Assembling together; When the Lord
Christ gave His Spirit to His Apostles immediately at His Resurrection, it was
when they were assembled together, Joh: 20. 19. 22. When the Disciples were
assembled together He breathed on them, and said unto them, receive the Holy
Ghost. And so we read in the 2 Acts; where we have the more full giving-forth
of the Spirit, It was when the Saints were assembled togetehr, when they were
all with one accord in one place; He might have given it to them one by one,
when they were alone: But our Dear Lord chooses to give-forth the Spirit,
when they were Assembled together: To assure us how much He loves the
Assemblies of the Saints; He will not give to every one in a corner alone, but
when assembled together: So that if Saints neglect their meeting together,
there may be little enjoyment of the Spirit, though it be the great promise of
the New Testament Administration.

There is much more to be said for this meeting together of the Saints, and
there is much said against it, we shall refer both this and that to another
place, the last Section.

2. We proceed to remove an offense taken against us, we say taken, for God
knows, we know not when and wherein any was given. Thus it is suggested, That
we are regardlesse of others, who walk not in fellowship with us. Much more is
said, but we shall hear more of it in another place; This we will say here
first.

1. That no good man can be regardlesse of another how bad soever; nay the
worse he is, the more regard a good man has unto him, so as he could take such
an one into his bosom, so be thereby he could make him better. 2. We profess
from our hearts, now that wisdom has entred-in thither, and knowledge is
pleasant to our soul. That we cannot but love all we have the least hope, do
love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, observing their orderly walk according to
the rule of the Word and Commands of the Gospel, under what forms or Notions
soever they be; that is little or nothing to us, they love the Lord in
sincerity, and that is motive enough, and bond strong enough upon us to love
them. That Christ has received us, prevails much to receive one another.
Though yet we confess, we cannot but invite others to come-in and join with
us, (we know He is the Lord, that persuades to come-in and adds to the Church)
but we say, we cannot but invite others to come-in to us, and walk along with
us; Assuring them that they shall find the same that we do, That all the
ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

3. And yet, That they may not be too hasty, and so rather stumble into the
way, than take into it upon choice, we do advise them to sit down first and
count their cost: Assuring them from as sure a word as the Heaven and Earth
have for their continuing, that they must come off from their own way, a way
of sin and death, and cast a spewing upon it, that they may no more return
unto it, than they would to their vomit to take it up again, before they can
enter this way to walk in it as becomes with a right foot, in all pleasing,
as before Him, Who has called us out of darkness into His marvailous light:
We tell them moreover, least they, finding themselves mistaken, should return
back to their Egypt of sin and Darkness, That though it be as pleasant a
way as pleasantness it self, yet, so says the Spirit, renewed, not, so says
the flesh; for not one stepp scarce is taken therein, but it goes to the heart
of flesh and blood. And truly to take it in passage, hereby we conclude the
truth of our way; That it is the way of holiness, which is a torment to flesh,
not mortified, as flesh is a torment to it. And so we say farther to him or
her, that bears any liking to this way, and makes some offers toward it (we
give all encouragement that can be (for who dares despise the day of small
things, the least motions or breathings heavenward how welcome!) yet we say
further, and it is good to tell them the worst with the best; That they never
found what a rebel flesh was till now; nor a busy Devil till now; nor what
persecution is till now; which if they meet not with from without (and that
were a wonder, Odium genius evangehj. hatred is the companion and very genius
of the Gospel. 2 Timothy 3. 12.
Hell-gates standing wide open against them night and day) yet certainly they
shall meet with from within; for so says the Spirit by the Ministry thereof,
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; and we have
our Masters word for it, In the world ye shall have tribulation; which word
though, has not the least power or efficacy in it self, but only as it is
managed in the hand of Satan, to turn Men from God; And yet the Lord Christ
has not let that go free without its deadly wound, but bids his followers be
of good comfort, for He has overcome the world, that is, for them and in their
stead; so that it should never be used nor heightened in its enmity to a total
and final conquest over them; these are the words of that Godly and learned
Man Dr O wen: But this is the Saints persev: p. 170.
point which we would drive-on like a nail to the head, and press upon our
selves and others, Circumspect walking, self-denial every day, yea every
hour in the day, looking off from all that is flesh, and up to Him who is the
Alpha, and will be the Omega, the Author and finisher of our faith.

4. And now that God has thus persuaded with us by his Spirit and Word, we
do after the manner of his people in all ages, (which was hinted before) who
feared their God, spoke often one Mal. 3. 16.
unto another; and we feel the comfort of it; And blame our selves most for
not doing it sooner; but blessed be God we do it now, and that he has given
us such a Pastor, who desires to know the state of his flock, that they may
be made meet in Gods time to give him the meeting at his Table; Truly we
blessed God for this day and night, and some of us for this great mercy, that
we never were at the Lords Table, for had we taken the invitation being
sixteen years of age, as multitudes did do, we had done we know not what,
as others did, and our Minister at that time had given it to He knew not whom:
For how could the Minister possibly know our state, who never, to our
remembrance, met with us, but at a merry-meeting, or the day before we were to
meet at the Lords Table, and then he that gave us the Question made us the
Answer -- We pass over this, and through the strength of grace, pass on in
this way, assembling of our selves together, as our Callings will give leave,
for the mutual edification each of other, and we doubt not but ere long all
the Ministers of the Lord, that are truly godly, what ever they do at present,
walking according to their light, will draw-on their people this way; and be
as often with them in private, as in the public place; minding with all their
hearts the danger of the neglect thereof, either in Minister, or in people;
where the Apostle lays that rise of that soul-damning-sinne of wilful
Apostasy in the neglect of this, Heb. 10 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of
our selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, etc.
For if we sin wilfully, verse 26.

5. We have now given you at your request some account of our way; we shall
point you now in passage, what lets and rubs we find in the way (it were not
else the way of Holiness, for the broad way meets with none.) And the way we
take thorough grace to pass over them, with much cheer and comfort in our
spirits being resolved upon the way, and assured what we must meet with
walking therein.

1. It is a way much reproached (we like it so much the better for that) That
old liar and Murderer with his servants are still casting a flood upon it,
which they will never do upon their own way of sin and death, yet that is
one let and a great rub to flesh and blood. And

2. This is another, because many of that way walk not so orderly in it as
were to be wished, and we have flesh as well as others, and carry the same
Dunghill, and Hell about us as the vvorst of men do (yet with this
difference, for we must not vvrong our selves, much less the work of his
grace in us) this Dun-hill savoureth like a dunghill in our nostrils, the
filthiest sink that is in the world; but with a wicked man like a garden of
spices; so our heart is an Hell too, and an Hell to us, whereas to a wicked
man it is an heaven, because it issues forth to him the way and means, first
wrought and molded within, whereby to reach at, and, if possible, to attain
all the sweets of profits and pleasures here below) but as we were saying,
because we have this Dunghill, and Hell within us, which is still putting
forth from us, and we have many eyes upon us to observe our walking, we are
careful with all our care that we may cut off all occasions, that the way of
Holiness may not be blasphemed through us; for though we do meet once a
week, yet so as it does not hinder but further our private affairs, as we
have found by good experiences, and indeed so much profit every way, specially
to our inward man (though Piety is prosperity enough where ever it is, and
Impiety misery enough where ever that is, the hid man of the heart is the all
of man, so be that prospers all prospers, for seldom or never without
abundance of grace does the outward and inward prosper together) we were
saying, That we are, through the grace of God such gainers, by attending the
means of grace, that we would not for a world neglect the assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is, but hold-on, exhorting one the
other, and so much the more as we see the day approaching; for this was spoken
once and we heard it twice; That they who will have nothing of the Sabbath on
the week day, will take-in much of the week on the Sabbath day, if not all:
The meaning is plain to them that will understand.

6. But now to cut off occasion, we walk in desire and endeavor orderly and
as becomes the Gospel, we meddle not with things too high for us, we are
not Intruders into the sacred Office, and utterly dislike those that are; we
take counsel at Gods mouth, and of his Ministers; we pray and exhort one
another much in those words; Only let your conversation be as becomes Phil.
1. 27.
the Gospel of Christ. And then we depart home, and find no want of our
absence there, according to the good word of our Lord we find it has been
with us, other things have been added to us; As our Lord knew our needs were.
We take it for granted, our Master in Heaven, is the best Master, and gives
the best reward to his servants, for He Himself and not another for Him will
be their reward: So will He be their Defense also, nothing shall hurt them, or
be damage to them, while they are attending His service.

We will insist upon this a little, that we may give, if not some
satisfaction, yet some answer to those that say, Is is enough and as 2 Timothy 4.
2. Nempe quod ad carnis prudentiam attinet. Bez. 1.
much as is required to attend Gods service on the stated-Day in season; and an
hour out of season (as the wisdom of the flesh calls it) would be no small
loss or hinderance to them.

1. To this we would humbly reply. 1. That this being so solemnly charged upon
the Minister to preach the Word; to be instant in season, out of season, it
reaches the hearers also; If there must be preaching, there must be hearing,
and there must be some time of conferring together about what was heard, and
comparing the Ministers sayings, as those wise hearers did, Acts 17 11. with
the sayings of God, and what profit came of it, all which cannot be, as we
conceive, but by speaking often one to another. And for that supposed damage,
That an hour or two in a week would cause unto the outward man; it is but
cast-in by the carnal reason of those that mind earthly thengs. It is an
unquestionable Truth, The flesh never complains of the waste or loss of
time, while it is pleased; but every hour is two, while that is vexed and put
to cost; yet we may be resolved at this point, While the Soul is a gainer,
the man is no looser; and, while the soul is a looser, the man is no gainer.
Spiritual accommodations will make a good heart forget temporal
incommodities: It is worthy our best observation, as that worthy Man has it,
what a full Upon Job 6. 6. p. 441. Ch: 22. 21.
compensation the Lord makes to His people, for the want of corporal bread and
water: Though ye are cut short in outward things, yet ye shall not be shortened
in Spiritualls; The rain of the holy Doctrine shall not be removed from you,
which we translate, Thy Teachers shall not be removed, Isai. 30. 20. Joel 2.
23. Surely they that look Sion-ward find much in this, to engage them to
hear much, and to confer about that they hear, and to take time for it,
what possibly can be spared from their worldly employments, which must be
served in their season, yet so as greater matters of infinite concernment be
not neglected.

2. In the second place we could take the boldness here, To entreat the
people of God to speak their experiences, whether they have not found as
gracious an hand with them, and as singular a providence over them attending
Gods service at convenient times, as once the Israel of God did, while they are
so well employed according to their Lords command, The enemy shall not exact
upon them nor the Son of wickedness afflict them; What a sweet and
heart-chearing providence was it, That when all the Males of Israel appeared
thrice in the year before the Lord at Jerusalem, none of their Neighbor
Nations (though professed enemies to Israel; on the East the Ammonites and
Moabites; on the West the Philistines; on the South the Egyptians and
Idumaeans; and on the North the Assyrians, should so much as desire their Land,
Exodus: 34. 24. Such a fatherlike care their God had over them, while they took
care of Duty, That He not only stopped hands from spoiling, but hearts from
desiring. Again, it was as sweet a providence as it was wonderful, That after
the slaughter of Gedaliah so pleasant a Country, (left utterly destitute of
Inhabitants, and compassed about with such warlike Nations, as were the
Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites, Philistines) was not invaded, nor replanted by
forraighners for seventy years space, but the room kept empty; till the
return of the Naturalls: Surely look what the Spirit spoke to the Angel of
the Church in Philadelpha, there He spoke unto us: Because thou have kept the
word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which
shall come upon all the world to try them that dwell upon the Earth.

3. In the last place to stop the mouth of carnal reason, That enemy and
adversary of all righteousness, and let alone, will have all the talk,
though, in the issue, it will prove to be but contradicting and blaspheming,
the word of His Grace, the way and practice of His holy Ones; This we say to
him, who accounts that time runs-out to waste, which is taken up in holy
conference, about what has been heard, and what profit they have received
thereby, That this man has never heard to purpose, the Word has not been
prevaling with him to Conversion; for, if so, The recalling of it, and
meditation upon it had been sweet unto him, and he would observe time and
place, as he does often alone by himself; so also sometimes, as his affairs
may give leave, among others also, to tell his experiences that way, what
furthered or hindered in that work, of profiting by hearing, that so he may
promote the good of others, as his own; for how desirous is he, That all were
as he is, excepting his reproaches and scorns for the Name of Christ; Holding
forth the word of life; He, that is rich enough (in grace) is nothing worth,
and he, that says, he has enough of the Word, has none at all to purpose, or
to profit by it. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
Col: 3. 6. We we about to set down a little of that much Zanche has upon
those words, but we intend to be short, we will only hear what Holy Sibs
speaks to this matter. They that are acquainted with their own wants, think
it an happiness to have plenty; and they that know their natural weakness,
know they need all spiritual supports and helps to keep the vessel of their
Souls in perpetual good case. They know also, that the more they know, as
they ought to know, in desire and endeavor, living-up to what they know, the
fitter they are for doing and suffering; for communion with God, and for all
passages both of life and death, therefore they cannot have too much care this
way.

7. One thing more we would add for the clearing of our practice, and
removing an offense (not given, we hope, but taken against us) That we attend
the public place of hearing with all care and attention, and our private
exercise at home, and at our private meeting place with all Diligence, ordering
matters so, by the help of Grace, that the one hinder not, but further the
other. Some are all for reading and praying at home, For they have good books
there to read and pray-by both: Others again are all at the public, and
nothing at home. To this only this may suffice, That the use of the private
exercises with the neglect and contempt of the public, have a curse upon
them: And the use of the public, with the neglect and contempt of the
private, have the same curse too: for both the one and the other are indeed not
used but abused.

8. Thus we have given you an account of the way the Lord has been pleased ^o
draw us unto by His good Word and Spirit, and to fix our foot-in; how also we
have passed-over the offenses, have been given to us in our way; and removed,
as we could, those, that have been taken against us; more we have to say, but
we refer it to another place; yet this we cannot forbear to say, That we
find this way so pleasant and good, so says the Spirit (the flesh is a flug,
an enemy rather) and so says nothing, or else contradicts and blasphemeth,
or would do so, were it let alone to do what it would) but so pleasant it is,
and so says the Spirit; That we would not for a world be in the way, in the
days of our ignorance we were-in; And we wish from our hearts so well we wish
you, That you were in the same way too, though it be as neglected and
reproached a way as the Church her self is, This is Zion which no man seeks
after. A sure way-Mark it is that it is the right way, clean cross to the way
of the world, where flesh and blood finds Rehoboth roomth enough, nothing to
cross it, or to put it to Cost, therefore right in every man's own eyes, though
it be the way to hell, going down to the Chambers of death But Zions way, or
the way to Zion lies so cross to flesh, that it can as well choose to walk
upon burning coals, as, upon choice, to walk in this way, till it be
mortifyed. The serious thoughts of this put us first to a stand, caused us to
look round about us, and consider in what way our foot stood, To put it to
Question, and not take resolution from flesh and blood, Is our way Right? (for
indeed, Sir, we were, we will not say in the same way with you, but in the way
of the world we were, while we lay with the world in wickedness) Is our way
right in our Lord's eyes? For every way of man is, as we read, right in his
own eyes, Prove: 21. 2. but that way is an abomination to the Lord. Indeed thus
through Grace, we reasonedupon the way, and saw clearly, the Lord being
merciful to us, and anointing our eyes with His eye salve, That the way so
right in our own eyes, was our own way, a way of sin and death, very pleasing
to flesh, putting it to no cost, none at All, therefore infinitely displeasing
to God. And so we concluded, That they have a very difficult work, if not a
desperate cause in their hand, who would maintain, That way right in a man's
own eyes, to be the way of Gods Holy ones, with whom He walks and they with
Him, circumspectly sure, according to their charge in desire and endeavor
exactly full up to the rule -- But we must contract, we have told what first
put us to a stand, and enquire for the old-way, that good way, paved forth as a
Causey-way, and traced by the footsteps of the Lord's Anointed.

2. This moved with us very much to hasten out of that way of the world, so
right in its own eyes, and stirred-up our Spirits against it as much almost,
(for we want his zeal,) not altogether as Paul was stirred, when he beheld
those abominable Idolaters; And as Luther was stirred in his Spirit against
Popery, observing the Popes giving pardons for we know not how many years;
Indeed we have heard, that gave the first offense to that Gideon of our times,
or but a Century of years bypast. And how did he bestirre himself after that
time (take it in passage and make use of it) to render Popery (that rode-way of
the world, or National Church there right in its own eyes) so corrupt and
stinking as any Carrion can be in the Nostrills of every man, that has but the
use of ordinary reason, so full of folly and Blasphemy it is? We were saying
that this moved with us very much to hasten-out of that way of the world, to
wit, The observation we made by our eye and ear of those abominable useages,
those profane mixtures in Gods-house, we mean the meeting place for God's
people, allowed and countenanced by the Stewards there. Why? no man so unclean
though he wallowes like a swine in all the (...), the Myres and filths of the
world (2 Pet. 2. 20.) yet clean enough being a washed swine, we mean, upon
account, of his Infant Baptism, to be a welcomed ghest unto the Lord's Table.
Once more, Why? No man so bad, though worse than any Infidel, a jearer, a
scoffer, a scorner, that sets a City on a flame, that will do unjustly for an
half-peny-gaine, when a heathen would not do it for less than a kingdom; A
man that declares his sin like Sodom, he hides it not why yet he was Baptized,
and is a washed swine, and upon that score he must be admitted, as a worthy
guest to the Lord's Table; So soon as we were enabled through grace, to make
observation of these Doings in Gods-House, we hrst'ned-out of that rode-way,
by His good Hand with us, as Lot out of Sodom. And God forbid we should look
toward it any more, unless with loathing; as one said of that City of Gods
Curse, Rome, when he left it, and had set his back upon it, Roma vale, etc.
Rome farewell, again I will Thee see,
When Baud, Villain, Raunter, I am resolved to be.


And now, Sir, we are come near you, and must yet come nearer, for we must
take-in here at the close of this, what we purposely omitted at the beginning
or entrance upon it; That we may show the Reader, the ground of your
Confidence (such as it is) That we were not able to hold forth the truth of our
way, and walk therein, Why? Because it is different from, if not contrary to
your way and walk, which is the same, as we fully understand now with Mr H.

We must be larger here that we may be plainer, so as he who run's may read
us and understand us.

SECT. V.
THus it was, and this the Truth of the matter; while you were enjoining us
our task you were pleased to instance, shall we say, or not rather to glory in
Mr Hs, who had taken-up Shield and Buckler, as your great Champion to
maintain the Truth of your way, wherein he had done so worthily, sad you,
that though there was one found, who made reply to his first book (as you
call it, we as was said must call it, The work of his flesh) yet there was
not one found, that would undertake to Answer his second, being a matter as you
thought too high for the undertaker.

To this we replied nothing, having indeed nothing to reply, For we never heard
of the man before; but speaking of these things, as our Duty was, to our
Minister at our meeting, as the manner is, and desiring his counsel and best
help about it; for we thought it very unbecoming our profession, our way and
walk, And very unanswerable to all that, which our Lord God has showed us,
wrought for us, and in us, if we should sit still, now looking one upon
another, and keep silence in such matters as these, being so charged to speak
to them, and to speake-out; else you would say, for so you said, you would
take silence for a grant, That our way was naught, we did not speak for it,
it was because we could not, we had naught to say for it. In the midst the
Debate of these matters, mention was made of M H, and of the sweet relish his
name had at your tongues end, which made some of us to think he was another
Simon Magus, Some groatone, and indeed so he is, as he was among the people,
being as we may hear afterward, the Master of the Herd. Notwithstanding
we must not conceal this, That when our Pastor heard that Gentleman named
and boasted of by you, he stood as a man, we know not whether more wondering
or greiving, (so dear are his respects to you, Sir, if you could see it) for
he professed, he more than doubted, This would greatly disparage your Name and
your Cause; and he added this, which he made very clear unto us, That many men
had done unworthily, but that Gentleman exceeded them all; O how he vaunteth
himself, speaking of his own in every line! his Mode, who is an advocate for
a National Church; oh his monstrous conclusions! his wrested quotations! his
uncouth Philosophy! his consequentiall blasphemy! as a worthy Divine speaks
upon another account. O the vomit cast upon the Scriptures, and our Dear Lords
practice! O the filth he belcheth out upon D. D. which modesty forbids us to
express. Many have done most unworthily, this Gentleman exceeds them all;
worse than the worst, as impudent as impudence it self. No man, said you,
answers his second book, This was written before the Author knew any other
Answer to Mr. Hs. but by D. D.
It is, think we, because the first answer was so full and clear, and so
mauled the man, That had he not been so impudent as was said, and animated by
the Spirit of the world, he had not rose-up the second time: But his old-father
and great Master found him more work to do for his children and servants the
men of the world, and he must do that, which he has seen with his father:
And being bound to such a Master he must obey, and he that has such a Driver
must run. Our Minister (for so he said at that time) put himself to the loss
of a little time in reading-his work of the flesh, and paid that charge fully
and with advantage by reading the Drs Answer thereunto; Yet for the work it
self he could hardly say of it, what Erasmus said of Seneca; If you look upon
Si inspicias illum ut paganus Christian scripsit, si ut Christianus paganice.
him as an heathen, then he seems to write like a Christian; but if you look
upon him as a Christian, then he writes as an heathen: So said our Pastor at
that time. Quickly after some of us did read the man our selves, hearing so
contrary and various a report of him, yours for his goodness, and soundness;
our Pastors for his badnesse, and rottenness. And truly when we considered
the portion of Scripture he took to prove Free Admission of all to the Lord's
Table; We may take that Learned Man's words, which Dr. Owen page 189.
he applies to Mr B: and apply them to this Gentleman Mr Hs; He made mention of
that portion of Scripture, Mark 14. 23. That he might have the honor of
cutting his own throat, and destroying his own Cause; or rather God in His
righteous Judgment has forced him to open his mouth to his own shame.
Indeed, Sir, these are our thoughts, be pleased to take them in passage. That
he your said Champion, and Leader of the Herd, undertaking from sacred Writ to
clear your way, has extremely confounded it, so marred the very face of it,
cast such a spewing upon it against his will, that we can hardly think, that
any one of a sound mind will walk in it. And we should look upon it as a
glorious providence, That the said Gentleman has undertaken your matters, for
now we are persuaded, that all the Ministers of that persuasion, shall be fully
manifested now, and their folly unto all men, as Mr Hs. now is; and as yours
will be, if you look not well to it, which, the God of all Grace, give you
grace to do, Amen.

So now Sir, in the strength of the Lord we are girding our selves unto our
work you have enjoined us, Probe doctus qui probus est; in these matters under
Debate between us, He is learned enough, who is honest enough; for if he has
Logic enough to hold forth this in the Negative, that foure-feeted swine must
not have admittance into your Parlour, bedchamber or closet, are not comely
guests to sit with Saints at a common Table; then he has not honesty enough if
he resolves not this in the Negative also, That two-footed swine are not to be
admitted to the Lord's Table, to communicate with Saints there. Si natura negat
facit indignatio versum, If nature deny, yet indignation will make a man a
Poet, was said of old. So we say now, the indignation we have against the
horrid doings in Gods House, at the Lords Table, committed by the Stewards
there, will make us Logicians good enough, for the argueing of these matters,
and rendering them an abomination to every godly man. So we have concluded, he
is a Logician good enough at these matters, who is honest enough. And so we
proceed.

Besides we know of Whom to ask Wisdom and strength and all; Therefore,
though we may be every way wanting, we may want gifts and parts, and those
acquired abilities, which others by labor and industry have gained in a full
measure, Yet blessed be God and Father, for what He has meated-forth unto us
severally as He will. 1 Cor: 12. 11. Math: 25. 15. Ephesians: 4. 7. and shown us the
way unto Himself, the Fountain and Springhead of all, whence we may have
continual supply for asking, as our needs require, so be we lean upon Him,
keep His Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in His sight,
putting no confidence in the flesh at all, for He will not be All in all to us,
till He has made us nothing at all in our selves. We are woefully weak, when
we rely on our own strength: And Gloriously strong, when we rely upon Him,
who alone is the strength of His people; If God be with us, let the weak say
they are strong. It is the Cause of God, of His Christ, of His Spouse, and
Household; He has, He does, He will help, Si natura negat; if nature be at a
stand and can do nothing, Grace is never at a stand, it does all, and all
freely like it self, without our money or money-worth. We, as all the
Faithful in the World, serve a very good Master; None like Him* He finds His
servants work to do, and finds them hands to do it; He does His servants
work Himself, and given them wages for doing of it. So no matter what be the
tongue, so He be the Guide; or the pen, so He be the Hand. Therefore having so
clear a Call to it, we will hasten to the work. Though non sunt haec
litigandi tempora sed orandi, these times call for prayer rather. But the wise
God has disposed it so, and will enable for this, and not let the other
undone; for prayer has got more victories than Disputings have done. And we
do not doubt but prayer will do its part now.

And this may remove the check in the way which is, That upon due observation,
there is little good done by Disputes of this Nature. One amongst us does
remember; That going with his Minister keeping his turn at a Lecture, you know
where, he met with that honest man the Disputer of the Country Mr. N. And
after some hours debate, about a National Church, (his Theme always,
together with Infant Baptism, and free Admission by Privilege thereof) the
hearers went away as wise as they came; only all the Advantage that was, was
wheeled about to the unreasonable and wicked-mans side, so be he were borne in
England, and baptized there, If washed, though a swine, all was well, and his
right to all Church Communions unquestionable. Though we hasten, what can be,
to a close of this, yet we will take-in this in passage to Inform the Reader,
That this good Man fetches all his strong Arguments, as arrows out of a
quiver, so a worthy Divine told one of us, whereby he argues for free
Admission of all to the Lords Table: Dogs and Swine and all, (for if all be
admitted, then all such will be there) from their Birth-priviledge, they were
baptized, therefore eo nomine to be admitted. This will be our Theme in due
place, for once and again we shall meet with it, only this here we would
speak unto it And

SECT. VI.
Truly, intending heartily the Readers information, as plain and rude in
knowledge as our selves are, we would make an homely supposition here; for
so, happily, we plain men may prevail more than by argumentation, so little is
our skill that way. We would suppose now a foure-footed swine sitting with
this Saint (such he is in our account, we hope, and in his Lords account also)
at his Table, in his Hall, or Parlour. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?
Our good Friends, Could ye forbear laughing, beholding such a swine, and such
a Saint sitting together? Spectatum admissi sletum teneatis amici? Our Dear
Friends, Can ye forbear weeping, yea bitter mourning, and yet approove your
selves Friends of Christ, and Followers of God as Dear Children, beholding
such guests as these, Believers and Infidells; Disciples and Drunkards;
Holy-Ones and worse than the worst Heathens; Saints and Swine, vile and loasome
Ones as Sin and Satan can possibly make them, little better than Raunters, not
half so hansome and comely as Quakers, sitting in their own clothes, but not
in their Right mind at the Lords Table? putting the Cup to the Mouth, as
boldly venterously, and impudently, as he did the bottle, Hab: 2. 15. Poison
Montanus renders it, as pious and Learned Mr Greenhill tells us on Ezekiel: 16.
page 281. Can ye forbear weeping, beholding all this? All these dishonours
put upon the Lord Jesus Christ, who Loved you, and gave Himself for you; and
washed you in His own blood? And then admitted you Himself, to be his ghests
at his own Table, etc? Can you? We think ye cannot forbear weeping;
beholding such an affront offered to your Lord Jesus Christ, in His own house,
by His Stewards there at His own Table; Is it not more provoking, if more can
be, than once it was, when they set their Threshold by Ezekiel. 43. 8. Adhibendo
111 ditauenes suas ad. praecepta mea.
the Lords Threshold's, and their posts by His poasts; that is, as Junius there
mateing the wisdom of God with the follyes of men? We think these horrid
Doings at the Lords Table more provoking; but judge ye.

Once more; Can ye forbear weeping or sighting with the breaking of your
loins? while ye behold so many poor wretches (poor indeed, miserably poor,
because so rich in conceit, Rev: 3. 17. and now, in conceit too; so highly
dignified and advanced, though indeed as Haman was upon the Gallows) sitting
together, and drinking poison one after another, as greedily as the Drunkard
does sweet Wine? If we long after one another in the bowels of Jesus Christ,
Phill 1. 8. Vide Zanchi.
we cannot but show it to those, who having no knowledge of themselves, can
have no bowels for themselves, nor their Ministers, we fear, any for them. --
But we will not prevent our selves: This is the chiefest Head of our
controversy. Only meeting with this good Man, and knowing his Genius, we
could not do less than what we have done: For we would have no good Man,
whom we would feign account a Saint, be of Mr Humph: persuasion: This man is
looked upon by all the Godly, we think, as a star in our heaven; and we
look upon him as such an one too, yet we may speak of him, as we have found
him, to be (yet love and esteem him never the less) moving sometimes
excentrically, and out of his sphere; and as one that never read holy Tindalls
good Letter to his Dear Brother Frith.

A short word more, and so to add to that we were saying; That this carries
all; We are borne in a Church, and Baptized there. Why it is the fac Totum,
the One thing necessary, the only thing required, so far as we can read or
hear; To give us right to, seize-on and delivery of all Church Privileges: If
we are borne in a Church and Baptized, which necessarily follows, then we
have enough, for eo nomine -- whereunto in its proper place; For with the Men
of Mr Hs: persuasion, To Deny the Lords Supper to Baptized persons, though
never so deboysed ones, is as silly, yea injuriously done, as for a scholar
readily to grant the premises, and wilfully to Deny the Conclusion. But

This now comes to be enquired into and debated-on. What the issue will be, the
Lord knows. He will have Glory sure enough, For that clean thing, as worthy
Mr Huit upon Dan: phraseth it, He can extract out of our filthiness, whether
we will or no. But this is commonly the fate of all Mouth-Disputations among
us Country-folke, It engenders strife, for coming near together to dispute
our matters, strife arises about words, then we fall-off from the maine
buisnesse, or leave it, as papers, in a flame. Indeed Disputes among us,
(whereto we ignorant, ones are marveilously inclined) who can better manage a
spade, and hold to the Plough much better than to an Argument, serve to stir,
or blow-up a spark to a Coake, and the coal to a flame. Thus too commonly.
And then how great a wood, a little fire kindles? The Doings now adays, and
Doatings upon some questions make full proof thereof.

Notwithstanding here is the Comfort; there is a Remedy against all this. The
good Lord show it us, and make application of it to us. Amen.

Before we close we will observe worthy Mr: Baxters words, for mostly they
are very clear, teaching, and weighty when he speaks of matters necessary for
us Country-folke to know and understand; these are his words; Points
controverted are better written than preached; and read than heard. And your
self said well; Note down your Allegations and proofs, and ground them upon
Scripture. This we shall endeavor to do looking up to Him, who leads us into
all Truth, and teaches the simple folk his way, so as they now become fo^les,
and so are made wise indeed, shall not err therein. Truly we have studiously
minded this thing, how to make this our undertaking, to become a work of
Faith, and Labor of Love! We remembered heartily there is 1 Timothy 6. 4. (...).
much Doting now adays about questions, so as we make clear proof, as the
greek word is, we are sick and languishing: we sooner dispute about Faith
than live by Faith; We talk more of Godliness, than of being so indeed.
Whence it was, That Saint of God on Earth now in Heaven, old Mr Dod never loved
to meddle in Controversies, giving this Reason, He found his heart the worse,
when he did. We see then what we ought to do, lookeup to God more earnestly,
stretching-out our prayers unto him; Luke 22. 44. (...).
That we may move in all meekness; knowing we are no more freed from all
error, than we are from all sin; And that one man may conceive himself as
certain of his error, as another Man of his knowledge; That so our
Controversy here may be wholly managed, in reference to practice, not to
parties; not that we (for what are we? but breathing pieces of earth, and
little better in sight than so many Crumbles of dust) not that we, but Truth
may have the victory; and our Dispute may serve wholly to advance, in our
selves, and the Readers, the power of Godliness. For vurely Error from the
Truth is best confuted, by holding-forth of the Truth, and clearing it to the
World, That our souls do cleave to it, delight-in it, and Cannot but do all
we can for it.

That the purity, Truth, and goodness of our Doctrines may be held forth, and
adorned by the Truth of our practice, purity, and godliness of our lives, is
the Prayer of all the Godly in the whole World, Ministers and People, whereunto
they with our selves, add that Signal Conclusion, Amen.

FINIS.

