A just Account Upon the Account of truth and peace, given-in by Brethren,
lovers of and fellow-helpers to both, wherefore they must open their matters to
the view of the world, speaking them, in their respective places, as upon the
house-tops, which else had been spoken in darkness privately, and as in the
ear.

They take away the righteousness of the righteous from them. Isa. 5. 23.

Every day they wrest my words, Psalm. 56. 5.

Which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they also do other
Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

We are made manifest unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 11.

LONDON; Printed according to Order for Henry Cripps, in Popes-head-Alley. 1656.

TO THE READER.
WE are angariated (we make bold with that Persian word, our English being so
short in our seeming to express the enforcement that lies upon us) compelled,
as one was to bear the Cross, or as a tired horse to go his Stage: so we to
put-forth our matters, as we intend to do one after another, for others to
judge betwixt us and a Minister of Mr Hs persuasion in Reference to the
Discipline of Gods House, free Admission of all to all Church-Communions; It is
possible, and but after the manner of men, and more ordinary with such as we
are, to judge amiss of our own performances, too partially and fatherlike (for
libri quasi liberi, books are like children) we overlook their faults, or we
deal too tenderly with them, as others may too rashly and rigedly. Therefore,
as things now stand, the world must judge betwixt us, or as many of them as are
fitted with patience to sit out the hearing of so mean matters, as they are
acted by us, as mean as the meanest, and may be presented to their eye and ear
in their order and respective places; Mean we say as acted by us, but in their
relation to the house of God, the Church of the living God, the management of
matters by the Stewards there, they may appear to be matters high and Glorious,
just according to the manner they are managed, if after the due order, then
high and glorious, if otherwise, then low and inglorious.

Now be not discouraged, Reader at our meannesse, though so mean we are as
thou can think us. We would gladly suppose thee a blessed man; the bent of
whose Spirit is such, that he cannot stir or make the least motion against
the Truth. And then it is a blessed comfort to this blessed man (to thee, if
thou be he) that though we should put forth our strength, not ingorantly
only but wickedly (which through grace is as far from us, as we would have
that to be, which is an abomination to us) against the truth, yet we shall
never prevail against it, which undoubtedly will be the great Conqueror at
last, and is gaining every day luster and Glory by our most inglorious actings
against it. Questionless, it is ventilated winnowed and purged by the blastings
of men of corrupt minds upon it; surely it is cleared from the dross (which
would cleave to it) passing through so many heated hands and fiery mouths, as
so many fining pots, though intended by man utterly to extinguish and consume
it: oh the glorious advantages truth has gained all along these feirce and
perilous times, while error sat in state, or as we may say in its Throne,
like to be, as might be conceived by some, a perpetual Dictator against it; It
is the Lords doing, is it not marvelous in your eyes?

But to stay thee no longer, we come to our case, which, in brief, is this; we
were desired (so we would rather say than charged or commanded, we should be
judged else to walk by a fancy in the matters of our Lord) by a Minister of
the same persuasion with a world (but argumentum pessimum turba, commonly the
most are worst) of Ministers, to give our reasons for our dissent from him in
point of free admission of all to all Church Communions upon account of their
infant Baptism; As also to the declaring against the observation of the day we
will call, because we would be understood, Christmas Day, in reference also to
forms of prayer, and in special to the Lords prayer; and four Queries
thereupon; These four Treatises, (for so we have digested them) with three
Epistles, together with an introduction holding forth by way of preface, the
way of Christ with His people, and their walk with Him, by the guidance of his
good Spirit in the directions of His Word, these, we were saying, we sent to
the said Minister one after another, as we could take a transcript of the
same; some two months after he returned us the Epistles, Preface, and first
Treatise of Baptism, with some exceptions against some expressions or passages
in all three; whereunto we thought our selves bound, upon the account of truth,
to make some Reply, whereof you may be judge, if please you; For truly our
Humors, or our principles, the one or both are so contrary, that though we are
bound to judge our selves, yet neither must we nor will we be judged in our
matters, though indeed we think them to be right, and well agreeing with the
Word of God, if that said Minister fixed in Mr Hs way, and firm to his
persuasion, be in an error as to these matters.

Quickly after the receite of this our Reply to his exceptions, as aforesaid,
he returned, together with that Reply, the three other Treatises (all he had or
would receive from us, whereas there were three more in our hands, in a
readiness for him) with so much heat as might argue his spirit somewhat
discomposed. Notwithstanding though some might think here was some offense
given in returning our Papers, we expected no more than we do the return of
our waters where they neither ebb nor flow, yet truly there was no offense
taken, they were received, and little regarded by us, having, as we said, a
transcript of them.

Some three weeks after, the said Minister asked one amongst us whether we
had looked into our papers he had returned to us? answer was made, no; he bad
us look into our Treatise of prayer (wherein our endeavor and care was to be
studiously curious) and there we should see what his son had written. We did,
as he desired, and quickly found his sons handy work for some leaves together,
as pleased him, or him that appointed him, false glosses, unjust constructions,
the blackest lines did that young man draw-over ours in many places; and, at
length, downright blasphemy charged he upon us. Whereat we were startled a
little at present, not because the son of that Minister charged us so deeply;
for he was, as some say, very youthful till of late, when the hands of the
Presbytery were laid upon him; what change was wrought upon him at that time,
or since that day, they should know, who live near him, hear his Doctrines,
and see his practice; But youthful he was, as is said after the manner of
young folk; and then as Paul said, all in him, or don by him was childish while
he was a child: so happily in the next step of our life which is youth, he that
is a youth thinks as a youth, speaks as a youth, acts as a youth, all in him,
or don by him is youthful, that is, subject to miscarriages and mistakes,
therefore we, as we were saying, regarded little what the son said speaking
of his own, nor can we think it strange, that a youth should act like a youth
(every age of our life having something peculiar to its self.) But this we
think strange, That the son charged our book so in the presence of his father,
and where two learned and pious Divines, as is meet for us to judge, were
present at the same time, whose names we shall mention in the ensuing papers.
You have heard our case, we will detain thee no longer, when we have added
this, That having offered our matters succeslesly to that Minister, returning
them with such a -- castigation (as the like, we think, has not been heard or
read) though we were charged by him to give him our persuasion, and the reason
thereof, in reference to the matters aforesaid, we find our selves constrained
to make our matters public; which we do the more cheerfully, being confident
of this thing, That there is nothing here, or in that, which may follow after,
which is against piety or charity; for we had rather our bones should be
scattered like chips about the hewing-place, than that our pen (which has the
advantage of the tongue, more hearers) should as others do in this scribbling
age scatter error and wickedness among the people, as the Scorpion its poison.

We trust the Good Hand of Him (our only leane-to, and that leads into all
truth) so far, as that we hope you shall find Truth all along, and managed in
our measure, as becomes sons of truth, and fellow-helpers of the same; This
Good Spirit direct your heart to the love of Christ, which only is
constraining to love Truth and peace; and to keep both as thou keep the
apple of thine eye, or thy chiefest Treasure. Amen.

In the Name and by the appointment 10. 5. 55.
of their Pastor, HEZEKIAH WOODVVARD.

SECT 1.
TRue is the Proverb, Sir, The beginning of strife, is, as when one lets-out
water, stirred quickly, not so quickly stinted; so like water it is of a
spreading nature; or as like unto fire, which may breake-forth from a bramble
and devour a Cedar. There is no such fear of our fire, as you are pleased to
call it, though being now let-out, it may spread like water; and so it shall
do, if we can help the spreading of it, That it may appear, how and where it
began, with the rise and original of it, how it was raised, yea forced: From
whence you may learn and study to be quiet, and meddle in your own matters,
walking peaceably in your own way, so pleasing in your own eyes; And not
meddle with others in theirs, fully resolved from the word of God to be the way
of Truth and of Holiness.

Surely it had been no contemptible point of your wisdom, and might have
argued good Discretion, "To have left this contention, before it was meddled
with, which to render according to the original, you may better skill of than
we. Only this we would say as to the stirring in this strife again, That we
did not use lightness, nor did we purpose according to the flesh, never more
to meddle therein, for so we said to you in our last, intending it the last you
should ever have from us, either by Letter, word, or otherwise, in reference to
those matters under Debate. For as we said then, " To what end? we had given
our opinion as you willed us, and there might have been an end. We have
experienced this Truth, " That Error is as binding upon the Conscience, and as
strongly embraced by the affections as Truth is, binding of us, and Embraced by
us, not in the name of an Error, but of Truth; And men are therefore wedded to
and in love with their own Conceptions, because (how monstrous and
hard-favoured soever in themselves, yet) nothing is more beautiful in their
eye, than they. "No man, says the Apostle, ever hated his own flesh, but
loves and cherishes it: The flesh of our minds (such are all false principles
and positions) is more loved and cherished by us than the flesh of our Bodies.
A light intimation (we proceed in his words upon Job 22 verse) or only the
appearance of a probability, will amount to a proof against either persons or
doctrines, which we like not; But the clearest Demonstration will hardly raise
a jealousy against what we like.

You have given, Sir, we fear, a very sad experience of this very thing, For
how stubborn and unmoved are you from Mr Hs: his error in point of admission
of all (filthiness all over, and wallowing therein as swine in the mire,
admitted notwithstanding) to all Church-Communions, the Lords Supper and all,
Though the strongest winds of Truth have breathed, yea blown hard upon it.

That you might not be willingly ignorant of this very thing, and withal to
show our dear respects unto you, we told you, That four Worthies of the Lord
had Encountered with Mr Hs: about the premises, and with as much ease, (to
phrase it as one does) and with like success, as the fire does the dried
stubble; and yet he stubbornely holds to it, for ought we know, we know you
do, remaining in the same mind with him, that foreforne man (Generally we
think deceived by the Godly all over the Land) as a Mountain unmoved to this
very hour. We know not which is worse, but leave it to you to judge, "
Unsettledness in the Truth, and an Easiness to let it go; or tenaciousnesse
in an error, and an hardness to let it go. Nor do we know well, which is
worse, a readiness to take up hard thoughts of our Brethren, or unreadinesse
to lay them down; only this we know, Were the laws of Zeal for God
observed, and of Love to man, you could not, as we think, " Despise the day of
small things, or the least breathings, or faintest endeavors of any, how mean
and weak soever (as babes in Christ use to be) enquiring after Truth, and that
old, but now forsaken way of holiness; Asking the way to Zion, with their
faces thetherward, saying, Come -- etc. Ier: 50. 5. And did you observe the Law
of Charity to man, it would cause you to examine every ground of suspicion
against a Brother twice, before you did indeed suspect him once: And you would
rejoice in any appearance of his innocence, whereby you might discharge your
own Spirit of all suspicions concerning him. These words, we hope, will not be
as wind with you, though ours are and have been to this time Therefore, as we
said, we had sorborne to speak, nay we do forbear to speak more unto you,
unless you happen to light on it, but forbear to speak we may not, we
cannot, for thus it was as you very well know.

SECT. II.
YOu would needs point us to something, your Son had written (for that Title
better becomes us, though Child better befits him) in our Treatise of prayer,
as if you would have us take special notice thereof, which indeed we have
done, for so a providence cast it, else we had not looked into it, having a
Transcript of the same: but upon your motion, you telling us, where we should
find your son's hand, we quickly turned to it, and found as you said, taking,
as you willed-us special notice thereof, Not because your Son did write it,
but because you his Father suffered him so to do, against the old and known
rule of Civility, as Scholars would say, and of all good manners too; which
you could not have suffered to be done (it is our persuasion) had you not had a
vile account of our Pastor, who was chief, if not alone in that work: See!
when a father contemns a man (but what is the Contempt of a man, suppose it
little or much? or how small a thing is it with him to be accounted vile in
another's eyes, who is, we hope, yet more vile in his own? but) see, when a
Father vilifieth a man, his Son (indulget sibi latius) will vilify him much
more, and venture (so arrogant and bold youth is) to pass judgment in those
matters, which he understands not so well now, as he, whom your Son so rashly
judges and deals so -- as some would say withal, as to say, " He
blasphemeth, understood them before your Son was borne. But all this argues
your high Confidence, That the Truth in those points, to which our Debate
relates, is on your side. Be it so, though it be but your Confidence, the same
with Mr H: yet to charge us, our Pastor specially so deeply for maintaining
the Contrary; You giving a Charge to speak our minds, and to make them legible
in those matters, is, as some have said, but one peg at the most below
impudence. And this is all we will say in this place, telling you what some
say, and happily they would add, though we forbear. Only we would leave you,
after you shall have heard more, to pass sentence on your self and your son
for this behavior. We will turn aside from this a little, and return to it
at the last, so soon as we have taken-in three or four things first, for so
you have thought fit, we had almost said to face us, yea to force us.

SECT. III.
WE, as we were saying, fully intended to cease the strife, since it has
proved such a thing, and to leave the Debate with Him, the Judge of all the
world, and "know's the hearts of all men; who will, we hope, show you and us in
His own best time; Who has spoken much, and in desire and Endeavor as much
to purpose; who has said little in Comparison, and yet less to the matters
under hand. And yet should you be able to putt off all with that old putt-off
(whereto some thing will be replied anon after) multa dicit, nihil probat, The
man speaks much, and proves nothing, or nothing concludingly, and so folly is
with us, (for your charge of Blasphemy, yours, which you suffered to be
charged, is too high) why yet, supposing all that, The error is on our side,
and Truth on yours (which were strange, if not impossible, you sideing with M
Hs: and driving-on with him in the same way) Notwithstanding, we faint not in
our minds, For our matters are humbly committed to the only wise God, Who is
able, and we are Confident He will, make emprovements out of folly (on whose
side soever it be) and give advantage to His Truth, by the breaking-out of
Error, and falsity; As it is one of the highest acts of Grace, (so one of us
have read) in man, to render good for evil: so is it one of the highest acts
of power to draw good out of evil. Upon this God All sufficient we wait. He
always hitherto has extracted the clean thing of His Glory (as one says
upon Daniel) out of the filthiness of Man's sin; our Confidence is, He will
do so now, He brought light out of Darkness at the first, " marveilous in our
eyes, not "hard and "difficult to Him; By His Grace we will Trust Him, He will
make a blessed, yea a Glorious method of these Cursed Confusions, caused by Mr
Hs: in His house; and, notwithstanding all is said against it by learned and
godly men, maintained by you. 2. And Sir, That we may tell you our boastings in
our God, our hope being set on Him, This good is come of it already; which we
will call a good blessing, we mean of this Debate, in Reference to " free
Admission of all to all Church-Communions, upon account of their Infant
Baptism only, without making so much as a profession of their Faith and
repentance, your Brothers conceit: We were saying, This good is come of it,
That we are abundantly satisfied as to the Negative, hearing it as clearly
made out unto us from the word of God, as if it had been written with the
Sunbeams: And by the help of His Grace, we shall hold unto it, while life is
held within us, being the more confirmed, if more can be, and our foot more
established in that way, by that little or nothing you have said against it,
(for you have said all for Mr Hs: and not a word for the way of Holiness) so
as neither your self, nor all the men of your way and judgment, though so
numerous that they fill the Countries (no good argument of their goodness, or
the straightness of their way) can be able to draw us aside from this way God
has pointed us to, leads us in, and you called us sorth to maintain,
notwithstanding the shockes against it, scornings and blastings upon it, and
upon us for the way's-sake; not more able, we were saying, to draw us from it,
than ye are able to remove a mountain from it is roots, or stay the Sun in
it is Course, or blow it out with a pair of bellows. So strong is Truth, and
so strong are all they that by the good Hand of their God are stablished
therein.

We add this more, This Truth, you accounting it an Error, and of the latest
Date, called us forth to maintain, how weakly soever maintained by us, as you
say, and we do not gainsay, shall be glorious notwithstanding (for it needs
not our patronage) in the eyes of the Lord, and of His people, when your loose
and more than airy Tenet against it, The same with Mr Hs: shall be for an
hissing unto both; To use worthy Mr Palmers words. Though yet you are pleased
to call it, This Truth avouched by us, we mean, The sickness of our fancy, a
Novell thing, never heard off in the world till now of late years, and had
dyed in the vessel, had not we broached-it, or set it a tap, as we may say in
the place we live-in; To that purpose you speak, and so Ironically, if we can
understand you.

3. But, Sir, to let these scorns pass with contempt from us enough, if not
with as much sorrow from our hearts for you; Is it possible, That you a Master
in our Israel, and a Steward in God's House, should be such a stranger to this
Thing, " The way of Christ with His people, followiug on in His steps? No more.
Yet, Sir, we take leave to ask you, why would you put your self to all the
cost of time and Spirits in returning your Answer to such a light and Frothy
Tenet, which might be brooded upon some few years since, but hatched but a few
months ago? Had any of us been as youthful, frolic, and venturous as your
son is, twenty to one we had written Blasphemy anent those very words: but
blessed be God we are better taught, and have not so learned Christ.

4. But indeed, Sir, however you may be informed, or wholly mistaken in your
information, your Answer was not desired, therefore not expected. It was
enquired only whether Mr Owen (of whom we had heard, " he is asking the way
to Zion with his face thitherward; therefore we enquired whether he) had any
sight or knowledge of our papers, or intimation about them. Only so, which
might argue us more careful than we now are or see cause to be about that
matter. Yet be it known unto you, we would rather hear three words in
Reference to our matters from him, or any other of those fix we addressed our
selves unto in our Epistle, (so be they be not of your persuasion) than three
thousand words from you. And we more than hinted our Reason wherefore in the
same place; Therefore Sir, you might have saved your self that labor, had it
pleased you, for we know full well, what manner of answer we should have from
you of the same persuasion with Mr H: and paceing or driveing together as
friends in the same way. And Truly Sir, we think it a little strange, that
you could imagine, that we could put any account at all upon any answer from
you, in the same way with him, so often mentioned, unless you had some hope to
bring us over to that way, which so many find without seeking.

5. We applied our selves to those worthy men, your good neighbors and
friends, as we are informed, the manner of peaceable men is to do. But seeing
it pleased them not, as you say, neither the one nor the other to meddle in
these matters controverted betwixt us, least, as the Proverb is, " They should
take a dog by the ears, being of the same mind, as may be conceived, as one
was, who said, "he always hated two kind of studies, " Studium partium et
"studium novarum rerum; Now our matters are novell say you, for it was never
heard of in the world since the world was till now adays, (1) That all
grossly ignorant and studiously wicked (the chief head of our controversy)
are not to be admitted to the Lord's Supper. That is a novell Tenet, an yester
days fiction; so also is this, (2) " They that have received Christ must walk
in Him, even as He walked, That a Gospel light should be adorned and
beautified with a Gospel life, a walk or conversation as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. (3) That the stewards in Gods House, should look well to
this, before they admit to Gospel Communions. (4) For that every man is guilty
of all the evil, which he has power, and a call to hinder; A beam from our
new light all this, which made not the least glimmering in our world, till of
late, some months or few years ago: You may pardon this digression. We
return to that we were saying, which was this, That since it pleased not those
much honored men to meddle in these matters, we are well pleased, though, we
made tender thereof unto them; and not displeased, much less discouraged at
all, That it is refused, for possibly the controversy must not be taken-up in
so silent a way.

6. Besides, which is our Confidence, and makes us humbly bold, we have a God
in Christ to go unto, who is our Prophet to speak to us as well as our Priest
to speak for us; our Oracle as well as our Advocate, He will take us by the
hand, and teach us how to go, so long as by His grace with us, we beg nothing
more earnestly of Him, and find it in our hearts to be as unwilling to tread
one step (wandering sheep though we are) out of His way, as is a wearied
traveller to go out of his; And possible also we had not stood so fast in Him,
with our eye so fixed upon Him, and our-foote in His way, as now we do, and
through His grace shall do (which loves to strengthen His weakest ones, To
magnify His own power in them, and with them, when their's is God loves to
show the world what His strength can do in a weak creature, as well as what
His Grace and Me^cy can do for a sinful creature. (...) Caryl on Job 6. 11.
475.
gone) had we not from our first footing, "the way of Holiness, and all along
to this Day felt many shockes, and as many contempts, contumelies and
reproaches cast upon us, and the way, no man st^nding by us the while, no not a
man of Name for learning and piety. And which is almost as bad, but God will
make all good, and even this best of all, You that are a steward in God's
house, and should, like a good steward, take them into your bosom, whom your
Lord and Master is pleased to take by the hand, that is, " To give special
help unto, you are so far from doing this, That you do little less than
maintain a war against them, (we mean all them all over the Land that desine
to walk with a right foot, according to Gospel Order in Church-Society: For
what are we, that we should complain in our own behalf) which exceedingly
gladdeth the hearts of the wicked, who 'love to have it so, and so their hand
is strengthened mightily, and their foot stablished in their own way of sin
and Death.

But what though, and things stand thus? God is in the midst of His people, He
stands by them, and will strengthen them, and in His own time, best for His
people, He will raise them, they shall not still lie in the Dust of Debasement:
His Jewels shall be made-up, which now lie as in the mire trod under-foote,
which is permitted, and not barely so, and no more, for Gods permission is a "
providence, and that is " active, to drive His people out of themselves, from
putting any Self Dependence looseneth from God. D. Preston.
confidence in the flesh, That their hope may be set on Him (which is setleing)
Who raises the dead; For commonly so it is, The more we have of the creature,
the less we have of God; because the fuller sight we have of the creature, the
less we look after Him, not apprehending out needs of Him, who fills all,
measuring-forth to all as pleases Him, and is All in All. O that we did not
cast so much about us for a look of favor from a man of high degree, and
could more look unto God for His favor, who looks after His people,
following them with His eye upon them, Psalm. 34. 15. that is " will deal well
with them, Jer: 40. 4. and best of all at the last: We Trust the Lord is every
Day instructing us to this Discretion, so as we shall be daily less in our
selves, and more in God. And then " let the weak say, we are strong. And they
that are strong out of Him, O that they did know how weak they are; or if
strong their strength will be their Confusion.

SECT. IV.
SEcondly, There is another thing we would speak unto a little, that we may
give satisfaction to others, for you can receive none from us, and we as little
from you.

You enjoined us to give you an account of our way, why it is not the same with
yours, which is the same with the man so often mentioned.

This now we have done, according to the Talent, or two mites rather, the only
wise God has entrusted us with, in all " Godly simplicity. And now you return
to us again and again; That we have said very much, but little or nothing to
purpose, or concludingly. And That another might have said much more and to
more purpose in four lines, than we have done in four Treatises; And so say
we too; for there is such a natural power in our hands, that we could have
said very little, and yet less to the purpose.

But yet Sir, we will not blame your little, nor should you, we think, so much
blame our much; Only we take leave to tell you our Pastors words (for though
we do not, yet you and he stand upon a level, That he was young, and now is
old, yet from his childhood to this very day, still versed amidst papers all
his days) he never saw so much thronged together in so little roomth, so
little and so much; so little to the heart, he beleives of every truly godly
man, so much to the heart of the wicked, who love to have it so, even as men of
your way and persuasion would have it; Justifying Mr H: in every line, and
reproaching the footsteps of the Lords anointed, we had almost said, in every
word, relating to that Controversy. The one cannot be without the other; he
that does the one, does both; -- That Is all we were ordered to tell you, but
from hence we will conclude in our own behalf.

First, That it is not the muchnesse that displeases, but that it is much
against the grain of our spirits; And then be it little or much, it is all
one, it much displeases. But suppose that much, which is spoken, is much after
the grain of our Spirits; why, though there be not a grain of Salt in it,
Yet, how pleasing is it! as wine and strong drink is to the palate of our
bodies, and as greedily taken-in as Mr Hs: Books are (to the heart of all the
most vile and abominable in the Land) or as that grass is to sheep which
rotts them. More and more of that, which is sweet, said Chrysostomes hearers,
as he tells us, more and yet more of that, though it "choke us; when a little
of that, which is Crosse-grained to us, as Truth is, does not a little
displease us. It is not how much or how little, but how it goes with or against
our Spirits, This renders it much or very little displeasing. So we are
concluded. And

Secondly, Thus we would conclude also; That, though All you and we have spoken
is but in words, yet we doubt not, and you may hope the same of us, Your Ear
and Endeavor was to speak more than words, else they are nothing but wind;
And then, as one says, He that has spoken but one such word, has spoken too
many by one. Yet

Thirdly, In reference to a multitude of words charged upon us; we grant that,
there may be plenty of words, but scarcity of matter, and there may be plenty
of matter in few words: Some have the skill of it to speak much in a little,
to contract, as it were, the Spirits of a point in to a few words, and so can
give you much in a little a large matter in a narrow Compass. But could we
skill of this thing, we would not show it in our matters, which tend to
inform them, that are as weak to apprehend, as hard and slow to understand,
as we our selves are, not able to apprehend that, which is couched and
drawne-up so close together; Much may be spoken to us in a little, but we
understand but little in much: All are not able to "drink Spirits; but must
have them infused into, and incorporated with larger discourses and particular
demonstrations. We, as all they that are the same with us, " Babes in Christ,
must have " line upon line, and precept upon precept, that is, a multitude of
lines and precepts. In a word, Better The Grammarian should blame us, than that
the people not understand us, was the old saying, and may plead our excuse, as
was hinted in our Epistle to you; whence it was That when you expected our
Answer in seven lines, we could not do it in less than seven Treatises. And
yet we expect not our matters should find acceptance for the muchnesse or
length thereof, nor yours perhaps, for the scantnesse or shortness of it; You
and we must subscribe to this Truth in Reference to our matters, Right
persuasion proceeds not so much from the Power of the speaker, as from the
disposition of the hearer; if he be averse from that he hears, or his ear be
forestalled, speak you much, or speak you little, it is all one, you had as
good speak to a millpost, and bid it move and turn to you. And so much to
that Objection.

SECT. V.
THere is a third thing you mention to us, wherein we would give you what
satisfaction we can, before we come to that wherewith we will conclude.

3. Our Pastor is invited by you to tell Mr Ford in a Letter to him, his
exceptions against some passages in his book for Infant Baptism, that he may
clear them in his next impression, which we vvish heartily he may do, if
possible to be don

Sir, we will not guess at your Reason, why you desire our Pastor to deal
with your Brother by Letter; You know, Sir, he always declined this Contest,
nor could he be persuaded to have meddled in these matters, but that we were
questioned by your self about them. And so, he standing in that Relation unto
us, he could not do less than what he has don, and do his duty; so then to
proceed, You may remember how fully and clearly we dealt with your Brother
and your self in this matter.

Thus it was, to repeat things again, so soon as our Pastor east his eye
upon the 78, and so forward to the 83 page of your brothers book, he saw
clearly, That the Tenets your brother holds-to there are the pillar and
ground, "Free Admission of all to all Church-Communions bears upon: The very
Tenor it holds-by; vvhereupon we saw it clearly our duty (for we were
questioned about it, and not our Pastor; so what he undertook and has don, it
was upon the account of Truth, and for our sakes) after we had done our work,
in order to your satisfaction, to return unto it again, and to make a
distinct Work or Treatise of it. And hereof we gave you and him intimation in
our Epistle to you, and in that other to him, and his fellow-brethren, as also
in our first Treatise, by an insertion there. And all this, that we might do
as becomes all things according to the Gospel Rule, and right order; we
made tender of our book again and again, that he might have the fight of
it, for we would rather offend our selves, than him or your self, or any
good man. But upon what account, he and you best know, it was refused; And so
after two months expectation, and then a flat denial, together with somewhat
more you wott off; We ceased, as in point of good manners, it was fit for us to
do; for what could we say or do more? Indeed we know not; we saw our papers
that were sent, returned with contempt and more, (They might fare the worse for
their Author, For the counsel is seldom loved, if the Counselor be not,
though yet Truth is lovely, what ever the Speaker be) The other three we
prepared, we offered and ye refused them; We say again, what could we do
more? and being fully resolved, we have done full-up to our duty; our Pastor
willed us to tell you farther, That whereas he purposed his said books, and
that said Treatise (the sixth in order) should see the light not before the
Author thereof be carried to the place of Darkness, That then his books may
speak for the way of Truth, fellow-walkers therein, and helpers of the same,
so monstrously opposed now adays; and for the vindication of that, he We are
taught to vindicate our Credit, when the Truth is wounded through the sides
thereof.
accounts better than riches, when his body must be laid in the place of
Silence; For why may it not be hoped, at least, why not endeavored, That when
his body is laid to sleep in the Dust of Death, his Name may rise from the Dust
of Debasement? however the will of the Lord be done.

But so he intended and fully purposed in his heart then, and not till then to
send that and other Treatises abroad into the world. But observing some signal
providence, This (1) That Mr Hs: pleadings for free Admission etc. should be so
pleaded for by a Minister of the Gospel, and Steward in His house, a leading
man and a Carrying man with the most of the professors in the County he
lives-in; And this after four Worthies of the Lord have stood up in the might
of God against him, speaking so much and so clearly from the Holy Scriptures
to that point of non-admission of all, that it had been enough to stop the
mouth of the Devil Preface to B. Cat: p. 68.
himself, which one said of an eminently learned and godly man asserting the
Truth against gainsayers. (2) And nextly to say the least, and as little as
can be, " The defaming of many Ministers and people round about him. (3) And
which pinches and presses yet more, if more can be, your pointing us to your
Son's handyworke in his Treatise of Prayer, specially the Lords Prayer, where
he charge the Rev: Author with Blasphemy upon Blasphemy, here one and there
another, and there a third; for this and that, and the other: But (4) specially
for Truths-sake, and the way of Holiness, which, as is conceived, suffers much
herein, through the spewings, you have given too just an occasion to be cast
thereupon, he will endeavor his utmost to give all, that will, a sight of all
that is written, making this Assuance withal to his Reader; First, That how
evilly-soever he is spoken off and dealt withal, yet he can do nothing
against the Truth, but in desire and endeavor, all, he possibly can, for it,
the promoting of the same in the hearts and lives of Gods people. And (2) That
they, who are helpers together with him of That Blessed thing, shall be helped
by him to the utmost of those abilities his Lord and heavenly Father is pleased
to Communicate to him. And he is persuaded, That This God Whom he has Trusted
will, as He has done hitherto, so to the end, help both him and them; And in
the last place, This he added more, That rather than he would, in the least
greive the Least of the Lords little ones knowingly, he would his tongue should
cleave to the roof of his mouth rather, and his pen to his Fingers ends; That
his hand should fall off from his arm, and his arm from his shoulder blade.
We come now to the fourth and last, and Then we have done.

SECT. VI.
4. SO we give you, Sir, to know, That our Pastor with our selves have taken
full notice, as you willed us, of your Sons handy-worke, in the Margent of that
Treatise our Pastor has written about forms of Prayer, and in special the "
Lords-Prayer, whereof you were more than an occasion, or causa sine qua non; we
have as we were sayiug well observed your Sons Charge of blasphemy there. And
Truly had it not been your Son, whom we have known so well, we had wondered at
it. Besides he is but young, a youth-full Man; Yet these words may fit very
well; An evil time sure, sad things are coming, " The Child shall behave
himself proudly against the Ancient; and, which aggravates the fault, we
think, the Son shall do this, the Father standingby, and giving allowance to
it, and which might, in some men's thoughts, highten it to a Crime, the father
of the Child a Minister of the Gospel, allowing his Son so dealing with his
fellow-Minister, and little less than boasting of it, if not glorying in it,
when it was so done. Your own acknowledgement, Sir, Mr Ford and Mr Owen with
your self were at your Sons Elbow, at least he was within the sound of your
words, which were these, " Take heed, Son, what you write, that it be no more
than what you can Answer, "I Will warrant you for that, said he: Say we; should
you have taken his warrant, being so youthful a Man and known so to be? Say
you, for we make bold to question you about this matter, though were we as
much above you in place, as we are below you, we would not be so bold with
you, as you know who was, when the Child offended in the presence of the
Father, he excused the Son a tanto if not a toto, and laid all the blame upon
the Father, and gave him a box on the ear, withal suffering the Child to do
a thing so unbecomming in the presence of the Father. So we return to you, and
This only we would say, Enquire we pray you at your Oracle (we mean not your
self, for if we counted you an Oracle, as, you say, we did, we see, we were
mis-taken; Yet because we think we did not, we will not ask pardon) we
pray you enquire of Gods Word, That Oracle, whether you, being the father of
the Child, should not have seen what the Child had written? Supposing you
had so done; It will be supposed also, we think, that for " Blasphemy, you
would have Commanded him to have written " Error; Yet that would have been too
heavy a Charge too, upon these words, against which blasphemy stands charged,
" That the Lords-prayer is a dead letter, for had there been a Spirit of life
and quickening in those words, commonly said with the speed of a good Clarke by
Ministers of your persuasion, way, and judgment, what a grown and Tall-man in
Christ had your Son been by this time of the Day, being taught this prayer in
his Cradle, by your own Confession, using it upward all along, and at this
very day saying it now very Clarke-like in the Pulpit; so tenaciously he holds
to that, the manner of us all, he had learned in his Cradle. And Truly Sir,
others may think you your self had made clearer Demonstrations of the good
Spirit speaking in you, had the words of that prayer been Spirit and life unto
you, having said it so often in our hearing at the end of your own; Well, Sir,
but if this be so as your Son says, "The Lords prayer is a quickening letter,
and he that says contrary " blasphemeth, then you do well, and your bounden
duty (as we Country-folke say) teaching it your Children; yet our persuasion
is from the premises, so from this also, which follows, That it cannot be as
your Son says, That this said prayer, should be Spirit and life, while yet the
most vile and wicked persons in the world say it every day, for few say any
other, and most solemnly on the Lords day after you, when you say it. We
commend your Son to your care and good counsel, he stands in great need of it:
And we pray for you, That you may stand in Gods Counsel.

SECT. VII.
BUt these two things we are Commanded to tell you, and so an end of this
matter.

First, That had an elder and wiser man than your Son charged Ab ineunt aetate
sua lusil in art? dialectica nunc in sacris scriptum insanit.
our book in that manner, it would have reminded our Pastor of one he has
read of some where, who, when he was young made himself merry with his
Sophistry, and afterward when he waxed old showed himself mad in Divinity,
and so sported with the sacred Scripture also.

Secondly, That you never stirred the Coals till now; yet do we not now, much
less have we so done, show the least heat, which you call fire against you, or
your Son, whether our bowels are not stirred with compassion over you both,
the Lord knows. Though yet against those black and horrid doings in God's
house, we have declaimed with zeal not enough, yet, we hope, that which was,
was according to knowledge: So also against the Observation of the Day commonly
called Christmas Day: Against this and the other, since you have raised us like
an huge Bell, we will make the Sound thereof, our cry against it, and free
admission of all, go forth through the whole Land, as the Sound of Mr Hs:
Books have done; we will do our Endeavor, and the Lord God do what is good
in His own eyes; for if this may prove a damnable opinion in the issue; That
all are to be admitted to the Lords Table, how notorious soever for their
deboysery. And this also, That the Day should be kept holy, which has not the
Lords Sanction upon it, Then we see not but that there may be a damnable
silence (which is the thing in question betwixt your self and us, and will
fall into consideration in its respective place) in those who should oppose
them. Every one must give account of his idle words; and a Minister for his
idle silence, says that worthy man Mr W: Jinken.

We have given our persuasion also touching forms of prayer, and in special
resolved some Queries about the Lords Prayer, not so much as blameing, much
less Censuring or judgeing them, that use forms, or that form of prayer at
the end of their's. We have given the reasons of our persuasion, why we think
it not so comely; When we have your Reasons for your doeings in that and other
matters, which we will not be so bold, as you might be with our Pastor, so
much as to entreat of you, possibly we may be of your mind in these things,
but we think it no easy work for you to give us any thing that has the
shape of Reason, thereby to make such proof of your doeings in Reference to
those matters underhand, that they are ordered according to the mind and will
of your God.

We will conclude with a few words to those Ministers that sense with Mr H^ and
walk together with him in his way in point of Church-Administrations; (1) That
some wits will adventure to make a fair cover, even of the very sacred
Scriptures, for the most deformed and grossest errors among which we do
reckon this, relating to free admission of all to all Church-Communions. (2)
And that a sad account will be given of that time, and of those parts, which
have been laid-out in the patronage of such matters, that lie clean Cross to
the grain of Truth. For it is as sinful (to use that learned man's words upon
Job) to sew Job. 11. 530.
fig leaves, or make fair pretexts to cover the nakedness of our opinion, as of
our practices, Therefore he that can receive it, let him receive it. Prove: 30.
32. If thou have done evil in listing-up thy self, or if thou have thought
evil (or maintained evil) lay thy hand upon thy mouth: Speak no more, never
be an Advocate in a bad cause, though it be thine own. When our errors are
shown us (as these have been in Reference to free Admission by four, as was
said one after another, we should not open our mouths, unless it be to
renounce and disclaim them -- But we have done.

And that we may be still doing, and be sure to do our duty, let us pray each
for other; " The Lord deliver us from Evil: The guidance of our own Spirits,
as bad and worse to us, than is that of the world: And give us a sound mind,
whether the body be sound, or unsound, no great matter, The sound mind is all,
the Mind that was in Christ, and is in all sound Christians. And this labor of
Love and work of Faith is but full-up to that lovely rule, " Whom we Reprove
openly, we should pray for secretly.

AMEN.
FINIS.

