A GOOD SOVLDIER, Maintaining his Militia, and Posturing himself, as the
servants of the Lord, now and in all Ages, have Postured the Kingdoms; WHEREIN
The Right Hand of the Lord with His servants directing their way, and blessing
their Work; and all His Ordinances, Fasting, Praying, Preaching, etc. unto the
Nation; is declared as mightily, as it was by the Resurrection from the dead,
whether we respect a Nation or a Man only. Here is a Register of Gods blessings
and Satan's curses; A Record of the ((...),) The great and admirable salvations,
which God has wrought for the (Righteous) Nation, and the Man there: And of the
terrible things He has done against His Adversaries these four last years.
Humbly presented to the House of PARLIAMENT and Assembly of Divines. WITH A
discovery of the Loyal Convert, That he is quite turned from his GOD, His KING
and His Kingdom: a most disloyal person to all three.

HOSEA 14. 9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? for the ways
of the LORD are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors
shall fall therein. Printed by Order, on a day of rebuke and blasphemy: and in
the year of earnest expectation after an Expected End, 1644.



A GOOD SOVLDIER, Maintaining his Militia, and Posturing himself, as the
servants of the Lord, now and in all Ages, have Postured the Kingdoms; WHEREIN
The Right Hand of the Lord with His servants directing their way, and blessing
their Work; and all His Ordinances, Fasting, Praying, Preaching, etc. unto the
Nation; is declared as mightily, as it was by the Resurrection from the dead,
whether we respect a Nation or a Man only. Humbly presented to the House of
PARLIAMENT and Assembly of Divines. By Hez. W.

EZEKIEL. 36. 25, 33, 37. From all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will
I cleanse you.

I will also cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded.

I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them.

EZRA 7. 23.Whatsoever is commanded by th God of Heaven, let it be diligently
done: For why should there be wrath against the Realm. JUDGES 5. 13, 21 The
Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.

O my soul thou have trodden down strength.

Imprimatur

EDMUND CALAMY



Printed by George Miller, dwelling in Blackfriars, 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE MEN, AND THE COVNSELLOVRS; The Mighty Men, and the Men of
War; The Judge and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient in all three
Kingdoms: Engaged now in the work and service of the LORD, To help the LORD
against the Mighty.
AS large and spreading a Dedication almost as was the Anchoran, An. 634.
French-mans, who dedicated a Book, not his own neither, to Prince Charles,
then to all the Popes and Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops: and to all the
learned-men within and without all the Universities in all four Kingdoms.
Every man abounds in his own sense, I in mine. But I conceive, and that I
cannot be mistaken; That when you shall have read this short Epistle
throughout, you will say, There is infinite Reason why I should dedicate these
following leaves to you all, you Princes, Nobles and Worthies; and to the good
people too, in all three Kingdoms: But more specially to you. You! The Lord
has picked you out of Thousands; You are His peculiars; His chosen ones; He has
honored you with his own Name, Saviors, Repairers of the breach, wide as the
Sea; Restorers of the paths to dwell in; Builders of the wastes, Raisers-up the
desolations, which a people of Gods curse have made in your LORDS Kingdoms. A
mavelous honor has the Lord put upon you! A glorious work has He wrought
for His Kingdoms by your hands! You are entreated now by the mercies of Christ
to show mercy to your own souls, To work out your own salvation, To do the
same work for your own souls, which you have done for the Nation: You are
entreated to take the same way in posturing your selves, which you have taken
in posturing the Kingdoms. A most just request, It is granted. You will
observe now what you have done for the Kingdoms.

1. You have plucked down the high and lofty ones, proud Persons, and vile
Things, Idols of jealousy before the eye. Pluck them down in your heart too,
or else you have done nothing for your souls.

2. You have commanded Prayer. Pray in prayer, pray servently, in your own
house and closet: And if you cannot pray so, mourn that you cannot.

3. You have opened the prison doors, and the mouths of Ministers: you have
sent forth Angels (a more proper word then Bishops) To preach the everlasting
Gospel (as you read.) (Truly the Lord will do Great Things for this Land,
Truly He will.) That you may see it with your eyes, and rejoice with His
Inheritance, labor with all your might to bring your hearts to the rule, and
under the power of the Gospel.

4. You have vindicated the LORDS Day, a day so vilified, so reproached, so
blasphemed; never was day so dealt with since the beginning of days; you have
vindicated That Day; Let it appear you have done it in Truth, for your LORDS
Day is your delight, and you sanctify that day unto the Lord.

5. You would keepe-off common-hands from taking the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of the LORD: You will look to your hands, that they be clean: and your
vessels, that they be holy, wherein you have put that Shewbread, those Holy
mysteries. You are consulting about a Church way. You are resolved, with
Joshua, To walk in it amidst your own house.

6. You would bring the three Kingdoms into covenant with their God; Blessed
be you of the Lord. But you do all this faithfully; you have lifted-up your
hands, to the high God, to Reform your self and yours. Now you must not start
aside. The Covenant is as a large circumference, it fetches a wide circuit
about three Kingdoms; If you love your souls, as you do the Kingdoms, you
must Center this Covenant, every man in his own heart; you must stand to it.

7. Active you are to quench the fire in the Kingdoms. You are as active to
quench the fire in your owne-bosomes, which let alone there, may burn to the
neithermost Hell, a place below the grave.

8. You would have the Lord purge-out the Rebels out of the Kingdoms: He must
do it, for it is his promise; But if you desire it heartily, you are more
active in subduing the rebellions in your own heart. This is to love the
Kingdoms in Truth; This is to walk in the Truth; This is to do faithfully
whatever you do to the Brethren and to strangers: And why not, to your own
souls? Go on and prosper, as your souls prosper. Love the Kingdoms still,
and love your own souls still; Posture and strengthen the Kingdoms with one
hand, your souls with the other. All this is done by the same means, in the
same way. The LORD keep your hearts close to Him, and your hands to His work,
which shall turn to your salvation also, through your prayers, and the prayers
of all the Churches for you, and the supply of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen and Amen.

A GOOD SOVLDIER.
The Reason and Use of this Treatise.
Declaring the right hand of the Lord with His servants, in the way of working
salvation for His Kingdoms: which way is so demonstrated to every man, that he
must see himself stand charged in particular to work for himself in the same
way, as be regards the salvation of his own soul.

I Must necessarily suppose, that no man, in the Christian world, can be a
stranger to the affairs of these times; what the condition of England (not to
speak of Ireland) is at this present time; what fraud has been used to
under-mine the Church, the City of God there, these many years; what forcing
against her these years bypast; what forcible ways have been taken to storm
it this last year, that it might be no more a City, or called by that name;
This very thing, I say, how angry the Nations are; how those, who should be (as
David speaks of his adversaries) the Churches guides and friends, how these
have magnified themselves against her, have consulted and parlied together (for
an Assembly of Robbers, is called a Parliament in Oxford) against Thy hidden
ones, saying, Come let us cut them off from being a Psalm. 83. 4^.
Nation: that their name way be no more in remembrance: All this is well known
to all, that are not willingly ignorant. So also, what ways have been taken by
the friends of the LORD CHRIST (those few that have appeared for Him) so defend
His Church from the furious assaults of bloody men; and how wonderful their
LORD has appeared on their side; how He has taken ^o Himself power, has
discovered those, that magnified themselves against Him; has exalted His right
Hand in all his peoples sight, in delivering, rescuing, protecting,
MARVELLOVSLY seperating betwixt His Friends, and His Adversaries; so
maintaining His cause and His servants standing-up for His cause, against the
power and policy of all opposers: All this also, is known in all the earth,
Isa. 12. 5.
therefore sing unto the LORD and exalt His name Jah: ^or, though the gates of
hell stood all this while wide open upon Gods people, yet these gates prevailed
not, All this violence, and wrong could not hinder the work of the LORD, but
promoted it rather in all the peoples sight: Blessed be the LORD. Indeed it is
the fairest and most admired prospect, that ever was seen, to stand still, and
behold the works of the LORD, and the operations of His Hand, reached forth to
His servants out of the clouds; yet is His Hand made visible now before all the
Christian world, carrying on and steering the hand and way of his people
through seas of proud waters, storms and tempests, mighty troubles, toward
their promised land, a wealthy place. To leave the figure and to speak
properly; The Almighties Hand, steering and guiding His people-in and
throughout this whole posturing work, is cleared now to the eye of flesh, and
is wonderful in our eyes. I shall speak a little here, for it is but a
little, which man can speak in this, how wonderfully the Lord has appeared for
His servants all along the way, they have gone, to advance His glory; but I
shall show openly the way they have gone, to be the very same, wherein all the
truly noble in the world have walked, when the Lord was pleased to use their
hands for the strengthening themselves, and well-posturing His Kingdoms. This
way is cleared to sense and reason, and demonstrable to every man by comparing
a Body natural, with a Body-politique, when there is no soundness in the one,
nor in the other, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores Isa. 1. 6.
: comparing the one Body with the other, and earthly things with spiritual,
every man may understand the way of posturing a Kingdom, and himself: for
that is chiefly intended here, and of chief concernment, else the well
posturing of a Kingdom will be nothing unto him.

The whole Kingdom is but the great Body politic, whereof (...). M. Ant.
Medit. B. 1. Sect. 15. p. 12.
he himself is not a part (for so the Philosopher would not have him called,
but) a member. Suppose now, that such a Body, which the natural man is better
acquainted with, a Natural body, lies here before us, in the same case, as we
have read and seen this great Body of the Kingdom to be-in, languishing near
unto death, The whole head sick, and the whole heart faint; Suppose it so; and
yet we need not make it a supposition, for so it was. We will not now go to
the College of Physicians to ask them, what is to be done in this case?
Whether something must be put upon the body, or something put into it? We will
put something into it sure enough, so sense and reason tells us, for we are not
so forsaken of both, as to clap an head-peece upon this Body, then a
Breast Plate, so other pieces of armor in order one after another, and then
call to him, as once to Sampson, up and quit thy self like a man, the
Philistines are upon thee. Alas! The Body is weak, because the humors within
are so strong, the spirits wasted and spent, because of something within, which
must be purged forth first. If you put Armor upon him, it will but cumber him
the more, and be a means to presse-out, that little spirit, which remains.
The Physician for the Body knows his work here, so does the soule-physitian:
If the LORD has entrusted them to discretion, they both work together, and
give their directions orderly; And the maine consultation is about the
casting-out of the bad humors, the inabling the man to fight with his disease,
and to overcome it: Here the Elders of the Church (soul-Physitians) see their
work, they must pray for him [for the body under such distempers, the mind
sympathising with the body, cannot pray for it self; the elders must be
called-in now, and that instructs us not to put off the great work, making
peace with God, to our sick bed; we can do nothing for our selves then, the
Elders must do all, they must pray for the sick, and] as the case may be, and
humors so strong, fast for him also: for some humors, as spirits, will not
out by other means. Physicians will prescribe a way how to enable the patient
to fight with his disease; how he may recover his spirits, and fortify them,
make them quick and lively; Then they will prescribe him a diet, how he may
keep himself strong, by keeping close to his prescriptions, and to the GOD of
his strength, and from all that is hurtful, may grieve the Spirit of his God,
and so a worse thing fall unto him. Now put Armor upon. this man^ and speak
to him as to Sampson, and he will do as at other times, when GOD was wi^^ him,
and he walked with God. It is just so in the posturing of a Kingdom, in the
setting that great Body in a posture of Defense; It is as the diseased Body we
read of, but of this in due place.

I think it more pertinent to this place, to say this, That this is the very
end the LORD does point at in all his sore judgments upon Kingdoms, and in
all the plagues, strokes, sicknesses, sorrows, He inflicts on the children of
men; This is the great end, That the plague of the heart may be discovered to
every heart: Therefore 1 King. 8. 38.
the earth is shaken terribly, that the bloodshed there may be discoverd; That
the Idols there may be utterly abolished; The very end, why the Lord arises
now to shake the earth terribly: And He will not leave shaking till the Idols
be cast-out to the moles and to the batts. In a word, Therefore the Lord has
done, and does the evil of punishment, That He may discover to every man, the
evil of his sin; And so I would descend from a general to a particular; for
when I have said every man, I have, indeed, spoken to no man, for no man will
think it spoken unto him: And indeed it is but a beating of the air also, lost
labor, to speak unto (...), a certain man, somebody, but I know not whom,
who, when you have talked about Posturing a Kingdom, the way how to set it in
a good posture of Defense, will not think himself to be spoken unto, though
he can think himself wholly concerned therein: for this is an old saying, and
very true; he that speaks to every body, speaks to no body: and what is every
bodies work is no bodies work, and so by all neglected; And though everybody
would share in the common blessing, yet nobody is so ready to share in the
duty; he would be safe, and have his cabin and goods so to be, whatever become
of the Ship, I mean the Commonwealth; not considering that he sails along
upon the sea of the world, in the same ship; and, where others are, there is
his cabin too, his interest is there, the public welfare concerns himself,
and his own safety. But this is not all, suppose that the ship, by the care
and the wisdom of the stecremen, come safe to land, yet this man's comfort
shall be, but according to the proportion of his care, in seeking the
preservation of the ship; Nay more than this, and so I will speak more
plainly, for I intend the information of the simple; What if the Militia of
the Kingdom were fully settled and maintained, what good were that, to that
man, who, in the mean time, lies quite naked, exposed to all the malice of
the Devil and his own heart; what were it to him, that the Kingdom is set in
a safe and good posture, if in the mean time, he himself be, as a Town
without walls, or as a City whose walls are broken down; who or what will may
come-in, and goe-out, and make a prey there? Therefore I will point a few words
directly to him, even that particular man, that looks to have comfort, safety
and peace in the Kingdoms safety. That is his hope, But there is an hope,
which makes ashamed, like waters dried-up in summer: Is it a true hope? Then
the man has this ground, That all this time, while the Kingdom has been
posturing, he has, with the good soldier, learned well to posture himself; he
has not neglected to do that every day, which omitted, will be the greatest
cut and grief to our hearts, on that day, the great day, when the ways and
secrets of all hearts shall be opened, and all the prizes, the opportunities
put-into our hands, let slip thence, and lost there, shall be presented to our
knowledge: This will be the Hell indeed. Therefore, that this hope may not be a
conceit only, but an Anchor, sure and steadfast, to the soul, amidst the great
water-floods, It concerns this man to consider as follows:

He has heard the Drum beat every day these three years together; It was
his Alarm; he was called upon to put himself in a posture of Defense; for when
the hour of temptation and sore agony comes upon him (it is come upon the
world) and he be found naked, he must be left the more naked of excuse, because
he was called-upon every day to maintain his Militia, to quit himself as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ: He must think also, if he thinks of himself, and
common reason forsakes him not, (which must needs tell him,) That sooner or
later he shall meet with enemies enough to combat with, though none of those
destroyers, (so busily employed now in working-out their own destruction, and
against their intent, the salvation of Gods people) though none of these, he
meet with, yet he must look to meet with those as bad to combat with, with
the Prince ruling in the air, Principalities and powers, those mighty
adversaries, might and power it self; Besides, vehement winds, and a scorching
season, will beat upon the head of every man sooner or later, and down he
falls, he knows not how low, unless his standing be sure upon the Rock, in a
good posture of Defense; when a sickness unto death comes, then this will be,
even the sense of all this, if the heart be not, at that time, as Naballs was,
like a stone, dead and past feeling; Before the man dies; then, I say, the
sense of all this will be; The man may be now like a wild-Asse traversing his
way, but in that Month he shall be Jer. 2. 24.
found.

But before this day comes, who knows what terrible things he may see! He may
see the tearing-up of mountains by the roots, and hurling them into the midst
of the sea, as the Prophet expresses Psalm. 46.
the terrible commotions, concussions, distractions, which have been, are and
will be in posturing times, troublous times ever, when the breaches in
Jerusalems wall are making-up; He may feel the earth trembling, Devils and
men raging, garments rouled in blood; he may see Towns fired; Cities
laid-wast; all desirable things taken from him, and what his soul loathes given
into his hands, instead thereof. Then, if he has maintained his Militia, if he
be, as the good soldier, in a posture of defense, happy is he. If otherwise,
neither he nor I can express how miserable his case will be; very miserable
and beyond expression. Sinners in Zion, men professing the truth, but not
showing forth the power thereof in their life, these shall be afraid,
fearfullnesse and trembling will come upon him, sorrow will overwhelme him; The
proud waters will go over Psalm. 55. 5.
his head; terrors shall make him afraid on every side; brimstone shall be
scattered upon his habitation. Job 18. 11.


There is one thing more in this, and commands our serious consideration.
Suppose this careless person should be isntrumental to the posturing the
Kingdom, in throwing out Persons and Things, which have troubled the peace of
the same; Suppose so, while yet he himself is an unreformed person, his own
Militia is quite neglected; Then this will follow, That all this he has done,
though according to the command of God, is upon his score, and he shall be
reckoned with for it, even for the good, he has done, because after an ill
manner. He (as was said of old) rebuked pride with another pride; he has
throwne-out Idoll-Persons, and their Idol services, but is as Idolatrous as
were they: They set-up Idols before their eyes, he setts-them up in his heart:
It was Jehues case, a most notable case; He destroyed Ahab and his house, and
had a word for it, the command of God, But he did it for the glory of his own
name; with a zeal burning-hot, but it was for his own house, and was such an
Idolater, as Ahab was: Therefore says the Lord (it is terrible) I will
avengeth blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. This Scripture is fully and
usefully cleared to me and thee, (for Mr Burrought upon Hosea, c. i. v. 4.
there is a deceit in Generals) how dangerous a thing it is to profess our
selves teachers of others, and yet not teach our selves; A reformer of others,
and yet our selves unreformed; An enemy to Idols standing without the man, but
a friend to Idols standing-up in his own heart: This is to abhor Idols, yet
to commit sacrilege. It is of great, of infinite concernment. Let me speak
this over once more to the Gallio of these times, I would single him out though
he is plural; I mean them, whose hearts, and hands may be with the
Parliament, but they regard the things that are done, no more than Gallio did
the beating of Sosthenes; To this man I Acts 18. 17.
would point these few words. 1. He can think it very fit that all that which
exalts it self in a Kingdom, to the destruction of King and Kingdom, be
taken down; the Idols there thrown away, for they make a Kingdom naked; and
he can be active this way; But he hears not himself speak all this while unto
himself, That it more concerns him to throw-out the Idols all, which exalt
themselves in his own heart against the Lord Christ, and his own peace. 2. He
can, perhaps, command Prayer and Fasting also, think all this seasonable in
these troublous times; but regards not how slack and cold he is at that
performance in his house and closset. 3. So for the word of GOD, the power of
GOD unto salvation, he can help to widen the door, to give it a free passage,
and yet shut his own heart against it, not subjecting himself to the rule and
power thereof. 4. So for the Lords day; he has perhaps helped to vindicate that
day from its horrible pollutions, and yet the duties performed on that day,
what a weariness to him? 5. So for the Covenant, he can persuade others to
enter-into it, and yet not persuaded in his own heart, to stand unto it, though
he has lifted-up his hand to the high GOD, and subscribed his name, that so he
will do. He complains of the public miseries, but indeed they are the
private, that trouble him (...). Isa. 1^. The Ladies says Homer, wept heartily
with Brisei over the body of Patroclus, but it was because their own Lords were
slain in the same ba^tle.
; he helps to quench the fire in the Kingdom with all speed, for he fears the
fire will take his dwelling place; he stands-up against the robbers and
spoilers, least they enter his own doors. I could tell him here a very apt and
pertinent discourse between Lypsius and Langius, touching the troubles and
miseries of Belgia; But because I suppose this man well skilled in the Latin
tongue, as Gallio was, being a chief person, a Deputy, I will point only to
this discourse in the Lips. de Constant. l. 1. c. 8.
Margin, and entreat him heartily to read it, That I may not delay the Reader
any longer from taking a full view of the method, and well ordered way, the
Nobles and Worthies have taken in this posturing work: then we shall see, That
the Good Soldier has taken the very same way in the posturing himself: And
so, by the good hand of God with him, he stands as a well postured Kingdom,
more stable than are the everlasting hills, and perpetual mountains; The
blast of the terrible ones against him, mooves him no more, than does a blast
of wind shake a wall of brass.

CHAP. I. The first work in Posturing a Kingdom, is,
The casting-out of Abominations thence, Persons and Things The chief Heads
and Leaders only named; Whereto are added, Masters of Schools and Colleges.
And to the Abominable things are added, blasphemous Pictures, Divine names
given to unhallowed places fignes and days. This work is first in design,
last in performance: It is doing, but never done, Much is done, and mighty
Reasons given, why there is no more done.

I Must review the comparison betwixt the Civil Body and the Natural: In
this, there were malignant humors as evil spirits; In that, there are
malignant Persons and Things. Malignant Persons, I will but name the chief,
specially those, who have Defiled the Land with blood; polluted it with
Idolatries; leavened it with Atheism and profaneness; All these might be
pointed at with the finger. 1. The murderers first, men of bloods, mighty
hunters before the LORD, who have slain the bodies of men; spilt their
precious blood like water. God will require it; At the hand of every beast will
GOD require it Genesis 9. 5, ^.
At the hands of these beastslike-men, much more, woe unto him and them, who
have spilt this blood; They have defiled the land, and the land cannot be
cleansed of the blood, that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed
it Number. 35. 33.
. 2. Those, that have (what in them lay) spilt the blood of souls, for whom
the LORD Christ has shed His most precious blood: Woe unto them; a double woe
upon Archbishops and Bishops, who have, by their abominable doctrines and
practices, slain the souls of men; so as the Church has complained bitterly,
Woe is me now, for my soul is wearied because of murderers Jer. 4. 3 ^.
; murderers in the highest degree Illud perniciosum, quod in aternitate
juguiabit, etc. Sal. ad Eccles. l. 2. ^.
: The Lord has lifted-up His hand against these; and by command from Gods
mouth, man has liftedup his hand also, and subscribed his name for the casting
of these forth: for they have leavened the land with Atheism and with
Idolatry, and with horrible prophanations: It were endless to reckonup
singulars here, This Atheist and that Idolater, these profane persons, who
swarm every where, this were an infinite work. I Will name but one single person
more, but he is plural, many, if not a legion; He is the Catechiser, a Master
in the School and College; Men of infinite use to the places where they are,
if they study to be useful; If good, then as were the figgs, very good: If
bad, very bad Jer. 24. 3.
: The Schoolmaster, he distilleth, infuseth, droppeth into children what
pleases them, and that is ever what is worst, whereunto corrupt nature stands
most bent and baised. Children are not as we commonly say, tanquam rasae
tabula, As a clean table, or paper, wherein nothing is written, but you may
write therein what you please. There is some truth in it, and of excellent use:
yet, I say, children are not as clean paper; there is something written in
them before the father took them into his arms, which all the fingers in the
world cannot take forth: The more care is to be had into whose fingers you
commit your children; and under what droppings they are set. If the little
vessel be ill seasoned at first, it is more then a doubt, it will never prove
good for service, or honorable use Child's pa^^. c. 1, 2. etc. 9.
: Much might be said here, and to very great purpose; I Will say but this, and
this I will say, because I have observed nothing done or said against these men
hitherto: These Catechisers if evil, are as evil as are the evil Priests;
nay more corrupting, if more can be, than are those brutish Pastors; Take them
together, they are altogether corruptours, All as lepers, pests and plagues in
a commonwealth. So much to Schoolemasters, that there may be eyes set upon
them: So also upon Masters of Colleges, and Tutours there; These are as were
the former, If bad, very bad. Children are (so they are now adays in years
and understanding) transmitted too soon to the College, (a slippery place and
in a slippery Lubricus locus and lubrica aetas: and facilis est in ea
prolapsio, Cic.
age: (The Masters there, and the Tutours admit these children, take the
Parents money, and return home their children, Asses Accipimus pecuniam and
remittimus Asinos.
,) which was the old complaint; Parents may complain more bitterly now; Our
children, good when we sent them to the College Aula tua recipit, non sacit
bonos. Child's patr. c. 9.
, have spent our money there, and a precious stock of time there, and have
gained nothing but what tends to their eternal loss, corruption in their
judgment and manners: O the sad complaints this way! They shall be heard now:
The School and the College it shall be visited; high time; for there are
malignant persons many, and things not a few, I must point to these next.

These are, I know not how many, but I will gather them-up into as short a
sum as I can. 1. Idols, and Idol services, with their appurtenances, all
things belonging thereunto; all these are no sooner set-up, adorned and served,
but a kingdom is made naked, and cast-downe. 2. With these I must rank
blasphemous pictures, and representations hung up for signs Holy Lamb,
salutation, etc.
in many places. 3. Sacred names St Saviors. St. Faiths.
given to our meeting places, commonly called Churches: To The Providence.
Ships also, and to days, which we call holy: So we should not do, for we
have but one Holy Day, and that is the LORDS Day; Other days there are, good
days Esth. 9. 22.
days of praise and thanksgiving: and days of atonement, Fasting days,
soul afflicting days: As for holy days, we know not where to find them,
unless in Romes Calender: and if we have them thence, then sure we must cast
them-out of ours: And greater reason yet, why it should be so; Because old
Latimer said long since, The Devil has more service done him upon one holy
day, then he has on ten working days. The strongest plea for keeping in these
days is, That children and servants must have days for recreation. Yes, but
let them not be called holy days. There shall be fit times appointed, wherein
children and servants, yea and masters too, may take meet and fitting
recreations; [I mean by meet, such as are recreations indeed; truly so called,
comely for Christians, such as will indeed make them fit for war:] But when
we have said all, or enough touching this grant or allowance, for lawful
recreations, and fit times for them, yet holy days, as we ignorantly, or
wickedly call them, shall be cast-out, when all is done. 4. Books next (for so
some mis-call them) those accursed things, so filled-up with blasphemies,
heresies; such in-lets to atheism and profaneness, making roomth for Rome,
and bringing-in Sodom to Jeru^salem; These shall be cast-out. To name the last
first, Books (as they call them) which deny, that the Law of GOD has any
coercive, or binding power; Man is a lawless creature now; let him do what he
has a will to do, GOD sees him not; Though it be said every where, they did
evil in GODS sight, yet GOD sees no sin in His children. What Book shall we
hear of next? We need not question it; A Book denying the immortality of the
soul, or affirming, That the soul does sleep with the body: I could tell the
Reader how an Heathens book was served, who had written but doubtfully
touching such a matter; It is high time, etc. but I know my place and station.

I might be large here, and yet say little, because vile, treacherous and
profane Persons are so many; and Things, defiling and destructive to a Nation,
are, as many; Therefore, if I should say more, yet. I should not say the half;
The half! when we shall hear what the Good Soldier will say, who will give
us the life and use of all this, and speak all he knows faithfully touching
his own heart, the Malignant lords there, (for every lust there, not crucified
is a lord there:) And Things, yet he cannot speak the half of that evil, or
malignancy, he finds within himself, his own heart; A great part whereof he
never knew; A great part of it, and of the evil therein, is to him as the
terra incognita to us, There is a space left for it in our Maps: So is there a
prayer put-up by this man every day, for pardon of that evil, which he
discernes not, but he knows it is there. Therefore since it will be upon
confession anon, That there is more evil in one man's heart, than he can
possibly take notice of; I forbear to name any more Persons or Things, which
are to be found in a Kingdom, That I may take the more time to satisfy the
Reader touching this objection, What is done against all these malignants, that
are known, and discovered, for the cutting them off, or casting-them forth of
the Kingdom, that our Kingdom may be the LORDS Kingdom; that He may come-in
and delight amongst us? thus now, the objections runs-on.

Ob. There are many malignants not pointed at, The Blasphemer, (...) the LORDS
Name, every da: Tho proph^^e person, the swea^er, the drunkard, and the
cor^^^nt, who ^^^^heth on this side, and on that, would have all, and would
lea^^ his neighbor nothing at all. And for the great A^^^^ the troublers, the
Princes within^er, who are roaring Lyone^ (...) Judges. (...), these all are
where they were they hold their pl^^^s; These murderers are lively and strong
at this day; The ^abernacles of Robbers Called a Parliament in Oxford, The
vilest men upon earth called themselves Concillon Deorum, an Assembly of Gods.
the assemblies of wicked men ((...) to) (...), and to stand upon their
terms; If ye will Trone of Peace and think now ye may to be of yoabes, (...)
cibmsciences, then you musT Treat with Robbers and murthere^ touching that
matter (those conscientious men) and (...) them half way, where you must not
give a polt, but ^am (as they call it) to plot-cats. Idolaters prevail very
much and hope to prevaile-yet more; v^e and light Prophets, and b^^i^ish
Priests have spread themselves throughout the Land, and leavened the same:
Treacherous men, Hoth^^ the Father and the son. Walker and (...) are not
out-off no not these, when Clement Walker A Check to the checker, give us a
clear understanding in this matter, and makes a full answer.
who was never good for himself (yet all for himself his private wealth) and
worse for the public, hun^ed the blood of the Righteous, has pe^^ioned for
h^^ head, who ^^ worth a thousand of ours as like the father as can be^ an
orpament to his Country, precious in the eyes and heart^ of all that are
godly; to whom yet the surrender of Bristoll is an grievous as it ought to be:
But they see Gods hand in it making way for his wrath at present, and for a
wonderful salvation to His people in His own time, shortly: Thus for maligna^^
Persons. And for Things, Idols are held up in many places still; Idol services
maintained still; Abominable Books are thrust ou^ here and there yet not
thrust into the fire: Days are called holy still; Persons and Things are as
they were: That is the sum of the objection, I cannot fr^me a short answer to
all this; We are upon the prime and first work, the foundation work, for a
stable and glorious building, we must go gradually on-ward and expect with
patience while the mountains and Hills are made Zach. 4 7.
and the head-stone is brought forth with shootings, crying. grace, grace unto
it. So I proceed and answer. First,

I. That indeed the cutting-off these mighty opposers should be the first work
in the well posturing a Kingdom; if that were done, we should deal well
enough with others. True it is, there is not a drunkard in the parish, but he
is a plague there; So is a swearer, a blasphemer, a Sabbath-breaker, these are
malignances, very ^^sts and plagues to the places where they live; But it
cannot be conceived now that all these can be cut off. If some one man, whom
the Scripture calls a ^oaring Lion, and an evening wolf^, some one chief
troubler of Isreal's peace, be out off; If one head, that has contrived, and
plotted the downfall of Israel, he struck-off, even this is a good beginning,
and according to rule; for the striking off this one head, has weakened all
hands, that were for the service, and at the back of this Head. Saul had killed
many Philistines, Thousands. David has killed but one, but that one was Go^^^h,
a Chieftaine amongst the Philistines, Now hear what the women say, coming
forth to meet King Saul; Saul has sl^^^ his thousands; 1 Samuel 18. 5.
and David his ten thousands. Mark that; Ten thousand slain in one Goliath.
that huge Philistine Captain of the H^st, that blasphemed the Living GOD. I
cannot doubt to say thi^ now and to affirm it, That, when Goliath was slain.
Ten thousand ^^^^ies were slain at that time: for all the host of the
Philistines, Gods enemies, were discomfited on that day May, 12. 1641.
when this work was done A wonderful work; for He, who only does wonders did
that, that is my first answer.

II. It may suffice for present, If some Acha^^, troublers of the commonwealth
and peace of Israel, be cast-downe, when they cannot be cast-out, which is
done, by taking away their dominion, sovereign power, and Lord-ship: As King
Asa removed his mother from her regency, from being Queen. And that, is a kind
of death, the casting the vile person-out of his throne, taking from him his
Bishopric or office; this work is done also. It is so also, in casting the
Rebels-out of the heart; these are never cast-out, but these are cast-downe,
subdued they are, put from their regency, out of their throne, they shall have
no dominion, no power there; And that is a kind of death, as good as a
casting-out, or better, the good God so ordering it, when rebels are kept so
under, that they shall rather do good than hurt, clean contrary to their
nature, poisonous and hurtful, yet they shall do the man good. But I have
preveated my self, I answer,

III. That this also is a great casting-downe of the Adversaries, when the
Lord, against Whom they strive, degrades them, smites them in their
intellectuals, makes them like a wheel, or, as the Princes of Zoan, fools,
their Counselors brutish Isa. 19. 11.
: so as they shall prosecute their own way of sin and death, to their own
destruction; Providentia ab eo tollitur, ne etc. Solv.
make their own pit wide, and large, and then fall into it blindfold and
headlong; But here the sober man will say;

A. That the Adversaries are no fools, they are speedy in consultation, and
quick for action; and if they have a victory they follow it; And though God has
indeed mingled a perverse spirit, amongst them, some are for the Spanish
faction, others for the French, yet all drive-on furiously to the same end; as
Herod and Pilate, all are made friends, that they may unite their forces, as
they against the Lord Christ, so these miscreants against His faithful
servants all the world over.

B. It is a truth, that these profane and wicked ones are wiser in their
generation than are the children of the resurrection; and yet notable fools
for all that; for when they say, as their Fathers before them, come let us
deal wisely, let us make the people of the Exodus 1. 10.
land serve with rigor, and their lives bitter with hard bondage, yet in this
the Lord does befoole the Adversary wonderfully. For first, the hotter the
furnace of the Adversaries rage is, the nearer God is to His people in that
furnace: The more desolate the Land is, the more it mourns to the LORD Jer.
12. 11.
The Lord will hear the mournings of his people. 2. The Adversary does do now
no more, then what the Egyptian Magicians or Sorcerers did once and again;
They did but add to their own plagues; they must drink of those waters which
themselves had turned into blood: So do these Adversaries now; they do but
helpe-forward their own affliction; work out their own destruction; lay
desolate their own land; consume, destroy their own blessings, poison their
own springs; add to their own plagues; turn their own waters into blood;
corrupt their own mercies. A miserable employment! A most deceitful work, to
poison those waters which, when they have all done, these Egyptians also must
drink: and then be made dunken with the blood they have coused, spew and fall
and rise no more. And when these destroyers have done all the mischief, in the
power of their hands to do, yet shall they not be able to hurt the servants of
the Lord, not able to impoverish them; notwithstanding all the Adversaries
rage, BREAD shall be given these servants: Their WATERS shall be sure b. The
conclusion Isa. 33. 16. q Ac si diceret puris and integris Dei cultoribus nihil
defuturum: panis euim and aquae nomine significantur omnia, Call. (...).
is, That these Abaddons, Appollyons, These destroyers, do now with one hand
work-out their own destruction; and with the other hand, salvation to the
Churches; so God befooles His Adversaries for the present. I answer.

IV. We must not conceive that a Kingdom is not Postured till all the
malignant Persons and Things be cast-out; that will never be; this casting out
these, is a work still doing but never done. It is very observeable, that
David's triumphant song, which he sang unto the LORD in the day the Lord had
delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul,
(who persecuted 2 Samuel 22. 1.
him with with an open face, before all Israel and before the Sun; and was as
openly punished:) This triumphant song was but David's breathing immediately
before he breathed forth his last words; now these be the last words of David;
Immediately before, 2 Samuel 23. 1.
we have that triumphat Psalm, and not before. We may note this by the way;
That this Posturing work, whether it be of a Nation, or of a Man only, is a
mighty work, long a doing, for it is never done; I mean, not completed, no
not till a little before we are speaking our last words; But I shall reserve
this for a full Chapter, that we may the more fully see, how we may be mistaken
in the Parliaments work, and in our own also, for this may be added hereunto;

V. That this cutting-off and thrusting-out Malignants, is indeeds, as the end
is, whereof the Logicians say, That it is the first in our intention,
proposition and design; but it is the last in execution: It is first intended,
though it be last, yea, though it be never attained. The purging-out of Rebels
is the end, the result of all Consultations, Acts and Ordinances, all these
resolve and empty themselves in thither: all counsels and Acts have a tendency
thereunto. It is true, we ought to be heaving at these Persons and Things as we
do at some indigested bits, which clogg the stomach and oppress nature, not
strong enough to cast-them out: So in the Body politic. But there must be an
endeavor to the utmost to cast-out these oppressors. And yet the Lord may
suffer these to be too hard for His people, for mighty reasons; To exercise His
servants graces in their war-fare, their Faith, their Humility, their Patience.

1. Their E^^th, That He, Who has begun this good wor^e will perfect it in
^^^own time, the ^^st time: The Lord (...) given His ^^^vants the neck of
their Adversaries (ten Thousand necks in one (...). Then the Lord said unto His
servants, as His servant Chap. 10. 2^.
Joshu^ said (...) ^^smaid, be strong und of good courage, for thu^ shall the
Lord do to all your enemies against whom you fight: shall smite your enemies
and stay them, and some of them you shall (...) D^^^d see^ ^ioliah shjaine in
the ^ou^ and the Bear. The drowning of the Egyptian Host in the red sea, gave
the Isa. 5^. 9. Psalm. 74. 14. Annona suit huic reposita qua vesceret populus,
Calvin, Ibid. Thank-offe^ing, p. 55. ^ee Cure of ^eares. p. 47.
Church assured confidence for ever; It was laid-up (says Calvin) as ^e^^ for
Israel against a dear year. When the Church was under the cruel tyranny of
Anti^^hus (so Interpreters do agree upon the occasion of that Ps^lme Psalm. 85.
Then their mouth was widest open in prayer and praise^. And read I pray you,
how they (...) bear-up themselves upon former experiences of Gods coming in
unto them: Thou have, Thou have, six times repeated. But this is the great
work, that God hac done for them; Thou have forgiven (...) of Thy people ver.
2.
sin is pardoned (pardon my sins and do^ what Thou ^^lt to me, said Luther Met.
Adam. vit. Luth. p. 108.
) Surely Gods salvation (...) to (...) foare him ver. 9.
that is comfortable; The ^yranny of Antiochu^ seemed (...) the people, That
GOD and his salvation was forre off; no sure, God is never nearer to His
people, (as a Father to his children) then when they are under the sorest
9oppressions: But the greatest mercy is behind; Thou fast given us the Lord
Christ (...), with Him, Thou can deny us nothing; We have the greatest
Blessing, SALVATION, its self; we cannot So the 10th verse is interpreted.
doubt of salvation now from under the bloody hands of Antiochus that tyrant;
mercy and Truth are met together; Righteousness and peace have kissed each
other; We can salute that ver. 10.
promise afar off; Let GOD alone now; He will do His people no hurt: If he
holds their necks yet longer under the yoke, it shall be for their farther
enlargement anon, and higher exaltation after they are humbled more: Secondly
then to exercise.

2. Their Humility, To make them humble, and to keep them so: The Lord suffe^^
these Adversaries to prevail over His servants, to be as (...) in their eyes,
and as thorns in their sides, because, when they might have cast-out these
Persons, and their accursed things them the servants of the Lord were slack and
would not; now they would and cannot: These Adver^^^^ (...) is aforesaid, to be
as pricking briars and (...), that the servants of the Lord may follow the
commands of their LORD fully for the thrusting of them-out, as the LORD shall
be (...) in after time to put power into their hands. And for the present time
they are taught to walk humbly with their God, and to commune with their own
hearts seriously, whether they, who are (...)apart by God Himself to reform
others are selfe-Reformers. If not, it will retard and hold-back that we call
Reformation, ^^^^tlly, and keep in malignant Persons and Things, to despite
ou^ hearts, to be unto us as vexing thorns, and grieving b^^^s. If they have
not purged themselves, who are gone forth to purge (...) theren, then may they,
Gods people though they are, (...) again before their enemies; and these
enemies may stand-up and pro^per, as once it was See Covenant Asserted. p. 14.
and 1^.
This consideration prevails evenmore with the people of God, and keeps them
very humble, makes ^^^lye law, and walk softly; And so they exercise

3. Then Patience, that it may have a perfect work, (...) wate now their-Lords
time, His appointed time, He is now performing his whole work upon mount Zion
and no Jerusalem^ when that in done, the Lord will punish these proud men, who
^^ave Isa. 10. ^^.
been so stout against Him; He will pluck down their stout hearts and the glory
of their high looks. The Lord his discovered these enemies already; He has
showen them openly, and their ^^^^^^nesse, their shame before all the Christian
world: Their judgment li^greth not: and their dam^ation slumbreth not 1. Pet.
2. 5.
The ^^^vants of the Lord can wait the Lords time, touching this matter,
therefore I answer.

VI. Though the first work in the building-up and forsifying a kindgome, is
ever to throw-downe to the ground all accursed Things, Altar and Images,
which, no sooner made and set-up, but ^ Kingdom is made naked, set under
foot, cast-down and undone ^rod. ^^. 23. 2 Ch^o. 18. 19.
:Though this was the first work, which the Pr^nee^. Priests and people of old,
set their hands and hearts unto, even the breaking in pieces these accursed
Things, and throwing them down [For very notable it is, how they used these
dunghill things, they never left hacking, and cutting, and hewing and
destroying, and ^utning, and drowning till they had utterly destroyed them all,
Chro. 31. 1.
I Though I say, this was the first work, yet we read, The high places were
not taken away, [that is, those high places, where they served The high places
where the people sacrificed to false gods were taken away. 2 Chro. 17. 6. The
other were not taken away, 2 Chro. 20. 13.
the true God after a false manner,] these were not taken away: And the reason
is given, for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of
their fathers. It relates to us fully; These high things, that do offend the
people of God are not taken away; and for the very same reason. Perhaps, nay
past all question, every thing, that exalts it self, even in their own hearts,
is not cast-downe, therefore these high things are not taken away: I should be
large at this point, but I will proceed.

VII. In the next place this may be noted; that this is our duty, to vow and
protest against all these accursed Persons and Things; to enter into a curse
for the casting of them forth; And having done so, having entered into covenant,
having lifted-up the hand, and subscribed the name for the casting forth all
these, we must do as our vows are, use all means for the purging our selves
and the Land: That is all we can do, our duty, use the means earnestly as men
inflamed with zeal, let the Lord alone with the rest: In the Neh. 3. 20.
last place then,

VIII. We must not make haste; we must wait the Lords time: which is not yet:
For 1, The Lord will, by the greatness of His Exodus 15. 16.
power, make His enemies as still as a stone: But He will first silence the
murmurings of His people; He will still the surgings and risings in his
servants hearts first. 2. The Lord will not do it till such a time, when His
people are so low, and their enemies so high, that the fetching-up of his
people, and the casting-down their enemies requires the putting-forth the
Greatness of GODS Power. 3. The Lord will not deliver His people till they be
fit, and meet, and prepared for deliverance; not till then. When He takes off
the yoke, He will make His people go upright; He will not remove the
plaster, till the wound be thoroughly healed; He is now searching and tenting
our wounds to the bottom, which were putrified and very corrupt: The Lord will
not give His people their Lands, Houses, Liberties, etc. for their corruptions
to feed-upon any more; or to feed their corruptions, to be fuel to lusts; He
will kill His peoples lusts now, they shall reign in them no more, Amen. 4.
The Lord will purge-out the Rebels all; it is His promise Eze. 20. 38.
; But he will purge the hearts of His servants first. The house of

Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame; and the house of Esau
for stubble, (i. e.) The Church of God shall devour all Obad. 18.
their enemies, There shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau, for the
Lord has spoken it. But this shall not be till the sons of Jacob be purified,
till the Lord has purely purged away their dross, and taken away their tin
Isai. 1. 25.
The Lord is now upon His Refining work, and for that great end, His fire is
in Zion, and His furnace in Jerusalem Isa. 31. 9.
. These children of Belial, most abominable persons, that have broken (all the
yoakes) the Laws of Heaven and Earth, have cast-off Piety, and humanity
altogether; men (if I may call them men) of no use, Deuteronomy. 13. 13. Men of
Beliall, Homines nequissimi quasi absque ^ugo, qui jugum legis Dei excusserunt:
vel qui nullius frug is and utilitatis sunt. Men of less use then is their
own dung. B^xt.
must yet do their Lord this service, they must serve Him as scullions, to
purge, to whiten Dan. 11. 35.
, and to purify the vessels appointed for honor; And when that work is done,
the fire from Jacob, and the flame from Joseph shall kindle upon these
Adversaries: and devour them. The conclusion is, Idols and Idol men, and
Idol services shall be all cast-out, when every thing, that exalts it self in
His childrens hearts, shall be cast-down, and subdued (according to the line of
men.) This shall certainly be, but His people must wait, and they can wait
and leave God to His own time, using the means, which are mighty (through God)
to bring to pass all this. These means shall be mentioned particularly and
insisted upon. But now we must see how this good Soldier has quitted himself
at this high point, and acted his part against these Malignants, Persons and
Things within his own breast.

I. The first work in well Posturing a man's self, is,
The subduing Malignant self, and casting-down Malignant Things. A wonderful
work and glorious, for which the man admires God, and freegrace, I raises God
while he has any being; and toward his brethren he is pitiful and useful as
a faithful steward of what he has received.

NOw we will take a view of a well Postured Soldier. An ordinary sight, you
will say, an easy work for one man to posture himself. Whether so or not,
comes now to be considered: And after due consideration, it will appear, That
it is an easier matter, to subdue Kingdoms, to conquer Nations, than it is,
for this man to take them captives, whose captive he was: To rule over his
oppressors Isa. 14. 2.
, (that is) to conquer his corruptions, the Malignants in his own heart; to
subdue self there. Let us take notice, by the way, what this self is; A
stubborn stiff piece, like an iron sinnew, it will rather break than bend: It
will persuade a man rather than stoop, to fall, though he is but to stoop to
Law and Right Reason. To maintain its will, it will hazard all its peace on
earth, even a Kingdom there, yea and a Crown in Heaven; such a perverse
person is self. And yet, if he has set his eye upon selfe-righteousnesse, it
will so glaze in his eyes, that he will think himself some great one Acts 8.
9.
, rich and wanting nothing, when indeed, he is wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind and naked Rev. 3. 17.
. This self is subdued and abhorred. By what means, in whose strength, what a
work it is, and how long a doing, will be pointed at in due time. Now we will
hear, what the man speaks in his confessions, he is large there, and he cares
not who hears him; His confession is; That all this Malignancy in Person and
in Things (we cannot reckon up particulars,) that all this, this Malignant
person is himself; and Malignant things are as himself: He will confess,
That he is well acquainted with Malignant Lords ever since he knew himself:
and that Malignant things troubled him more, than all the Malignants in the
Kingdom, for those offended his God most of all. Certainly thus he says,
That there is a desperate wickedness in his heart; and an J^^. 17.
inconceiveable deceit there. And surely, if we consider well on it, we shall
say every man of himself, as St Paul did, O wretched man that I am. Here is no
inconsistency now in words, A good man, and yet self in him, for man is
supposed in a Christian: And where man is, there self is more or less, and
that is himself, and Homo supponitur in Christiano.
much evil there is. If we see it not in the fruit, yet there it is in the
seed and root, as we shall clearly discern presently: for this is manifest
to all, who have eyes to see, or an heart to understand themselves, That all
the malice we have been speaking of, so mightily opposing the good of the great
Body, all this is but a glass, for every man to see himself in; the very
model and representation of every man's own heart See ^ts treasury opened, Mat.
15. 19. Mark. 7. 2^.
; he sees his own heart there, and image as he sees himself in his child, or
as he sees a face in water answering a face; In a word, This man, beholding the
whole world lying in wickedness, does behold therein, as in a mirror, a world
of wickedness in himself. This wickedness, malignance we may call it, does
not breake-out and show its self in all alike, but there this malice is in the
root and seed, and fomenting cause of all that, which we have taken notice of.
And the very discerning hereof, that so it is, is the first step and degree a
man takes in the way and method of maintaining his Militia, the well posturing
himself. For now he sees, that the work is of absolute necessity, it must be
done. 1. He first discovers an enmity, an opposition from nature within
himself, to the work of Reformation; his heart flies from it as from death,
for indeed it is a kind of death; and nature, which is self, is as opposite to
it, as that Israelite was who counted Reforming a killing Exodus 2. 14.
. Nature not renewed will oppose this with all its might. And if the heart do
let the Bill pass for the completing of it, it is because it is over-powred;
because the thunder and hail, some strong motions and fears are upon the
spirits; when those are blowne-over, self will be self still; strong holds
will stand up still; strong reasonings to maintain all the Idols, the
abominable things there; All this will be till self be overpowred by an
Almighty power, and spoken unto by a strong hand Isa. 8. 11.
: Then self is mastered, then there is a yeilding-up the strong holds, there
is no more Reasonings (...). 2 Cor. 10. 5.
with self for the maintaining of self that Malignant person: or Malignant
things, Idols or Idol services. True it is, these Malignants are not
cast-forth all, no nor quite subdued all: Though the Body of sin be mortified,
yet the life thereof is prolonged, a and the power thereof is (as the Kingdom
spoken of by Daniel) partly strong and partly broken; Lord-like-lusts, or Dan.
7. 17.
lust-like-Lords will storm his soul sometimes, and force a reentry. And the
Lord suffers it to be so, for mighty reasons, which I must resume, in part, as
pertinent to this place as to the other: for as it is in the great Kingdom, so
it is in the little kingdom within a man's own breast: The man's warfare must be
maintained, he must be kept waking and watchful; he must see how important a
matter it is, and of what infinite concernment, That he keep close to the God
of his strength, and his salvation, that is first. And

2. This wickedness is in the heart but it is hated there; lusts are there,
but not Lords there; they have no dominion there; These are put down from
their Regency; he has prayed against them three times, and as often covenanted
against them. Yea look what malice or evil there is, which the man cannot
meet with nor cast-out (all he cannot) that remainder, he has dealt with it as
the Jews of old did, the night before their great feast, with their leaven,
they searched diligently for it into every corner and cranny of the house, as
this man searches his heart; and what they could not find-out they did curse
and abominate, saying, never more sour our lump: So this man deals with
self and its Idols, he makes diligent search after them to throw-them-out;
what he cannot cast-out, not find-out (for self has many dark corners within
its self, which man's eye could never pierce into) yet he pryeth into the
bottom and root of all, and this he does curse and abominate, saying, never
fruit grow thereon: And what fruit there will grow, he prays it may be as an
untimely fruit, which never saw the sun. And so what he cannot overcome, he
does hate and abhor. And mighty reason why he should so do, abominate and
accurse that so fruitful seed within him: for had not the LORD, according to
His servants prayer, kept down that Root from putting forth its self,
according to its activenesse; had He not restrained that corruption, not
susfering it to bring forth according to its fruitfulness: Had the Lord
suffered this cockatrice to broode-upon and hatch her eggs; had He left this
sinning sin, within the man, to bring forth its own cursed fruit, then had
this man been as vile as the vilest, as proud as the proudest Prelate; as
Idolatrous as are he and she, who lift-up their hearts to the most lying
vanities; as cruel and as bloody as are the Tabernacles of Robbers; This man
might have been swearing, cursing, blaspheming, tearing, piercing the Name of
his God, amongst the Irish rogues, and English monsters; This man might have
been in the Kings Army, a Prince there, (by nature he is no better then they)
A child of wrath as others: Ephesians. 2. 3.
If the Lord had not been gracious unto him, added more grace, made him to
differ, 1. Cor. 4. 7.
he had been as one of them, a mighty hunter before the LORD, as a roaring
Lion, or a she Bear, or an evening Wolf, such an one he had been, if the
Lord had not overpowred his corruption, made him to differ from another wrought
graciously in him, and for him, for which he admireth the Lord in His
free grace, and blesses His holy Name. The Lord has wrought a mighty work in
him, faith, by which he has overcome the world, escaped the pollutions there,
the lusts of the flesh the snares of the world, a world of wickedness, (a
Grace to be admired) by which he stood-out against the gates of Hell;
overpowred power its self, principalities and powers; how admirable all this?
This raises the heart,first,

1. In admiration of free grace; And you, that were dead in trespasses and
sins; What more? that is all we find in the Original; Ephesians. 2. 1.
In our English we read this more, has He quickened: but in the Greek only
this, And you, that were dead in trespasses and sins: A mercy to be admired;
has He quickened! That is swallowed-up with admiration; for it is more
admirable then was the making of the world, or creating of light. There is more
in this, HAS HE QUICKENED! Therefore swallowed-up with Job 6. 3.
admiration, as Jobs words were with exceeding grief: You has He quickened!
dead as well as others, whom yet He left in the same death, to perish in their
sins: You has He quickened. It is all one as if the Apostle had said, And you
has He justified, ungodly though you were; For you the Father has given His
Son; and the Son has given Himself to reconcile you, and to bring you near,
far off once, and an enemy though you were: And you has He loved with an
eternal love, because He loved you (there is Deuteronomy. 7.
no other reason of His love,) He set His heart upon you, and passed over
others Thousands, no worse than your self! And you has He seen in your blood,
and He said at such a time as that, to you, it is a time of love, live live:
Twice repeated, as well to show the greatness of His power, as the riches of
His mercy.
O admirable! He has observed thy way, wherein thou wentest on frowardly, as
others did, yet to thee He said, I will heal thee; Ezekiel. 16. 8.
so He forgave thy sin and healed thee Isa. ^7. 18.
All this, so admired of this soul, is contained in this, HAS HE QUICKENED!

2. And now that God has dealt so with His servant, so visited him in his low
estate, quickened him, brought him from death to life; now his heart is filled
with admiration, and so is his mouth filled with praise: All without him, all
within him, are called upon to praise His Holy Name. For what? The man cannot
express that, he is swallowed-up in an ocean of love, from everlasting unto
everlasting; and now he will lengthen out his praise, wider than the Heavens,
even to everlasting. His Lord and his God has regarded him, has kept him; has
held him by the hand in the most suppery ages and places; how many puddles
might he have fallen into? how many mires might he have wallowed-in? had not
the Lord held him upright; O how does his soul meditate praises! how does he
study Mictams, Hallelujahs; and holiness! O with what Selahs, with what
exaltation of heart and voice, does he sing the 103 Psalm, Bless the LORD, O
my soul: you shall hear him out-anon, with what elevation of spirit will he
sing this, for it is his triumphant song, which he will sing immediately before
he is breathing forth his last words: Then and not till then, for all the time
before he must be in a warfaring condition, as the Church is, and it is best
for him and the Church both: Yet assured he is as all the faithful are, that
nothing shall do him hurt now, every thing shall do him good, even his worst
enemies, and he shall be more then conqueror at last; But not till immediately
before his last words, then he will speak to the Lord the words of this song,
The Lord has delivered m^ out of the hands of all mine enemies, and out of the
hand of my self; His name be praised, exalted, magnified for ever and ever,
Amen. The time of his (...) is not yet, but yet he knows the foundation stands
sure, he knows to whom he has committed his soul; he has a sure standing, he
is settled upon the Rock: he stands and shall stand like a wall of brass
against the blast of the terrible ones, and laughs at their storming; he is at
peace with his God, and is not afraid of the beasts of the earth; Job 5.
The Lord is his portion, and his cup runneth-over; he is poor, perhaps, in
esteem of others, but he is rich in faith; he is as a man that has nothing,
and yet possessing all things. The Lord has satisfied him with the fatness of
His house, even with the richest mercies; He has enough indeed, for he has God,
and with Him all things. (...) Genesis 33. 11.
He is a contented man; and well he may be content, for he has the fountain:
If the streams be cut off, intercepted for a time, no matter, he is sure of
the I ountaine. The Son of Righteousness shines upon his tabernacle; then
the night is day to him, for the Sun makes the day, though neither Moon nor
Stars appear, (i. e. that is) God is all to him without the creature: the
creature nothing to him without God. God is his, therefore is His servants
mouth wide open to His praise. But you will ask; Are there no storms in his
soul, no clouds over his spirit at any time? Yes sure, many times, you may
hear of that anon; Now,

3. Behold we how this servant of the Lord carries himself toward his fellow
servants; he entreats them, he beseeches them by the mercies of Christ, and,
knowing the terrors of the LORD, he persuades with all meekness, instructing
those, that oppese themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
if GOD, peradventure, will give them repentance. He is tenderhearted,
forgiving another even as GOD for Christ's sake Ephesians. 4. 32. Coloss. 3. 13.
has forgiven him: He is a friend to his enemies, if they curse him, he will
bless them: for there are three considerations very mighty to prevail with
him this way. 1. That God, for Christs-sake, has forgiven him much, he knows
not how much; should not he forgive that little, those few pence, (such and so
small are man's offenses against man in reference to those against God.) 2. That
the Lord justified the ungodly. 3. That the night before He was betrayed, Romans
4. 5, 5, 6.
He made a Feast for His enemies, even them who pierced Him: He gave His blood
for those, who had an hand in shedding ^^ blood. This is a melting
consideration, and engages the heart strongly, to give and forgive; to bear
and forbear with all long suffering and meekness. We have enough touching
this matter. I come now to consider the means, whereby this Soldier has thus
postured himself, has attained to this height of spirit, which is observed in
nothing more, than in his humble carriage, and Christian fortitude. But we must
observe it first in the proceedings of Parliament, the steps and ways they
went in well-Posturing the Kingdom.

CHAP. II.
The prime and chief means to Posture a Kingdom, Prayer and Fasting;

How prevailing Prayer is, It does all, it commands God, and God commands
deliverance; Prayer and Pr^ise go together. The Churches falls and
disconifitures, particularly that at Newarke, matter ^f^nfinite use to the
Church, and of high pr^ise.

WE have heard what the Nobles and Worthies have done toward the completing
this great work, the strengthening or well Posturing the Kingdoms: We proceed
as they did not in their own strength. It is not all created strength, that can
do such works as these; remove such Persons and such Things;

They sought forth and applied themselves to such means, whereby they might
bring-in God to their help; They did after the old manner, which never failed
the Church, they commanded the City first, then the whole Nation as Esther the
Jews, fast ye for us, we Est^r 4. 16.
will fast also: They knew, there is a kind of malignant spirit which will not
be cast-out by any other means: They took hold of the Almighties Arm; they
wrastled with Him for this thing; they prayed, they wept, and would not rise
from their knees without ^ Hos. 12. 4.
blessing; And so they prevailed for the casting-out their dead, Idol men and
Idol services; so they shall root-out them, who have rooted-in themselves so
long: So have they thrown down their Altars, and cast-out those abominable
services. They wept and they prayed, and so they became a prevailing people
with their God upward to this day, and so they were delivered; So they have
stricken-through many mighty men; So they have wounded ^^^ heads over many
(Diocesses) Countries. Prayer [I name that only because it is the principal
and chief work upon that solemn day: fasting does but help to make the
prayer more spiritfull; It weakens the body, that it may strengthen the spirit,
and heighten it; Fasting is, as I may say, the emptying duty; It shows a man,
openly, a mortified man, lesser then a crumb of bread, and drop of drink: It
makes him nothing-worth in himself, yea worse than nothing, an emptying duty:
Prayer is a filling duty, it fills-up as fast as the other has emptied, we
shall see how efficacious prayer is.] Prayer gained the in-come and harvest of
all that spiritual seed, the servants of the Lord, now departed from us, were
sowing all their life long: now that harvest comes-in. Time would fail me, to
tell what the people of God have done by prayer. Prayer has done all, which has
been done, for God forbid that we should speak of any thing, which the Lord
has not wrought for, and with His people; And nothing He has wrought, but He
has been sought unto, and enquired of for that thing. It is true the Lord has
given His people the greatest mercies, which they prayed not for, ELECTION
before Time; His SON in the fulness of Time: All deliverances since are the
fruit of the Churches prayers, though they have exceeded her prayers, and her
hopes: Prayer obtained a Parliament, brought them together and their hearts-up
to the work; and prayer has kept them together, has sifted them as wheat in a
seive, blew away the chafe, and not a wheate-corne lost; Prayer strengthened
the hearts and hands of the Worthies in throwing-downe the Bishops; It
strengthened the Bishops hands against themselves, for the throwing themselves
out of the Lords House, and into prison; Prayer cast forth the brutish
Pastors, and services like themselves; And prayer will strengthen the right
hand of the Lord with His servants, that they shall do more and more valiantly
touching that matter. Prayer shall, as it has done, bring to pass great
matters; But not in its own strength (for This is more fully explained in an
Answer to a blasphemo^s Rhyme from Oxford. See Good newe^ from all quarters
brought unto us upon the wing of prayer.
in its self it has no more strength than has an Oaten-straw, but) as it
closes with a Promise in the hand of a Redeemer, Who is strong This is more
fully explained in an Answer to a blasphemo^s Rhyme from Oxford. See Good newe^
from all quarters brought unto us upon the wing of prayer.
; in That strength the Worthies of the Lord have leaped over walls, and skipped
over mountains, these have been made plains before them. I must passe-over
here what Rescues His people have had, what strange deliverances! what
discoveries the Lord has made of His right hand, with His people, and against
His Adversaries, confounding them in their pride and bloody designs; It is the
Lords doing and mavelous in our eyes! But He was sought unto for these
things: And though we passe-over many things, we must not passe-over this; That
Prayer made void a terrible and bloody Commission, To cut and to slay all that
had an hand with David (all the faithful in the Land:) and to destroy a mother
in Israel. Prayer turned all the contrary way, It brake the snare,
disappointing the hope of the Malignants; laid-open the pit, as deep as Hell,
and hurled some chief Actors thereinto; And this opened the mouth of the
righteous yet wider, made their prayer more fervent, so that it quenched a
fiery-flying-serpent, some called it a Proclamation, to cut off all succors
from the City of God; These hail stones and coals of fire, prayer dissolved,
and quenched: The heat of the Adversaries displeasure was quite extinct by
prayers fervency. Prayer did the like exploit at Gloucester; It quenched all the
Grenades cast into that City: so as these had no more power, notwithstanding
all their storming a whole Month together, but to kill a Pigge: Nor had the
Adversary a Legion though he was, done so much, not killed that Pigge, but by
order from Heaven. In Judah is God known, His name is great in Israel; His
dwelling ^sal. 76.
place is in Zion. (Proceed,) There brake He the arrows of the bow, the shield
and the sword, and the battle. There! Where? In His Tabernacle in Zion, there
dwelling and walking with His people, and they conversing with their God, in
His ordinances. There and then He brake the arrows and the bow; there and then
He turned away the storming Adversary; then He raised the siege. When? On the
seventh of September (it is written,) on that day, when the Inhabitants of
Gloucester were praying and (with ^ehoshaphat) praising: when the Adversary was
storming and ready to devour, then were the inhabitants, as that good King,
praying and praising; Praise the LORD, for His mercy endures for ever; It
follows; 2 Chro. 20. 21.
And when they began to sing and to praise, the Lord, etc. So it followed then
and now also, for when they were praying and praising, then the Lord brake the
arrows and the bow, then He plucked the bridle in the Adversaries mouth, and
away He turned him, and where is the fury of the oppressor? Praise ye the LORD
for His mercy endures for ever.

We must not forget now how prayer and praise went-out with our Armies, marched
along with them, therefore God was with them; nay He was in them in the midst
of them; We must tell it out to His praise; how God was with His people in the
field, how He sustained them there, even more miraculously, than Elias, by a
Raven; The Ethiopians, the Kings Army (they are Ethiopians unto Me says the
Lord Am^s 9. 7.
,) these were caterers, and purvayers for Gods people; These Ravens, these
unclean creatures brought His people meat; So they, the servants of the Lord,
forced the meat out of those H^rpies claws, ^ate it, and gave praise to God:
And in the strength of that meat they marched, and their God with them! He
gave his people an eye to overlooke all the Lions and she Bears in their way;
He strengthened His people to the battle, gave them power-over their
Adversaries; And brought them home as upon Eagles wings: In all this, prayer
commanded God (He is pleased so to be commanded) and so He commanded
deliverances for Jacob; They shall advance God; In His Name they brake through
a Troop: They set-up God in His place, and so they keep the heart in its
place, never out of frame, not afraid with any amazement. Time would fa^le me,
if I should set down how prevailing Gods people have been with their God, and
how wonderfully their God has wrought for His servants and against His and
their Adversaries ever since they gained Bristoll; Certainly the Lord has
wrought wonders for His people in every place ever since; He has wrought as
mavelous things now in the North, and South, West also, as once He did, when
He divided the sea, and let the ransomed passe-over: As marvailously has He
protected, (separated) here and there betwixt His friends and His enemies, as
once He did betwixt the Israelites and the Egyptians, or betwixt David and
Saul, And prayer did all this; It raised that SELAHAM MAHLEKOTH 1 Samuel 23. ^^.
, that rock of separation, as once betwixt David and Saul, so now betwixt them,
and their enemies. I must pass over that wonderful work of Providence
toward Hull; There is a monument raised to the eternal memory of that
salvation. I must leave every good man to his own collections; I know he has a
book wherein to register the works of the Lord, and the operations of His
hands, that he may muze on them; To these his collections, I will add but
this, which I received from an inhabitant in Gernsey; That, that monster
amongst men, a Devil incarnate, that Abaddon, Apollyon, the Governor of the
Castle there, a man indeed for shape, but an evening wolf in practice; This
brutish man has discharged against the Town 3000 shot of Ordnance from the
Castle, and yet has destoyed neither man, woman nor child, only killed a Dog
Osburne has continued storming that Town these 9 Months, yet has wounded only
one Man, killed a Dog, a Pigg, and a Pigeon.
, the lowest and basest creature in the world, yet better than man is when he
has cast-off his humanity. The sum of all is; Prayer and Praise (for that is
always included) has done all, that has been done; for God commands Prayer;
and Prayer commands GOD; and GOD commands deliverance for His people; Praise ye
the Lord. We have seen part of the ways have been taken for the strengthening
the Kingdom; Prayers and Praises have done great things; These have
carried-forth the malignancy of the Kingdom: or obtained power against it.
These have brought-in all supplies from above, and commanded deliverances for
Jacob. It is the Churches confidence for ever, that prayer, closing with a
promise, offered-up in the hands of a Mediator, will effect greater matters
yet, than our eyes have seen, (i. e.) That there is no work so difficult, no
not reforming work; No way so intricate, no not a Church Way, but prayer will
make it possible and passible: (Assured,) That Jacob shall never be so small,
his affairs never so low, but prayer shall raise Jacob, a worm though he
seem to be; and pluck-up His affairs. His seed never sought God in vain,
from the first day of their seeking unto this day The 29 of March, a day to be
written, whereon the Lord God gave His people a wonderful return of prayer, I
say the Lord God, for though we give as much honor as is sitting to the
chief, and all other instruments, yet to God all the glory. Joh. 14. 13, 15. 7.
1 Jo^. 8, 14.
; It is their confidence, for the time to come, for they have a promise for it,
Ask what you will and it shall be done. They will ask nothing but in
reference and submission to their FATHERS will: and thence their confidence,
that they are heard in whatsoever they ask; not for the dutiessake (they
abominate it as a duty only, and performed by themselves) but for the
promise-sake, which the Lord will make good unto them for His Sons sake, Amen.
Prayer has a kind of omnipotency in it: Praise is an heavenly work too and of
the highest use: I would now gather some observations from what has been said
touching both, then i will add, what the Malignants have contributed hither, to
the catalogue of our mercies, and matter of our praise, and so I shall
conclude. The first observation is;

1. That our enquities, busy and overhasty thoughts, and deviding cares,
about Reformation (the well Posturing a Kingdom, The time when it will be) are
most vain, and disquieting to no purpose. Let us do our duty, our own work,
be careful about nothing but this, that we do our work: or, if we cannot
work, as we commonly call work, if we have not heads for Counsel, nor hands
for Action, yet, let us do our duty; let us make our PRAYER to our GOD; that
wheels all about; that does the work. And impossible it is, that a
Reformation, a child of so many Prayers and Tears, (the Prayers of all the
faithful, that are or have been in the world,) That a child of so many Prayers
(as was said of Austin unto his mother) should perish; Perish! No, nor stick at
the birth a minute longer, than as the sticking-there shall make for the
exaltation of Gods arm, in the pulling-of it-forth: and the filling-top-full
the hearts of His people, with comfort in its season, after they have suffered
a little, that is the first observation.

2. That their Excellencies, the chief Commanders by Land and Sea; All the
Nobles and Worthies of both Kingdoms, (more dear unto us then the blood in
our veins) do march-on under the safest conduct, which is, the banner of the
LORD spread over their heads by the uncessant prayers of all the faithful in
the world: There is not a man, woman or child in the world, that can pray, But
they say, concerning this Host of God: We wish you prosperity in the name of
the Lord: All the blessings in the Book of God, 1 Samuel, 25. 29.
fall down upon you every man, as the dew upon the grass: And for their
enemies, them, let the Angel of the Lord scatter and slingout as out of the
middle of a sling.

3. The servants of the Lord do ascribe all unto God; All is a Napthaly, a
child of Prayer; ASKED OF GOD; and the gift of GOD; And that sweetens, the mercy
the deliverance; And, if it be a crosse-blow, it sweetens that too, it makes it
a blessing, as it follows presently. They write upon all their walls,
Salvation, and upon their gates, their out-lets and in-lets, they write Praise,
Isa. ^o. 18.
(i. e.) they ascribe all to God. The Adversaries of the Lord not so; As Saul
before them, they never get any Advantage against David, but by Treacheries,
wiles, fine devices, curled policies, the depths of Satan: Therefore when David
(the faithful of the Land) are, the enemy thinks, delivered-up into his
hands, then he does as Saul did, bless the Ziphites, a vile, treacherous
people, 1 Samuel 23. 21.
whom GOD curses.

4. The servants of the Lord do not trust to an Host of men, though a
thousand thousand for multitude; (such an Host Jehoshaphat 2 Chro. 17.
had) yet as he, so they do trust in God, give themselves to prayer, that so
they may bring Him down to their help: They set their eye as steadfastly
Heavenward, as if they had no strength upon earth, for they know, they are not
delivered by such a strength Psalm. 33. 16.
. They on the other side, the Adversaries of the Lord, put all their trust in
multitudes, as if they were gods not men; spirit not flesh. And if these fail,
as fail they must, then their hearts fail, and shake within them, as a leaf
shaken with the wind; And it must be so, not possible it should be otherwise,
for they cannot pray; An infinite disadvantage if it were thought on! When the
Adversaries Army fails (that is all flesh) all fails him; when the creature
leaves him, all leaves him, for he cannot pray. But when the arm of flesh
fails the righteous, it is no more, but what they expected, and they cling the
faster to the arm of God, who strengthens most when the arm of flesh is
least in sight: When all the creatures are gone, yet God is not gone, nay then
he is nearest, for then Prayer is Isa. 6. 6.
powered out unto him (but dropped forth before) and then they can lift-up their
heads in expectation of a glorious redemption at hand, for they can pray; An
infinite advantage.

5. Gods servants praise God for their falls; for these tend to the completing
of their great and glorious victory at the last. In the mean time, they
fall-low before their God, and rise-high in Quando duplicantur la^er^s ven^t
Moses, Auget certamina quando liberab. t, Curysolog.
their faith, which assures them, the lower they are, the nearer their
exaltation is; and the higher their Adversaries are, the deeper their fall will
be; and so I come to that which the Malignants make their jeere and scorn now,
The discomfiture the servants of the LORD had at NEW ARC, 22d of March: They
would have me put it down in my Catalogue, and make it matter of praise. God
forbid we should forget it; It is a matter of excellent use, then ought it to
be matter of high Praise. In every thing give Phil. 4. 6. 1 These. 5. 15.
thanks, much more for such a mercy, which shall, through the Churches prayers,
tend greatly to the fortifying and establishing her people. Certainly the
servants of the Lord, they that are praying on the mount, and they that are
sighting in the valley, all these shall receive more good from their
discomfitures, especially that at Newarke, than from all the victories they
have had this last year. Therefore mighty reasons there are, why the Church
should make it matter of high Praise. First;

1. The Lord showed much love toward His people in that discomfiture. Love!
You will say it was a fruit of Gods Anger, and sore displeasure against His
people. Indeed it was; But mark we, That which causes GODS Anger toward His
beloved ones is LOVE Erga (...) suos ^oc (...) bile est, ^^^ Divine causa amor
est.
: This is wonderful, but so it is, and that is one mighty reason why the
Church should render Praise: for,

2. It is a resolved case, If the arm of flesh be strong, the servants of the
Lord will-beare-up themselves confidently upon it: Then the Lord knaps it
asunder as easily as you can break burnt slaxe. The Lord must be praised for
this, for this is pure love: He will have His servants lean upon their Beloved
and none other; The Lord will break them, and break them, and break them,
till they say, Thou art our Rock, our strong arm every morning, and our
salvation every night; in whom we can boast all the day long. This is their
prayer and matter of their praise; So the Lord will bringup the hearts of His
people to Himself, no matter though He beats them down, and lays them like
worms upon the earth: So He b^ings-up their hearts to close with His arm, no
matter, though the Lord bring His people so low, even to whisper out of the
dust.

3. Great matter of Praise for that discomfiture at Newarke: for the servants
of the Lord (simple hearted men, as were Eliakim, and Shebnah, and Joah 2 King.
18. 26.
, these expected a favor from Rabshakeh: So these) treated (the Malignants say
and i will take their saying) for their lives, liberties, ease of tender
consciences, with the Prince of Robbers, Prince Robert, a profane and wicked
man, A price of clay mingled with blood (...).
, as was said of Nero, who had cast off humanity; Mighty only to do mischief,
and to satisfy his own lusts, (as was said of another Crispinu^ monstrum null^
virtute redemptu^, Aviiijs aeger soldque libidine fortis, Juv. Sat. 4 ^.
) The servants of the Lord (as Malignants do report) treated with this Prince,
and his murderers, the vilest and most abominable persons, most notorious all
over the Christian world for their faithless, treacherous, horrid and
horrible- butcheries, The friends of God expected mercy from the enemies of
God! Now the servants of the Lord will for ever walk more humbly with their
God, and humbly seek His face: for He is merciful. They will understand now,
That the mercies of the wicked are cruel, that is, none at all Pro. 10. 12.
Plane nullae.
, Ah Lord! Will the Lord suffer His servants to lie prostrate at the foot of
Rabshekah, to beg a favor at his hands: Yes; That they may understand at the
length, how vain their expectation is from man, but never vain from God;
Praised be His Name.

4. Great matter of praise as of prayer; We pray that the Lord would make His
servants meet for deliverance, and His enemies fit for destruction. This is
the only way, which the Lord takes, this casting-downe fits the servants of the
Lord for their rising-up, which shall be the higher, the lower their fall was:
And this rage of the Adversary fills-up their measures, heightens their
destruction, for in proportion to their rage now shall their judgment be anon:
It shall reach unto Heaven and be lifted-up unto the skies: Jer. 51. 9.
Certainly the Church could not have wanted any of all this, which has
fallen-out at Bristoll, etc. nor the discomfiture at Newarke, Through their
prayer, all this shall turn to their advantage and furtherance of the Gospel.
That and this will make the stink of the Kings Camp come-up into the nostrils
of all the Christian world; if they are not an abomination yet, they will be
shortly; every man will come-out against them with their sword in their hand
(without hire of money) as once they did against grievous wolves. The people of
the Land have been disspirited hitherto, now the Lord has taken a course to put
spirit and life into His people. The great whore, that she might put back her
destruction, and reprieve her judgment, may give fair words sometimes after
her manner, and yield far to accommodate a peace. It shall not serve her
turn; The arrows of the strong-ones shall be sharp in the hearts of all her
friends; and the sword of the Lord shall eat her flesh and then she shall be
burnt with fire Rev. 17. 16. 19. 18.
. In the next place, we are assured, That,

5. Now, at hearing of this news, The Adversary is-up on high, exceeding proud
now; They set their mouth against Heaven, they speak proudly now; And now the
righteous, they are low, speak as out of the dust; They mourn unto their God:
(Great cause they should, because they were so over joyed and confident in the
arm of flesh) They set their eyes steadfastly upon Him now, Who creates light
and Peace (His light, His Peace is a creation, and this makes way to it) Their
eye is single now upon Gods arm; They had an eye and an eye before, an heart
and a heart, more fixed upon the arm of flesh than on the arm of God. O
praised be God, Who has, by this stroke, made His servants eye single now; And
now they will pray fervently. Deliverance seems thrust-back by the hand of
violence, they will fetch it on-ward again by their prayers: The time for
their deliverance seems stretched-out and lengthened; Luke 22. 44. (...).
they thought it near at hand, now it seems far off: But now they will
intend and stretch-out their prayers after it (as their Lord Christ in His
agony) more earnestly; now their prayer, it as on continued action: Praised be
God for this, for it has made prayer more fervent, and also because now;

7. The Builders of the wast places, the repairers of the breaches, I mean the
Parliament, and Assemblies, all the faithful in all three Kingdoms, all these
will work high now; Their words, and their actions, and their heart, and their
faith, all will be upon the wing now; They will work (as he at Jerusalems
wall) earnestly, Neh. 3 20. (...)
(i. e.) inflamedly, with a zeal boiling hot for the house of God, for the
Cause of God; And yet they will not trust to the Cause, though as good a Cause
as ever was trusted to in the world; But this trust to the goodness of a
Cause, is a greater Idol than was that in Cheapside, in the Chapel or in the
Closet, for that was setup in the heart: Therefore God has smitten it, and
broken it in Ancient times, and so upward to this day: And yet He has
maintained His Cause when He has confounded the trust, and confidence in it,
and the managers of it; A matter of infinite use, and commands our observation
now.

8. The servants of the Lord, trusted to the goodness of their Cause; they
contend for the pearl in the Gospel (that is the Gospel) the Diadem, the
Crown of three Kingdoms; never had men a better Cause to contend for since
man was created than this is: And may they not trust to the goodness of this
Cause? Yes, they may, trust and be confident, That a good Cause shall have a
good issue; that it shall overcome at the last; that the Lord will bring it
forth to victory; that the end shall be good. It is as much as can be said of a
good man, his end shall be peace. But note we, A good Cause may be ill managed;
It may be carried also by the hand of God variously, tossed-up and down, as
David said of himself, like a locust; To teach us, that the goodness of the
Cause does not argue the goodness of our trust: I Will add this; The goodness
of the cause gives me warrant to expend my purse, and my spirits, and my life
for it; But it does not warrant me to put my trust unto it: Where this trust
ought to be fixed, we shall hear so soon, as we shall better understand, how
vain the confidence is we put in the goodness of the Cause; It is an Idol,
God has broken it to pieces: It is His manner so from days of old upward to
this day. I Will instance only in two famous examples; Israel in old Elies days
[or rather when it was night with him] had a good cause in hand, which they (as
we now) maintained against the Philistines, and yet they fell before the
Philistines about four 1 Samuel 4. 2.
thousand men. They trusted more yet to the goodness of their cause; and up
they brought the Arc accompanied with Hophni and Phineas, and then confident
of the goodness of the Cause, how bad soever themselves were, they shouted
with a great shout; and ver. 4. 5. ver. 8, 9. ver. 10.
the Philistines were sore afraid. But their courage overcame their fear, and
they fought with Israel, and slew of Israel thirty thousand footmen: and the
Ark of God was taken too: and the two sons of Eli slain also. They trusted to
the goodness of the Cause; It was the Lords Cause, the Arc was the Lords,
that would save ver. 3.
them from the hand of their enemies. No, but it would not, The Cause of God,
the Ark of God was so far from helping them, that it exposed them to more
wrath, which they could not be delivered from, till the servants of the Lord
had taken their heartsoff from the goodness of the Cause, and set their hearts
fully toward the Lord, in returning to Him, according as Samuel counseled;
which is very notable; for having done so, the Lord wrought a mighty salvation
for His people, as you may read 1 Samuel 7.
. I Will pass on to another example.

The Tribes trusted to the goodness of their cause. So they might they
thought, for it had the impression and stamp of God upon it; They went-out, as
our men do, by Gods command, against notorious delinquenis in Gibeah, sons of
Belial, as vile and abominable almost, as these are now in the Kings Army, the
Princes and Nobles there; Gods Cause, and Gods command, and they must prosper
sure, they thought. No; notwithstanding the goodness of their cause, they fell
before Benjamin heaps upon heaps, twenty and Judge. ^.
two thousand at one time; eighteen thousand at another: that Israel may
never put confidence in a good cause after this time. And yet so Israel have
done, as at this day. But I hope they will do so no more, never trust to the
goodness of our Cause any more; trust God with that, and trust we to the
goodness of our GOD, that trust never fails: A good God still, and if the
news be bad, He can make it good: And if, as the Malignants would have it, the
worst, that ever was told in Gath, yet this Good GOD can make it best of all: O
that we could trust in Him, to the goodness of our God! Though men be
treacherous, God is faithful: though they fail, He never fails those that
trust Him. 2. Let us trust to the goodness (that is) to the soundness of our
conversion, our turning from Idols to serve the living God; If our conversion
and turning be sound, we may trust to it, and not care for all the turnings and
windings of the crooked serpent, they shall do us no hurt; the changes of
things here below makes no change in them, whose heart is truly changed: nor
makes it any change in God; though means are weak, He is strong; though men
fail, God never fails! And note we, the turnings and tides of things here
below, do but serve to turn our hearts unto God; to stablish them there. And
when the heart is set-upon that bottom, though the world be turned
upside-downe, yet the man stands upright. The failing of man's arm, (too short
at the longest extent to bring salvation) brings-up the heart to close with the
Almighties arm, which neither shortens nor lengthens, but is stretched out
still. And when the heart is brought thither, then it is fixed, and not till
then.

9. The Israel of God must praise God for their discomfitures; for thereby
they are instructed to discretion, to know GOD and themselves, that He is all,
and does all; that they are nothing, and can do nothing. Thereby also they are
wrought-up unto an acceptance Lev. 26. 41.
of their punishment, to a submission, a willing resignation, and quiet
yeilding-up themselves to Gods dispose; Do Thou with us whatsoever seems good
unto Thee Judge. 10. 15.
: An excellent temper of spirit after it is over-powred, and beaten down. And
yet this humble and prostrate spirit, has its Reserves; Only let Thy Cause
prosper; do good unto Zion. [So the LORD will, and His Cause shall prosper;
and though it may seem delivered-up into the enemies hand, yet, as the Arc
did, it shall but plague the enemies] And deliver us not-up into the hands of a
cruel Lord, an ungrateful snake, deliver us not unto him. [God will not do
it, unless it be good for His people, so to be delivered-up, that they may
know, and feel the difference betwixt the service of the God of Heaven, and
the service of the gods of the world 2 Chro. 12. 8:
.]

10. Lastly, When the adversary and enemy begins to fall before the servants of
the Lord, he shall surely fall down to the bottom, like a millstone into the
great waters. But Isreal's fall is but a rise E^^. 5. 14.
toward their highest elevation. When (righteous) men are cast down, we must
say, there is lifting-up. The righteous are cast down Job 21. 29.
to humble them The Church never yet lost by her losses: They ever to this day
rose the higher by their falls: So it will be in after ages.
, and no sooner humbled but they are lifted up, they are regarded and saved;
And He shall save the humble person. When the righteous are smitten into the
place of dragons, when they are in a low pit, there can they spy Heaven, and
see the Star of Jacob there (as we, standing on a low bottom, can see Heaven
best-of all: so the righteous in their depths) I mean, when their distress is
greatest, then is their trust the strongest; then they hold-up their heads in
expectation of a redemption drawing nigh.

Now put all together, and see whether any victory the Church has lately had,
gives us so much matter of praise, as does the discomfiture at Newarke, though
as great as the enemies would make it.

God has discomfited His people: Of mere faithfulness He has done it, because
He loves them and will have them love Him, and trust Him, and seek Him
servently, work for Him earnestly, sight His battles valiantly; careful
still, and now more careful to remove the accursed thing. Because He will have
His people trust Psalm. 20. 7. Hos. 14. 3.
in charets and ride upon horses no more; Trust in the goodness of their cause
no more; trust on the arm of flesh no more; but remember the Name of their God
evermore; and their duty to be holy, who manage an holy cause. So they shall
prosper, rise and stand upright for evermore, Amen.

To summe-up all, and to put a close to this excellent Theme; It must be the
same, which we should put down at the foot of all our Receipts, all the Mercy,
which we receive (and we have nothing, which we have not received) either from
the right or left hand of God: All are Mercies, either manifestly such (those
only Manifest is que max^me delect^^t: occultis quae prosunt etiam no^entibus.
See Thankoffring, p. 16.
we call Mercies) or secretly such, wherewith our GOD will do us good against
our wills: He must be praised for all, and this must be the close of all, O
that men would praise the Lord for His goodness: and for His wonderful works
to the children of men ^s^. 107. 8.
. Surely the Lord, as He said to Moses, has made all His goodness to pass
before us also Exodus 33. 19.
: Even these last years He has proclaimed His Name, fearful in praises,
doing wonders; O that men would praise the Lord, for,

He gave us the Lord Christ, (a Mercy inexpressible, which we never prayed-for:
but there we must begin, the beginning of Mercies, and foundation thereof) and
with Him, all things; The Fountain, from Whom all the Churches fresh springs
of comfort do^ ^low in unto her; In Whom are all the Treasures, rich Mines of
Grace and Glory: all praise to God for Him, through Whom God is a Father of
Mercies, and a God not of some, but of all consolations. O that men would
praise the Lord, etc. and for,

2. Casting the rays of His glorious light, upon this Land first of all. O
that men would praise the Lord: and for,

3. Breaking the yoke of His burden, and the rod of His oppressor the Pope,
when the Lord cast-out those six damnable Articles almost an hundred years
ago; O that men would praise the Lord, and for,

4. Giving us a Child-King, yet making him a nursing-Father: and a
Maiden-Queene, yet making her a nursing-Mother: And for all the goodness, the
Lord gave, through the hands of those excellent Princes (He delights to work
by weak instruments,) to brethren and to strangers. O that men would praise
the Lord. and for,

5. Delivering us out of the floods of great waters: and making His Adversaries
sink down there like a stone. O that men would 56 Years ago.
praise the Lord for His goodness, and for,

6. Not suffering the fire to kindle upon us: but consuming His Adversaries in
their own furnace, which they had heated seven Almost 40 years ago.
times hotter than ordinary. O that men would praise the Lord, and for,

7. His Parliament, which the LORD would have, His Adversaries give, and
continue unto His Land: (O wonderful!) And when they would curse their own
gift, (O abominable!) The LORD would bless it; how admirable! O that men would
praise the Lord, and for,

8. Those excellent, marvailous, distinguishing, seperating-Mercies, which the
LORD has reached-forth to all His Kingdoms, through His servants hands. O
that men would praise the Lord; and for,

9. The Parliament at Oxford; yes, though the Devils Parliament, yet praise the
Lord for that: for both the Houses there; The ignoble house of Robbers, where
Littleton speaks little, (nay not one word of) Law: And the base house of
Thieves, where Eure speaks as little Reason. O that men could praise the LORD
for this Anti-Parliament. The Lord has suffered it to be set-up for excellent
reason, To try and prove His Parliament, whether they will not be as active
for GOD, as that Parliament is for the Devil: As spiritfull for the LORD
Christ as those Adversaries are for Antichrist. O that men would praise the
Lord: and for,

10. All His deliverances: Here I stand in a maze; Whoever could reckon-up the
deliverances God gave to one particular person! how much less able, to account
the deliverances to a whole Kingdom: 1. The deliverance at Edg-hill October
2^, 1642. On the Lord day.
, ye servants of the Lord, praise ye the Lord. 2. That at Brainford November. 12,
Saturday.
: open the month and praise ye the Lord, for that wonderful deliverance.

3. For the deliverance at Newbery September. 19, 1643. ^husd^y.
. O that men would praise the Lord for that. And for that near Winchester
March 29, 16^4. 2 Chro. 20. 26. A comfort, that comes too soon, is a
discomf^ture afte^wuds; what ever we think, the Lord God helps His C^u^^h
^lways right carly Exodus 28. 36.
. O that men would praise the Lord for His goodness, and for His wonderful
works to the children of men! O that BERACHAHS, Blessings and Praises were
written upon them every one, specially upon those, that came not too soon,
when we desired them. O that BERACHAH, Blessing and Praise were written upon
the places where, the days when, the persons by whom the Lord wrought these
deliverances. O that this were engraven upon their persons, Holiness to the
Lord, then men would praise the Lord for His goodness. And for delivering His
servants into His enemies hands. O that we could praise the Lord for this, for
this shall tend to their eternal go^d. O that we could praise the Lord, for
suffering the enemy to fire upon us, as those that would set our houses on a
flame over our heads; these will kindle His servants zeal (Lukewarm before)
against their own sins, and such great sinners before the Lord. Bl^ssed be the
Lord for this; God does assure His servants, that, as David's deliverance was
nearest, when his Ziglag was fiered 1 Samuel 30. 1.
, and his enemies rage at the highest: So is His ^hurches deliverance at hand,
when He suffers His enemies to cast about the rage of their great wrath: now
the Devil has but a short time Rev. 12. 12.
: O that men would praise the Lord for His goodness, and for His wonderful
works to the children of men! Let Ireland praise the Lord, He has thrown down
her Tabernacle, but it is to raise it up, and to stablish it for ever. Let
Scotland praise the Lord, who has wrought wonderful works there once and
again; and more wonderfully will He work for them and by them, if they and we
can give God all the glory: If we can make God our strong arm, He will use His
servants hands, thereby to bring to pass great matters. O that we could praise
the Lord (i. e.) ascribe salvation to our God! Let England do so, now a burning
bush all on a flame, yet not consumed. Not consumed! not hurt in all this fire;
She is resining, she is purifying now from all her tin, all her dross: Never
in such a way to exaltation, to be made the head of Nations, and the most
honorable of Kingdoms! O that men would praise the Lord, ascribe salvations
to their God. Let Hull say so, a monument of salvations: Let Gloucester say so,
an everlasting pillar for everlasting praise: Let London say so, the City of
God, that has lain among Lions yet not devoured; amongst those, who were set on
fire, yet not consumed: A City, that has been stormed with all the grenades,
that could be shot against her; Proclamations, Detestations, Commissions, all
the fiery darts, haile-stones and coals of fire, yet stands untouched as a
monument of everlasting praise before their God; and as a mirror of Mercy and
sacred providence, before the eyes of all the Christian world; that City of God
so exalted, will exalt the Lord, will praise the Lord for His wonderful works,
to her and her children, so preserved, so marvailously separated: and for this
very end, To show that the LORD is upright: He is her rock, and no
unrighteousness in Him. London will praise the Lord, for had the Adversary had
power answerable to his will; (i. e.) had he had an arm like God, as he thinks
he has; then had he cast abroad the rage of his wrath; he had destroyed the
humble persons there, and trod them down in their places: he would have
commanded fire and brimstone from Heaven, and rained it down upon London:
Therefore will that City show forth the loving kindness of GOD in the morning,
and His faithfulness every night, Amen. Now I descend to p^al. 9^. 2.
the particular, for we are lost and deceived in generals.

II.
The prime means of Posturing a man's self, Prayer, How prevailing; and how
comely Praise.

THis Soldier has not, by his own hand, gotten himself the victory, victory
over himself, in denying, in cru^ifying that self; victory over his Idols;
casting these forth: He has not, in his own strength taken-up his cross, and
followed his Lord Christ. He does not, ascribe this to his sword or to his bow.
A poor man ^ to stand-up against Principalities and powers! A poor creature
to wrestle with flesh and blood; to carry forth or subdue all the filth of his
heart, and to bring-in every needful grace: All this is without the sphere of
natures activity, beyond the power of all created strength; he prayed and he
wept concerning all this, and so had power with his GOD: All this was a
Naptal^, the fr^ut of mighty wrastlings with his God: So he quenched the fiery
darts of Satan, those grenades, and so forth, for I know not what he has done.
But all is done by the good hand of his God with him; In the power of His might
he has quitted himself as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ; he has done
valiantly, and yet not he; no, but the grace of GOD which was with him 1 Cor
15. 10
, still strengthening him and inabling him, to do all things (...) 4. 1^.
(...).
: His God has done great things for him, He has quenched those darts, put oil
into the wounds those made; The more fiery and piercing those were, the wider
passage they made for joy to come-in, and to open the mouth the wider for
praise to go forth. These great things God has done for His poor servant. He
has wrought great works in him too; It was His good pleasure so, though he be
nothing 2 Cor. 12. ^1.
; And now this man's heart being fixed, he is as secure as any man in the world,
trusting in the Lord, he is careful for nothing: If the temptation be strong,
and the strait great, he does according to the counsel Phil. 4. 6.
, and the example 2 Co^. 12. 8.
before him, once and again, and the third time, makes his prayer and
supplication before his GOD: and if the temptation be not removed, and he
enlarged, yet that is done which is best for him; It is sanctified; and he is
made able to bear it, and a way made also to escape 1 Cor. 10. 13.
. Prayer now, and Gods grace now, are as prevailing, and as sufficient as ever:
and so he has concluded, and is careful for nothing; But in all things he
gives thanks; he sees infinite reason for that, specially for his temptations,
for he has ever found the way God has made to escape has been the more
wonderful, the sharper the temptation, and the greater the straight has been:
Honor, and glory, and praise, be attributed to this dear God for all His
mercies, and loving kindnesses to His poor servant; for His Heaven here [which
was more than he looked for, or was Joh. 16. 33.
promised,] and for all his Hell too, his losses, and crosses; his pains and
his sorrows; his conflicts and his troubles, not mercies in our esteem, but
mercies to him, and in his account made so, and found so to be by many
experiences, therefore registered in the beginning See Thank off^^ing, chap. 3.
of his calender of mercies; Glory and praise to God for all His mercies, and
loving kindnesses to His poor servant. How many are those all? he will tell
you when you tell him how many hairs you have on your head, for he will not
require of you, how many sands on the sea shore, or Starr^s in the firmament of
Heaven; all the mercies to his soul; There he begins, with righthand mercies,
from everlasting to everlasting; all causes of, and conducing to his eternal
well being: Poor man, poor in spirit, rich in faith! He never thought
himself worthy to enjoy the light of the Sun in the firmament: but that the
LORD the Creator thereof should lift-up the light of His countenance upon His
servant! That, the dayspring from on high, should visit him! That the Son of
Righteousness should arise unto him with healing in His wings. This! how
admirable, how unspeakeable a -- mercy is this See Thankoffring, chapter 3. You may
commend this man, says Luther, for he is an humble man, a child may lead him:
his servant may reprove him: Christ dwells and walks in him; the man is and
does nothing: And if he be an humble-man, he is a thankfullman even for the
least mercy and greatest a^^liction; Iu all things he gives thanks, Luther.
! I can tell you no more of this, his own words are swallowed-up here with
admiration, as Jobs were with grief: Here come-in his Selahs, his Mictams, his
Hallelujahs, as we read before, and shall read hereafter. All left hand
mercies (under that general he comprehends all deliverances, all mercies to
the Churches, (he is much taken with them, much enlarged in his praise to God
for Jerusalem, her prosperity! he prefers it before his chief joy;) very
thankful also for mercies to himself, to all his round about him, and about
his table, relating to their warfare here.) All mercies! he is lost and
confounded in particulars here, yet by his will he would not forget one: he
writes upon all mercies concerning his soul, his body; day-mercies,
night-mercies, all within him, all without him, all bestowed upon his brethren
and sisters, upon himself and his about him, he writes upon all, Asked of GOD;
the gift of GOD; all is a kind of salvation; upon all those gates, whereat
evil went-out, or mercy came-in, he writes, The salvation of the LORD: upon
all those out-lets and in-lets he writes PRAISE, which attends prayer evermore;
He writes Praise also upon his conversation, even holiness unto the LORD, he
lives unto His praise, Who has given all to him, has done all for him, wrought
all in him, for all is from the LORD the God of his salvations; to whom he
ascribes all honor, and glory, and praise, from everlasting unto everlasting,
for ever and ever, Amen and Amen.

CHAP. III. The Word Preached is mighty to Posture a Kingdom.
The propog^t^ng thereof has been and is the endeavou^ of all good Patriots in
all ag^s of the world. What this Land was before the (...) of this Sun
gl^mmeted forth unto the people t^ere. What the People went when covered over
with the d^rkn^sse o^ P^pe^y. Wh^t the dark pl^ces of the earth are now. How
this eng^geth the (...) to promote the Gospel with ali their might; how mighty
through God, yet l^ss^ exp^cta^^on of Peace from the world now, than ever; The
Reasons why it ^ust be so: Assured Re^ce is from H^^ven, Christ's L^gacy to His,
in Me ^eace.

THus victoriously have the Worthies of the Lord marched-on hitherto, not in
their own strength, nor ascribing any thing to their own arm: but to the
right hand of the Lord, He has done valiantly; They brought Him down to their
side; interessed Him in the Cause; lifted up their hearts and hands to Him; so
they wrastled, even with strong wrastlings, and so they are prevailers, All the
people of God, that little little flock, all the world over, striving with them
also in their prayers. But so they could not have done, if they had not
believed; and believe they could not without a word; and a word they could not
have, in an ordinary way, without a Preacher: No blessing without prayer; no
prayer without faith; no faith without a word, a word of promise, wherein Thou
have made me to hope, says David. This consideration and some others, which I
may hint at presently, made the Worthies of the Lord very serious, and most
actively-busie, as were all the Nobles and truly honored before them, to
send-forth able and faithful Ministers (Indeed the Messengers of the Churches,
and the 1 C^to. 17. 7. Kings C^^on. p. 1^.
glory of Christ) To teach in all the Towns and Cities of Judah, That is the
way to posture a Kingdom fully and indeed; the way the Nobles ever took, and
ever succeeded-in, upward to this day. That we may raise this mercy to the
height, give men their honor, and God the glory; let us make a stand here, and
turn back our thoughts very far, to the people of this Land, before the
dayspring from on-high did visit them, I mean, before some ray of Heavenly
light did glimmer-forth unto them. Let us consider this in the first place.

1. What manner of people were they in those days? surely, as Agur said of
himself, when he knew himself, and had some knowledge of the Holy one: These
were more brutish then any Prove. 30 2.
man: they had not the understanding of men: and so brutish they were truly
and indeed, because they knew not themselves so to be, nor had they any
knowledge to be holy: That we may ru^ne-over this as quickly, as our thoughts
use to do, this i will only say; These people were then as the poor Indians are
now, as Idolatrous as these: These worship the Devil now, so did the people in
England then. He speak nothing of their other worship which they gave to the
Host of Heaven, nor of their Arch-Flamines and Flamines, ^ilamines, I lid.
, their Arch-Priests and Priests; the very same with ours, not so much
heathenish, but altogether as unchristian, whom we called Archbishops and
Bishops: I Will pass over all this, that our thoughts may returne-upward again,
until we come to, As it is at this day. Considerwe then in the next place, That

2. When it pleased God to break through that thick-cloud of Atheism, by the
preaching of Joseph, (for so we have it by tradition That Joseph of Arimathea,
preached the Gospel first to this Island.
) the cloud quickly thickened again, and grew more dark all over the Heaven,
by the spreading of Popery: And then the people were worse than before,
abominable Idolaters; They sacrificed to Devils before, so they did then; but
then they did more than ever they did before; They worshipped the Sun before,
for that was most glorious in their eyes: But afterward they worshipped the
works of their own hands; and that was a more brutish worship; They made gods
with their own hands, as easily as they could carve wood and stone: And then
they fell down before the gods, which they had made. And observable it is, how
monstrously cruel they were at that time; They devoured one another as bread;
they cut one another throat^s, as ordinarily, as they drank Ale: And to save
their throats one friend was a pledge to the other, while he was drinking;
whence our word so ordinarily used ever since, He pl^dge you. Who ever saw
Idolaters that were not cruel; They that could make gods, could make no
conscience of marring the Image of GOD. And thus they have continued to make
gods upward to this day: for that Art, whereto nature is very apt, is quickly
learnt; and once learnt, nature never unlearnes it again. Now in our return
upward to this day, let us consider how brutish these god-makers were in those
days, how like to the gods they made.

3. And we will reflect no farther back, than to the beginning of Elizabeth's
Reign, that excellent Queen, of the sweetest memory. What a brutish people
then! They that made gods, made no conscience of unmaking men, of destroying
themselves made in the Image of God; To tell you one of their mad and brutish
prankes: In our Northern parts, where the people always were, and now are,
very expert to make gods, and can serve them as well, this their manner was, To
hang up a glove in their Church, in way of a challenge, where meeting upon our
sol^mne day, they made that place like our Paris-garden, where the men are more
brutish now, than are the beasts there. Thus brutish they were in those days.

And now we will come-up to, As it is at this day, and enquire, how it is now:
Who are they, that have deserted the Parliament, all the faithful in all three
Kingdoms, and assisted a war against them, as at this day? Who are they,
that are now fighters against God; the right hands of the times; eldest sons
to that Prince, that rules in darkness? Who are those vipers, that eat
through their mothers womb to make their escape; Who are those but such who
lived in darkness, and hated the light? Who made the lowest and basest of
things (their lusts) their gods; and put from them the Holy one, would have
none of Him. True it is, these mighty Nimerods, Marquesses, and Earls, and
Lords, whom their horrible -- butcheries, and Turkish cruelties have rendered
men of Name now, but shall render them a curse to after generations, All these
were borne and lived in days of light: But they put it from them, they cared
not to know the Lord; they never heard, or not cared to hear any other, but
Court-Sermons, which courted them for the service of their King, never taught
them how to serve the LORD of lords, and God of gods. The Sermonists there (I
cannot call them Preachers) the best of them, except one, (a prime one once,
the last now in esteem) were but English Senecaes at the best, they had no
more savor of Divinity (...), Basil, Ep. ^^. They make such a compound of
Divinity, with art and wit, as he of his Roses with spices, that they mar. ^^^
the savor of it quite. (...), (...). de var. Hist. l. 4. ^. 39.
, of Christ, and His Gospel, than those Epistles have. And for the Chaplains
there in Court, and in their Lords houses, their Sermons there were not half
so good as Senecaes Epistles; These contain excellent humanity and morality,
and good Divinity too, (if Divinity can be there, where the Name of Christ is
not:) but these Court-Sermons had not that in them, which we call humanity: and
for divinity, there was no more savor of it there, then there is in the white
of an Egg: No marvel now that men, who thrust away the light, do walk now
as men in the dark, and are yet more cruel and bloody than their forefathers
were. For the people now generally all over the Land, these are as brutish as
their Lords and Leaders are, and for the same reason, for their guides and
Pastors are so brutish. From these premises, which we doubt not, but were
thoroughly considered on by the truly Noble and highly Honored now in
Parliament, we must conclude, First,

1. That the dark places of the earth are now as they ever have been, full of
cruelty.

2. That there are a people in the City, and Country (not to speak of Wales)
who live in as palpable darkness, under as thick a cloud of Popery, as they
did a thousand years ago I know some Parishes in the very heart and center of
the Land, where neither the children now, nor their Fathers, ever ^ heard the
Gospel preached:
; nay their darkness now is more palpable, and the shadow of death more
gross, and thick now, in these days, than in days of old, for this reason;
Because some places in the City and Countries, are as Goshen was, which make
the other places more dark: for a spiritual light, as does a natural, but
flashing only in the face, and not abiding, does but darken the eye of the mind
the more, as a natural light does the eye of the body. More might be added
here, but I pass on, and conclude.

3. That the Archbishops and Bishops took the readiest way that could be
taken, to bring an Egyptian darkness all over the Land: For 1. They thrust the
Ministers of God, (excellent men, I never think of that Bith^nian, but I think
of our Bishops and their Curates, Lact. l. 5. 1, 2, 9, chapt.
and precious) out of Gods house, and their own: and thrust the vile men into
their places, such, whom Job would not have admitted to sit with the dogs of
his flock. 2. They taught the people by their own example; I say, by their own
example, to make gods, and then to worship before them: and that was the only
way to make a people, as now they are, as brutish as stocks: and as fierce as
Lions. I say nothing here how they did blaspheme the Lord and his day; I
conclude.

4. That there is not a man, I say not a man, that has heartily joined himself
to the Kings Army, who has not received the mark of the beast either openly in
his forehead, or secretly in his hand; or he has damnation written in his
forehead: not a man in the Kings Army, willingly there, and on that side, who
is not a Papist, or, which is as bad, an Atheist (that is) bruitishly ignorant,
or notoriously profane: So I have listed that Legion, that black Regiment, the
Devils guard, under two general heads, Papists and Atheists all: And when the
Nobles there shall go about to recruit their Army, as sure as the Devil is in
Hell, and his angels, his ministering servants are on earth; so sure it is, they
shall not find a man, hearty to their service, not one man in all the Christian
world, who is not one of these two; one that knows nothing, as he ought to
know, he is a Papist; or one that is brutish in knowledge, and more brutish
in practice, he is an Atheist.

5. That should the Nobles and Worthies have parlied, as many years as they
have weeks, upon a way how to remedy all this, how to make a firm Peace, and
establish Truth in the Land, that these may meet and kiss each other, they
could not have thought of a shorter, more compendious, and more ready way, than
that they have taken. And so now I must return back again, that I may
traverse the way the Worthies of the LORD have taken from the first day they
sat in Parliament upward to this day: The simplest reader shall then more
clearly understand, the changes and tides of things as they are at this day:
and be able more than by conjecture to tell what shall be in after-dayes. The
way they took. First,

1. And it must be always first in all orderly proceedings, They proclaimed a
fast, that they and we might afflict our selves before Ezra 8. ^1.
our GOD, to seek of him a right way: That must be I say again, always
first, for we all know, and are assured, That the hand of our God is upon all
them for good, that seek Him: but His power, and His wrath is against all
them, that forsake him. Of this before. ver. 22.


2. They called-in the exiles; opened the prison doors, brought forth the
precious, thrust the vile into those places; they opened the Ministers mouths;
and then, as matters did require, they entered into a Protestation, they
avouched God to be their God; to May 5, 1641.
serve Him after His manner; and to stand-fast in the liberty wherein God and
Man, the law of God, of Nature, of the Kingdom, of Nations had made them free:
We must enquire in passage, how did this take? And answer: That there were very
many, Archbishops both, and Bishops all; Princes and Nobles; Pastors and
people, who refused. Ah Lord! Refused to take God for their God! Refused to
maintain the Diadem and Crown of three Kingdoms! Refused to stand-fast in
the liberty wherein God and man had set them! Ah Lord! Indeed it is to be
pitied, but not to be wondered at, if we consider the places where these people
live; The Teaching they had there; and the influence that teaching had into the
hearts and lives of men all over the land. I pray you let us consider, The
place first, where lived they?

1. Under the droppings or near about Cathedrals. It is as barbarous a word as
the people are who live there: yet we now know what the Cathedrals are, The
Bishops Churches, and the Devils Chapels: There the Bishop had his seat, and
Satan has his throne.

2. What teaching had they there, under those droppings, or near there abouts?
what teaching there? None at all, no catechizing, no instruction there: A
Sermon perhaps there was, such as it was, which nourished no more than nuts
do, which fill with wind: or Clem. Alex.
than Stock Fish does, which, Erasmus says, nourishes no more than does a
stone. And for the places further off whereinto their Prebends there had an
influence, The people were not taught at all; not that there was any Spirit
good or bad, or that the people had any other souls, than what the beasts
have. True it is, and not to belly the Devil, The Doctor told the people, when
he came to receive his Easter book, and gather in his Tithes, That there is a
God, and they must serve Him; A Devil too, and they must fly from him, and
hate his works: for a heaven there is, and everlasting Joys there; And hell
there is, and eternal pains there. But the people believed none of all this.
That was their fault, you will say. Indeed it was. But the Doctor was foully
to blame: Because, what he taught with the mouth once or twice a year, he
untaught with his hands every day: for no sooner preached he the preaching, his
own heart suggested to him, but away from the Church to the Alehouse, where
he would drink like a swine; or if not given to that sin, (as all are not) yet
to another as bad; Besides all this, he would earth himself in the earth; hunt
after honors, ride after preferments furiously, as Balaam did; drown himself
in the world, as if he knew no other God, as certainly he does not. And this
spoiled all his Philosophy to the people; he, that told them there is a God,
and then turned his back upon Him, could they believe him? He that said, there
is an heaven, where the Righteous are eternally happy; and an hell, where the
wicked are eternally, miserable, and yet lived like the unjust judge, that
feared not God, nor regarded man; as one, that had a soul for no other purpose
than a swine has (pro sale) to keep his body fresh, and sweet; could the
people Trust him? Ah Lord! should I tell the Reader in the last place,

3. What an influence these Cathedrals had, and the Priests there into the
lives and manners of all round about; If I should tell how As Bunbury a vise
person in Reading.
brutish Priests and people are in the Cities and countries round about, men
without God in the world, he would not wonder, that there are so many found
every where fighters against God: what can be expected from a brutish people,
but to walk brutishly? What wonder is it to see men contend against God, whom
they know not? To fight against the Gospel, the glory whereof they never saw,
nor any more light, but what slashing in their face, blinded them the more?
what wonder is it to see Pastors and people more brutish and more cruel than
in ancient days, when they are more superstitious now than they were then? We
are more cunning god-makers now than were our forefathers 16. hundred years
ago, they were but bunglers to us: but we more unexcusable (the time of that
ignorance God (over-looked) winked Act. 17. ^o. (...).
at): And, as is said of a cunning Gamester, The more cunning he is, the more
knave he is: so, the more cunning we are, the more abominable we are, but very
exact we are at that craft now, this godmaking, we exceed all our fathers; for
our skill, which is natural, we have confirmed by imitation: and we thank our
Priests we are more brutish than the Flamines were of old, we can make many
breaden gods, and wooden gods, and stone gods: and a book a god, yet not Gods
Book neither, we can do more as naturally as the fire can burn, for we can
make every lust a god. How can we now avouch God for our God? But you will ask
me by the way.

How do men and women make gods? The prime and chief Idolaters in all the
kingdom happily never made a god with their hands?

Very likely, but as the cunning Artificer makes gods with his hands: so there
are as cunning as he, who can make gods without hands: for by bowing before
this or that, be it bread, flesh, or fish; stock or stone, we make it a god, as
well as we can, such an one as it is. The Lord plagued the people because they
made a calfe which Exodus 32. ^5.
Aaron made. Aaron made it, and the people made it; he made it a calfe, and the
people made it a god by doing such homage and service unto it, as should be
done to God only. What calves were they? even such as we are, while we serve
dumb Idols, the works of our own hands, or the works of our own hearts. I
pray you mark that, they are Idols set-up there, the Devil, the world, and the
flesh: while we give such a service to them, as is due only to God, we make
these our gods: We make the world a god, and the Devil a god, and pleasure a
god, and the belly a god, by serving the creature more than we serve the
Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. And now that we are such cunning
workmen at making Romans 1. 25.
of gods, All the Christian world may see in what a posture we stood to a
Protestation, to take God for our God; To avouch Him. But yet neither the work
nor the workers did cease, The faithful all the land over, who had avouched
God for their God; were assured, That God would avouch them, and them only for
His people: so they followed-on to seek the Lord, in the way where He is
always found: They knew they were in the way toward a glorious peace, in the
pursuit of Truth: and were more confirmed in it, Because the Princes of the
earth, and the heathen people there set themselves against that Peace: This
made them gird-up their loins like men, and walk on, filled with the Spirit.
They are not meet to do Gods work, who say there is a Lion or she Bear in
the way; Who cannot master difficulties, and make use of them for
encouragements; To leap over walls, and skip over mountains; In Gods strength
they can do all this: And so, two years after, the Worthies entered into
covenant with their God; and fairly proposed it to the people; and they all
took it, all that were freemen, not under the Antichristian yoke, and had
any knowledge of GOD, or how to serve Him: all these took it. Only Atheists,
and Papists, (god-makers) they refused (for all these had, with their Pastors
and people, made a covenant with sin, death, and hell, and they would stand
to that): and to maintain their standing, their rage workt higher, if higher
could be; The Adversary stormed the more, the more the Covenant of GOD pressed
toward them, and the equity thereof flashed in their faces, and cleared to
their eyes, how abominable, and bloody their devices were, even to destroy a
mother City in Israel. But all this rage (for now hell was moved; Nay, all
this while, from the first day, that the Protestation was entred-into, ever
since, all the gates there were set-wide-open, but all) did serve the more to
confirm and stablish the servants of the Lord in their way comming-up to the
LORD To join themselves to Him, in a Covenant never to be forgotten: And up
they are brought three Kingdoms together, God speaking to them with a
strong-Hand, and they are in a fast-Covenant with their God. (This will be the
subject of the sixth Chapter.) Here only we must observe with all observation,
how the Covenant takes, What lets still, and will let till it be removed?
Treacherous Prophets, and vile Priests, these must be removed; Precious and
faithful, such must be put into those places, as forerunners to prepare the
way of the LORD, and a people for Himself. Alas! It cannot be expected, that
we, a poor dark people, should (understanding what we do) enter into
Covenant to take God for our God, His Christ for our Lord, and King; His Spirit
to be ruled by Him, and to walk after Him. Indeed we understand none of these
things: I affirm, and can confirm it in the name of all the brutish Pastors
and People all over the land, That we have no more saving knowledge of those
matters, God, and Christ, and His Spirit, than the seat has whereon we sit; or
than Heyly^s deaf-stone, Heyly. Geog. p. 503.
or than Heylyn himself; nor possible we should; We hear our Pastor, (in
name), a brutish man indeed, more brutish than our selves (and that is more
brutish than the Ox and Horse we drive) say prayers, as our summer-bird sings,
still the same: he is dead, and his prayers dead; In an extraordinary way,
whence should we have life? Then he reads the holy word of God; but with such
unwashed hands, and unclean lips, That he makes it, as does our sin, and
unpreparednesse, unclean to us also. Indeed my spirit is stirred now: I see
plainly for want of knowledge we perish all. Ye Worthies of the Lord, lift-up
your selves upon the wing now, your hearts, and your Prayers, come-on, make
speed to help us, carried-on as upon Eagles wings, swiftly, strongly: deliver
us, we pray you, from Treacherous Prophets, vile Priests, and brutish Pastors,
our souls are wearied because of these murderers Jer. 4. 31.
, The LORD deliver us. Till we have Pastors after Gods own heart, we cannot
avouch God for our God: we cannot enter covenant with Him: we shall do, as we
have done, break all your bands, and cast from us your cords, as brutish
Pastors, and people, Children of Belial, use to do. For Gods sake hasten for
our help, flying as upon Eagles wings, and deliver us from these unreasonable
men. Nay, though we may be so brutishly ignorant, That all our talk is of
Oxen, we ask not after such a mercy for we understand it not: yet, Ask ye
after Isai. 65. 1. (...) patefact us sum vel obviam expositus. I met them who
would have shunned me. 2. Chro. 30. 22. Act. 8. 30.
us, ye have your LORD GOD for an example, He manifested Himself to them, who
never Asked after Him, (nor ever would); He was found of them, that sought Him
not. Ye will consider this, and more which your wisdoms can better suggest,
To hasten your work and speed our deliverance, by sending forth unto us those,
that can teach us the GOOD KNOWLEDGE of The LORD: We might truly say, as the
Eunuch did, (had we such a sense of our own ignorance) we cannot understand
what we hear or read, except some man should guide us: had we a guide, an
interpreter, one, that were able to expound and show us by his life and
doctrine the meaning of what is read (which was the old and Nehem. 8. ^. and
gave the sense.
good manner never to be forgotten) possible we might go from our seats in our
meeting places, rejoicing, as others have done, because they had understood the
words, that were declared unto ver. 12.
them; Though we are very forgetful, and as ignorant (the more need of a
guide) though, I say, we are so, yet we forget not, what the Disciples said;
our hearts did burn within us while He (the Lord Luke 24. 32.
Christ) opened to us the Scriptures: Then they felt that heat, and fervencie
of spirit, when the Scriptures were opened; the sense thereof given, then heat
(An Almighty Hand working therewith) comes-into the heart; Then the spirits of
men are quickened; Then the stubborn will is subdued; Then the man is pliable;
then the heart yields, is flexible, ready bent, and girt, to obey in all
things. Now, Speak, LORD, Thy servant hears: now, command, Lord, Thy servant
obeys; Nothing now too much to do, nothing now too hard to suffer; The will
is subdued, it is gained; the man is taught now: Now offer him the Covenant,
bid him lift-up his hand to it, and subscribe his name; yes, that he will, with
all his heart, he will do it with rejoicing. We shall hear of that anon, we
are but making way to it now; The only ready way, which the Worthies of the
Lord (the Lord instructing them to discretion) always, and now have taken, To
appoint teaching ministers for every congregation; To thrust-out the vile
thence; To put in the precious there; such as may come unto us in the fullness
of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ Romans 15. 29.
; such as can, by the good hand of God with them, open our eyes, turn us from
darkness to light, (oh how mighty, and as excellent is the work of a
minister,) and from the power of Satan unto God: such ministers the Worthies
endeavor now, Act. 26. 18.
with all their might, to send forth, and appoint through all the land: for
they would have all the people now to join and knit themselves all together as
one man, to contend for God, for Religion, for the faith, against the mighty
Adversaries to God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, All the Devils in Hell, and his
Angels on earth, Papists and Atheists there. And this is the only way, That the
Word of God be published, and that great may be the company of Preachers to
publish the same. We will observe what we read now, for it will suffice
touching this matter. And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven,
having the everlasting Gospel to preach Rev. 14. 6.
unto them, that dwell on the earth, etc. We must set a Mark now on that which
follows, And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, That great City is most certainly fallen: When the everlasting Gospel
goes forth, when that is preached to them, who dwell upon the earth, then it is
fallen, it is fallen: All falls before it, or vanishes as Darkness before the
light; superstition is fallen, it is fallen, it is certainly fallen; Heresy is
fallen, is fallen, is certainly fallen; profaneness is fallen, is fallen, all
this is certainly fallen. All this was set-up and maintained in the dark; all
this will fall or vanish in the light before the sunshine of the Gospel; The
Adversary took advantage of the night, and joined shoulder to shoulder, To
thrust out the faithful, and to thrust into their Rooms pastors as brutish as
themselves; and then what edification could be expected but of Altars and
Images and crucifixes, and such like services as brutish as these Stocks; In
the Darkness Altars were raised, were raised, were certainly raised: The
Adversary and enemy took the Advantage of the Night when men slept. Much might
be said touching the methods, wiles and depths of Satan this way, how his
ministers sought all ways, turned every stone, whereby to stint prayer, To
stop the mouths of the faithful, to Thrust them out, to block up the way and
passage against the Gospel, that it might not pass on with the increase of
God. Blessed be God That the children of the Light and Resurrection are as wise
now (almost) as were the children of darkness, and the world: They have (what
they can) removed that which has l^tted, made a mountain a plain, so as the
Gospel is like to have a free passage. And then we know what follows, Babylon
is fallen, is fallen, that great City, Mother of witchcrafts, and
profanations, is certainly fallen: And in that fall Atheism, superstition,
heresies, profaneness fall also; Now that the Word of God has a free passage;
now that faithful ministers are sent forth to prepare the way of the Lord, to
make His path strait; now Babylon is fallen, is fallen, is certainly fallen.
Doubtless The Lord has thoughts of peace toward His kingdoms, I do make no
doubt of it, They do not question it neither who are wiser than I, seeingmen,
and have wisely considered the outgoings of the Lord toward His poor ones.
This I can observe, I thank God, and so does every man, who is not stark
blind, that in the Cathedrals, those Dens of Robbers; (where the vile Priests
and treacherous persons lay slumbring, and sleeping, (though they had blood for
their pillowes,) and where they thought to lie snorting in their nests for
ever: In the Cathedrals where the singing-men, who divided their times betwixt
the Alehouse and the Chapel, giving three hours unto that cursed place, and
one unto this; where they pray-singing, and sing-praying; In these places,
Churches, and Chapels, as we call them, The people are taught now out of the
Word of God, what God is, and how God must be served; what prayer is, not an
howling; what faith is, not a conceit in the brain, which has no bottom, but
the mighty work of God there, etc. In those places, where was barrenness
barrenness, the footsteps of the Lord drop fatness now upon His people there,
for there the good Word of God is opened, is expounded, so as we, by the good
hand of God with us, understand what we hear, and go away rejoicing, our
hearts burning within us. Verily, the Lord will do great things for His land.
Will! said I? He has done great things and glorious already, and yet but pawnes
and pledges of greater mercies; The Angels, having the everlasting Gospel, are
gone forth to preach, and wherever they come, they say with a loud voice, Fear
God and give glory to Him; For certainly we shall hear this voice next;
Babylon is fallen is fallen, that great City, Rev. 14. 7.
mother of whoredoms, that has made the Kings of the earth drunk with the
wine of her fornication is certainly fallen. Nay we have heard this voice, it
is fallen, it is fallen, more then once already: And this voice also, Come out
of her my people that ye Rev. 18. 4.
be not partakers of her sins, and receive of her plagues; The complement
whereof is, A drinking of the wine of the wrath of God, powered out, without
mixture into the cup of His indignation: Blessed be GOD, Who has shown such a
favor to His people, Rev 14. 10, 11.
given them Pastors after His own heart, who can preach the word, the Lord
Christ unto His people; can open the treasury of Grace, and knowing the
terrors of the Lord, can persuade men: Blessed be God for this unspeakeable
gift, Amen. What could the Lord have done more for His Land? He will give His
people an heart to the prizes in their hands, and that is all. I cannot leave
this point yet. Truly a wonderful thing is done in our days; In the
eveningtide it shall be light; When we thought it would be the darkest time,
with us; behold how lightsome! We, poor ones, thought verily, there would be
no vision. Behold stand still and wonder, and give glory unto God, lights are
set-up in many, and are setting-up in all Congregations: It follows; The
Northern Army, those locusts and caterpillars are fallen, are fallen, are
certainly fallen. The mother of whoredoms shall be slain now with the breath
of Gods mouth: Darkness must vanish, for light is come; the everlasting
Gospel is preached. I remember Luthers words a new;

I will not buffet darkness, to beat it away, (said he;) I will bring-in a
light, and the darkness is gone: I will not so eagerly contend with the Pope,
for the throwing down his Images; I will pluck them out of the heart, for I
will labor to exalt the LORD CHRIST there in my ministry, and then the Idol
falls. This puts me in mind of another grave speech; A grave Divine was spoken
unto thus, or to this purpose; I pray you (Sr) chide that man for wearing long
hair, so like a Russian. I will not, said the good old man They say it was Mr
Dod the oldest Minister in England.
, be eager with the youth, touching that matter, but I will teach him to know
himself, I Will show him the judgment of God upon long hair, (It was Absoloms
halter 2 Samuel 18. 9. c 1 Cor. 11. 14. (...), Chrysostom. I^^d. Hom. 26.
!) I will expound unto him, the words of the Apostle c, whereunto he must
needs see how contrary he walks. I Will seek to hide pride from his eyes, and to
weed it out of his heart, and if I can do so, I need not bid him cut his
hair that we may see his forehead, that he may appear like a man and not like
a fury: This is the point which carries all before it, if it be carried home;
preach Christ into the heart, and then the Idol goes-out, and every thing,
that exalts its self against the LORD CHRIST will be thrown down, for Christ
will be Lord where He comes. I may conclude now, that my self and others as my
self, cannot contribute to the battles of the Lord; yet let us contribute to
this work, The setting-up a faithful Ministry in the Countries, where Satan
has his throne, keeps his interest, and holds his possession by tenure of
ignorance: Let us pray to the Lord, Who works and none hinders, that the Lord
would pity the Countries which are under the shadow of death; that He would
send forth Angels, unto those dead folks, to preach unto them, that dwell on
the earth, and to every Nation and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with
a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to Him, and so forth as we have read.
Certainly wherever this voice is heard, there will be a marvailous change;
the Lords name blasphemed there before, will be hallowed, reverenced,
sanctified now in some suitableness and proportion to so great a Majesty; the
Idol before the eyes, and in the heart, maintained before, and argued for,
will be cast-out now; Gods house shall be, as it is called, an house of prayer;
they shall worship him there in truth, and as He has commanded; the good word
of God, and the dispensers of it, despised before, will be honored now: The
Lords day, profaned there before, will be duly observed now, And the Covenant
rejected before, will be taken now, and stood unto. Doubtless the next news
we shall hear is, That Idols, and Idoll-men, and Idol services are fallen,
are fallen; for the Kingdom of the Lord Christ is set-up, is set-up; the
everlasting Gospel is preached; Angels are sent-out, are sent-out upon that
message: Certainly that mother of witchcrafts must be made manifest now, as on
the day she was borne, her shameful nakedness must appear; and then she
shall be cut in sunder, Amen. And then it shall be with the Church as when that
wicked woman was slain, The people of the Land shall rejoice, and the City of
God shall be 2 Chro. 23. 21.
quiet: then silence in Heaven, when this wicked woman, so gorgeously
apparelled (yet nothing but earth about her) shall be Rev. 17. 4.
slain. But O that we did not expect peace before that time, a peace of the
worlds giving: O that we were not too hasty, and quite mistaken in our pursuit
after this so fundamental, so comprehensive, such a mother blessing Peace: O
that we could wait Gods time with patience, and full assurance, that they, who
wait for Him shall find Him, and themselves no loosers at the last. Every
thing is good in its season; so is peace the better, the longer expected; and
the more wholesome, and excellent, if not, as some fruits are, ripened before
its time. A mercy given too soon, when we would have it, proves a judgment
after ward. A calm is pleasantest after a storm: so is peace, ushered-in with
war, as this peace must be: For I am mistaken quite in the book of God, and
in our book of Days, Chronicles and Histories of the Church, if a sore brunt
and great fight of afflictions be not yet behind: That wicked woman, the
Jezabell of these last days, was long in rising, by stepps and degrees to her
height and zenith of her glory: She is now fallen from thence, and she falls
apace, yet, by stepps and degrees, not yet as a millstone: She has received a
blow, an astonishing blow on her forehead, and yet the blow, hitting not so
right, she has broken loose, as we know an Ox has done, and is mad with rage:
the next blow will strike her at once down to the ground, Book of Martyrs.
she shall not need a second blow; but like a beast, whose throat is cut, she
will struggle for life. All this assures us, we must expect no peace yet,
unless such a peace, which the men of the world give, and that the sons and
daughters of God abominate, even all offers and assayes that way. They expect
war now and gird-up their loins in expectation of an hard-brunt, for thus
they reason, first,

1. From ordinary observation of our ways, I say ours, a poor ignorant
brutish people, they observe with what eagerness of spirit, and zeal
according to our ignorance, we have contended for our Service-booke, and how we
pout, and whine, and scratch, and bite too, while we have no other weapon,
because our Servicebooke is cast-out: What is become of our Religion, say we,
how shall we pray now? how shall we serve God now? and thus we are in a rage,
stark mad upon our Idol, our Masse-booke, persuaded as verily that a Divinity
is in that book, as a people were That the Moon was in the Asses belly L.
Viv. Com. in Aug. de Civit. Dei. 10. cap. 16.
: I think to tell you-out this story hereafter; In the mean time, they that
are wise in heart do observe this, for thus they reason again;

2. If we are so mad now, because that brutish service, which has made us so
brutish, is cast-out of the Church; how mad will we be think they, when we our
selves must be cast-out; when we must be excommunicated, thrust away from
partaking of holy bread, because of our uncleanenesse; when we must be
deliveredup to the Devil; (for the destruction of our flesh) when this must be
(certainly the time is at hand when it must be) how mad will we be then, think
the wise in heart; how will we fret, and fume, and rage, and storm then?
Certainly, he that considers this, though he considers no more, and though
he hears of peace, will yet hearken to the counsel; he that has no sword,
let him sell his Luke 22. 36.
garment, and buy one.

A. No need he should be at that cost, for now the prophecy is fulfilled, Out
of Zion is gone forth the Law, and the word of the Isa. 2. 2.
Lord from Jerusalem: Angels are gone forth with the everlasting Gospel; It
follows, and the people shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their
spears into pruning hooks; Nation Ezra 2. 4.
shall not lift-up sword against Nation; neither shall they learn war any
more; A blessed peace now, now peace, peace, a perfect peace, inward and
outward, Amen.

B. I could join with you heartily, but stay a little, nay, for ought we know,
we may stay a great while. This promise was made to the Church almost three
thousand years ago, it is not fulfilled yet; the Church waits the
accomplishment of it now, for it shall come to pass in the last days. These
days are now: But the last days contain a large length, and extent of time,
they have been running-out these sixteen hundred years, and whether this
prophecy shall be fulfilled in our days, or not, wise men cannot tell, some of
them think not; This is my first Answer. 2. If by Peace, you understand an
inward peace, that is peace indeed, then we grant; That, unto whomsoever the
word of Christ comes with power, it brings this peace along with it, at last: I
say, at last, for at its first coming to the heart, it finds all the
opposition, that the heart can make against it; And stirs and tumults there
will be within this little kingdom, within the man's breast: for there are
Idols there, which must be cast-out; and he that is called a strong man, must
be overcome, and his goods spoiled; which shall be at the last. At first
entrance, there will be an hot contention, stirs and tumults, as was said,
even these within that little kingdom, the man's own breast. And if so in that
little kingdom, we need not prophecy (for we see it fulfilled before our
eyes,) what stirs, tumults, oppositions, persecutions must be expected now,
through all the Lords Kingdoms, now that the Angels are gone forth with the
everlasting Gospel: Now that the Mountain of the LORDS house must be
established in the top of the mountains, and must be exalted above the hills;
now expect fire and sword, all the opposition, that Hell gates, the Devil and
his angels by force and fraud can make against these Angels, who are carrying
forth the everlasting Gospel; and saying with a loud voice, fear God, etc.
Now the Nations are angry, the wicked gnaw their tongues; we must expect from
these Nations, these Heathen, brutish people, as from an angry people, men mad
upon their Idols, and with rage, nothing but fire and sword; Therefore must
all, that love the Gospel, the Nation, and their own lives, all these must
learn war now; they must beat their plowshares into swords, and their
pruning-hookes into spears; for never was it known, if you ask from one end
of the Heaven to the other, You never read of an unbloody Reformation, when
there was such a deformation all over the Church and State.
That the Angels lifted-up their voice, saying, fear God, etc. and the angry
Nations did not lift-up the sword at the same time against those Angels: That
the Angels preached the Gospel of Peace, and the Heathen people, yea and men
civilized, professing the truth, but denying the power, did not learn to war
against it at that very time. Will these Angels expect better welcome from the
world than their Master had, the Angel of the Covenant? No sooner opened He
His mouth to preach, but the people opened their mouth against Him, and reached
forth their hand to cast Him down headlong from the edge of the hill: He would
teach them, they would persecute Him, with the tongue and hand both. His
Apostles, (men sent forth to preach,) fared no better, not one of them: But
their brutish dealing with Paul is most notorious, we never read or saw the
like until this very day, I Will but point to it. It must be so, and so it must
be expected; These Angels, like Paul Acts 19.
and the other Angels, will turn the world upside down, and the little world
we call man there, all upside down; they will tell men as plainly as Paul
did, That those are not gods which are made with hands; They will bid men fear
God, worship Him, that made Heaven and earth, and the sea; this is to turn the
world and men therein upside down, for it is to turn the heart Heavenward
whereto it stood cross ever since it had a being. We cannot think now, that
such turnings upside down, can be without confused noise; for in this turning,
Heaven and earth are brought together. We expect now the downfall of Antichist,
he must fall, he must fall down, down like a millstone into the great waters,
how great will that fall be! There will be a great noise sure, for all the
shoulders in earth and in Hell, are conjoined to support and hold-up Babylon:
When all these shoulders shall crack and its pillars be broken to pieces like
earthen vessels; there will be a great noise sure! We understand by reading,
that the prophecy is fulfilling now, when the mountain of the LORDS house
shall be established on the top of the mountains, and exalted above the hills;
Now the Devil and his angels, the mountains and the hills, the Kings and
Rulers on the earth will bend all their force to hinder the accomplishment of
this prophecy, which does assure us, that these mountains and hills shall now
be made plains, therefore the gates of Hell stand wide open now to oppose the
exaltation of Christ's Kingdom; A mighty opposition, and a confused noise will
be now, the rushing of Nations as of mighty waters will be heard now.

A. Why now? does the preaching of the Gospel, or the Angels that preach it,
cause this confused noise, sore pain, and trouble to the inhabitants of the
earth?

B. Yes that it does, by accident, as scholars say; As the Sunbeames cause the
poison in a serpent to appear, and draws forth its malignancy; The Sun puts
no poison there, but finds it there, draws it forth, and actuates the same. You
may, for farther illustration, compare the malignant-Lords and Rulers of the
world to a dunghill; (to that stinking place, the best men of the world have
compared their own hearts, to a dunghill) The Sun puts no filthy sent there,
nor are the Sunbeams impured or defiled by shining there, (nothing can defile
the Sunbeams) but the Sunbeams upon the dunghill draws forth a filthy
savor thence, makes it reak there: so the setting-up the Lord Christ upon His
holy hill, does not put any rage, envy or malice into the hearts of His
adversaries, the Princes of the earth and Rulers there; no, all this is in the
heart before, as in its proper place; but now it is quickened, and actuated by
the brightness of His coming, as the poison in the serpent, or as the filth
in a dunghill by the heat of the Sun, and clearenesse of his beams. The maine
intendment of the Gospel, and of those, that preach it, is, to cause peace to
the earth. But there is much bloodshed there, which the earth has drunk-in, and
this must be discovered, yea and required also: There are many Idols there,
those must be cast forth as abominable things, and that causes the troubles,
shakings of Kingdoms, and earthquakes as at this day; And indeed the Nations
must be shaken, before the Lord Christ can be the desire of the Nations. And
this is the power of Hag. 2. 7.
the Gospel, or the Gospel preached with power, to shake the Nations
terribly, to make the earth tremble. Then you will say,

A. Give us our Idols again, crucifixes and Images, and our Idoll-Priests and
their Idoll-services, as in our Cathedrals, and in the Kings and Queens
Chapels [where there were mimick Jer. ^4. 17.
actions, and antic gestures, not altogether so ridiculous as now they are in
the Jews Synagogues: but altogether as abominable in Gods sight there and
here, yet give them those services againe] for then it was better with us (as
they said it was with them, when they offered to the Queen of Heaven.)

B. The answer is near: The same, which Jeremiah made to those people of old;
did not the Lord remember our doings? our abominable services, came they not
into His mind? So that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of
our doings, and the abominations, which we have committed? So it may be said to
us, therefore the sword devoureth as at this day; our abominable Idols set-up
before the eye, and kept-up within the heart, our abominable services unto
them, have caused all this; and now that the light is come, and has discovered
all this, so that the earth shall no longer cover her slain, nor hold fast her
Idols, therefore is the earthquake.

And now to shut-up this Chapter, with the best-counsell, and to follow the
best example, let us do now as they do whose God is their portion and His
peace their legacy. These do not stand expecting when peace will be in
England: not when the King will come home to his Parliament (he must come home
to himself first, and then all the Christian world shall hear of it, what a
shaking there is in his breast) these tarry not for man, nor weight for the
sons of men. They will do their duty, search their own Tents, thrust-out the
Idols thence, that is first. They will seek to God always; And, not ignorant
of the Devils wiles, nor of his malice, nor of his strength, that now he and
his angels will cast about the rage of their wrath, discharge against the City
of God (the butt and mark of their malice) all their grenades, fiery darts,
hailestones and coals of fire, so to storm the City of God; knowing all this,
these servants of the Lord will take unto them the whole Armor of GOD,
They-will gird their loins with Ephesians. 6.
Truth; fence their hearts with righteousness, their feet with Patience; They
will put on the helmet of salvation, and shield of faith; they will take unto
them the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: for the same word,
which so shakes the earth now, and, against the nature of it, so disquiets the
inhabitants of Babylon, because of their poisonous natures, will be the best
weapon a man can take both for offense and defense: and will procure assured
quiet, rest and peace at the last: I say, as aforesaid, at the last; for while
the mountain of holiness (called the mountain of the Lord, because of its
excellency, stability and perpetuity) is exalting in the heart, there will be
stirs and tumults there, as are now in the world, for hills must be made
level there also, and mountains must be plains; But when this mountain is
exalted there, then there is peace, be the Nations never so unquiet: And so in
the world, when the mountain of Gods house is exalted above the hills and
mountains, then Peace, Peace, a perfect peace, a peace of Gods making, a
created peace.

A. But there are fair offers and overtures toward peace now.

B. See! what harkening there is still after a peace from the world; I pray you
hearken what the word of God says, which is this, That out of the same mouth
does not proceed blessing and Jam 3. 12, 12.
cursing: as the same fountain does not send forth, at the same place, sweet
waters and bitter. These things ought not so to be, nay they cannot be: they
cannot call for a curse upon the Land, and call for a blessing, a blessed Peace
at the same time: The same hands cannot grievously oppress the people; and, at
the same time, ease their consciences; These things ought not to be, nay they
cannot be; these are the wiles, depths, and deceits of Satan, all to stop the
Angels way, that the everlasting Gospel may not be preached to them that dwell
in the earth; therefore we regard not what is parlied on touching a peace of
men's making; But by the good Hand of God with us, we will hear the Angels
voice, saying, Fear God, and give Glory to Him, and worship Him, as He has
commanded, in Spirit and in Truth. And then, though the earthquake continue (as
it is like to do, for the blood is not discovered yet, nor required, as it
must be; nor are the idols cast forth yet,) yet the servants of the Lord shall
not be greatly moved, though the Lord should forsake the earth, yet He will not
forsake His people.

A. Ai, But His People are very low.

B. Like enough they may be lower; and yet not so low as their Head and Lord
was. But He is risen, and the higher He is risen, the lower He was; and as sure
as He is risen, so sure His Church shall rise, for they must be made like Him,
as in sufferings, so in Glory. In the mean time, the Lord will give His
servants quietness, and assured Rest in the most unsettled and unquiet times;
Peace in God, and then Peace Peace, Peace in life, and Peace in Death, Peace
Peace, a perfect Peace, Amen. And so we understand fully, what Peace is to be
expected now from the world, now that the Gospel is preached there. But the
servants of the Lord serve a good Master, and He has spoken to the hearts of
His people good words and comfortable, In ME PEACE; be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world. I come now to the devout soldier.

III. The Word of GOD mighty to posture a man's self.
Of high account, and precious use.

THis man can speak great things of the Word of God; for, through God, it has
wrought great things in Him, a wonderful change: he that was blind before, now
sees, [As in making the world, light was the first creature: so in making a man
every whit new, the first work is the setting-up a light in the understanding;
that work is done] The Word, not as spoken by man, but spoken with a strong
hand, has wrought-upon the will too, has made that pliable, and flexible, which
was stubborn and stiff, as an Iron sinnew before, and clean cross to the
good pleasure of God; it is wrought-up now, it is turned back: and it is as
wonderful as was the turning back of Jord in or a Giant in his course: All is
turned now, the whole man from darkness to light, from serving of Idols to
serve the living God. By the good Word of God, received in truth, this man is
emptyed now, (in his measure) of himself, self pleasing, self seeking, that
great idol of the world, which crams and fils-up the heart so brim-full, that
it leaves no roomth there, for God and our neighbor: This man is emptied of
himself now, and filled with God. The first Table, the commands there, is this
man's first and chief delight; and the second Table, the commands there, is
next unto it; His inward man takes delight in the Law of God; He loves God
above himself, and more then heaven; and his neighbor as himself: In a word,
he is made poor in spirit, and rich in Faith: and all this is done by the Word
of God, made mighty through God, blessed be his Name. And now how sweet is the
Word of God unto him! sweeter than honey, or the honey comb: he esteems it
more than his necessary food. The Job 23. 12.
word of God ^now he sees it, and understands it, he sees wondrous excellencies
in it, therefore he meditates thereon day and night. It is his Oracle, he does
all he does by direction therefrom, for it is Quid est Scriptura sacra nisi
quadam epistola omnis o^ Dei ad creaturam suam.
GODS mouth, his Lords will concerning his servant; A letter sent unto him from
God Himself to signify His pleasure to the Children of men; It is of the
highest account with him, for it makes him, as it did David, wiser than Saul
and his politic Councillors, these were David's enemies; wiser than the
Doctors Psalm. 119. 100.
and Rabbis, they were his teachers: more prudent than men of large, and long
experience, they are the ancients. The good word of God! this fits him with
counsel and strength, and all for war; This supplies him with every part, and
parcel of his Armor, tells him how to put it-on, and gird it unto him, even
the whole Armor of God. The word of God! with that he charge and charmeth
every lust, he stils them, and they are quiet; and if they rise again to
storm his soul, he stormeth them by the Word of God; he brings his Idols
before that Glory, and so slays them before the Lord: It is light with him
now, for the Word of God is in his heart; he lieth-downe with it, riseth-up
with it; walks with-it, it is his companion; O how safely does he go ^ how
wisely does he order his steps! The Word of God is a light unto him, that goes
before, he follows; he sees now little small sins, if we might call (in
comparison we may) any sins small, or little, which are committed against a
great God: and makes us liable to great wrath, he sees the smallest sins, for
he is light in the LORD: The Sun of Righteousness has darted-in His beams
into his soul: where the sunbeams come, there moates are seen; when in the
night of ignorance and superstition mountains are covered from our eyes,
sins that reach as high as heaven: This man discerns small sins, and is
humbled for them, for he is light in the Lord; and he walks in the light; he
has a word for every thing, and there-after he moves: Therefore it is, that he
delights so much in the good Word of God, more as was said, than in his
ordinary food; he is still looking into his Fathers will, for there he looks
to find all concerning him; And he knows in all his heart, and in all his
soul, that not one thing of all the good things, contained in that book,
shall Jos^^ 23. 14.
fail: All shall be made-out unto him, through the hands of his Mediator, in
the fittest time, as it has been to all the servants of the Lord, before him,
and shall be, To all after him, unto the worlds end. And now it is the desire
of his soul, that all may partake of the good Word of God; taste the same
sweetness in it, as he does, and see the same wondrous excellencies in this
law as he sees. It grieves his soul, and he weeps in secret, that there
should be any places in Judah, where God is not known; where the dead bury the
dead, and the blind lead the blind every day: where there are like Priests and
like People, one as brutish as the other. Therefore he contends mightily, that
able and fit men be sent-out to all towns and Cities, who can instruct, teach,
and catechize young and old, (the old needs instruction as much as the young,
more necessary to both than their daily food, to be instructed) in the good
Word of God; he sets to his shoulder with all his might, that the Lord Christ
may be lifted-up to his Throne, that his Ordinances may be set-up in their
purity, not mixed, nor mated with the mixtures of men, and their fooleries: for
where the good Word of God is setup, whether in a Town, or in a man only,
there idols fall: By the same degrees as the Lord Christ is exalted, idols are
thrown down; If he hear the good Word of God is preached, then he knows what
will follow, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, the idols of his own heart, these
are fallen; and the idols in the land shall be shaken-out of the land too, and
then Christ shall be the desire of the nations: All these things shall be
according as the Lord Christ takes to Himself power; As light breakes-out, so
darkness vanishes away: By the same degrees as the Word goes forth, and the
ordinances are set-up, so superstition, heresy, and profaneness falls.
Therefore all his delight is in the Word of God, and in those, that are the
publishers of it, and so he concludes.

CHAP. IIII. The Sanctification of the Lords day, an excellent means to
posture a Kingdom.
The profanat^on of it must work contrary effects; The Bishops Doctrine and
practice m^st notorious that way; The means by which they pre^^^led with the
people and made them as brut^sh as themselves. The Par(...) ^^t do work now
as all the Worthies of the Lord before them: but Then they w^rk^ to purpos^,
when the Bishops are cast-out and their book^ into the s^e, whereby we have
been taught, yea compelled to profane the Lords d^y by a l^w; and when the
ordinances and good laws touching that sole^^e mat^^r, are indeed and fully
executed.

THere is one day in the week of special observation set apart for special
services, more specially for the making known this good Word of God, the
declaring, interpreting, giving the sense thereof unto the people; This is the
Lords day, the only Holy Day, deputed and set-apart for that Holy Holy service,
to be performed in public and private: We must observe now in passage, the
counter workings of the Adversary, the Devil and his Angels; These marred the
beauty of this Day, more than of any day: they plotted as great a dishonor to
that Day as their fathers did to the Lord of that Day, when they platted a
crown of thorns for His head: the Adversary and enemy did; what did they
do? All the Christian world knows what, and did they know no more of their
witchcrafts, prophanations, impieties, iniquities, no more but what they did
against the Lords Day in scorn of That Day, and the Lord of that Day, even
that were enough to render them as they are, odious and abominable unto all the
world to the worlds end.

A. The world knows, and must not forget their virtues; the Bishops did some
good works, and they wrote a few good books, that they did;

B. A few indeed; I have much to reply to that, and some replication is made.
But I will say no more to that here but this, and this I will insist upon, They
did profane the Lords Day by a law, that they did, and having said that I have
said all; When the Lord complains, says Mr Calvin, [he is much quoted to
justify the taking liberty on the Lords Day: and a liberty to change that Day
to any other day in the week, which every sober man knows now (for the light
is clear) that all the wiles, d^pths, policies of Satan could never effect,
and never shall, for so the Righteous God decreed, that the Jews Sabbath, a
memorial of the Creation: and the Christians Sabbath of the Redemption, should
be both so observed to the worlds end, as that the six-dayes of the week
should be kept entire not broken: But though Calvin be quoted for this
negligent conceit] yet thus he says, when the LORD complains, That His sacred
Majesty is contemned, His commands slighted; Ezekiel. 20. 21.
that His people have provoked Him more than any people; then the Lord says no
more but this, They have polluted my Sabbaths; intimating this now, that, as
the honor and height of Religion in those days consisted specially in the due
observation of the Sabbath Day: so now in the observation of the Lords Day: And
that the breach of that law, and the pollution of that sacred Rest was the
greatest disobedience then, and so the complement, the very filling-up of their
iniquity now. But so the Bishops and their C^r^^tes have done, they have so
polluted that Holy Day, their Lords Day, so polluted it, as the heathen never
did their days sacred to their gods: for they thrust forth those Pastors,
that were not so brutish as themselves, and set up a Minstrill in his stead,
and a May Pole, and gave free liberty to all that would, the Minstrill to
play, and the people to dance before it. This was the readiest way that could
be thought on (and that the Bishops knew very well) to cut the sinnewes of a
nation; to weaken, to infeeble a people, to make them fit for war, said that
cursed paper, To make them fit to be devoured by war, as it is at this day.

I will stir-in the Bishops sink a little more, for it is fit that their
stink should go through the land, and come-up into the nostrils of all the
inhabitants there at this time: for now Gods Hand is sore upon-us, it may be we
will consider what Bishops we had, and what an Advousion of libettie they gave
us, and how we accepted of it, as men in covenant with Hell, and in love with
death; The Lord is now warring with the land, He is pouring down His wrath
upon us, and we complain bitterly: O that we could understand what our Priests
have done, and what we have done; They made void the law of God, and we loved
to have it so, and never considered what would be the end thereof; never
thought of that. Let us think of it now, and then we shall say, The LORD is
Righteous, we, our Princes, our Priests, and our people, we have all sinned a
great sin, they in giving, we in taking pass-times, and sports on the Lords
Day, which were not lawful on any Day: but on the Lords Day, how stupendous,
how astonishing a profanation on that Day! They and we [but if our Priests have
no consideration, how should we consider, and yet we had a natural light,
which we should not have put-out] we should have thought upon some other Day,
for now we have done just as the strumpet did, I have Peace offerings with me
this day, said she, I have paid my vows, come let us take our fill of love;
Her Adultery had been heinous on any day, but this greatly aggravated her sin,
that the selfsame day she had been at the sacrifice and Altar, the very same
day she went to the Adulterers bed [some Popish votaries are reported to be
very foul this way, rising from the harlots sides to consecrate the Sacrament,
and then from the Sacrament to the harlots bed] our Priests have committed as
great a sacrilege in this point, touching the Lords Day; and, which aggravates
the same, they have commanded the same sacrilege, that we should rise from our
seats in the Church to drunkenness, to a profanation of Gods Name, to riot
and wantonness, for all this is in this granted liberty, as in a root of
bitterness, springing-up, whereby many are defiled: and we must grant it to be
as sacrilegious and foul every whit, to rise from our seats at Church, to go
to the Ale-bench, to tiple there, or to the May Pole to riot there, as it is to
come from tippling and rioting unto our seats at Church, there to present our
selves before God and His People, with them to partake of the Holy holy Word of
God.

I pray you let us consider this also, that this liberty does not only
profane the Day, which we, common people, are not sensible of, but it does
utterly deforme the Solemnity and Beauty of the Day, even to the eye and ear
of the meanest Person and of the lowest conceit; The Beauty of the world is
but from that comely order, wherein every creature is placed, and thence the
Beauty and comeliness of the body, Our little world, in the conformity and
comely proportion of the parts with the whole: so also the Beauty and
comeliness of the Day consists in the sutablenesse and congruitie of
services upon the Day, that they be homogeniall, and consistent one with
another, and holding some conformity with the holiness of Him whose Day it
is. Experience tells us, That comely upper-parts and lower-parts uncomely suit
not well: Because comeliness stands in ^n one-nesse, in a fit agreement of
many parts to one: If one should take away but the hair from off one of the
eyebrows, it would diminish nothing (says August.) from the D^ Civit. lib.
(...). cap. ^2.
bulk of the body, but very much from the beauty of the body: so exactly and
curiously has the Lord framed it, so decently, and every part in such order,
giving comeliness to every part, and a fit agreement of all the parts with
one. And certainly, He that has made the body so comely, and stamped upon it
such beauty, does require that we make an honorable account of our body, as of
the Temple of God: and maintain the beauty of the Day also in keeping unto
such Duties as are comely, holding a congruitie, a correspondencie, a
consistencie with the holiness of the Day, and with the Lord of the Day. If we
should see a body whose upper-parts were like a man, and whose lower-parts were
like a beast, we could not well tell what to call it, but a monster it is in
nature. And is it not as monstrous to see one part of the Day dedicated to God,
in services suitable unto Him, and beseeming His M^jestie! [for if we are to
entreat the servants of Christ in a Godly sort (...), in a comely fitting
manner, as is worthy of God, and as we may expect acceptance at His hands: much
more should we so observe, and use the Lords day, (...), as becomes the Lord
of the 3 John 6. Qui ingreditur ad placandum non de^et egredi ad exacerb^ndum,
neque enim (...) officij est indulgentiam poscere and iracundiam provocare. Sed
aliud ora hominum aliud corda agunt, and dum verbis praeterita mal^ plangunt
sens^ futura meditantur, etc. Denique si (...) quisp^am scire quid in templo
^ujusmodi homines cogitaverint videat quid sequatur, Salv. de gub. l. 3. p. 89,
190. Ingyrum acti, potestatem ^undi quo vellent, etc. Buxh^^mj Quest. Romans 4^ p
128.
day.] And is it not I say, as monstrous to see one part of the day dedicated
to God, and another part of the day devoted to the Devil, in such sports and
passe-times as are suitable to, and advantageous for the enlargement of his
kingdoms; let me contribute hither, Salvians words, which are to this purpose;
Now I come into Gods house to partake of the ordinances there, that I may
obtain grace, and be edified, or built up therein: Then I goe-out to trample
upon grace, and to throw away what before I had received: Nay I come-into Gods
house, to appease Gods wrath, then I goe-out to provoke His anger, as if it
were not so much as the anger of a man: Now I come-in setting my face toward
God, then I goe-out turning my back upon Him. This is to provoke the HIGH And
LOFTY ONE; To make Him (in the day of our trouble and outcry,) to turn to us
the back also and not the face: It is to make our selves, and our sacrifice an
abomi^ation.

Hitherto I have been opening the Bishops Charter, the height, breadth and
extent of it, which those Princes have indulged, extended and enlarged (for
they must bear the odium of it) to us ward. They made us a free-people after
the manner the Romans used to make their servants free; They turned them
round, bid them look what way pleased them best, and take it: So the Bishops
said to us; When you have sa^e out your hour at Divine-service, then take your
own way, as is best pleasing in your own eyes; If to the Alehouse, then
thither; If to the May Pole, then thither. And that we may not doubt of the
validity of this Charter, it was ratified and confirmed to us by great Divines,
English, French, Dutch, but all spoke English to us, in several Treatises and
Sermons; The first Dr White Pi^hop of Ely, now gone to his own place.
Treatise enveighed against the Sabbatarians [Those indeed, who, in the
strength of God, and His command, did and now do, sanctify a rest unto the
LORD.] A second Dr Hey^^n a notable,
, writes an History of the Sabbath; A third D^ D^^, a ca^e not hal^e baked; he
is ^alled Dove, a silly man without an heart.
appears by his scribble to be one of the Tribe, and faction: but carried the
dispute warily, showed his spirit against God and good men, and now has
declared himself a very malignant. -- A fourth Dr (...), a notori^es
blasphemer.
preached against the Day, told us it was no Sabbath. A Dr Turner a notorious
Divine.
^ift grants it to be a Sabbath, but intended only for master and servant, to
riot all that day, re^erving; only two hours for Divine service: and he thanks
the holy Fathers of the Church for granting that liberty. A sixth Dr Prideaux
then; now Bishop would be.
, whom I should have named first, because he was Chaire-man in Oxford, did
read a Lecture upon the Sabbath.

Now he that can read and has examined what he reads, has seen clearly,
that these Treatisers, and Sermonists have given no more honor to their LORDS
DAY, than the Romans gave to their Gooses holy day, (such a day they had in
their Calender.) Aug. de Civit. 2. 2^.
But we common people read nothing, nor regard what is written: We hearken
only to what others say, make use of their readings and observations, specially
upon such a subject as this is, of liberty: And thus we have heard those say
that have read our Priests books, and observe unto us, That our Priests in the
first place,

1. Put-in this Caution: we must not call the Day, Sabbath (a sanctified rest)
that was Jewish [they might call it Sunday, for that is no more heathenish than
Moonday is.]

2. They assured us. That the fourth Commandment had no binding power with a
Christian, [That pleased the people well, we might riot as aforesaid, for we
had the leave, yea the command of the Magistrate, and no law against it; for a
Law, without a binding Lex sine coertione null^.
power, is like a b^ll without a clapper.] Thus we were made freemen, turned
round, and at liberty to take what way they pleased.

3. They told us moreover, That they who would not run with us into the same
excess of riot, were too superstitious, as the Sabbatarians were of old, and
the Jews before them. These words did eat like a Gangreene, It is necessary,
I tell the Reader what these Sabbatarians were, and how the Jews some of them
of old were charged. The Sabbatarians in the enemies account, and as they told
us, were almost as superstitious, as the Jews were, who, in obedience to Gods
command [Abide you every man in his place: Exodus 16. 29.
let no man go out of his place on the seventh day] but mistaking it quite,
kept themselves to their place, and to the same posture of body, (kneeling or
holding up the hands) all day long, wherein they had set themselves in the
morning. I Will reply a word to this in passage; That, though the Adversary quotes
his Author for this, yet this is an horrible lie, impossible to be true: For
choose the easiest posture of body that is conceiveable, sitting, or lying, or
standing, or kneeling, and you cannot keep to it all day long. But suppose,
that there were some of them so superstitious, so to do; yet this cannot prove
that the Sabbatarians ancient or modern, were as superstitious as these Jews
are said to be.

Yes says the enemy to all goodness; The Sabbitarians were, and now are,
almost, as superstitious as the Jews were; For though they did not abide and
keep to one place, yet they do keepe-to one work all day-long: They hear at
Church, and they repeat at home, and in so doing they cross the practice of
the This fellow considered not, That where the Lord Himself is, there is a
Sermon: And the place where the Lord Christ came, He made it a Synagogue to His
servants. In Deo hoc speciale est, quod quem^unque locum su^ dignatur presentia
sanctificat. Cat. Eccles. 39.
Lord Christ Himself, who statim a Synagoga, presently from the Synagogue went
unto Simons house to dinner: for now He had ended His Sabbath days work. O
horrible! what a blasphemy is this! This is Pocklington, a notoriou^ -- and
blasphemer. I pass over this blasphemy, noting this by the way, That the enemy
could not speak more pestilent and corrupting words, than these are to our
ears; Alas! our manner is not to repeat Sermons; No, no sooner are we out of
the Church, but our talking is of Oxen, and making of furroughes. As for the
word of God, if we are not asleep, we let it-in, never ruminate or chooe upon
it; it will nourish as our meat does we think, though we never think of it
afterward: A damnable conceit! yet we are strongly conceited, that so careless
we may be, for the enemy sets before us the example of the LORD JESUS, so
blaspheming the stepps of the LORDS ANOINTED: I forbear now, that I may
proceed a little farther: And i will grant,

That the Sabbatarians, ancient and modern, are not almost, but altogether as
superstitious as were the Jews of old, they will abide in one place all the
Sabbath long: Be it so, so that place be not in an Alehouse, or before a
May Pole. But indeed it was no better then superstition, to keep to one place
and one posture all day long; And yet their superstition will rise-up in
judgment against the monstrous profaneness of our Priests and people, one
giving, and the other taking a liberty to rise-up from their seat at Church, to
play and riot on the Lords day. The Habbasens, says Brerewood, Enqui^ies, 25.
thought it not lawful for them, after the receiving of the Sacrament, to spit
that day till the setting of the Sun. This was superstition too; but yet this
reproves our brutish Priests and people, the one giving the other taking an
excess in tippling and drinking that day, till they overcharge themselves so,
that they must spue that day. But thus charitable our Bishops and Priests are,
to us, they will not have us be superstitious, because we are Christians;
thank them for that; But let us remember, because we are Christians, we must
not walk more loose than did the Heathens; No, say they, nor ought we to be so
strict in observing our Lords day as the Jews were in observing their Sabbath
day: We are not bound-up so close as were the Jews; we have more liberty than
they, for we are not under the Law, but under grace.

True; but take we heed of turning such grace into wantonness: Mr Jewel
instructs us very well at this point, from his book I take these words, Under
the Law, then it was, Christ shall come; now it is, Christ is come: shall come,
and is come, are sundry words, but Christ is all one Yune Chri^^us ve^tur^s,
(...) Christus venit; ventur as and venit d^versa verba sunt ^^ ^dem Christ^^.
: (So) The Jews had their Sabbath then, we have our Sabbath now; Then, and
now, are diverse words, the Rest is the same to both, and the Reasons the same,
binding both: but our band is the stronger. Stronger! Infinitely stronger. And
let the Anti-nomian, he that is against the whole Law (if there be such a mad
fellow in the world, for ^ure he is not sober) let him hear this, as it
referres only to the fourth Commandment. Tell me, why should the Christian
take more liberty in the world, than the Jews did? why should the Christian be
more loose on his Lords day, than the Jew was on his Sabbath Day? Good reason
you will say, Because the Jew was held under a yoke like Isacher, crouching
down under that burden: But Christ has made the Christian a freeman. That is
true, and he is free indeed. But, as it is the greatest honor in Heaven, so it
is the greatest engagement on earth, to serve before Him: Where there is a
breaking of the yoke; there is a making that people go upright Lev. 26. 1^.
Qu^a pura est pupilla oru itum para esset (...) bo^^inis vit^. Degu^ Dei l. 3
p. ^8, 84. Pl^^ ex^^ it Deus a Christianis, etc. A^e^^a (...) rel ^atio est,
^^^ M^^^^o devoti^^em no^^^um ^et o ^^p. ^avit Salv. ad E^cle. Ca^h l. 2. p. 38
4, 38.
, walking according to the truth of the Gospel. Salvians words are very
remarkable, The life of a Christian should be kept as pure as the apple of his
eye: then he puts it down positively, and proves it notably, That God does
require more of Christians, then of the Jews. Christians have greater
prerogatives than the Jews had, why then is not our bond of obedience, as
strong as the^^s was? Yes, doubtless, and the reason is plain, which he gives
forth with a full hand, and in full weight, and demonstration of the Spirit:
That the Christians prerogatives are above the Jews; So he inferres, and
concludes, Therefore we pay more, because we owe more: therefore we must be
more devout, because the Lord has purchased our devotion at a greater price.
So Salvian. I Will now draw-up to this conclusion, which I find made to our hands,
a thousand years ago Lege Osiand. Epit. C^nt. 6. l. 4. c. 14. Art. 1.
That we are to set-apart and to sanctify a day to the Lord, and to sanctify
it as the Lords day, in exercises well fitting the day, and enjoined by
Statute Law, long since upon the day, and the foregoing evening of the day:
And, which is yet more observable, enjoined also, That the Priests,
implacabiliter and in an holy indignation, should very severely punish such as
would violate this Statute Law; I thought it fit to put down this Statute in
the last place, enacted a thousand years ago, that we might see, what a wide
difference there is, betwixt the Priests now, and the Priests in those days;
The Priests then implacabiliter, they must have no peace with them, who
wilfully broke the Law of their God; who would not apply themselves to the
duties of the day; and, on the evening before the day prepare themselves for
those duties: So the Priests a 1000 years ago in those dark days; our
Priests now in the Sunshine of the Gospel, implacabiliter, they were in a
rage with those, who would not teach the people, yea command them to riot, to
dance, to drink, to spue on that day: Ah Lord, what Priests have we in our
days, how different from those in those days? Our Priests have committed a
great sacrilege, never the like; The Lord Christ reserved to Himself but one
day, gave us six days; our Priests took from their Lord, that one day, and
gave it to the people, that they also might plat a garland of May-flowers, and,
in scorn of their Lord and His day, set that garland upon that day: We had six
days, the Bishops and Curates had exceeding many Holy Days (the Church can
spare them every one) yet the Bishops spared to take any one of our six days,
or of their own holy days, though (so many) and took that one day, set that
scorn upon the Lord's Day. An horrible sacrilege.

We hope the Worthies of the Lord will observe all this; they will
implacabiliter, they will be carried with an indignation against these vile
Priests, who have walked so contrary against God, and good men. I know, what
has been done against these Priests, and their books, and that many wholesome
Laws, and good ordinances are made, and issued forth; blessed be God. But yet
God will have more done against them, who have done so presumptuously against
Him; more must be done against them than is a bare taking from them their
office; They commanded the people of the Land to riot, to drink, to be
drunken, to spue on the Lords day; the Lord will have them spued-forth for
this: And for these Infidels books, [I say Infidels, for when they do believe
unto salvation, they will confess, and show their deeds, and bring forth their
books, Acts 19. 19.
with their own hands, and burn them before all men, as we read they dealt
with their books, which yet had not bewitched the people, so as these Infidels
books have done] these must be purged in the fire; That all the Christian
world may take knowledge, that the Church of England abhorres those more than
heathenish doctrines contained therein, which have laid the whole Land [I can
take no good man off from communing with his own heart; and searching out his
sins also, added to the common heap, and as fuel to the common fire] under
the wrath of the Lord: So as the wonder is, that the whole Land is not Hormah,
utter desolation: The Lord is gracious, He remembers he has a people in the
Land, whose souls abhorred that profanation; But because of those heathenish
books, permitted in a Christian Church, therefore a fire is kindled against
Jacob, and anger is come up against Israel: Psalm. 78. 21. ver. 49.
Therefore the Lord has cast upon us the fierceness of His anger, wrath and
indignation, and trouble: He has sent evil angels among us. We cannot doubt
but the consideration hereof and of the premises, will kindle the zeal of our
Worthies, and make it burn seven times hotter than ordinary. They will take
for an ensample Nehemiah, who loved his Nation, and was zealous for it, and
fervent in spirit, for the glory of his God, which he showed in nothing more,
than in vindicating the dishonor put upon the Sabbath day, The same reason of
zeal for the Lords day. We will observe with all observation, how zealous
Nehemiah was, and what kindled his zeal, and set it all on a flame, made him
so earnest; what was it? The judgment of God, like a great mountain, was
still before his eyes: The people did not hearken to hallow the Sabbath day,
says Nehe. 13. 17.
he, and not to bear a burden entring-in at the gates: Therefore the LORD
kindled a fire in the gates thereof, which is not quenched at this day:
Nehe^iah remembers the people of that sore bnrning, Jer. 17. 27.
(hotter than was that at Taberah) the thoughts of that heated him so, that he
contends with the Nobles and Merchants about it, and charge the Priests and
Levites touching that matter. Numb. 11. 3.
The zeal of the Nobles and Worthies now need rise no higher, than as
Nehemiahs zeal rose then: and so high it should rise, for there is the same
cause; The fire of Gods wrath is now burning amongst us, which must put fire to
their zeal: And as their zeal rises, so superstition, heresy and
profaneness will fall: for the readiest way to strengthen and fortify a
Nation, to make it fit for war indeed, to make it the head of the Kingdoms,
is to take the clean contrary way, the Adversary took to enfeeble and weaken
a Nation, to make it the basest of Kingdoms. To kindle our zeal, and to make
it yet more fervent for the Lords day, the due sanctification thereof, both in
public and private, I will add this; If our Reformers shall show their zeal
in removing those prophaners of the LORDS DAY; and in burning those books
which have given a liberty that way, and have spread over the Land other 1
King. 8. 58, 60.
damnable doctrines, Then will the LORD remove farre-off His Northern Army,
those locusts; which have devoured every green thing, where they came: The
Lord will drive them, and their Prince, with His tempest, into a Land barren
and desolate: And He will restore unto us the ^ares, which that Army has eaten:
We shall eat in plenty and praise the Name of the Lord, that has dealt
wondrously with us, Amen. So I conclude. The only way to quench the fire
entred-in at our gates, is to show our zeal of spirit, fervent and seething
hot, for our LORDS DAY: for as the Lords day, and His worship, on that day, is
maintained, so will the Lord of the day maintain the cause of His servants at
all times, as the matter shall require, that all the people of the earth may
know, that the LORD is GOD, and that there is none else. I descend now to the
good Soldier, to see how devout he is in his observation of this day.

IIII. The Lords day is a good man's delight.
THis is the day, which the Lord has made, this man will rejoice and be glad in
it: The day wherein He records with rejoicing, and meditates on the glorious
ways of salvation, particularly the Resurrection of the Lord Christ, and that
plenteous Redemption by Him. He calls this day, honorable, a day of
observations; and so he engages his soul to keep it; and on this day to
stock his soul with his gathering, for all the days following, maintaining
his communion with the Father and the Son through His Spirit, in the means
and exercises proper to and becoming the day: And so keeps-up on the mount all
that day (as humane frailty can give leave, man is supposed in a Christian:)
for he looks to keep a day in Heaven, which shall never have night, whereof
the first seventh day was a figure or type: for that day is not described by
evening and morning, as were the other six, which consisted of light and
darkness; but that seventh was all day or light, figuring-out the Saints
perpetual joys in Heaven, where he, with Genesis 23. M^ A^s.
the Saints of light, shall enjoy a perpetual Sabbath, or rest, even a long
day, a perpetual light, where is fullness of joy for evermore.

CHAP. V. The administration of the Sacraments in right order, of high
concernement to a Kingdom.
That these ought to be administered by, and unto sitting persons.

IT is a matter of high consideration, how exact and accurate the zelots in all
ages, good Kings and Princes, all have been touching Temple or Church Matters:
Kings gave their attendance and all diligence thereunto: It was their charge
they thought, and their honor, we are sure, to see unto it, that all the
filthiness was carried out of the Temple, every thing provoking in Gods sight
removed: that the vessels there, even those be cleansed; the Priests and
Levites, who did execute the charge of the Lord, that they be purified; the
people sanctified; all things must be done decently and in order for the great
Feast was now preparing, they were to keep the Passover, unto the LORD GOD of
Israel Read 2 Chr. chap. 29. and 30. chap. 34, 35. 1 John 2. 16.
. It is enough to point at these things, and now to show in a few words (in so
clear a case) how all this relates to us, and is written to provoke them to
give all diligence, and to be zealous, whom the LORD has set as overseers in
such high matters. I Will only set down briefly, how it has been; They, whom it
does concern, and are assembled together for that high end, will consider how
it ought to be.

Next to the LORDS Day, nothing has been more profaned, than have the LORDS
Sacraments, seals of the righteousness of Faith. The Sacrament of Baptism
has been administered by sons of Belial, who knew not the LORD: And to those
children, whose Parents, both father and mother, were openly profane, made no
acknowledgement thereof, neither cared, nor could, nor would give a reason of
their faith, or hope that is in them: I will only add this to be enquired
into, whether a Parent; presenting his child to the Sacrament, is not to give
first an account of his faith, and reason of his hope, that is in him, and of
his interest to the covenant? Certain it is, that, if the Parent were so to
do, he would present himself and his child before the Lord and His people in
a more solemn manner, and with more consideration. We all know how questions
have been answered, and matters slubbered over, I FORSAKE THEM ALL; What do
you forsake? All, that is in the world, the lusts of the flesh; the lusts of
the eye; and the pride of life. The Good LORD pardon His servants, we have
spoken, we know not how often, very unadvisedly with our lips; When we said we
forsake them all; we forsook nothing at all; Even at that solemn time, and
before the Congregation, there was nothing in sight, but the lusts of the eye;
and pride of life. We slubbered over, with our Parsons help, another question
as unadvisedly, as the former, and made answer thereunto; ALL THIS I STED
FASTLY BELIEVE; All what? That, though the Minister can but sprinckle water
upon the child, he can neither cleanse the water, nor can the water cleanse the
child, yet the LORD CHRIST has done both, and her^^ in this Sacrament. He gives
us clean waters, Blood to justify, Water to sanctify, All Himself, and all
in Himself; and all this, we said, We steadfastly believe. Oh Lord! we
understood not what we said, We cannot have Faith, and no knowledge. Lord!
pardon the iniquity of thy servants; We have provoked Thee exceedingly this
way, in not considering what we said; We have sinned, It is in the purpose of
our hearts to do so no more. This now I have set down by way of enquiry only;
The Lord instruct us to discretion touching these matters.

The other Sacrament has been (for what is done, I leave to the wise to judge)
as much profaned by brutish Priests, and by us, a brutish people, as much, I
say, nay more than the former: To say all, I will say, in Mr. Calvin's words;
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper has been too commonly administered by such
vile Persons, whom you would have di^dained to have set with the dogs of Job
30. 1. (...). ^oeda per^^stio, dum sine delectu impudenter se i^gerunt s^elesti
and palam flagitio si homines, quos nemo honest us and verecundus ad communem
convictum admitreret? ut ad^uc miramur unde rot bella. Calv. ^n prim^ ep^st. ad
Cor. cap. 11. ^er. 30.
your flock: and given to those whom you would not admit to a common table; He
adds, and do we wonder wherefore it is that we are devoured by the sword,
eat-up with famine, consumed with the pestilence; that the LORD has opened His
Armory, drawne-out against us all the weapons of His indignation; do we wonder
at this? Why do we wonder? the Cause is apparent, and in every man's eye; Let
us never look to see an end of our miseries, till our lives be amended: and
this horrible profanation of the Lords Table, so highly provoking in Gods
eyes, be taken away. Blessed be God, there is we hope all possible care taken,
touching these great matters, for the removing the ignorant and brutish
Parsons, the setting in their places the honorable and the precious, that all
may be done about these Tremenda mysteria, knowingly, conscientiously,
decently, and in order. To press this upon those to whom this care does
specially belong, I Will take leave to contribute this to this place. There is one
clause always said at the Burial of the dead, where at good men have scrupled
very much, they have pronounced those received to mercy, who have gone in a way
most contrary to mercy all their life long. In handing-forth the Bread and Wine
to the people, they utter words, which are more to be scrupled at, when they
give forth those consecrated signs of the Bod^ and Blood of Christ to those
that are brutishly ignorant, or op^nly profane. Here I Will tell the Reader a sad
Relation; though he may have heard of it before, yet, perhaps, not so well
considered on, as now it may be, thus it is related; A man that had laid-up
treasure for himself, but was not rich toward God Luke 12. 21.
, fell sick unto death; he perceived plainly his soul was now required of him,
and an account of his stewardship; he sends in post-haste for his Pastor as
the manner is, demands of him whether he could give him any comfort; The
Minister after some consultation with him, answered, no, not any comfort for
him, he had walked contrary thereunto serving the creature more than the
Creator: No comfort for such servants said the Minister; say you so, says the
sick man, (for now he was sick-indeed) how have you deceived me! You have, from
time to time spoken most comfortable words to me in the Church, and can you
give me no comfort now on my sickbed? How often have you said thus unto me; The
Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee: then you bad
me, Take and eat; Take and drink, in Remembrance that Christ gave Himself for
me? And can you give me no comfort now? Oh! you should have denied me comfort
then, when time was, and so I might have been in a way for comfort in this
needful time now that my days are cutting off, I must have time no more. Had
you told me then when time was, that the Childrens bread belonged not to me,
then I might have be thought my self of my miserable condition, and have asked
more grace. But you, giving me the Lord Christ, I thought all was well; These
words pierced the ears, and the very heart of the Minister, so it is reported;
And well they might, and engaged his care for after time, to understand, as
far as man can do, the state of His people, whether they be worthy to whom
he gives the Body and Blood of the Lord Christ. It is enough to engage all
Ministers to the same care: and to hastenup as near as can be, to the pattern
in the mount, to be patterns and examples before the people, going before them
in an holy way, teaching their people publicly, and from house to house,
testifying Acts 20. 20, 2^.
to them every one, Repentance toward GOD, and Faith toward the LORD JESUS
CHRIST. Amen.

V. A good man precise in these high matters.
THe good soldier has much to say here, and much against himself, but his
scribe cannot set it down; he puts-up his supplication to his God, that he
would not regard what he did, and how he walked in the days of his ignorance;
nor be extreme to mark what His servant has done, and does now in the days of
light: he does acknowledge that the sin of unworthy Receiving is his sin also,
he cannot quit himself of it: That sin is gone into the common heap, and
helps to make as the fire kindled in the kingdom, more scorching: so also, the
herbs the sow^er, but yet the Passover the sweeter: I mean, it helps to
increase a godly sorrow, and through the exceeding mercy of His Savior, it
makes his Joy the fuller. And now, for the present time, and hereafter before
He 11. 2 Cor. 5. 9. (...) We strive as the men of the world for the highest
preferment and rooms in the world.
presents himself at that table, he searches his heart, and prieth into it as
narrowly as the Jews into their houses, which was said before: and so he is a
worthy Communicant in Gods acceptance: and the lower he falls now before the
Lord in humility, the higher he rises in his Faith, and acceptance with the
Lord, which is the earnest labor and travel of his soul, even that he may be
accepted of Him. Amen.

CHAP. VI. A National Covenant mighty to establish and fortisie a Kingdom.
There are objections against it, specially two charges. 1. That it engages to
maintain Religion by the sword. 2. That it is as a body without an head. There
is a scruple concerning our undertaking the Defense of the Kings Person
resolved: And objection^ against the prosperity of the Covenant answered.

WE have seen with our eyes, that the servants of the Lord working with God
this Day have wrought as great a Salvation for the Kingdoms, as Jonathan for
Israel: We have observed the way (it is but one and the same) they went-in, the
very steps and degrees of their happy proceedings. And now we are come to the
highest step, the entering Covenant with the high God, which contains much,
nay, all the forementioned, for all that went before, has a direct tendencie
hereunto, as to its end, next to the glory of GOD; The engaging the heart of a
Kingdom as one man, unto one God; The interesting, intitling Him to the
kingdom, the giving-up the Government of it into Gods Hands, which is the way
to make a Kingdom so strong, so well fortified, that all the devils in hell,
with those in the Air, and all their sworn servants on earth can have no power
against this Kingdom now to do it hurt; though they rage against it, and, to
their power given unto them, do storm it, yet they cannot hurt it: for the
kingdom is brought-up to God; the Government yeelded-up into His hands; He
will look to His own. But I was saying, as this covenanting with God was the
End, and tendency of all that went before, so this contains the means, and
perfects them; I mean thus, The first step toward this work was the casting
forth the accursed Persons and things; these will return again; the heart of
the kingdom will deal with these, as Israel of old dealt Jer. 34. 11.
with their servants when the siege was removed, they will take them-in again:
But now the Kingdom has covenanted against these, they have sworn to
maintain war against them, and their encroachings, they will never serve dumb
idols any more, thus they have covenanted; No peace with themselves any more,
so far as self is its self; no peace with Rome any more, or her idols, no
peace with any thing that makes roomth for superstition, heresy,
profaneness; no peace with any of these any more, as a Kingdom looks to
maintain their standing, and peace with God ^vermore. And because the Kingdom
has found how prevailing fasting, and praying, and praising, and preaching is,
to advance this work, and to complete the business; They have covenanted with
their GOD to maintain all that, which has brought them-up to Him into that
sacred Band, viz. to be in fastings often, to pray continually, to praise the
Lord while they have any being, to holdout the Gospel what they can unto the
whole land. Wal^s shall be visit^d; The places of the earth so full of cru^lty;
lights shall be sent down thither; choice Ministers shall be appointed for
that great and, who know the terror of the Lord, and will persuade men to
understand the will of their Father, and will declare it; do consider how Holy
the Lords Day is, and will have it so observed; Do feel the weight of the
charge of souls, and by the grace of God will quit themselves like men of God,
in the discharge of their Duty. So I have recalled the sum of that which went
before, and given a taste of that which should follow. I should now demonstrate
and make clear to the Reader, how mighty a National Covenant is to establish
and secure Kingdoms; That indeed a Covenant is the One thing necessary for
that great purpose: But I am Mr Caryl. Mr Coleman. Mr Case.
happily prevented herein by the labors of excellent men: many very excellent
Sermons, full speeches, and Treatises not a few, are extant touching this great
business: I will say no more ^^r it, unless by way of answer to that which is
said against it; many cavil against it, and some question the lawfulness of
the Covenant; That I may set it free from these cavils, and put the Covenant
out of all question, I will dissolve my speech continued hitherto into a short
Dialogue.

A. There is a Covenant talked-off, and entred-into by some few, which seems
to engage three nations: But not the one nation have taken it, no not Scotland;
and not above a third part of our own Nation.

B. True, and I will give you a mighty reason for that anon.

A. You can never give me a Reason, why ye should all enter into covenant as
one man, To maintain Religion by the sword. Christians must be sufferers, as
meek as sheep before the shearers, as their great Master was, from whom they
have their names. Can you give me any one example of any in any ages of the
world, that stood-up with their swords in their hands to maintain their
Religion?

B. Verily I could, though a man of small reading, give you twenty examples
ancient and modern both; whole Kingdoms, particular cities, that these have
all in all ages, as matters did require, stood up with their swords in their
hands to maintain their Religion, Laws, and Liberties; But I will confine my
self to a beggarly The less of man, the more of God; The weaker the men, the
stronger their God.
example (as the adversary calls it:) I Will instance in those beggarly poor
peeled people (so their lords made them, and so they esteemed them; so the
Mastives of the world toused these sheep of Gods pasture,) the Waldenses
inhabitants of Angrogne and Luserne in the County of Pied mont. These poor
people (so rich in faith) were persecuted from place to place, as David by
Saul, like Book of Martyrs, p. 871.
a Partridge on the mountains by the Nimrods the Mastives of those Days. They
parlied upon the business with their Ministers, Whether they should take the
sword into their hands for their defense or not? It was resolved at first, No:
They might not, though their blood was shed, yet they must in any case take
heed of bloodshed: so away the poor people ran, and their Ministers with them,
whether they could, like a chased-bird to that mountain, and to that rock; and
that did but enrage the enemies (the popish lords) the more. Then some other
Ministers in the places adjoining tell the poor people, that their Ministers
were quite mistaken, they assure them that all the laws of God and man, the
law of Nature and of Nations do allow them their sword, wherewith to fence
their throats, and maintain their lives; and, if to maintain life, then much
more to maintain their Religion, which is more than life: so the poor people
were resolved. But they would, as before they had done, deal with their Lord
of Trinity (it is not pertinent to give you the reason of the name) by
petitions, and supplications, desiring only that they might hold-fast their
God, and keep fast to their Religion: for that is the way to keep God with
them: It would not be granted, no answer could they hear: but, To the fire
with them They could gain nothing of their adversaries hands by entreaty, but
knocks.
; to the fire: Then they fell to praying, and fasting, their best weapons.

A. We allow that, and Tears too, the Churches weapons, but no sword.

B. You should not interrupt me, I was saying, they prayed fervently, they
spent, as a great commander did, Ante bellum in oratione jacuit, Sal. de Gub.
li, 7. p. 251.
a whole night in prayer, being to go into the field next morning: so these
prayed in prayer, were earnest with the Lord God of Hosts, and in His strength
they marched into the field the next day, so soon as it was light: for says
the story, The Lord would make His people know, that they ought to defend
their life, that precious thing, and their Religion (their crown) with the
sword: And how spiritfull they were; how well they quitted themselves; how an
old man dealt with his potent Adversary; how a young man 18. years of age
dealt with his mighty enemy: how four chased forty, and forty put an
hundred to flight, this is mavelous to consider, which I leave to the Reader.
Only this I Will tell him, that the adversaries and enemies said openly, that the
Waldenses had bewitched and charmed their weapons: Indeed so they had done; but
it was with prayers, and strong cries to their God. O how omnipotent Prayer is!
for the strength of GOD is in it. But I must pass it over and proceed: When
this poor people had worsted their adversary, he would parley with them then;
and they were willing to yield to any thing, so they might keep their God, and
to His Faith. But notable it is, whenever they sounded to a parley, then the
Waldenses were at a loss: for their adversaries were treacherous, took
advantage against them still when they met to treat of peace: Whereby the LORD
GOD would assure His servants still, That they must not treat with idolaters:
And so they left treating, and fell to fighting again, and prospered in their
battles to a wonder; for they brought down God to their side: The sword of the
Lord and of Gideon; We know what that has done, and we are as confident for the
after time.

A. You have told me a modern history, not an hundred years old, sure I am
the Primitive Christians were sufferers all, in all times.

B. Yes, you may be sure of that, while Ethnic Rome (the Dragon) raged: and
Antichristian Rome (the Beast) reigned, all this while the servants of God
must be sufferers: wherever that ravenous beast set her foot, there must
follow a treading down, as in our days.

A. But my meaning is, The Christians never resisted, they suffered and endured
patiently.

B. True, they did endure patiently the wrath of GOD: but they did not expose
their throats to the wrath of man; they were fighters too, as they had power in
their hand, and law on their side: and they were as glorious in fighting for
Christ, as in suffering for Him: and they did it by the same Faith, By Faith
they put to slight the Armies of Aliens. The servants of the Lord Christ have
been sufferers Heb. 11. 34.
a great while; they have suffered in Germany, suffered in France, in Ireland
they have suffered, what shall I say? the spoiling of their goods and of their
lives? yes and more, they have suffered heavy things, even what the rage of
the enemies wrath could inflict upon his poor people, I cannot express what
suff^rers they are in Ireland; nor what sufferers they are in England. I say no
more. But the scene shall turn shortly. The sufferers all this while are
fighters now, and shall be more than conquerours anon. The servants of the Lord
shall be delivered, and their adversaries shall come into their room.
Certainly though the enemy and adversary thinks he has prevailed over the
Church of God; he has brought her low, even to the dust of death, in some
places to a dry-Bone, yet Spirit and life shall come-into these Bones again,
and the Lords warriors shall not sit down, till they shall execute the wrath
of the Lord upon that bloody city, rewarding her even as she rewarded them:
and doubling unto her double according to her works: for this is the charge of
the Lord; In the cup which Rev. 18. 6, 7.
she has filled fill to her double. They, who are engaged upon this service
must execute the vengeance, then these are fighters sure: Therefore the
servants of the Lord may fight, nay must fight, and will fight: It is their
sword which must eat the whores flesh, and drink her blood: And this is not
done by prayer, though Prayer has a great stroke in it; but by fighting with
the sword: Therefore I conclude yet again, The servants of the LORD may use the
sword: It is their charge from the Lord. But that you may be more fully and
clearly resolved at this point, That Christians may use the sword, I Will now
ask you one question, and you shall resolve it your self.

B. Has the Lord Christ had any battles fought in the world: or are His battles
fighting now?

A. Yes sure, for there is large mention of the Lords battles in the sacred
records everywhere: and of a levying war against the Lamb (that is) against
the Lord Christ: I cannot doubt of this.

B. Who are those that have fought the Battles of the LORD in all ages of the
world?

A. I cannot tell their names, but sure I am, they have been the faithful
servants of the Lord in all ages.

B. Very well, then the servants of the Lord may fight.

A. Yes, the Battles of the Lord.

B. You are sure the servants of the Lord will fight no other battles, only war
against them, who war against the Lamb.

B. One question more, who do fight the Lords battles at this day?

A. The Lords servants sure, The King and his Armies.

B. You considered not what you have said, you must recall it again: I shall
assure you now, that your answer is not short of blasphemy; It reaches even to
that height, even to a sin, that shall not be forgiven to men: For your own
sake hearken; The LORD CHRIST had wrought an amazing work for His poor Mat.
12. 23.
creature, man, whom the Devil had possessed, made him blind and dumb, he
could neither see, nor speak, nor hear; The Lord Christ throwes-out the
Devil, and so torments the tormentour. The people, beholding this amazing
work, said, Is this the son of ver. 23.
David? (that is) Is this the work of a mere man? Yes, said the Pharesies, a
mere man, and no more, has done this: And for that, he has done above the
strength of a man, he has done by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. The Lord
Christ heard all this, and ver. 24.
knew their thoughts, says the Text, (i. e.) he knew that their thoughts had
more malice, more of Hell in them than their words showed forth, yet their
words were abominable, contrary to a clear light; And put words and thoughts
together, they reached to a blasphemy against the HOLY GHOST (...), etc. L^g
Basil. Reg. Brev. 273.
: So said the Lord Christ, and proves it: For, says He, the Devil will not
putforth his strength against himself, to spoil his own house, to breake-in
pieces his own kingdom; Men may say so, that the Devil will do so, fight
against himself, that so they may darken that, which will be more cleared than
is the Sun-beame; but no man thinks so: and the LORD knows the thoughts. You
will consider this, and then you will not dare to say, what, you are not such a
fool, to think, That the King and his Armies, (Atheists and Papists all) will
pluck down their own house of gods; throw-out their own Idols, destroy their
own kingdom; fight against their god, the Pope; you cannot think they will do
to: Then I pray you do not say so; for you hear it proved from the LORDS own
mouth, it is blasphemy so to speak.

A. I speak not my own words, therefore they must not be charged upon me. The
King has protested, you and all men know what, and we all know how often: And
the prime Bishop Primate of the world undertakes, I hear, to satisfy every
man touching that matter; he is the oracle in Oxford, no man departs from him,
but he is fully resolved in his heart touching the lawfulness of the Kings
way, and war: and so they clap their hands upon their breast saying, The
voice of God and not of man, he has cleared the point of Resistance, how fully!
Let me add one thing more, That the Bishop is said (but indeed I do not
believe hearsay) to cast an odium upon your praying and fasting people in
London, Ministers and others, that they fast to debate and strife, and how they
may take away their Kings Crown and life.

B. To quit you and set you clear of this Bishop first, though it should be
last. The Primate is a well known man, of more reading than ordinary, and of
less judgment than is conceiveable; It is certain, God has not given him a
discerning spirit; he is very credulous; It is verily conceived, that if a man
will swear that snow is black, or your kitchen fire will not burn, or that
evil is good, he will believe him; A very good natured man, if that be good.
Nay some do believe, That, if the Devil should come to the Primate, protest
and swear unto him, that he (and his angels) love Gods people, seeks their
preservation, he will be a wall about them and their houses night and day; if
the Devil should vow and protest so much, the Bishop would believe the Devil
also, that he will not swear and lie. No credit to be given to what the Bishop
says, but yet, I wish from my heart he had said nothing: for what ever he
says, though, That Papists will fight for the Protestant Religion, there be
fools enough in the world will believe him: The Lord pardon what the man has
spoken, if he has spoken as it is reported: howsoever he has need of the
largest indulgence from the Lord. But for your part, you will believe your own
ears: for you hear and see both what is said and done at London, upon our
public Fast-dayes: do our Ministers there, do the people A King must protect
^is people, their King will do it, f^r it is the office of a King.
there, fast to debate and strife? do the Ministers there speak good for
their King, [so they do acknowledge him at this day, though he has cast-off
the care and protection over His people] do they speak good for him before
the Lord? Speak; do they or do they not?

A. They do, God is witness, their souls are witness, our ears also, that
the Ministers of the Lord wrestle with the Lord night and day for their King,
that his heart may be brought-up to GOD, and his Person to the Parliament.

B. I will add what cannot be contradicted, no not by the Devil himself;
That the King (though he has not showed himself a King to his poor people)
yet is he in their hearts, and a King of prayers in their mouths: O! how do
the servants of the Lord desire, how importunate are they that he may be a King
of praises; And let the servants of the Lord pray without ceasing; though
Samuels mourning, was not heard for Saul, yet it was heard for 1 Samuel 15. 35.
16. 1.
David, whom God gave to His people, a King after His own heart. Prayer is no
vain work, it shall have a return, if not what we would, yet what is better;
And what hinders the return of prayers, the Lord, that knows the Kings
thoughts, knows, it is his sin, that lies in the way, that sin of -- and so
I come to his protestations; You say he has protested three times, That he and
his Armies, will maintain the true Protestant Religion: That he fights the
battles of the Lord, so you say.

A. I told you indeed, that the King said so, and you know, and all the
Christian world knows, that so he has said, and protested seven times.

B. Truly I do not know it, for I never heard him say it; I have read his
Protestations, and they are penned by I know not whom: and indeed I am content
to be a sceptick in these days, not to credit, over-soone what I see or hear;
and yet I will never deny what I understand. If the King has pro^ested, that he
will maintain by his Irish and English Papists the lives of his poor people,
and the life of Religion, as I understand he has protested once and again,
then -- The Lord has heard his wor^s, and knows his thoughts, and there I
leave the matter: for how high this sin rea^heth, the Lord Christ has said.
This only ^le add, it shall be easier for his Queen, in the day of judgment,
than for him; for first, she came indeed into a Land of visions, but where her
Seers (our Bishops) were blind. It is affirmed, that not long after her coming
over hither, the now Archbishop yet in name, was asked whether the Protestant
and Papist had not one and the same way to Heaven? He answered, yes, both one
and the same way: That is true enough, if both would take the same way. But
this was the Bishops meaning, That the way was as passible, and the door to
Heaven set as wide-open to all comers by the intercession of the Virgin Mary,
as by the Mediation of the LORD JESUS CHRIST; And now it is all one to her,
whether she embraces the Lord Christ, or an Image (she says) in His
likeness; And so she can with more boldness persecute the LORD CHRIST in His
members, and thinks she does the Lord good service: because the servants of the
Lord do serve their Lord and Him only, and do abominate Idols: But this is the
point, what she does she does professedly, she fights for her (holy) Fathers
house, and the house of her gods: and therefore she has prepared an Army, and
instruments of death in abundance, for that purpose; and she does not say now,
much less protest, that she has hired these men, and prepared these
instruments; pawned the Jewels of the Kingdom; been at all this cost to
establish the Religion truly Protestant; her doings, her sayings, her thoughts,
(though all abominable this way) yet they do all agree: I conclude, It shall
be easier for her in the day of judgment than for, etc. And now I have gained
my scope, the end I did drive to, and you must be brought-up to it whether you
will or no, and conclude with me;

1. That the Lord God has had His battles always in the world, ever since
there was a kingdom in the world set-up against His Kingdom, which is not of
the world: He has had His warriors also to fight His battles: for these words
relate one unto the other. I conclude.

2, That these battles of the Lamb against the Beast, and of the Beast against
the Lamb, will now in these our times, rise to the greatest height of
opposition: because now the prophecy must be fulfilled, and the judgment upon
the Beast must be executed; Reward double unto her: In the cup, which she has
filled, fill to her double: I conclude.

3. That these are the servants of the Lord, who fight these battles now; and
to say contrary, is to say that the Beast will wound her self, will power down
a violl of wrath upon her own head; that the bloody City will shed her own
blood with her own hand; that the Devil will be divided against himself, and
oppose, yea destroy his own kingdom: To say so, for so we cannot think, is
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. In the last place, we must conclude;

4. That these warriors, who now fight the Lords battles, are not come forth
into the field, as a great Commander, to show the absoluteness of his command,
brought-forth a great Army, to pick Cockle shelts. No; They fight for their
Lord Christ, to maintain His Cause, His Crown, His Scepter, the Diadem of
three Kingdoms, (the Gospel) and the Crown of their rejoicing now, and in
that Day of the Lord, the day of His appearing, when His warriors shall be
made more than conquerours, receive their palms into their hands, and their
crown (set) upon their heads: Therefore they are resolved to stand to it, to
quit themselves like men, to be vahaut for their God, for His Christ, for His
cause I heard a man say, who had lost an eye in Br^insord fight, That had he
had a 1000 eyes and as many lives, he would be content to sacrifice them all to
this Cause.
, and City of God; and this is matter of high praise; that the Lord has
continued them to these days; their lives, liberties, livelihoods, that they
may expend all, livelihood, liberty, life and all, to testifi^ the Gospel of
the grace of God. Blessed be the Lord, who has given such gracious spirits,
unto the sons of men.

A. You have cleared your Covenant at that high point, The lawfulness of
bearing Arms for defense of Religion; But you swear also, to defend your
Kings Person.

B. No, but we do not. What man dares swear, that he will defend His Person,
who rusheth upon the Angels sword every day, as blindfolded as Balaam did. As
the King is a public person, and walks in Gods high way, we swear to defend
him: yea if we should swear the contrary, which never any but Gods enemies
have done, unto whom his loule too much cleaves, yet the Laws would defend
the Kings person and Crown both: But while he walks as a private person, and as
his will leads him, in his own way without GOD, and without the law, we cannot
undertake for him: We will pray for him, and seek to rescue him out of his own
hands, and the hands of them, who hate his soul: But we cannot swear, nor do
we swear, to preserve his Person and Authority, unless in the preservation
and defense of the true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdoms. The Lord God
has made a covenant with His poor servants, that He will defend them, that He
will. Lord! what is man that Thou should regard him? but that Thou should
set Thine own guard about him, what a wonderful mercy! Yet so the Lord does;
He will set a guard of Angels about His servants bed, and about his path, and
about all his ways: A wonderful grace ^ And we read, that these ministering
spirits, are never more readily employed, than in their dispatches and workings
for the salvation of man: I say again, A wonderful grace ^ But now the man
must be gracious; he must look to his way; he must keep in Gods way; If he
str^ggle-out, walking in bypath of his own choosing, he forfets this great
privilege, and charter of preservation; he walks as one out-lawd, a man from
whom the defense is gone: If the man walks in the way of Caine, he has no
Letter patent for safety now, no more than Caine had; A man walking in his own
way, a way of sin and death, goes-out from the presence of the Lord, and from
under His protection, The conclusion is; We, swearing to defend the Kings
Person, do undertake to do our utmost that way in the Preservation, etc. And
this is as much as God. Himself undertakes; which may suffice to clear that
scruple, if any such there be.

A. But surely if your Covenant were of God, it would have a freer pass
through the Land, whereas this meets with a mighty opposition.

B. The best sign, that it is of God: for the more of God is either in a
Person or in a Thing, the more the Devil and his angels, will bend their force
and fraud against it: I told you at the first, I would give you mighty reason,
why there are so mighty obstructions, why Hell gates have stood and do stand
wide open against the holy Covenant; The reason is; Because it is holy,
therefore the Abomination of desolation, the Kings Army, spread-over the whole
Land by the Kings command, has indignation against the holy Covenant; and
therefore the heart of the King is against it also.

A. Now you are at the top and head of the business, and there you must
resolve me, that I may resolve others, who do much question the lawfulness of
your Covenant, because it is as a body without a head a headless Covenant.

B. It is an headless objection; he has but little brain, as the saying is, a
man of no understanding, who makes this objection. That Covenant wants not an
head, which has the Lord Christ, the Head of His Church, chief in it, and all
the concernements of His Church contained therein, which is abundantly
sufficient, to render this Covenant most solemn and sacred.

B. But you have not the Principal verb, the King in your Covenant.

B. Yes that we have, and there is an undertaking there to preserve his Person,
and his Crown; and if that way does not take, neither his Person nor his Crown
can be preserved.

A. My meaning is; ye have made a Covenant without the King, which makes it
questionable to me and many others, whether your Covenant be lawful? Tell me;
Was it ever known, That Princes and Worthies brought their King and people
into Covenant? No never; The King evermore brought his people into Covenant
with their God: and indeed there is no decency in it, if it be otherwise, nor
is there order: It is a plain guiding and leading that, which should lead,
the head I mean.

B. You have asked me a Question, and you have answered it your self: you
shall correct your question, and i will correct your answer; Was it ever known
that Princes and people brought their King into Covenant? No, say you. Yes, say
I: Princes and people have brought their King-up into Covenant: But what if we
had no example, nor president from former times: It will not therefore follow,
that Princes and Nobles may not enter Covenant with their God; to take Him for
their God; His Christ for their King; His Gospel to be subject to it, without
their King; If he be a child and cannot; ignorant, in such an high matter, and
cares not; conceited, and believes not; or wilful, and will not be drawn to
enter Covenant with his God. We say of a Parliament (the highest House in the
Kingdom) They cannot always walk and work by presidents: but if their
^athers have ot done that, which may be a president now unto them; then may
they, as matters may require, do that, which may be a president to their
children. They, who make Covenant with their God, have a president for so
doing, you may be sure, more ancient than the world is, but let that go. The
safest, the surest, the only way to fortify, and strengthen a Kingdom, is, to
bring a Kingdome-up, and into Covenant with their God, To serve, to serve (it
is twice repeated) the LORD their GOD. If the only sure ^ Chr^. 34. 33.
way to secure a Kingdom, then it must be done; The Princes, and Nobles, and
Worthies must bring themselves, their King too (if they can) the people also
(if they will) up into Covenant with their God; They must do it; they stand
bound to do it, though they had no president for it: What if there be no
president fo. it, yet the Cause, the extremity, never the like: Therefore the
Worthies must do it, as they love themselves and the Kingdoms, and their
children after them, they must do it, and so be a president to their children.
And blessed be God so they have done, and they have an example, a president for
so doing; Jehojada a Priest, he postureth the Kingdom, orders the Militia, and
which is the chief work, Jehojada made a Covenant between (Him) GOD and
between all the people: and between the King, that they should be the Lords
people. There is a president.

A. True, Jeho^ada did it, but he was a chief man, the Government was upon his
shoulders.

B. True, say I too, And will you not give the same power to all the Princes
and Nobles, all the Worthies, all the Faithful in all three Kingdoms, which
you give to one Prince in Israel?

A. Yes, God forbid else; But I conceive there is a wide difference betwixt
what Jehojada did, and what the Parliament have done; Jehojada might do what
he did, for it was his place, and he might govern the King being a child, in
his nonage, but seven years old, The Parliament may not do as they have done
[I reason as a man according to my ignorance and little understanding in these
matters] their King is six times seven years old, of that age, which the
Latin call a constant age.

B. I am pressed to it: Cursed is he, that flattereth with his mouth, when he
is to speak for his King and Kingdom: In dread of that Curse, I answer; That
there is a greater engagement upon the Worthies now to do as they have done
(which is the same, which Jehojada did) than was upon Jehojada: he had to do
with a child-King in his nonage, yet he made the Bond strong between God and
the King: and the King and the people; a strong bond, that he should be King to
rule for the Lord, the Lords King^ and the people the Lords people. The
Worthies now, have to do with a Man-King, in his dotage. Dotage! It is more
than so, he has given-up his power into his enemies hands; himself and his
Kingdom into the hands of them, that hate him, and his good people: The
Worthies now must make the Bond stronger than ever, if stronger can be, for
these have to do with a King, who does walk most contrary to what a King
should do; A King is Gods Deputy, ruling for God; he puts-forth all his power
against. Go^ A King must protect, guard, defend his poor people, (therefore
made He thee King,) to maintain the Defense, and to keep-out the wild Beasts;
he takes-away the defense, breaks-up the hedges, lets-in grievous wolves to
destroy his poor people. A King rules over men, he must be just; This King
breaks Gods people ^ Sam. 23. 3. Psalm. ^2.
to pieces, he is so unjust. A King must judge the poor of the people and
break in pieces the oppressor; he condemns the poor, and needy men, grinds
their faces, and breaks in pieces the oppressed. A King must build-up the
house of his Kingdom, and Gods house there; he pluckes all down, and if he
had power in his hand, he would reign down fire and brimstone upon it: Mighty
reason^ all these, why the Worthies should make their Bond-strong, like a
treble cord, which cannot be broken; Jehoiada brings-up all Judah into covenant
with their God; A strong bond: the bond is stronger now, Scotland and England,
and Ireland are come up to their God, there is a threefold cord. God be
praised.

A. But Jehoiada did all he did to establish the King in his throne.

B. Very true, and this is as true, that the Princes now in Parliament have
taken the same way to establish the Kings Throne, which can be done by no other
means but this, By making a Covenant between Him (God) and between all the
people: and between ^ Chro. 2^. 16.
the King, that they should be the Lords people; Wicked men, vile Priests,
brutish Pastors, fools, to whom it is an abomination to depart from evil,
these fools will make cavils here, and exceptions against this; what? making a
covenant between God etc.

A. The King would have no such covenant made, nor will he enter into it.

B. We know that well enough, his heart is against it, yea he has indignation
against it: but in so doing he sets his heart also firm as the Leviathans
heart against his own peace, and the peace of the Kingdom, for ask from one
end of heaven to the other, and enquire concerning this matter, Whether there
be any other way to save a King and Kingdom but this, To make a Covenant
between God and between all the people: and between the King that they should
be the LORDS people: Therefore we conclude, if the King will have nothing to
do with the Covenant, if he will despise that Oath of GOD, then he shall have
nothing to do with the Bl^ssing, he rejects that also against his own soul. But
yet he may live to see his people prosper, as certainly they shall, being made
the Lords, being entered into covenant with their God, and made the LORDS
people: The King may live to see this, he may behold it with his eyes, even
peace upon Israel, but he shall not partake of that Blessing, being out of
Covenant with his God.

A. Why, but the King is not involved within the Covenant, therefore, though he
does despise it, he cannot be involved in the curse.

B. A bold speech, and as bold an inference, the King not involved in the
Covenant! The Princes have made a Covenant between GOD, and between all the
people (and between the King too) That they should be the LORDS people; And the
King not involved, not concerned in it? The King is concerned, he is involved
in it; All his dear pledges are there; All his concernments, All his good
people, and all the bad, all the Malignants too, All this and all these are
involved therein, in this Covenant, as much as Joash was, and all the people
were concerned in that Covenant, which Jeho^ada had made. Joash was but a
child seven years old, and he understood like a child; And for the people,
you cannot conceive that they could be all gathered together at Jerusalem;
There was a Congregation, which we now call a Parliament, the Captains of
hundreds, and the Chief of the Fathers; and when they had slain that vile
person, that murdresse, then Jehoiada makes a Covenant which involved all the
people, even to the utmost parts of Judah; There is no doubt but Athaliah that
wicked woman had her favorites at court, and some in the city, and countries
too, as vile, as wicked and idolatrous almost as she her self was, who
secretly, if not openly, as that cursed woman did, called out Treason, Treason.
But wherever they were, though as far remote from Jerusalem as Wales is from
us, yet were they involved within that Covenant at that time: And so are they
involved in this Covenant at this time, which the Princes in the two houses of
Parliament, (I mean by two houses, Scotland and England, and God be praised
they are made one also) have now entered into. I know, for all the Christian
world knows, that there are some who murmur^ now, and some mock, and some
call out, Treason, Treason, calling others by their own name; But yet, they
are involved in this Covenant they and all their families, they and their
wives, their children and servants. I will give you one instance for all this,
it will suffice to satisfy any reasonable man; The Princes of Israel had made
a league with the Gibeonites. The children of Israel journ^yed and Josh. 9. 17.
came to Gibeon, and they would smite it with the sword. No, but they must not.
No? Had the people made any league with Gibeon? Yes, that they had, for the
Princes had made a league with them, and what the Princes have done, the people
have done; and they must stand to it. Then all the Congregation murmured at the
Verse. ^^.
Princes. That was not well that the people would murmr against the Princes.
But yet their murmuring would not serve their turns, We have sworn unto them
by the LORD GOD of Israel, now therefore we may not touch them. We may not!
That is true, and all Reason for that, for We Princes have made a league with
Gibeon, so it may be objected. But the words are mistaken; We includes Princes
and people, we have made a league with the Gibeonites, and with us the people,
now therefore we may not touch them. What the Princes have done, the people
have done; We Princes have made a Covenant, We and You must stand to it; can it
be imagined that the Princes can be bound, and the people loose? now therefore
not WE (that is, neither we nor you) may touch them: Princes make a Covenant as
they make a Law, not for men asleep but for men awakened; that all may take
notice of it, none plead ignorance, etc. Indeed I thought to have proceeded,
But I understand very well that this one Scripture is sufficient to stop
Contradictions of sinners will not cease, till they cease to be.
the mouths of all the Malignants in London, and brutish Pastors in Wales,
where they roar and storm, and open their mouths now against the Covenant, I
will say no mo^e to that.

A. You are very brag now; you boast much of your Covenant.

B. You are mistaken, We boast in the LORD all the day long: Who has instructed
His people to discretion, and, by His Almighty Arm has brought them into
covenant.

A. And what great matters have you done now, since you entered into covenant?

B. No great matters we, but the GREAT GOD that delights to use small things
has done great things by little means. Indeed I could be large here, I could
go from North to South, and tell what great things he has done, Indeed I
could. The sum would be this, Little means and a great GOD has effected
great things, wherein we rejoice; Ever since the LORD has brought His people
into covenant, He has wrought for them, and with them, and in them, like a God;
He has prospered His people wonderfully; delivered them miraculously,
marvellously separated betwixt His people and the Egyptians, here and there the
Lord has, etc. but I see the book swells bigger then I would have it, I must
forbear.

A. What has the Lord done, the malignants, as you call them, observe no such
matter.

B. Do they not? Whether they observe or not observe, no matter, Gods people
must observe the works of God and the operations of His hands; so must all,
whom the God of this world has not blinded, observe what the God of heaven has
done for His friends, and against His enemies ever since the taking of
Bristoll, and entering Covenant with their GOD; They must observe how the proud
men have fallen; how the Lord has punished the host of the Isai. 24. 21.
high ones, that were on high; How He has brought them down, etc. But the
wicked will not observe it, those wild Asses will traverse their way still,
till their month come, then they shall be big Jer. 2.
with sorrows, and then they shall be found: When pains are upon them, when
the LORD shall tear them to pieces, as a lion teareth the caul of the heart,
and goes away, leaving them in a torn Hos. 5. 10.
and helpless condition; when He shall put them into the fire of Ezekiel. 2^. 20.
His wrath, and leave them there (the utmost of judgments) then they shall
observe.

A. Well: leave that unto your LORD GOD, and let us come to your Dear brethren
the Scots, as you call them; Long looked for are come at last.

B. Yes, that they are, blessed be God, who has put such a zeal into them, such
a love, as strong as death, much water could not quench it. They came out in
the coldest season, in their zeal to GODS house are they come forth, for their
vows are upon them; And the Lord is with them, and with their families, whence
they came-out: The Lord will not leave them, who are engaged upon His service;
the Lord will go before them still, and be a ^^re-ward unto them; He will be
to them a sun and a shield; He will be all to them, who are All for Him, He
will be all which their families shall need, or what their souls, and Gods
Cause shall require, Amen.

A. But what have they done, the Scots, I mean.

B. I cannot tell; But sure I am, the Host of God, a people in Covenant with
their God shall do Dan. 11. 32.
; it is not expressed what, but great things we are sure.

A. Shall do! Boast not of that, the Armor is but girding on yet, it is not
put off: Tell me, for we heard you say, If the Scots were come, all were done;
they would carry all before them; New Castle and all: Is your expectation
answered?

B. Yes, the expectation of the Righteous, for they expect no more from the
creature than what the creature can do; And that is nothing, unless the Lord
shall be pleased to work with it, and then the creature shall do great
things: our expectation indeed, who have little or no faith in God, but all in
the creature, our expectation is not satisfied: And it is well it is not. It
may learn us also, weak creatures, as weak as water, ebbing and flowing, as
the News is from the North, up-and down; as the means are in sight or as the
Arm of flesh is before us, so we rise or fall; It may learn us after so many
experiences of the commings-in of God unto us, to do dontrary to what we have
done, to put little or no faith in the creature, all in God. Blessed be God,
who does check our vain hopes for excellent purposes, to wind-up our hearts to
Him; Indeed we do, what in us lies, to break our own Arm to pieces, by laying
strength upon it, which it cannot bear, and not upon Him, who is Mighty: while
we are so conceited of the Creature, that it can do so much, God can do
nothing; But the Lord we hope has taught us now to look-up to Him, and there to
rest, in expectation of all from Him; And now that we can do so, we can assure
our selves, that the LORD will use His precious servants in the North, and
every where, and do great things (exploits) by their hands, for which His
servants will give Him the glory; they know the cause is His, the Kingdoms
His, the People His by Covenant; the Lord will work like a God now, as always
He has done, for a people in covenant with Him. Amen.

A. I know not what God will do in future times, what has He done at this Day?
here you have made a long discourse concerning this and that, a third means,
and a fourth, all tending to strengthen, and fortify a Nation, and a Person,
and to render them as a well of brass: See your self speak! Are the Kingdoms
strengthened? The one Kingdom is not, the other, this Kingdom, is torn to
Hos. 5. 10.
pieces: God tears it like a lion, and seems to go His way; And Scotland
scarce able to defend its self.

B. O what love then have our brethren, dear indeed, shown to us! To put
their lives in their hands, that they might ^ave our lives; To come forth in
such a season, that they might help us to quench the fire in our houses, when
they have so much to do to defend their own houses! what love is this! But
they are a people in Covenant with their God, and with His people: It is
enough. But the Lord who returns a Dish of cold water, will return this love
sure sevenfold into their bosoms, to them and to theirs, He will undertake
for their Land too, Amen. To answer you now;

1. I have indeed spoken, as I could, touching this and that, the third and the
fourth means, mighty to posture and fortify Kingdoms, whether you respect
the People or a Man only; These are mighty means and sufficient, God working
with them, to bring to pass this glorious end: You cannot blame the means;
how they are used, that is the question, which I will not resolve here. As was
said of Scanderberges sword, It had done and would do great matters, but then
Scanderberges Arm must set it on: So these things I have treated on will do
great matters, but they must be well managed, and an Almighty Arm must
accompany them; And this I will say more, that

2. This posturing work, whether you respect a Nation or a man only, is a
glorious work: See now, I pray you, what hinders and recards (...). Niz. Ep.
100.
this work! We expect Great and Glorious things, but not from the Great and
Glorious God; we stand gazing upon the creatures-arme, and do depart from God
Almighty; If the creature be weak, we are weak; if means are small, we are men
of small hope; yet the Lord does weaken means, and check them, that men may
know they are but men, not God; their horses flesh and not spirit: He does make
the means of small and of no account in our eyes, that He might greaten and
heighten himself in all the peoples sight; and yet (ah Lord!) how weak is our
faith! we cannot get-up our dependence, to place it above, though there it
never failed, was never disappointed.

3. You say, Ireland is not (that is) it is wholly desolate Jer. 50. 13.
; Grant that, yet God is just, for Ireland was ^holly oppression Jer. 6. 6.
: There are great desolations, there were great abominations Lev. 26.
amongst His own people there, it is Tabarah Numb. 11. 3.
; The fire of the Lord burns there; Much scum is in the pot, very much dross
there. But yet, I do not grant, that it is wholly desolate; there is a remnant
there, and God is good unto them yet, even to the pure in heart; the LORD has
indeed wounded Ireland with the wound of an enemy, with the ^hastisement of a
cruel Jer. 30. 14.
one: and for the multitude of their iniquities has the LORD done this, because
their sins were increased: And yet the Lord says in the very same case; All
this, the Lord has done to Ireland; is but a correction and in measure; He will
not make a full end of His People: but He will make a full end of His
adversaries (i. e.) He will destroy them utterly, they shall be wholly
desolate. The Lord is refining Ireland now, and, which is very comfortable, He
sits as a Refi^er Mal. 3. 3.
, that is, He sits by His peoples furnace (of affliction) while they melt
there, and will see to it, that their dross shall be consumed only, and not
His people, they shall be purified; so then, Ireland is, and though she is but
small and low, yet the great GOD that raises from the dead, can raise them
again: It is a wilderness: Eden before, a wilderness now: Now I will up;
says the LORD. They are as dried bones, can they live? We must not question
it, life and spirit shall come-in by the very same means, which the adversary
and enemy has used for the driving-of all life and spirit out; By the cessation
of Arms there, and calling-over those murderers bither; By these very means
shall that people live: for never was it known from the beginning of days to
this day, That man's very short Arm could out-reach the ALMIGHTIES ARM. And
let me give you an account of my Faith touching this bleeding country of
Ireland; I verily believe, that the Reserve, the Remnant of the LORD there,
shall help to fulfill the prophecy, they shall help to reward her enemies
double according Rev. 18. 6.
to their works. And the ground of my Faith is GODS Promise, They shall take
them captives, whose Captives they were: Isai. 14. 2, 3. 4, 5.
and they shall rule over their oppressors. And it shall come to pass, etc. I
pray you read it out, it is as comfortable for England brought to that
condition now, that her people need comfort; now therefore they must read and
confider such promises, which will be sweeter than Sugar kept under the tongue.
To make answer now, as it relates to England.

1. It is a torn Land indeed; Is that a wonder? No, This is the wonder, that
there is any whole part in all the Land.

2. It is a torn Land, and the LORD has torn it; He tears, but Hose. 5. 14.
He does not go away; He stands by His torn pieces, they shall come together
again, for the LORD will gather-them, and unite them so, as they shall stand
the firmer, and faster together for ever. The Lords fire is in Zion, His
furnace is in Jerusalem: The Lord will not leave His people there, He will
stand by them, while they melt, nothing but the scumme and dross shall
goe-out; He is winnowing, cleansing His Church now, not the least grain shall
Amos 9. ^.
be lost.

3. It is a torn Kingdom indeed, pillaged, peeled, robbed, spoiled; Woe, woe,
woe to him (he is many, a legion) that has done this, has torn, robbed,
spoiled his own Land; Hear what the Lord says, Thou shall be cast-out like an
abominable branch, Thou shall not be joined with thy fathers in burial;
because thou have Isa. 14. 10.
destroyed thy Land, and slain thy people. The seed of evil doers shall never
be renowned: O terrible! I proceed;

4. All these tearers, and spoilers, and Robbers in the Kingdom, their
strength and their power in themselves, and in their strongholds, does but
argue the difficulty of this posturing work; it does argue no more; And that
is nothing, to dishonor, or discourage the work, but to honor the work very
much, and to enliven and quicken the workers. Hell-gates stand wide-open now
against this work; a clear argument that the work is of God, and the godly
will proceed in it with the more courage and resolution; The Devil roates now,
his servants rage, what will you conclude from thence? The Gaudeo sic Satanam
indignari and blasphemari quoties a me tangitur, Luther, 2 Epist. ad. Am^.
Devils are pinched now, his servants are Gaudeo sic Satanam indignari and
blasphemari quoties a me tangitur, Luther, 2 Epist. ad. Am^.
pricked at the heart Quod signum misorie gloriae est omnes haeretici
detestantur, Hier. Isa. 41. 10.
, they gnaw their tongues now, because they see the breaches in Jerusalems
walls are making-up, the work must prosper; A wide door is opened, (that is,)
the passage for the Gospel is widened more; you must expect as Paul said, many
Adversaries, all the Devils in Hell, and in the air, and all his servants on
earth. The difficulties in a work clear it to be of God; honors the work,
and the workmen: I shall contribute more to this anon. I would conclude now
with a word of comfort from Gods mouth to His people in England, the City of
God there, Fear not, fear not, [I know not how often it is repeated, for the
securing and establishing of the Church.] O thou afflicted, tossed with
tempests, and not comforted shall I say? No, The Lord has comforted thee in thy
greatest discomforts, in thy greatest agony He has strengthened and helped
thee; thy punishment has been less, indeed, than thy sin; thy punishment is
but a correction, indeed, and in measure: The Lord sits as a Refiuer over thy
furnace; lift up thy head now, thy redemption draws near, it is at hand, when
the prey of the terrible ones shall be delivered, Isa. 49. 25, 26.
when thy mourners shall be comforted, when thou shall see thy desire upon
thine enemies, when the LORD shall give thee an EXPECTED END; A gracious
promise. What end is that? Jer. 19. 11.
A GLORIOUS END; His servants, who keep their watch, and to their work, have
heard and known what end their LORD makes, cannot expect any other end, than
glorious, from a GOD, so full of mercy and of glory. Certainly, the Lord will
make a full end with His Adversaries now, His people shall see such a
destruction all over the Kings Army, as has not been yet seen, nor shall be
the like unto it, till Gog and Magog be slain, the last enemies Eceeh. 35.
the Church shall meet with upon earth; and no sooner she meets with them, but
she shall overcome them; presently upon sight of them, they shall see their
carcasses fall on the ground, not by the sword of a mighty man. The Church
expects now the like confusion ver. 3. 4.
upon her adversaries, now her Lords men of war shall render their
adversaries double. It will be a glorious end to His people, who weight for
Him; an end far exceeding expectation, for the servants of the Lord will
consider the way their LORD has walked-in before them all this while; His
goings-out against their adversaries; His commings-in toward His friends,
these have exceeded all expectation. Certainly the end will exceed much more;
This is much to be considered on.

1. The LORD has suffered the adversary and enemy to plow upon the backs of the
righteous, and to make long furrows. True, but His people see with open face
all this has been greatly conducing to a glorious end, the making fruitful the
field of the Church. Our taskmasters have been many, their burdens and yoakes
grievous. These have been but outward, upon the body; the Lord has taken-off
spiritual yoakes, burdens of conscience, grievous to be borne, not a few: A
mighty consideration, to assure His people, they shall have an Expected end.

2. The Lord has indeed given His people the bread of adversity, and the waters
Isa. 30. 20.
of affliction: All this is grievous, yet not so grievous as this is
comfortable, Thy teachers shall be removed into a corner no more: thine eyes
shall see thy teachers. (I Will add,) and thy murderers, vile Prophets and
Priests cast-out. An unspeakeable mercy, Amen.

3. The Lord has emptied our purses, taken from us (our superfluities, things
that may be spared very well, snares unto us) our silver and our gold, He has
lessened and cut-shorter our provisions we had made for the flesh: Well, and
what if we never have such provisions any more, such full tables, such fine
clothes, etc. Surely the soul will be no looser by that; and we should count
nothing a loss, whereby the soul is no looser: and nothing a prosperity,
whereby the soul does not prosper. But what provisions has the LORD made for
our souls? that is to be considered on, as matter of high praise. What if the
LORD will bring famine upon the sword, which, when we look upon our sins, we
may expect? What if He bring us to a morsel of bread, to make us look to our
crumbs, which, in plenty we would not do; nor regard His example, Who could
have multiplied every crumb into a loaf, yet would have the fragments
gathered-up, that nothing be lost: What if they, who fare deliciously every
day, be brought to The poorest mercies have the richest thanks.
barley loaves, and two small fishes; This was the LORD CHRIST'S fare, and there
is no mention of drink, says one, Basil. Reg. tub. 18.
likely that was water; yet for this poor fare, in our account, the LORD of the
creatures gave thanks: Why should the servant look to fare better than his
Master; its enough for him to fare as his Master, though his fare be course. So
now, if the LORD should cut short our provisions, yet if we can remember, and
be humbled, that in the days of plenty, we forgot the giver of all blessings,
then we may see cause enough, to be thankful for our barley bread; and matter
of abundant praise, that we are like to have plenty of the word of God; Want
of bread makes a famine, as the saying is: But the scarceness of the word of
GOD is the famine indeed. Brown bread and the Gospel is dainty fare, said he,
who could prize that unestimable gift. Gods people have the Gospel, and like
to have it in abundance, and they have enough.

4. And so to conclude, the ways of God have been mercy and truth toward
those that fear Him; His servants may say, nay they do say, Whatever their
Lord has taken from them of the earth, (of that, which is earthly) He has
recompensed with Heaven, with that which is heavenly. A good exchange. Verily
they can say, not a stroke the Lord has given, but it has been healing; not a
wound He has made, but in mercy, and in measure: and if it has seemed deep,
and wide open, it has been to search it to the bottom, and to expedite a
perfect cure. Truly, the consideration is admirable; If the frowns from the
Lord be comfortable, what will His smiles be? If the strokes from His hand be
healing, what will the kisses from His mouth be! If His wounds be but a
correction, and that in measure, what will the binding-up the breach be, and
the healing of his stroke? how overslowing will be the cup of His consolation!
If the way He has gone-in here before His people, be so full of grace; If the
means He has used for the restoration of His Church, be so full of glory,
what will the end be? An expected end sure (that is) a glorious end, which the
glorious God will make. No more is to be done now, by His poor servants, but
do their duty, and their work, heartily, earnestly, servently; wait for GOD
patiently, depend on Him faithfully, six upon Him steadfastly, keep close to
Him, and to the Covenant resolvedly: Remember the LORD, Who is great and
terrible; Neh 4. 14.
and fight for your brethren, your sons and your daughters, your wives, and
your houses, We have entered into Covenant to do so, to stand-up for God, and
to stand to our Covenant, that is all we have to do. I leave the Nation now,
and come to the Man.

VI. Entering into Covenant with God, a mighty means to posture a man's self;
And to render him mighty, able to prevail with God, and over men: he walks
as a man in Covenant with his God, both ^^ome and abroad, above himself and
the world; he is of much use to his private wealth, but of more use to the
public.

HE takes the same way still to posture himself, which the Worthies have taken
in posturing the Kingdoms, he enters into Covenant too; But as hardly
brought-up to it as the Kingdom was, with much ado, yet at length it is done;
he had fasted, he had prayed, he had praised too, and the good word of GOOD was
as a sword in his hand to slay those enemies, which would not have his Lord
rule him: but till he had prayed and praised, I may add and preached himself
into Covenant with his God, his enemies, self, self-will, self-reason,
self-seeking, self-pleasing, that accursed person, and things returned upon him
still, would force a reentry: Thus I say it was until he came-up to God fully
and indeed, to enter Covenant with Him, and to keep unto Him, fully resolved
with full purpose of heart to amend his ways, and cleave unto God: til he was
resolved Acts 11. 23.
as Joshua was, who made his own heart the center of Reformation, till he had
so done, he had done nothing to purpose. I cannot set down here how often this
man assayed at this Covenanting-work, nor the warpings of his spirit; as I
cannot set down his failings and fallings down, and up again: So, nor can I
set-down the mournings of his spirit, for all this, and more than I can name;
We shall hear of this anon; This is to benoted hence; that this Covenanting
work is not a work of a day or two, nor an easy work. We suppose now the work
is done, he is in Covenant with his God, and resolved with full purpose of
heart to stand to it; he has laid his soul under sacred bands: and because his
heart would startle-aside and draw-back, like an unruly heifer, he binds
himself, as were the sacrifices, to the horns of the Altar, with sacred coards,
faster and faster, with strong purposes and resolutions to hold fast to his
rule and close to his God.

A. But is all peace with this man now; finds he no molestation or trouble from
his adverlaries, the Devil, world or flesh.

B. Never more than now; As it fares with the Kingdom now, now it is entered
Covenant with God, now the Devil roares, and his angels rage, they proclaim
war with it now, and vow to storm it every hour: So the Devil, world and
flesh deal with this man now in Covenant with God, now Hell-gates are set wide
open upon him: but through God, he shall be delivered from them all; his
enemies would storm him and some ground they get upon him sometimes, and down
he is, and when he getsup he is tossed like a locust, rather like a Ship in a
tempest; but this is his confidence, his Head is above, his Lord Christ is
risen, therefore though he be stricken into the place of dragons, yet, when he
is himself, and can consider wisely of Gods doings, he assures himself, he
shall rise the higher, the lower he is fallen; and so we will behold the
safety, the security, the peace of this man; peace, peace, perfect peace, In
war peace, in necessities and persecutions, peace; in sickness peace, in
death peace, peace; But of this anon: he is as a die, a cube, a square body,
throw him whether you will, into the place of dragons, if you can, you
cannot-overthrow him, he stands still, firm in his faith, and strong in his
God; This is he, that is as the chariots of Israel, and horsemen thereof; the
chief Ammunition, the better part of a Kingdoms Artillery. This is he, that
has chased a thousand, nay he has put ten thousand to flight, legions of
Devils, all the Princes of darkness, Principalities and powers, the Prince
that rules in the air, and mightily in the children of disobedience: All the
fiery darts, from those adversaries, he has quenched; all that power, he has
overpowred, in His strength, through Whom, he can do all things; And now for
the world, he is at a point; the pleasures and profits there, do not take him,
nor ensnare him; the changes of sorrows there, do not greatly move him, not
so as to put him off from his bottom; He is rooted and stablished in Christ,
nothing now can do him hurt, nothing falls out unto him as a plague; the hurt
from the sword, the evil of the sickness, is taken away from him, he feels
it not; And for the furious rage of his adversaries, he laughs at it, as he may
do, who maintains his peace with God: They would storm him every day, but
they cannot; he has chambers to enter-into where he is safe till the
indignation be over; The adversary would cut off all succors from him from all
quarter^s; he mocks at them, and rejoices in the Lord, the God of his
salvation; he has done his duty, which is his work, and is resolved still so
to do; for the rest he is not careful, he commits all to God, soul and all,
in well-doing; and now can stand still, waiting the salvation of God, with whom
he is in covenant, to whom he has lifted-up the hand, and subscribed his name:
And for whom, the Lord now has lifted-up His hand, that He will make-out unto
this man, all Himself, (and all is in God) His Power for him, His Wisdom for
him, all for him; Gods Attributes all shall be laid-out for him, who will
lay-out himself, all he has, and all he is; his estate, and his life, for God:
All in God, and all is God, shall be laid out for this man, that will expend
himself and be spent for God: the Angels also, these shall be his guard; all
the creatures for his use and service; and for his head, an helmet of salvation
now, and a crown of glory at the last; But this is reserved till the last.

It may be said, these are but words, talk only and no more; We must see this
man speak; he has lifted up his hand to the HIGH GOD we must see how he acts
with his hand; He has spoken with his mouth, let us see how he fulfils with
his hand; The meaning is, we must see how he lives: how lives he? Exactly
according to Gods rule; the word of God, that is his rule, and he driveson
mainly in all he does to the glory of God, that His God may be glorified, that
is his end; he is not a talkative man, he is practical; he is not for words
but for power 1 Cor. 4. 19, 20.
he ponders his stepps, then he walkes-on boldly, confidently, prove. 10. 9.
(...) It signifies both the confidence or boldness, which men have, trusting
in God and walking in his ways: and the safe and secure estate, wherein God
sets them from danger of evil. Mr. Ley.
for he walks uprightly, and does all things decently and in order: he spies
narrowly into a Church way, for that is an holy way, and waits wisely their
determination, whom, he himself amongst others, have chosen, and appointed to
consult about that way: In the mean time he prays, heartily, and does his
work earnestly, and spieth narrowly into the way of his own spirit, how
suitable His spirit is to a Church Way, that holy way, and how becoming a
Christian: and so his maine work is, while others are about the public, with
and about his own heart, that, it may be kept as the Temple of God, the Holy of
Holies there; And about his own house, the ordering and settling of that in a
Church way, that his house may be the Church there, which was the praise of
them, whose praise is in the Gospel. And now he is in a Church way indeed; and
if none will go along with him, he will go alone, for he knows he is in the
right touching the ordering his own heart, and his own house in a Church way
sure, for he centers all, he has lifted-up his There is the neglect, the Lord
discover it to Cities and Countries all the Land over.
hand unto, in his own heart, which he makes the center of Reformation, and so
goes on orderly, he with his household, and then to the house of GOD, where,
doubtless, he can order things if he be called to it, even in a Church way as
in his own house, decently and in order: but we look upon him in his own
house, where he is a chief Parliament man, the chief Ruler and Speaker
therein; His care is to walk in a Church way there, he walks after inward
gracious principles, he strives not after outward privileges: and so his
example reproves many in these days, who neglect their own houses altogether,
and yet contend for a Church way; A notorious failing, and the less excusable,
because they are so forward for a Church way, and go cross to it in their own
houses. This man not so he is precise and exact in his walking amidst his
house, as becomes a man whose vows are upon him; he falls to his work, and to
his proper work, he has an offic^ and he waits upon it: he knows his
station, and keeps to it; his Relation, and he answers it (a man is not good
who is not good in his Relation) he walks in 3 John 4.
Truth, and he does faithfully whatever he does to them within, or those
without, to brethren or to strangers; If he rules, he does it ver. 5.
with diligence, and with tenderness, respecting not his but their good, whom
he is set over, not yours but you, his standing Rule. Romans 12. 8.
Whatever his relation is, he stands bowing himself to it, and to answer it
fully; if a Father, a faithful father; if a master, a faithful master; if a
servant, as sure enough he is, how high soever he is in the world, a faithful
servant; he gives all diligence, he uses all faithfulness; The sum is, he
seeks not his own (as all do, and so all goes to ruin) but the things, which
are JESUS CHRIST'S Phil. 2. 22.
he stands like a stock holding the balance, which way the public. weighs
he goes; his thoughts cannot stoop any other way; he is in his house as the
ship Admiral to the other ships, he carries the lanthorno, he shines before
his children, and servants, conversing graciously with, and before them,
holding out a light unto them by his conversation amidst of them.

But what service does he for the public? A great deal; no one man in the
world more than he, because he is so much at home, and where ever he is,
communing still with his own heart; he is a great enemy to GODS enemies, the
rebels now in the Land: But a greater enemy, if greater may be, to the
Rebellion in his own heart, or that he meets with from those God has made him
Ruler over, and chief Over-seer; The Rebellion there vexes him most, for
that, he knows, grieveth the Spirit of his God most of all. Therefore his
chief care is now to search his own tent, his heart, his house; knowing very
well, that if there he any stop in the Churches victories, the cause is, some
accursed things not discovered in the Churches Tents. And this he would have
wisely considered-on by the Commanders in chief and Leaders after them, and by
every common soldier that follows them. That their chief enmity might be
exercised against that enmity which is in their own hearts and tents, against
God and His pure Worship: That they would contend most eagerly against the
Rebellions there, for this will give the clearest testimony, whether their
hatred of Rebels, and this (highest) Rebellion now in the land, be a right
hatred; and whether the desire of having the land purged of them be a right
desire. If a Man's spirit be not most lifted-up with indignation against the
Rebellions in his own heart, whether thoughts or idols there; his boastings are
vain, and his attempts likely to be as vain, touching the casting-forth the
Rebels out of the land. This is the way this good Soldier takes, his
complaints are most against the rebellions within doors; and as his chief
hatred is against them, so also his chief hatred, and firstborn of his
strength is against this or that, which is an offense to his GOD, and to cast
that out, and so he becomes a very public person, a good part of the Kingdoms
Militia, as the Chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof, as was said.
Indeed he is all for the Public, and no body for himself; but yet, that it
may fare well with the Public, he deals and communes most with himself, and
his own heart, the rebellions there troubles him most; and if there be a
discomfiture given to the Armies of the Lamb, or a check to the proceedings in
the Church-affaires, and her concernments, he thinks verily the rebellions
within caused all this, Isreal's tents were not well searched, the accursed
thing is not found out, therefore this man prieth and spyeth most at home; and
is not so desirous to have the plagues removed (the sword, famine, pestilence,
Ezekiel. 14. 21.
noisome beasts) as those sins removed, which fourbished the sword of God and
Man, let loose those beasts, gave them a commission, and bade them slay and not
spare, [Sa^bath-breaking, strange vanities before the eyes, idols in the heart,
daughters of a strange god, the blood of the innocent shed; and not required,
bearing with those that are evil, which a good Church cannot do Rev. 2. ^.
;] these he would have removed. A woeful mercy to have a judgment removed from
a land, and the sin that brought it in to continue upon it. It is not a remove,
it is but an exchange of a lighter judgment for an heavier; as it was with
Sodom, the Sword was removed, Abraham delivered them from that, but fire from
Heaven consumed them after-wards, because (that sin) continued and increased in
them to a greater slame, so as they were consumed in a proportionable
punishment, fire from Heaven consumed them, and their city, who were consumed
in the fire of their own lusts: If sin, which causes the judgment be not
removed, there can be no remove of a Judgment, but an exchange only, and for
the worse ever, and more grievous to the body; or which is worst of all, the
judgment may be taken off from the body, and laid upon the heart and soul,
and that is a judgment indeed, the nearest on earth to the suburbs of hell;
blindness of mind, hardness of heart: so as men commit sin with greediness,
and are past feeling, can pretend a care of grieved consciences, when their own
are seared with an hot iron, and as hard as the nether Millstone. I conclude,
This man prays, Remove the judgment, good LORD, from off the Nation: but in
mercy, remove our sins first, else a worse thing follows, which GOD forbid. We
have seen what this man is at home in his Closet, and amidst his household;
what abroad in the world; what in his private house; what in the house of God;
what he is for his private wealth, what for the Common; he is good at all
times, in all places; does good to all, what he can do, hurt to none, though
in the power of his hand so to do: he prospers in all things, for his soul
prospen, and so he would have all to prosper. Amen.

CHAP. VII. Mistakes about a Parliament,
That one is not a mistake, but a blas^hemy; what our mistakes or off n^es are,
and how corrected; what a Pa^liaments Desence is, what their work, and what
the mistakes touching that work.

THe Parliament cannot rise higher, nor do more for themselves and the
Kingdoms than they have done, for they are come-up to GOD, they have made
themselves the LORDS Parliament; and the people the LORDS people by covenant.
They have no more to do but consider well, what they have done; and to stand
to it. We have read before how the holy Covenant is gainsaied, opposed,
blasphemed; now I come to the Covenanters; The chief and Leaders-on to this
sacred work are the Parliament, and see what a mistake there is about them,
they are counted no Parliament or but a pretended one, and that is as good as
none. The Adversaries and enemies are willingly and wilfully mistaken sure, (1).
they take themselves, an Assembly of Robbers in Oxford, for a Parliament: And
the convention of Princes, Nobles and Worthies in Westminster, for a pretended
Parliament: so they seem to take it. A mistake shall I call this? well, let it
go; But if it be a mistake, it is as wilful a mistake as ever was heard of in
the world, and as full of malice. For my part whatever I call it, a mistake, or
the like, I must think it to be, and it shall be proved to be, a blasphemy,
and that in an high degree, a blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, for this is the
case, and thus it is opened and cleared. The Parliament have put-to all their
shoulders to exalt the Lord Christ upon His Throne in heaven (the Church:) and
to set their King upon his His Throne on earth: never any Parliament have done
like them, for they have endeavored their utmost to take away the wicked from
before the King, Prove. 25. 5.
to hold and to keep him in the Throne of God, that he might be a King for God,
rule for Him, do Justice and Judgment to all His people; and so to settle a
Right Scepter in His hand, and Psalm. 45. 6.
a Crown upon his head, that it might stand fast there, till the appointed
time, and then but exchange it neither, a crown of earth for a crown of
glory; And in so doing they have said to their King Indeed and in Truth, O King
live for ever; the eternal GOD be thy Refuge, and underneath the everlasting
Arms; Thrust out the enemies from before thee, and destroy them: Thus have the
Parliament wrought, and endeavored for their King; God, Angels and men are
witnesses of this, the Parliament call all these to record with them touching
this matter.

They in Oxford (an Anti-parliament indeed) have done all contrary, cross and
against their KING in heaven, and their king on earth; Dethrone their LORD
CHRIST they cannot; but they have dethroned their King on earth, they have
cast-him out of the Throne of God; They have driven him out from abiding in the
in-heritance of the Lord; They have set him up a Throne at Oxford, put a reed
into his hand, I say, a reed, (a Scepter of unrighteousness, which will pierce
his hand and his heart:) and in truth, a crown of thorns upon his head, which
so vex and trouble him night and day, that he can have no quiet. It must be so,
Every thing has rest in its proper place, out of that place, and no rest; The
King is out of his place, and now the Adversary drives him-on in the path of
the destroyer up to the horses bridle in blood, so furiously, that the
Adversaries suffer him not to stand still and consider, that the Angels sword
is before him, for if they would suffer him to consider, he would say as Balaam
did, If it displease Thee, LORD, I will get me back again. Numb. 22. 34.
Displease the Lord! The Lord is infinitely displeased with him, He is angry
with him every day. And see now the Kings condition, how miserable it is! He,
that had GOD, and His Law for him, while he sat in Gods Throne, has now all
against him, GOD and all; his Anti-parliament has exposed their king naked, and
shelterlesse to all the spouts of Gods indignation, and vials of His wrath: His
person is indeed fallen into the hands of Thieves, and Robbers, they have taken
him, from his God, and his God from him; They have taken from him his peoples
hearts too, The Lord give him to see what his adversaries have done against
him, and discover this their iniquity to his soul.

2. The Parliament have done those works for God, for His Church, for the
promoting of Gods Kingdom, which were not possible to be done by mere men, or
men alone, not working with God all this time and God with them. The
Anti-Parliament have done all they could do, to promote Popery, to bring the
land under an Antichristian yoke and an Egyptian Tyranny, according to the
effectual working of Satan in them, and with them all this while. From these
premises it is concluded from the sacred Scripture, that to Matt. 12. 24. Joh.
15. 24. (...). sil. Regul. hrevs. 273. Works live clear Testimony Joh. 10.
25, 37. Isai. 30. 12. Psalm. 62. 3.
call this no Parliament, or that in Oxford a Parl. is a blasphemy against the
holy Ghost. The Reason is, Because it is To deny the fruits of the Spirit in
men, the operations of Gods Hand with and toward His servants: and to attribute
these to the Devil and His Angels. The servants of the Lord will leave this --
to the Lord, let Him alone to punish this, They have committed themselves, and
their Righteous Cause unto the Righteous Lord; the Judge of all the world will
do right: The Adversary shall proceed but a little farther, for their folly is
manis^st unto all men. Doubt it not, Reader, thou shall see with thy eyes this
Anti-Parliament confounded in their own ways, for they trust in oppr^ssion and
perverseness, and stay thereon; Its stands now as a bowing wall and tottering
sense; its breach shall come suddenly at an instance, for the Lord shall break
it as the breaking of the Potters vessel, so he will break it to Isai. 30. 13.
pieces, and will not spare: The Lord is gracious; He has passedover mistakes,
such as we shall read of presently, and corrected them; But this blasphemy,
etc. For now the Lords best servants and most loyal subjects are called
Rebels, and Traitors: And they that are so indeed, Robbers and Murderers,
Mighty hunters before the Lord, these are called Marquesses, Earls, Lords,
Knights, and Doctors of Divinity; The more vile and treacherous they are, the
more honorable and dignified they are: The Lord has heard this blasphemy, He
looks upon it, He will require it. I will close this with two consectaries. The
first is,

1. That the Covenant is of God, for Hell is moved at it, all the Irish Rebels,
and English Monsters are grieved and have indignation against it: Therefore
Holy, and of God, else their hearts could not abominate it.

2. For the Covenanters, they shall lift up their faces without spot, they
shall be steadfast and shall not fear: The LORD shall clear their innocence:
their upright dealing shall shine forth as the morning. But the eyes of the
wicked shall fail, and they shall not Job 11. 10.
escape; and their hope shall be as the giving-up of the Ghost. Amen.

Sober men have been mistaken and offended here also, almost as much about the
Parliament, as the Barbarians were about Paul, (II.)
now he was a murderer, presently after he was a god: It is an Acts 28.
hard matter to keep a mean betwixt too much and too little; good men fall
sometimes upon the extreme; But it is upon some sudden suggestion, they are
quickly from-off-it again: we will see now what the mistakes have been; what
has caused them, and how corrected.

1. It has been some offense of heart unto some (for a little time) to see a
rebellious, stiff-necked people fighting themselves into slavery, servants
that will not be made free; then also (for I must huddle) to see a viperous
generation of men sticking fast upon the hand of the Parliament: An offense
indeed, to see the Worthies of the Lord waste out themselves, their time, and
their spirits (if I might call it a waste) to make us freeman, free in the
Lord: and, us again so requiting the Lord and them: and to hang upon their
hands some of us, as vipers upon Paul's hand. Settled and serious thoughts have
corrected and removed this offense, considering

^. That this was the measure, which was meated forth unto the Lord Christ
Himself; He came amongst His own, they received Him not; He wrought wonders
amongst them, they regarded them not; He would have made them freemen, they
would not, they were free already, nor did they so much as thank Him; how high
their wrath reached we all know: And that they quitted Barrabas and condemned
Jesus; there is nothing now that is new, I can give but an hint only, and more
needs not. 2. Considering that it is the best sign of a good cause to see
evil men, Papists and Atheists, all the Christian world over, contending
against it: And of a good Parliament to see a viperous generation, an
Anti-Parliament, sticking upon their hands, stinging of them, fighting with
them, setting themselves in a Diametricall opposition unto them. More
considerations there are, but these may take off that mistake.

2. It was an offense of heart at first, to see so many on the Kings side; to
follow-on in a direct path to ruin; This offense was taken away by
considering: 1. That when Leaders and Captains drive-on furiously in the path
of the Destroyer, others will drive after 2 Samuel 31. 5.
as furiously as they; We know who fell upon his own sword, which his
Armor-bearer seeing, he fell likewise upon his sword 2 Chronicles. 12. 1.
and died with him; And that Rehoboam forsaking the Lord, all Israel forsook
the Lord with him. 2. It was remembered also, That not many nobles, not many
wise stand on Gods-side, and up for Him; No, the fewest and the poorest in the
world: so it has been, and if it be so now, it should be no offense; Saul, who
persecuted David with open face, and in a clear light, had almost as many 3
Sam. 24. 2.
thousands with him, as David had hundreds, and those chosen men out of all
Israel (that is) valiant, stout, well-appointed, and fit for war: David, that
stood up for his own defense against an enraged King, had but an handful of
men, and those most of them in distress, 4 Sam. 22. 2.
and in debt, and discontented. This consideration resolves its self into this
conclusion, That a murderer may have thousands on his side, all choice men (I
mean, right and fit for war:) and a faithful servant of the Lord may have few
on his side, nay none that look after him; This was David's case, yea, the
Churches case, just; her adversary called her an Outcast, saying, This is Zion
whom no man seeks after; No man: so it may be with the Church and Jer. 30. 17.
people of God, and yet the Church still, and a very clear evidence that she
is the Church, whom God looks after and seeks after; Therefore is she called
Sought out Isa^. 62. 12.
: It is not the Churches case now, the Lords Name be praised; many Noble, many
wise, many learned are on the Churches side now; even all the truly noble,
truly wise, and learned throughout the three Kingdoms do now appear on the
Churches side, as they did for David after God had cleared His upright dealing
as the noone day, and humbled him. But this is not the distinguishing mark; as
not whereby to know Saul from David; so nor whereby to know which is the
Parliament indeed; not by the number of nobles and worthies, [unlesse (as now)
toward the latter end, after God has cleared His Churches cause, emptyed His
servants hearts, made them know (the difference betwixt) the service of a
Parliament, and the service of an 2 Chro. 12. 8.
Anti-parliament, as the Lord says, in the like case:] but this is the
infallible mark, observe to which Assembly or Parliament the Edomites,
Adversaries of Judah, all the Papists in the world join themselves: This
observation never fails. True it is, men in distress, and in debt, may join
themselves to the Parliament (though not one for a hundred such, who are joined
to the other side.) But these Edomites, Irish and English murderers, never
come-up to the Parliaments side, not one of them, unless as Doeg came to the
house of Abimelech, to get advantage against David, and to hasten destruction
upon Israel: Observe then to which side these Edomites are joined, English and
Irish Monsters, and this will clear that mistake, none like it.

3. It was a great offense to hear both parties protest the same thing, To be
for GOD, for the true Religion; for the Rights and liberties of the subject:
And it is an offense of heart, and staggers some at this day, To hear the
King, seduced by his Anti-Parliament, protesting and declaring all this, and
commanding it to be read in all his Churches on the LORDS Day. What? That they
seek peace, and pursue it: and are stout and resolute for the defense of the
true Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: and they say, hearken all ye
people, for they will have their loyal and lawful intendments, made known
and declared to the people in that very place, where the Oracles of God should
be declared: Indeed this has been an offense to some, and may stagger simple
ones at this day. But the wise in heart were never offended at it, for they
considered, first,

1. That truth was never opposed, Religion never persecuted, but under the
vizor of truth, and semblance of Religion: nor ever were the Laws and
liberties of the Kingdom, and of the Church of Christ oppressed, (...), as we
say, with a bare head, but under a Cap of Maintenance, (that is) under a
pretext, To maintain all Laws, liberties, Religion, and all: In nomine Domini
incipit omne malum, an old Proverb, and an old device of the Devil; his Pope
began just so long ago, By the grace of Almighty God, and His Authority
entrusted to me, I will; what will he do? or what did wise men expect would
follow those premises? Omne malum, all the mischief that he could do, an
utter subversion, as power was in his hand, of all the Laws, Rights, liberties
of Christ's Kingdom. I could tell the reader, and assure him, that the most
abominable heresies, horrid iniquities, all these came-in under a Cap of
Maintenance, to defend and maintain their contraries. It must needs be so,
else it were not possible that the adversary could prevail; he must not tell
the people, that he will take away their Rights and liberties (Religion is the
least of the peoples thoughts,) and make them slaves: If the Devil should say
so, he would have no subjects; No, he must transform himself, and his
ministers into Angels of light; he must tell the people by the mouths of his
Ministers in the Churches, as Absal^m did, just so, ye shall have justice now 2 Samuel 1^. 4, 7, 8.
; and that they may be assured of it, he must tell them, he has vowed a vow
unto the LORD, and he must pay it; and then Absalom struck at David's Crown.
This is a prime consideration, and of large use, the sum thereof is this;
They, who will make work for Friars in England, set-up Popery here, must do
as the Friar does, shave his head, but he puts on his cap, that all the world
may not know him to be a bald -- So he, who would make work for Mass Priests,
now must puton a Cap of Maintenance; he must seem to maintain all that he
has a mind and full purpose to destroy; Rights, Laws and liberties of the
Kingdom, Religion and all: Let the wise in heart consider;

2. That this profer of defense and semblance of maintenance, as aforesaid, is
old and rotten, it is become very unsavory now; They remember very well, that
the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin offered fair this way, their service to
the builders, and reformers, the Worthies in Parliament at Jerusalem; We will
build with you, said they, for we seek your God as ye do; and we Compare Ezra
4. 2. with a King. 17. 29, 33.
do sacrifice unto Him ever since the time; what time? If we compare Scripture
with Scripture, we shall know what worshippers they were, by their own
confession; ever since they could make gods of their own, fear the LORD and
serve those gods, ever since. There are the same offers tendered now to the
Parliament, the same protestations made now; they are rejected with the same
disdain now as then, you have nothing to do with us to build, we our selves
together will do our work, and serve the LORD. So these adversaries were
answered then, and so now; and then it follows as it now does, what the
adversaties of Judah ver. 3, 4. Psalm. 9. 16. Rem meditan dam summ^.
did to weaken the hands of the people, and to trouble them in building.
Higgaion Selah this, a matter that has been very much meditated upon, and now
cleared.

True: The wise in heart may be resolved here, and cleared, but how shall the
common people be resolved at this point; When they hear these offers and
undertakings for the defense of their Laws and liberties declared unto them in
their Churches, they must needs think all this to be as true as the Gospel:
for nothing, they think, but truths are declared there, so they think, do they
not?

No; they cannot think so now; they have been used to such Declarations; The
King (so we were persuaded) would have his Declaration touching the
sanctification of the LORDS Day, with Minstrells and May-games, this he would
have read in his Churches, and his legit ut Clericus, his Ministers did read
it Clarke-like: But that all the Christian world might know how abominable that
Declaration was, which yet was declared to the people from the mouth of his
Ministers, in his Churches, the servants of the Lord adjudged it to the fire,
to be put thereinto by the June, 1643.
hands of the common Hangman, which was done.

There was another Declaration, and the King commanded it to be read in his
Churches, by his Ministers, to his people; And so it was, That the LORDS best
servants and most loyal subjects were Traitors and Rebels all. But see the
turnings and tides of things, that year, and the year after, [Indeed as
wonderful, as was the turning of Jordan back, for according to that time it
must be said, What has the LORD done?] The Tables were turned, then, and the
Images broken to pieces there; and the next year after, there, at the same
Deske, and by the same Minister, these Traitors and Rebels before, must be
declared to be, as indeed they are, the Kings most loyal and best subjects:
The people cannot be deceived now, with the Kings Declarations, quaere
peregrinos vicinia rauca reclamat; If the Kings Ministers will have his
Protestations and Declarations to be received and credited, they must send them
over to the remotest Islands, where the inhabitants are wholly ignorant, what
servants, ministers, instruments, the King has and works-by: where the people
never heard, nor saw, nor felt what their -- actions are. Indeed the people of
England are sottish and brutish enough, for the most-part our Pastors are
such: But the Kings party must not think, that we have neither eyes, nor ears,
nor any other faculty, whereby we understand the incoherence, inconsistency and
disagreement of things; we can hear what is spoken, and we do see what is
done: and we see, how contrary words and actions are one to the other. Nay
though (...), etc. Basil. Ep. ^ 2.
the Devil has possessed some of us, made us blind and dumb, we can neither
see, nor speak, nor hear, yet we have one sense which will never leave us
till we dye; we can feel. And now, though we have no more sense of Religion
than our brutish Pastors and vile Priests have, yet from this sense we
conclude, first, 1. That Papists openly so or in heart, will not maintain the
Protestant Cause, for they have burnt the Protestants in the fire: nor will
they, at this time, edify and build-up the house of GOD, whatever they will
have declared to the walls there; for they have set our houses on fire over our
heads, and threaten us yet more. 2. That the adversaries of Judah will not
become friends now, unless for advantage; that they, under color and
semblance, and show of friendship, may worke-out the subversion of Judah. 3.
That robbers, spoilers, murderers, will not defend our Laws, just rights and
liberties, for we feel what they have done against us, like evening wolves,
they have destroyed all where their foot could come, they have made our Eden,
and garden of the LORD, as a wilderness: Our sense has told us, these men,
rather beasts-likemen, have done like themselves, as says the Proverb of the
ancients, wickedness proceeds from the wicked man: And whatever 1 Samuel 24.
13.
their Declarations are to the Churches and people there, yet they will do as
always they have done, who are men full of all subtilty, and all mischief;
children of the Devil; enemies of all righteousness, that will not cease to
pervert the right ways of the Lord. Lastly, As we are quick to feel where we
are pinched, so we have a little understanding (so much as our children have,
for that suffices) to know, which party, the Kings or the Parliaments, does
wrong us, does make us smart; we can judge of works and of works, what the
Kings party does, and what the Parliaments party; what are the undertakings of
the one, and what of the other: One scruple there is, and that troubles some of
us, not a little.

A. The King, by his evil Councillors, has forced an Oath upon us, and now
we have taken it, we think we are bound to stand unto it, as you to your
Covenant.

B. No, for so you are able to resolve your selves. You have so much
understanding, you say, as to judge betwixt works and works, what are agreeable
and correspond with Law and right reason, what are contrary to both. The
judgment is as easy betwixt Oath and Oath, Covenant and Covenant: The
Parliament have sworn and must not repent to maintain the Rights of their LORD
Christ, and of the Lord their King; The privileges also and just liberties of
their subjects all. The other side, a contrary party, have sworn clean Salv. de
gub: li. 4. 135, 136. Per Christum, quia tollo illu^s per Christum, quia o^oido
illum. Rem ac substantiam.
contrary to all the forementioned, and must repent or perish for ever. Now
judge you of your Oath, whether you must stand to it or not, after I have told
you what Salvian tells me, which is this, There are some men such sinners, so
abominable, That they will swear by the Lord Christ, that they will spoil and
rob His subjects, yea, and kill them too. I Will tell you how I was answered
the other day, by a Lord-like oppressor, who had ground the face of a poor man,
my neighbor, turned him (as the good Ministers now adays are turned) out of
all, took from him all his livelihood. The poor man entreats me to entreat for
him, I did; Sr, said I, deal not so unjustly in taking away this poor man's
livelihood, you have taken away, his life Deuteronomy. 24. 5. Quicquid hominis vitam
ex necessitate tolerat. Vibrant in os meum truces oculos juravi inquit. etc.
Quid ampli^^ sacerem? Discessi.
This Lord bent his brow upon me, and looked fierce like a lion, then told me,
He must do as he had done, and must not do otherwise. Why must you not? I
replied; And he to me, By the Lord Christ I Will do it, for by Him I have sworn.
Ah Lord! The man is beside himself, stark mad. I Will speak no more to him, so I
departed. Here is a clear case, I have done: so much to remove the mistakes
about the Parliament, the taking off the offense, if any be, against their
Persons.

There is some mistake about their defense, that that does consist (III.)
in numbers of men, and strength of ammunition, walls, gates, and bars. Indeed
this is a defense very considerable, and when the Lords time is come (it is at
hand) and His servants cause fully tried (as David's was) then the North shall
give-in to His Churches help, and the South shall not keep-back; East and West
will standup; every man will stand upon his own guard, without taking gain of
money Judge. 5. 19.
. But this we reckon not upon as a defense to be leaned upon; These are but the
small feathers of Gods protection; the great out-spreadig wing, as the
out-spread firmament of His Power, is the LORD GOD Himself with His Twenty
thousand Psalm. 68. 17. 2 Kin. 6. 17.
Charets, even thousands of Angels, the Lord among His people, as in the holy
place: He is the Defense of His people, even all those that are, and seek His
Glory; the Lord is their Defense, or He creates a Defense upon His Assemblies,
all the Glory Isai. 4. 5.
; His defense is a created defense; it defended His servants when their Soul
lay among lions, amongst those, that Psalm. 57. 4.
were set on fire with rage, yet defended; how they were defended they cannot
tell, but they were defended, A created preservation is above man's
apprehension. But so the servants of the Lord may know themselves to be the
Glory, the Assemblies of the Lord; and therefore nothing can dismay them; when
it is said, this strong-hold is lost, and that town gone, yet the Parliaments
strength fails not, it is not gone, for GOD is not gone, that strong-hold
continues, even God in His holy place, an EVERLASTING Isai. 26. 4.
STRENGTH, and that is a sure ground of EVERLASTING CONFIDENCE. God is all, and
always works most gloriously then, when He works alone, when the Creature is
gone, and the proud helpers do stoop under Him 1 Job 9. 13.
, then He works like a God. Never so for his adversaries; (that is) He never
wrought for them with an Arm made bare of flesh: His Arm has wrought for His
Adversaries, but still He has clothed it with flesh, and they have called
flesh their Arm; and given it all the glory. The conclusion is, the
Adversaries defense is of their own making, or but imagined. The Parliaments
defense is created, so wonderful, that it is above apprehension. God is called
their Defense, their strong Tower, a Refuge for His Servants, therefore GOD with
His people will answer all objections against them, Remember the Lord, who is
great, there is the defense, none such, Neh. 4. 14.
the Rock, not like the adversaries rock, the enemies themselves being Judges;
under this defense, the shadow of this great Rock, march you on-ward, Ye
Worthies of the Lord, be not afraid of your adversaries, Remember the Lord, who
is great and terrible: and fighe for your brethren, your sons, and your
daughters; your wives, and your houses. Spare them not, for they will not spare
you, and fear that the Lord will not spare you neither, if you spare them; God
has commanded, Be zealous for Him, as Phineas was, Numb. 24. 8.
smite those adversaries as Phineas did, and then expect the plague will cease:
And so I come to the last thing in proposition, the work of a Parliament, and
to clear the mistakes about that work; what the work is first, though I
think, the Malignants are not so brutish as to question it.

1. Their work is, the setting-up every thing in its place; the IIII.
LORD CHRIST upon His Throne above in His Church; His Deputy the King upon His
Throne below; Religion in its place, and the Law in its place, (which must do
us Right when the King will not,) that's the work, to give Inventae sun^ leges
cum ab uno viro, etc. Cic. ossic.
the Kings of Heaven what belongs to Him, and His King on earth what belongs to
him; his Prerogative its length, and the subjects Privilege its Right, that
the King and his good people may rejoice together, and not, as it has been,
when the King and his Favorites, sat drinking, that is, rejoicing; the City
of God, his people there were in perplexity, (i. e.) sat mourning: No, the
Parliament must endeavor, as they can, that all may rejoice together, or all
mourn together; there is harmony, a good consent and agreement, befitting still
a Christian King, and a Christian people. This is the work of a Parliament;
they would have it understood of all, it is to reform things out of order in
Church and State, and set them to rights, that there be a good understanding
betwixt the King and people. In a word, it is called a work of Reformation.

Sober men are mistaken here also, and in an extreme still; sometimes they see
obstructions like mountains in the way of Reformation, and then they think,
It is a work will never be done, the child of Reformation will stick at the
birth still: Then again, they see the mountains made a plain, then they think
the work will be done presently: th^se are hasty thoughts, which men making
haste, are full-of. Sober men see the vanity of these thoughts quickly, and as
quickly correct themselves and their roving thoughts with perfect and settled
thoughts, as these, and so they come-off from the first extreme considering,

1. That we expect now a man-child to be borne (i. e.) a complete Reformation:
The sober man must think now and settle upon the thought, that the production
and bringing forth of a natural birth into the world (whereto nature is so
helpful) is the wonderful work of God, and ascribed to His Hand. Nature
indeed travels hard, and many throes she makes, as if she would throw-out all
her spirits, and strength, and breath at one cast: And yet, when nature has
done all she can, to her utmost, she cannot out-act her self, there the child
sticks at the birth, and there it must stick, till an Almighty Hand fetches it
forth, not the mid-wives; No, Thou art He that tookest me out of my mothers
womb, says David. That Deliverance he ascribes to God; and it assures him for
the time to come, that he shall be delivered in his greatest straits, for so he
comfort himself (I Will note it by the way) against his jeering adversaries,
David trusted on the Lord, said they, that He would deliver Psalm. 22. ^.
him let the Lord deliver his servant now, seeing He delights in him. So the
Lord will, says David, and he thinks his adversaries are mad to think the
contrary; But how is David assured, that the Lord will help him out of those
straits? Yes, the Lord will deliver me, says he, and he is assured, for the
LORD delivered me in greater straits than these, when I was in my mothers
womb, straits indeed, He took me out thence, says David; the sober man
considers this with all his heart, and

2. If such an Agony, so much trouble, and so many throws before a man-child
be borne, he considers what an Agony there must be, what throws, what
contentions, what strivings, before a NATION be borne, before Zion brings forth
her children! Ah Lord! but I must suppress my meditations, an hint must
satisfy: Only the sober man wisely considers this with it,

3. That it is now as once it was, the adversary has stood before Rev. 12. ^.
the Church all this while she has been in travel, and ready to be delivered,
to devour her children so soon as they be born; and now that they are borne,
and secured by the LORD Himself, and carried as upon Eagles wings, strongly,
s^iftly out of his reach, yet the adversary stands watching his advantage, and
if his hands cannot reach these children, yet his mouth shall; for now also, as
in former times, he has cast-out of his mouth water as a stood after the ver.
^5.
Church, that he might cause her to be carried away with the flood: thus the
man considers, and

4. That the servants of the Lord have taken the readiest way that could be
taken (a way that never failed, it cannot fail now, whereof before) to
mid-wife-forth this Birth; And how wonderfully they have wrought with God, and
God with them, is now the wonder of all the Christian world: We have had
wonderful Births, I have not a fitter word, for the Almighties Hand has
brought them-forth, and the longer they stuck at the womb, the more complete
they were. But it is said, the MAN-CHILD is not borne yet, (i. e.) the work is
not completed, though man has wrought with God all this while, and GOD with
man, which made sober men think that the work would be speedy, and sudden.
These were as hasty thoughts as the other were distrustful, and in another
extreme. Thus they are corrected by considering first.

1. The instruments or means God works by; By men most times, I need not
add, weak, for man implies it; though he may stand for a thousand in our
choice, yet he must not stand so in our account; Man is but a Cipher indeed,
and standing alone he is nothing So one of the best and ablest men of the
world, has accounted himself 2 Cor. 12. 1^.
nothing; not to be accounted of: And so are we to account of him also, Cease
from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to b^ Isai. 2. 22.
accounted of? It would be well with us i^ we of low degree could look upon
men of high degree, and they upon themselves as Nothings, for then they and we
would labor to bring-downe GOD unto men, and to carry-up our spirits unto God,
to six upon Him steadfastly, and so our spirits would be more constant and
settled, we should be able to stand still (which now we cannot do,) and wait
the salvation of God: As for men whether low or high, they are all the sons
of men (i. e) Nothings, vanity, No trust to be put in them; God only is all,
and does all, and as He lets forth Himself to His creature, or withholds His
hand, so His creature is and acts; If we think that men can do any thing of
themselves, then we think of them above what is meet: But if God will join
himself to men, (those Ciphers,) as he has done, and is pleased to do, then
one man is an hundred quickly, and ten a thousand.

You will say now, why are not things done suddenly as we expected? why is not
Reformation completed? There is mighty reason for that; though God joins His
hand to man's hand, yet He goes His creatures pace, slowly but surely: He works
as a God, and His works are discerneable; But men work as men; though they go
GODS way, yet they walk their own pace. And see in passage the goodness of
their God, He does account of men as workers together with him; He will go
with them their pace, do their work for them, and yet deal with them, as they
with their little children, let them take the honor of the work, which He has
wrought: But wo^ unto them now, if they so requite their LORD, not ascribing to
Him all the glory. Let us looke-over the register of Gods works, which He has
wrought by men, or which men have wrought, these three last years, working
with God. I see my work growes-bigge under my hand: seeing I have not ^^e
skill to lessen it, and yet have shortened my meditations, let me greaten and
heighten the work with the great and high works of the Lord; who ever was the
instrument, God wrought them; I Will be as quick, in recording them, almost, as is
a thought; and yet the readers understanding shall go along with me, if he has
laid-up these works and pondered them in his heart.

The first work in sight (after they had made their prayer and supplication to
their God, to bring Him down to them and their work) was the opening the prison
doors to the righteous, and shutting them upon the ungodly ones. Then the
wicked did ^^ee as before an earthquake, for the wrath of the Lord pursued
them. Then yoakes were taken off the necks, and burdens from off the
shoulders. The Bishops were choked with their own Oath, the fire coming from
themselves consumed them, and their own lips swallowed them up, as the lips of
fools: Then they were Eccles ^0. 1^.
heaved-at, as the stomach heaves at some indigested bitts, to castthem-forth,
but nature was not yet strong enough; Then there was an heaving again and
again, and yet it would not do: but they were heaved-off from their strong
foundation. Then a trieniall Parliament; and a long Assize. Then a Protestation
was entered into, for God wrought with men. Then a great Champion, that had set
his foot upon Church and Commonwealth, was cutshort by the head: Then the
bloody Inquisition, High Commission and Star Chamber Courts were taken away,
those snares were broken. Then a breach was made-up, which the adversary would
have made wide as the sea, and a Pacification, etc. Oh Lord! how wonderful!
Remember still, God works like a God, though He goes man's pace. Then the
Tragedy began in Ireland, to end in England; and oh how active the Bishops
were, to bring over the stage hither; to set it-up here: And while they were a
working, they wrought themselves out of the Lords House; and shut themselves
fast-up in prison, with their own hands. Then the earth was moved, for it was
smitten terribly, and swords now drawn, but could draw no blood, O wonderful!
Then every man to his strong hold, but they were safe among Lions, who made God
their refuge. And now there was a kind of checker-worke all along, many
strokes of red, and some white; the Lord mingled judgments and mercies, but
all was mercy and a fruit of love to His Church and people; things were so
dispensed, that His people might know, that they had grieved their God:
apparent tokens of Divine wrath toward the Land, and clear manifestations of
loving kindnesses toward His people, for then the adversary girded and girded
himself, and God brake him as often to pieces. Sometimes the Lord walked
contrary, and backward, we fools thought so, but then He went forward,
strait-on to the white and butt, He tended to from all eternity: and all His
way though cross to us, were very direct, we fools can discern it now:
Sometimes His servants rose high, then f^ll as low, but their falls were their
advantage, and tended wonderfully to give them assurance of an expected end:
Then the wiles and depths of Satan were discovered, a plot as deep as hell,
and as full of malice as the Devil: But from that sour this sweet, for then a
second Covenant was entered into; And all this time (which must be remembered)
the malignants palaces were then, as now they are, their prisons: So the beauty
of the Bishops excellency is stained, and the prophecy fulfilled, Wild beasts
of the desert shall lie there, and their houses Isa. 13. ^^.
shall be full of dole full creatures. This turning the Bishops palaces into
prisons must be remembered still, and how their Curates spued themselves out of
their houses, or their houses spued them forth. Then Hell-gates were set wider
open, if wider could be, and there issued forth an horrid Proclamation; Then a
Kentish untimely birth, an hellish Rebellion, which ran its self presently-out
of breath, and expired. But God wrought gloriously still, for now He brought-up
three Kingdoms into Covenant, and one Nation forth for our help. O
wonderful! I must now pass over the victories God gave His servants, and the
discomfitures also; there was wonderful mercy in all: But on this our thoughts
must dwell, though I pass it lightly over. GODS House, appointed by Him to be
an house of prayer, but made a den of thieves, is now turned to the same use it
was intended, made an house of prayer: and these merchants, with their
servants, are cast-out; when this is done all over the Land, then the work is
completed; but blessed be God for what is done, for ever praised be His Name,
Amen.

And so we have seen what man can do, when he stands alone by himself, just
nothing: for he is a cipher; But if God will work by him, then he, that was
nothing before, or but as a cake of barley bread, shall smite the host of
Midian, overturne their tents, Judge. 7. 13.
and lay them along, as our worthies have done. Indeed the more contemptible
the instrument is, the more glorious Gods hand is, as when He works with an
Oxes goad, or jaw bone of an Ass; then heaps upon heaps, and the work is
wonderful. And if so when He works by His instruments, what manner of work,
and how glorious, which He wrought alone, going His own pace; Then His work was
as quick as His word, which says the Psalmist, went forth swiftly, witness
the Heavens and the Lights there, which we see but cannot apprehend: and the
earth with the creatures there: All these He wrought alone, He spoke the word
and they were created. And what manner of salvation will that be, which, the
LORD says His own arm, He alone will bring? A created defense is above our
apprehension, so will that salvation be.

Thus we have considered the workmen, they work as men; God works with them,
and works as God; but goes His creatures pace. Sober men consider.

2. The nature of this work; it is a dethroning all illegal power; a
casting-out all illegal things, whereunto nature (corrupt) contributes
nothing, but all she can against it: So does the Devil and all his angels; for
nature will not depose its self, nor the idols she has set-up; nor will Satan
and his angels dethrone themselves, whatever they prate to the contrary: This
work is, as was said, a rectifying of things amiss in Church and State, the
recovering of truth and peace, which our sins have taken from the earth; the
establishing religion, the worship and service of God, according to the rule,
and word of God. This is the nature of the work, which has been said the third
time, that the simple might understand, and consider wisely of it, and then he
will not say, it is a work of quick dispatch. It was not quickly concluded,
where to begin, there was such a confusion in things. Indeed there were as many
breaches in the Church and State, as there be holes in a Seive, which the wise
Came. in vi^a Mela^ch. p. 29.
man thought, he would make hold water, but could not tell where to begin his
work; Melancthon makes great use of this comparison, to set forth the state of
the Germane Church an hundred years ago, and was a prognostic of the
troubles and desolations there now: such a confusion there was in Church and
state at this time, such as that was in the Germane Church, so as a wise man
indeed, with a natural eye, could discern nothing but (...) and (...) all
things in a confusion, like the empty place, without form, and nothing in
place: so many breaches in Church and state, that it was impossible with man to
know where to begin; Nor is it possible now to know when they shall make an
end. God that makes a path in a wilderness, has took his servants, in their
maze, by the hand, and led them throughout hitherto. To clear the difficulty
of this work, and what makes it so difficult, I will compare it with the
adversaries work. Their work was to advance POPERY. And truly their work
went-on as their word, very swif^ly; Let there be altars built, crucifixes and
images made, it was done. Let Prayer be stinted, let Ministers mouths be
stopped, it was done. Let the LORDS Day be profaned, let there be no Sermon in
the afternoon, not one; and let Reading go for preaching in the forenoon, it
was done. A way with the bands of God, His laws, away with Covenants, those
shackels to the flesh, away with them (and let our covenant with hell stand,)
all this no sooner commanded, but it was done, quick work. We cannot mistake
the reason; here was a compliance with flesh and blood; nature was pleased
here, the world pleased, and the devil pleased; this leaven (our natures being
sowred with it from the beginning) sowred the lump, the whole land quickly?
for what should hinder? Nature, flesh, the world, and the Devil gave in their
help presently, so things were done suddenly. The Parliaments work was and is
as we heard, a counter-work, To exalt the LORD Christ; to advance and spread
His Gospel, to remove and take away that, (...) him (a 2 These. 2. 7.
legion) that lets now, will let, Persons and Things: I will not stand to
clear the difficulty of this work, which sense and reason have made so clear
and so demonstrative. I Will only say, the Difficulties (as great as are
imaginable) honors the work, and the workmen, if they be enlivened thereby,
and provoked to put out their strength, all their activitie in this work, so
visibly now and apparently the work of God. Indeed 1. These difficulties should
be so far from discouraging, that they should hearten, and put more spirit
into every man, that he put to more strength Eccles. 10. 10.
; these difficulti^s speak unto him, Arise, sleeper, such a work in hand, and
such Jonah 2. 6.
opposition, and such a tempest raised to hinder the same, and asleep now! up
sluggard, and pray to thy God. 2. Indeed that is to be considered also, the
straits and difficulties make the servants of the Lord more prayerfull; now
they power out their prayers; Now they are earnest, and importunate; Now they
will not let God alone; Now they will give Him no rest; their Lord has brought
them within sight of the promised end, now as Daniel did, they set their face
unto the LORD GOD. 3. And the greater the straits are, Dan. 9. 3.
the fuller their hope is, they are carried with a stronger gale of Faith
through them to the promised and Expected End. We have considered the nature of
the work, it is hard and difficult, carried through the straits; this honors
the work, and the workmen, it makes them more active, more spiritfull, more
prayerfull, more hopeful, I might add, and more joyful; for through those
straits, and slouds of great waters, they are carried with full sail, full ^
Col. 2. 2. (...). 1 These. 1. 5. ^ieh. 6. 11.
assurance to their promised wealthy place, where their joy shall be full. In
the last place, that the man may not make haste, he considers;

3. That the promise touching this work, the completing of it, is, de futuro,
God will restore, He will build-up Zion, His Tabernacle, after it is fallen; I
know not how low, but not too low for His hand to raise-up again. But I Will pass
over this; Blessed be God that his Promise is so near accomplished, that He has
brought His servants so near unto an expected end.

Here is a Paralogisme a now to be considered on, (for thereby Col. 2. 4.
unstable souls are infinitely beguiled) touching this work, the easiness
and facility of the same. Thus they reason; the means whereby this Posturing,
this Reforming work is effected, are very easy, Praying, Preaching, etc. these
were no sooner commanded but done; then why is not the work done? the means
are easy, and quickly performed, therefore the work is an easy work, and of
quick dispatch, whether you respect a Nation, or a Man only; there is the
deceit.

The Man shall make answer to this in the next Section, where he will tell you
that fasting, and praying, and hearing, etc. are but outworks, bodily
exercises, the outside of Duty, which are of little use. The man will show us
the inside, and truth of these duties, which do the work indeed. I Will close
this Chapter with a pretti^ story, which may not be impertinent to show us the
inside of a duty, and what it is that does the work. It is thus related, That
a poor man's field proved very fruitful, it was likely to yield him a very
rich increase; his neighbors envied and reproached him, saying, he was a
witch, and wrought with the Devil, and conjured Plin. lib. 18. cap. 6. ceu
pelliceret venesiciis.
their corn into his ground; Nor did they only say so, but they summoned the
poor man to make his appearance before the Judge, there to answer his
indictment for witchcraft. The man makes his appearance, brings with him a
lusty and strong Wench, his daughter well fed and clad, together with his oxen
well fed too, and strong to labor, with all his implements of husbandry, all
these he presented before the honorable Court: At which sight the Court stood
at amaze. At last the Judge questions the man, Fellow, said the Judge, what
means all this, what makes thy daughter, and thy oxen here, here is nothing
will be said against them. Like your Master-ship said the poor man, a plain
fellow, You must indite Venesicia mea haec sunt: nec possu^ vo^is ostendere
luc^brationes, vigilias, sudores.
these, for these are my witches, all the spirits in sight, that have conjured
my ground; This is my witchcraft. I have brought my daughter here, that I may
tell your goodness, I do not trust servants, nor her neither, no farther than
I can see her. I do my business nesse my self, or see it done; But yet this
is the least part of my witchcraft, I cannot show your learning what my
watchings have been about my ground, when my neighbors were fast in their beds
or loose in the Alehouse: nor what my careful diligence was, early and late,
to keep and maintain my fences about my ground; nor how sweat has furrowed my
brow, and how my spirits have wasted; but these are the spirits which make my
ground fruitful. The application is easy whether we respect the Nation, or a
man This posturing work is more advanced in the Closset than in the Court.
only. These outworks, bodily exercise, outward performance, something they
do toward the strengthening a Kingdom, whereof Ahab and the inhabitants of
Niniveh are great examples: And something they do to make the field of the
Church fruitful. But it is the inward-works, the workings of the Spirit, the
strivings, the wrastlings there, these do the work. It will appear now in the
next Section, for now I am coming to the Good Soldier, to remove the mistakes
about his person, and work, and I will go along with him in his warfare to
his worlds end.

VII. How the Good Soldier beares-up himself above his oppressions.
This Good Soldier is mistaken, his adversaries oppress him, and blaspheme
him daily; how be beares-up himself; and what his consolations are under their
oppressions; and how he answers their blasphemy. We mistake him, and he
mistakes himself: Some mistake about his Armor: We and he are mistaken in his
posturing work; he thought it an impossible work, we think it very possible,
and easy; He rectifies our mistakes touching the chiefest duties of a
Christian.

THis man is a Good Soldier of Jesus Christ; That is enough to tell you, What
he is? he is Body, and goods, and life, and all he is for the Parliament; he
has lifted-up his hand to the most High God, that so he will be, and he will
stand to it; he will stand-up for God, sure, he will spend himself and be
spent for his Lord Christ, who gave Himself for him, washed him in the Laver
or Bath of his Cause, his Truths, his Rights, the Privileges of his Lords
Kingdom: for that is the way, the only way, to maintain the Kings crown,
and the Kingdoms of this world from shattering to pieces. And seeing his Lord
Christ, and the Lord his King, and all the three Kingdoms are concerned here,
the man thanks God heartily, that he has a body, and goods, and a life, all
spared and lengthened out unto him until this time, when he may offer all,
power out all, as his prayers, for such a Cause as this, and for the Governors
of Israel, the maintainers of this Cause; Oh, his heart is toward all them,
and every one that offered themselves willingly. This man is of the Martyrs
mind, Shall I dye but once for Him, that dyed a cursed death for me, to make me
blessed for ever? What no more stripes, no more shame for His sake, who was put
to open shame for me? What no more goods to lose for Him who was made poor,
that he might make me rich?
Now you need not suppose that this man has enemies enough; the broken
University of Oxford, and all the whole Anti-Parliament there, all these are
his enemies, and will do him all the mischief they can; their Court- Rab
shakeh blasphemes him every week, whom he regards no more than the Moon does
the barking of a Dog; he is not afraid of the Beasts of the earth, not he. The
University protests against this man, that if he be a Divine, he shall never
be a Doctor; This man regards their honors no more than Peter did the
money, Their honors perish with them. Act. 8. 20.
they have no dignities for honest men; the higher his deserts are, the lower
his esteem shall be: And if he be a Gentleman, he shall never be a Knight,
etc. for they can command the Kings Sword. Simple fellows, Scholars and no
more? Tell this man of honors, and of their bestowing, whom God has honored.
A right Mordecai he, He came again to the Kings gate, Esth, 6. 12.
the same man at the gate, on horseback, and on foot. A rock indeed, be the
seas raging or be they calm; is there a pleasant Sunshine, or does that wind
roar called Huroclydon, Acts 24, 14. (...), etc. in cp. ad Col. ca. 4. Hom.
10. (...), etc Ibid. Job 38. 31.
this man is, as the rock is, still the same. But the adversaries have
plundered his house, done him all the mischief they can, he is on Gods side,
and they threaten to burn his house too, and if they could they would dig-up
the good man's grounds, put all his earth into baskets, and cart it to Oxford.
This is the great offense now adays; I pray you let me tell you from another
mouth, how this man neglects all this: and then, how he comforts himself under
his pressures. His adversaries, says Chrysostom, would lay load upon his
loins (for he is a Righteous man;) he runs the faster now, and beares-up the
stronger. They would, by their hard dealing, hinder his course; they cannot do
it, it is impossible; why? his course is spiritual in heaven, there his
conversation is; you cannot bind such a Runner, no more than you can bind the
sweet insluences of Pleiades: or loose the bands of Orion. Indeed it is in
vain to storm this man, or to threaten so to do; for, as is said of Joseph,
if the storm increases, and rises high, he as a Pilot rises higher, and
rides securely above all the floods of great waters: there is his security and
his comfort. He has been at Chrysoft in Genesis
a loss, because he would be loyal and obedient; It is not a loss; if the
world call it so, they are mistaken, it brings in an infinite gain. It is not
possible to take a shorter way to be rich, than to be at a loss for Christ:
none feel more sweet experiences of the Lords compendious providence, than
they, who are resolute in their Compendia proviaentia.
obedience: They may safely expect God in His admirable ways of providence,
when they will resolvedly walk in his ways of obedience, when the servants of
the Lord have given glory to God in relying upon His wisdom, power and truth,
they shall find Him employing these for their direction, assistance, and
bringingabout all things to their desired issue: yea above whatever was looked
for, or thought of. None of these things this man is now robbed of could yield
him any comfort but from an influence, through them, from Heaven; This
influence, the adversaries cannot stop no more than they can bind the sweet
influences of the Pleiades or Sun beams; what comforts he had before from
houses, lands, friends, etc. the same the Lord now instills immediately from
himself: and the immediate comforts are the strongest comforts.

That which (to a man unacquainted with Gods dealings) is a ground of utter
despair, the same, to a man acquainted with the ways of God, is a rise of
exceeding comfort: for infinite power and goodness can never be at a loss;
neither can Faith, which looks to that, ever be at a stand: whence it is, that
both GOD and Faith work best alone. There is enough in Religion (if practiced
in power) to beare-up the soul against all imputation laid upon it; It has
this singular grace and pre-eminence in it, that either it guardeth us as an
heavenly shield from all calamities; or else conducteth us safe through them,
and permits them not to be miseries: It either gives honors, promotions
and wealth; or else more benefit by wanting them, than if we had them at will;
It either fills our houses with plenty of all good things, or makes a sallet
of green herbs, more sweet than all the sacrifices of the ungodly. The man
abides now with mecknesse, and waits with patience the time when with his eyes
he shall behold his redeemer, Who lives and is Mighty, Who will, in His
appointed time, repair and make-up all His Churches breaches; will restore
unto them all those years, the locusts have consumed, the canker-wormes and
these caterpillars; will wipe all tears from their eyes; will clear Jacobs
face, so that he shall wax pale no more; will cheer up his heart, that it
shall never droope again. And this appointed time is at hand; when Jacob shall
rejoice, and Israel shall be right glad. And so much to the pressures from the
adversaries hand: and how the servant of the Lord bears himselfe-up under
these pressures: I thought it very useful for these hard and perilous times. I
come now to their blasphemy. What is this fellow? We need not question it, he
is on Gods-side, on the Parliaments side, then he is a Traitor and a Rebel;
so his adversaries belch-out their words, calling him by their own name: Me de
suo nomine vocat. Cic. parad.
The man thanks them very heartily for that; he takes it for a greater honor
than if they should make him a Knight (of the post,) Lord, Earl, Marquess or
the like. A great honor to be vilified, miscalled for Gods Cause, to be
reproached for His sake. So their fathers reproached all the Worthies of the
Lord in all ages: If they were true builders in Gods account, then were they
Rebels and Traitors in the enemies account: Their fathers said as much against
Christ Himself, that the Devil was in Him, He was a Samaritan and had Joh. 8.
48.
a Devil. Indeed this man glories very much in this, that he is as his Master
was, so reproached, so persecuted, so blaspemed. What says he now in way of
answer to these blasphemies? Nothing, he spreads this blasphemy, as the King
the letter, before the LORD; His Lord shall answer it, and so He will; He will
answer it by Himself: for God is blasphemed, and not the man; His grace, His
image upon the man, His actings in the man to and for his God; that, that is
it, the butt and white, at which malice bends her bow, and shootes her arrows,
even devouring words: God must answer this by Himself, for He is blasphemed,
the man will say nothing. The reproach is against his LORD and Master, He will
require it; if there were nothing of GOD in the man, no more than is in his
adversaries, they could agree very well, for then Rebels and Traitors all, and
no offense at all; but God and godliness in the man, there is the butt and
white, God will answer it. And now the man will sit down and mourn for these
his adversaries in his spirit, who, he is verily persuaded, [considering the
season, and clearenesse of light, and malice so apparent in their reproaches,
not against him, but God Himself and His Image upon him, His actings in him)
have blasphemed the HOLY GHOST. He mournes for them, and so he comes off from
that sad and mournful subject, the blasphemer and his blasphemy, And now I
come to the mistakes about this good man.

We are mistaken, and he both, and in extremes all. Sometimes we may think,
that this man so magnified here, and so magnifying his office, is some goodly
man to look upon. No, it may be not, look upon his outward visage, and may be
there is nothing to be desired; he is made so conformable to his LORD once,
that he may be but a contemptible outside now. And so we are quickly
corrected, for thinking of him above what is meet. And now we fall into the
other extreme; though we have not so base and vile thoughts of him as his
adversaries have, such as Goliath had of David, yet our thoughts are too mean
concerning him. But let us remember, that his adversaries conceits, and ours
too, will be corrected one day: It is a point of wisdom to correct them now,
while there is time, and hope; for our conceits hold merely by the tenure of
ignorance, (The adversaries conceit not so) There is council enough in the
sift of Wisdom Wisd. 5.
to correct us all, if we take it seasonably, ponder and consider well of it:
The consideration of those words, will correct our mistakes touching the man,
or nothing will do it, till our mouth come, and endless pains rest and abide
upon us for ever. But whatever our conceits are of Laudanti^us facile credu^us
etiam mentientibis, seu falsus honor ^uvat, etc. Ilier.
him, though they do heighten and lessen fools, who hearken what others say
of them, rather than what their own consciences say, these our conceits of him,
whether high or low, cannot make him conceited of himself: As he does,
touching peace, so much talkedof, and hearkened after now adays, he hearkens
and lissens what GOD says, for He speaks peace: So touching that we call
praise, esteem and account in the world; If he have it from GOD and good men,
he has enough. It is a very small thing with him to be 1 Cor. 4. 3.
judged of man's judgment; He, that judges is the Lord: and all his labor or
ambation is (for he labors as an ambitious man does after honors in the
world) to be accepted of GOD: By the 2 Cor. 5. 9. (...).
grace of God he is what he is; in himself nothing, but all in God; wise in
His wisdom, strong in his strength: And he has nothing he can call properly
his own, but sin: what comeliness he has (his chiefest is as the Churches is,
within Psalm. 44. 13.
, Glorious there) God put it upon him Ezech. 16. 14. Pro. 25. 11. Like apples
of gold with pictures of silver; his zeal shines without, it burns within.
Rev. 4. 10. He receives all from God through Christ; his graces have their
strength and stability in Christ, and so his condition is more stable than
Adams was. 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Whatever grace he has he boasts not, but in GOD, for he has received it: and
all his receipts, he does cast down (as the Elders their Crowns) before Him
that sits upon the throne.

Yet we must note before we leave his person, That this man may be mistaken
about himself; very possible, that his conceit of himself may be too high,
and sometimes too low; too high and exalted above measure through the
abundance God has given him: but then God puts a thorn into his flesh, some
strong masterlike temptation, and down he is brought upon his knees, as Paul
was; then he sees how weak he is, and how little cause of boasting or
exaltation in himself; and now if he glory, he will glory in his infirmities,
that the power of Christ may rest upon him: But he finds it hard to keep-up to
his peg, for now he is too low, he speaks too meanly of grace its self, and
that he should not do of a crust of bread, for it comes from God, opening His
hand: But he has abundance out of Gods treasury, and yet he speaks
murmuringly, as if he had received nothing, and then he cannot be thankful; He
has no grace, not he, no faith, no love, he has received nothing: nothing! he
has the grace of humility, poverty of spirit, he is emptied of himself, he
sees himself to be nothing, and is this nothing? He fears God above many;
loves God above all; and though he says he has no faith (so low he is) yes, he
has, for he clings to his Lord Christ, and cleaves unto Him; and, though he
says he has no interest in his Lord, yet, if you question him at that point,
he will tell you, he will not give away his interest he has in his Lord Christ
(for He is his Heaven) for a thousand worlds. An happy mistake this, yea
glorious A glorious grace humility, which lays a foundation whereon to build
a glorious Temple.
: Yet let the man take heed he does not deal unkindly with his God, and render
himself unthankful for such grace. We know he is thankful for a bit of
bread, lesser than such a poor mercy; how much more for that grace, the grace
of humility, if he has no more? (but where ever there is an emptying grace,
there will be a filling grace,) for this makes the man honorable in Gods
esteem, precious and of high account: Hear what the Lord says to him; Thou,
pressed with tribulation and poverty, do say, Thou art poor; but I say, thou
art rich, for thou possessest all things. Thou do want nothing, because Rev.
2. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 10.
thou know what thou want, and labourest after a supply, as after the
most loveliest thing, more after grace, than glory, so God says. Read again,
This man has overcome the world; and is all for another world, where his Lord
Christ is; Now he reads what follows, he shall inherit all things; and I will
be his God and he shall be my son: Here is enough to correct the mistakes
this man Rev. 117.
has of himself.

What his Armor is and the several pieces of the same, all the III.
world knows, that are not willingly ignorant. That Armor without is not
despised by him, nor neglected: But that, which is not Ephesians. 6.
in sight, which David, coming against Goliath had put on, that makes the man
like flint, and brass, and renders the shocks, and blasts of the terrible ones
against him, as fruitless and harmless, as a puff of wind against a mountain
of brass. It was spoken before, upon all the glory (and he is a great part of
it,) there is a defense; even upon all those, that are, and seek Gods glory;
And see now how confidently he walks, as bold as a Lion; he laugh^ Job. 5. 22.
at the sword, and famine, neither the red horse, nor the pale horse, can
affright him; His heart is fixed trusting in the Lord; And he walks accuratly,
precisely, exactly, according to the line of men, as becomes a man so
protected, so defended, that has a guard of Angels still about him.

A. But makes his adversary no offers upon him?

B. Yes, and more than offers, he buffets him oftentimes, and sometimes, once
or twice, the adversary clubbed him down: but he was quickly up again, and
stood more strongly and kept his watch, and his Armor about him, more
carefully for ever after.

A. But does the man never straggle out of his way, and so from under the eye
of his guard, the Angels of God?

B. No never; I do not mean, that the man keeps still in the same walk; that
he makes no fault, nor turnings at no time; The man has wanderings, and like a
sheep straggles sometimes; but his sheapheard overlookes all this, and looks
him-out; his Lord God beholds him in the way, wherein he walks most constantly,
and would walk steadfastly for ever; He pittieth His servant in his by paths,
and his servant loathes himself because of his wanderings, and scatterings that
way: It is the high way, that this man's soul desires to keep unto, and the
high way of the upright, is to depart from evil; that is his way, and he
keeps his way, and preserves Prove. 16. 17.
his soul, and so he is preserved. A well postured man indeed: how he came to
be so well armed, so meet for defense, and offense; what a labor and work this
is comes now to be considered.

The man was mistaken about this work himself, he was in an IIII.
extreme; he thought it could never be done. We are in another extreme, we
think it is a work quickly done. I intended to be large here, as the matter and
work does require, presuming I might make this the most useful of any thing in
the book: But because it has so much exceeded its proportion, and the common
rates, i will suppress a good part of my meditations, and lay those, I shall
express, as close together as possibly I can, In the order I proposed. 1. This
good soldier thought, that this his posturing work would never be done; he
may think so still, you may say: for, as was said, it is a work still doing,
and never done, not completed till he dies, as we shall hear afterward. But
his meaning is, and his thoughts were, that he should never see the work
brought on-ward to that perfection, as now he sees it, considering what a work
it is: The exalting the Lord Christ in his heart, as Lord there (where He is He
will be a Lord) Thrusting-out or casting-down all the lusts-like-lords there)
he had many lords there till he had one LORD there a: The setting-up the law of
God in his mind, and bringingup his mind thereunto: In two words, the work and
labor is, Multos domiuos habet qui unem non habet. Animae sexum non haben^.
to deny himself, and to take-up his cross, and follow the LAMB wherever he
goes. I shall never be able to do this thought he (this son or daughter, for
neither souls nor Heaven has sexes,) And truly, though this was an hasty
thought, yet very excusable. The man could not tell where to begin his work,
and he can but tell when he shall make an end, whereof anon. At length he
understood by reading; that he must begin with God, seek Him by fasting and
praying, so to bring Him down to him, and his work. This was another work:
oh! how high the work, and how low his spirit! yet that was the way, he must
not leave off following-on to seek the Lord; he must use the means heartily,
and so he did, yet the work was not done. Done! The great work was behind, the
engaging work; the engaging his hand, and heart, and spirit to the Lord, and
against His adversaries, though beloved lusts, as his right eye and arm, yet
he must say to them all, and every one (his own iniquity, and that within his
house or tabernacle Job 11. 14.
) get ye hence Isa. 30. 22.
: I have engaged my heart, espoused my soul and spirit to my LORD CHRIST, He
must have it, get you hence, what have I any more to do with Idols Hosea 14. 8.
? (The Lord heard him speaking this, and observed him) oh how hardly was he
brought-up to this engaging work? The way of the righteous is on-high indeed, a
bringing back the heart from the earth, whereunto it is fallen flat, (and made
all earth till Heaven came into it) and up to God: But up it was brought, and,
like a stone indeed, down again it falls with its own weight. The man can
tell you better than I what stops and pauses he made in this work, what
backslidings (not in heart,) what startings aside (not in spirit,) what
warpings, what declinings! A great while before he could attain to aconstancy,
a fixednesse of spirit; And this he attained-to, not before he discerned
plainly, that his canning his ability was nothing; his strength was to sit
still (that is) seek GOD and His strength, and depend thereon in Gods way, and
never forsake that confidence, for God watches over such a work, so pleasing
in His sight; and He hearkeneth to the desire of them that fear Him: So that
all the stopps, pauses, obstructions, walls, mountains in his way to this
work, did but serve to make this man also more careful, watchful, prayerfull,
spiritfull, hopeful, joyful: For though his warfare be not yet completed,
nor never will be in this world, though all is in expectation, de futuro, and
so runs the promise (my servant shall eat, and drink, and rejoice) yet Gods
grace Isa. 6^. 13, ^4.
is sufficient all this while; He is the Undertaker to complete the man and his
work. And now the man has a good portion in hand, as an earnest-penny, or as a
bunch of grapes, to assure him, the full vintage and harvest in Heaven, where
is a length of eternity, which his thoughts, at the largest extent, cannot
measure: And all that length of -- eternity, the man shall have a full
fruition; of what? that cannot be expressed. But so he has cleared his own
mistakes touching the impossibility of this work. Now if we will ^earken to
him, he will clear our mistakes on the left hand, touching the easiness of
this work: for our conceit is, that the means, (prayer, hearing, reading,
etc.) this man has used to posture himself, are easy. But he will tell us, it
is but a conceit; we are infinitely mistaken: He will show us our mistakes in
order, and correct them, first our mistake touching Prayer.

1. Prayer is no easy work, unless you mean the Bishops work, their
Common Prayer, which they called Divine service. This man cannot acknowledge
any common prayers; nor can he conceive, there is any divinity in these
prayers, that are so called; for first, we must not come before God with common
hands, then not present unto Him common prayers; We dare not present such
prayers to our governors Mal. 1. 8.
. 2. We expect no common-mercies, but such as GOD, Who bestows as a God, uses
to give to His peculiar people: we must not then petition after a common
manner. 3. Common Prayer at the best, can have but a common acceptance: but we
must pray, and labor (...).
in prayer, that we may be accepted of Him. 4. As the Censer without fire was
never isntrumental to remove a plague: so, nor was this common prayer
efficacious for that purpose: for it has no divinity in it; they that look for
divinity in those prayers (these words, in no sober man's construction, can
reflect upon them, that made the prayers; there was, we doubt not, much of God
in them:) but to look for Divinity in this Divine service, argues as much
ignorance as was in those people, who looked for the Moon in the Asses-belly;
Thus it is related, Cum nostra memoria sit populus qui lunam ab asino epotam
crediderit, Ludov. Vives comment. in Aug cap. 16. lib. 10. de Civit.
The reflex and shadow of the Moon was in the water while the Ass was
drinking; presently a cloud over-shadowed the Moon, then the people thought,
the Ass had swallowed-up the Moon; And after they had indicted the Ass, (as
the Papists did the Rats and Mice, for eating their breaden gods) they rippedup
the Asses belly expecting to find the Moon there: He that tells the story
assures us, that he could remember, that such a brutish people there were in
his days, an hundred years ago: And so it might be, for we have Pastors and
people more brutish in our days, who think, that the Spirit and power of God,
is in their Common Prayer, which they call Divine service, and make it an
Idol; as ridiculous every whit as to think, that the Moon was in the Asses
belly. Having cleared that rubb in the way, he proceeds to tell us; That
indeed, reading of prayer is an easy work, for there is no fervency, no power
from Heaven; but praying in prayer, that is labor and work both, a fervent, an
hot work, like the working in metals, and there is power in it, a power from
Heaven, even the spirit of power. I do not say now, that no prayer is a
prayer, that has not all this heat and power in it; I know there are degrees
of heat: And as there were degrees of Psalms, or Psalms of degrees: So there
are degrees of Prayers, and prayers of degrees, some higher, than some; some
more fervent than some, some fuller of spirit than some: But every true prayer
has an height in it, an heat and fervency in it, a power in it, which comes
down from Heaven, and raises the prayer to Heaven, to the bosom of God, else
it is not properly a praying, but a saying (for I date not call it a prating or
babbling) nor will I say, that such ^ livelesse saying of prayers has no
acceptance with Him, who hears the Ravens, but I will say, that such a saying
of prayer, is not a praying in prayer. But so the man prayed, he prayed in
prayer, before he could remove the accursed things: But first of all, which
should be noted first, when first he prepared his heart, and stretchedout his
hands, he put iniquity far away; he cleansed his heart ^ob 11. 13, 15.
from loving and liking of sin: and, what he could, he cleansed his house, he
suffered not wickedness to dwell there; then he liftedup his face without
spot, he is steadfast and does not fear. So little to rectify our mistakes
touching prayer, no easy work. Praising is the highest, the most refined work
of a Christian: I cannot speak a little of it, therefore i will say nothing.

2. Nor is Fasting an easy work, I mean to sanctify a fast. To afflict, not
the body only, but the soul with fasting. What is that? To charge upon the
soul all the national and his personal grievances, his sins the cause of all
this, with the circumstances and aggravations of these sins; to charge them
upon himself, the (Causam sociam) the helping cause of this bloodshed, etc. I
and of the shedding of the Lord Christ His blood too; his sin pierced his
Saviors sides; This is to sanctify a fast; and not to hangdown the head like
a bulrush for a day, that is no fast. 3. Nor to rest and cease from labor: so
the Ox can do, and the Ass; but this is not to sanctify the LORDS Day: This
is it, To keep a day to the Lord so, as to be in the spirit all that day,
having his fellowship with the Father and the Son: not by our will to do our
own wills, nor speak our own words, nor think our own thoughts; to keep as on
the mount, in meditation upon the glorious work of Creation by the Father; and
those admirable ways of Redemption by GOD the SON; this is to sanctify a
Rest; and so our mistake is rectified touching that matter; That that is no
easy work.

4. To hear at home and at Church is an easy work, for it is but the form
and shell of duty, now to hear, and presently as soon as the word has been
sounding in our ears, to talk of our Oxen, and making of furrows, or to ask
what news? this is not hearing, this is provoking the Lord; It is to turn His
Grace into wantonness, not improving the light, not harkening to the voice of
nature; this is an easy work. But to hear with an hearing ear, nay an
hearing heart 1 King. ^. 0.
, to hear so as to chew upon it, consider on it, and to make it sink down,
this is hearing, and an hard work: so to Read with care and endeavor to
understand (else reading is nothing, or as the Parrats prating, but
ridiculous.) To Hear and Read and to profit, there is the Power. These are
distinct things, no easy work. To carry a Library in your brain is no great
matter. But to have, as one had Lectione assidua and meditatione diuturna
pectus suum bibliothecam fecerat Christ. Hieron. li. 2^ Ep. 22.
, a Library in your heart, full of Christ, His Word dwelling there richly, that
is the praise; The head may be full, and the heart empty. You may read and
hear good books, good Sermons, and you may be never the better, the worse
rather: To hear will render you as unclean as those beasts, which did not
chow the Cud; much reading and much hearing without chooing upon it, and
whetting of it upon your heart, is but like much eating and drinking, no
digesting; it clogs the stomach and causes sore sicknesses; I might have been
more brief in so clear a matter, but yet it is a great matter wherein we are
infinitely mistaken; Therefore I will add this also to be considered-on, that
every thing must be done to edification; that must be the end of our Reading,
hearing, singing, speaking, praying; But so to hear, read and sing, that I may
be built-up by it in my most holy Faith, is no easy work: To read, to hear,
so as bring-up my heart to close with it, to yeeld-up its strong holds, to
submit to the law and obedience of it in every thing the word commands or
forbids, even to the cutting off the right arm, or plucking-out the right eye,
the parting with the dearest and sweetest lusts: So to hear as to obey (for
that is hearing indeed) so to hear as to let the Word sink down into the
heart to abide and ingraft its self there; so to hear as to conclude my soul
under it, this is Reading, this Hearing: this is to profit by both.

A. Why but God teaches to profit, and so he says, and you say the man must
do this and that, he must close with the Word, and submit to the Word, and let
it sink down; and I know not what; these are but words, he can do none of all
this, God must work in him the will and the deed.

B. That is true, but it does not follow; Therefore man must do nothing; man
must be doing to, he must stir-up himself to meet the Lord: he must keep
himself in the way and walk of the Spirit, he must raise up his spirit, put
forth all the activitie of his soul; when he comes to read and to hear Gods
Word, he must turn every Word he hears or reads into a Prayer, that God may
bless it to him, and turn every word into Grace; that strength and light of
nature, and reason and conscience, that God has given him, he must use and
improve to the utmost as a faithful steward of that little. I know that man is
nothing, and without Christ he can do nothing; And yet I think I may say, that
man shall not be comdemned for what he cannot do, but for what he could and
did not do, not do, not improving the talent he had. Man is not merely
passive in receiving of the word; a fond conceit, which makes a man lie-still
and sit-still at home and at Church, and turn over the leaves there as a
natural fool does, or as a door turns upon its hinges; Man, I say, is not
merely passive, the Word works upon him, not as Physic in a Basin, or
Glass, but as Physic drunk down, and in his body. The Word is as rain drunk
into the earth, or as meat taken into the body; let the man look what kind of
ground he is, and how his meat does digest; for if not a drop of rain falls in
vain, nor a bit of bread given us in vain, then nor the Word of God sure; it
does the work wherefore it was sent, and therefore the Good Soldier puts forth
all the Activitie of his soul, all his power; he reads and he hears to
profit; he reads and hears that he may be an infinite gainer; he has taken in
all the Word of God, and it is a dweller with him, that was his end, therefore
he reads and hears, that the Word of God may dwell with him and richly in all
wisdom. And Col. 3. 18.
as his riches are great that way, so he lays them out as liberally teaching
and admonishing others as he has occasion; He is one of the plain^st
Commentaries upon the Scriptures that is in the world; ^he plainest, I say, for
others comment upon it by writing, he by living; he expounds it by his feet,
and teaches it by his fingers ends, the best Exposition, the best teaching in
the world, for he teaches by Example. A lively Text man, for the Word of God
is legible in Text letters all his life over I pray you read Mr Caryls
Exposition upon Job, page 3.
; A blessed thing when our Ministers can see our Hearings, and behold our
Readings in our walkings and conversations amongst them! But this they shall
never see till they have persuaded with us, their hearers, to go home and
meditate on what we have heard, and so to whet it upon our selves, and ours:
for if so be we do after our manner, so soon as we go forth the Church
doors, we talk of Oxen, and making of furrows, or asking after news, we
think not of what we heard, then there is a moral impossibility Our
Ministers knowing what our manner is, what a Liberty our Bishops gave us; and
the terror of the Lord, will press this upon us, and endeavor mightily to
prevail with us touching this matter.
that ever we should profit by what we have heard or read.

A. You have well advised us touching Hearing and Reading; but indeed we know
not whom to hear, nor what to read: for besides our own observation, A loyal
Convert (turned over lately out of Litchfields press in Oxford) has told us
that most of our Teachers and people to, are Anabaptists, Brownists,
Separatists, Atheists, Antinomians, Turks.

B. Do not you know that the Scholars of Oxford are past all shame? Let the
world judge, if there be Atheists in the world, Antinomians (men that set
themselves against the law) or Turks in England, whether these are not in
Oxford on that side: and whether that poore-Schollar be not one of them, hoping
to get preferment that way, let all the world judge. Yet we do grant that we
have Atheists amongst us, for we have some here that stand for the
Anti-Parliament there. And Antinomians also: for, if against the Parliament,
they are against all laws too. Indeed some there are that are called by that
name amongst us, who, I am verity persuaded, understand the Law and Gospel
better then he or I do; and then they cannot but approve the one, and embrace
the other heartily: some also there are, that are honored with that name, and
yet are very ignorant of both Law and Gospel; But we hope, not willingly, much
less wilfully, ignorant: and therefore there is hope, they will see their
error, and amend it shortly, now that so clear lights shine forth before them.

And now we have but three Sectaries remaining with us; But grant him his
saying, that there be six, nay, sixteen, yet this is no wonder. Epiphanius,
says Mr Jewel, rehearseth-up fourscore sundry heresies; and Augustine many
more, which sprang-up even together with the Gospel: what then says he, was
the Gospel Apol. 3. p. Cap. 2. d. 1.
therefore not the Gospel, because heresies sprang up withal? or was Christ
therefore not Christ? or was Christ and His Gospel the cause of these heresies?
No sober man will say so, this rather, that this is a great argument of our
Part, that this same doctrine, which we teach, is the very Truth of the Gospel
of Christ: for neither is cockle wont to grow without the wheat; nor yet the
chafe without the corn: I Will read on in Mr Jewels words, for so he answered
his adversaries then, so we now, the objection is the same, the answer must be
the same, That the world sees now right well, thanks be given to our God, that
we have neither bred, nor taught, nor kept-up these monsters: And you must
believe us in all this, if you will read our books (those that go with
license to the Press) or hear our Sermons. I should say more, but this may
suffice and satisfy every sober man; yet the admonition is good, Take heed
what you hear Mark 4. 24.
; Take heed how you hear Luke 8. 18.
. And let all your gains and In-comes by your Hearing and Reading be expended
and laid forth in your life and conversation. Amen. I proceed.

5. It is an easy matter to do after our manner, throng-in to the Table of
the Lord, there to partake of those Tremenda mysteria, the signs of the Body
and Blood of the Lord: But so to come as the Good Soldier comes, To receive
virtue thence, To take and eat by Faith, this commands a great work of
examination before hand, what brokennesse of heart I bring thither? what
strength of love? what life of Faith?

6. In the last place, to covenant with the Lord, to lift up the hand, to
subscribe our name, it is but the outside, the carcass, the bodily exercise of
the duty and profits little, and is easily done; But to lay the soul under
sacred bands, to engage the heart to God, that the man will be wholly the
Lords, wholly for His work, His service, All his actings shall be to His Lord,
and for Him, do any thing, suffer any thing, be any thing or nothing, so his
LORD may have the glory; Liberty nothing to this man; Riches nothing; life not
accounted of, for the man is nothing, he is not his own; he is wholly for and
laid-out for his God: An hard work to bring-up the heart to this. To what? why
to live in another, to speak and to act in another, and for another; to be all
for another and nothing for himself, to refer all to God, to receive all from
God, and to be in a man's self nothing at all: It is a costly work, but he has
sworn to it, he has lifted-up the hand; and subscribed the name: As the beast
to the horns of the Altar, he has bound himself to God with full purpose of
heart, that he will be his LORDS servant, all for his LORD. Amen. And this may
suffice to show the nature of these works.

CHAP. VIII.
S^c^nesse, Deaths H^rbinger and Death its self are known enemies to nature,
and the Conquer^urs of this world: yet this Good Soldier is more than
conqueror over both, which is m^d^ plain by a distinction the Sacred
Scripture makes betwixt sickness, Death and Death.

THis man has brought God down to his soul, and he has brought-up his soul
to God, engaged to Him: And he has, (and he has all things, for he has God
(...) (i. e.) All things, Genesis 33. 11.
,) he has in his Lord Christ's, there is his confidence, and the stabilitie of
his graces: And all he has, he layes-out for Christ, that is his duty: as all
his actings are to Him, so are they for Him; An happy man indeed! he is out of
the reach of his Adversaries, the evil of sickness, the Power of death cannot
reach him, is not able to hurt him. We suppose now, and yet that we need not
do, for it is an uncontroleable Truth, That weakness, weariness, and
faintness is that SQVIRE of the Body, which still attends nature: And this
man, though he may bear it out for a time, and think to wrestle with this
Squire, yet he must yield to it anon, take-his-bed, as we commonly say,
lye-down there, tumble-upon it, turning-on this side toward his friends, they
cannot help him; then on the other side toward the wall, as the good King
before him, and prayed 2 King. ^0. 2^.
. But all this while, this man is not sick. It is a Paradox against all conceit
and reason, a very riddle, I know, but we shall easily read it, if we will read
the Scriptures, and as these direct us, distinguish of sickness; There is
sickness full of wrath: A sickness full of comfort. This is very
considerable; of infinite use, therefore I must infist upon it.

There is a sickness full of wrath, And wrath with his sickness Eccles. 5. 17.
Ah Lord! now it is a sickness indeed: The Lord deliver us from that sickness
wherein is wrath, for that is to be delivered from al^ evil. Wrath makes it a
sickness, a pure sickness, for therein is wrath; It is not the pain of the
head, nor of the stomach, nor of the heart, which makes it a sickness: No, no;
It is wrath that makes it a sickness; Wrath! The Lord deliver us from it, for
it makes health a sickness, eating, drinking, playing, sporting, but a
sickness, all these; Mark the words, All his days also he eats in
darkness. Darkness! what is that? It follows, Much sorrow. The man indeed
feels not the sorrow, he is jocund and merry, but the more sign of more
wrath, which he shall feel anon in his month Jer. 2. 24.
, when pains come upon him, then he shall say, I am sick; for he feels wrath
with his sickness; Wrath was upon him before, when he was eating, drinking,
sleeping, God was angry with him every day, (all his days, he did eat in
darkness, says the Text) Psalm. 7. 11.
he was not sensible of this till now his day, and month is come, now he is
sick indeed, for he has wrath with his sickness. Indeed we should not pass
over this lightly, but I must proceed when I have given the sum only of what
I should have spoken, which is this, 1. Wrath with a mercy, be it health,
peace, all outward prosperity, makes all but a sickness: 2. Love, the will of
a heavenly Father with sickness, weariness, faintuesse, with war, and all
outward molestations, and inward troubles, makes all healthy, sound and well.
That is the sum, the use is this, To put every man upon this work in the
conscionable use of all means, while health is, and yet his month is not come,
whereby to pacify wrath: if he be not careful this way with all his care,
then thus it will be when his month comes, and his eyes be open; then not only
every griping in his sickness, but all that he called health, and all he did
in his health, will come unto his remembrance with a sense, and relish of
wrath: Therefore use all means to pacify wrath. And so I come to the other
sickness full of comfort, this good man's sickness the Love of God, the face
of God upon this man fills his heart top full with comfort: Though pains be
upon him, and a sore sickness, yet he will not say, I am sick.

A. But may not God withdraw His face from this man, even at such a needful
time?

B. Yes, that he may, for a night, and the man may apprehend wrath in it, and
that apprehension makes it a long night: but joy comes in the morning,
abundantly recompencing that nights sorrow. God will not plead against his
servant with His great power: No, but He will put strength in him Job 23. 6.
.

A. May not this man have a great distemper upon him, such as may make him
watch his opportunity to knock his head against the bed^sted? so I think I have
observed it.

B. Possible so, and such may be the distemper of his disease; but yet the
spirit is not out of frame; And now his friends will look to him sure; and
suddenly the fit will be over, and then the man is himself, and asks his
friends, (jealons of his behavior) whether he did speak unadvisedly with his
lips? No said they, and they said very true, for it was his disease, not the
man. And the man is very joyful at this. Oh said he, for so I have known it
to be, I would say nothing that might dishonor my God.

A. I but the man may be ground to pieces with a keen and cutting stone in his
reins. (...). Chrysostom. in Cap. 18. Matthew.


B. May be so, and yet no wrath in this. It is the will of his GOD, the love of
his heavenly Father, so to exercise His son or daughter for a minute; the love
of a Father, no wrath in all this.

A. But the man has a loathsome disease upon him, that we call Seeming mercies
are plagues when they come from wrath: And seeming plagues are mercies when
they come from love: said the Preacher, who gives forth the whole mind of God
in the Scriptures, and his words by weight. Mr Marshall. Text Numb. 25. 11.
April 22
the plague.

B. True, but not a plague to him, no plague in that house, whatever we see
upon his door, or tokens upon his body, yet no plague there, if wrath be not
there. Put it down and conclude thy soul under this truth, That where is,
there is a plague; Where no wrath, no plague: If wrath be pacified, the plague
is gone; If wrath be not pacified, the plague remains, be it sword, famine,
pestilence, or wild beasts: from hence this is the result, Talk ye of Peace
till your tongues are wearied, there can be no peace so long as wrath is not
appeased; but appease wrath, and then peace indeed, Peace, peace, whether you
respect a nation or a man only.

A. But this man's acquaintance may be removed from him; Because of his sore
disease, like a leprosy, a separating sickness, he may be alone, and none ^o
comfort him.

B. Not possible, granting still, that there is no wrath. None to comfort him!
said you; God speaks comfortably to him, never so comfortably as now, now all
are gone from him; now he feels the greatest comforts, the strongest
consolations: God comforts Isa. 66. 13.
him now, as one, whom his mother comfort (oh how does a mother comfort her
sick child!) so will I comfort you, and you shall be comforted. Ai, for his God
undertakes for His servant; his God will comfort him, it is not possible he
should say now; I am sick^

A. Not sick! his head aches, and stomach aches, and back aches, and his heart
aches, and yet says he not, I am sick!

B. No; The Inhabitants shall not say, I am sick, for his iniquity is forgiven
Isa. 33. 24.
: There is the point, wrath is gone, sin, that causes wrath, that is forgiven;
his flesh and his heart, those fail him, but God does not fail, He is the
strength of his heart, and ^sal. 73. 26.
his portion for ever. And now I come to that we must all come to, death; we
can pull-out the sting of it quickly, if it be as quickly done as said; Then we
must distinguish of deaths also, There is a killing death; and there is a
quickening death.

A killing death; wherein a man at once, dies twice, dies a second death; dies
once, and dies ever; ever dying and never dead, a killing death. The sacred
Scripture assures us it is so; They are dead, they shall not live Isa. 26. 14.
: they are deceased, they shall not rise. What is this? I cannot express how
terrible it is, It is a dying for ever, or a living for ever in the mouth and
jaws of death; A living in death for ever, a continuing not in the shadow, but
in the darkness of death for ever, for the morning Star shall dawne upon
him, nor the Sun arise: A darkness, where he shall never see the day, a
perpetual, an everlasting night. There is another Scripture as terrible, I
will kill her children with death Rev. 2. 23.
, who shall be so killed? is cleared from the context, that woman Jezabell, as
mischievous to the Christian Church as she was to Israel; That woman, and her
children, her and her disciples, who have drunk-in the wine of her
sornications, she and they shall be Killed with Death; Killed. with Death! It
is very terrible, God may open upon the mother and her children His Armory Jer.
50. 25. ^ Hose. 9. 13. Cruent is caedi^^^. Jun.
, she may bring forth her children to the sword, to be eaten-up with famine,
consumed with the pestilence; devoured with wild beasts, as now a days, and
yet not killed with death. To be killed with death, is, when death seizes upon
the woman and her children, gnawes on them for ever, they shall dye and never
dye; perish utterly, and never perish, they shall fall by death into an ocean
of misery, like a millstone, and there be killed with death, such pains as are
unconceiveable; and, which is the killing indeed, the Hell indeed, everlasting
pains, which makes every day of pain (if there were any day in Hell) an
eternal night of misery. It is a killing death, when every minutes pains, has
the sense of eternity in them.

2. There is a quickening death; Thy dead men shall live Isa. 26. ^^.
: death is no death to them, life rather; It comes unto the godly swallowed-up
in Christ his death (I think I may apply it so) that they may have life, and
have it in abundance Job. 10. 10.
. There is a short controversy marvellously carried in a full contrariety of
words, but meeting in a point of an eternal truth; The controversy was
concerning the Rulers daughter: The LORD CHRIST said of her, she is not dead
Mat. ^. 24.
: The standers by laughed Him to scorn, for says St Luke, they knew she was
dead Luke 8. 53.
: dead and yet not dead, a truth in both; she was dead to nature, alive to
Christ, Who is the resurrection and the life: the body is not dead to Him.

There are two other expreslions very notable; He shall not see death, nor taste
death; he sees it not as a conqueror, a king of tenrours, but conquered,
unstinged, spoiled, and led-captive: he looks upon as old Jacob upon his sons
wagons; or the Prophet upon his fiery chariot, so he looks upon death. He
tastes not of death, no wrath there; It is wrath, the killing with death, that
is the gall of Aspes; but now the wrath is gone; The man said before, I am not
sick, for my fin is pardoned, and all wrath taken away; And now he is sick
indeed, Sick of Love; It is the will of his heavenly Father, that his sickness
must unto death, and a fruit of His rich and abundant love through his Lord
Christ, by His Spirit, that he should neither see death, nor taste it, but see
death swallowed-up in Isa. 38. 17. Chashak^^.
life and immortality; Indeed he is sick of love, for the Lord has loved his
soul from the pit: His loving kindness was better than life to this man all
his life long; what it is unto him now at his death cannot be expressed; but
you shall hear his Song of Loves.

VIII. The good Soldiers Triumphant Song.
THis man is (supposed) now ready to breath out his soul into the bosom of his
Father; the time of his departure is at hand; his work is done; he has fought a
good fight, he has finished his ^ Tim. 4. 6.
course, kept the faith: He has nothing to do now, but to die. And that was
his care all his life long, To set all his house, and goods there, body and
soul and all in that order, that he might have no cumber, nothing at all to
trouble him, in that hour of temptation, no other work to do then but to dye.
He has but one Song to sing now, which, though his body be weak he can sing in
the spirit: When he had strength of body, he sang all David's Maschills, Psalms
to give instruction; all his mictams, those precious songs therein recording
the rich mercies, and the abundant loving kindness of his God: And then he
asked his soul, what will thou render unto the LORD for all these? And then he
resolved upon it, to praise his God while he had any being: Then he sang the
Psalms, to call to remembrance; then when he was lively and Psalm. 38. 70.
strong he chanted-forth the 30, 31, 32, 103, and 116, 120, and so to the end
of the book of Psalms; all these he has sung with rejoicing: Now he has but
one Psalm to sing, and it must be very short, he will lengthen it out in
Heaven, as long as eternity is long, for ever. Now he lifts up his body, if
it be not too stiff, and heavy; and his eyes, if he can, if he cannot, his
spirit is willing, and the spirit carries forth the voice, when the tongue
moves not; O my soul, exalt, magnify the Lord thy God, He remembered thee,
when thou wast nothing; regarded thee in thy low estate; when thou wast in thy
blood, worse than nothing, then He called thee, said to thee, live, live; then
He washed thee with clean waters, a dorned thee, took a way thine iniquity,
transgresson and sin, forgave all thine iniquities, healed all thy diseases;
redeemed thee out of all adversity; held thee in life, kept thy feet from
falling. Come Lord Jesu, faithful and true, whom I have trusted; I have
committed my soul into thy hands, for thou have red^emed it LORD God of truth.
His last words. And now his warfare is ended, and he completed; In the very
point of his dissolution, he is made perfect. Now he is where he conversed on
earth, and delighted to be even where his love, his joy is, with His Lord
Christ blessed for ever, Rev. 22.
(He was his Heaven upon earth, and is his Heaven now;) and with the Saints of
light, singing together the song of Moses, and the Lamb, Hallelujah for ever
and ever.

Let my way be as this man's way; my course as his course, my life as his life;
then my end shall be like his, and the recompense of reward the same, Amen. So
be it. Amen and Amen.

A Postscript to the honest hearted Reader.
THree sheets of paper (for I must not call it a Book, that has neither truth
nor reason for its patrons) were this very hour put into my hand, called A
Loyal Convert. The scrible is stuffed with the highest Treason, horrible
treachery, abominable blasphemy, the basest flattery, vilest compliancy, with
willing and wilful ignoranc^, all these, all throughout. Take it apart; The
Epistle first is proud, lofty and insolent; his own, who knows nothing as he
ought to know, and his own heart worst of all. The following papers have
attained their scope; To gainsay reason; To cross sense. To blaspheme God and
His Scriptures, His King and His people, all the Kingdom over. The Malignants
applaud it, every one says; No doubt of that, and the fairest Argument that
the scribble and the scribe is as brutish as themselves are, I call God to
record upon my soul, That the Epistle and the scope of the following pages, is
as I have in short declared it to be: And that (...). Ephesians. 4. 14.
I have so done for this only reason, That unstable souls, who are carried
with every wind, like strawes or leaves in Autumn, (many, every where) may not
be beguiled with Paralogismes, Oxfords wild Sophistry now adays,

A. But here is no Answer you will say, where as the silly Scholl^r has Ob. and
An. all along his papers.

B. He has indeed, but his Objections are as silly and ridiculous as are his
Answers: Yet while was any hope, by braying she fools, to get out their folly,
these their Arguments, such as they are, has answer after answer from Scripture
and Reason both; But seeing he will be a fool still; will bring old and worn
Arguments, with blasphemies to boot, we have our command doubled, answer him
not: To what purpose should they be answered, who will acknowledge no other
God, but their King; no other wor^^ip^ but what is in their Service Book: who
will not see the right hand of the Lord lifted-up now [though never more
gloriously since the day He was lifted-up from the earth, as it is now, and all
these years, since the Parliament sat:] And can see nothing ^ all, with all
their eyes, wrought by the contrary party, but through the depths of Satan, and
treacheries of his Angels, right men for Pessimum est qutoquid agitur a
desperantibus. P^in. (...)
honor, unless they can overcome God himself, and thrust the Lord Christ out
of his throne: no answer to these men. But one word more to the honest hearted
reader; who may be taken w^^ such silly stuff, he met with in the
forement^^ned; he may b^^ little transported beyond his own principles of
nature and right reason: Hardly possible, yet possible; Then let him read
Allegiance not Impeached; I assure him upon the word of a Christian if he be
not willingly ignorant, The reading that book, will (...) the man to his right
mind again, and keep him close to right principles for ever.

FINIS.

