Church Members SET IN JOINT.

OR, A Discovery of the unwarrantable and disorderly practice of private
christians, in usurping the peculiar Office and work of Christ's own Pastors,
namely PUBLIC PREACHING.

In way of Answer to a Book printed under the name of Lieutenant Edmund
Chillenden (but indeed none of his) entitled Preaching without Ordination.

Wherein all the Arguments by him produced, are fully Answered and disproved,
the truth of the contrary evidenced, and the Office forementioned, thereby
returned into the hands of the right owners.

By Filodexter Transilvanus.

Heb. 5. 4. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron.

Jer. 23. 21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken
to them, yet they prophesied.

Matthew. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

London, Printed for EDMUND PAXTON, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
chain, over against the Castle Tavern near to the Doctors Commons. 1648.

To all the faithful in Christ Jesus, and all other my Countrymen, who may
chance at any time to be Readers of this Book.
BRETHREN,
MY hearts desire and prayer to God for you all is, that you may be saved, and
that you may be rooted and established in the faith of that Christ and Gospel
which you have received, and by which also you are saved, if you continue
steadfast unto the end, and be not removed from him that has called you into
the grace of Christ, to give ear to seducers and false prophets, who pervert
the Gospel of Christ, and subvert the faith of many. Questionless the days
are come upon us, of which our Savior has foretold us long ago, that many
false prophets shall arise, and deceive many; yea (if it were possible) the
very elect themseles: who may therefore the more abundantly rejoice in this
confidence that God will keep them by his own power through faith unto
salvation; when they shall perceive themselves planted upon a rock that is
higher then the gates of hell, stronger then the rain and tempests that
assault them: by the power of which they are enabled to stand, even in such
times as these (which are the worst of times) when so many hundreds fall on the
right hand and on the left. Amongst many other means which God (J doubt not)
will teach you to make use of for your continuance in the faith: the matter of
this ensuing Treatise gives me occasion to speak of one, which is a high
prising of and diligent attendance upon the ministry, ^he word: that word I
mean which is preached by those who are sent of God and this Church for the
same purpose. In my short experience I have observed that the Devils grand
design for the raising of his own Kingdom, has been in all ages to hinder
the efficacy and authority of the publik Ministry. In the days of
Antichristian darkness there was either no preaching at all, or none but that
which was delivered in a strange language, by which the people received no
benefit. In latter days, under the Prelates tyranny here in England, what
stone was left unrolled to discourage and undermine the most saithsull, holy
and learned ministers: either by withholding from them a competent maintenance
(whiles many a profane superstitious dotard and dumb dog had more then
enough) or by injoyning an ungodly compliance to humane and antichristian
inventions, Ceremonies, Oaths, Subscriptions, etc. which their consciences
could not away with: Hence many professors made it the greatest part of their
religion, and made this their rest, even to go up and down, to hear Sermons,
and speak against those (persons or things) that were the occasion of muzling
the mouths of so many of Gods messengers. In these days the door is opened
so wide, that who so will, may now take upon him that high and holy calling,
and under pretense of preaching the Gospel, vent privately and publicly all
manner of untruths, and because they cannot raise themselves to that high pitch
of preferment which they aim at, as long as godly Ministers bear witness
against them both in Pulpits and Presses: therefore they possess their
Proselites with all the prejudice they can against their Ministers, either
their calling is Antichristian, or they are men of an Old Testament spirit, or
(at best) they are Black-coats. Hence many, who have acknowledged often with
much comfort that God had made their Minister instrumental, not only to turn
them first unto God, but to build them up in faith, and knowledge and all
grace, and have formeriy loved them so dearly that they could even have pulled
out their eyes to have done them good: yet now they disfrequent their company
and their Ministry: and lay themselves open thereby to all manner of
Temptations and delusions: and the farther they fall away, the higher they
raise up themselves in their own esteem, giving forth that they are all
taught of God: and hence they take upon them desperately to broach all manner of
proud Atheistical conceits; one questions whether there be any Heaven or Hell,
or any Resurrection from the dead: another thinks himself to be as good a
Christ as Christ the Lord, and does not fear to say that the Godhead is as
much in him as it was in Christ, etc. whose distemper is the more despreate
because the nature of it is to admit of no remedy. In the midst of this
confusion whether shall we fly? The Land is become like some deep pit in a
wilderness into which are fallen Toades, Mice, Frogs Serpents and all manner
of vermin, and there they bite and devour one another: Religion is turned into
a very gallimafra of errors and heresies, and each heresy brands all other
doctrines with the name of Heresy, besides it self. The wise and eternal God
which made the world out of a Chaos, and brought light out of darkness, in his
rich mercy bring light and order out of this dismal hellish confusion, and let
all that love the Truth say Amen.

In order to which end I have under-taken in this ensuing Treatise according to
the ability I have received, to make forth this truth against Chillenden and
all his followers, that there is no ground either in reason or Scripture for
private persons, though never so well gifted, to preach publicly unless they
be thereto caled by the Church: intending shortly (if God permit) to prove
positively from the Scriptures that preaching is a work peculiar to
Church Officers. And before the Reader peruse the Treatise it self, I shall
desire him to take notice of these two particulars.

1. That all the arguments which I have here undertaken to answer, are stolen
out of a Book of Robinsons (the famous Separatist) entitled The peoples plea
for prophesying. I believe Chillenden would be content that the child should be
divided; for if it be wholly given to the right father, upon my credit
Chillenden must have no part in it.

2. I have not taken notice of many places of Scripture written in the margin,
but of those only to which he does expressly refer his Reader: partly
because they are very unequally ascribed, not parallel to the line to which
they refer; and partly because most of them are places from which he borrows
words or phrases occasionally mentioned, nothing at all pertaining to the maine
scope; many other things of less consequence I have passed over, but nothing
of moment as I know of. Farewell.

F. T.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

An Answer to a Book entitled Preaching without Ordination.
THe Lieutenant, before he comes to speak a word to the Question by himself
propounded in the forefront of his Book, viz. Whether men may Preach except
they be Ordained: premiseth many things to consideration, which are neither of
any necessary dependence upon each other: nor of any use imaginable, either to
the clearing and well stating of the Question, or to the confirmation of his
own opinion touching the Question. For which reason I shall not now retreat so
far from the business in hand, as to make an incursion upon his praecognita
(things which neither of us are concerned in, as to this present controversy:)
but shall there begin to answer where he begins to make good his undertaking,
after he has brought about the Question (as it were by countermarch) into its
former place, and applies himself to the proof of the affirmative; namely,
that it is lawful for a person not ordained to Preach. Thus far only I
shall follow him, as to make use of his method in premising some few Positions
for the better stating of the Question between him and me.

First then I cannot but take notice that every one of his stolen Arguments,
whereby he labors to evince the lawfulness of preaching without Ordination,
are of equal force to prove the lawfulness of preaching without the Churches
choice and approbation: the thing wherein himself and others of his way do
place the very essentials and vitals of a minister, as to any outward call, as
may be seen in his positions Page 2: and 3. and then to what purpose is a
Liberty of Choosing their Minister given to every particular congregationall
Church, as the thing whereby he is made a minister: seeing every private gifted
Christian, eo ipso because gifted, may take upon him to preach publicly though
neither ordained nor yet Chosen by the Chruch? for such an intrinsicall
connection does this Author make between gifts and preaching, that, if his
Arguments be sound there need not intervene so much as the Chruches Election,
nay farther, not so much as a trial of those ministerial gifts and
qualifications which himself acknowledges to be requisites before a person be
ordained, These. 6. 2. I desire the Reader to take notice, that when we preach
for Ordination as a thing requisite to a Preacher, we are to be understood
according to the Analogy of these following advertisemntes.

1. That by Ordination we mean an act of the Church, whereby a person is
solemnly set apart for the dispensation of the word, Seals and Censures, by
way of peculiar office: we do therefore at this time wave all disputes about
the persons ordaining, and all other rites and circumstances pertaining to
Ordination.

2 Preaching we take in the strictest sense for an explication and application
of the Word of God with all authority, to the information, exhortation, reproof
or comfort of them that hear.

3 We acknowledge it a duty incombent upon all Christians (whether eminently
gifted or no) even the least and meanest, to reprove, exhort, in struct and
comfort one another, as occasion shall be offered, in away of love, and of
equal and mutual interest, as members spiritually of one another, and heirs
together of the kingdom of life.

4 In a Church that has not its complete constitution and organization (which
Chillenden Calls a Church not perfectly brought under Gospel order) or in other
Cases of absolute necessity: we admit in reason of a liberty for private gifted
Christians to preach the word: though the Scripture has neither any particular
precept for it, nor clear pattern of it, as I know of. Yet in no case can it
be allowed that any private Christian (though never so well gifted) shall take
upon him to preach to any Church, unless he have at least the election and
approbation of that Church: which we suppose to be a sufficient outward call,
when the Churches condition is (as it may be) such, as that it is morally
impossible to have a better. Jus divinum positivum, cedit juri divino naturali,
when they are inconsistent each with other.

5 If any Christian has others in subjection under him, he has thereby
authority to instruct, reprove and exhort them out of the word of God. Men were
made immediately for God, immediately for one another, or for one another in the
Lord. Religion has the command of all men's faculties, conditions, and actions,
to refer and order them immediately to Gods glory, that the whole man may live
wholly unto God He must therefore live unto God in respect of his power over
others: that is, his power over others must be ordered and improved to Gods
glory, else he lives not wholly to God; Hence we grant, that a father or master
in his family may instruct, exhort and command his children and his household
to do justice and judgment. A King or Magistrate in the Commonwealth may
exhort and command his subjects to the general duties of Religion. For
Religion refers all power to a Spiritual end. But some power is immediately
Spiritual, as the power of the Ministers of the Gospel, the immediate end or
object whereof is the Spitituall good of their people. Other power is more
remotely Spiritual, which though it ames at Spiritual good, yet it attaines
it not but by the intervention of that power which is immediately Spiritual v.
8. The Magistrate ought to look to the spiritual good of his people,
therefore he may command them to give diligent attendance to the Word preached
and to practice according to what is taught, and may make use of many
perswasives and dissuasives as he thinks fit, which is as much as any of the
Kings of Israel ever did in any of their instructions or public exhortations
to their people. The like may be said of all other power, domestique or
military. These things being premised, the truth I shall undertake to defend
against Mr. Chillenden, is this,

That it is utterly unlawful for any Christian whatsoever, gifted or not
gifted, to take upon him ordinarily to Preach the Word in the name of the Lord
with all authority before the Church publicly assembled, unless he be called
and set apart thereto by the Church. Hereof I might bring proof sufficient:
but my war is at this time defensive, not offensive. Let us therefore try
what strength our adversary is of.

Having therefore first supposed that Churches have power to choose, yea and to
Ordain (which is false) their own Officers, he inferres thus.

Chill. If the Church have power, it must be granted that first there must be
a Church having this power, before there can be any Officers rightly ordained.
Therefore, if men may not Preach before they be ordained, how can men be
completed to the Faith and order of the Gospel?

Answ. The meaning of this Argument I suppose is this, the Church is before the
Minister. The Church is called by the Preaching of the Word; therefore some who
were no Ministers ordained, must necessarily be supposed to be Preachers; for
without preaching no Church; and without a Church no ordained Officer. I list
not now to take notice of every error, only in reference to the present
controversy, I answer, 1. The eldest Church had a Minister before it, as every
effect has its Cause before it; The first Churches were gathered by the
Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists; who were men ordained and sent of God for
that purpose, John 5. 16. And being gathered, were by the Apostles themselves
commended to the care and watchfulness of ordinary Elders, Act. 20. 17, and
28. Who were persons, not only gifted, but ordained, Act. 14. ^3. Tit. 1. 5.
that through the hand of God going along with them, Churches might be edified,
increased, multiplied, unto the worlds end, Ephesians 4. 13. In succession of ages
there has been succession of Churches, and succession of Elders; but both the
one and the other miserably corrupted and defaced in the common deluge of
Antichristianisme. The way of Elders entering into their Office, we acknowledge
to have been corrupt in all its circumstances, yet for the substance valid: as
Caiaphas his entering upon the Priesthood in such an irregular way, was
unallowable, yet being entered, it stood, and God himself, did not withold from
him a Spirit of Prophecy, in the time of his Priesthood, which was a common
sign of confirmation given unto men that were called to any weighty and
public Office in Israel. But I perceive Chillenden ascribes not much to this
Argument, and therefore I have reason to say but little to it, especially
because learned men (such as Mr. Rutherford and others) have said so much to it
in their late writings upon the controversies of these times.

Chill. Chil. His second Argument in a word is this. It is lawful for a man
that intends the Ministry, to Preach before he is ordained, for trial. Ergo
to Preach without Ordination is lawful.

Answ. Ans. It is lawful without all question for a man that intends the
public Ministry to Preach for trial before them that are to judge: but from
hence to infer, that every private man of what condition soever, who has no
purpose nor inclinations to apply himself wholly and only to the work of the
Ministry, may thrust himself upon a course of constant preaching publicly,
before the Church, without reference had to any trial or judgment concerning
his abilities, is wild reasoning. A man that Preaches for trial is supposed to
be called thereunto by the Church, by virtue of which call (if he accept of it)
he is a Minister in fieri, though not in facto esse, and may therefore lawfully
perform those actions which tend to complete him in the execution of that
charge which he is entering upon: all Ministerial actions he may not perform,
unless he be Ordained (for ordination is that which gives complete
Ministerial power) nor yet this single act of Preaching can he perform, with
such authority, and confidence of Gods assistance, as after he is ordained, as
1 Timothy 4. 14. For his Call being but imperfect, it can give him but an
imperfect power: how beit whatsoever actions are conducible to the end of his
Call (which is to give testimony concerning his abilities for the Ministry)
those he may perform, till by Ordination his Commission be enlarged, and
extended to all Ministerial actions. The sons of the Prophets were wont to
exercise their Prophetical gift, before they were generally received and
acknowledged as Prophets. 1 Samuel 10. 5. 2 King. 2. 7. etc. The Apostles and 70
Disciples whom Christ sent forth, Luke 10. 1. and Matthew. 10. might do, and did
many things by virtue of that Commission which then Christ gave them: yet those
things which he gave them in their last Commission as Apostles, John 20. they
neither did nor might do when they were first sent out; their Call did not
reach to it. So a man that intends the Ministry and is called to give trial
of his gifts, may Preach in reference to that end, (which another may not)
though he may not administer the Sacraments, nor yet make a continual trade of
Preaching.

Chill. But (says Chillinden) if a man may Preach one Sermon, why not two,
then why not twenty? And if one month, why not twelve months?

Because the Churches calling of him to Preach for trial being a transient
action, having order and reference to Ordination, as a more pefect and
completing action, cannot imprimere indelebilem Characterem as Ordination
does. My meaning is, it does not, nor cannot convey an habitual power of
Preaching, because it is not the ultimate and last action that does complete a
man in his Ministerial Office. 2 It exceeds the end of this Call, which is
supposed to be this, namely to give a testimonial concerning his faculty in
preaching, that others may judge, whether he be (...) apt to teach, etc. and
not one or two, or three Sermons to men that are judicious and discerning (such
as they that try others for the Ministry are or should be) is as sufficient
for them to ground their judgment of a man's abilities upon, as two hundred.

Hitherto Mr. Chillenden has contended with reason, and is proved but an ill
Logician, let us now enquire into his proofs from Scripture, and see whether
he be any whit a better Divine.

Chillend. His first Argument is drawn from the example of Eldad and Medad,
and Moses words upon the report of it, Numb. 11. and 26. to 30. -- The Spirit
rested upon them -- and they Prophesyed in the Camp -- And Moses said -- would
God all the Lords People were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit
upon them. Chillenden begins with the last part of the Argument first, namely
Moses his speech, and afterward presses that example of Eldad and Medad more
closely. I shall go trace him in his own method, and see whether it leads to
the conclusion pretended.

Answ. Reader take notice, Moses here wishes that all the Lords people were
Prophets -- not Priests or Levites (I mean ordained Official men) but
Prophets, such as Eldad and Medad etc.

Moses wishes they were Prophets, not ordained Official men: He need not
desire it; for they that had a spirit of Prophesy were thereby extraordinarily
and immediately ordained of God to the work of Prophesying. For Prophecy was
not a permanent habitual gift, such as was in the power of the Prophet to
exercise when he would: but it was an impression made in the mind by the
immediate operation and irradiation of the spirit of God, stirinrg up a man at
certain times to Prophecy, Ier. 42. 7. Hence it was not in the power of man,
(who had the power of Ordination in other cases) to Ordain a man to be a
Prophet: as in the time of the New Testament it was not in the power of men, no
not of the Apostles themselves, to Ordain another to the Office of an Apostle;
but all that were chosen to be Apostles were appointed immediately by Christ,
as the 11 Disciples, and Paul, Gal. 1. 1. and Matthias, Act. 1. 24, 25, 26.
This observation therefore is a nullity. Had Moses spoken of a Function, unto
which Ordination had been applycable, no doubt he would have wished that they
might have been ordained before they had exercised it habitually, but speaking
of such a work unto which nothing was requisite -- but the pouring out of the
Spirit, what need he speak more then he did? 2. Let us apply it to the thing in
hand: grant that he had wished it to Christians now living: I ask, does he
wish a Spirit of extraordinary Prophesy (such as theirs was, as I shall prove
anon) or of ordinary Prophesy, such as is common in these days of the New
Testament, if extraordinary, then he had wished that which no Christian could
have taken hold of, for a spirit of extraordinary Prophesy has not been in the
world since the Scriptures were perfected: if ordinary, then it makes for us,
for then he wishes such a Spirit as does not exclude, but include Ordination,
the Scripture acknowledging no Prophets in our days but Ordained Preachers,
unless it be those false Prophets, and false Teachers which the Apostle
speaks of, 2 Pet. 2. 1. 1 John 4 1. For my part I judge he speaks of such a
spirit which himself had, and which was then powered down upon Eldad and Medad,
which was extraordinary, and therefore not applicable to us. 3. The speech it
self is to be understood as it is uttered, not indicatively but optatively.
For Moses does not wish absolutely that all the Lords people were Prophets, but
quantum adse, as for his part, he envyed no man that had the Spirit as well as
himself, nor would he have his servant Joshua, or any man else to envy for his
sake, but he wishes all good to all men as it might be expedient for them.
This is the plain meaning of the place, as he that reads may quickly
understand, The like speech has Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 5. I would that ye all spoke
with Tongues, yet he says before, Chap. 12. 29, 30. Are all Prophets? Do all
speak with Tongues? His meaning is, (the same with Moses) he wo^^d not that the
dignity of his person should stand in the way, or be any hinderance of others
from partaking in the like gift. q. d. As for my part I can easily bear, yea I
wish that that gift of Prophesy which is in me, were common unto all, nor will
I have any man forbid for my sake: and this I am persuaded is the sincere
desire of every faithful Minister, even of the most eminent, that your self
(Mr. Chillenden) and all Christians might have the same spiritual gifts which
they have, if it might stand with the will of God and order in the Church. But
what then? Is this any ground for a man to run before he is sent? Jer. 23. 21.
But Chillenden (it seems) does judge the giving of the Spirit a sufficient
sending. For thus it follows.

Chill. That which made them Prophets was the Lords putting his spirit on them.
Why then should not men now, to whom God has given of his spirit, with gifts,
utterance, and knowledge be Prophets and Preachers? -- The gifts of God are not
given to be hidden under a Bushel, or to be kept in a Napkin, etc.

Answ. Doubtless the Lords putting of his Spirit on them, made them Prophets;
but this pouring out of the Spirit did eminently include Ordination, or that
which was equivalent or transcendent to it, even an impulsive command from the
Spirit which they could nor resist, Amos 3. 8. The Lord has spoken, who can
but Prophesy? Yea, I conceive that the Spirit so over-powred them, as that they
were not masters of their own words and gestures, but were acted by a secret
Spiritual violence, even above themselves to an high and extraordinary
sublimity of speech, and insolency of gesture, to the astonishment of those
that beheld and heard. Of Saul it is said that when a Spirit of Prophesy came
upon him, he stripped off his clothes, and lay down naked all that day and all
that night, 1 Samuel 19. 24. And in respect of those insolent expressions and
gestures which they were carried forth to, that did they receive the Spirit of
Prophesy suddenly falling upon them, it became an ordinary speech in Israel,
if they saw any strange and insolent carriage in a man (yea though it came from
an evil Spirit) to say that he Prophesyed, 1 Samuel 18. 10. And we know that the
Spirit falling upon an ungodly man, so overmastered him, that he spoke what he
never intended nor had any mind to speak. Balaam I mean. Number and. 23. 24 These
Prophets therefore, w^^^ rather passive then active, in their Prophesyings:
which I conceive to be the reason why the Hebrews for Prophesying use the word
(...) in Niphal, the passive voice, Prophetaties est, there being no Hebrew
word of the active signification to express it by intimating that men were
rather passive then active in Prophesying. Hence they could not use those
expressions and gestures which are naturally most persuasive (as men in
Preaching do) but such as they were, acted too by the Spirit, yea and what
they spoke, they spoke from the Spirit, even divine mysteries immediately
inspired, wherein it was impossible for them to err, though such they might
be as they themselves understood them not, whereas our Preaching consists in
an explication and application of the Word, which the simple and unlearned may
wrest through their ignorance, either to a wrong sense in explication, or to a
wrong subject in Application. And lastly, the end of this spirit of Prophesy
was to be as a sensible sign of confirmation to them that received it, that
God had called them in particular to some great and eminent employment, Numb.
11. 16, 17. Hence it is said verse 25. They Prophesyed and ceased not: so the
Chaldee translateth it, but the Hebrew word is (...) they added not. viz. to
Prophesy any more (as D^ut. 5. 22. These words he spoke, and he added no
more) intimating that then indeed they Prophesyed, but not from thenceforth
continually; because the Spirit was given them but as a temporary gift and
miracle for confirmation of their Office. As unto Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 6. and
Caiaphas the High Priest. John 11. 50, 51, 52. Now lay all these together, and
it will appear that in efficient, matter, form, and end the Prophesying
spoken of, Number. 11. was extraordinary: and therefore Chillendens inference from
that to ours is most notoriously inconsequent. Put it briefly in some form:
Eldad and Medad having the Spirit did prophesy. Therefore they that have the
Spirit now may forthwith prophesy. No more but up and ride. Because they
prophesyed de facto, (for they could not choose) does it follow that every
spiritual man may now do it de jure? They spoke by the impulsion of the
Spirit (which impulsion was an authoritative sending or calling) does it
therefore follow that they who are only gifted, and have no such extraordinary
impulsion, may prophesy, though not called thereto by the Church? They spoke
spiritual mysteries immediately inspired, and therefore could not err: does
it therefore follow, that any private gifted Christian may undertake publicly
and with all authority to expound and apply the Word, which in these days
(Prophesyes and Visions being ceased) cannot be done, as may be most for
edifying, without some insight into the Logic, Grammar and Rhetorique, which
are, none of them; any part of those gifts, that Chillenden acknowledges to
be requisite to make a man able for the work of the Ministry. If the
Apostles and Prophets in writing the Scriptures have laid Arguments and words
together, it is requisite for the better understanding of the Scriptures, that
a man be able to take their Arguments and words a sunder, which how it can be
done, without some insight into Logic and Grammar, I have neither Logic
enough to conceive, nor Grammar to utter: though above all, I acknowledge a
necessity of a spiritual illumination, and opening of the understanding by the
Holy Ghost, that a man may discern of the spiritual meaning of that which
lies hid under the Letter. By all which (besides that which is already spoken)
it may appear how invalid that inference is, which Chillenden makes by way of
interrogation thus, Why then should not men now, to whom God Chill. has given
of his Spirit, with gifts of utterance and knowledge, be Prophets and
Preachers.

Answ. Because their gifts, (upon whose practice this Doctrine is grounded)
were extraordinary, and therefore whether they expressed them with, or without
Ordination, it makes nothing pro or con as to our present question, which is
to be understood of ordinary preaching. But besides those gifts carried a
Commission in their hand, to every man that received them, that he might
lawfully, and must necessarily make use of them to his praise that gave them.
The extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit in such an immediate, sudden,
plentiful and powerful manner, was equivalent to a voice or Call from heaven,
and gave sufficient authority for the actual exercises of those gifts. But as
for ordinary functions, in the execution of which gifts were necessary as well
as in Prophesy, there did ever concur a Call from God either immediately, or
mediately by his Church: without which Call, whosoever should intrude into the
doing of the work pertaining to that function, was a false Priest, false
Apostle, false-Prophet, false-Teacher. In the Ministers of the New Testament,
it is perpetually required that there be not only (...) (ability in respect of
gifts) but (...) (power or liberty in respect of Call) in all the Ministerial
actions they perform.

And if the gifting of men did enable them with pleny-potency for preaching in
a public Ministerial way, I see no reason why Paul or any other being put
upon it to show their authority by which they preached, should always plead
their (...) or lawful Call, and not their (...) or ability in respect of
gifts, which they perpetually do; and not they only, but the Scriptures
themselves put an express difference between gifting and sending (the two
essentials in a Ministen) the one materializing him, the other formalizing him,
as I may so speak, as Joh. 20. 21, 22. First he sends them ( As my Father has
sent me, so send I you) then he gifts them, Receive you the Holy Ghost, Ier. 1.
5. I have separated thee, etc. There Is his sending, and ver. 9. The Lord put
forth his hand and touched my mouth: there is his gifting. Isayah is gifted,
Isa. 6. 6, 7. but withal he is sent v. 8, 9. so Ezekiel chap. 2. 2. cum ver.
3. So every Preacher of the Gospel must be gifted, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Apt to teach.
And yet withal he must be sent, Romans 10. 15. How shall they Preach unless
they be sent? which sending (though the Lieutenant will have it to be by
infusion of gifts, and that without any reason alleged, or any thing like it,
as may be seen in his Book Page, 23.) must needs import an authoritative
mission (...) according to the clear etymology of the Greek word; which
manifestly alludes to the name of an Apostle, a name given by Christ himself to
them who were first sent by his command to preach the Gospel, Luke 6. 13. And
it signifies one that is sent, (not any way) but as the Ambassadors of Princes
use to be sent with their masters mandates. This is also clear by the very
letter of the Text. For they that are sent are they that bring the glad tidings
of Salvation: And who are they? The watchmen says Isaiah, in the place from
whence these words are borrowed, Isa. 52. 8.) who in Hebrew are called (...) in
Greek (...) which is the very simple word by which the Apostle Calls the Elders
of Ephesus, (who were ordained Officers) and in them all the Ministers of the
Gospel to the worlds end, Act. 20. 28. -- Over which the Holy Ghost has made
you overseers, or Watchmen, as they are called in Jsaiah: To say nothing at
this time, that it is a manifest abuse of the word [sending] to interpret it of
sending by gifts infused; in which sense, if Chillenden will undertake to show
where it is taken but once in all the whole Scripture: I will undertake to show
that it is taken above a hundred times in that sense which I now contend for.
But of this place more hereafter. In the mean time I suppose this last
consequence is sufficiently battered, partly because the Spirit of Prophesy,
spoken of, Numb. 15. carried along with it an impulsive command, or immediate
Call from God: and partly because the Prophesy it self was extraordinary, and
therefore cannot be compared in any due proportion with our Preaching, that
from the requisites or non-requisites into the one, we may infer the
requisites or non-requisites to the other, no more then we may argue thus. Mr.
Chillenden being unordained does fight: therefore being unordained he may
Preach.

Chill. But let us see what follows. The gifts of God are not given to be hid
under a Bushel.

Anws. From hence our Savior infers that the Ministers of the Gospel, (whom he
then sent into the world to Preach) should cause their light to shine forth
before men, Matthew 5. 16. What is this to private gifted Christians? A Candle is
lighted to be set in a Candlestick. The Candlestick in the Reddition must be
the Church, as Rev. 1. 12, 13. They that are set in a Candlestick
proportionably, are the Ministers of the Gospel, who shine forth (more
eminently) as Lights in the Church. They must therefore, first be set in the
Candlestick, before they can give light to them that are round about. And how
is that done? By being gifted and doubtless not so only, Act. 13. 47. So has
the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a light to the Gentiles,
etc. Cor. 12. 28. God has sent in his Church (not gifted men) but Officers,
Apostles, etc. And our Savior speaking the same parable, Luke 11. does put an
accurate distinction between the light of his Ministers, and the light of
eminent gifted Christians; of the former he says that they are set in the
Church (or Candlestick) that they may give light unto others, ver. 33. And of
them that receive this light, he says they are thereby enlightened, not so much
to enlighten others, (though that also they ought to do in their place) as to
make themselves lightsome and glorious in the Church, ver. 36.

Chill. Talents must not be hid in a Napkin.

Answ. What then? Therefore every man may improve his Talent in a disorderly
way. This is fine reasoning, peradventure a subject in some kingdom may be
every way better qualified for the well managing of the Scepter, then the King
himself: may he therefore take upon him to dethrone his lawful King, and set
up himself in his place? A woman may possibly have more wisdom then her husband
in the family, or more knowledge and grace then a Minister in the Church: may
she therefore usurp authority over her husband in the family, or over her Pastor
in the Church? the truth is, this excellent principle (miserably perverted)
has been the dark Cellar wherein that powder has been hid, which has almost
blown up all Government, both in the State and Church, and Army, and hurld all
things into black confusion. And I am sorry that any of my Countrymen
(especially such as pretend to Religion and the fear of God) should border so
near upon the Spirit of Corah, as to be of the same mind, and to speak the
same language, Numb. 16. 3. They gathered themselves together against Moses and
against Aaron saying, you take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation
are Holy every one of them, and the Lord is amongst them: wherefore then lift
you up your selves against the Congregation of the Lord? The same answer
therefore, which Moses gives to them, may I return to Chillenden, and all
others that make use of this Argument, ver. 9, 10. Seems it but a small thing
to you, that the God of Israel has separated you. -- And has brought you
near to him -- and seek you the Priesthood also? Surely he that has a
Talent, and employes it not, shall be esteemed an unprofitable servant. Every
gift has its (...), and yet every Christian must remember that he has his
(...) Romans 12 4. his own proper work, in the performance of which he ought to
abide with God, 1 Cor. 7. 24. Can the hand do no service in the body, because
it is not the head? In Fine, if there be any man in the Church, that has the
spirit of Grace, government, wisdom and utterance, whereby he is fitted to
preach the Gospel, though he has not that measure of knowledge in languages
and other Arts, as were desirable, yet if he be sound in Faith, in Doctrine,
and in manners, he shall do a work acceptable to God, and the whole Church will
thank him, if he shall desire the Office of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. 1. suffer
himself to be proved, ver. 10. and (being approved) to be ordained by the
laying on of hands, chap. 5. 22. And I am apt to think that no man who does
sincerely intend to preach the word of truth, as it is in Jesus, and affects
not an unwarrantable liberty of preaching when he list, and desisting when he
list (which being ordained he may not do) I say I am apt to think he cannot
really stick at that order of admission and entrance into the Ministry, to
which the Scripture gives such a clear and abundant Testimony. And thus much
for the first Argument, and for all the pieces of Arguments which are here and
there, immethodically scattered up and down, which are neither sufficient to
prove the whole scope of the Author, nor yet have any dependence on any
proposition of the grand Arguments: As for the two objections which Chillenden
proposes to himself, and answers, let him that ownes them make them good:
for my part I would be loath to defend a truth of GOD with such objections:
though in the latter of the two, I conceive there is more strength then
Chillenden is aware of, if it be well pointed. I shall say nothing to it now,
because I shall have occasion to make it good anon; only this I cannot but
observe once for all, that this Lieutenant is very good at making Jack a Lents,
and then insulting over them with drawn sword, here I could have thee, and
there I could have thee. I presume no judicious man could ever have it in his
mind to make such slender objections as I often meet with in this little
Pamphlet, and therefore I suppose they are eggs of his own hatching. But let
us pass them over, and come on to the next Argument.

Chillend. 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9. The Princes of Judah ( who were no ordained
Ministers) Preached the Law to the people.

Answ. I cannot believe our Lieutenant read this Scripture over twice. The text
says expressly that the Priests and Levites preached. For thus runs the words
v. 8 9. with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, etc. and with them Elisham
and Iehoram Priests. And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the Law of
the Lord with them. Here is not one word of the Princes preaching: It is said
indeed ver. 7. that the King sent to his Princes to teach in the Cities of
Judah. The Hebrew word is (...) in pyhell ad faciendumdiscere to make them to
learn, or to see them taught, to wit, by others, as Ashpenaz is commanded
togather some of the children of Israel together (...) to teach them the
Language of Caldea; Is it imaginable that Ashpenaz the chief of all the Noble
men in the kingdom did teach them himself? doubtless he did it by others, as
these Princes also did, and so Rabbi Solomon Iarchi expounds it. It was proper
(says he) to the Priests and Levites to teach and instruct, but the Princes
went with them, least they should have rebelled against their words, that they
might compel them to obey, etc. what a monstrous abuse of Scripture is this to
interpret it against the very Letter of the text?

Chill. It is evident by the writings of Moses and the Prophets, that any of
their wise men might teach though not ordained.

Answ. Hereof we have not one word of proof, besides. Luke 2. 46. in the
margent (as if Luke were either Moses or one of the Prophets) where he relates
that Christ being but 12. years old disputed in the temple with the Doctors,
Was Christ one of the wise men? or is every disputation a Sermon? or were those
Doctors intruders doing what they did without authority? Does not Christ say
of them, that they sat in Moses seat? Matthew. 23. 2. For my part I judge them
to be professors of Divinity or Tutors, who were wont to instruct younger men
at certain state-seasons (answereable to our Terms) Act. 22. 3. For which end
they lived together in a College. 2 Kings 22. 14. The Tutors and instructors
being therefore called Fathers. 1 Samuel 10. 12. and the Scholars sons of the
Prophets. 2 Kings 2. 15. As to that which Chillenden urges farther from the
example of Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Nehemia, etc. we give this Short answer. That
what they spoke was either a judicicall charge, (which every Judge may give to
the grand Jury) as Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19. or 2 a Prophetical, or 3 a
Magistraticall act, and so not precedentiall to private Christians. For a
Magistrate by virtue of his Office has a spiritual power (though not an
Ecclesiastical or Church power) to pray, exhort, and bless the people, and to
make use of other natural and general mediums of spiritual good, according
to what I premised, These. 4. For which end Magistrates had often (if not
always) a Spirit of Prophesy, as the 70 Elders whereof Eldad and Medad were
two, Number. 11. Saul, David, etc.

Chill. It was the customs of the Jews to let men Preach who were no ordained
Ministers. As Scribes, Pharisees and Lawyers.

Answ. These at least were Prophets, Matthew, 23. 2.

Chill. Why did they suffer Christ to dispute in the Temple?

Answ. Disputation is no preaching. Nor do I think that that disputation was
in the Temple, where the solemn worship of God was wont to be on the Sabbath,
but in some of the buildings about the Temple, which were called by the name of
the Temple.

Chill. Christ was permitted to preach in the Synagogues, Luke 4. 16, etc.
Though the Jews did not acknowledge him to be a Prophet sent of God. Ergo.

Answ. It was permitted him (especially in Nazareth his own country, Luke 4.
16.) because he began not to preach till he was 30 years old, and at that age
his Majesty, and the miracles which he wrought had made way for him: because
every man esteemed him as a Prophet sent of God. Luke 4. 14. and 3. 15. and 21,
22, 23. Mat. 5. ^0. 21. And as for those who knew him not (and for a long time
he was but little known, out of his own country) their permission of him to
preach argues nothing; for they did presume that none would offer to preach but
such as had authority, and therefore when he taught before those that knew him
not, They ask him the question plainly, Matthew 21. 23. By what authority do
thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?

Chill, Paul and Barnabas preached publicly, yet the Jews took no notice of
them, as of Ministers ordained.

Answ. Chillenden I suppose means the same which his Master Robinson has writ
before him, of Paul's preaching at Antioch Act. 13. 14, 15. To which we Answer,
that it is false, that the Jews took no notice of them to be ordained
Ministers. For it was known that they were come to Town, and the Ruler of the
Synagogue sent unto them verse. 15. their fame therefore was great at Antioch. A
whole year before this time, they had preached the word there, and brought
many to Christ, where also were many other Prophets and Teachers that had
preached the word both to Jews and Greeks. Act. 11. 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27,
28, and 13. 1, 2.

Chill. Act. 18. 24. to that end, Apollos was no ordained Minister, yet he
preached.

That Apollos was no ordained Minister, is said, but not proved. For my part I
judge he was. 1 He was a teacher in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 3. 5. and
that an eminent teacher, in so much as that his hearers had advanced him into a
competition with Paul or Peter, 1 Cor. 1. 12. and preferred him before them.
And there were no ordinary constant Preachers, but such as were ordained, in
the Apostles days. Yea and the Scripture intimates that he had as good
authority to Preach as Paul himself, though not given him in such an
extraordinary manner, 1 Cor. 3. 5. Who is Paul, or who is Apollo, but
Ministers, etc. If the Apostles, calling himself a Minister, in that place,
argues sufficiently that he had authority to Preach; why does it not argue the
same in Apollo? the rather, because the Greek word (...) there used, is
generally in Scripture, ascribed to Ministers in Office, or in Commission,
whether ordinary or extraordinary, 2 Cor. 3. 6 and 6 4 and 11 23. Ephesians. 3 7.
and 6. 21. 1 These. 3. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 6. Act, 1. 17. and. 6. 4. and 20. 24. And
why should it not signify the same here? 2 The Apostle speaking to the
Corinthians of what esteem they should have toward the Ministers of the Gospel,
advises them to judge of them as they are; even as of Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of Christ, 1 Cor. 4 1. (...) Now a Steward is such a
one as does dispense the household affairs by Commission under his master. A
Steward then of the mysteries of God is such a one to whom Jesus Christ has
(either by ordinary or extraordinary Call) committed the Preaching of the
Gospel unto his Church. A dispensation of the grace of God givon me to
you-wards says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. ^. Now such a Steward was Apollo, as
well as Paul, 1 Cor. 46. Therefore Apollo was a Minister in Office, called of
God, either extraordinarily as was Paul and the Apostles: or ordinarily, by the
laying on of hands as were Pastors and Teachers. 3. It seems that Apollo did
Baptize as well as Preach, which yet farther argues him to be a Minister in
Office (for though Chillenden claim authority for unordained persons to
Preach, by virtue of their gifts: yet I find not that he allows them to
baptize by virtue of their gifts) for when the Apostle says. verse. 13. Were
you Baptized in the name of Paul? he adds ver. 14, 15. I thank God I Baptized
none, -- least any should say that I Baptized in mine own name. q. ^. Those
whom I Baptized, did I Baptize them into mine own name? that from thenceforth
they should call themselves Paulists? Or did Cephas Baptize those into his
name, whom he Baptized, that they should call themselves Cephists? Or did
Apollo Baptize any of you into his name, that they should call themselves
Apollonists? Yea (says the Apostle) seeing you are divided into Sects,
according to the names and number of them, that Baptized you, I am glad that I
Baptized no more of you then I did, because I would not be the Captain and
Ringleader of a Sect. This (I say) seems to be the plain meaning of the
words, which clearly holds forth to me, that Apollo Baptized as well as Paul
or Peter, and therefore was a Minister in Office as well as they. Let us hear
what Chillenden has to the contrary.

Chill. 1 Says he, The Scripture is altogether silent in it.

Answ. Not altogether, for what I have spoken for it, I have spoken from
Scripture: And if the Scripture had been altogether silent, yet were it nothing
to the purpose: for there were many Elders of whose ordination the Scripture
speaks not a word, but leaves us to infer they were ordained because they did
the works of Elders, As Crispus, Tychicus, Titus, Demas, and others.

Chill. 2 Says he, We only find this of him in Scripture, that he was
instructed in the way of the Lord, etc.

Answ. Whether this be true or no, let the Reader judge from what I have spoken
of him.

Chill, 3 Says he, He could be no Officer in the Jewish Church, because he
embraced Jesus Christ: nor in the Gentile Church because he knew only the
Baptism of John.

Answ. Bables; as if first there were no Church of the Jews yet that embraced
Christ and believed. 2. As if he might not be a Minister of the Gentiles,
though he knew only the Baptism of John* (...) expertus. He experienced only
the Baptism of John. That is, he was Baptized only with John's Baptism: and
the Holy Ghost had not fallen upon him in such sort as upon the Apostles and
other Ministers of the Gospel in those days, which is spoken to his
commendation, and the magnifying of the Grace of God in him, that he should be
so knowing in the way of God, and fervent in the work of God, though he had
been Baptized only with water into the Name of Christ (which was John's Baptism
Act. 19. 4.) and had not received the Holy Ghost, as it was then dispensed,
which was Christ's Baptism in distinction from John's, Matthew. 3. 11. He shall
Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. 3. As if he might not be an
Evangelist as Timothy was, and so no settled Officer in any Church, but an
itenerant Preacher to every Church where he came, which for my part I think is
the truth, because he traveled up and down with the Apostles. And so much for
his third Argument.

Chill. Act. 8. 4. therefore that they were scattered a road, went every where
Preaching the word. And Act, 11. 19, 20. It was the Church that were scattered;
therefore, it was the Church that Preached: and all the Church at Jerusalem
were not ordained Officers.

Answ. The most that can be made out from this Argument is this, That to Preach
some times upon occasion, when by reason of persecution we may not enjoy our
own Teachers, and have no other help but our own gifts, is lawful. But with
what appearance of consequence does it follow from hence, that it is not only
lawful, but necessary (for so Chillenden makes it) for a private gifted man
(though not ordained) to preach, in a Church already constituted, and under the
order of the Gospel, where Ministers may be and are ordained in a regular way,
and their people may have free access to them? Necessity sometimes is instead
of a Call. These that were scattered (grant that they were private Christians)
did not therefore preach because they were gifted (for then they should have
preached before persecution had scattered them) But the present necessity was
instead of an Ordination: at least it was a Call of God for them to preach
without Ordination, when by reason of disturbances Ordination could not be had.

2. But the Text says not that the Church was scattered abroad, but (they all)
were scattered abroad: which particular (they) refers not to the whole Church,
but unto those who kept company with Christ while he lived: and with his
Apostles at Jerusalem after he was ascended, even the 70 Disciples, Act. 1. 15,
21. who were all, or most Evangelists.

1. From the very beginning of the Book, the Evangelist sets himself to relate
the Acts of the Apostles, together with the 70 Disciples, (though he instanceth
most in Peter) declaring how the spirit promised to be given them after Christ's
ascension, did work effectually in their Ministry. Therefore here he observes
the same method.

2. This is the more probable because he instanceth so suddenly and
immediately in Philip, ver. 5. thereby showing whom he meaneth-by (they all)
verse. 4. For had he spoken of a man that had pertained to a new company, of
whom he had made no mention before, he would then have said a certain man named
Philip, or some such expression to give notice that he was directing his speech
to another and a new subject. But speaking so immediately of Philip, it argues
he is still upon the same company; I mean the 70 Disciples who abode with the
Apostles and received their commission from Christ, as well as the Apostles,
upon whom also the Holy Ghost was powered down together with the Apostles, Act.
2. they were therefore men ordained by Christ himself, John 15. 16. to go and
preach the Gospel. Chillenden grants that Philip was ordained, but it was
(says he) to be a Deacon, an Office that did not bind him to preach. Not
remembering that the same man is expressly called an Evangelist, Act. 21. 8. and
that after he was chosen a Deacon: and such as he was, such seem all the rest
to be, even Evangelists.

3. It is said they went, every where as (Evangelists were wont to do)
preaching: (...) it is in the Greek; a word that is never used but for preachers
by function, and though the word be a participle denoting an act and not a
faculty, yet it always notes such an act as is performed by virtue of an
Office.

4. They did not only preach, but it should seem they did Baptize too. Act. 8.
12. 16. 38. and though Philip be the man whois there only mentioned, yet it is
most probable that the rest who were scattered abroad Baptized also. For Act,
11. 21. a great number believed and turned to the Lord. Now the manner in those
days was, to Baptize men so soon as ever they made profession of Faith, Act.
22. 16. and Act. 2. etc. And therefore we are to think the same of these at
Antioch, that they also were Baptized; nay the rather, because there is no
other time mentioned when, nor person by whom they were Baptized. Some of
the Apostles were afterward sent down to themfrom Jerusalem, not to Baptize
them, but rather to confirm, and give the holy Ghost to them, being already
Baptized; for that I find to be the end of their undertaking many other
journeyes of the like nature, Act. 8. 14, 15, 16, 17. Act. 19. 3, 4, etc.

5. If these preachers had been private Christians, dwellers at Jerusalem, and
had fled only for safety, because the persecutio was hot in the City, and when
they were abroad took occasion to preach the Gospel, is it not altogether
probable that they would have returned home again to their families, as soon
as the persecution was ended? No man can deny this. Now I shall make it appear
that they stayed forth above twice as long as the persecution lasted. For the
persecution began the ninth year of Tiberius Anno Christi 34. and it lasted
till the time of Paul's coming to Jerusalem, Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches
rest, which was about three year and a half after the persecution began, in
the year of Tiherius 12. and of Christ 37. Yet they that were scattered did
not return home, though they might with safety; for three or four years
after this time, Acts 11. 19. we read that they were got out of Canaan into
Phenicia, Cyprus and Syria, preaching yet to the Jews only. This was in the
fourth year of Cajus Caligula Anno Christi 41. For in that year did Antioch
receive the Gospel, and then was Barnabas sent thither from Jerusalem, and
thither he brought Paul, after he had found him out: and there did they two
spend a whole year in preaching, which was the next year after this I am
speaking of; for then came Agabus from Jerusalem and prophesied of a great
dearth, Acts 11. 28. which fell out in the second year of Claudius, Anno
Christi 43. according to the consent of Scripture and best Historians. Therefore
from the year of our Lord 34. till 41. were those Disciples a preaching, that
is some six or seven years, whereas the persecution ceased at three years
end, more or less. And yet we hear no news of their return, but that they
went on preaching in Phenicia, Cyprus and Syria; which to me I confess is a
very strong argument that they were not private Christians, fled from Jerusalem
for safety by reason of the persecution, and so preached occasionally and
accidentally, but that they were Ministers sent abroad on purpose by the
Apostles, and at that time the rather, because they would not adventure the
surprisall of all their persons in one place, lest the work of the Gospel
should be retarded.

6. (They all) that were scattered, cannot be understood of the whole Church,
that is, of all the believers in Jerusalem; for the Text says expressly, that
the Church, that is, believers, staid at Jerusalem, yea good store, many
households of them, verse. 3 and that when they all of whom the Evangelist
speaks were scattered abroad, verse. 1. And the truth i^, it is a senseless
thing to imagine otherwise: for if all the believers in Jerusalem were fled,
where could the Apostles be entertained? where could they find harbor and
protection? that they should be able to lie couchant, when ordinary private
Christians could not; yea, and to what end and purpose should they stay when
the Church (for whose edification, encouragement, increase and government they
there abode) were all fled?

7. Would not persecution much sooner take hold of the Heads and Ringleaders of
a faction (such as Christianisme wa^ then esteemed) then of their followers? Is
it not probable that the Shepherd should be smitten before ^he Sheep were
scattered? can any man then think that the Church was fled, and yet the
Apostl^s continued quiet?

8. That phrase Acts 11. 19. They preached to the Jews only; and that other
Acts 8. 1. That they preached in the Regions of Judaea and Samaria, seem
secretly to intimate what manner of men they were even such to whom Christ had
spoken. Acts 1. 8. -- -- Ye shall be witnesses to me both in Jerusalem and in
all Judaea and in Samaria, and Acts 13. 46. It was necessary that the Word of
God should first be preached to you. For which reasons I conceive that they who
are here said to be scattered and to preach, were not private gifted
Christians, but Ministers lawfully called and sent sorth to preach. Let us here
what Chillenden has to the contrary.

Four things he sales, whereof the three first are upon the point but one,
and therefore to them all I may return one single Answer. For whereas he
says, 1. The Scripture gives no hint of it, this appears to be notoriously
false, from what I have proved by Scripture concerning them. 2. Says he, They
are only called the Church at Jerusalem; which is also false, for they are not
so called; and if they were called so only, yet as long as the Scriptures are
clear, that by (Church) we are to understand the persons forementioned, what
matter is it for the name? 3. says he, They preached only upon occasion of
the persecution. Neither is this true; for why then did they not return home
when the persecution was ended? The persecution was the occasion why they were
sent forth at that time rather then at another; and if it were true, then say
we, they did not preach merely as guifted Brethren (for then why preached they
not before persecution scattered them?) but as men called by the present
extraordinary necessity. 4. Says he, Barnabas w^ sent over to confirm them.
A^sw. So was Paul sent into Macedonia to help, Acts 16. 9. They that were
scattered went every where, Acts 8. and therefore Barnabas was sent to carry
some time amongst them for their confirmation, which he also did, even a whole
year and upward, Acts 11. 26. Some other objections there are (men of straw
which the Lieutenant sets up to buffet) which we scorn to own,

Chill. Pet. 4. 10, 11. As every man has received the gift, even so minister
the same one to another as good stewards of the manifold graces of God: If any
man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, etc.

Answ. To which we answer (leaving the Lieutenants Dandiprats for himself to
play with) first, That it is indeed every man's duty to improve the gifts of God
in him for the benefit of others, provided that he minister the same (...) as
he has received it; that is, in that way which is suitable to the condition
of the gift he has received. But withal we assum that no man in these days
has received the gift of ordinary public preaching but he that is called,
and that his very calling is a principal (...) or gift which he receives from
the grace of God, Romans 12. 6. Having then gifts ((...)) differing according to
the grace ((...)) that is given to us, which gifts in the words following he
clearly interprets to be those offices to which they were called. Is there no
way of communicating gifts but in a way of preaching? Is there not as
exhorting one another? Heb. 3. 13 a prevoking one another to love and to good
works? Heb. 10. 24. a comforting one another with good conference? 1 These. 4.
18. etc. 2 Some conceive (and that not without ground) that it is a precept
peculiarly directed to Church officers. There is but one word in the text that
seems to make against it, and that is (...) The Apostle would have them
minister to one another, which word seems to extend the Apostles exhortation to
all in general. But for my part I see no reason why the word should not be
englished in in own native and proper signification (...) ad suos, to his own,
that is to those that are related to him: and the nearer the relation is which
any man has to others, the more strictly is he bound to communicate the gift
he has received from God to them for their good. As neighbors to neighbors,
Masters to their families, Parents to their children, Pastors to their people,
and generally every man, (...) ad suos, as the word is used, John 20. 10. and
the like in Mark 5. 19. (...) ad tuos, to thine own. Then the meaning of the
Apostle here is this. That all Church Officers should be ready to communicate
the gifts they have received (...) to those over whom God has set them: which
is the same advise which the same Apostle gives them, cap. 5. 2. Feed the flock
of God (...) which is amongst you. And for my part I am the rather inclined to
this interpretation, because the Apostle having said in the verse next before
(...) (hospital one toward another) here presently he changes the word
(thereby intimating some change of sense) and bids them to be (...) (not (...)
to one another) but (...) to his own. But 3. whether this be so or no, the
place is clear against the preaching of private unordained persons. For though
the Apostle should speak here generally to all Christians, that they should
communicate their gifts each to other for mutual edification; yet he does (as
it were purposely) except a communication of gifts in a way of Preaching,
making that a peculiar privilege to him whose office and work it is to Preach,
by virtue of his calling, ver. 11, Let him that speaks, that i^, he whose
Office and work it is to Preach, let him speak as the Oracles of God. For (...)
in this place is he that preaches, as also 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. The general
Rule then is this, as if the Apostle had said, I will that all men generally
improve the gifts they have received, to the benefit of others, as much as they
may. Specially, let the Past^ur or preacher, (the (...)) let him play the good
Steward with his gift in preaching: and the Deacon with his in Ministering etc.
thereby intimating that when he spoke to Christians in general in the former
verse, advising them to ministration of their gifts, he did not mean they
should do it in a way of Preac^ing, and so usurp the Office of the Pastor, no
more then he does allow those who might be gifted for the Deaconry, to turn
the Deacon out of his Office, and play the Deacon themselves, when he says in
the words following, let him that ministers (that is the deacon) let him do it
as of the ability which God gives.

Chillendens Arguments, wherein we doubt not but to find him as unsuccessefull
as in all the rest.

Chill. 1 Cor. 12. 7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man
to profit withal.

Answ. I take the scope of this whole chapter to be this, namely, to declare
the wisdom of God in constituting and ordering his Church (the mystical body
of Christ Jesus) and proportionating one member of it to another so
geometrically, as that it abides in a wholesome crasis and symmetrie, without
schism and deformity; as from the order of the members in the body natural,
each to other, arises the unity, consistency, and beauty of the whole. ver.
15. 23. 25. 26. etc. And this order in the Church is nothing else but a due
correspondency and aequipoysing of inferiors and superiors. ver. 27 28. 29. I
should therefore much wonder if this chapter should afford any argument for
Chillendens confounding error. As to those words ver. 7. the manifestation of
the spirit etc. the meaning is that though there be diversities of gifts,
administrations and operations in the Church, ver. 4 5, 6. yet the
manifestation of the spirit (that is the spirit manifesting it self in those
extraordinary gifts) in what man soever it be, is given for this one end,
namely the Churches edification: though the gifts be many, yet their end is but
one: quid hoc ad Rhombum?

Chill. 1 Cor. 14. 1. The Apostle writing to the whole Church of Corinth, says
thus, follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that you
may prophesy.

Answ. We deny that the Apostles exhortation is directed to the whole Church:
nay Chillenden himself denies it, and says expressly (that the Apostle
speaks of prophesying, by those who were enabled with sufficient gifts) in
this very place: and that indeed is his scope from the 28. and 29. ver. of the
12. Chapter, even to give directions to gifted persons, in the Church of
Corinth, and his directions are two, that they do all in love (chap. 13.
without which knowledge puffs up chap. 8.) 2 That of all spiritual gifts
they should affect prophesy. But what is this to the whole Church? But the
Apostle says, you may all prophesy ver. 13. Answ. Not all the whole Church;
for he had said before. chap. 12: 29. are all prophets? The Church is the
final object for whose edification prophesy is. Chap. 14. 12. not the
efficient cause. But the Apostles meaning is, that all that were Prophets might
prophesy. For after he had given direction to those that spoke with tongues.
ver. 22. 23. he comes to give direction to the Prophets for their number. ver.
29. and for their order ver. 30. and therefore of them is to be understood that
which follows, you may all Prophesy. Now these Prophets were not private gifted
Christians, but men of eminency and authority in the Church of Corinth, and
extraordinarily inspired with a spirit of prophesy, as I shall now prove; only
I cannot but take notice how Chillenden fayles in the maine foundation of this
his Argument, viz. that these Prophets were ordinary gifted believers, which I
can no way assent unto for these reasons following.

1. It is most evident that the Prophets spoken of throughout this whole
Chapter, are persons contradistinguished from private gifted Christians For
says the Apostle, verse. 37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or
spiritual etc. Who are these Spiritual men? Certainly those Christians who did
abound, more then others of their Brethren, in the graces and gifts of the
spirit. For so is the word taken, Gal. 6. 1. You that are spiritual restore
such a man. And more expressly in this very Epistle, 1 Cor. 3. 1. And I Brethren
could not speak to you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto
babes in Christ. Here is an express opposition between a Carnal Christian and
a Spiritual Christian: the weaker sort of Christians being called Carnal, and
the stronger and more able Christians, who were men in understanding, being
called spiritual. To return then to the place in hand, The Apostle opposes
the Prophet and spiritual man, that is the gifted Christian, (as our Savior
opposes the Prophet and the righteous man, Matthew. 10. 41.) Therefore when he
spoke before of Prophets or unto Phrophets, he spoke not to the private
believers or Church Members in Corinth, though never so well gifted, but unto
Prophets, strictly and distinctly so called, who were a rank or order of men
in the Church, that was above the most eminent gifted Christians in respect of
outward state and condition. And this is the more probable, because the Apostle
does seem expressly to divert his speech from the Church unto the Prophets and
other gifted men in the Church, Chap. 12. 1. Now concerning spiritual gifts
Brethren, etc.

2. Prophesy was a gift of the same nature and continuance with the gift of
tongues: as appears by the Apostles perpetual comparing of them together in
this chapter. But that the gift of tongues is ceased now, and that it was an
extraordinary gift while it was in the world, I suppose Chillenden himself
cannot deny. Therefore, how he can affirm the gift of Prophesy ^o be an
ordinary and an abiding gift, let himself judge. 3 Prophesy was an
interpretation of the deep mysteries of Scripture by inspirationor immediate
revelation, verse. 30. If any thing be revealed to another; and Ephesians. 3. 3, 5.
-- The mystery -- which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men,
as it is now revealed 1 Cor. 13. ^
unto his holy Apostles and Prophets. Whence they that believe the doctrine of
the Gospel, are said to be built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Ephesians. 2. 20. And hereby is Prophesy distinguished from Doctrine, 1
Cor. 14. 26. Prophesy being there signified by Revelation Doctrine noting an
explication of the word, by comparing Scripture with Scripture, and by the
Analysis of a Scripture into its simple Arguments: which is the way of
exposition now in use in the Church. So verse. 6. -- unless I come speaking to
you either by Revelation, or by knowledge, or by Prophesy, or by Doctrine. That
is, unless I speak a Revelation (which is Prophesy) or knowledge (which is
Doctrine.) For what is Prophesy but the uttering of a Revelation? And what is
Doctrine, but an uttering of knowledge? That knowledge (I mean) which is
attained by a studious search and enquiry into the meaning of Scripture.
Wherefore it must needs be that Prophesy was no ordinary, but an extraordinary
gift: extraordinary in those days, being given but to a few; but much more
extraordinary in our days, being given to none.

4 From the same place it is manifest that Prophesy was not a gift residing in
the mind by way of habit, but it was an impression transiently made upon the
mind by the Holy Ghost, like lightning in the air: If any thing be revealed to
another says the Apostle. Clearly holding forth thereby, that one Prophet
might have the understanding of some spiritual gifted mystery given him, while
another was Prophesying: and that not by the help and operation of any faculty
of his own, as his fancy, judgment or memory, but by Revelation, or divine
inspiration. Now I would ask of those who call themselves Prophets in our
days, whether their fancy, judgment and memory do not help them to all the
glorious sublimated conceits, which they so much boast of (notions so
transcendent that they many times leave all reason, sense and truth many
thousand leagues below them) If they grant it, then they can no longer plead
this practice of prophesying in the Corinthians for their pattern, it being of
a more noble descent, even immediately from heaven, without the help and
obstetrication of any natural abilities. If they deny it, and have the face to
affirm that they receive it by immediate Revelation, then must I sound a
retreat to all that are men in understanding, and are not apt childishly to be
tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine, to the Law and the Testimonies:
if any man add to the words of this book, let him be accursed.

5. The Prophets in the Church of Corinth were not private gifted Christians,
but such as had the power of the government of the Church, as ordinary Pastors
and Teachers. Yea, and those very Prophets and the rest of the gifted persons
(as I conceive) were the Pastors and Rulers pertaining to the Church of
Corinth: For that Prophets had a Pastoral care, seems undeniable to me,
because Act. 13. ^. Paul and Barnabas (who were no private unordained men,) are
called Prophets: and it is a rule received without contradiction, that every
superior order of Ministers did contain the inferior. As for example, an
Apostle was a Prophet, Evangelist, Pastor, Teacher, Ruler, and Deacon, 1 Cor.
14. 36. 1 Cor. 9. 5 1 Pet: 5. 1. Act. 6. 2. etc. A Prophet in like manner was a
Pastor, Teacher, Ruler and Deacon; for Prophets were second in place to
Apostles. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. And that these Prophets and other gifted persons
did exercise pastoral Offices is clear in this very Chapter. First, the whole
Church came together to hear them, verse. 23. When they were come together, one
of them prayed in the name of the Congregation, verse. 16. To which they all
consented by saying Amen. They did also Preach the word and apply it to
edification, exhortation and comfort, verse. 3. of them that believed: and the
conversion of the unbelievers. verse. 24, 25. Moreover they had a Power of rule
and government, to keep order and decorum in the Congregation* As for example,
to enjoyne women silence in the Churches, ver. 34. Let your women keep silence
in the Churches. The Apostle says not simply let women keep silence, but let
(your) (...) 1 Pet. 5. 2. women: that is the women of your Church, which are
within the verge of your authority. For do not ye judge them that are within? 1
Cor. 5 12. they had also power to make way for a Prophet to speak, when he has
any thing revealed to him, verse. 30, 31, 32. an act properly pertaining to the
Ruler of the Congregation, Act. 13. 15.

Qu. If you ask then, wherein did Apostles and Prophets differ?

Ans. I answer, in this. The Apostles spoke what they heard and saw, 1 John 1.
1. It being essential to an Apostle to have seen the Lord: and many
Revelations they had of things not contained in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, which the Prophets had not.

6 But be they what they will be, their practice cannot be brought down as a
precedent for private Christians in our days to prophesy: because the gift of
prophesy perished in that age, when the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
were accomplished. For prophets were both in time and dignity before Pastors
and Teachers, 1 Cor. 12. 28. But the most honorable Office in the Church from
thenceforth to the end of the world 1 Timothy 6. 14. is the Office of Pastors and
Teachers, 1 Timothy 5. 17. therefore prophesy is ceased, being an extraordinary
gift, peculiar to Prophets only, not to all gifted believers, Let us now hear
what Chillenden says to the contrary.

Chill. First, says he, the whole body of the Church of Corinth was not
extraordinarily gifted.

Answ. Very true. For some were Prophets, not all. Therefore the particle (all)
verse. 31. is not to be understood of the whole Church.

Chill. Secondly says he, The Apostle forbids women to Preach, because they
must be subject to their husbands: therefore he gives all men that were gifted
leave to Preach.

Answ. If this Argument be good, it will infer a liberty for all men to preach,
of what condition soever, as for gifted men; for may not I argue thus. No woman
may preach because she is a woman; Therefore every man may preach: as well as
infer this, therefore every gifted man may preach: unless the prohibition made
to women, reaches only to gifted women? And by the same reason that
Chillenden, upon that supposition of women's not preaching, infers a liberty of
preaching to men, with this restriction, if they be gifted, by the same reason
will I infer the same liberty for men, with this restriction, if they be
ordained. But for my part I conceive the Apostles prohibition as it reaches
generally to all women, so it is intended specially against women, which had,
or pretended that they had a spirit of prophesy, for such then were in those
days, Act. 21. 9. though there be none now. And I am inclined the rather thus
to think, because the Apostle does not say simply (...) but Ai (...) which
particle (Ai) as Scaliger the great observes, is evermore determinative, in the
Scripture, pointing out some special or individual. So that the Apostle does
hereby strictly forbid women though Prophetesses, to preach in the Church, and
that for a moral reason, (which a positive precept does not supersede) because
they must not usurp authority over the man. And therefore is the Church of
Thyatira blamed for suffering that woman Jezebel to preach, notwithstanding she
called her self a Prophetess, Rev. 2. 20.

Chill, But Chillenden says, that women Prophetesses might Preach, and proves
it from Luke 2. 36. Exodus 15. 20. Judges 4. 24.

Answ. Women, though Prophetesses, never took upon them publicly to teach the
Church. The places alleged do not prove the contrary, nor any thing like it.
As for Anna, Luke 2. 38. The Text says she came in at that instant (namely
into the Temple) and gave thanks unto the Lord, and spoke of him to all them
that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. What is this to the purpose? Is a
particular thanksgiving before three or four people (and in all probability
there were not many more, at least in hearing) a public preaching before the
Church? And whereas it is said, she spoke of him to all that looked for
Redemption in Jerusalem, it must needs be understood privately, and from house
to house; for all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem (which were many
thousands) were not then in the Temple to hear her speak. And the Greek word
(...) which we translate (coming in at that instant) signifies that it was by
mere accident that she came to the Temple at that time: and therefore I do not
believe that any of Jerusalem came thither to meet her.

To Miriam Exodus 15. 20. I answer. That all that is said of her is this, that
she and her maidens sang praises together to God, though she brought up the
chore being a prophetess. And what they sang, was no more then the very same
which the men had sang before them: for the text says, she answered them,
ver. 21. compared with. ver. 1. But what is this to public preaching before
the Church? Because we allow women to singe in the Church, must we therefore
allow them to preach in the Church? Singing is for the edification of the
members of the Church in particular, not of the whole Church collectively:
therefore to sing is not properly to speak in the Church: for he that sings
speaks to himself. Ephesians. 5. 19.

To Deborah, Judges 5. (which I suppose is the place you mean. I say the same
Deborah and Barak sang (which is no preaching) nor yet is it recorded whether
publicly before the Church, or privately, as Mary and Elizabeth, each to
other. Though I conceive also that in her case there might be some peculiarity,
she being extraordinarily raised up to be a Queen and Judge in Israel, and in
that respect superior to all the men in Israel, nor subject to any: and
therefore not equally bound with other women, to observe the Apostles rule.

Chill. But (says Chillenden) The Apostle exhorts that the Church should judge
of the Doctrine ver. 29. If they had been extraordinary Prophets they could
not err, and then there had been no need of judging.

Answ. The Apostle does not exhort that the Church should Judge, but the other
prophets: for as some had the gift of tongues, speaking suddenly in a language
they understood not, and therefore God gave to others a gift of interpretation
of tongues 1. Cor. 14. 27. 18. so many might be suddenly inspired with a
spirit of Prophesy, and therefore others had a gift of discerning of spirits
whereby they knew a Prophet of God, speaking from the spirit of God, from a
minister of Satan transformed 1 Cor. 12. 10.
into an Angel of light; for in those days there were false Prophets gone
abroad, who called themselves the Prophets of God.

Chill The Apostle ver. 37. 38. exhorts them to acknowledge the things he
writes to be the commandments of God. Could they be thus infallibly guided by
the spirit, and yet must Paul call on them to acknowledge the things he writes
to be the commandments of the Lord Jesus?

Answ. Boys play As if 1. something might not be revealed to an Apostle, and
not to a prophet: seeing something might be revealed to one Prophet and not to
another. ver. 30. As if* 2ly. the Apostle did not here put an apparent
distinction between a Prophet and a spiritual man, if any man think himself
to be a Prophet or spiritual says he, (as also a Prophet is distinguished
from a righteous man, Matt. 10. 41.) ascribing to both a spirit of judgment:
the one by a prophetical gift, for prophets could judge, ver, 29. the other by
a gift of wisdom, whereby the spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. As
for that phrase. ( Let him acknowledge) it does not necessarily carry with it
the force of an exhortation, but of a simple affirmation, as it were signifying
who are the true Prophets of the Lord, and who not: as in the same phrase it is
prophesyed that toward the latter end of the world, good men shall grow
better, evil men worse, Rev. 22. 11.

Chill. But verse. 39. The Apostle puts them upon the use of means for this
prophesying: which argues the gift was not extraordinary.

Answ. (...) It Is in the Greek as verse. 1. Be zealously affected toward, or
zealously desirous after spiritual gifts: and what he means by it, himself
expounds, verse. 12, 13: Even so ye, for as much as ye are zealous of
spiritual gifts, seek that you may excel to the edifying of the Church.
Wherefore, let him that speaks in an unknown tongue pray that he may
interpret. And this is all the means the Apostle prescribes, which is far
from arguing that the gift was attaineable in a way of ordinary study and
industry. Though we also acknowledge that the spirit of prophesy might be
quenched, through the neglect and dissoluteness of him who sometimes formerly
had received it.

FINIS.

