

A Religious TREATISE UPON Simeons Song; OR, Instructions advertising how to
live holily, and dye happily.

Composed at first for the use of the truly pious Sir ROBERT HARLEY, Knight of
the Honorable order of the Bath

But since published by Timothy Woodroffe, B. D. Pastor to the Church at
Kingsland, in Herefordshire.

Job. 42.5. I have heard of thee, by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye
sees thee.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the three Crowns, at the lower end of
Cheapside, over against the great Conduit, 1659.

Christian Reader!
We having perused this ensuing Treatise bearing the Title of SIMEON'S SONG,
and being desired by the worthy AUTHOR to prefixe a line or two, we can do no
less then give it a kiss of peace and send it away: recommending it to thee for
a sound and savoury discourse, and such as wants not a pleasant quickness to
hold on thy appetite, and we do believe that all who love the Lord and wait for
the consolation of Israel, that their eyes may see his salvation: will upon
perusal find it answer their time and pains, and will then judge as do

JOHN ROW, S. WOOD.


TO THE Much Honored Colonel Edward Harley, Son and Heir to THE Renowned Sr
ROBERT HARLEY, Knight of the Honorable Order of the BATH.
Much Honored Sir!
LEt my boldness crave your favorable acceptance to Epistle you, and put your
name in the frontispiece of this precursor to your Fathers happy departure,
those tendency was to be serviceable unto his celestial transfiguration, This
Epistle is an historical Narrative of him, who was a worthy pattern of much
goodness in life, and therefore said, to your self and others (of his own flesh
and blood) Children, I have taught you how to live, and now I do teach you how
to die.
his name (but mentioned) was, and is, as a precious ointme^t poured out: your
religious fixedness in these changeable times, your discreet zeal for the
advanceing of your Lord and Master's kingdom, with your unfeigned love to the
truth, more then all arguments besides, indigitated to me, that yours must be
the patrociny; especially when I shall add the interest which you had, in such a
Fathers heart, who is now departed from among the living; and yet still lives
with the Lord; he had great things in reversion, held (in capite) from heavens
magna charta, and is now gone to take the plenary possession of them. Whilst
Sir ROBERT HARLEY lived, I dare say, (his enemies being Judges) he much studied
the art to live well, and as years and weaknesses (toward his dissolve) did
approach, he studied (as much) the art to dye well, for his aim and end was to
live in Jesus, and to dye in Jesus: to whom to live was Christ, and to whom, to
dye was gain. This blessed servant of the Lord, was much ashamed that he had
lived so long, before he lived to God; but this he did also (viz.) most
religiously and sincerely bless God (in my hearing) that for forty years or
thereabouts before his death, his soul was fixedly resolved to live to God,
(who I doubt not) but he is blessing God with SIMEON, that he departed in
peace, in a good old age, and full of grace.

Ignobled greatness had no value in his heraldry; he well foresaw, that a Saint
has the richest co^t, and that nothing in heaven or earth, does so honor and
enoble a family, or person, as true Religion; as God in Covenant, as Christ in
chief; therefore says Christ to his Church, since thou wast precious in my
sight, thou have been honorable, and so long shall an house stand before the
Lord, and their Almond tree ^ud, and flourish; (observe O you Gent^y!) and the
Lord Jesus will put the rod of power and authority into such hanas: for else,
what is birth but a dunghill flower? or parentage but a filthy cloth? and all
the titles of honor, and embellishments of the worlds glory, but sublunar, and
stained vanities; all whose tendency is toward the dust. But to be a son of
grace, and a true believer, is more true honor, then to be Theodosius the
Emperor; and this was the judgment of good old SIMEON in this Book.

Your religious Father (I hope none will call this flattery) was eminently
known to be a Worthy indeed, one of the Gospels great Worthies, heavens
favorite, Christ's friend; and Christ his friend: for whose sake he cheerfully
forsook all, and exposed himself, and all that he had on earth, to the fury and
malice of his and Christ's enemies; and said often (in evil times) he would
trust God with all: Seneca said well to Polibius, Salvo Caesare, non est de
fortuna conqueri. So this noble Patriot, would not, did not murmur, and
complain, when brought very low, nor durst he implead, or pass an hard sentence
against God, under any check of providence: but say, God is good, his will is
best, and blessed be his name: thus he acts dependence on Jehovah, and his
faith in the sure mercies of David; then he prays, and looks up, looks up and
prays, again he prays and waits, waits and prays, he hears and believe; then
he humble his soul with fasting, renewes his covenant with his God; and so
keeps up his confidence; mean while searches his soul after secret and lurking
corruptions, if he could find any way of wickedness allowed in him, that he
might lay aside every weighty, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and
run with patience the race that was set before him, looking unto Jesus the
author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
God, Heb. ^2 1, 2.

It Is abundantly known he was of a public spirit, and laid out himself beyond
his strength, to be doing good at every call of providence; not only in a
Parlament^ry way, wherein religious Sir ROBERT HARLEY was ever chosen by his
country to be one, and in Gospel or Church-work (within his sphere and
capacity) he had an enlarged and a pious heart, together with a liberal hand,
however he did streighten himself, and his, and eng^g his credit, that he
might show bowell-kindness to the despised, but faithful ministry of the
Gospel, and to the indigent members of our Lord Christ; not only in his native
country, but even to pereg^ines, and exiles; And since I have touched the
Ministry, his love to all the worthy laborers in the Lord's Vineyard is much
known, wherever himself was well known; and for his Country, Hereford City,
and County must not be silent, to praise God for him, whose pious care for
their spiritual good, has excelled, since they do enjoy many faithful, able,
and painful Ministers, mostly by his choice, bounty, and liberality; who else
in all probability, had layen waste, and old, as many other places do; or else
had been under seducers, not teachers of sound Doctrine, under Idol shepherds,
dumb dogs, and ignorant leaders, who are destroyers, not builders.

In his declining days, his Father of mercies exercised him with sore
afflictions, of bodily infirmities, spiritual combats, and conflicts, and
soking, and grinding distempers of the stone in the bladder, with Apoplexies,
and Palsy, and other infirmities of age; but O the sweet and invinceable
patience! O the humility, the holiness, contentation, and wise moderation of
himself, and sweet composedness of his spirit! He was naturally of an hasty
dispositon, but his conquest over such his infirmities, those who waited much
on him, and others who much visited him, do, and must testify, that the Lord
gave him a great measure of Christian patience, meekness, and self-denial;
with that total resignation of himself, unto the will of his heavenly Father,
that indeed he was changed into another man, and was of another spirit, a good
while before his change.

Near the Sunset, when the shadow must be long, and his life short, his senses
of seeing and hearing, seemed to have been renewed; especially his hearing,
which had been much decayed for many years; that surdity, or privation, was
wonderfully restored and quickened, to the great admiration, not only of
friends and relations visiting him, but to the comfort of himself and all
attendants about him, reading and speaking to him, enjoyed the benefit of
another Patriarch, to hear his gracious words, which did daily improve to his
dying day; the loss of whom is very great, and much bewailed, not only in his
family, and relations, but in the Church of God; yet so it pleased God.

This servant of the Lord, had much of heaven on this side heaven, whereby his
bitter portion given him, under sore afflictions, and strong conflicts, had
much sweetning in them: the various turns o^ providence, and the amaz^ng
alterations of Church and State, made him live more upon God and less upon the
creature; when his Castle at Brampton was besieged, and taken, when his sweet
and gracious consort (yet of happy memory) was taken to mercy, and to rest from
her labors; when his children were taken prisoners, his goods given to
spoilers, and robbers; his family exposed to the cruel mercies of exasperated
enemies, and carried away captives, his lands sequestered, and all his revenues
extinct: yet even then, good Sir ROBERT HARLEY assured his believing soul, that
nothing was slain, dead, lost, spoiled, and taken from him of all his
proprieties, which might have been better to him, then the gain which this
precious soul found without them: he would long for nothing which he found
that the Lord thought good to deny him, still he found stronger arguments to
ballast his religious soul, then to be overturned with such contrary winds: the
just shall live by his faith, under dark and bloody providence. The little
which himself and his had left them at that time, he was very thankeful for,
and he did want the rest with content, which made him very rich, whom the sword
and cruel oppressor, had made very poor.

Now (much Honored in the Lord) and happy Son to such a Father) after such a
deliniation of so many specialls never to be buried; our eyes and hearts are
toward you, who do live to succeed such a president of grace and virtue: our
daily prayers to the Lord are for you, and your posterity, that the Lord (who
gave you such a Father) will also give you to be always correcting and amending
the copy and history, with a wise and understanding heart, to walk in his godly
footsteps, that you may as fair excel him in all wisdom, as Solomon did good
old David, and will please to write on your heart, and on your life, in great
capital letters, on a table of pure gold, Holiness to the Lord: that you may
ever see, and enjoy, the Lord's covenant-goodness, continued to sons and
daughters of your own flesh and blood, from generation, to generation, which
is, and shall be the daily prayer of,

Your most affectionate servant in the Lord, T. W.
From my house in Kingssland, June 13* 1658. When at deaths Gate, my soul I do
commend Into thy hands, Salvation be mine end.



Deo Gloria Amen.
TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
SSome have written. Institutions to a christian life, as Calvin and Herlenius;
some of the emendation of life, as Richardus Hampoll in his Speculum
Spirituale; others (not a few) De vita activa, and contemplativa, as Ludolphus
Saxonicus, and the schoolmen, but the right manner of dying well, and the
gracious encounter with death, in its approach and the happy conquest in the
article of death, has been very seldom heard of: which gives me
encouragement, to cast in my mite into this treasury, and to make holy Simeon
my happy president, and (indeed) herein aestuebat ille senex beatissimus, whose
breathings of spirit did wax hot, whilst he fixed his believing eye upon his
Christ, in four respects; (viz.) as he was his peace, his salvation, his light,
his glory: in the first, he looked on him as his Mediator; in the second, as
his Redeemer; in the third, as his guide and teacher: in the fourth, as his
crown of rejoicing. In this Treatise you have Simeon's humble confession his
faith unfeigned, his blessed hope, his constant love, and ravishing expectation
under which, he does happily repose himself till his departure out of his
prison and house of clay; which he assuredly knew would not be long. This Book
was penned, now, and then a sheet, as the Authors leisure (from other studies)
permitted; and were presented unto an aged and eminent Servant of the Lords,
Sir ROBERTH HARLEY, Knight of the Noble Order of the BATH; being God's
prisoner, and confined to his Chamber, by reason of manifold weaknesses and
distempers of body, with which the Lord pleased to exercise him, for diverse
years before his death; being utterly disenabled to wait upon God in his
public Ordinances, and therefore among other mercies, he gladly entertained
these remembrances, from a Minister of Christ, who was very much his servant in
the Lord, the most of the papers were sometimes read to him, in his Chamber by
the Author himself, which papers have bin (since his death) gathered up, and
now composed in this little Treatise, for the use and benefit of such as do
desire to live and dye blessedly, as Simeon did. Therefore (judicious Reader)
accept of his good will who has endeavored, to pre-dispose and prepare thy
anxious soul, for a blessed separation from the body, and with good Simeon to
depart in peace: Thus I commend thee to God, and this Book to thy close
perusal, and reading throughout: hoping the Lord will please to make it very
instrumental to thee, to advance thy more happy and comfortable dissolution and
change, which is the highest aim, and utmost end of him who subscribes himself,

Thy Servant in the Lord's Work, T. W.

ERRATA in the Lines of the Book.
Page 2. Line 9. for giving, read given. page 2. lin. 10. after people, add) p.
3. l. 20. for Elegy, read Elogie. and lin. 10. for off, r. os. and l. 23. f.
of r. off. p. 14. l. 11. f. bliever, r. believer. p. 15 l. 10. s. ungodly, r.
undgodly. p. 20. l. 15. f. diminutive, read abbreviate. p. 24. l. 10. tear out
[but] p 28. l. 11, and 12. f. the r. his. p. 24. l. 21. f. and he, r. who. p.
48. l. 10. f. dvides, r. divides. p. 45. l. 21 f. tongue, r. tongue. p. 45. l
ult. f. a. r. and. p. 48. l. 20. f. new, r. now. p. 59. l. 2. f. masions, r.
mansions. p. 95. l. 85. r. 65. p. 65. l. 2. f. their r. thy. p. 55. l. 12. f.
back, r. bark. p. 77. l. penult. andd [2] p 98 l. 22. f. not God, r. God not.
p. 98. l. 23. f. is, r. come not. p. 99. l. ult. f. Gospells, r. Gospel. p.
109. l. 19. r. do bless. p. 116. l. 17. f. their r. there. p. 129. l. 19. f.
u. r. us. p. 131. l. 20. f. flictions, r. afflictions. page 142. l. 4. f. him
r. them. p 146. l. 5. f. namely, r. named. p. 154. l. 13. f. toto, r. tanto. p.
169. l. 11. f sudden, r. suddainness. p. 187. l. 12. f. espouse, r. spouse. p
192. l 8. leave out be with all, and read entertain us. p. 198. l. 24. f 3. r.
4. p. 199. l. 7. f. 4. r. 5. p. 100. f. 4 r. 6.

ERRATA in the Quotation of the texts of Scripture.
In the Margin, p. 23. l. 1. pro vosii, lege visio. p. 24. l. 21, p. tempur,
l. tempus. p. 25. l 28. pro refulgiet, l. refulget. p. 37. pro Rev. 3.9. l.
Rev. 5.9. p. 38. p. Genesis 2.14. l. Genesis 2.17. p. 39. pro Hosea 31.14. l. Hos.
13.14. p. 73. pro Job 1.4. l. Job 14.8.9. p. 79. pro John 3.12. l. John 1.1,
2.3. p. 206. pro Job 12.1. l. Job 1.21.

Courreous Reader; some few faults there are flipt in the Greek, and diverse in
the Hebrew, by reason of the Authors far distance from the Press, as also the
unskilfulness of the Corrector to the Press in the Hebrew tongue; therefore the
judicious Reader (as he meets with them) is desired to mend them with his Pen.

The Contents
SImeon's Song in two parts. Proposition and Confirmation.
page 5. 6. How one may desire to dye in peace. p. 6. The only time to dye in,
is with Christ in our arms. p. 10. It Is an high honor to be the Lord's
servant. p. 11. Who dye the Lord's servants, shall be translated to a more
celestial service. p. 12. Death of a destroyer is made a deliverer, of a curse
a blessing. p. 14. Who sees himself in Christ, may well desire to dye. p. 17. 2.
Questions. What was Simeons sight? What was Simeons desire? Ans. A strong
restless contented admirable
desire. p. 26. 27, 28. Reasons of this desire. 1 Because the godly see
themselves in a safe condition. p. 39. 2 Because they see future things as
present, and salvation actually begun. p. 39. 3 Death opens a door of glory to
such. p. 40. 4 Because of the conflict of a saint in death. 41. Because of the
necessity of death. 43. Because of the blessed advantage which soul and body
find in death p. 45. And that in three particulars all defects shall be done
away. 46. 2 The constitution shall then be changed. 49. 3 All thy fruition shall
be of God, in God. Ibid. Death to some is a singular blessing, 51. To some the
basest life is better then any death. 52. The Saints dye comfortably and
blessedly, in many respects. 54. Qu. Why do any truly godly fear death? Ans. In
two respects. 58. Qu. May not a wicked man desire to dye? 59. Ans. Yes, But not
as such Idem Death to wicked ones, is formidable in six things, from p. 35. to
63. Some find unconceivable comfort in death p. Shall man that dies, live
again? Ans. Yes, by weighty considerations 74. The matter of blessedness is God
enjoyed. 77. The manner is, to behold God in his essential glory. 78. An
exhortation to unfeigned thanksgiving for many choice mercies, made over to
believers here below. 83. What moves God to be so gracious to such? 90.
Directions to stir up to thankfulness from p. 92 to 100. 2 Exhortation to
prepare for a timely and happy death. 103 God keeps thy time under his lock and
key. 104 Few provide solidly for death. 108 Some flatter and sin themselves
into a miserable death. 69 Wicked men cannot dye in peace. 70. It Is a very
great miracle for an old impenitent to repent at the hour of death. 72 The
youngest is as mortal as the oldest. 74 Who will dye well, must accept the
time of repentance. 75 We must renew our repentance of ten. 76 Sinners must
hear Christ's voice to day. 77 Men may not trust to long life, nor to late
repentance. 78 It Is dreadful to be to repent, when the day of grace is past,
to a particular soul. 79 To be well principled in the doctrinalls of true
religion from p. 80. to 84 To hold solemn conference often with death, 85
Wherein are many sweet meditations and weighty considerations, from 86 to 91
All things must be set in order for death, Ibid. 1 The body, in four respects,
unto 96 2 The house must be set in order, Ibid What Is meant by the house, 97
God's Mete-yard, lays out every man's estate, 98 What wicked men do unduly get,
and wickedly possess, is in a sense the gift of God, 100 In setting our house
in order, what is ill gotten, must be restored, 101, 102 What is restitution?
102 Who must restore, Ibid. When? 103. To whom restitution must be made, 104.
It must not be done as alms, but as just debt, 105 Of the care of persons
related to a family, 106 Relations must christianly be admonished, 155 But why
admonished at such a time especially 157 to 160 Godly persons can then pray for
relations, with much boldness and confidence, 162 Concord among Children a
sweet blessing, 164 Parents dying, should command the care of younger children
to godly guardians, 167 Goods desposed of by will, or otherwise, 168 In which
regard must be had to the first born 170 Obj. One is made great, the rest
undone. Ans. Not so, God provides otherwise, and good Parents do otherwise, 172
3. Exhortation, humbly to submit to the Lord both in life and death, 174
Different is the carriage of men in the approach of death, 125 A sweet
Prosopopoeia of a gracious soul in death, 176 We must submit to God In Health,
Sickness, Death.
p 178 An holy resignation of soul and body, in all states to the Lord, 178 In
sickness, say, thy will be done, in me, and upon me, 180 Great differences
between the visitation of God, and of men, Ibid. Who dye preparedly, do
confidently put themselves into Christ's hands, Ibid God will fit all his for
death before hand, 183 By four things. 1 He makes them weary of the world, and
sinful self, 134 2 He does sanctify every pain and dolor to them, Ibid. 3 He
makes them long for death, and willing to die Ibid. 4 He lades them with sweet
apprehensions of infinite love, 133
How to entertain the approach of death, 134 And death it self in the article
of death, 135, 136. Whether it be sinful to fear death, 137 Ans. Not simply
unlawful, 138 Basely to fear death, a sin, 138 Who lead an evil life, must
needs fear death, Ibid The Saints fear death, and others, but from diverse
principles, 139 It Is not improbable but we man enjoy relations after death, 142
How to shut up our own eyes, and bind up our own jaws in death, 143 4
Exhortation. Let not friends grieve overmuch for them that dye in the Lord.
144 Friends may weep a while, but not too long. ibid. 145 Friends may use
laudable ceremonies about the dead. 146. Friends may be at cost with the dead.
ibid. 147. Friends may keep sad mourning seats. Ibid. Rules of advice to living
Friends. 1. To mourn with moderation 149. 150. 2. With timely pacification,
151, 152, 153. 3. To be satisfied with the goodness of God yet continued to
thee who survivest. 154. 4. To be comforted again. 156. 5. Our mourning not
without a good mixture of joy. 158, 159. 6. Labor an holys acquiescence in the
al-suffiency of thy Lord God. 180, 161, 162, 163.

Imprimatur.

EDMUND CALAMY.

The Author's Letter to Sir ROBERT HARLEY, about the beginning of his long
sickness.
Honorable Sir!
AS I do much bless God for the Religious stedfastness, in such vertiginous
times; when so many reeds have been shaken with every wind; so I am confident,
you will ever bless God, for that your house was built upon the Rock: and for
the excellencies of Christ, and of his attractive loves to your soul: who made
you sick of love, after the more full enjoyment of him, who is a head of fine
gold, and a Cluster of Camphere: the Lord your righteousness; the chief of ten
thousand: who has invited you to repentance unto life, and to more daily
communion with his excellency. Pardon my boldness Gracious SIR, possibly God
will use my little Talent, to warm your heart, with the shining love of Jesus
Christ: so peerless, so sweet, so chaste, so full, so unchageable, so adequate,
and magneticall, in all his Mediatoriall works upon your soul, I say upon your
soul, so miraculously saved by the Lord: and pulled out of the suburbs of Hell,
so unexpectedly, so undeservedly, so freely, in the day of your souls first
love, and espousall to his blessed self. Time was (Noble SIR) that your Honor
walked in the way of your own heart, bathed and rolled in a worldly Paradise of
princely favor, when your thoughts, were too much (I presume) taken up about
additionalls: with which to enamell your present state, with worldly
contentments: whose emptiness, together with your Christlesseness, the God and
Father of all your mercies, discovered in his own time, to that your precious
soul, and withal, did let down some beams and glimpses of the unum
necessarium, more necessary then to be born, to live, to be fed, and clad: I
mean Jesus Christ, and him crucified: when heavens infinite mercy, caused the
day to break, and the shadows to fly away: presently upon which you must
confess with godly Junius, statim mihi alio facies apparuit: when you then
heard with other ears, understood with another intellect, saw with other eyes,
spoke another language, and with a new tongue, read the Scripture with another
spirit, and understood with another sense, and understanding: yea, and acted by
other principles then before, old things then vanished away, and all things
became new; But how? I answer, by that power of God, that exceeding greatness
of power, which raised Christ from the dead, and set him at the right hand of
God. SIR! thus you came to know Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, which is above
all knowledge, especially to know our selves to be Crucified with him; Oh! that
is wisdom indeed, and knowledge most transendently excellent: for it will make
a man wise to salvation. Besides, thus to know Christ, and thus to know him for
our selves, is of most excellent use to us at present, since it is not only an
informing, and speculative knowledge, but a conforming and reforming, a
practical and operative knowledge, which works mightily on the unregenerate
part: persuading that also (by degrees) to be Crucified with Christ, and to
live more entirely by the faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave
himself for us. (Precious soul) this life by faith, is life indeed, the present
life natural is a death to this life, but the believers spiritual life, that
is a life purchased at the dearest rate, viz. by the most unvaluable blood of
Christ. It Is to live in God the Father spiritually, to live in Jesus Christ by
the mystical union, and by the sanctifying Spirit of God; breathing this life
into dead souls, and quickening our dead and dry bones, enabling and impowering
us, to cry Abba Father by the Spirit of his Son: and loosing the tied tongue,
to say from our own particular interest, O Lamb of God which take away my
sins; all my sins: the sins of all my li^e: nay, all my other men's sins; all
the sins of my vile nature; nay, my sins of the first Adam: and all this
blessed Jesus, as freely as ever the rain did fall, or the Sun did shine, never
to impute any one of them to me, but acquitting and absolving thy poor
creature, merely for thy mercies sake: to justify me for ever, before the eyes
of thy glory; nor is this all, (O Father of mercies, says the pardoned soul)
but thou do also richly engratiate thy poor servant, to be the beloved Spouse
of thy dearest Son: and to confer that grace of Adoption, to bring me nigh to
thy self, by the blood of Christ: yea to confer sanctification on me, that I
might also partake of thy divine nature; of a Briar, to make me a sweet Rose,
of a Lion, a Lamb; of most deformed, defiled, abominable within and without; to
make me lovely, comely, fair as the Moon, beautiful as the Sun* and so to
take me into thy most holy Covenant, with thy self: and to give me a propriety
in all things in heaven, and earth. Thus life is mine, and death is mine, the
world is mine, things present, and things to come, all is mine, I am Christ's,
and Christ is Gods: a very strange Paradox, a very large Inventory, yet no
larger then the New Covenant, in which God has said, I will be your God, and
you shall be my people, that is proof enough: for qui habent habentem omnia,
habent omnia: here is a Bee-hive of the sweetest honey (much beloved in the
Lord) before your the effectual calling, like the wandering Be, your honor
went from flower to flower, from one tree to another, and found but little
sweetness, if any at all, and what ever it was, you were content to forsake
that too for Christ: but then you said as Jacob in another case, I have enough,
my son Joseph is yet alive; my soul is yet alive, alive to God in Jesus Christ,
and with old Simeon, you are daily singing forth this Cantionem Cygneam, Lord
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation* Lo! the budding of Simeon's Almond tree, one bud is, Simeon, is a
volunteer to death, not dragged thither by fatal necessity, nor his soul
thrust out of doors, with a violent hand, but willing now, or whenever his
Master shall please: So, good Old Abraham, dies in a good old age, full of
years, and full of grace, scarce an empty corner in his soul: both instances
had enough of days and years, therefore did breathe, and pant after eternity.

And now (celestial soul) hearken a while and you shall hear the Spirit of
Christ, sweetly whispering, Arise my love, my dove, my fair one, and come away:
why tarriest thou? To whom the redeemed does joyfully answer, Be it so (O
blessed Savior) I do only tarry thy leisure, I come Lord, I come; but in thy
time, and according to thy Word, not before: mean while, Lord help me to act
faith in thy rich promises, and in a blessed reliance of most holy recumbency,
to sit at the footstool of thy great mercy; admiring the honor thou do to
all thy holy ones, and magnifying thy grace, to thy Saints, differing only in
degrees from glory; for grace is glory militant, and glory is grace triumphant.

And to conclude, Honorable SIR! Holiness in heart and life, is greater
honor, then to be born the son of a King: for the holy ones of the Lord have
(as it were) the blood Royal of heaven, running in every vein, and the
remembrance of every such one after death, is as a precious ointment powered
out; or as the smell of the Wine of Lebanon: bear up then (soldier of Christ)
against all discouragements in your journial toward heavenly Canaan; what if
you do meet with temptations, and trialls, nay with fiery Serpents in the way:
follow your Captain Christ Jesus, who for the joy and crown set before him, did
endure the Cross, and despise the shame, and is now set down at the right hand
of the most high. Wonder not (O warrier of Christ) if bullets of temptations,
and fire balls of hellish terrors threaten to destroy your faith, which if
they hit, they cannot hurt you: Jesus Christ (in whom we are more then
conquerours) takes all the blows, and gives you most insultantly to triumph
over them; and to read down ally our spiritual adversaries, and to be gainers
by them all, in the day of your blessed change; when you shall be clothed upon
with the same glory which Christ himself had, from the Father by special
donation; and the very day of your death you shall be with Christ in Paradise;
as a Bride welcomed by the Bridegroom, when your honor shall for ever sit with
the King of Saints, in heavenly places: congratulated by innumerable Angels,
and by the general Assembly, and Church of the first born; enrolled in heaven,
by the spirits of just men made perfect, and with whom your blessed self, shall
make one, saying, Hallelujah, salvation, and honor, and glory, and power unto
the Lord our God, Amen. Hallelujah.

Yours

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Tho. Parkhurst etc.
(...) or Divine characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the more
secret and undiscerned differences between 1. The Hypocrite in his best dress
of seeming virtue, and formal duties: And the true Christian in his real
graces, and sincere obedience. As also between 2. The blackest weeds of daily
infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving grace; and the reigning sins
of the Unregenerate, that pretend unto that godliness they never had. By that
late burning and shining Lamp, Mr Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of Wrington
in Somerset. Folio.

Mr. John Cotton his practical Exposition on the first Epistle to John, second
Edition, corrected and enlarged* in Folio.

A Theater of flying Insects, wherein especially the manner of right ordering
the Be is excellently described; with discourses H storical and Physical
concerning them; with a second part of Meditations and Observations,
Theological and Moral, in 3 Centuries upon the same subject, by Samuel Purchase
M. A. in 40.

Catechizing God's Ordinance, in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister of Buttolphs Aldgate, London, the second Edition corrected and
augmented,

A Religious Treatise UPON Symeon's Song: OR, Instructions advertising how to
Live Holily, and Die Happily.
LUKE, 2.29, 30. 29 Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy word.

30. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.


SIMEON, here may be styled God's white Swan, Eccl. 12.5.
singing his own Epitaph; now in the time when his Almond-tree did sweetly
blossom.

It is Simeons Funeral Song, Cantus F^. nebris.
of which Songs, I only find two in Scripture: (so sadly do the most lay down
this Earthly Tabernacle; when as the dear Saints of God, should then rejoice
with joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8.
and full of Glory.)

You read of one in the Old Testament, and that was good Old Moses, 120. Deu.
31.19. (...) 30 Duter. 32. through out
years old; who calls his instructions before his death (giving to the
people a song, which he requires to be written for the use of the Children of
Israel, when the Lord should put a period to his days on earth.

The second was Simeons Song here, whose days were protracted, till he should
see the Lord's Christ bodily, Galatians.
and spiritually at once. Both, great men, and honorable, as say, the
Ecclesiastical Histories; both Holy, and Godly men; Moses was God's Servant,
and so was Simeon: Both honored with a Religious and Blessed memorial: Moses
dies, with fixed eyes upon true Canaan; but Simeons eyes are fixed upon Christ.

The Spirit of God knows as well the time of our Spiritual joys, as of our
effectual calling; and the actings of our repentance, and of our Faith: See
here, this good old man, is now excited to take the opportunity to act his own
joy, and to personate that, which believers should act much more then they do;
namely, to look believingly on the Lord Jesus, their joy, and consolation as
Simeon did: Who First took him up in his arms,

Observe, that Simeon declares his in the possession, of this beatificall
Vision.

verses 29, 30, 31, 32. called Simeons Song; as if he had said, I fear not sin,
nor dread I death: I have lived enough, I have my Life: I have seen enough, I
have my light: I have sorrowed enough, I have my joy: (sweet Babe) let this
Song be a Lullaby for thee, and a Funeral for Me; sleep thou in mine arms,
while I depart in peace.

Simeons resolve and willingness to die.
Simeon resolves to die willingly, so freely does his heart breath out, and his
tongue express, what he had so well resolved on.

Simeons time in which he wills to die, neither sooner nor longer.
His time, even now, (Lord) no sooner, nor no longer: Lord say Amen to my
desires.

Note his relation, in which he stood, in the word Servant, answering
relatively unto the word Lord: and so it is between a Master, and servant. And
here let us observe Simeons humble acknowledgment of his relation, Simeons
humility.
in being the Lords Servant.

A Servant indeed he was both in heart, and life; both in word and deed, an
humble worshipper of the Lord God; who as he had been graciously preserved by
him, in a 1000. dangers all his life long; and much owned from his Mothers womb
till now: So he will now resign up himself in death to the safe custody, and
farther favor of so good a Lord, and Master.

In the words be two parts.

1. A Proposition, Lord now let thou thy servant depart, etc.

2. A Confirmation, For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

In the first he proposes the large desire of his soul, as if he had said,
Lord long have I lived, and have seen all the Vanity that is under the Sun; and
thought I could never have my fill: But now Lord, since thou have made me see
the emptines of the creature, and thy fulness; why do I live any longer in such
a place as earth is? In such a condition as mortals are? Lord now let thou
thy Servant depart in peace: What, depart out of thy public service now in
the Temple? no, but by thy leave, but thou (Lord permitting,) let my long
imprisoned precious soul depart this body, and this body and soul depart, out
of this present world.

So now he desires death, which is resolutio animae a corpore, (as the
Philosophers call death,) who say that there is a strong ligament between the
soul, and the body, which death does unty; and so deliver up the person either
to a better, Qui pacatum habent Deum, et pacatam conscientiam illi in pace
moriuntur.
or worse place.

Simeon here desires to depart in peace, who as he was at peace with God, and
with his own Conscience: So he desiers to die in an holy calm, and sweet
peace.

Hitherto of the proposal, next briefly of the Confirmation.

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation..

The happy death of every gracious Simeon, is much exalted, by the promises of
God, which in Christ Jesus are yea, and Amen, to the praise and Glory of God. 2
Cor. 1.20.
As if Simeon had said, Domine jam moriar alacriter; Lord I will now depart,
for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation; Lord now said thy Holy Oracle truth,
which was delivered me to believe, Isa. 5.2. All the ends of the earth shall
see the Salvation of our God. Isa. 52.10.
And I Simeon my self do see the person, and the thing (viz) Christ and his
Salvation, which he shall bring to all Nations. Nor is this all, but he speaks
of the Offices, and actings of Christ: saying, which thou have prepared before
the face of all people, Isai. 49.
out of Is. 49. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvation to the ends of the earth. Him whom man despises: Him
whom Nations abhor, Kings shall see and arise, Prices also shall worship
because of the Lord that is faithful.

[And to be the glory of thy people Israel.]

Here Is high exaltation of the Tribes of Israel: because from amongst them,
shall Christ come according to the flesh, and the consequent of Simeons Song,
was,

2 Luke. 33.
1. The parents of Christ they marvel especially considering, what they lately
heard from the blessed Angels, 1 Luke. 30.
and what the Shepherds reported of him.

2 Luke. 34.
2. Simeon blessed them, and said to his Mother Mary behold this Child is set
for the fall, and rising again of many in Israel.

Now as Solomon's throne had six ascending Ivory steps over laid with gold: 1
Kings 10 18.
so here be six steps of ascent, for the poor soul to come very near, to a
greater then Solomon, even to the everlasting King of glory; 2 Cor. 11.2
who has a long time been preparing every gracious soul, to be a Bride for
himself, and to enjoy the Lord Jesus in his blessed arms, with everlasting
conjugalls.

Where first note, the time, now, servant. Fourthly the dignity of which he did
desire to dye, and that was in peace. Simeon now had the Lord Christ in his
arms, who made peace, who came and brought peace, who was peace, and the very
God, and Prince of peace. Ah soul that is the only time for thee, and me to die,
when we have gotten Christ into the arms of our faith, then, then, and not
before, we can sing with Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace: for when Christ is thus in thine arms, thou art in his arms also, so
reciprocally do these two lovers clip, and embrace each other.

Now a word both of this proposal, and confirmation in the manner of his
speech.

The words be the humble prayer of a gracious servant to his Lord viz. to die
presently in peace; but according to the mind, and with the good leave of his
Lord,

Quest. But who is Simeon here? or, what it Simeons condition?

Answ. 1. A servant, but an honorable one, for he was the servant of the Lord
of life and glory.

Answ. 2. A servant, bound by strongest obligations of oath, and covenant.

Answ. 3. A servant, during life, nay a servant for ever, to a Master whose
service is perfect freedom: Joh. 8.36
but what freedom can such a servant ask or expect? yes this great Lord has a
blessed freedom, an everlasting jubilee, to grant to all his servants; that
aged Simeon foresaw, and that he asks.

Mistake me not, Simeon desires not asks not to be freed from the service of
his Lord: but asks to be translated into an higher, into a more celestial,
and evangelical service, and according to the faithful word of promise made to
him by his Lord: and so heartily desires, and prays to depart from faith, and
hope, to fruition: from prayers to praises, from fears and doubtings of a
misgiving heart, to a most sweet tranquillity, to fear and doubt no more: from
pains, and dolours, to perfect ease: from miserable comforters, to the God of
all Consolations: Job. 16.2. Romans 15.5 2 Cor. 7.5. Heb. 2.14. Heb. 12.23.24.
from troubles without, from fears within, from sin, death and him that had the
power of death, to eternal, heavenly joys: to the great assembly to the lambs
redeemed ones, to perfect holiness, and endless happiness, and to Jesus Christ
himself to be partaker with him of heavens glory; yea of that very glory, which
himself had with the Father before the world was, Joh. 17.5.
and to be possessed of that very glory, which the humanity of Christ has at
this present time, at the right hand of God.

Simeons eye of faith was poring to look through the dark cloud of his
infirmities, upon this dazzling glory, and so does beg his freedom, to be
discharged of his earthly Tabernacle, according to the word of his Lord.

now I shall endeavor to sum up all, and to mould the proposition of this
ensuing Treatise in one most certain conclusion.

Simeon did here.

Many have unjustly desired to dye, upon unjust considerations; as Cato,
Cleombrotus, Lucretia, and others: quia Spiritus latenter jusserat. lib. 1.
cap. 21.
but they may alone (upon just grounds) desire to dye, who have an eye within
the veil, and an ear to hear the spirit bid them, now, be willing to dye.

Those sacred Virgins who in the sack of Rome, chose to prevent the barbarous
heathen, prostituting their bodies to uncleanness, by a volunta-murthering of
themselves, had no warrant at all; nor ought they under any pretense, have fled
unto so desperate a prevention, this but by the way.

They alone, who have had a gracious aspect upon the Lord, can be rightly
willing to dye: they who have so looked into the promise, that they are
assured, God will show them their Lord, first believingly, and then
beatifically, do also look upon death (which was wont to be so formidable) as
very much changed: for now, death is no longer a destroyer, but a deliverer: no
longer a punishment, or a curse, but a blessing: yea death to a bliever, is one
legacy in that rich Inventory of the Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.30.
all things be yours, death is yours.

While death was in the Devils power, death was an enemy; but Christ has made
it a friend, and a blessing, a bridge to pass over, from the vail of tears
into the Kingdom of glory. As Haman provided for Mordicai: so death intended a
curse, and mischief, but accidentally it proves a blessing, and to be desired.

Indeed to men without God, and Christ, out of Covenant, and without the word
of promise, death is of all terribles, the most terrible: (...).
and a most rigid executioner of divine wrath and vengeance; but to the Godly,
so it is a servant of the Lords, and our servant to unlock Heaven gate, and to
admit the precious souls of Christ's redeemed ones into Christ's bosom: such do
quietly send away their souls to heaven, whereas the ungoldly man or woman (who
is an unbeliever) his soul is taken from him; Luke 12. Job. 27.8.
and as Job speaks, will they, nill they; they would fain live longer, (...)
but they must not, they cannot, so inexorable is death to them: but every
Simeon is willing to resign, when his Lord shall please, he dies not, because
he must dye: but because he willingly subscribes to the Lords fiat.

This Conclusion is confirmed by manifold witnesses.

To me to live is Christ, 1 Phil. 21.
to dye is gain. But Paul was here in a great straight, (...). v. 23.
having strong arguments on both sides, to desire life, and to desire death
therefore says, I am in a straight between two, having a desire to depart and
to be with Christ, which is far better.

Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you, that your
rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me.

Another testimony of this truth proposed, is in St. Paul's second epistle to
the Corinthians.

2 Cor. 5.1,
For in this we groan earnestly desiring to be clothed upon, (...).
with our house which is from Heaven: For we that are in this Tabernacle do
groan, being burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, v. 4.
but clothed upon, (...)
that mortality might be swallowed up of life. Now he that has wrought us for
the self-same thing is God; v. 5.
who also has given us the earnest of the spirit, and so goes on, Therefore we
are always confident, v. 6.
knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
For we walk by faith, and not by sight, we are confident (I say) and willing
rather, to be absent from the body, u. 7.
and to be present with the Lord.

Quest. But whence all this? Q.


Answ. From the Apostles hope, A.
and expectation he had of Heaven, that mortality might be swallowed up of
life; according to the testimony, and earnest of the spirit of God, that after
this life he shall be clothed upon, with life, and glory: that then he shall
be with the Lord: Thus much his faith had showed him. And thus much for the
confirmation.

We cannot see Christ in his coessentiality with the Father, and with the Holy
Ghost: Such a sight of God here below, would be inconsistent with a mortal and
sublunar being, and would swallow up the Creature man: as the Schoolmen do
affirm. But here against does Gregory object, What? may we not se, who see the
Lord's Christ? Especially seeing him God-man, as Simeon here did? no longer in
the type, but the truth it self.

qui videant videntem omnia, quid non videant? Greg. sol. lib. 4 cap 33.
St. Augustine does well answer this, and the like objections, saying, we can
see no more of God, and of Christ then God shall please to manifest unto us, or
then Christ shall please to reveal unto us; as he did to Moses, when God did
put him in a clift of the Rock: Exodus 33.22.23.
what breaking forth of his glory the Lord shall please to discover unto us,
finite creatures, those we may see. Visione intelligibili videntar ea quae sunt
a nobis intelligibilia. Aug.
But the Father goes on further, we may see much of God with our intellect, (I
mean) of such things, as are intelligible; and thus many things of God, and
Christ, do fall within our capacity, and as we are able to bear them; thus
visions be some darker, some more lightsome, some persons have more day, and
some more night; yet, at the best, our sight here, is but obscure, as the old
man's sight, through his spectacles. I say some Saints have cleerer visions, as
Ezechiel, to whom the Lord opened Heaven; which made him say, I saw the Visions
of God. The great Jehova, Deodate in his Annotations.
did after a special manner, Illuminate his understanding faculty, and did
reveal to him such divine, and ravishing secrets, as did far surpass any human
capacity; with which some precious Jewels of the Lords, have been so
spiritually transported, that they have sweetly breathed out their celestial
souls, into the arms or bosom of their Lord Christ, their salvation; as
Simeon did desire here to do.

One well observed of late, that there is nothing, which has so great an
influence, upon a holy man or woman, nothing does so much affect their hearts,
as a clearer discovery of the visions of God: as when Job said I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye sees thee. Job. 42.
And says St. Augustine, who is said to be 12. years old when our savior
suffered Euse. Eccle. Hist. lib. 3. Exo. 34.6.
often wished to have seen Christ in the flesh, as Ignatius that blessed Martyr
did.

1. There Is a sight of God in his divine attributes, and so he proclaims
himself, in the hearing of all the peopl; The Lord, the Lord God, merciful,
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, etc.

Aquin.
2. There is a sight of God in his eminency and excellent greatness; and so
appeared he to Moses, out of the midst of a burning Bush: and to Abraham,
Jsaak, and Jacob, by his Name (Jah) that deminutive of the Word Jehovah, Exo.
3.2.
Psa. 68.4.
or God Almighty and All-sufficient.

(...)
So, by his name (I am) ver. 14. This is my name (says he) forever, and this is
my memorial unto all generations. ero qui ero.
Thus the Israelites saw him, in his excellent greatness, which he did so
display before them.

3. There is a sight of God's surpassing purity, and holiness of his nature,
and so the Angels and souls of the Saints departed, and now in Heaven do see
him: Isa. 6.3.
and so the Seraphims, who cried one to another, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord
of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory.

4. There Is a sight of the plenarie blessedness, and fullness of God, Genesis 17.1.
(...)
filling all things; of which God himself told Abraham, saying, I am the
Almighty God, walk before Me, and be thou perfect.

5. There Is a sight of Gods dominion and Soverainty, Isa. 6.5.6.
at some glimpses of which, said the Prophet Isaiah. Woe is me, for I am undone,
for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. etc.

6. There Is a sight of God in his providence, who does so dispose of, Ep.
1.11. Mat. 6.26.27. Rev. 4 11.
and order all things, according to the counsel of his own will, that he does
whatsoever pleases him, both in heaven and earth: he provides maintenance, and
subsistence, for the host of all his works: vegetative, sensitive, or
rational, whether animate, or inanimate, Mat. 10.30.
For the Lillies of the field, for the Fowls of Heaven, the very hairs of our
head are numbered. Ps. 74.17. Job. 36 27. Job. 37.10.
He orders the day and the night, Summer and winter, Heat and cold, and he
makes small drops of water; By the breathing of God frost is given; and the
breadth of the waters is straightened.

7. There is a sight of God in the face of Christ, viz. a reconciled God, and
Father in Jesus Christ, and which, more fully to make known, this God, and
Father, 2. Cor. 4, 6.
has commanded the light to shine out of darkness, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; So that as the great
body of the sunn, gives light to the worlds hemisphere, Mal. 4.2.
so does God in Christ (by the son of righteousness: sending forth the blessed
beams of Evangelicall grace and glory) shine upon the Church, Gloria Dei hic
est perlucida, and refulgens. Oecolamp. in Eze. 43.2.
and give saving light, into dark sovles; and does blessedly break in upon
blind men and women, who before, sat in mufled darkness, and in the shadow
of death. Reader heed these things well, for they carry, light life and power
in them.

8. And lastly, vosti haec fidei contemplatio tranfigurativa appellatur. Theod.
epus Cy^i de fide in Epiph.
there is a sight of God in the person of Christ, and that is when we do
apprehend a Godhead filling the humane nature, with most unutterable
apprehensions of God, his Divinity, and when (by the powers of rich grace) we
do come to apprehend our selves, so far interessed in the two natures of the
second person (for ever made one Christ) as to conceive and believe our selves,
to be the chosen, cum Deus sese suaque c^gnoscibilia largius and perfectius
patefacit suis. Mercer. in Job. 4.5.
and beloved of God in Christ, before the world was; and (by the mighty work of
free grace) do begin to find our selves, accepted, beloved, redeemed and saved
by our Lord, thus set before us: whom blessed Simeon, looks here on, corporally
and spiritually as his own Christ, as his salvation by means of the most Holy
and happy continuance, thus many Prohets and Kings have desired to see, Luke
10.24
of all the three Persons in the Trinity: whereat Simeons heart became
wonderfully enlarged: It being given in to him from above, (according to the
promise of the Holy Ghost) that he should not see death, before he had seen the
Lords Christ.

Iunius in Isaiam.
Simeons sight here was not only ocular and intuitive, but but intellectual
and fiduciall, being Divinely revealed to him, as the visions of Daniel,
Ezekiell, and John: for his sight was a manifold vision, Epist. ad smyrn and
Policarp.
of the Lords Christ in person, in his natures, in his offices; so that Simeon
was (as it were) transfigured, Isa. 22.1. Epo vero and post r^surrectionem in
carne cum vidi, ubi ignatius habet, locum tempur, and personas quicum petro
erant, and ipsa verba Christi.
as Peter James and John; and carried into the vallie of visions, to whom God
pleased also to Communicate, a vision of rapturing loves; as to the Church in
the Canticles; and as unto blessed Jgnatius, but after his resurrection, when
he appeared unto Peter, and those who were with Peter, his words be, and I also
after his resurrection saw him.

Simeon was communing with the promise, Promisit s^ deus compariturum in nube,
Levit. 16.2. Nubes fuit symbolum inhabitantis dei miserentis, ac eos servantis,
quu^ templo Salomonis and sancto sanctorum primum importaretur arca, digressis
commodum sacerdotibus ex adytis, nubes replevit domum domini, nec sacerdotes
subsistere poterant, ut administrarent, prae nube illa; quandoquideme rat
repleta gloria domini, domus domini 1. Regum. 8. verum hoc loco constituto
templo novo, claritas and splendour, absque nube refulget patres omnes sub nube
suerunt, and omnes in mosen baptizati sunt nube, sed jam, quia revelationis
tempus, absque nube in facie Christi, gloriam dei contemplamur, nunc, non inter
Cherubim lux est, sed illucescit and resulgiet ipsa quoque terra, a gloria Dei:
quemad modum terrena Credentium corda, incomprehensibili lumine gratiae
adimplentur, aeterno templo dedicato haec terra in Adamo, maledicta est, and
tribulos gignit; faedissimis enim cogitationibus discerpitur cor hominis:
intranti in novum hoc templum suum gloriae Dei perlustris eadem efficitur: nos
enim pridem peccatores regenuit in spem vivam. Ecolamp. Mag. Basiliensis Episc.
in Ezekiel. 43.
and with his faith about the veracitie of that promise, and about his Lord
Christ, wrapped up in the promise, for his use; mean while, does the Lord bring
in Christ himself in person, who was the soul and marrow of the promise: and so
his believing soul, was (even here) gratified with a blessed vision, whereof
more fully in that which follows, namely, Simeons delight, Simeon sight, and
desire.

I shall amplify this truth by two necessary questions.

Q.
Quest. 1. What this (so working sight) is?

Q.
Quest. 2. What this desire is?

A.
Answ. To the first, I answer that after a sinner has taken some good notice
of his miserable self, out of Christ, Ephesians. 2.12.
out of Covenant, a stranger to the Common wealth of Israel, without God, and
in a miserable pickle, confounded in himself (as Ephraim) much afflicted, and
greatly humbled before the Lord. Jer. 31.19.
I say after such a sight of himself, when a wretched sinner comes to see
Christ in the gospel, (as in a crystal glass) chosen of God, and the beloved
Son of God; 2 Cor. 5.19.
in, and by whose mediation God did reconcile himself to the world. And when a
sinner comes to see himself in his Christ, as his Christ; as one in whom he he
has a special interest, and propriety (as blessed Thomas did see Christ, when
he cried out, my God and my Lord) and when thou come to see him, who has
made thy peace with his Father, by his most precious blood upon his Cross. And
to see him, who has procured thy justification, thy adoption, and purchased
his Fathers everlasting love for thee, and has given thee to be an heir of
Heaven, a coheire with himself, and provided rich mansions of endless glory.

Such seeing, Liking.
must needs breed likeing, and such will breed desires, and longing even to be
sick of love, after the fuller enjoyment of him, who is the Author, and
finisher of thy salvation.

It is to see the Lord Christ, A. 2
clothed in our nature for us: and to see him in both natures, our mediator
and advocate with the Father: to see him our King, our Priest, our Prophet,
mightily enabled to carry on, and to complete the work of our redemption to the
uttermost: it is to see him, who as he was promised by all the Prophets to come
into the world; Act. 10.43.
so I see him come indeed, to make satisfaction to divine justice for me, to
pay my debt, and to set open heavens doors to me, and to pave for me a new and
living way to go to God by him. Heb. 7.25.


A. 3.
It is to see my gracious Lord reaching out both his arms of his love, to
receive me into the blessed bosom, and tendering the precious self, to be made
of God to my soul, wisdom righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30.
sanctification, and redemption: to see him my joy, and life, the life of my
life, the soul of my soul, my crown and glory, to see him owning me to be his
beloved spouse dying for me, and respecting more my spiritual life, then his
own natural life, and he dyed once that I should live for ever: it is to see
him who chose to be accursed, that I might be blessed: who was content to be
condemned (as a vile malefactor) that I might be acquitted, justified, and
saved.

It is to see him, who suffered the torments of hell for me, that I might for
ever enjoy, the glory of heaven. Think now blessed soul, had thou been in
Simeons case, and place, whether thou would not have said, and sung as
Simeon did, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

2. Question.

What this desire is?

Desire is the wing of the soul, 1. a strong desire Pher.
whereby it moves toward some good, where it loves to feed it self, and to
be satisfied with the thing desired, Job. 39.29.
as the Eagle looks on the pray afar off, the Eagle is sharp-sighted to
discover the pray; swift of wings to hasten to it; armed with strength to seize
upon it: so our desires (according to our apprehension of the objects goodness)
does convocate all the powers, and faculties of the soul, to promote, and
procure the good beloved and desired, as in the text, Simeons love, and desire
is fixed upon Christ, the best good in heaven, and earth, 2. Hag. 7.
and therefore is called the desire of all Nations.

Well might Simeon desire what he did: for (as it is said of a Roman Emperor)
neminem unquam dimisit tristem: So the Lord Christ never sent any longing
Simeon away empty, who comes to him as Simeon did, (sub ratione boni and
jucundi) to find enough in Christ to fill up all desires, and all the
vacuities in the soul.

Nothing comparable to Christ, thought Simeon, Exodus 33.
nothing but Christ, said the blessed Martyr, nothing but thy glory, said
Moses, show me thy glory: like Anselms bird, tied to the ground with a string,
and ascending to the length of the thread, raising her self, and flying
upwards. Oh! so is my soul (said he) sighing, groaning, and desiring to depart,
and to be with Christ, (as Paul) to see the Lords salvation, as Simeon.

This desire is a restless desire of a poor, weary, heavy laden soul, A
restless desire.
very low in a vale of misery, and valley of tears, exiled from her native
soil, where troubles, and griefs, crowd in like Jobes messengers: as the waves
of the Sea, Romans 7.24.
one at the heels of another. Which made the Apostle to ask, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death.

The consideration of which made an Heathen to say to his Scholars, that if it
were offered, which Sr Robert Harley said often in his old age.
him to be young again, he would not accept such an offer; so troublesome did
he count this present condition to be.

But the precious servants of the Lord, have more cause to desire death; for
that they do live under a better hope, and do see their celestial souls under
the miserable captivity of sin, and satanicall thraldom; combating continually
with the lusts of the flesh, 1. Jo. 2.16.
the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life; with troubles of diverse kinds,
with discontents every moment: under the emptiness of the creature, the
groaning creature, which we do too much rely upon: besides what troubles? what
wants? what fears? what doubts? what losses? what crosses? is every day filled
up withal? what malice, and envy, from the men of the world, for godlyness
sake, if but in appeareance?

Ps. 35.19.
What slanders? lies, and mischievous reports shall be vented, and sent abroad
to blur and cloud a gracious conversation. As David complains of mischief
divised, and contrived against him (a poor innocent) without any cause on his
part.

What unrighteousness? oppressions? what self-seekings? what vainglory?
confusions divisions? what rendings of Christ's seameles coat? enough to make
any good Simeons heart to ache, and his eyes like the pool of Heshbon to stand
full of tears of water, and under all these abominations, (as branches of the
curse) together with the vanity all things are exposed unto; even the
unreasonable creatures do groan, yea, Romans 8.22.23,
the whole creation groaneth together under its vanity: and the dear servants
of God, cannot but be very sensible, and be willing to draw forth their desires
after that glorious liberty, and happier condition laid up for them in the safe
hands of Simeon's Lord. Nay, this good old man had learned under what vanity
all things below Christ did groan; how far from home they were and under how
perilous and sojourning a condition.

How obvious they lay to the grudgings of the worlds Naballs, and how their
ears are daily beaten with the barkings of balaamitish curs, who drive designs
to set the world (their earthy god) above Jesus Christ, these things ran much
in Simeons heart.

Besides the personal evils, and sufferings of decrepit old age, of
languishing sickness, under a world of bodily infirmities; the seizure of
mortal diseases, which do ascertain death not to be far of. And although we
know that we must dye, yet we know not how soon.

The pinching pains, and incessant dolours of a worn-out, decayed body, at the
best but of a crazy constitution, supported (like an old house) with the
propps, and buttresses of art, and nature, ready every moment to fall about our
ears; making us wish in the morning, Deu. 28.67.
would God it were even, and at even, would God it were morning. All which laid
to heart, makes blessed Simeon desire to dye, and live no longer: but to dye in
the arms of mercy, no matter how soon, to wish, to sigh, to groan, and heartily
to long for a principle of faith, and hope to depart in peace.

Good old Simeons desire is, the desire of restlesness after that which is
above all desirable, even rest, and salvation in Heaven with the people of God
who rest from their labors, Rev. 14.13
and their works follow them.

Ah soul! had thou but a sweet taste of this blessed rest remaining to the
people of God! Heb. 4.9. Gal. 5.22.
had but the fruits of the Spirit in any gracious measure! thou would bid
all adieu, and could willingly part with all on earth, such as honor,
pleasures, profits, friends, nearest, and dearest relations; with all thy
earthly interests, and contentments, yea with all thy lands, revenues, and life
it self; and would sigh, and groan within thee (as old Simeon did) after the
fuller enjoyment of thy Lord and dearest Christ, waiting for the adoption (to
wit) the redemption of thy body.

3. A desire of Contentment. 3. a desire of contentment. Rev. 12.1.

Good old Simeon has enough of life, Rev. 12.1.
being clothed with the Sun, he can now tread the moon under his feet. And (as
Saint Paul) have a low esteem of all things beneath Christ, Phil. 3.8.
and can say, Psa. 116.7
as David, Return to thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee. And hence does gracious Simeon, desire to acquiesce in his Lord, and
to dye by his statutum est, who is life it self; to possess him, possessing
whom he is assured, to possess all things; therefore said well-contented
Simeon, Lord let me be translated hence in thy good time, to be inseperably
with thee to all eternity.

4. of Admiration.
4. A desire of admiration.
Simeon might well admire the glory, and excellency of that Salvation, on which
his eye of faith was so fixed, and stand amazed, Malac. 4.2.
at the rays of this Sun of righteousness, which shines not into every soul,
and says. Oh! the pretiousness of this salvation, which is so attractive as to
draw out my soul out of my body; my soul, and body out of this present evil
world: but for blessed ends, blessed be thou my Lord; that I may worship thee
in Heaven, as the four beasts did, and the four and twenty elders, when they
fell dow before the Lamb, And sung a new son, saying, Revel. 3.9.
thou art worthy to take the book and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation.

Blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him, and unto the Lamb for ever,
and ever.

So much in answer to the two Questions.

1. What this sight is? 2. What this desire of Simeon is?
Reasons why all Christ-seeing Simeons may desire to dye.

Because old Simeon found himself delivered from the curse of the first
Covenant, Genesis 2.14.
which was eternal death; as it holds proportion with the blessing in
Paradise, eternal life: and he found himself delivered from the wrath to come,
by him, who was to dye, and to destroy him that had the power of death. Heb.
2.14.


Job. 33.24.
He found himself delivered from going down into the pit, death was in it self
the sentence of the law, and the recompense of an offended God: but old Simeon
found the jaws of death broken, and this beast of prey, now becomes unable to
hold him, no more, then it was able to hold Jesus Christ: and therefore all
Simeons may insult in their death over death, and say, Hosea 31.14. used by the
Apostle. 1. Cor. 15.55.
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? the sting of death
is sin, the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be to God, which gives us
the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Death does deliver us from, and periodize all wrongs, vices, infirmities,
bodily pains, and labors, all the piercing cares of this life, and all vain
pleasures.

As after Noah had been tossed but one year upon the waters, Genesis 8.4.20.
how glad was he to land on Mount Ararat! so, old Simeon after many years,
wearisome days, and nights, fluctuating on the waters of worldly perturbations,
O how glad was the good old man of a resting place! where he could say hic ero
salvus, as the long sick man did write upon his grave stone, hic ero sanus.

Simeons do see their salvation future, as present, so does faith prevent time,
and is the evidence of things not seen, and the substance of things hoped for.
Heb. 11.1. Luke 19.9.


This day is salvation come to thy house (as when Christ called Zacheus from
the tree) salvation is actually begun then in a believing soul, who is said to
have his conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20.
while he is below. Whence he looked for a Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.

1 Cor. 15.18.
And when death comes believers do not dye, but sleep: nothing of them dies, but
their sins, their imperfections, and afflictions; yea the very being of sin, is
done away, as when the house is pulled into pieces, all the ivy roots in the
wall are destroyed.

2 Cor. 5.8.
and that is very sweet: here is a mystical union to Christ, but no glorious
presence, no, that is the crowning mercy, which is kept till after death. Now
judge you, here you are a prison, there enlarged: here you are absent from your
head, your husband, your Lord, and King eternal; but by death the soul is put
into the hands of the blessed Angels, and by them is presented to Jesus
Christ, to be for ever with the Lord in glory. This Simeon foresaw, and
therefore said, Lord now let etc.

Which dvides itself into these

1. The conflict between soul, and body in death. 2. The necessity of death, in
regard to soul and body. 3. The blessed advantage which soul and body find in
death.
1. Great is the conflict often times, the spirit may be willing, when the flesh
is unwilling: which two twins, do (a great while) stand at loath to depart:
Jacob was not by, Ge. 45.26.
and by willing to leave his Country, and the Land of Promise to go to his
Joseph, Israel not by and by willing, to go out of Egypt, Exo. 5.21.
though it were to terminate a long, and tedious captivity in Egypt, Exo. 12.40
Phil. 1.23.
of 430 years.

Paul's Cupio dissolvi did not by, and by break forth, till the weight of sin,
carnal conflicts, the buffettings of Satan, and manifold persecutions did load,
and weary his precious soul, together with a tedious mortality: but then this
gracious servant of the Lord, became willing to put off his body of sin, and
death together, and with Simeon to say, Lord now let etc The same hand
which does take down our earthly Tabernacle, does build for us a surer and
eternal habitation made without hands in the Heavens; at which change, 2 Cor.
5.1. (...) Eccl. 12.7.
the soul is taken to God that gave it, till the last day; when soul and body
shall be made capable of those higher enjoyments, which Jesus Christ has dearly
purchased, and prepared for them; a taste whereof our Lord was pleased to give
unto Peter, Mat. 17.2.
James, and John, in the transfiguration; and unto St. Paul when he was
raptured into the third heaven: 2 Cor. 12, 2,
both which, some have thought to be more comprehensive, then this vision of
old Simeon here; and yet all the dear Servants of God do (in some aspect) see
Christ, before they die; and amidst some fears, and misgiving thoughts, do
abundantly long to see him more.

2. the necessity of death in regard to soul, and body. No mortal wants any
thing so much as immortality; and wants do necessiate men to desires, storms
drives many goodly ships into harbors; war does force the stoutest men to
holds, and forts: so the soul and body of the Lord's gracious ones, much
pinched with the sense of their wants of glory to come, and of their
beatificall fruitions promised them, be necessitated (with blessed Simeon) to
desire to die, that they may pass over troublesome Jordan, to enjoy the
promised blessings, of celestial Canaan, where soul, and body shall be
refreshed, enriched, Ps. 24.
and eternally glorified, with Jesus Christ, their everlasting King of glory.
which thing our Savior does sweetly breath out by St. John, Joh. 17.24.
in that prayer of his, Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am, that they may behold my glory. q. d. that they may behold
my transforming glory.

1 Cor. 13.12
Can the glory of grace that comes by Christ, represented to us as in a glass,
so transform a soul, as Simeons in the text? has the glory here by mediums
such a power? then, what will it be when we shall behold it without means.

Something Simeon did reach after in his holy wish, which he could not
comprehend here below, though he had his Lord Christ in his arms; but he will
rejoice in God his faviour, he will believe, Job. 14.14.
and hope well, he will expect, and wait with holy Job, till his change come:
when he knew his joy shall transcend the joy of harvest, or that of men
dividing the spoil: 1 Pet. 1.8.
it being a joy so unspeakable, and full of glory. See then, (...).
that death is necessary to prepare the soul, and body for immortality; of
which more in the third branch of this fourth reason, as follows.

3. The blessed advantage which soul and body find in, death, after death,
Phil. 1.12.
presently the soul begins to be in it is prime: for whilst she was in the
corruptible body, she was ruled by corrupt sense and violently carried by loose
appetite; driven, and compelled (against it is own gracious desires) to give way
in some part to a body of sin: for she can hardly look out at the eyes, but
looks upon a baited hook: nor hear by the ear, but there is the serpents
voice, nor the tongue taste, but there is some gall in that honey: nor the hand
touch, but there is a defilement: nor the foot tread, but there is a net: and
every sense a member of the body, ready to be a Judas to the soul, to betray
her with a kiss.

Now what wise Simeon will not be willing to depart, to exchange a dungeon for
a palace; (...).
copper for gold; base beggary for high honor; a short lease of base heath, of
barren and craggy rocks, Genesis 3.23. 1 Pet. 1.4.
for the garden of Eden, a paradise; nay for an inheritance inmortall, (...).
and incorruptible. For (as one said) to live here, is to be half dead at
least, death has the all of a great part of our lives, and dead works (I
think) have above the one half of the most sanctified ones here, who yet do
die daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. (...). 1 Cor. 7.24. (...).
that they may live the more to Jesus Christ.

For the body, ( the body of death, as Paul calls it) is but let fall into the
earth to sprout, and grow (like the corn in the ground,) to grow
incorruptibly, spiritually, as the Apostle at large speaking of the advantage,
which the body has by a blessed death; after when, (til the resurrection) the
glorified Soul shall not need to return back again into the body, both do
sweetly repose, in their present state, till the second appearance of our Lord,
Phil. 3.21.
who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his most glorious
body, (...) 1 Co. 15.42 43.
according to his mighty working.

Thy body in death is made a great gainer in three particulars, for it is laid
down in corruption, but it shall rise in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor,
but it is raised in glory; Yea with exact comelines of stature with beautiful
proportion, where was deformity (either by the excess, 1 Co. 13.10
or defect of any part,) there all deformity shall be don away.

Commonly a litttle before death the body looks pale, wan, earth-like, nay
sometimes one may smell earthlinesse, and there is a kind of loathsomnes, even
to dearest, and nearest relations; immediately upon the departure of the soul,
the body begins to be unsavourie, as well as unlovely, and could the dead body
speak, it might say to the grave thou art my house; To the worm, thou art my
Mother, Job. 17.14. (...) Ge. 23.4.6.
and Sister. And sweet friends; as Jonathan, and David will look out a burying
place, to bury their dead out of their sight.

But yet in the day of their resurrection, the bodies of all blessed Simeons
shall rise in great splendor, and glory; Mat. 6.28.
like the lilly root, which lies in the winter in the ground: but in the
summer rises a well clothed flower, very glorious: so shall the bodies of the
Saints be glorified, like the very body of Christ, Isa. 26.10.
now at the right hand of God in heaven.

(...) 1 Cor 15.43
Consider the then constitution of thy new frail body; it was Sown in weakness
but will be raised in power. All constitutions of bodies be not alike, but were
thy body of Goliah's strength, Goliahs'.
yet one languishing sickness, will make thee non able to turn in thy bed, or
put on clothes, or lift thy hand to thy head, or set one foot on the ground
before another to go.

But the day is coming (blessed saint) when thou shall be raised in a most
healthful constitution; never more to need meat, drink, clothes, physick-art,
or any help: no more weariness, sickness, hunger, cold, or nakedness; Mat. 22.30
but thou shall be as the Angels, and Saints in Heaven.

3. Consider now that thou art a but thou shall be raised a spiritual body,
called so, because it shall no longer need any natural means, or helps for
the presevation, nutrition, and conservation: but shall be wholly delighted in
God, and in an immediate communion with him, shall be filled with God.

Thou shall (as it were) be spirituallized with the nimbleness of a Spirit, Aug.
so as in a very short time, thou may move from place to place: So that
(says one) where every soul would be, by and by it shall be there, and you
read that suddenly after the resurrection, 1 These. 4.17. (...).
our bodies shall be caught up to meet the Lord Christ in the air, which is
the beginning of this agility, and glory.

Thus much of the reasons, which are; 1. From Simeon's deliverance. 2. From
Simeon's eye of Faith. 3. From his embraces with Christ.


The 4th consists of these 3 heads.

1. The conflict between soul and body. 2. The necessity of death. 3. The
blessed advantage the soul and body find in death, in three particulars.
Application in four Corollaries.

1. The first contains matter of instruction, with some necessary doubts, and
objections answered.

2. Matter of terror to wicked men.

3. Comfort to the Godly wise.

4th Exhortation, which runs into 4. branches. To be thankful for this sight
of Simeon. To prepare timely and solidly for an happy death. To submit
graciously to the Lord's dispose of us, in life, or death. To be moderate in
mourning at the loss of godly friends.


Whatsoever death may be to others, Corollary
yet to all good Simeons it is a desirable and a singular blessing. Such
(through death) do look upon glory on the other side of death, who are not
sadded at the separation of soul, and body: because of their eternal
conjunction of soul and body with Christ, Ignatius his grinding pains, were but
the mill in which he was ground to be the finer meal, for Christ Jesus his own
use.

Though Christ's soul, and body were parted, as far as heaven and the grave
could be distant: yet neither of them (says one) were parted from the deity,
nor from the Father.

I confess, to natural men death is terrible, and they think with Solomon that
a living dog, is better then a dead Lion, Eccl. 9.4.
and that the basest life is better then any death.

Indeed, they cannot but fear death, who fear not God, who believe not in
Jesus, whose wickedness does cut off all hopes of happiness after death: and no
marvail, for their conscience stings them at the remembrance of death, and
death is like that murderer, 2 Kings 6.32. Which was sent to take away
Elishah's head.

It Is the most unwelcom messinger that ever knocked at their door. Or as
Belshazzar's handwriting, Dan. 5.5. (...) Pro. 9.
when 'twas interpreted, whith made him appale and tremble: for the conscience
tells them that no good can come to them by the hand, and stroke of death; nay
such do die whiles they be alive, by the checks and chidings, convictions, and
condemnations of their evil conscience.

But what ever it be to wicked men, yet to blessed Simeons, death has another
face, and presence; to such, it is but their trusty messenger to carry them to
their Fathers house, to be possessed of their eternal inheritanc^ or else,
it is but as Joseph's rattling chariot wheels, Ge. 45.27.
ready to carry Jacob unto his Joseph, unto his Jesus.

For such be sure to dye.

1. Comfortably. 2. Blessedly
First comfortably, for out of this eater comes meat, and out of this strong
comes sweetness, Jud. 14.14.
as in Sampsons riddle. Though I walk through the vallie of the shadow of death
(says holy Daniel) I will fear no evil, Ps. 23.
for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff do comfort me. q. d. I am in the
hand of my heavenly Father, where can be no miscarriage.

John, Revel. 14.13. Luke 23.43.
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord; for that very day their soul shall
be with Christ in Paradise. And so life which keeps the soul from heaven,
absent from the Lord, is a loss to a Saint in a religious respect.

We may illustrate the point by these following considerations, only first
observe that we are not delivered from the necessity of dying naturally; no,
Heb. 9.27. (...)
that statute must stand, that all must be subject to the necessity of dying,
believers, and unbelievers, nor are any delivered from subjection to sickness,
and diseases, nor scarce any from pains at the hour of death, nor from
separation of soul and body: but all Simeons deaths be comfortable in these
respects.

1. The sting of sin is death, a poysonfull sting, but Jesus Christ on his
Cross, did take away this sting of death: he disenabled death to hurt his
redeemed ones; nay our Lord did insult over death, Hosea 13.14. (...)
(saying by his Prophet) I will redeem them from death, O death, I will be thy
plagues! O O grave, I will be thy destruction: and by his Apostle, O death
where is thy sting etc. insomuch as, death is now made the Saints friend, (...);
who before (through fear of death) were all their life subject unto bondage.

2. As our Lord has delivered us from the sting; and fear; Heb. 2.15. (...).
so also from the curse of death, by which our death had been a dreadful
inlet, and passage, to the second death: nay he has delivered us from the
curse of sickness, pain, and mortality, etc.like that meal cast into the pot of
bitter pottage, 2 King. 4. (...)
when the sons of the Prophets cried out, Death in the pot! Death in the pot!
Romans 8.
so does Jesus Christ heal, and sanctify our very trouble, and afflictions;
that they shall do us more good, and work together for the best to us, viz. to
bring down the tympany, and prick the bladder of pride; to crucify, or quench
our lusts, to cool our rash anger, and raging passion; to unmask our
hypocrisy, and generally to beat down the body of our corruptions; and to help
us, to put off the old man more, and more: which as the Apostle, and Saints, do
more lay to heart: so they do more earnestly groan to be clothed upon, with
our house which is from heaven.

2 Cor. 5.2. (...).
3. By death, the Saints be delivered from the dominion of death, which was very
high, and imperious; and did extend to the souls, as well as the bodies of men.
Now the satisfaction of Christ, which he made to divine justice, and the
redundancy of his merits daily presented to his Father, have prevailed to cut
deaths dominion short, and to loose the bands of death from off us, as easily
as Sampson did loose the green cords, wherewith he had been bound.

But why then be the Saints of God punished at all with a temporal death? Ob.


Death is not properly a punishment, An.
nor inflicted by the Lord in wrath. First, for that in the forgiveness of sin,
wrath is quite taken away, and God blots out their transgressions for his name
sake. Secondly death is turned into a blessing by the hand-worke of Jesus
Christ, opening a new and living way unto that rest which remains to the
people of God. Heb. 4.9. Ps. 116.15. (...) pretiosa (...), quasi bono habilis.
Thirdly, precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

Death is compared to a common gate in a city, castle, or garrison, at which the
prisoner enters, as the way unto his dungeon: but the friends, and honored
ones (albeit they come in at the same gate) do obtain princely, and noble
entertainment: so death is common to all, godly, and ungodly: to the one it is
a door of entrance into life, to the other a door of entrance into eternal
death.

Q.
Why do any truly godly ones fear deaths, since it is so friendly to them?

A.
Because some of God's precious ones have (through abundance of natural fear)
many, and strong misgivings of heart, yet do much expostulate with themselves
about it, saying, Why art thou cast down, Oh, my soul? Psa. 42.5.11. (...)
Why are thou so disquieted within me? trust still in God, etc.

Some of Gods dearest servants have very strong apprehensions of death, and the
circumstances there-about; and but low, and weak apprehensions of Jesus Christ;
and so their eyes be too much fixed on their outward things, which they leave
behind them, and two little on their Father into whose hands they should
commend themselves, and all that they call theirs: and too little on Jesus
Christ, at the right hand of God for them: and lastly, too little on those
masions of glory, which the Lord Jesus has prepared for them: to each of whom,
our Lord may say, as to Peter, why art thou fearful, Mat. 14.31.
O thou of little faith? Come, give me thy hand, come, rely depend, and believe
more strongly, and thou shall not fear to tread on the sinking waters of death.

Little faith breeds great fears.

May not a wicked man desire to die? Q. 2


Yes, but not as a wicked man, A.
but as a discontent: and so the godly, and wicked may both have desires to
die! For the godly Elias a gracious servant of God, sick of great impatience,
sits him down under a juniper tree, 1 Kings 19.4.
and says, it is enough (Oh Lord) take away my life: for I am no better then my
Fathers.

So good Jeremiah curses his birthday, Jer. 20.14.
and repents him that ever he lived, or had been preserved to be then alive

2. A wicked man also, though not as such anon, but in some desperate
condition, may be willing to die, as wicked Saul, 1. Sa. 31.4.
ashamed to live, and astonished to think of his reproach, spoke to one, 2 Sa.
17.23.
and another to kill him, So Ahitophell, weary of his life, went home, set his
house (not his soul) in order, Mat. 27.35
and hanged himself; So Judas his horrible guilt forced him out of his wicked
life; So some notorious malefactors, have laid violent hands (in prisons, and
else where) on themselves, rather then live longer, to be made examples, and
monuments of public shame. But these wretches be acted much by Satan himself,
or by his instruments, as when Job's wife comes to her husband with, Job. 2.
(...) Benedictiones Dia holy sunt maledictiones.
curse God and die.

What ever Job's wife was otherwise, I Will not insist; but sure I am, now she
was an instrument of Satan.

Where by the way observe.

That Satan is restless to bring the dear Servants of God to think, and

Satan will persuade us to ease our curse God and die.

Observe he sometimes suggests that it is not sinful to seek, or wish

He would persuade us, that death

Observe that Satan would have

But (O distressed soul) know, that Gods method is repent; and die believe and
die; pray and die; be renewed in thy heart and life and die; be sure of thy
Salvation, (as Simeon) and then be willing to die; get Christ into thy soul and
then die; Job. 2.9. which a godly man would have controverted and not said,
curse God and die; but (...) bless God and live.
not curse God, and die.

I conclude my answer, it is not lawful to wish for death absolutely; but with
an holy submission unto our Lord's will.

To wish for death, because we are troubled, grieved, imprisoned, aflicted, is
an ungodly wish for God has much work for his Servants to do in their
aflictions, as well as in their consolations. We must glorify God in our
sickness, in bonds, imprisonments persecutions, and fiery trials; and this we
must strive to do, and not presently wish to die, and leave our work: this
made Simeon keep well to his conditions.

To die God's Servant.

To die in peace.

To die according to the Word: but upon other terms, Simeon may not, Simeon
did not, desire to die.

The second Corallary.

Very terrible are the thoughts of death to wicked men, who (under such as
their apprehensions are) cannot, be willing to dye: dreadful are the
commemorations of their God-opposing, grace-dispising, mercy-refusing,
spirit-quenching life; with a thousand abominations charged on them, by their
own consciences. Oh! 1 These. 5.19
these be daggers at such a ones heart, begun even here to be gnawed upon, Esa.
66.24. Mark. 9.44, 45, 46, 47, 48. Jude 15.1 The sting of a sin-awakened
conscience, will not let them be willing to dye.
by the worm that never dies.

Poor soul! how can thou desire to die whom such works do follow? Oh, the
sting of a sin-awakened soul is inexorable! every word of the tongue is ready
to sound out damnation, damnation, and every color (which the fancy presents
is sable, even as black as hell. 2 The fear of an approaching judgment; Heb.
9.27.


Wretched sinner! how can thou desire to die? who know of an approaching
judgment after death, to be managed by that just, and powerful Judge, whose
eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, Rev. 1.14. Rev. 2.18. Rev.
19.12.
to manifest before the world of men, and Angels, all thy sinful thoughts,
idle and wicked words, an account for every talent.
with all unrighteous actions, whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever committed,
against God, men, or thy self.

Nor is this all, but this righteous Lord God must, and will have an exact
account of Adam's transgression; Coll. 3.10.
and of the depravednes of thy degenerate nature, which was originally
dignified with God's own Image; and moreover, Mat. 25.15. to 29.
thou must be accountant for every talent in those three great farms; (viz)
the farm of nature, the farm of the world, the farm of the Gospel: how thou
have received in these talents, how thou have laid them out, Luke 16.2.
and what good improvement thou have made to the glory of thy Lord. Oh! how
will thou who have been so unprofitable a servant, once dare to desire death,
in order unto their appearance, before the great God of heaven and earth?

If Paul's preaching of righteousness and judgment to come before Felix, did
beget such trembling, how is it possible thou can desire to die? especially,
whiles thou art to come before so impartial a Judge, who cannot, 4. The
thoughts of an impartial Judge.
who will not be blind, frighted, or corrupted, nor vary one silable from the
exactest Justice, to retribute to every one according to that he has done, 2
Cor 3.10.
in the flesh, whether it be good or evil.

Impenitent sinner! Ps. 1.5.
this Judge has said the ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment: since thou
foreknowest thy miscariages before that impartial judge, it is not possible
that thou can desire to die.

The consideration of being friendles, 5. The thoughts of being Christless, and
friendles at that day.
graceles, and Christles at that great and notable day, and before the bar of
that majestical tribunal; and without an advocate, when gvilty conscience shall
most hideously cry out, Just, Oh Lord, is all thy charge against me. Oh what
will become of my poor soul! who turned the grace of God into lasciviousness,
Jude 4.
who despised Jesus Christ coming to save me.

Mat. 22.3.9. Cant. 5.1.
Oh what shall I now do? who was so sweetly invited, to the feast of grace, to
eat of those delicates, which mercy would have set before me! Job. 8.13. Job.
6.19.20. Isa. 6.5.
How can I desire to breath out mine anxious soul? when all my hopes shall
perish: nor know I what will become of her, Rev. 6.16.17.
Woe is me! woe is me I am undon, for even he (the Lord Jesus Christ) whom I have
so provoked, is now my Judge inexorable. Mountains fall on me, hills cover me,
hide me from the angry presence of such a vengeance-taking Majesty.

Yet mountains will not do it, nor can hills cover me, astonished as I am, what
shall I do? which way shall I look? Man. 15.22
then happily the soul may think to say Lord Jesus thou Son of David have mercy
on me; v. 23. Pro. 21.13. Phil. 2.7.8.
but neither will that serve my turn, for he will say, who art thou that criest
after me? sinner, sinner, it is now too late, time was, Zach. 7.13. Esa. 58.1.
Esa. 65.12. Luke 19.41.
I came to thee in my condescending mercy: time was, I cried unto thee lifting
up my voice, like a trumpet: time was, I wept over thee, bemoaning, and
bewailing thy misery. I stood long at the door of thy heart and thine ears,
saying, open, Cant. 5.2. Cant. 2.10.
open to me wretched sinner! nay I called thee, my love, my dove, my spouse;
Yea I stood knocking till my head was wet with the dew, and my locks with the
dropping of the night: but as thou would none of me then, Mar. 7.23 Rev.
2.21. Mat. 8.12. Luke 13.18.
so neither may I know thee, depart from me: thou would not weep, nor mourn,
nor repent in the time thereof, therefore now thy portion is weeping, howling,
gnashing of the teeth.

Oh! this shall cut thee to the very heart, to see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
received into the Kingdom of God, and thy self cast out; to see those whom
thou cursedst saved, and those whom thou abhorredst glorified.

Thou who wast ashamed of Christ, Mar. 8.38.
and of his word, the son of man shall be also ashamed of thee, when he comes
in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.

The delivery up of such condemned ones to Satan.
Then also consider the delivery up of such condemned ones into the cruel hands
of Satan, for immediatly-after judgment will succeed, an everlasting exclusion
from God, from Christ, Mat. 25.41 46. (...). Deum non videre omnia gehennae
supplicia superabit. Bern. Isa. 30.33.
from the heavenly Jerusalem, and from eternal glory; together with a final
resignation of them into the merciless hands of evil angels, to dragg them
into that burning Tophet, which the breath of the Lord like a stream of
brimstone does kindle.

3. Corollary.

This commends matter of great consolation to all Christ-seeing Simeon's in
sundry perticulars, as follows.

Death is a conquered foe, dispoiled of his power, Hos. 13.14 1 Cor. 15.57.
and weapons to hurt us. At the first sight death looks upon us with a pale,
and ghastly face: but upon more judicious thoughts, pale death has no hurtful
weapon in his hand; therefore in death the godly wise does (through Christ)
insult over death, and say, O death I fear thee not: O welcome death, and long
looked for, blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
made death so hurtles, or rather friendly to me: and now, farewell honors,
riches, pleasures, lands possessions, and inheritances; farewell husband, wife,
children, and all my relations below; farewell thou ruinous, and infirm body of
mine, in which (till bowell-compassions covered me all over with a mantle of
richest grace) I walked among the dead in destroying ways, after the course of
the world, Mat. 8.22. Luke 15.13 Prou. 6.18. Prou. 2.18. Ephesians. 2.2.3.
and after the spirit that works in the children of disobedience: But now God
has looked on me in a time of love, and said unto me live, Eze. 16.6. Hos.
2.19.20.
and espoused me to Jesus Christ, and therefore I am glad of death, and that my
body be dissolved, til my soul and body shall meet, and never part again.

a branch.
Death is comfortable, because Christ is with us. David feared not the vallie of
the shadow of death; Ps. 23.4.
because his God was with him. Hosea 2.15
This vallie is like that of Achor to the people of God, which preceded their
entry into the land of promise: where they tasted the first fruits of the land
of Canaan: for death borders upon eternal life: at the end of this dark vallie
is light, and glory: and thy God who owned, and guided thee thither, must be
unfaithful if he should leave thee, Ps. 71.18.
when thou art old, or lie down in the grave.

Old Policarpe, he had better learned Christ, for he had so often tried him in
other promises, that he now dares confide him in this.

This may further be illustrated by thy union to Christ, who is the Savior of
thy body; and by that compleatnes of Christ s mystical body, Ephesians. 5.23. (...)
Joh. 17.24
which may not want one of his members, but every one of those whom the Father
has given to him, must be with him, and behold his glory; which the Father had
given him, as our Lord Christ prays, John, 17.24.

Saint Paul would be dissolved to be with Christ. Thus then, that Christ is
with the saints in death, and for ever, here is matchles comfort.

This consolation is considerable in the earnest of his spirit, branch
which God gives to his Simeons, Gal. 5.22.
as the first fruits of everlasting glory. The saints of God do in their
spiritual life much live upon the graces of the spirit, which are the earnest
penny of that which is behind in the covenant of grace.

Now what is the earnest in comparison of this full sum? Numb 13.24.
what were the grapes, pomgranets, and figs which the spies brought, to the
goodness of the land of promise? no more is grace here, compared with that
exceeding, and eternal weight of glory. (...). 2. Cor. 5.5. (...) ver. 6
Grains, and scruples carry no proportion with talents, this was the ground of
the Apostles willingness to die, he has given us the earnest of the spirit,
therefore we are always confident, knowing that whiles we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord.

We are confident I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body; and to
be present with the Lord.

4 Branch.
Glory, honor, immortality, and everlasting pleasures at God's right hand, are
sure to be conferred at the death of every blessed Simeon, according to the
capacity of the separated soul: all which says Peter is prepared, 1 Pet. 1.4.
(...). 5. Branch.
and reserved for thee in heaven, as our Lord himself does also tell us by
saint John, I go to prepare a place for you.

Let Pagans, and Infidels, those that die out of Christ, fear death; but
blessed Simeons have a cornucopia of comforts to feed upon: for (after the many
storms, tempests, and tossings up and down, Act. 27.14.
with the Euroclydon winds of this present world) death brings them into a safe
port, and harbor, when they shall say each one to his soul, return to thy
rest, O my soul? for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. And each one to
his body, Ps. 116.7.
lie down, be content, sweetly repose, and rest from thy labors. But many will
ask, If a man die, shall he live again, Q. Job. 14.14.10.
as Job? Man dies, and wastes away, and gives up the ghost, and where is he?

Unto which question holy Job himself makes the answer. First, A.
from a comparison, a tree in the winter seeming dead in the ground, Job 1.4.8,
yet through the sent of water, it will bud, and bring forth boughs, like a
plant.

Secondly, Job believes that God does hide his saints for a time in the to
remember them, ver. 13.
and to bring them forth in their set and appointed time.

But thirdly, to make up the comfort, God will most graciously, v. 15.
and mercifully change them (as I shall afterward show) he will call to his
saints in the grave (dissolved into thousand atoms of dust) they shall hear
his trumpets, and Arke-Angels voice, and shall come forth to the resurrection
of the just. And lastly thy living again is a work of the Lord's own desire as
conducible to his own glory; the glory of his Son's kingdom, and the glory of
the saints immortality, who died willingly, under so blessed a hope, Titus 2.13
of so happy a resurrection: to all whom lying in the chambers of death, does
the Lord speak by his Prophet, saying, (but somewhat allegorically) thy dead
men, shall live together, Isa. 26.19.
with my dead body shall they arise, awake, and sing ye that dwelt in dust: For
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.

Branch 6.
All blessed Simeons must consider, that their deferred happiness comes sure at
last, like a full vintage: possibly thou may weight, and look long for thy
consolation as Simeon did, sigh, long for, weep, pray, Joh. 2.8. Mat. 5.12.
Heb. 10.35. Heb. 11.36. Luke 16.22 Joh. 14.2.3. Hab. 2.3.
and sit down in patience many wearisome days, nights, weeks, months, and
years, before the great, and promised reward, before the bosom of Abraham,
the mansion prepared, or the vision of God comes; but at last, it comes and
tarries not, then bear up (tossed back) a while Christ is with thee in the
ship, Mat. 8.26.
and thou can not miscarry: and in his appointed time, shall be thine
eeverlasting calm.

Go on then (blessed soul) in the strength of the Lord, fear no death, but
comfort thy heart with the things already apprehended, Phil. 3.13.
and with infinite more behind, concerning which observe the blessedness of
such as die in the Lord. Rev. 14.13.


1. The matter of this blessedness, God enjoyed.

2. The manner, the beholding Gods face.

The matter lies in the glorious manifestation of God's majesticall presence;
Deu. 5 4.
a little glimps whereof Israel had in the mount, Exodus 33. vlt. Isa. 6.5.
and Moses when God put him into a clift of a rock, and showed him his back
parts, and the prophet Esai when he cried out, woe is me I am undone, because I
am a man of unclean lips, etc. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
hosts: These did not neither could see Gods face, and live, but some thing God
showed to their understandings, out of which they did conclude (as they were
able) the greatness, glory and majesty of God's presence; but after death the
blessed saints of God, shall see more of God (viz) face to face, and know as
they are known, 1 Cor. 3.12.
of which, more in the next.

2. The manner of a saints beholding God, is by an immediate, and angelical
knowledge of the essential glory of the Lord God almighty; and by a full
enjoyment of the great Jehovahs beatificall presence. Then shall we see the
likeness of God, or see him as he is, 1 John 3.2.
and then shall we know, and see him to, in an immediate union to, and communion
with God.

this is that which the godly-wise have much studied (viz) the matter, and
manner of the saints happiness after death, which I shall endeavor to set out a
little more.

1. And so it is called light, and life, Psalm. 36.9 Col. 1..12
as the Psalmist, a fountain of life, in which we shall see light which is
there opposed to the darkness of condemnation; not an amazing light, Acts. 9.
as was Saul's at his conversion: but a rejoicing light, and a glorious light,
inabling us to look with undazling eyes, upon the sun of righteousness in the
face.

It is called a kingdom which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28 Luke. 22.29.
whether we are admitted free denisons under celestial privileges. A kingdom
without stirrs, commotions, or the least alterations, not once needing
counsels, nor arms, Rev. 21.23
nor the light of the moon, nor the sun, but the lamb shall be the light
thereof.

Rev. 2.10. 1 Cor. 9.25. (...). 2 Timothy 4.8,
but this a crown of life, a crown incorruptible, a crown of righteousness,
which shall never be taken off the heads of the saints: but they shall reign
crowned forever in their inheritance, of infinite extent, 1 Pet. 1.5.
and reserved in heaven for them, as before.

2 Cor. 5.1.
It Is an eternal house, not subject to dilapidations, nor to be amended by
reparations, nor additions, a house full of all provisions, Luke 22.30
even to satiety, and fullness: full of joyful company, such as the glorious
Trinity, blessed saints and Angels; full of pleasant melody, perfect harmony,
and one continued feast of glory, Psalm. 16. ult. (...)
at the very right hand of God. Sure I am, this will comfort all Simeons in
their desire to die.

And now to set out the manner a little more also, how this blessed vision of
God is communicated after death.

Godly, and learned divines have wont to gather it from the analogy of
Scriptures.

It Is a vision of intelligence: we says the Scripture, John 3.2.
that is we shall know him spiritually, and celestially, without the least
interposition of any cloud upon our understanding.

We shall know him, says the Scripture, 1 Cor. 13.12. (...) Cant. 2.9.
and not through a glass, as below; where believers see him, who is invisible,
not through any lattesse, but we shall be with him within the heavenly house of
his glory, and be full of God (as I may say) and full of Christ, and full of the
Holy Ghost, and never see night, or darkness more: Rev. 22.5.
for God himself will be all unto us, and we shall reign with Christ for ever.
Soul! does not this use of consolation seat very high? and can choose, but
with Simeon to desire to dye, Psalm. 32.11
and to be glad in the Lord, and rejoice evermore;

All that I will add shall be this blessed soul! thy glory shall be
satisfactory, and filled up to the top, yea it shall mount above all thy
desires,





Rev. 7.17.
First thy tranquillity shall overflow, as a mighty river at thy beholding the
face of God; Rev. 21.4.
all enemies shall be destroyed, Heb. 4.9.
and all perturbations shall finally cease. Rev. 14.13
This is the rest, and peace of all holy Simeons.

The second is thy eternal pleasure and sweet consolation, which also flows
from the blessed beholding of Gods face. Such shall be the Saints delight in
God In thy presence Lord, says the Psalmist, is fullness of joy; not a mixed
joy, as of the Church on earth, like the sweet smell of the prickie rose, which
sometimes runs into the flesh: but like the joy of the Angels at the birth of
Christ, Luke 2.10.13.14.
who sang without interruption, saying glory to God on highest, on earth peace,
good will toward men.

Pleasure and joy in heaven be inviolable, no man can take it away, Joh. 16.22.
(...). Rev. 19.1.3.6. Rev. 14.3 Exo. 15.1. Rev. 15.3.
ever full of the sweetness, and blessedness, which is in God himself;
praising, and magnifiing God with everlasting hallelujahs, and singing the song
of Moses, and of the lamb, without ceasing to all eternity.

Come precious servant of God, is not thy hony-combe full yet? does not this
cup of consolation overflow? Did ever think in the days of thy vanity when
thou wast moved to look into thy wretched estate, and damnable condition? that
thou might get out of that gall of bitterness, Acts 8.23. (...).
and bond of iniquity, and when moved with the matchles love of God, with the
sweetness, and fullness of God in Christ, laid up for thee so vile a wretch; I
say did think it was half true, which was told thee of the desirablenes, and
excellency of Jesus Christ to all believers, in, and after their blessed change?

Lo now, what ever discovery here has been made, all the tongues of men and
Angels, are not able to reveile the hundredth part of thy beatificall fruition,
in the bosom of glory, who do depart this frail life, in the true relation
of a dear Servant of God, and who dyest in that blessed peace and according to
the Word of God.

Thus much of this sweet consolalation. Which divides it self into six
particulars.

1. That Death is spoiled of it is power to hurt us, and of a conquered foe is
made a friend.

2. Saints cannot miscarry in their

3. All the godly have the first

4. The saints honor, glory, and

5 Death is an haven after a storm, a

6. The saints promised, and hoped

1. In the matter, blessedness in God enjoyed. 2. In the manner, the beholding
of Gods face.
Next follows the exhortation which is fourfold.

1. To be thankful for this sight of Simeon. 2. To prepare for an happy death.
Solidly. and Timely.
3. To submit to God's dispose in life, or death. 4. Not to mourn overmuch for
them that dye in the Lord. 1 Exhortation

Let all gracious Simeons be truly thankful for their sight of Christ with any
glimpse of true faith, Mal. 4.2.
this is Oculata fides or faith illightned with a beam of the Sun of
righteousness holding forth glorious things laid up in store for the admirers
of Jesus Christ for all those whom he has drawn near unto himself with the
sweet honey-combs of his matchless love, Cant. 1.4.
Cant. 4.10.
and with the sweet savor of his costly ointments, and with that untold
unvaluable mine of evangelicall grace.

Look on (blessed Saint) fix thine eyes upon that Covenant-goodness into which
thy poor soul is admitted and be thankful: which Covenant was the birth and
product of God the Fathers everlasting love and mercy to all his seeing
Simeons, Deuteronomy. 7.7.
the Legacy of free grace of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, richly enamelled,
with royal privileges and most gracious promises comprehending all those jura
regalia of the remission of sin, Romans 9.4.5.
of justification before God, of adoption and sonship. And by the way observe,
that Remission of sin, (which Christ did bleed out for thee, who scarce ever
did bleed out a tear for him,) it is a choice mercy bestowed on none, Romans
11.23.
but such as are vessels of mercy, viz. Gods precious people, those blessed
ones whom God makes the objects of blessedness, Exo. 34.6.6. (...)
and proclaims himself in his glory as to Moses the Lord the Lord God merciful
etc. and shall not such be thankful?

Believing Simeon, faith does as it were antidate thy happiness, and make
things to come as if they were present; and (as one says) substantiates things
not yet seen and appropiate them to thy self, Ps. 60.7.
as, Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine: These places were not then conquered,
but God had spoken in his holiness, and that was assured to David's soul, he
had made a sure Promise, Psa. ^32.7. Isai. 55.3. Acts 2.30.
Covenant, and Oath to David, and so a believer may say, heaven is mine, heaven
is mine, God and Christ, everlasting glory is mine.

Faith looks on the promise as fulfilled already and put into its hand, in the
full assurance of it, and (after a sort) into perfect enjoyment, as when the
Spirit brought Ezekiel in the visions of God to Jerusalem, Ezec. 1.1.
his body was commorant; in Babilon's captivity, by the river Chebar; even then
his spirit is said to be in Jerusalem, for his spirit did lift him up between
heaven and earth, Ezec. 8.3.
and brought him in those visions to Jerusalem. The soul may be in sweet
communion with God in heaven, when the body may be in the earth. Every Simeon's
soul is (in a sense) in heaven already sweetly solaced in the beatificall
Vision, Mat. 5.8. Rev. 15.3. Rev. 2.17. Rev. 22.1.2. (...) 1 Cor. ^.9.
and singing the song of Moses, and the Lamb, tasting the heavenly Manna, and
bathing her self in those rivers of pleasure which the Lord has put within
Christ's purchase, and prepared for them that love him: to which our blessed
Lord does point, as a means of this enjoyment, Mat. 6.21. Lay up your treasure
in heaven, for where your treasure is there will also your heart be.

A Simeon may be below, Col. 3.2.
and yet his affections above, as Paul does exhort, set your affections on
things above and not on things beneath; so that a gracious soul is under a
double consideration, of earth and of heaven, whose mind is not said to be
where he is, but where he likes, and loves best: and therefore, have some of
the Ancients wont to say, that (even here below) the soul fetches many a
flight to heaven with those dove-like wings of silver, Psalm. 68.13.
and those feathers of yellow gold in the Psalm. 68.13. to see the God of
Glory, to speak with Jesus Christ at Gods right hand, to present her petitions
by her gracious Advocate and Mediator at heavens Throne in expectation of a
most gracious answer.

Again, the soul flies up to heaven to visit those innumerable Angels, and to
contemplate the Patriarks and Prophets happiness, to admire the Apostles
honor, to congratulate all the Assemblies of the first born, and to salute the
spirits of just men made perfect: Rev. 4.1.
this Saint John saw, a door in heaven opened, and he heard a voice, (as it
were) of a trumpet talking with him, which said come up hither, and immediately
he was in the Spirit, and behold a Throne was set in heaven, and one sat on
the Throne, whence the Prophet John (by a call from heaven) coms up, but how?
not Corporally but Spiritually, then the Spirit lifted up the good man, in
sweet meditation and most holy affection, as Simeon here, whose gladded and
thankful heart, breathed out this Song in the text, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart, etc. Then O believer! put on thy white robes of holiness, Rev.
7.^.13. (...).
its but a little while when (with Elijah) thou shall ascend joyfully, when
those earthly rags shall fall off, and thy Christ shall cloth thee over with
his bright garment of Glory: bear up then blessed Saint, rejoice and be
thankful in hope of the glory of God; it is a duty becoming thee to be
thankful; Romans 5.2.
See what argument Christ uses to raise up the drooping hearts of his dejected
Disciples, Lu. 24.17.
What manner of communications are these, while you walk, and are sad? Joh. 17.
What are you so sad? are you not advised that I must depart and glorify my
Father? Joh. 14.3.
and that when you go hence, I must and will prepare mansions of glory for you;
do not you consider, what I am to you? and what you are to me? whom I have so
and so honored already? and am in you the hope of glory Col. 1.27.
and that you shall shortly in three days expect my Resurrection from the dead,
Mat. 16.21
1 Cor. 15.20. Joh. 14.1.
an assured evidence of your Resurrection? you my beloved Disciples, be not
troubled at my death and departure, Judge. 8.2.
nor at your own, but praise and give thanks; for certainly the gleanings of
the grapes of Ephraim (which you enjoy) are infinitely better then all the
vintage of Abiezer, the earnest and first fruits which even now you live
spiritually upon, Eccle. 1.2. chap. 12.8.
do excel and transcend all the glory and vanity of things sublunar or below.

1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. and before in Deuteronomy. 7.7.
And indeed (my beloved Disciples) consider what moved me and my Father to own
you rather then others, so undeservedly, when we passed by so many of the
great men and nobles of the world; to make you vessels of honor and to give
you an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled that fades not away reserved in
heaven for you. Romans 9.21. 2 Timothy 2.21. 1 Pet. 1.4.


What am I (said David) and my Fathers house that I should be son in law to a
King? 1 Samuel 18.18.
whence was it that the mother of my Lord should com unto me? Luke 1.43.
(said Elisabeth to the Virgin Mary.) Great was the joy in the hearts of the
four lepers of the great and besieged city of Samari^, 2 Kings 7.3. to the 12.
whom the Lord so wonderfully relieved and enlarged. Alas! all these were but
as nut-shells and oyster-shells compared with the mercies of blessed Simeon,
whose mercies as they be real celestial and lasting for ever; so they do call
for real and angelical praises: Heavens candidates be glad at deaths
approach; thou art next apparent to glory, and indeed be thankful, for it may
be thou may be one of the next souls who may be gloriously ushered in
thither; nay (in a sense) thou art in heaven already: thy faith is there, thy
hope is there, thy conversation is there, while thy eye is fixed on thy Christ
there, and thou art daily translated from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord, Ephesians. 1.3.
and all this is sealed to thee by the Spirit of promise, of which more fully
afterward; mean while do but open thy eyes and thou can not but be really
thankful, fiducially to see all the prophesies, and all the promises to thee
accomplished, although thou see it but a far off.

And now that thou may be thus thankful, let me be assistant to thee in four
or five directions.

Direction Luke 2, 14, (...)
1. Study thou (poor mortal) to praise and magnify thy God, and thy Christ, in
the, highest, as the Angels did at the nativity of Christ; high mercies do call
for high praises, thankfulness may be in carnal earthly men for good turns done
them, yea and gladness in the beast that receives fodder. But (O thou saved by
the Lord) thou must act higher, even from a principle of Covenant-grace,
reached out to a lost and dead sinner, by the hand of unconceivable mercy,
procured by the Lord Jesus saving thee so mightily and wonderfully, not out of
the common storehouse of divine providence, but out of the Ark of the Covenant
or bosom-love of thy Lord Jesus Christ: Therefore (O blessed soul!) thy
thankfulness must be super-abounding, and thy whole soul be poured out in this
duty, with holy vows and fixed resolutions, as that sweet singer of Israel,
Psalm. 116. I will love thee, I will serve thee, Psalm. 116,
I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgivings and I will pay my vows
unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his people, in the Courts of the
Lords house, in the midst of thee O Jerusalem, praise ye the Lord: Lo what a
pattern of high and real thankfulness is here presented unto gracious Simeons.

2. To be more real in our thankfulness for such salvation-mercies as Simeons
here was, we must look farther then the superficies and outside of a mercy,
for as God in his workings of good providence, has a wheel within a wheel; so
he has oftimes, a mercy within a mercy; and when we are called to such a
piece of thankfulness as is here required, we must brighten the souls eye of
faith, and by the prospective of divine promises and covenant-goodness, we must
dive deep and look far, to see (if it were possible) not only the hand of
mercy stretched forth to us, but the very heart of Gods mercy opened to us;
Genesis 6. compared with 1 Pet. 3.19.
nay through that mercy, the soul must look on the Lord himself: for else, we
do but see the Ark of preservation, as the old world did; not the
covenant-goodness of God in that Ark, nor his Church in that Ark, nor his
Christ there, nor all the saved of the Lord, even thy self there, spiritually
in the heart of God, and Jesus Christ; you must look into the inside of your
mercies, else you will but see the bush on fire and it preserved, but not the
good will of him that dwelt in the bush; Exodus 3.2. Deuteronomy. 33.16.
for one may observe the Lords faithfulness, in keeping covenant and promise,
and not look on Jesus Christ the promoter of the covenant, by, and with whom
the Lord made such a covenant: therefore we must thoroughly look as well on the
inside of the mercy; whence a mercy comes originally on Gods mind, aim, and
end; as on the mercy it self reached out to us: we must look on Gods mind
toward us, in the mercy, how to walk and act before him in fom sutableness and
expectation to the mercy we do enjoy, to live more holily, to worship more
devoutly, to act faith in Gods al-sufficiency, to trust in him more, to recumb
and depend more, and to be the Lords more entirely the^ ever before. For as in
many mercies there is a good outside but a better inside; so in the carriages
of the people of God, there is not only a more out-side-carriage before the
Lord, but a more intern spiritual and cordial acting of a thankful soul, to
serve the Lord more sincerely, more absolutely, more graciously, and more
holily; as David not only throughout the 116 Psalm, but also Psalm 42.5. after
more experience of the Lord, and a farther inspection into his gracious dealing
with him, he says, O my soul trust thou in God, for I shall yet give him
thanks and praise him, for the help of his countenance: so verse. 11 hope thou
in God for I shall yet praise him who is the help of my countenance and my God.

direction
3. To be very real in our thanks, we must much revolve in our minds and
consider our great unworthiness, and that we are unfit for any mercy, as Jacob
did, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and that we
are then dead dogs, as Mephibosheth humbly spoke to King David, 2 Samuel 9.8. we
must call to mind the number, the kind, the nature, and the good of a mercy,
the freeness, the fullness, and choiceness of it, and the suitableness of the
loving kindness, and be thankful to admiration, as David was often, and as
Simeon was here for his vision, which was so adequate to his soul and bodies
welfare, here and hereafter, in life in death, and at the last judgment: this
will make a soul sing and say, Luke 1.69.70.
Blessed be the Lord God, who has raised up such Salvation for so miserable a
creature as I was, and to say with holy David, Bless the Lord O my soul, Ps.
103.2.
forget not all his benefits! and the better to recollect these mercies,
Christians must be careful to keep records of singular mercies, of the year
and day, the matter, the manner, the measure, the instruments, as David did
most sweetly, for that out of these records, shall be made up the song of
Moses, and the Lamb. 2 Samuel 8.16. 2 Kgins 18.18. Joah the son of Asaph was
Hezechiahs Recorder. Psalm. 105.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Read the 105 Psalm, it is wholly filled with rich enumerations of the Lord's
wondrous works from Abraham to the time of the planting of the Lords people in
Canaan, and they are bid to remember his mavelous works, and the judgments of
his mouth, how he had remembered his Covenant for ever: the Word which he
commanded to a thousand generations, his Covenant with Abraham, his Oath with
Isaac and confirmed the same to Jacob for a law and to Israel for an
everlasting Covenant etc. true thankfulness as its long-lived, and written
with infallible characters; so it takes care to eternize the praises of the
Lord and says as thankful Job, Job. 19.23, 24.
O that my words were printed in a book, that they were graven with an iron pen
and lead, in the rock, for ever, have we done so? that not God looses his
glory, and thy soul is too short in thy real thanks.

direct. 4.
4. Real thanks must be all to God, self is little regarded, so as Gods name and
glory may be exalted; Many are somewhat thankful when self is much concerned,
and will praise the Lord, Psalm. 68.4.
when dangers be over, Psalm. 107.
when enemies be defeated, cut off, and destroyed, when afflictions be over,
and sickness turned to health, that now they may enjoy again their honor, their
ease, their pleasure, their estates in the world, their corn, and wine, then
they will give God thanks and bless his name, Hab. 1.15. they rejoice and are
glad: (...)
but still their thanks go no farther then self is concerned, which the Prophet
calls a sacrificing to their own nets, and a burning of incense to their own
dragg; but such their thanks seldom goes higher then themselves. But I must tell
them, that those thanks, which do begin and end in self, be not real
Christian thanks; but true thanks do draw out the soul, to bless the Lord for
Jesus Christ, and the Gospells, for the manifestations of his glory, power,
wisdom, truth, and all his goodness to his Church, and for the prosperity of
Sion, when it goes well there; O then, thankful souls will insult for joy, and
be full of praises as the Israelites were at the bringing home of the Ark; And
David danced before the Lord, 2 Samuel 6.12, 14, 15. 1 Kings 8.
and was girded with a linen Ephod. And Israel brought up the Ark with
showting, and with the sound of the trumpet, and at the dedication of the
Temple; as on the contrary, when it goes ill with the Church, and people of
God, it goes also ill with gracious souls, 1 Samuel 4.13, 14, 15, verse. 19.
as with Eli and Phineas wife (when the Ark was taken and when the glory was
departed from Israel) who called her son Icabod. And thus so public spirited
was she, that her life seemed to be bundled up in the welfare of the people of
God

direction 5
True real thankfulness does acquiesce in God, can repose in the Lord his
alsufficiency and covenant goodness for such a one does see all the enemies of
his salvation ever fall down before the Lord, 1 Samuel 5.4 Josh. 6. to the 20.
Genesis 3.15. Rev. 6.2. (...). Psalm. 4. ult. (...)
as Dagon did before the Ark, irrecoverably and to be demolished, like the
walls of Jericho; such do see the seed of the woman break the serpents head,
and Christ himself riding conquering and to conquer, do see Kings bound in
chains, and nobles with fetters of Iron; in this consideration, does David lay
himself down in peace, who as from time to time, his soul did recollect the
Lords manifold great and glorious mercies conferred upon him; so he said, I
will trust in him, and he shall be my God for ever; this he said after a long
enumeration of Sea and land-mercies, he engages himself in voluntary vows, to
devote and consecrate himself to the Lord, that shall be all his work for time
to come, and he will wholly be the Lords, not his own, so had the Lord obliged
his servant, that he is at a stand what returns of thankfulness to make, but at
last concludes to offer thanks to pay his vows, and to be for ever realizing
the praises of his soul, by declaring them and exemplifying them, and improving
them until they do empty themselves into beatificall hallelujahs, and he
himself do sit down with Abraham Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven. Thus
of real thankfullness: Which sees fiducially into all the Lords
covenant-goodness, and does substantiate things not seen, and make things
absent as present. Thus we have seen what be true real thanks, which will be
found (in some measure) in all thankful Simeons.

1. There be very high praises of God and his Christ.

2. They look far, and search deep in the heart and inside of the mercy.

3. There Is humble acknowledgments of self-unworthiness.

4. God has the all, of true thankfulness, as all came out from him; so it
empties it self into God again.

5. It acquiesces and reposeth in the Lord.

All this did abundantly shine forth in godly men, and so they do in every
truly thankful soul. Thus of the first exhortation.

The second exhortation is to prepare for an happy death, Solidly, and Timely
Exhort. 2.^ to prepare for an happy death. Psalm. 90.


Be we all exhorted to prepare for an happy death.

1. Timely. 2. Solidly.
1. Timely, thy days be numbered (sinner) although thou know not the number, the
time that's kept under Gods lock and key, he has pleased to let thee know the
sinfulness, the cursedness, the brevity, the vanity, and anxiety of thy life,
under a thousand dangers, and maladies: but not to know the computation of thy
life (except in the gross) that the days of a man are threescore and ten, (...)
and it may be fourscore; albeit not one of twenty attain to live so long, v.
10.
and if so, yet then is their life but labor and sorrow.

Quest. But why (blessed Lord) may the eternal soul say, have thou concealed
this from us?

Ans. That we should every day wait the good pleasure of our God, till our
change come. Job. 14.14


Answ 2. That we should every day, be willing to hearken to the counsel of our
good Lord, to be prepared to die happily, that every prayer we put up, that
every sermon we hear, should be poured forth, and hearkened unto, as our last.

Ans. 3. That every tender and opportunity of mercy be entertained by us as
our last (as it is for ought we know)

Ans. 4. That without the least procrastination we should enter the narrow
gate, while it is opened unto us, and seek the Lord very humbly, Is. 55.6. Lu.
19.42.
and cordially while he will be found of us, that we should know the things of
our peace, in the day thereof.

Ans. 5. That we should in due season gratefully accept Jesus Christ's sweet
love while he makes such ravishing applications to us, Cant. 5.2.
saying open to me my sister, my love, my dove, mine undefiled one, and come
with me from Lebanon my Spouse; come away (dear heart) from the dens of Lions,
and from the mountains of Leopards; So that the Lord (by his absconding, and
darkning deaths time from our eyes) does discipline a poor soul (as he did the
wise Virgins) seasonably to getoyl, and lamps, our vessels full, and lamps
burning, and to get our loins girt, Exodus 12. Mat. 25.13 (...). Mark. 13.33.
(...) verse. 36. (...).
with our staves in our hands, that we ever shaking off all rusty
bedrid-security may be ever upon our watch, being so much advised of death so
near (for ought we know) which way soever we go, or whatsoever we are about.

2. Solidly, Now to the solid preparation of which I am to speak; before which
I must needs promise a few things, to awaken wretched sinners, fearfully
beguiled, in so great a business, as is our solid preparation.

1. For it is lamentable to see how poor sinners do sin away precious mercies,
and implunge themselves into deaths gulf, Ephesians. 2.2.
and into the jaws of hells destruction, living in sinful lusts, being acted by
a satanical spirit of disobedience, until they be in the jaws of hungry death,
who devoureth them as the old world, while they were eating and drinking,
rioting, drowning, and even damming themselves, in the days of Noah: or as a
deaf and merciless Sergeant seizing on a gallant, walking the streets in the
pride of his heart, but suddenly arrested and dragged violently to the
Counter, or some nasty prison; Luke 12.20. (...).
even so do great multitudes befool themselves into deaths Counter, never to be
delivered till they have paid the utmost farthing, which ca^ never be, while they
promise to themselves (through vain confidence) long life, and happy days, and
that all shall be well with them at the last, though one foot is in the grave,
and they be ready to drop down as they go (poor creatures) who boast their
faith so strong, and their hope so well anchored, Lu. 18.11.12.
because sometimes they cry God mercy, do confide in the formality of some
duties, and an empty profession of Religion, void of the life of faith, and of
the power of godliness; whom a deceived heart has so long fed with ashes, Isa.
44.20.
and their deluded souls with a lie in their right hand: unto all whom I must
say in the words of the Prophet, O self-deceiver! O self-destroyer! the Lord
has rejected thy confidence, Jer. 2.37. Mat. 7.23.
nor shall thou prosper in them: for the Lord Christ will never own thee, but
will profess he never knew thee, and say depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.

2. Others live to their dying hour, in a state of unregeneracy, unbelief,
hardness of heart, Mat. 23.27 Ezekiel. 8.3.14.16.
after the course of the world, and keep an inside as corrupt as the
sepulchers of rottenness, of which our Savior spoke, as vile as that Image of
jealousy, or that idol Tammuz, (said to be that idol which their women did
yearly lament, with unseemly ceremonies, not to be named) or as those who
worshipped the Sun, Job. 31.26, 27, 28.
and had renounced God and his worship.

But (O beguiled soul) who has so bewitched thee? that thou do dream that
thou may live a slave, a vassal to base lusts within, and to ungodliness
without, and that all thy days, and be saved at last; that thou may live the
life of the wicked, Numb. 13.10.
yet dye the death of the righteous, certainly these be men and women of no
understanding, he that made them will have no mercy on them, Isa. 27, 11.
and he that formed them, will show them no favor.

Did not the Ministers of Christ ordinarily tell thee, what a self-deceiver thy
heart was? and what a deceiver sin was? worse then the harlot, and that the way
of sinners, Prove. 7. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
would be bitterness in the end, and how unsafe nay how desperate it would be,
when a sinner daily hearing these things, bless himself, saying I shall have
peace though I walk after the imaginations of mine own heart.

God says, Isa. 48.22.
there is no peace to the unregenerate soul, no peace to the unbeliver, to the
stone-hearted sinner, neither here nor hereafter. But thou say I shall have
peace.

Quest How shall this be tried.

I Answ. When death comes the horror, trembling and astonishment of spirit,
which will more or less seize upon them, shall pass the umpire, but a sad one
and that which is the beginning of endless and everlasting woes.

(O reader) be moved, as I profess my self often troubled within me, to hear men
and women boast (like a Pharisie,) their faith, hope, and great expectation,
saying they shall dye in the arms of mercy, because God made them, and they
have lived under, and professed the Gospel, have been taken and reputed good
christians among men: by these and other merely external works and
insufficient grounds do they too too shallowly conclude, that it must needs go
well with them at the last.

Joh. 3.3.5. 2 Cor. 5.17. Heb. 12.14
O let such lay to heart the word of him which shall stand. Except a man be born
again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. If any man be in Christ he
must be a new creature. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord; who is not
ingrafted into Christ the true vine, shall be cas out; Joh. 15.4.5. Rom: 8.17:
Gal. 6.7. 1 Cor. 6.9.
none but adopted sons can inherit, whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
reap. Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God;
be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor effeminate, nor
thievs, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
kingdom of God.

But all such as have not made their peace with God timely, and really, let
them be ascerteined that merciless and impartial death shall snatch them away
from their dwellings, and relations, Mar. 9.44.46, 48.
into the blackness of darkness for ever, where the worm dies not, thrice
repeated.

Then let none dare protract time, and think to be prepared in a moment, in the
time of sickness, and the hour of death: indeed God may then show mercy, I had
almost said a miracle (as on the thief, Luke 23.43.
) but such miracles are very rare in Scripture, for strait is the gate, Mat.
7.13.14.
and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few they be that find it.

Some are so combred with the world, that they never will be at leisure to
prepare to die; do think, and speak of it, but never do it; like the banquerout
who says he will pay all his debts, but takes no more care of it, then of his
ending day.

Pro. 9.17.
Some are tickled with sins, stolen waters of pleasures, and profits, till
wounded and slain, Prove. 7.23.
as the young man going after his harlot, like an Ox to the slaughter, or a
fool to the stocks, Till a dart strike through his liver, for her house is the
way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.

CPoor sinful man) death is coming on the wing every day nearer and nearer,
and thou art insensible of its certain approach; Eccles. 12.
nay, death's harbingers are with thee already, who do weaken thy silver cord,
and spend the marrow of thy frail life, who do dim thine eyes, deaf thine
ears, whiten thine hairs, and thou (incogitant) perceivest it not; and these
messengers of death will ere long be, break the golden bowl, from which all
parts enjoy their vital spirits.

And (sinful man) suppose thou be young and lusty, flourishing (like David's
Bay tree,) thou art no more sure to live a day longer, then he of an hundred
years old, who creeps on all four, as we say; for so soon as the hopefullest
man begins to live, in that very instant he begins to die; death gnaweth on
every man's root of life, till (sooer or later) she lays us all in the dust.
The besotting folly, and uncorrigible madness of sinful men, (living as if
they were in covenant with death and hell) making lies their refuge, Isa. 28.15.
and hiding themselves under falsehood) have made me too long in this
preparatory to this second exhortation, whom the Lord notably answers (as if
viva voce) your Covenant with death shall be disanull'd, Isa. 28.18.
your agreement with hell, shall not stand. And thus I come to the exhortation
it self Solidly and Timely, to fall upon the work of preparation, which
consists of these four heads.

1. An holy desire to live well. 2. To be well principled in matters of
Religion. 3. To be much in conference with death. 4. To set all things in
order for death.
The first head.
Many do like heaven well, but not the way thither; many desire glory to come,
when they can enjoy earthly glory no longer: whereas a right holy desire (as
Simeons was) will take all due care to get into, and to keep heavens milky way,
not to accumulate that high degree per saltum, but be glad to go Christ's way,
saying Father I have glorified thee on earth, Joh. 17.4, 5.
and now glorify thou me in heaven.

A presumer, or intruder would live in sin, till his dying day, and then be
forgiven, and taken into Abraham's bosom; but the true desirer is glad (as
Saint Paul, Act. 20.21.
) to go God's way of repentance, of amendment, and of believing unto salvation,
as low Zacheus did, when he welcomed Christ into his house and heart.

The presumer desires faintly to dye, but it is when he cannot live, nor sin any
more; but the well prepared soul after days and years of much serving God,
after much sore travel, through hot afflictions, strong temptations, and many
fiery trialls, Psalm. 42.1. Genesis 32.26, 28. 1 Samuel 1.13.
is fervent in desiring death, and restless as the Heart after the water brooks;
like Jacob, who will not leave wrestling till he prevail, nor Hannah cease
praying till the Lord had granted her the desire of her soul. 1 Samuel 1.13.


Gal. 4.19. Pie vixit, ergo libe^ter vult mori. Psa. 90.12.
The soul was restless, till whole Christ was formed in her, and now she desires
to die, with groaning desires she had lived well, and therefore she would dye:
such be ever numbering their days and so do apply their hearts to wisdom; to
which end,

1. Thou must accept the time of thy repentance laid out for thee by the Lords
own hand; Rev. 2.21.
Jezebell had her time, so had the old world, Sodom and Gomorrah, and the
Jews, so had Corazin; ank Bethsaida; but they accepted not that time.

In our repentance their must be Godly sorrow for sin, for all the sins of our
natures, 2 Cor. 7.
of our hearts, and lives, aggravated by many sad circumstances of the matter,
the manner, measure, time when, how often lived in, against means, Lament
throughout
to have avoided such sins against light, and counsel to the contrary, yea and
(it may be) against our vows never to do so or so, with very great and large
desires of pardon and reconciliation to God, in and through Jesus Christ, and a
restlesness upon thy spirit, till thy soul be satisfied, that thou art pardoned
and accepted, and thy evidence for heaven sealed with the blood of Christ,
together with strong engagements upon thy whole man, never to return again to
folly; but to keep an holy vigilance ever upon thy soul, with solemn
covenanting thy self to be the Lords, and not thine own any more, as thou wast
in the day of thine impenitency.

2. And whereas in many things we sin all, even the most righteous sins often
every day, we must renew our repentance often as David did, Hezekiah, Peter,
and other^, yea so often that we may be said to walk humbly before the Lord, in
an humble and holy conversation, laboring never more to be deceived by the
presumption, pride, and daring boldness of our unregenerate part, and so the
longer thou thus walk'st humbly and penitently before the Lord, the better
still, is thy preparation; which made one to say well, that good men are best at
last, even when they are dying, so great a dependence has a gracious death
upon an humble and holy life. John 9.4.


Prove 27.1. (...) Heb 4.7. (...), according to some c^itricks and that very
judiciously, is Etymologized (...) thy day. Lev. 19.6, 7.
As repentance must be solid, so it must be seasonable; for night will else
come, upon thee, and therefore says Christ, I must work, whiles it is called
to day; Cras Cras is the voice of a crow, and not of a Christian; loose not
this day, talk not of to morrow to repent in; for Solomon will tell thee, thou
know not what to morrows womb may bring forth. To day then while it is called
to day, hear Christ's voyc bespeaking presentaneous repentance: Manna must be
gathered in the morning, the peace of offering be offered on the first* and
second day, not the third. There be four ages of life, childhood, youth,
middle, old age; the first and last are more incapable, but the other two, are
best to repent in; trust not long life, nor late repentance, least thou be like
unto some courtiers who usually do all too late, rise too late, dress too late,
dine too late, sup too late, and I fear (commonly) repent too late, and dye,
Job. 20.11 Genesis 4^.9. (...)
when (as Job speaks) their bones are full of the sin of their youth, and they
must be necessitated to say few and evil have been the days of my life.

Many flatter themselves and deceive others with perwigs, Not much different
from that of the Poet -- Scit te P^oserpina calvum, personam capiti detrahet
illa suo. Prove. 9.3. Pro. 1.28.
and so seem many years younger then they be; but neither will God be
deceived, nor decaying nature deceived, no more then the Devil was by him that
had colored his hair, when he said I know thee well enough for all thy locks;
Oh sinner it is present repentance God looks for; long has he knocked, cried,
and called, but thou would not hear, thou shall therefore cry, and call, and
God will not hear, as in that of Matthew, How often would I have gathered you,
Mat. 23. 37.
as the hen does her chickens, and ye would not; now (it may be) you would,
but I will not, I would have purged thee (says God) but thou wast not purged,
thou shall never be purged any more till I have caused my wrath to light upon
thee, Ezech. 24.13, 14.
I the Lord have spoken it, and it shall come to pass, and I will do it.

(Sinner) it is a dreadful thing to go unseasonably upon the work of repentance,
(miserable creature) being about to dye, What wilt do? when God, and Christ,
and the Spirit, be against thee? when all mercies shall be thine enemies, who
shall be thy friends? and when they shall conclude thy final misery, who
shall pity thee? when they shall laugh at thy self-destruction, and mock when
thy fear comes? Prove. 1.26.
therefore what thou do, do quickly in thy repenting, and thy renewing acts
of repentance: for (for ought thou know) death may come this very night, and
by the Lords takers, may take away thy soul; Luke 12.
albeit thou have prepared many things for thy self, thy wife, thy children,
and posterity; yet none shall do thee good, that art unprepared of that, which
should do thee good indeed: whatever then thou delay, let it not be solid and
timely repentance, hold not thy hand in thy bosom, saying, Pro. 6.10 vese 11.
(...) as a man of a child.
as the sluggard, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, till death come upon
thee, as an armed man, that is irresistably, and inexorably, and cannot be
avoided, Pro. 6.6.
whom therefore God sends to the Ant, and Pismire to learn wisdom of that
provident, but irrational creature

To be prepared solidly and timely for death, head 2
we must be well principled in the fundamentalls of true religion, and well
grounded in the doctrinals not only of repentance toward God, Acts 20.21
but also of faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. We must be rooted and built
in Christ, Col. 2.7.
and established in the faith, in that faith which was once given to the^
Saints, Jude 3.
and has been received, believed, and maintained by all the Lords worthies
since the primitive times, Heb. 11.
Heb. 12.
according to the Scriptures; in which we have God himself revealed, concerning
whom we must know out of those Scriptures the doctrine of 1. His nature. 2.
His works. In his works we must know his works, 1. Of Creation. 2. Of
Providence. In his Providence, consider 1. His General. 2. His special
Providence. In his especial providence, as it concerns man, so look on him, in
his fourfold estate, 1. Of Innocence. 2. Of Corruption. 3. Of Grace. 4. Of
Glory.





Again consider man his estate of grace. And here behold him 1. under the means
of grace, 1. Election in God. 2. Redemption in Christ.


2. Under the subject of Grace, The Church of God universal.

3. Under the degrees of Grace, 1. Justification. 2. Sanctifiation.


4. In the state of Glory, viz. 1. His resurrection. 2. His last judgment. 3.
Eternal life.


And more especially be we exhorted.

1. To be sure we get a solid and distinct understanding of these fundamentalls
by heart. 1 Cor. 1.3.10, 11. Ephesians. 2.20, 21.22. Mat. 4 4. (...) v. 7. (...), 1
These. 5.21. (...). Jam. 1.3.12. John 13.17. Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.17. 2 Pet.
3.17. Rev. 2.13. Gal. 3.1. Ephesians 4.14 (...).


2. Be we well able to prove them every one by diverse plain and undeniable
texts of holy Scripture.

3. Be very careful to be a gracious practitioner, by living upon, and walking
up to, all those infallible and precious truths, which you have known to be the
reavealed will, and mind of God, all which are written for your learning, that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work: and pray
daily, that God will give you his holy Spirit, to live and dye in the faith of
our Lord, and never to be lead away with the error of the wicked, nor to fall
from your stedfastness; but to abide immovable upon the rock, even in violent
storms, and persecutions, when seducers, blasphemers, and heretics are abroad,
and very sollicitous, to gain Disciples, to turn us off the foundation, and to
carry us away with lies, and with every wind of Doctrine. (Dear hearts) we had
never more need (now the beast, the dragon, Jud. 12. Rev. 16.31, 14.
and the false prophets, are so busy) to be advised, to be well grounded,
now when so many of Antichrists emissaries be every where croaking like frogs,
(...).
in our very Congregations, to pervert souls, and to gainsay the precious
truths of Christ, plainly and powerfully preached and maintained, by his
faithful Ministers; they come (I say) with foul mouths, with railing, and
reviling language, bearding the Ministers, and saying, thou lie, thou limb of
Antichrist, thou son of the whore of Babylon, thou deceiver of the people, and
thou persecutor of us; thou say the Scriptures be the Word of God, which we
deny; thou say men have original corruption after grace, which we deny;
thou say we are not perfect, but we are; thou say our spirit is not
infallible from the light within us; but that infalliability we do and shall
still maintain.

Now (my beloved Reader) far be it from any well principled soul, to be
moved, or shaken with any such imposters, 1 Timothy 6.10. 1 Timothy 1.19.
to err from the faith, or to hearken to such Apostates, who are reprobate
concerning the faith. Oh let none be bewitched with such a generation of men,
so diabollically enchaunted; but let us from time to time have recourse unto our
groundwork, laid out before us in the Word; and let us call to mind, what was
our judgment before these errors and blasphemies did so daringly stare us in
the face; again, let us well consider, what was the judgment of the ancients,
(viz.) of solid sincere Christians, and orthodox Martyrs who dyed in, and for
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to the exhortation of the blessed
Apostle, 2. Tim. 1.13.
holding fast the form of sound words, in faith and love. Where the Apostle
would have these two things,

1. That our judgments and understandings be clear and evidentiall, giving
faith and credit, unto the divine authority of those grounds of truth, which
are founded upon the holy Scriptures bearing witness to them.

2. That our love unto the truth of Christ be entire, for those who are not
thus soundly grounded in their understandings and judgments, do lie open to
Jesuitick frauds, and may be easily deceived, by them who lie in wait to that
purpose; Ephesians. 4 14. Act. 20.30
of whom we have some sprung up among our selves, and those likewise who receive
not the truth in the love of it, 2 These. 2.10.
nor in love to Christ, as the holy, and pure, the powerful, Rom* 1.16.
and wonder-working Word of God to save souls; such (I say) may easily fall
away, albeit they may be full of other learning, and have attained excellent
parts, for such have been highly esteemed, much praised of men, and much used
in the Church of God. Thus much of the second branch (viz.) to be well
principled in matters of religion.

3. An holy and solemn meditation of, and conference with death, in in every
Simeon.

Quest. Consider what death is to such?

Answ. It is a degree of happiness, yea an inlet to full happiness, before
when, none could be said to be happy; but when a Christian shall meditate,
that death is an haven after much fowl weather; Acts 2.26. Psalm. 16. Rev.
14.13. Mat. 25.34. 1 Pet. 5.4. Rev. 2.10. Rev. 21.4.
a bed of rest after sore labor; a taking possession of our glorious
inheritance; nay of inthroning with a Crown of Glory, and the putting an end to
all groans, complaints, and sins; the dismissing of a blessed soul, out of a
loathsome prison; and when he shall meditate that death is but the putting off
of old rotten ragged clothes, our day of Jubilee, with many more heads of sweet
meditation; how will he (who would prepare to dye well,) be fitting himself,
with deepest considerations, what course he must take to dye happily? These
meditations carry gold in their wings, and are strong Rhetoricians to persuade
a poor dying creature, Act. 8.37. Romans 10.10. Gal. 2.20.
o believe in the Lord Jesus with all his heart, to live in the faith, and to
live by the faith of the Lord Jesus who has loved him, and given himself for
him; 2 Timothy 4.7. 1 Timothy 1.19. Isa. 38.3.
to keep faith and a good conscience toward God and men, and to walk before
God in truth (as Hezekiah did) with a perfect heart: these divine meditations
be of excellent use, to open and set before u^, all the sweet
covenant-mercies, assured to the godly in death; to unclaspe the book of all
the consolations, and divine promises; and to fill the soul, with a wonderful
longing, and desire upon desire, after those sweet enjoyments, 2 Timothy 4.8.
which be laid up for the Saints, at the happy dissolution of soul and body.

Come on then (immortal soul) and by holy meditation now and then walk with
death half an hour, and say, Oh death I must come into thy quarters and
territories shortly. But Oh the atheism, the pride of heart, and infidelity,
which like a dung-heap, wreaks up abominable stink, at the perceiving of which
my heart does tremble, and I am horribly afraid; Oh that I could spend the
remainder of my days in weeping, and ringing of my hands, and in tearing off
the hair of my head, but yet what will that avail me: but (Oh death) mind me
rather, yea O Father of mercies possess, my soul of true repentance, and with
an humble prostration of my self at the footstool of thy mercy-seat,
restlessly crying mercy, mercy; Oh death mind me! how inexorable thou art,
and that I may be truly humbled, and that the great God of heaven, will not be
dallied withal, Gal. 6.7.
at the hour of death; Oh death! what is the matter? that thou art so terrible?
No may death say, I am terrible only unto hypocrites, and unbelievers, Romans
6.23. Lu 12.46. Rev. 21.8. 1 Cor. 15.55.
to wicked and unprepared souls, others do and may take comfort in my
approaches to them, well knowing, that I have no sting in my hand, no victory
or conquest over them, but am a friendly harbinger, to receive them unto a
blessed peace, who dye in the Lord; after when they shall sin no more, nor shall
need to repent, Rev. 14.13.
nor weep, nor fear death any more: Rev. 7.17.
nay, death may tell thee she is thy approved friend, and that she will be
the death and burial of all thy foes, corruptions, ^fflictions, of all thy
cares thy fears, thy tears, and adversaries, and will put a final end to all
thy conflicts and encounters. Thus in thy meditation of death remember, that to
be young and flourishing is no privilege against death, nor to be beautiful,
nor to be rich, nor to be strong, nor to be learned, nor to be beloved of
Kings, and Princes; nay, remember that no time, no place, no presence, no
power, no business, is any security against death, yet alas! the most dye
sooner then they did expect, and before they were well provided: and in thy
medi^ation of death, and conversing with it, (whatsover be thy outward
comforts, and glory, as honors, lands, goodly houses, men and maidservants
attending, friends, or companions making merry with thee (as Belshazzars
Princes) yet when death comes like the sunset, Dan. 5.1.
all must and will extinguish and depart; though relations sadly weep and howl
never so loudly about us, when they see us speechless, and throatling,
cold-sweating, and struggling for life, or see us die, as one going to sleep. O
meditate on these things (now while the glass runs and has (at least) some
sands in it) that it shall never repent thee, to have soundly repented, nor to
have graciously lived, and orthodoxly believed, to have self-denyed for Christ,
taken up his Cross, Man. 16.2^. Man. 19.^8. Phil. 1.21.
followed him in the regeneration, to have been the servant of Christ, to have
lived to Christ, and dyed in Christ.

But then will every tongue say, not O that I had lived longer, but O that I
had lived better; O that I had sinned less, and believed more; O that I had
prayed more, Mar. 9.24.
been more in duty, more in Christian communion, conversed more with the
Scriptures, been more in the promises, studied more the covenant of grace,
sanctified the Lord's day more, taught and better educated my family, etc. So
shall thou never repent any good, but rejoice, that ever thou had any
gracious breathings, and wilt say, O welcome death, and blessed be my God, and
Father, who now calls for his child, and servant: I come, I come (Lord) now
let thou thy servant depart, etc. farewell my body, and you my friends, take
this body of mine (which I so long governed so ill) to your dispose, and (Lord)
take my soul into the arms of thy mercy, since now thou call me according to
thy word. So much of the third, viz. our holy and solemn meditation of, and
conference with death.

4. The fourth is to set all things in order for an happy death; here comes in
many things very considerable.

1. The soul must be set in order, as thy understanding by saving illumination,
to know the things that belong to thy peace; Luke 19.42.
thy will in order, to be a sanctified will, in its desires, dominions, and
endeavors; thy affections in order, to fix them upon their right holy objects;
thy faith in order, patiently to wait for the due accomplishment, of all the
precious promises, which in Christ are made over to a sanctified soul; no more
of setting the soul in order, having said so much already.

2. The body must be set in order.

3. The estate must be set in order.

1. The body is a sinful mortal decayed natural body, Romans 6.6.
subject to a thousand m^l^dies, and miseries, which must be mortified, and
crucified of its reigning domineering power, and all the organicall parts, must
be subj cted unto Jesus Christ, till when the body is not in order to dye: he
that will dye happily, must keep a daily funeral of his transgressions,
errors, and sinful miscarriages, toward God, self, and men: that albeit they
may have a kind of slavish being in us, yet they must have no dominion over us.

2. The members of the body must become the members of Christ, Romans 6.12.
as the eye to see, the tongue to speak, 1 Cor. 6.15.
the hand to work, the foot to walk, for Christ, and all the parts to suffer
with Christ, before we can be in order to dye.

3 The body must be kept, as a chaste virgin for Christ's use, 1 Cor. 6.15.19.
and the holy Ghosts use, whose Temple it is, we must be sanctified bodies, as
well as sanctified souls, but the dear servants of God, have much ado with
their bodies, to subdue, tame, and bring under their untruly members, of which
Saint Paul did sorely complain, and said, to will is present, but to perform
that which was good he found not. Romans 7.18.
The reason was, because his unregenerate part took so great advantage from,
and by the inordinate pravity of the body, (which is become so prone to serve
the mind, and will, in every sinful motion within; and like tinder so
naturally proclive to catch, at any temptations, and allurements to sin from
without, 1 These. 5.23.
(that the blessed Apostle Paul does pray that the Thessalonians bodies, as
well as their spirits and souls, be sanctified throughout, and preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. The body as well as the soul must be in covenant with God, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, before it can be in order to die; but then though death may
kill, yet death cannot hurt the body, for God is the Saint. God, and father in
death; and when the body lies reposed in the grave, Psalm. 116.15. Genesis 50.25.
Exodus 13.19. Jos. ult 32.
precious in the Lords sight is the death of his Saints, and God sets a great
price even upon their bodies and bones, though the Saints themselves in their
sufferings have a low estimate of their bodies, which (I think) has so steeled
and resolved them to under-go, and cheerfully to wade through the bloody
persecutions of most cruel and butcherly Neroes, knowing the Lord God his
covenant-goodness, even unto their bodies, should they be burnt to ashes, or
torn with wild beasts, as multitudes were served in the primitive times and
since. Fox. Martyrol.


Again, the Lord Christ is their head even in the grave, and they be his
members, upon which he also sets a great price, so as when the soul departs to
God who gave it, even then the bodies of the Saints, have (after a sort) a
principle of life within them, and do but sleep when they be dead, do belong
to Christ. by covenant, whom he will raise up, Eccl 12.7. Isa. 26.19. Mar. 9.21.
1 Cor 11.30. chap. 15.20. Ephesians. 1.19.
by that very exceeding greatness of power, whereby his own mortal body was
raised up, and not only awaken them, but introduce their own souls, and
receive them up to himself, to be for ever with him in glory. Col. 3.4.


Nor is it possible that any one member of Christ, Ps. 34.20.
can loose one muscle, nerve, artery, bone, or sinew, one eye, one limb, or one
hair of the head; but shall arise a complete beautiful, and well-featured
body, however his, or her body was mangled, and deformed here before, or at the
time of death, and burial, and since, (for the bodies in covenant to be united
to Christ,) a perfect body, according to the Apostle, a perfect man unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.
Nor will Christ suffer one part, never so little, to be wanting, for Christ
must account for our bodies to his Father, who of terrestiall, must make them
celestial; of corruptible, 1 Cor 15.41, 42, 43, 44.
incorruptible; of dishonorable, glorious; of weak, powerful; and of natural,
must make them spiritual bodies.

3. The holy Ghost is in Covenant with our bodies whose work it is, and will be
to fill those old mansions, with such a plenitude of the spirit, as those
glorified bodies shall be capable of; Ps. 16.9.10 (...) in hope. Prove. 7.27.
and at present do live in hope of, (though they groan a while with the rest of
the creature) so then, the body must be in Covenant with God before it is well
ordered, to lie down in the chambers of death; which is (by the way (a rich
comfort to the saints of God, that God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are in
Covenant with bodies, Number. 23.10. Ps. 102.13, 14.
as well as souls, yea, when they shall be laid in the grave, and moultered to
dust, God is in covenant with that dust, with Ahrahams, with Isaacs, and Jacobs
dust, and with the dust of their seed lying in their graves, in which respect
the saints bodies, are said to sleep in their death, and to rest in hope.

Nay I verily believe there is more yet in the dust and bones of dead bodies,
that they have a kind of desire after resurrection, 1 These. 4.16. Isai. 60.1.
Isai. 26.19. Joh. 5.28. go but into a vault of men's dead bones, and tarry there
an hour or two, and they will draw much of your spirit and livelihood from you,
and put you under great thirst, till some days after.
and after the word of command from Christ's mouth, to arise, to come forth, to
appear, and to stand before Christ, to receive their glorious enlargment and
blessed investiture into that glorious Kingdom, which their Lord Christ has
purchased for all that dye in Jesus. Thus our bodies must be set in order
before death, in these four last mentioned respects: 1. They must be mortified,
crucified bodies. 2. Implanted members of Christ's body. 3. Kept chaste and holy
for Christ's use. 4. Bodies, in Covenant with God the Father, Son, holy Ghost.



The next duty in the third head incumbent to him that will dye well and
preparedly, is to set his house in order. By the house, may be understood the
persons dwelling in family with us, and more especially, the children who are
to be disposed of, according to their rank, condition, and capacity, as Noah
prepared an ark, Heb. 11.7.
and so his care passed over every one of them.

Or by house, is meant the affairs of the household and family, thus Joseph is
used by Potiphar, to manage and order the affairs of his house and family.

Or else it is taken to dispose of the goods of the family, Genesis 39.5, 6.
to divide and give to every one his portion, or estate, according unto right
reason, and natural affection, that a man's posterity may more comfortably serve
God, in the state, and condition in which the godly-wise shall see good to
leave him; thus Abraham before his death gave his Isaac the inheritance, and to
his other Children he he gave gifts, Gen* 25.5, 6.
and legacies, and sent them away, while he yet lived, and so gave up the
ghost, See Weams his exposition. page 80. 81. on Job. 5.26. and Genesis 29.8.
and died in a good old age; an old man and full of years, and was gathered to
his people: to insist a little on this.

The all wise-disposing providence of our heavenly Father, has laid out the
estate and condition of us, in which we must serve him, in the well managing of
our talents, with which he has entrusted us, Mat. 25.15
and of which some have more, and some have less, of this lumber to possess:
yea the very wicked, have a just title (under God) as I prove out of Job, Job.
9.24.
the earth is given into the hands of the wicked to reign and bear rule, yea
and to be Judges in it, and God sometimes himself covers the face of such
Judges, (as a condemned man's face, going to execution) earth is there put for
all terrene and worldly things, as the Psalmist, even the heavens, or the
heaven of heavens is the Lords, Psalm. 115.16,
but the earth has he given to the children of men. The Lord by deed of gift,
has providentially reached out all good things here below promiscously to all
men, by his own line or meat yard, Number. 33.54.
saving unto us all, here is thy lot, thy habitation, thy land, thy lease, thy
goods, and thy estate, thy bound, dominion, and possession, Jos. 1^.6. chap.
18.10.
hitherto shall they extend, and no further; here is thy confinement with a non
ultra; yea, what ever wicked men come to possess, or inherit by adoption,
descent, or succession from fathers, grandfathers, ancestors* or other
allyances, yet all is the gift of God's common providence, and for believers
whatsoever they have, comes in the name of Christ's purchase for them, and by
special covenant and promise unto them; Romans 8.32.
for as God spared not his own Son, but gave him to dye for them, how shall he
not with him, also freely give them all things? which make for their good.
Earth is given to the sons of men, to the just, and to the unjust; but heaven
is given into the faints hands, as it were Benjamin's mess.

I must go one step further yet, and that is, what wicked men do unlawfully
get, rake, ring, cheat, rob, plunder, and (by violence and oppression) recover
and injuriously wrest from others, is (in a sense) the gift of God, (viz.) he
permitting them to range a while, to prey upon the poor innoce^, the
fatherless, orphant, widow, and stranger; so he permitted wicked. Ahab to kill,
1 King. 21. Jer. 22.13.
and take possession of innocent Naboths Vineyard; and he permits Shallum to
build his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong, to use his
neighbors service without wages; and says to him by his Prophet, thine eyes
and thy heart are not, but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent
blood, and for oppression, and for violence to do it, all this did our all-wise
God order in his common providence to last a while, till Shallum had run his
course, and filled up the measure of his iniquity; but then the Lord sends a
cruel adversary (like a ravening wolf of the evening) to execute his just
judgment upon Shallum, according to that prediction in the seventh verse. of the
two and twentieth of Jeremiah saying, ver. 7.
I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his weapons, and they
shall cut down thy choice Cedars: and Shallum the son of Josiah, King of Judah,
he shall dye in the place whither they have led him captive, ver. 12.
and he shall see his land no more.

Now mark, how the Lord speaks of this destroyer, Nebuchadnezzar by name, Jer.
27.6.
I have given all these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon, my servant and the beasts of the field, have I given also to serve
him. named Evilmerodach, 2 Kings 25.27. Jer. 52.31. Dan. 5.1.
and his son namely Belshazzar, the Lord disposed of those Countries by donat
o^ to him; yet Nebuchadnezzar invades, and spoils, and takes them and theirs
by violence: upon which, say the annotations well, that the great God of heaven
and earth sent him against a people of the Lords wrath and g^ve him a charge to
take the spoil, Isa. 10.6.
and to take the prey, and to tread them down, like the mire of the streets;
and he went (nevertheless) upon his own errand, to glut and satiate his pride
and ambition: verse 7.
therefore says the text, he do to Jerusalem and her Idols? etc.

The like I might say of railing Rabshakeh, and cursing Shimei; they intending
one thing, and God intending another, according to the counsel of his own
will, thus he gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers. Isa. 42.24.


Now as in the days of our life, so when we come to dye, we must look over our
estates, and review all our outward things, and search narrowly into our
receipts and in come, that whatsoever unrighteousness has brought in, whatever
oppression, wrong, and injustice, has accumulated to our wealth, we must
charge upon our selves, and not only repent before God, but make restitution to
the parties injured, if we know them; or else in general to the Church and
poor who are Gods receivers, in such cases, as did Zacheus, Luke 19.8.
behold Lord (said that good man (in the day of his repentance) The half of my
goods I give unto the poor, and if I have taken any thing, from any man by falls
accusation, I restore him four fold.

It would be too long to consider, what restitution is? who must restore? and
when? yet a word or two, very briefly 1. What restitution is?

Restitution is an act of Justice, not arbitrary, but necessary: as the law
provided, and as the casuists and civillians do agree.

2. Who must restore?

The deteiner, so justice both divine and humane does require, and Gods law
stands still in force upon that soul, that does not his best by repentance, and
restitution to prevent the Justice of it.

Many rich men do fill their houses with the spoils of the poor, Isa. 3.14.15.
and prey upon the needy, making their advantages out of the poors necessities;
as many buyers and sellers, biting usurers, oppressing landlords, who live by
an unlawful calling, or unlawfully in their calling. Poor wretch! how can
thou be ready to dye, and put thy house in order, Mic, 6.10,
who have (as Micah speaks) the treasures of wickedness in thy house? some it
may be hundreds, some thousands, wrapped up in their estates? of which if every
bird had his feather, every other man had his own, little or nothing would be
thine. Oh! this will pinch close one day, and gnaw hard upon the consciences of
gripulous fists and great gainers, who have made too much have to be rich, when
in obedience unto divine command they must make restitution before they can
truly repent or dye preparedly. This is Durus sermo, to all sacrilegious
Cormorants, who devour the Churches patrimony, and do take God's Deo-datum's
to themselves. Such devourers must make restitution, else it will be a snare to
devour holy things.

3. When we must restore?

Answ. Speedily, as when Abimelech rose early to restore Sara to Abraham. Say
not come again to morrow, Genesis 20.8. Deuteronomy. 24.13.
when we do repent, till when we cannot say we have truly repented; the
Scripture says to day before to morrow, that is, with all due convenience;
when thou art setting thy house in order, with Z^cheus, then set penitentially
upon the work; Oh! tarry not, till death compel thee to part with all, because
thou could not detain them longer. The godly wise, and holy ancients say no
restitution, no remission, and then no promise, of pardon; no hope, of mercy,
nor good acceptance of any duty else. Who is in a capacity to restore, and does
not, is out of heavens way. If the wicked give again that, that he has
robbed, the Prophet says, he shall surely live, Ezech. 33.15.
and not dot dye: therefore in setting thy house in order, make restitution,
least it is want shall make void, Jam. 5.1.2.
shall curse and blast all the rest, and God shall cross thy will, and deny to
bless those goods and lands which thou bequeathest, to thy heirs and legators.

Judas seemed very conscious of this sin, Mat. 27.4.5.
therefore he quickly brought again the thirty pieces of silver which he had so
wickedly gotten; but yet Judas could not find pardon: then what will such do who
come short of Judas! Possibly thou talkest of settling thy estate by gift, deed,
will, or otherwise, and so committest thy soul to God, and thy ill gotten goods
into the hands of heirs and executors; but be not deceived, God will not be
mocked, such heirs shall not be the better, but the worse, and such goods have
a curse in them, Deuteronomy. 28.
and shall prove so to the generation that shall come after thee, who may truly
say, 16, 17, 18.
God has cursed our friends bounty and blessings. Mal. 2.2.


somewhat to pious uses for ever. But all this will not deceive the all-knowing
God, to steal a pound and give a penny; therefore said the Father, Dare te put
as, tollere noli; thou think-thou give, when thou first robbest and take
away; give says Austin, but be sure thou give of thine own, else thou can
not set thy house in good order to dye. I have been somewhat longer in this,
because so many millions of men in our age do in all probability dye
desperately in this particular. The Lord open the eyes of the living seriously
to lay these things to heart.

4. To whom restitution is to be made.

5. Upon what account it must be.

Ans. To the persons to whom the wrong is done; if he be dead, or cannot be
heard of, then to him or them to whom it shall be due by law. Thus Naomi did
perform the office of a kinsman unto Ruth, she being the next of the posterity
of the dead, Ruth. 3. ver. 2.

Upon what account must restitution be made?

Ans. Not as alms, benevolence, or charity; but as an act of just restitution.
Not as a free gift, but as a due debt, and as that which God calls for, which
law and conscience calls for to have done, as that which is the right of theirs
to whom we make restitution.

In many cases injuries are so done by the cunning sleight of deceivers, by
fraud and policy, and so would up, with deceitful hearts, and sleight of hand,
and witty contrivances, that the laws of nations and common wealths cannot find
out means to give every one his own; but the all-seeing God knows what is
unjustly done though it be in the dark, and he looks that in the day of our
repentance and preparation to dye blessedly, that we make just restitution
(what possibly we may) And in the day thereof we must not think that we do
give, or be bountiful and good benefactors, when we do but our duty: and
therefore that word which we call alms, the word in the Syriack tongue is called
Justice, Mat. 6.2. When thou do thy justice, which we read alms, because
alms is a fruit of justice; Vide Alex. Alens. de generali Restitutione,
speciali Satisfactione. Part Quarte Quest. 24. membrum per totum.
but things to be restored be a due debt, comminicatio ista non est gratuita,
sed ex justitia debetur.

Quest. What if there be not enough to pay all?

Answ. If the creditors be equal then pro toto, if not, then the poor must
be paid the first; If there be not any thing left, then be of a willing mind
and leave it upon Gods account, beseeching him to be thy restorer whose is all
the earth, and the fullness thereof.

The next thing respects the persons related to a family, and so parents and
other relations must take care of persons whom they leave behind, on whom they
are to bestow 1 holy admonition, and 2 good counsel, 3 with faithful prayer.

1. For admonition, so they are to advise, and instruct them, the best they
can, how to walk prudently, and graciously toward God, and men, as did Isaac,
and Jacob; Isaac called Jacob unto him, and blessed him, Genesis 49.1. to 19.
when he sent him to Padan Aran, to Bethnell. So Jacob the father of the twelve
Tribes, called them all one by one, and blessing, he blessed them, as some of
the Rabbis say was the custom of the holy Patriarchs, to call their children
before them, some considerable time, before their death, to acquaint them with
their covenant-interests, with the knowledge of precious, and special promises
to be expected, to instruct them in holy aphorisms, and good documents of
faith and manners; so did Moses, almost throughout the 33 of Deuteronomy. naming the
Tribes one by one, from the sixth verse to the end; so did dying Joshua, a
little before his end, Jos. 23.2,
call all the tribes of Israel, and spoke more especially to their elders,
heads, Judges, and officers, and said unto them, v. 3,
I am old, and stricken in age, you have seen all that the Lord has done unto
these nations, because of you, be ye courageous, v. 6.
keep, and do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, v. 8.
1 Kin. 2.1,
and cleave unto the Lord your God; and so David called and instructed Solomon
his son, 2, 3, 4.
charging him to be strong, to show himself a man, and to keep the charge of
the Lord his God; to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, that he may
prosper, and that the Lord may continue, his promising word that he had made to
David, concerning his son Solomon.

Let Magistrates, Ministers, Parents and other relations, lay this to heart,
that good men, wise and godly men, have made their deathbeds to be their
pulpits, and oratories, to prophecy to preach in, and to give sweet and
wholesome instructions to their relations.

Quest. But why at such a time of pain, and sickness and sorrow?

Answ. Not because the work is to be left alone till then, though then
especially it may not be left undone.

Not because (as some philosophers say) the soul upon deaths approach, Xenoph.
lib. 8. Plat. in apolog.
is more divine, and supernaturally inspired; but because, at that time, the
words and wholesome admonitions, of a dying Magistrate, Minister, Father, or
friend, do probably make a deeper impression, upon affectionate and religious
minds.

And to let such relations understand the religious care of Godly ancestors,
that their posterity might do well with such golden legacies, and live upon the
covenant-goodness of the Lord God of their Fathers.

Great is the difference between the carnal worldling, and the gracious
believer; the one looks no farther then the temporal good of his relations,
the other to their spiritual, and eternal welfare. Like wicked Achitophell,
peradventure he will put his house in order, but without any due regard, 2 Samuel
17.23.
to his own or their souls, such persons may and do often call their friends,
children, and relations about them, as Ishai did, in calling forth his sons,
first coms Eliab, then Aminadab, then Shammah, but David the anointed of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 16.
was called last of all: so when death comes near, first the Physician is
called for, and he comes, but his Art cannot deliver from the unsatiable grave;
next like Ahaziah, he is remembered of some God of Ekron, some good witch,
wizard, or white devil, to enquire of, but if he help not, in the third place,
a wise and cunning Lawer is sent for, to entail and perpetuate his lands to his
lawful heirs, and to help him make his will, and to bequeath his movables to
children, and friends: mean while, how sad, and comfortless is this dying
creature? Oh how much is he cumbred about his many things? Luke 10.41
wishing heartily longer life, not to grow better, but to grow richer; and
lastly when all hope is past, then he sends for a Minister, (one (it may be) of
his own carnal and earthly mind) and before him, confesses his sins, in the
gross, to have been great, and many, then a^ks God, and all the world
forgiveness, repeats his good works, tells of his keeping his Church, of
receiving at Easter, of his care to pay every one his own, of his just, and
honest dealing with all men: he says the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the Ten
commandments, and if the Minister be one of those daubing flatteres, Ezech.
13.10.
he magnifies his goodness, and happy estate, making the poor wretch vainly
confident, of a very good posture in which to dye, praying to God for him to
have mercy on his soul, and to receive him into his Kingdom, and so leaves the
deceived soul, presuming that Christ says to him, Luke 23.43
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And if he preach his funeral
sermon, he extolls him for an eminent Saint; and well he may, for he is well
paid for his pains. And thus do many wretched sinners, leave the world, they
know not how, [having (it may be feared) put nothing in order, for an happy
death.]

But as for holy admonition sweet and pious counsel, how to be prepared to dye
happily themselves, and to leave their relations under a gracious frame of
heart, is the least of such men's care, who should be advised, first to serve
the Lord God, and to walk before him with an upright and perfect heart, and in
their particular callings to serve his providence and glory, wirh all
integrity, in holiness and righteousness all their day. Luke 1.75.


The second thing is holy and faithful prayer, of persons near their end, for
and in behalf of their relations; I shall only instance in Parents prayers for
their children, who are to bless them in the name of the Lord, as resigning up
their charge unto their heavenly Father to take care of them, as Isaac and
Jacob did; Genesis 28.1. Genesis 48.15, 16. chap. 49. Heb. 11.20.21.
besides Parents know best what have been and are the ways and conversations of
their children; they know what have been their sins and infirmities, what their
defects and wants, what is their present state and condition, what mercies,
pardon, and grace they do most need, and by their neerness of relation to them,
and by their duty which they owe them; and lastly their interest which they
have in them, they are much concerned to look to, and study their welfare much
every way; as might be showed in Job's care of his children when they were
grown up, and dwelled in families of their own, he sent and sanctified them,
Job. 1.5.
not only while they were little ones going to school, and under their Parents
roof.

Godly Parents near to death, do see and read volums of divine and gracious
providence, flowing toward them and theirs from out the Ark of the covenant,
by virtue of which, they are much invited to mind and press the Lord with that
successive goodness of his, to the after generation and posterity of them that
fear the Lord, (viz) that their generations shall be blessed: Psa. 112.2.
and upon this account, do they (with an humble boldness and much confidence)
put up their holy supplications and prayers, that he will please to enrich and
bless their children, with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly places in
Christ; Ephesians. 1.3.
that the Lord will be their portion, Psa. 16.5. Ps. 73.26 Ezra 9.8. E^a. 56.5.
Jer. 13.11.
and ever give to them and theirs a place in his Sanctuary, and a name better
then that of sons and daughters, and that they should be unto the Lord for a
people, for a name, for a praise, and for a glory.

And for outward things, they must commend them also to the blessing of the
Lord in every state, high or low, rich or poor, of marriage or single life;
that the Lord will please to lay them out such a condition, as in which, they
may be most serviceable to God, to the country they live in, to neighbors,
relations, and friends, in all godliness and honesty; and their Parents even
while they do live, may say of natural children as John does of his spiritual
children, Joh. 5.3, 4.
I have no greater joy, then to hear that my children walk in the truth.

And observe, as Parents must take care of the particular concernments of every
child, (who will be ready to observe what Parents intend, do, or may be like
to do for them) often saying secretly to themselves, what shall I do? and what
shall I do says another? what will become of me says one? and of me says
another? and of me says a third, when my Father and Mother are dead?) so must
the soul of every one, and the outward estate of each one be cared for, by
every wise, holy, and affectionate Parent. Job he offered sacrifice for each
one; Lev. 4.13.14.15.21. Lev. 1.2, 3, 4.
where mark that whereas some sacrifices were for the whole Congregation, and
some only for single persons, so Job did not only offer a general sacrifice for all his sons, but a particular sacrifice for every individual of them, whatever
their sin should be.

Parents (when you draw near to dye) you must not only pray in general that
God will bless your children, but you must (if possibly it may be) set them
before the Lord, one by one, Genesis 32.24.
and wrestle with God by prayer, for a special benediction to be upon the head
of each one of them, according to his or her age, rank, calling, condition, and
habitation; according to his, or her temptations, affl^ction^, and trialls;
that God will sanct^fie them unto himself, and make them very isntrumental for
his glory, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Esa. 38.3.
that they may know the Lord God of their Fathers, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and willing mind; and that (by such children) God will raise up to his
own name, and unto his own glory, an holy seed, and faithful generation, to
serve the Lord for ever, and that such children may live in a most sweet and
holy concord, which as it is a great blessing unto Parents, so the contrary it
is a great heartbreaking to them, as might be showed in Adam, Genesis 4.
who when he had only two sons, the one kills the other; and in Abraham's
family, was scoffing Ishmael; Genesis 21.
in Isaac's family Esau hated Jacob; Genesis 27.
Jacob had twelve sons, eleven of them hated and sold Joseph to the
Ishmaelites, Genesis 37.
intending never to see his face more* 2 Samuel 13.28.
David had an Absolon, who caused his brother Amnon, 1 King. 1.5.18.25.
to be murdered; and Adonijah rises against Solomon. Look to it Parents, be
much in prayer to God, that your children may be sweetly bundled in the bond
of love, and charge it on them, with strongest arguments show them, Ps. 133.1.
how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity; v. 2.
it is like the precious ointment upon the head, v. 3.
that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron 's beard, that went down to the
skirts of his garment; it is like the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that
descended upon the mountains of Zion; and tell them that there the Lord
commanded the blessing, and life for evermore. Where? there where this bond is
kept inviolable.

Some would add a third thing, much tending to the setting ones house in order;
namely, the recommendation of children, (such as are under age) unto the loving
care of some godly, wise, and christian friends: thus did old David comend the
care of young Solomon his son to certain Princes to help Solomon in his reign,
1 Chronicles. 22.17, 18.
when he should govern, saying, is not the Lord your God with you? intimating
thereby, that they would be very useful, and helpful to his young son: such
friends may be of excellent use, and benefit to fatherless children, whom the
Lord himself gives charge unto to deal friendly by them, to be as fathers to
the fatherless, Psalm. 68.5.
as God himself vouchsafes to be called. But I leave this of Trustees, and
Guardians, and come to the last thing concerning a man's setting his house in
order, and that is about his last will and testament.

It Is to be presupposed, it has been much of a Parents care, to set a part
somewhat for children in the management of outward things; that they have laid
up somewhat to distribute, and dispose of at their death: And not without great
reason. 1. That the future, as well as the present may be provided for.

2. That peace in the dispose of the goods of the family; may be provided for,
from out that true interest which Parents have in the goods of the family, to
bequeath and dispose the estate, which the God of all the earth has left, and
entrusted them withal; which must be done judiciously and understandingly, in
the time of good judgment, and perfect memory, and that so plainly, that his
meaning may not be mistaken, nor his words perverted, and the whole, kept free
from all exception.

Here against, they do highly offend God and man, who (as they for the most
part) have lived out of order themselves, so they do take no care, to make any
will at all, to the great confusion and prejudice of their family and
relations, to the defrauding of many of their right, to whom they owe and are
indebted, whilst they leave all undone: Others by a foolish delay, are
surprised by the sudden of their death: Others tarry till they be prevented of
understanding and speech: Others put the words of their will into such
ambiguous terms, that occasion is given to intricating, and undoing-suits of
law, even to the dividing and estranging of the affections of near and dear
relations, to the wasting of a great part of all, or more then all the estate,
to the utter ruin of the surviving friends, and relations, with perpetual
hatred, and evil will, which like a fire still burninig, cannot be
extinguished in many generations. Oh! you who fear God, lay these thing to
heart, and be pre-admonished, I hope a word to the wise is enough.

And now in setting thy house in order, be very careful to use an impartial
hand for the first born; Deuteronomy. 21.15, 16, 17.
it is one of his prerogatives to have a double portion; upon this account, the
birthright was Joseph's, 1 Chronicles. 1.5.2.
who was the first born of the true wife: Genesis 4^.3. non ad hominem, sed ad
Deu^ at tinet, haeredes facere, Glanvill lib. 6. c. 17
the first born is the excellency of the fathers dignity, his might, the
beginning of his strength, as Jacob to his eldest son; nay the Civillians say
well, God singles out and makes heirs, even his first born: This the law of
nations does give to the eldest.

So does the law of our land, and for this I could easily lay down many weighty
grounds of reason, and religion.

Exo. 13.2. Ibid.
1. As that God himself sets an high price upon the first born.

2. The Lord also laid a paternall, Priestly, and Ministerial charge upon the
first born.

3 God provides no land should be sold for ever, Lev. 25.25.
for the land is mine, and yea are strangers and sojourners with me; but if
necessity require any to sell his estate of land, then he must sell it to one,
that was next allied in blood unto him, and he shall redeem that which his
brother sold, and at the Jubilee, he shall return to his possession, and be no
longer in bondage. Which though it be not our rule, yet the reason is weighty,
why the heir should not be disinherited unless in some special cases, and
those extraordinary, Genesis 21.10. Judge. 11.2. Judge. 9.18. Genesis 49.4. 1 Chr. 5.1.
as illegitimacy in Ishmael the son of the bondwoman, and Jephtha the son of a
strange woman, and Abimilech the son of an handmaid; or deboistness, as profane
Reuben, who defiled his fathers bed, for which his birthright was given to the
sons of Joseph, the son of Israel. The common objection is, so shall the family
be undone, to make the heir great, and leave the residue of the family low, and
in a mean condition. This inconvenience was as incident to the families of the
Tribes of Israel, as to the families in England, or any other nation; and yet
God will have the prerogative of the elder, to stand, to be the heir, and more
fully p ovided for, because he is the excellency of dignity, and the excellency
of power: Not that the residue should be left destitute, but that a paternal
and maternal care be had, in training up of children in some honest calling;
and in settling younger children with some other estate; in taking order, that
portions may be raised out of the lands, where land of inheritance is
considerable, if in the life of Parents other provisions have not been, or
could not be made. Yet so as the eldest may be a father still to brethren, and
sisters, and may be enabled to protect, and de-defend his own flesh and blood,
from wrongs, and oppressions, according to his power or capacity; and lastly,
that the elder brother, may be enabled cheerfully to welcome his brethren, and
sisters, when (upon good will, or just occasions) they shall visit their
brothers house as their head quarters; and that such relations might take, and
give mutual advice, in all occurrences, which shall be more considerable and
weighty.

Thus of setting our house in order, wherein was showed,

1. That all men good, and bad, have their estates laid out, by Gods meat yard
of common providence; therefore wicked ones, as well as believers must set
their house in order before they die.

2. In setting the house in order, evill-gotten goods, must be restored; where
was showed, 1. What restitution is. 2. Who must restore. 3. When we must
restore. 4. What must be restored. 5. To whom, and upon what account.


3. What due regard is to be had to the relations of him, who must set his
house in order, and that in four things, In 1. Holy admonition, and
instruction. 2. Faithful and humble prayer for them, and blessing of them in
the name of the Lord, to appoint Trustees and Guardians, where requisite. 4.
Concerning his last will and testament.


3. Exhortation.

Humbly, and wisely, to submit to the Lord, as in life, so in death. Here I
must premise a little of the different carriages of Simeons and Naballs, at the
approach of death, and in the very article of death; some are discontented at
every cross providence, as Naball, 1 Samuel 25.3.
whose heart dies within him; as mumuring Israel, who say would God we had died
in the wilderness, Numb. 14.2, 3.
rather then be killed, in a war by the Canaanites; some through impatience
give bitter language toward God, Job. 1.9. Jonah 4.8.
as Jobs wife to her husband, curse God and dye; and as Jonah who storms
against God himself. But a gracious Simeon will let out his heart to God, 1 Samuel 3.18. Job. 1.21.
and say I com Lord, be it to thy servant according to thy word, It is of God,
and let him do with me what seems him good; the Lord gives, and the Lord
takes away, and blessed be the name of the Lord.

Oh i'ts sad and dreadful to hear, and to hear of wicked and awakened
consciences, to chide themselves out of this life, with horrible accusations
saying, woe is me, woe is me, that ever I was born, woe is me, woe is me, such a
sinner; Oh thou my wretched body, what cause have thou to curse thy wicked
soul, for being so ill a governor and commander of me thy body! that now I know
not how to live one hour longer, nor how to submit to death; live I cannot, but
dye I must.

O my celestial soul, tho halt also great cause to curse thy wretched body for
being so ill a servant to thee so precious a piece of Gods creation, in that
thou art now afraid to depart at thy great Lords command. As the parting of
soul and body is violent, and very sad; so more sable shall be their meeting at
the resurrection, when the sin-accusing conscience shall deliver up soul and
body to the righteous judge of quick and dead; Act. 10.42.
when that judge shall deliver the guilty sinner, and the law shall judge, and
bind him over to death eternal, and to hell, where the worm diet not; Esa.
66.24. Mark 9.43.44.
and the fire never goes out, but must abide an eternity of weeping, howling,
and gnashing of teeth.

(Precious Saint) far otherwise and ^ull of bliss, is the state of every
blessed Simeons soul, and body in the approach, and very article of death; when
he shall sweetly sing or use this Prosopopoeia or words to the same effect,
Thou body of mine, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ be with thee, in
thy departure, in thy death, and in thy grave, for he has shut thine eyes,
and bound thy jaws, and bid thee abide a while in peace; be thou content to
sleep in death, and to rest in hope, on such a bed of roses: for er'e long, thy
dust and clay shall live, and thou shall arise with Christ's blessed body, Isa.
26.19.
thou that dwell in the dust, shall awake and sing for thy dew, is as the
dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead in her. And thou my happy
soul shall return a glorified soul; to be united for ever, to thy
incorruptible, immortal, and glorified body; to be joined to the great
Congregation in heaven, where God, and Christ, and the Spirit, and all
Angelical natures, shall for ever honor thee, and all other glorified ones,
with that very glory, which Christ Jesus had with the Father, John 17.
before the world was.

Suffer this exhortation then (I beseech you) to take hold on your hearts,
sweetly to submit to your allwise God, and Father, even in every state and
condition, of life and death, which I shall amplify under these three heads, 1.
Of health, 2. Of sickness, 3. Of death.


1. In our health and prime of our life, whilst green and flourishing like a
bay tree, must be an holy resignation of our selves, into the hands of so good
a God, Eccl. 12.1. 1 Chronicles. 28.
betimes we must remember our Creator in the days of our youth; then we must
learn to know the Lord God of our fathers, as good David gives in counsel to
his young son Solomon; and this submission must be a total resigning of soul
and body to the Lord; a lesson, not taught (in any school) below heaven, none
of the Moralists, none of the Philosophers could attain it, being only found
in the school of grace, which among other things does teach, Psalm. 34.9* 10.
Mat. 28. 20. 2 Cor. 12.9. Isai. 41.10. Isai. 33.16.
that no good thing shall be wanting unto such; and that (be our condition
never so strait) yet God and Christ are with us, and his grace shall be
sufficient for us; he will uphold us and help us, with the right hand of his
righteousness; and our ammunition is made of rocks in pregnable round about us;
Isai. 27.9.
and lastly, God will so order all his good providence for us, that they shall
all work together for our good, as Israel's pressures in Egypt, Joseph's
casting into the pit, and twice selling to be a slave, as the rod of Ashur,
and the furnace of Babylon.

Now in thy submission to the good pleasure of thy heavenly Father, thou must
not be over hasty after fruition, but with an holy patience, must possess thy
soul during thy stay in this world; for as thou, so those forenamed promises
have their set determinations, by an unchangeable decree, as Noah's time in the
Ark, Genesis 8. Job. 14.14.
and Job waits his appointed time all his days, and so did Simeon here in the
text.

2. In sickness we must submit to the Lord's visitation, and say, Lord it is
thy hand, and thy holy will be done in me and upon me, I will use the Physician,
(a good ordinance of thine) but I will recumb in thee alone; I will honor the
Physician for my necessity, but I do commend my self to thy allwise dispose:
who if thou shall please to add to my days, and to piece out my frail life a
little longer, I will (by the assistance of thy grace) endeavor to live, and
to be, an instrument of thy praise; but shall thou see it good, to end my
pilgrimage, and to take me home (Oh that is best) I will sing Hallelujahs to
thee for ever.

But (by the way) consider the poor, and the Lord will strengthen thee upon the
bed of languishing, Psalm. 41.1.3 10.
and will make all thy bed in thy sickness, and be merciful to thee, and
raise thee, and requite thee: men may visit thee deceitfully, flatteringly,
speaking good words unto thee, and whispering evil in their own bosom, and
say, when shall he dye, v. 5. v. 8.
and his name perish, an evil disease say they cleaves fast to him, and now
that he lies, he shall rise up no more; but the Lord shall visit thee upon the
bed of sickness, with a visit, speaking pardon of sin, peace of conscience, thy
reconciliation to himself, with joy in the holy Ghost, even joy unspeakable and
full of glory. Giving to the poor, though it be thy duty, Pro. 19.17.
yet it is called a lending to the Lord, who will repay it with more
consideration, then the principal it self; Thou put thine alms into the
poor man's hand, and the Lord makes thee payment ten thousand-fold, into thy
heart and soul.

But least I be thought to digress, this sick man or woman, must submit
patiently and readily unto the gracious hand of the all-wise Lord God, and that
in the name and worthiness of his sweet savior Jesus Christ, devoutly praying
(as David did in the words of faith. Psalm. 71.1.
In thee O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion. Deliver
me in thy righteousness. Correct me not in thine anger (O Lord) nor rebuke me
not in thine indignation: Jer. 10.24. Psalm. 6.2.
heal me (O Lord) for my bones are vexed. Psalm. 22.11.
Be not far from me for trouble is nigh at hand; lay no more on me, then thou
shall give me strength to bear; 1 Cor. 10.13.
Cast me not away when my strengh fails me: and so will the Lord answer,
Because he has set his love upon me, Psalm. 71.9.
therefore will I deliver him; I will be with him in trouble, Psalm. 91.14.15.16.
I will deliver him and honor him. With long life will I satisfy him, and
show him my salvation. And for thy comfort know (who have a mansion with God)
that thy God and father, does ordinarily fit his children for death, in their
sickness; presenting to them the unloveliness, and vanity of all things below;
the blessed interest which the Saints do enjoy; in their Christ; and the happy
change which they do make, who dye in the arms of their Jesus; and that such
shall for ever be quit of all sinful society, yea of sinful flesh, no longer
to abide among dead men, nor among the tombs of dead ones; shall never have
cause to hang up their harpes upon Babylons Willows tree, Ps. 137.2.
never be interrupted in singing our Hebrew song: and therefore does our
gracious Father in sickness and otherwise, open the narrow hearts, and deaf
ears of Simeons souls, and then speak to them, saying, come my precious ones,
suffer me now to dispose of you; let me new mould you and transfigure you for
your disease, and so (dear heart) I do

First make thee weary of thy body of death, weary of the worlds blandishments,
and painted glory, and weary of thy sinful self.

Secondly, I do sanctify every pain and grief, every cross and trouble, and
make them become sanctified mercies, Ps. 131.2.
whiles I do wean thee, to be less in love with things below; nay I cause that
every decay of thy natural strength, every dimnesse of thy eye, every dullness
of thy ear, every weakness and sickness of thy natural body shall tend to such
a blessed change, that at last, the soul and body are made willing to depart
for a time, to attain unto, Phil. 1.22.
and enjoy a glorified cure.

Thirdly, I do not only prepare thee to this submission, but I do also make
thee desire and long to dye; I do so spiritualize, and order thy soul, that
sickness shall be as welcome to thee as health; death as life to thee, who
live upon God, in God, and to God: Do want health of body? I do satisfy
thee with health of soul; art near to death? be it so, then thou art nearer to
life, even a glorious blessed and eternal life: sick man I am thy Lord God,
and I do assure thee, (by thy interest in my self) through my son, I am better
to thee then ten healths, as Elkanah was to Hannah then ten sons; 1 Samuel 1.8.
I am better to thee then many lives, thy life here was but a breath or
rivullet of life, but in thy death thou art admitted to live for ever in him,
Joh. 14.6. Ps. 36.9.
who is life it self, and to thee the fountain of life.

Fourthly, in sickness the Lord speaks to his holy ones, to be of good cheer,
from the deep meditation of the love of God shed abroad in their hearts by the
holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. Joh. 1.16.
from the fullness and al^ sufficiency of Jesus Christ, their dearest friend,
their Lord and King; who coms leaping and skipping, over the mountains to
solace himself, in, and with them, whom he had so wonderfully delivered from
the dens of Lions, Cant. 2.8. Cant. 4.8.
and mountains of Leopards, or what else has been formidable to them: Come
look on me, and to me lean and rely on me; pour out thy soul into my bosom;
Isa. 45.22. Mic. 7.7.
who will assuredly give her sweet repose, until the great day of my second
coming; Cant. 8.5.
Act. 7.59.
when thou shall be received, soul and body, to be for ever in mansions of
eternal glory, Cant. 3.11.
to keep a most triumphant Jubilee with the Lord for ever. Mal. 3.17.
Act. 3.19.


3. In death, we must submit to our Lord, Joh. 14.2, 3
and that in two things In the approach, Act. 7.54. etc.
and point of death. Precious soul in the approach of death, Heb. 11. 2 Chronicles.
6.42. Ps. 25.6. Ps. 119.49. Psa. 22.8. (...) Heb. 7.25.
act faith in the Lord Jesus, as Stephen did, and as those Martyrs did: faith
will plead thy covenant interest, and persuade to roll thy self upon the free
grace of God, so fully represented in the promises; faith bids thee look on thy
Lord, and savior, interceding thy cause, at heavens throne.

Set hope on work, to take faster anchor-hold, on Jesus Christ, Psalm. 18.2.
Deuteronomy 32.4.31. 2 Samuel 22.47. Ps. 62.2.7. Ps. 89.26. Ps. 39.13.
the rock of thy salvation.

Set prayer on work, and pour out thy soul, saying (O Lord) spare a little,
till I may recollect my self, and be sweetly composed, to rejoice in the
approach of my my change; Lord give me to welcome death, with all ready
entertainment, as Gods messenger, to deliver me from my prison, Ps. 142.7. Job.
4.19.
and house of clay, wherein my celestial soul (the espouse of Christ) is
confined, and imprisoned, and say, (O Christ) I come, Luke 16.22.
(Lord Jesus) send some of thy blessed Angels to receive and carry my soul into
Abraham's bosom; as one of the fathers does personate a dying Saint, O holy
trinity Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (which in unity of nature, art one, the
self-same God) into thy hands I do commend my spirit; into thy hands O blessed
Savior my King, my priest, and my Prophet, do I recommend my self, unto thee
sweet Jesus do I (a dying servant of thine) come, who came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief; unto thee (blessed Lord) who wast conceived,
and born of the virgin Mary, sufferedst, diedst, was buried, and laid under the
power of death, Acts 1.24.
for me, to alleviate my death, and make it stinglesse, and curs-lesse, who
wast raised up from the dead, and did miraculously ascend, and art now set
down at thy fathers right hand for me, to come again at the end of the world,
to be judge of all men, and Angels, even to be my judge to justify and absolve
me, before all the world, and to invest me a poor and miserable creature, with
that very glory, which thy humane nature has now in heaven, and which thy self
had with the Father, before the world was; into thy hands (gracious redeener)
into thy hands (O eternal spirit) do I recommend my self, who do even ravish
my heart, by applying, and sealing all the Covenant-goodnesse, and gracious
promises of life and of salvation; even to me, even now about to breath out my
last breath of life. Thus dying soul in thy submission un-thy Lord God, set
faith, hope, and prayer on work.

Quest. The learned have a question, whether the Saints in death do fear death,
having commission in some cases of persecution, in one City, to fly unto
another; and Christ saying, Mar. 10.
go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the Cities of the Samaritans
enter ye not; Act* 9.25.
and Saint Paul escaped out at a window, at the fear of death; and Christ
himself often shunned the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Rulers, who sought to
kill him; Joh. 7.1. 1 King. 19.3.
so did David shun Saul, and Elias the wicked instruments of wicked Ahab and
Jezebell.

Answ. To all which I answer, that it is not simply unlawful to fear death, nor
to avoid it is snares; for death of it self, is not good, nor is it natural to
us, but cruel and horrible; but basely to fear death, rather then to glorify
the name of God in our sufferings, this is a great sin; to be afraid to dye
after an evil life, and out of Christ, to such, death is the terrible of
terribles such cannot be well willing to dye: but when God shall (in the way
of his good providence) call us to dye, either by a natural death, or to seal
unto his truth under persecution to dye a violent death; then we may welcome
death, and the instruments of death, as Historians say Saint Andrew did, Salve
crux pretiosa, susci pe nunc Discipulum, cum prius sustinueris Magistrum.

Thus M. John Philpot embraced the stake in Smithfield.


who with a gladsome Spirit, said I kindly salute thee (precious cross) be
content to bear me the Disciple, who have formerly born my Master: every Simeon
is carried above the apprehensions of natural and moral men in death, and
has very grand considerations, neither basely nor sinfully to fear death, and
therefore subscribes unto her, with heart and hand.

Answ. 2. The fear of death in the Saints, and the fear of death in others are
very diverse; the one is acted by sinfull-self, whom such an one seeks to
preserve, for fear of greater wrath; the other is acted by gracious self, who
seeks to know the mind of God in his death, to subscribe to it, and to serve
divine providence, as in life, so in death; whom if the Lord shall recover, or
deliver, he gives himself to God again; if the Lord has determined death shall
take place, he resigns up soul and body, with an holy contentment, Mat. 26.39.
under the good pleasure of his heavenly Father.

Let Pagans and Infidels (who never believed, who never feared God,) fear to
dye or despair in death, because they dye without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. Collos.
1.20.21. Ephesians. 1.10.
because they have no faith, nor do lay hold on that reconciliation which Jesus
Christ has made between the Lord and gracious souls: but let Christians
rejoice, and be glad, ever giving thanks unto the Father of mercies, Col. 1.1.2.
who has made them meet to be pertakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. Which inherirance for situation, is the Empyrean heaven, far above all
heavens, where is Christ himself, to entertain, and glorify all those who
sleep in him; where is nothing but glory, for all such poor souls dying in the
Lord; as the King of Glory, to be with all vessels of glory to accompany us,
thrones of glory, to sit on an eternal wait of eternal glory, 2 Pet. 2.1.11.
(...), An entrance shall be administered to you abundantly, or (according to
the original) richly. Phil. 1.23.
to put on crowns of glory to wear, a kingdom of glory to possess; here the
soul of the departing one cries out, in a blessed ecstasie, I have enough
(blessed Lord) I come, I come, having so abundant an entrance made for me, into
celestial triumphs; blessed be God, who has made me thus willing and desirous
rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord; where I am
assured to find peace without intermission, or perturbation; health without
sickness; plenty without want; wealth without poverty, and everlasting life,
without death. Of which holy City said Austin, when shall I come into thy
golden streets? when shall I see, and enjoy the heavenly society of blessed
souls, and that glorious Jubilee? Fain I would come to fruition, but Oh how am
I detained? anon will death come, behold, she stands at the door and knocks,
bid her come in, that I may bid her welcome; to whom I am ready to answer, as
Rebekah did, Genesis 24.
to her old near and dear relations, (who were so loath to part with her;) I
will go with the man; so say I even withlong-looked-for death, my harbinger,
and friend, Oh death I willingly go along with thee, whom my Lord has made so
necessary, and serviceable to me, in my happy translation; Acts 10.
for (me thinks) I see Heaven open, as Peter in his vision, and the son of man
(like as Stephen did see him) standing at the right hand of God: Oh my soul!
thou art in a rapture divine, to contemplate the things in heaven, which are so
unspeakable and full of glory.

True, I shall (in death) be taken from my dearest friends, but let not that
retard my souls willingness to dye; for its not improbable, but I may know my
gracious friends in heaven, since our divine knowledge there, shall not be
diminished, but enlarged: hence some conclude, we shall joyfully know the
Patriachs and Apostles of our Lord; and this seems the more rational, because
Peter, and James, Mat. 17.13.
and John, at the transfiguration, knew Moses and Elias, whom they knew not
before, so shall the sun of righteousness irradiate the Saints, with the
celestial beams of his transcendent glory.

The last thing in our submission in the point of death, is to shut our own
eyes, and to bind up our own jaws when the departing soul utters her last
words, blessing God for that land of promise, which (like Moses) she sees at a
distance, Deuteronomy. 34.4. Jos. 23.6, 8, 11.14.
so Joshua about to dye shuts his own eyes, exhorting the people to fear and
serve the Lord, so did Stephen, who calling on the name of the Lord, fell
asleep, so did Simeon, gathered up, disposed and prepapared himself most
sweetly singing, Lord now let thou etc.

Our blessed Savior does as it were shut up his own eyes, and bind up his
jaws, in that he sweetly submitted himself to the hand of death saying, Lu.
23.45.
Father into thy hands I do commend my spirit, and so do all well prepared souls
take care to dye under an holy resignation of their bodies to the grave, for a
time, and of their departing souls, into the hands and bosom, of Jesus Christ,
who is our Reuben to take care of our Benjamin, that is, Genesis 42.37.
of our immortal souls, to convey them safely unto our Fathers house. Thus of
the third Exhortation, which is wisely to submit unto the Lord God, in every
estate, in our health, in our sickness in the approaches of death, and and at
the point of death.

4. Exhortation.

4. Exhort.
To friends not to grieve overmuch at their departure who dye in the Lord. It
is lawful and commendable, it is just, and honorable to have sad thoughts at
the loss of such friends. If the very Egyptians mourned for old Jacob seventy
days, and that with a great and sore lamentation; Genesis 53. 1 Samuel 15.35. 2 Samuel
13.37. 2 Chro. 35.24.
if Samuel mourned for Saul, and David, shall not we much more mourn, when the
Saints are taken from us? All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah: Surely
then it is not only natural and moral, but it is religious to mourn for old
Simeons, you owe much honor to them, and may well mourn, you have lost so good
a man or woman from your Christian communion, 2 Samuel 3.38.
such a Father such a Mother or dear relation, or that there is lost such an
instrument of Gods glory, so serviceable to the Church, and state, such a light
and blessing to the city or country he lived in. The memory of the just shall
be blessed, Prove. 10.7. Psa. 112.6.
but the name of the wicked shall rot; the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance.

2. You may weep a while, and add to that sorrow fasting, and abstinence, as
the valiant men of Jabesh to the body of Saul, 1 Samuel 31.12.13. 2 Samuel 1.12.
and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Bethshan, who came to Jabesh and
burnt them there. And took their bones and buried them under a tree at Jabesh,
and fasted seven days. And they mourned and wept, and fasted until even; and
David fasted for Abner until even.

3. Friends you may set apart longer or less time for mourning and
lamentation, as David is said to lament with lamentation over Saul and Jonathan
his son; and bad them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow; behold it
is written in the book of Jasher, and so he continues his affectionate
lamentation to the end of the chapter. But you will ask me what was the use of
the bow? the Rabbis say, it was a title given to his lamentation; others say,
it was the close of every verse in this lamentation, when the children of
Israel did sing the mournful elegies of Saul and Jonathans death: but a late
writer says, that this mention of the Bow, was to intimate unto the Israelites
how exceeding necessary it was to discipline their children in the exercise of
weapons, and especially of the Bow; because therewith the dexterous Philistines
had mostly prevailed against Saul and his army in this battle; for it is said,
the Archers hit him, and he was sore wounded of the Archers; 1 Samuel 31.3.
and this I take to be the most genuine sense, But now to return.

3. Friends, it has been very laudable, to wash the bodies of your noble and
worthy progenitors, and other your relations; so you read, Act. 9.37.
that they washed the body of Dorcas, which I believe was a legal institution;
yet something answerable to it, has still been used among Christians.

4. Friends, before you bury your dead, you may be at cost with them, and bury
them in sweet odours, and rich ointments, which is called embalming of them,
Jer. 34.5.
and burning sweet odours for them; as for Zedekiah King of Judah, thou shall
dye in peace, with the burnings of thy Fathers, the former Kings which were
before thee, so shall they burn odours for thee, and lament saying, ah Lord!
after Joseph of Arimathea had obtained the body of our Savior of Pilate; he
and Nicodemus sent for of myrh and aloes an hundred pound weight, Joh. 19.38.39.
and were at great cost to enbalm the body of Jesus. When Mary was at so great
cost with Christ, she pouring a box of precious ointment upon his head, Christ
does apologize for her, Mat. 26.10.
saying, why trouble ye the woman? for she has wrought a good work upon me.

5. Friends, you may keep solemnities, Eccl. 30.18.
and sad mourning feasts, and set meat upon the burial of the just, which
feast is called the bread of men, Ezec. 24.17.
and a cup of consolation, to comfort those that were sad at heart. I could
instance many customs of heathens, who did cut, and wound themselves, scratch
the face, pull off their hair, prick and pinch their flesh, and lay on
plasters, to make it unseemly; some threw dust upon their heads, went
barefooted, rent their clothes, put on sackcloath; and some have used
minstrels with sad tunes; and the Irish loud ululations. Some at the funeral
of noble men, have used a trumpet, and for children of the commonalty they used
a pipe; and the Romans had their skillful mourning women: but let us who have
better learned Christ, be wise and sober, and not betaken with the vain
superstitions of heathens; yet let us interre them, with due respect had to
their rank, and dignity; we may provide costly Tombs, as Joseph of Arimathea
did for Christ, and as they did for the Kings of Israel, who were buried in the
City of David: but let none exceed their rank and ability, in burying their
deceased friends, in which some have been so vain, as some of the sons of the
Kings of Egypt, who spent vast treasures in their vain glorious pyramides; and
in which some of the Romans were so vain, that they made a law none should
exceed such a cost; we must be wise, moderate, and sober in our mournings. As
godly Simeons are not unwilling to die, from their nearest relations, when God
will: so neither may Christian friends lanch forth into immoderate sorrows,
when the Lord has qualified them for their blessed change, and given them to
see the salvation of the Lord.

To draw to a conclusion, take these additionall rules, and directions, by way
of advice, and caution. Friends, it becomes you not to be Stoically insensible,
nor to grieve overmuch; Saint Paul would not have his Thessalonians ignorant
concerning them that are asleep; 1 These. 4 13.
that they may not sorrow, even as others which have no hope. The rules be
six, the first is, 1. For moderation. 2. For timely pacification. 3. For
satisfaction. 4. For consolation. 5. Asweet mixture of joy and sorrow. 6. An
holy acquiescence.


1 Modera.
To the first, The Scriptures bid you mourn, but moderately, you may be much
affected, but manage it wisely; the two sisters of Lazarus did mourn, but with
good mediocrity, for they knew he should rise again; Joh. 11.24.
and our blessed Savior groaned in Spirit, and was sore troubled, who yet well
foreknew that he should awake out of that dead sleep, wherein he had layen so
many days. Remember then, that the Holy Ghost puts on holy rains upon our
affections of grief, Job. 1.21.
the Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord;
where Job was moderated, by the all-wise-disposing sovereignty of God.

Again, a Saint never dies, but (in a sense) God wants him, and he whom God
gave to be such a friend, the same God takes him again, because he needs him;
you will say you have need he should have lived longer: but whoseneed must take
place, yours or God's? yours, to whom such a friend was lent so long? or God's
need, whose he was? who must, and will have him nearer to himself, in a more
celestial employment, and that to all eternity; you must suffer this
consideration to alter the streams of your grief, and to exchange it into a
sweet submission, unto your gracious Lord God. Friend, (or dear relations)
suffer not your selves to be transported with swelling displeasure, or other
mutining passion, because the main interest of thy friend is laid up in God,
perhaps thou say, Oh! it was my dear father, my tender mother, my sweet
brother, or sister, my son or my daughter, whose life, and mine seem to be
bundled together; he or she was my right hand, my right eye, and will God take
such an one from me? I had rather he should take any one else, yea, my very
self, to have spared such an one: thus foolishly do some passionate ones rangle
with the just determinations of their omnipotent Lord God; as churlish Nabal
did with well deserving David; 1 Samuel 25.
Naball refused to part with some of his provisions, to relieve David and his
hungry soldiers, by whom Naball and his flocks had been so preserved: Naball
answers with expostulations, and with pleading his propriety in his bread, his
water, and flesh, as thou do thine, in thy friends; hence he concludes that
David's motion was very unjust, and the most unreasonable, that could have been
made, what says he, shall I take my bread, my water, and my flesh, that I have
killed, and prepared for my sheerers, and shall I send it to I know not whom,
nor whence they be? There be many servants (now adays) which break away every
man from his master. What is come upon me says Naball? Who is David? and who
is the son of Jesse? See we had need of this moderation when God sends cross
providence to us, else we shall murmur against the Lord himself, and this
murmuring is a great sin.

The second rule is timely pacification, we must not mourn overmuch, 2 Timely
pacification.
or overlong, when God takes away our friends; Jer. 31.15. Mat. 2.18.
this will be to call Gods wisdom into question, it was Rachels fault that she
refused to be comforted; but it was Jobs high commendation, that he was timely
quieted and satisfied, after the loss of so many friends, and such an
abounding estate, from hence, that it was the sovereign Lord God that had done
it; he composeth his mind, and blesses God not only when he was full of
children, and wealth; but when he was emptied of both, and that by Satan's
malice and other malignant adversaries, even then did Job bless the Lord, Job.
12.1.
and gave him thanks: what for the death of his children? what for the loss of
his goods, and estate? what for the loss of his reputation amongst his hollow
hearted friends? no, not simply so, but from this consideration, it is the
great Jehovah the Lord of hosts, let God do what he shall please with me, with
my relations, and with all that I call mine, yet I still find abundant cause to
thank him: what, when God shall thunder and lighten against him, with storms
and tempests from heaven, from earth from hell? what, when he shall shake the
high Cedars, as if he meant to pull them up, and destroy them root and branch,
and make the earth to tremble (as you may imagine?) when so many evils crowded
in upon him? when the grown up children of his own body were slain? 1 Pet. 4.14.
then to say blessed be the name of the Lord, and so timely to be content,
surely the spirit of glory, and of God did rest upon humble and holy Job the
servant of the Lord. The spirit is out of rest, like Noah's dove, hove ring
about, not finding where to rest the soul of her foot, till she came to the
Ark; so the Godly-wise, under their soaking afflictions go from place to place,
till they come to the Lords sanctuary, and mercy seat, where they find rich
materials of praising, and blessing God, in their afflictions, and for their
afflictions; suppose it be loss of an eminent father, or any other near or
dear relation, of children, as Jobs was, Job. 1.13. to the 20.
they feasting one another, to maintain and enjoy brotherly love and concord;
then to be destroyed by a violent tempest, beating down the house by the
power, and malice of the Devil; who also (but a little before) had all his
camells taken by plunder, and his servants slain by the cruel sword; a litttle
before that, also had his flock of sheep and his servants with them burnt with
fire from Heaven; and a little before that had his oxen plowing, and his Asses
feeding by them, all violently taken away by the Sabeans: which aggravating
gradations might have eternized his sorrows, but holy Job well had learned, that
as God is not always chiding, neither must we be always mourning; besides he
did assure himself, that the rod of the wicked, Ps 103.9. Ps. 125.3.
shall not always rest upon the lot of the righteous; and however it be, yet
God is good to his Israel.

Thirdly for satisfaction, which respects the goodness of God toward thee,
and toward thy lost friends. Friends in Gods name mourn, yet consider that
your friend that is dead, did war a good warfare, 2 Timothy 4.7.
and combat with implacable foes, did fight the good fight, did finish his
course, did keep the faith; and was kept by the mighty power of God to
salvation. Consider, he is now dead in the peace of God, and is even now
enjoying what was promised, in Abraham's bosom; is now reaping what he sowed,
and insulting over all his spiritual adversaries; faith is now in fruition,
and thy friends soul is now wearing that Crown of glory, which Christ had
purchased with his dearest blood. And now consider, is it any branch of
religious reason, now to be murmuring and complaining of our loss, as if it
had been irrepairable to our selves, or our friends; since our friend is with
the Lord, Romans 8.37.
is more then a conqueror through him that loved him, and is rejoicing,
praising, and magnifying the Lord, as for other mercies, so for death; which
came so seasonably, and so graciously to deliver Christ's prisoner out of
durance, to discharge Christ's valiant soldier from fighting with spiritual
adversaries, who command, to triumph for ever over them; to live and reign with
Christ in heaven; and to be enthroniz'd into a kingdom of glory, and to be
actually in the great assembly saying, Rev. 19.1.3.
and singing Hallelujah, Hallelujah, salvation, power, and glory be to our
God; Hallelujah, the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Well then, let us be glad
and rejoice; since living friends are no loosers by thy gracious friends
departure, and since deceased friends are such gainers, put off your sable
weeds, and rejoice for such as you believe do dye in the Lord, imitate their
holy footsteps, Phil. 3.17.
follow them as they followed Christ, put on the (milkie white) garments of
holiness and righteousness all your days, till you can say, you are gainers by
death, and shall in God's time be translated, to be for ever with your friends,
Romans 16.7
who were in Christ before you, as Saint Paul spoke; and went to heaven before
you, to see, and enjoy that salvation which Simeon spoke of in the text, where
you shall be assured of mirth, without mourning, of life without death, of an
immortal crown, without any cross at all.

The fourth concerns thy consolation, Consola.
and so be comforted who tookest all due care, to walk as a Christian, with
holy, tender, and abounding affections toward thy dear friend, when, and
while, he or she lived with thee; ask thy self, what Christian communion thou
had? what care and watching over thy friend, in all good offices of love?
did discover thy self a friend to his soul? did admonish, exhort, reprove,
or comfort him, according to thy best ability, and his necessity? wast much in
prayer, by humble seeking God, to beg every blessing which thy friend did want?
did do all the offices of love to thy friend in his sickness, or under any
need of thy help? if thou wast sincere in this matter thou mai'st be comforted;
and bless the Lord who gave thee such an heart, and now that the Lord has
taken thy friend into an higher story of divine favor; be better persuaded,
well knowing that God calls thee now to other work upon which to attend, and
leave thy friend to the Lord, betake thy self to serve his good providence
among the living, who do survive. Somewhat we see of this in David, 2 Samuel 12.
while the child was very sick, besought God for the child, he of which when
David had heard, then he arose from the earth, he washed and anointed himself,
changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord, and worshipped; and
when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat: At which carriage
of his, his servants saying, what thing is this that thou have done? thou
did when the child was alive, and when it was dead, thou did David
answered, while the child was yet alive, I fasted, and wept, for I said said,
who can tell whether the Lord will be gracious to me, that the child may
live? but now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him baek again,
I shall go to him; but he shall not return to me? And David comforted
Bathsheba. Thus there is a time to be born, Eccl. 3.2.
and a time to dye: a time to weep, and a time to laugh: a time to mourn, and a
time to dance.

Fifthly our dolorous mournings, 5. A sweet mixture of joy and sorrow in our
mourning.
must not be without some mixture of joy, the loss of beloved friends may seem
desperate and irrecoverable, and the sorrow is the more exuberant, but yet
there is joy again, which does surmount in the gracious soul to allay it is
bitterness; who can loose nothing of the creature, but it is made up in God,
repaid in Christ, with a great overplus; therefore sorrow may not always abide
upon his spirit: if he sorrow, that any stream of his comfort is cut off, it is
but turning him to the fountain, and he has all made up to him again, and he
rejoices blessing God, who says to him, as Elkanah to Hannah, am not I to
thee instead of more friends? so says God to the mourner, I am to thee instead
of all and more then all; And thus as fast as does thy sorrow abound, so fast
and faster do thy consolations superabound.

That dear friends be dead, that is sad to hear of or to see, but that
mortality is put off, to put on immortality, that is joyful; that death has
swallowed up our friends may grieve us, but that death is swallowed up of life,
that does rejoice us; that friends be departed seems to begin a desolation, but
that they be delivered from their body of sin from grinding pains, from
destroying diseases, from unruly lusts and sinful passions, from strong and
dangerous temptatitions, from fiery darts, from Satan's wiles and methods; all
this is matter of joy: you who exceed in your mournings for your loving parents
and dear friends, taken out of this world, I may fear you believe somewhat in
this worlds glory, to be very lovely, and truly good, and more excelling then
the Scriptures ever spoke of, and therefore you so mourn at your friends being
bereaved of and taken away from that good; when as (indeed) all that is below
and sublunar is fading, and perishing, and all that is below Jesus Christ and
the glory to come, Eccles. 1.2. stained vanity emptiness (...)
is but a melancholy lump of vanity and vexation of spirit; which made the
Psalmist say, that every man in his best estate, is altogether vanity: you seem
to forget that the whole creation groans under this vanity, and travelleth in
pain, together till now, and not only they, Romans 22.23.
but our selves also which have the first fruits of the spirit; even we our
selves groan within our selves waiting for the adoption to wit the redemption
of our bodies: when God sees good to take away our gracious friends, he takes
them from such vanities and perturbations, as under which they do groan; that
we might not only be satisfied with his dispensation, but bless God and say,
be it so Lord according to thy word.

When you think of your friends long languishing sickness, sore pains,
wearisome days and nights, and of the cruel stroke of death; then like
Heshbons pools our eyes be full of water, and like house-spouts tears run down
our cheeks; but man of sorrow recollect thy self and wisely consider that by
deaths hand all pains sicknesses and sorrows are finallized, and there shall
never be one tear sorrow or pain more; thy body is laid to sleep as in a sweet
bed of roses, till the general resurrection, and thy soul is at perfect rest
and ease, is carried by the blessed Angels into thy Lords arms of sweatest
embraces, and has the same entertainment as Christ's humane soul and body had,
after his blessed ascension, whom the Angels brought to the Ancient of days;
Dan. 7.13.
so does Christ present the souls of his Saints departed to the father. Do
grieve and can not be comforted? Oh change thy minds affection as thy friend
is changed! for he is received into heaven with the same acclamations as Christ
himself was welcomed, only it shall be according to thy measure and capacity By
this time, I hope I have wiped off all tears from thy eyes, and put a sweet
handkerchiefe into thine hands to do it thy self: Then meditate much, and say
it often blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, or rather that sleep in the
Lord that they may live for ever. Precious soul do not mourn unmeasurably, for
such who are triumphant in heaven, being clothed in long white robes, and
washed in the blood of the Lamb; who at the general restoration of all
things, shall claspe and embrace us as we them being made like to Christ's most
glorious body. Thou then who have been long a mourner, gather up thy spirits,
God has provided thou shall not want thy friend, himself will make up all to
thee so far as is good for thee, as he did to Job before; his hand is not
straightned, he can raise up better friends, and compose thy spirit with an
holy contentment, Ambros. stantem lego, flentem non lego.
as the Father says he did the spirit of the virgin Mary, who standing by the
cross of Christ, was not seen to let fall one tear.

Sixthly and lastly, be persuaded to quit thy surcharged heart of all sad
disquietting thoughts; for immoderate grief may not be continued, without the
sin of muttering, and murmuring against the all-wise providence of God, which
is high rebellion against his wisdom, and dignity; as if thou (poor shallow
creature) knew better then he, what was, or what had been best: go to God in
faith, cast thy self down before him, humbly, believingly, for there is enough
in God, to make thee whole; go to him in humble prayer, commend thy case
absolutely to him, and engage thy self determinately to be at his appointment,
in this thy present condition; and say, Lord, I am in thine hand, do by me thy
servant, and mine, as shall se em good in thine eyes; And lastly, acquiesce
sweetly in the sufficiency, and al-sufficiency of thy Lord God. And this is the
fourth exhortation, wherein we had the obsequies of friends mourning for them,
that dye in the Lord; in seven particulars, and rules unto mourners in six
particulars. Thus have I endeavored according to my weak measure and small
talent, to raise up and revive departed Simeon, that in him I might set before
you a gracious servant of the Lord, who lived holi^y, and dyed happily; and
left a sweet savor behind him unto succeeding generations; that in ages to
come the people of God may walk in the way which he had proved, and hold by the
golden line of Simeon's faith, till they depart in peace, and their eyes do see
their salvation, as Simeon did; which the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ vouchsafe unto us, of his everlasting love, and infinite mercy. Amen,
and Amen.

FINIS.
In obitum Illustrissimi viri, ROBERTI HARLEY, Equitis honoratissimi ordinis
Balnei.
MUsarum vertex obiit, fidumque Minervae
Palladium, patriae gloria, fama togae.
Quem culmen sibi, quem coryphaeum agnove togati,
Quem sibi legerunt omnibus Alpha libris.
Pauperibus, quorum tenuis sors esse negabat
Edoctos, (...) utrumque dedit,
Nec cessat propriis de vectigalibus haustis
Flaminibus stipem larga dicare manus;
Quin nummis puduit perituris parcere, major
Cui proventus opes non habuisse fuit.
Cumque ipso navem quisquam conscendit eandem,
Cui virtus fuerat, cui cynosura fides.
Eximium hinc meritus titulum, non ille creatus
Sed proprio fuerat munere factus eques.
Quippe suas sumpsit sola virtute secures,
Ipse sibi Consul, fascis and ipse sibi.
Quem nec honor, nec seduxit commissa potestas,
Sed regere and populum novit, and imperium;
Quotquot Jacobo numerabat rege senatus
Anglia, te vivo (Carole) quotquot erat,
(...) Senatoris toties excepit, and haeres
Successorque fuit continuo ipse suus.
Hunc duo Postremi tantum exclusere senatus,
Et solum cana front Senator erat.
Tandem obiens cecinit Servum dimitte salute,
Vita, quae tecum condita (Christ) fuit.
Plena mente, fide, possis ut dicere rursus
Vel nasci Christum, vel Simeona mori.
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).


