AS YOU WERE: OR A reducing (if possibly any) seduc't ones, to Facing about,
turning head, Front against God) by the Recrimination (so intended) upon Mr. J.
G. (P^stor of the Church in Colemanst^eet) in point of Fighting against GOD.

By an unworthy Auditor of the said (Iuditious-pious-Divine) Master JOHN
GOODWIN.

Su^^osed (...) Ezech: Woodward

nouemb: 13: Printed in London the year. 1644.

AS YOU WERE.
1. THe Recriminator (so he may be named, if a quality, disposition, may
denominate its subject) says; That to build on what Gamaliel here speaks is
to build on a rotten and unsound Foundation. Reader, if the Council had not
done thus, how had the Apostles fared? Certainly bad enough, they had lost
their lives by the sentence of the Court. But why says the Recr: as he does?

1. He tells us that he never heard so much good of Gamaliel except from
Popish Interpreters. But (to believe him herein, happily he read none other on
the place) may not others here so much from some other not Popish? Truly I have
read but two, and they sufficient enough in such a case, viz. Piscator and
Baeza; The first says that Gamaliel is here commended: the latter says no
whit less, some what more then the former; according to him, Gamaliel was a
Patron of Christ's cause. Indeed the Minister spoke not a word of any personal
goodness in the man, but of the authority of what was spoken by him. Balaam,
Saul, and Caipha's may prophecy; But he tells us the best Interpreters judge
him irreligious, etc. Who are they? He tells us not. Wherein Gamaliel thus? he
shows us not. But let them be what they will, and this speaker so and so too,
yet it prejudices not the Preachers Doctrine.

2. He says Gamaliels scope was but the preservation of himself and the
Council (he might well have preferred the Council in placing his words see
verses 35, 38, 39.) from the fear of Jews and wrath of Romans; Poor man! The
first would be but at the Apostles apprehension (as of Christ, its said they
laid not their hands on him for fear of the people, not execution (as it
appears in the example,) the latter they often regarded not in such a case (as
appears in the stories of the Gospel and Acts. Eminently in that they often
would have killed Paul a Roman borne, (Acts 23. 27.) and I dispute not how by
their Law. Cap. 24. 6. The Recr: without ground runs astray from the Text, to
fetch a meaning which will not agree with this place. For the speech of
Gamaliel tends manifestly (to any not partial, prejudic't) to withholding
from these [Apostles] and that respecting their Council and works, and al
least endeavoring to overthrow it, they be found [even] fighters against God,
verse. 35. 38. etc.

3. He says, though there be some truth in the speech, yet three great errors;
namely, 1 He makes it uncertain whether the Apostles Doctrine and Miracles
were from God or men? True, he makes it if twere uncertain; but to prove that
he indeed held it so is more then this Annymus can prove; He might, and in all
likelihood did thus express himself for fear, or policy (as many most
think.) So did Hushai strangely for an honest heart, in that case of David's,
in his Council to Absalom, whereby he defeated that of Achitophel 2 Samuel 17.
Were Gamaliel certain of that he speaks of doubtfully, he exceeded a
Politician, was not a Neutralist, nor Adieophorit, Nullifidian, but believed)
and so happily exceeded his judgers. But whether dubious or grounded herein, its
evident he here fought for God. And that he said, was good, (1) in it self;
Therefore Godly learned Gualter says it should be to us as an Oracle to learn
from, etc. (which no evil speech may be) I qote it because the Minister does
(2) In the rise also, probably, Gods spirit was the motive as of Nicodemus his
admonition. Joh. 7. 50. 51. Its the Interpreters instance. (3) In the means
lawful. He a Doctor of the Law one of this chief Council, Assembly gives
this advice (and that seasonably) at a consultation (4) In the end its rendered
so. It saves the lives of the Apostles, and that intendedly.

2. He would himself and have others judge this (or things to many seeming
dubious, whether of God or no, uncertain for the present) by the event. Truly
God gives such a Law; he would have Prophets whether false or true, tried thus,
Deuteronomy. 18. last; and hereby this Council were such judged, and according to
Gods rule and ordinance and least found fighters against him. They yield to
this Doctor of the Law, his advice of letting these (Apostles alone till God
and themselves clearly discover what now appears dubious, uncertain (which
supposed uncertainty in Gamaliel is this man's first exception, error.

3. According to his Council Heretics and Heresy should be let alone in
confidence, that if such ways if not of God will come to naught. How now? do
thou not understand, or do you be -- Gamaliel; Gamaliel was (possibly, yea
probably) as great an enemy of, adversaty, destruction to Heretics, Heresy as
this Recr: and would have acquitted himself as such an one, and had the whole
Council also, like Jews indeed rooted out, plucked up these, if he had known
them so to be and evidenced it to them. But the case standing as it did,
Gamaliel speaks for the Apostles, and the Council agree to him, not
proceeding to their slaying. (According to this the Minister spoke, that till
we are certain that such a Doctrine is Heresy, we cannot without danger of
being found fighters against God, endeavor to overthrow it.)

Next he would show an odious comparison; which is not so unless every
comparison be odious. Its true, some Ministers of the Congregationall way are
of a very choice anointing. God has given them a spirit of discerning [that
truth] above some others: yet may those some others be pillars and prime men in
the House and Temple of God, and happily willing to be thought s^ too, as it
seems Paul was as well as Peter, Gal. 2. where Paul no^ only compares but
preserreth himself unto Peter (so says earned King James in his Epistle to
all Christian Mornarch, page 48.) and that on purpose to heighten his own
estimation. Here the Recr: quotes discriptions and conceits (in the prime
thickness of his wit) that there was a contradictio^ among them; but
afterward (reading good ingenuous lines, sh^rpens, raises, quickens the
inventi^n, w^t) he his on reconci^ing them, (the apparition disappeares.) But
why inserts he the Section? Its likely when he began he intended not to dead
ingenuously, to show this: but now he is contented to do it, happily in caution
to prevent the Reply. For sure enough there is no such great art, etc. in this
Act for our rearning, his glorying.

Next he says the Congregationall way does hinder the Presbyteriall ways
driving on. In truth the case is thus, the Presbyteriall drivers will rather in
state, stand and not go on, then suffer the Congregationall way (the elder
sister) to go a foot before them.

To the next quotation the Minister, speak not what he said that way is like
to prove to many, without ground: For if the roaring at a distance is so
terible, afflicts so, what will be the misery of its persence? probably -- So as
the dred, Psalm. 90. 11.

To the next quotation, if this Recr: be a Preacher I commend his reach he
takes Text enough. If Mr. John Goodwins writing will not do, he turns to the
Apologists. (Reader, remember his Chimaera) who knit a knot with Mr. Goodwin,
yet the sayings abide single and apart, unentangled. The Apologists deny not
what Mr. Goodwin says nor Mr. Goodwin what the Apologist writ, who add if the
Magistrates power back the sentence of Non-communion, it will be as effectual
[as the Presbyteriall way is supposed to be.] Sir, here effectualnes is not
simply ascribed to the Presbyteriall way, nor to the Congregationall by this
backing, where then is the tie?

To the next quotation, if he like not the answer he should have well answered
Naziaren, and not have crept away with a Tempora mutan^ur, etc. Well, God mend
us, and so the times. Here next the Recr: falsely quotes the words. The first
sentence is this, why may we not think but that God may as well say, that there
are too many learned and wise men in great Council, for God to reveal truth,
or to give truth victory, against error by. 2. He quotes half a line out of
a sentence containing 15. lines Which in effect say, that where greater numbers
of men accomplished with grace, etc. shall assemble, etc. to argue etc. only
with an intent to be helpers of the Saints, and not to exercise a dominion over
their faith. (2 Cor. 11. 24) they may expect a special presence of God with
them. The third is plainly this, that even in Counsels, etc. its' usually
seen that some one or few either of predominate parts or authority among them,
sway and steer, etc. And is any the least appearance of evil, in saying this?
(1) Have not even those admirers, worshippers of Councels (the Papists I mean)
spoken m^re and ill of Counsel? But herein comes not Mr. Goodwin near the
Arminians? etc. A poor shift for a calumniation. I find the Arminians in
their confession (cap. 25. d^ Synodis) saying, that Synods ought to be
convented by the example of the Apostles themselves, Acts 15. And that they
ought in the first place to drive Heretics from the Churches, etc. And that
the Christian Magistrates (after God and Christ's chief) authority ought to
intervene, and say not all Presbyterians the same? come not they near the
Arminians? Thus it is to argue like the Recriminator. 2. Have not our worthy
writers against Papists said as much as Mr. Goodwin (in this point) and seven
times over and once more: In perticu^iar Whitaker whom he quotes? I will
instance in places if cause

Next he would claspe the hands of the Apologists and Mr. Goodwin, and make us
believe they give a blow to Parliaments power, viz. coercive in matters of
Religion, (he should like a man have manifested what that power is, and that
God has given it, etc. And that these give less to the Magistrate than the
principles of the Presbyterians. This would have abundantly rendered him
acceptable to the Congregationall men. If the man emulate such an honor, let
him appear in the Cause.

Next he would have Mr. Goodwin give his first borne for his transgression
what transgression? Forsooth, he against his Doctrine lifts up a thought, etc.
against the Presbyteriall way which claims origination and descent from
Heaven, and that without security upon security, etc. How knows he that? Did
Mr. Goodwin tell him or any other so, or has he faculty without his
acknowledging, to know his evidence? Surely neither, but we be -- Mr. Goodwin.
Well then, suppose Mr. Goodwin has such a demonstration etc. yet may not
another, or any without so much proof, appear in contestation against this or
that Doctrine as Heresy? etc. Alas. The whole book answers this objection,
yet the -- asks it. But yet (says this never c^ntented man) falls not this
upon the excommunication in the congregational way such evidence, proof,
demonstration, security, a heritick may, ought to be after orderly proceeding,
rejected, cast out of the lines of the Churches Communication, etc.

From my Counting House. October 24. P. P.
REader,
The charge of the blood of our men, etc. lost at the defeat in the West, is a
heavy charge: it has and will make the bears speak when the murder of
Jesus, was laid on the heads of the Jews, they are cut to the heart, and take
Council to slay the Apostles, verse. 23. of this Chap. and Chap. 7. 54. they
are again cut to the heart at this, and gna^^ on Steven with their teeth, and
yet truly there it lies. vide cap. 5. 28. Now I remember what Mr. Peeters (that
faithful countryman and laborious for the States good) said but the other day,
(a Tuesday the fast day for our Armies.) I am confident, it was that (he had
spoken against scratching, afflcting our brethren) gave us the blow in the
West. Upon which Mr. Goodwin preached these Sermons.



FINIS.

