CHRISTIAN DIVINITY IN TWO BOOKS by John Wollebius, D: D: Englished and
enlarged by All Rosse

The Chain of Salvation

Salvation is Ordained by God in Heaven Promised by the Word in Scripture
Merited by Christ in Nans nature Sealed by Sacraments in the Church Received by
Faith in the Heart Confessed by the Mouth in Martyrdom Testified by Works in
regeneration


depiction of the Woman clothed with the Sun (Revelation 12) holding the Law
and Gospel II III VII IX X

EVANGELIVN

Reu. 12.



Are to be sold by John Saywell in Little Britain. MDCL

To Vaughan sculp


THE ABRIDGMENT OF CHRISTIAN DIVINITY:

So exactly and Methodically compiled, That it leads us, as it were, by the
hand To the Reading of the Holy Scriptures. Ordering of Common-Places.
Understanding of Controversies. Clearing of some Cases of Conscience.


By JOHN WOLLEBIUS, Doctor of Divinity, and Ordinary Professor in the
University of Basil.

Now at last faithfully translated into English, and in some obscure places
cleared and enlarged, By ALEXANDER ROSS.

To which is adjoined, after the Alphabetical Table, The ANATOMY of the whole
Body of DIVINITY. Delineated in IX. short Tables, for the help of weak Memories.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mab and A. Coals, for JOHN SAYWELL, and are to be sold
at his shop at the sign of the Greyhound in Little Britain without
Aldersgate. 1650.

To the Right Honorable, THE LORD ROCKINGHAM.
My Lord,
I Have been long indebted both to your Lordship, your noble Lady, and your
hopeful Son Mr. Watson, for your favors and good will toward me; I have
therefore adventured (not by way of requital, but of acknowledgement) to
present this Theological Epitome to You, which is the most exact and
compendious of any that has been yet done by Protestant Writers: I may say of
this Edition, as Philosophers speak of Nature; that, It is neither deficient in
necessaries, nor abundant in superfluities: What was in the Latin Copy dark, I
have cleared; and what was contracted, I have unfolded. How needful Epitomes
are in all Sciences, chiefly in Divinity, I need not write; if either we
consider the shortness of our time, or the largeness and multitude of Volumes
which have been written of this Subject, or the weakness of our memories, or
the fastidiousnesse that is begot in us by reading tedious and voluminous
Discourses. God who knows what is best for us, has epitomized all Practical
Divinity into X. Precepts, and our Savior has reduced those ten into two, and
all that we can pray for or against, into six heads or Petitions. The traveller
that desires to be soon at his journeys end, will seek out the most compendious
way: He is an unwise traveller that will clog himself with Silver, if he can
epitomize it into Gold; sure a weak stomach will better retain the small
quantity of an extract, then the large draught of a nauseating potion: He that
with judgment does contract the vast body of Divinity into an Abridgement,
does imitate God, who having the first day diffused the light through the whole
Hemisphere, contracted it, and as it were epitomized it the fourth day within
the body of the Sun: He that will condemn Epitomes, condemns himself; for man
is the epitome of the world. But I must avoid prolixity in commending this
Epitome, lest my practice thwart my words. My Lord, This Book is the Epitome of
Divinity; and this Epistle, the Epitome of my true affection, and many thanks I
owe you and yours: on whom I wish the influence of all happiness, which is the
hearty desire of

Your Lordships Humble Servant, ALEXANDER ROSS.

THE Preface to the Reader.
THe blessed Apostle, in his second Epistle to Timothy, cap. 1. ver. 13. writes
thus: Hold fast the form of good words which thou have heard of me, in faith
and love. An excellent admonition, and worthy to be pressed upon all
Christians; but chiefly on those who have wholly devoted themselves to the
study of Divinity. For as it concerns every Christian to be skilled in the
chief Catechistical Heads at least, that by their help and guide they may with
the greater profit hear and read Gods word; so it becomes all Students in
Divinity, before all things to imprint in their memories the Anatomy of the
Body of Theology; that in the Common Places, in the Definitions and Divisions
of heavenly doctrine, they may be exact and perfect. Now in this kind diverse
eminent men, furnished with a far greater measure of Spiritual Unction then my
self, have afforded such helps to young Students, that he who goes about to
add any thing to these, will seem to light a candle at noon tide, or to
garnish the firmament with more stars: Yet notwithstanding, whereas it is
consistent with the conscience and callings of all Gods servants, to advance
what they can the public benefit; I being called to be chief Pastor in this
place, was enjoined by the Reverend College of Divines to expound the Old
Testament, which by Gods help and their command I so undertook, that besides my
Lectures on the Text, I proposed to my hearers a short form of wholesome and
good words, taken out of other men's lucubrations, and reduced into this brief
Epitome. Now although I perceived that many did very well like my pains and
purpose in this kind; yet I profess, the divulging of this Piece was least in
my thoughts. Therefore, in that at last this Child, of which I have been in
labor these seven years, is now born and brought out to light; I earnestly
entreat the friendly Reader to impute this not to any itching humor I have of
writing, but to the often solicitations of my friends who have extorted it
from me. I beseech God, that he will be pleased graciously to preserve the
remaining companies of Teachers and Scholars, and that for his mercies sake,
whereof we have daily fresh testimonies, as in many things, so in this, that we
are not all destroyed: And as for those who are dispersed, that he would
graciously recollect and settle them, even for his only begotten Sons sake our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE ORDER OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST BOOK. Concerning the Knowledge of God.
Chapt. I. Of the Essence of GOD. Page. 12 Chapt. II. Concerning the Persons of
the Deity. Page. 18 Chapt. III. Concerning the Works of God, and the Decrees of
God in general. Page. 26 Chapt. IV. Of Predestination. Page. 31 Chapt. V. Of
the Creation. Page. 38 Chapt. VI. Of Gods actual Providence. Page. 46 Chapt.
VII. Of the Government of Angels. Page. 50 Chapt. VIII. Of the Government of
man in the state of Innocence. Page. 55 Chapt. IX. Of the fall of our first
Parents, the beginning of man's misery. Page. 58 Chapt. X. Of Original Sin,
and Free Will. Page. 62 Chapt. XI. Of Actual Sin. Page. 67 Chapt. XII. Of the
miseries which follow sin. Page. 69 Chapt. XIII. Of the Moral Law. Page. 72
Chapt. XIV. Of the Ceremonial and Judicial Law. Page. 78 Chapt. XV. Of the
Gospel, and how it agrees with and differs from the Law. Page. 87 Chapt. XVI.
Of the Person of christ God and man. Page. 90 Chapt. XVII. Of the Office of
Christ the Mediator. Page. 104 Chapt. XVIII. Of the Humiliation of Christ.
Page. 108 Chapt. XIX. Of Christ's Exaltation. Page. 125 Chapt. XX. Of the Common
vocation to the state of Grace. Page. 133 Chapt. XXI. Of the Covenant of Grace.
Page. 136 Chapt. XXII. Of the Seals or Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace in
general. Page. 140 Chapt. XXIII. Of Baptism. Page. 152 Chapt. XXIV. Of the
Lords Supper. Page. 157 Chapt. XXV. Of the nature of the visible Church. Page.
161 Chapt. XXVI. Of the outward Administration of the Church. Page. 170 Chapt.
XXVII. Of the False Church. Page. 183 Chapt. XXVIII. Of Vocation in special.
Page. 192 Chapt. XXIX. Of Saving Faith. Page. 193 Chapt. XXX. Of Justification.
Page. 202 Chapt. XXXI. Of Sanctification. Page. 211 Chapt. XXXII. Of the
Perseverance of the Saints. Page. 214 Chapt. XXXIII. Of Christian Liberty.
Page. 218 Chapt. XXXIV. Of the coming of Christ, and Resurrection of the flesh;
which go before the last Judgment. Page. 220 Chapt. XXXV. Of the Last Judgment.
Page. 230 Chapt. XXXVI. Of the End of the World, and Life eternal; the
consequents of the Judgment. Page. 234
THE ORDER OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECOND BOOK. Concerning the Worship of God.
I. Of the Nature of Good works. 241 II. Of Virtues pertaining to the
Decalogue, and whole worship of God. 246 III. Of the Virtues and Works
belonging to the First Commandment. 249 IV. Of the Works belonging in general
to the II. III. and IV. Commandments. 255 V. Of Works belonging in special to
the Second Commandment. 258 VI. Of the Virtues and Works belonging to the Third
Commandment. 274 VII. Of works appertaining to the Fourth Commandment. 283
VIII. Of the Virtues in general belonging to the Second Table. 288 IX. Of
Virtues and Works belonging to the Fifth Commandment. 296 X. Of Virtues and
Works belonging to the Sixth Commandment. 302 XI. Of Virtues and Works
belonging to the Seventh Commandment. 307 XII. Of Virtues and Works belonging
to the Eighth Commandment. 318 XIII. Of the Virtues and Works belonging to the
Ninth Commandment. 326 XIV. Of the Virtues and Works belonging to the Tenth
Commandment. 334
THE PRAECOGNITA OF Christian Divinity.
CHristian Divinity, is the doctrine of the Knowledge and Worship of GOD, to
his glory, and our salvation.

The RULES or CANONS are these.
I. This word Theology, or Divinity, is diversely taken: but in this place is
understood that Knowledge of God, which a Christian may attain unto in this
life, out of Gods word.

The word Theology being taken abusively, is sometime used for the Gentiles
Divinity, which was threefold: Poetical, or fabulous; Philosophical, or
natural; Sacerdotal, or political; the scope and end whereof was to contain the
rude multitude within the compass of obedience, by some religious exercise, be
what it will. But Theology properly so called, is either Original, or Derived.
Original, is that knowledge whereby God knows himself, which really differs not
from Gods essence. Derived, is a certain image or representation of that
Original, primarily in Christ our Mediator, secondarily in Christ's members. Now
whereas part of Christ's members is triumphant in heaven, another part militant
here on earth; that Theology of the triumphant part, is called the Theology
of the Blessed Saints; that of the militant, is styled the Theology of
travelers.

II. Theology in this place is considered, not as a Habit residing in the
intellect, but as a Systeme or collection of precepts: therefore it is defined
by the word Doctrine.

For Theology as it is comprehended within certain precepts, is different from
the habit of Theology, as the efficient cause from the effect. Now the
question is, if we consider Divinity as the habit of the Intellect, what genus
shall we assign for it out of the intellective habits? Surely there is none,
which if it be taken solely and apart, is not of a narrower compass then the
thing defined. For that habit which apprehends the Principles, called
Intelligentia; and that habit which demonstrates the Conclusions out of the
Principles, called Scientia; and that habit which arises out of the two
former, called Sapientia, are habits merely contemplative; but for Prudentia,
it is an active habit directing the mind in its actions; and Art is an
effective or operative habit with right reason. A. R. Divinity is more
speculative then practical, because it principally handles divine things, and
in the second place humane actions. But as it is a practical science, it is the
most noble of all practical sciences, because the end of it is be atitude, to
winch the ends of all other sciences are ordained. Divinity also may be called
wisdom, or sapientia, because it considers the Chiefest of all Causes, not only
as He is known by his effects, but as He is known in himself also.


Divinity then consists partly in contemplation, partly in action: Therefore
Divinity may bear the name both of Sapience, and Prudence; Sapience, so far
forth as it apprehends the principles, by means of the Intelligence being
divinely illuminate, and from thence demonstrates the conclusions by means of
Science; Of Prudence, so far forth as it directs the mind of man in its actions.

III. There is a twofold principle of Divinity; the one by which it is, and
that is GOD; the other by which it is known, and that is the Word of God.

IV. Gods word at first was unwritten, before Moses his time; but after Moses
it was written, when God in his most wise counsel would have it to be sealed
and confirmed by Prophets and Apostles.

That the Papists may obtrude upon us their unwritten traditions in stead of
Gods written oracles, they would bear us in hand that the Word was written only
upon haphazard, or contingent occasions. But so many mandates to write,
delivered to the Prophets and Apostles, do cry down this error. Exodus 17.14.
and 34.37. Deuteronomy. 41.19. Isa. 8.1. and 30.8. Jer. 30.2. Habac. 2.2. Revel. 1,
11, 19. and 14.13. and 19.9. and 21.9. The testimonies of the Apostles
proclaiming that nothing was said or written by man's advice or council, cry out
against this error. Joh. 20.31. But these things are written, that ye might
believe, etc. Romans 15.4. But what things are written, are written for our
learning, that through patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might have
hope. 1 Cor. 10, 11. These things are written to admonish us. 2 Timothy 3.16. All
Scripture is given by divine inspiration. 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. So that ye first
know this, that no prophecy in the Scripture is of private motion: for
Prophecy came not of old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost. Lastly, these precepts cry out against them,
by which we are directed to the written word in matters of salvation. Isa.
8.20. To law and to the testimony. Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures.

V. We acknowledge therefore no other A. R. He means that which is called
principium cognoscendi; which is the first instrument by which we come to know
the end and media of Divinity, and out of which all the precepts of Divinity
are concluded: But there is another principle of Divinity, which is called
principium essendi, and that is God.


principle of Divinity, then the written Word of God.

VI. It is an unquestionable Principle amongst Christians, that the holy
Scripture is both of a divine original and authority.

VII. It is then a question ill beseeming a Christian, to demand whether the
Scripture or holy Bible be Gods word, or not?

For as in the Schools, there is no disputing with him who denies Principles;
so we account him unworthy to be heard, who will deny this principle of
Christian religion.

VIII. Among Christians it is lawful to ask, By what testimony do we know that
the Scriptures are by divine inspiration? So we ask not for this end, to seduce
others, or to cavil, but only to be instructed.

IX. Now this testimony is twofold; the one principal, the other ministerial.
The principal testimony is that of the Holy Spirit, outwardly in the Scripture
it self, inwardly in the minds and hearts of the faithful, being illuminate by
him speaking and persuading the divinity of the Scriptures. But the ministerial
testimony is the testimony of the Church.

Outwardly in the Scriptures themselves, the Holy Ghost when he speaks of the
divine original and authority of the Word, uses these phrases; The word of the
Lord. Thus says the Lord. Jesus said. All Scripture is by divine inspiration.
2 Timothy 3.16. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. But
inwardly in the hearts of the faithful he persuades the divinity of Scriptures,
so far forth as he opens the eyes, and illuminates the mind of him that reads
the Scriptures with prayer and humility, that he makes him see the wonders of
God, and causes him to acknowledge the voice of Gods Spirit sounding in the
Word.

The Romanists urge the Churches authority alone, which they have in such high
esteem, that they will have the whole authority of Scriptures to have its
dependence from the Church; and for this only cause they will have it to be
Gods word, because the Church is the witness of it. But this is not to make
the Church a witness of the Scriptures divinity, but to make her self capable
of divinity. But we will prove by these ensuing arguments, that the testimony
of Gods Spirit alone is it, which firmly assures us of the Scriptures divinity.
1. His testimony concerning the Scriptures is most firm, by whose inspiration
the Scripture was written: For every one knows his own hand best, and is best
acquainted with his own style: But the Scripture was written by the inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1, 20 21. Ergo etc. 2. He that together
with the Scripture is promised in a most near conjunction to the faithful, his
testimony of the Scripture is most firm: But the Holy Ghost is promised to the
faithful in a most near conjunction with the Scripture. Esa. 59.21. My Spirit
which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart
from thy mouth. 3. Without whose illumination the wonders of the Scripture are
not seen, his testimony alone of the Scripture is most firm: But without the
illumination of the Holy Ghost, no man sees the wonders of the Scripture. Psalm.
119.18. Open my eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy law. Ergo, etc. 4.
Whose office it is to lead us into all truth, he it is that witnesses this
truth, to wit, that the Scripture is Gods word: But it is the office of the
Holy Ghost, to lead us into all truth, Joh. 16.13. Ergo, etc. Now as for the
Churches testimony, although it is to be received as from Gods minister, yet it
is false that the Scriptures authority depends on it; For what can be more
absurd, then to make the words of the Master to receive their authority from
the Servant; or the Fathers letters to receive credit from the Foot-post; or
the Princes mandates from the Printer; or that the Rule should have its
dependence upon the thing ruled? We know that the oracles of God are committed
to the Church, and that she is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. But
as it is foolish to tell us, that the candle receives its light from the
candlestick that supports it, so it is riliculous to ascribe the Scriptures
authority to the Church. The Churches testimony may be prevalent with those who
as yet know not the Scriptures, and have not received that sincere milk of the
word, nor by it are grown up, 1 Pet. 2.2. But in those who have tasted the
sweetness of divine oracles, the testimony of Scriptures and of the Holy Ghost
is most firm and effectual: For as he who tastes honey himself, has a more
sure knowledge of its sweetness, then he that believes another speaking and
witnessing of it; even so, he knows more assuredly the Scriptures to be Gods
word, who has tasted its sweetness, then he who gives credit to the Church
witnessing this sweetness. The Samaritans at first believed the woman when she
spoke of Christ; but after they heard Christ himself, they say to the woman,
Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves,
and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world, Joh. 4.42.
Even so he that having begged the assistance of Gods Spirit, reads the
Scriptures again and again, at length says, Now I believe no longer for the
Churches testimony, that the Scriptures are divine; but because I have read
them my self, and in reading have stamped this Syllogism in my mind.

1. That Scripture which every where brings in God himself speaking. 2. Which
is written by those men who being furnished with the gift of prophesying and
miracles from God extraordinarily, do with such faithfulness record all things,
that in rehearsing of sins and infirmities, they neither spare themselves nor
friends. 3. Which records not only Truths, and all things agreeing with right
reason, but Divine matters also, and such as transcend all reason. 4. After a
Divine manner, and in a wonderful harmony of circumstances in the same things
rehearsed by different Writers. 5. To the glory of God alone and our Salvation.
6. With admirable efficacy, both in moving the hearts, and corroborating them
against most exquisite tortures. 7. In the miraculous preservation of it
against Diabolical and Tyrannical fury:
That Scripture, I say, which thus delivers these things, is doubtless
Divine, both in its Original, and in its Authority; But such is the holy
Scripture; Therefore, it is Divine, both in its Original and in its Authority.

That I may then contract the matter in brief: the Testimony of the Church, is
first in respect of the time; but that of the holy Ghosts, is first in regard
of Nature and efficacy. We believe the Church, but not for the Church; but we
believe the Holy Ghost for himself. The Churches Testimony does monstrate but
not demonstrate; it shows the (...) that the thing is, but the Holy Ghosts
Testimony shows the (...) or the cause. The swasive power is in the Church, but
the persuasive in the Spirit only. The Churches Testimony begets an opinion,
but the Testimony of Scripture begets Science and a firm Faith.

X. The Canonical Books of Scripture, are partly of the Old, partly of the
New Testament: To the Old belong the five Books of Moses, Josuah, Judges, Ruth;
these Books are single: the Books of Samuel, of the Kings, of the Chronicles
are double: The Books of Hester, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, the four greater Prophets, and the twelve lesser are single. Now of
the New Testament, are, The four Evangelists, The Acts of the Apostles, The
Epistles of Paul, To the Romans one, To the Corinthians two, To the
Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians single; To the Thessalonians
and Timothy double; The Epistles of Peter two, of John three, of James and Jude
single, and the Revelation.

XI. But for the Books of Tobiah, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Esdra 3, 4.
of the Macchabees 1, 2, 3. of Baruch 1. The Prayer of Manasses, The Epistle of
Jeremiah, The Additions to Daniel and Hester; Although they may be read with
profit, yet they come short of that Authority, which is in the Canonical Books,
for proving Articles of Faith, and therefore they are called Apocrypha, that
is, hid or obscure.

The reasons be these, 1. Because they were not written by the Prophets, but
they have been written, for the most part, since Malachi the last of the
Prophets. 2. Because they are not written in the Style or Phrase of the
Prophets, or in the Hebrew Tongue. 3. Because they are never alleged in the
New Testament. 4. Because in reading of them we find many passages contrary
and inconsistent with Canonical Scripture, besides many fabulous, and repugnant
to Faith and Piety.

XII. The Holy Scripture is sufficient to Salvation.

2. Tim. 3.16.17. The whole Scripture is by Divine inspiration, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect and thoroughly furnished to
every good work.

XIII. Therefore as the constitutions of the Church conducing to the right
usage of outward Rites, are in their own place to be regarded, so no tradition
is to be admitted as necessary to salvation, except the Scriptures.

The Romanists do not only fight for Popish Traditions, but also equal them,
nay prefer them to the holy Scripture; but we are content to rest in that
command of God, which forbids to add to, or take away from his word, Deuteronomy.
4.2. and 5.32. and 12.32. Rev. 22.18.

XIV. The search of holy Scripture is enjoined to all Christians.

Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, Colos. 3.16. Let the word of God dwell
plentifully among you; Neither is that obscurity of holy Scripture, which the
Pontificians pretend, any obstacle to this our assertion; for though it be
obscure in some places, yet in other places it explains it self, and delivers
the prime Articles of Religion, with great perspicuity.

XV. Therefore the Translation of the Bible into vulgar Tongues is necessary.

XVI. Yet no translation is authentical, but that which agrees with the
Original fountains of the Hebrew and Greek.

XVII. Although the Interpretation of Scripture is committed to the Church, yet
the only Supreme Judge of this Interpretation is the Holy Ghost speaking in it.

Esaias 59.21. My Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart from thee. 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. So that you first know
this, that no prophecy in the Scripture is of any private motion; for the
prophecy came not of old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Therefore sacrilegiously do the Pontificians
arrogate to the Church of Rome, or to the Pope alone, this right of supreme
Judge.

XVIII. The sense and meaning of each Scripture is but one; yet in the
Prophesies of the Old Testament it is composed of a history, and mystery.

For example, Hos. 11.1. In these words, When Israel was a child, then I loved
him, and called my son out of Egypt; The sense is compounded: for literally
and historically, they are to be understood of the delivery of the Israelites
out of Egypt; but typically and mystically, of Christ's calling out of Egypt,
Mat. 2.15.

XIX. The means to find out the true sense of Scripture, are, Frequent
prayers; the knowledge of Tongues; the looking into the Fountains; the
consideration of the scope and argument; the distinction of proper terms from
figurative; the logical analysis or noting of the causes, the circumstances,
the passages going before and coming after; the comparing of obscure places
with cleerer, of like with like, and of disagreeing places with each other;
lastly, the analogy of faith.

XX. As God is the proper and prime object, so is he also the principal and
supreme end of Divinity.

XXI. Whereas then the chief end, and the chief good, are one and the same
thing, it is manifest that Christian Divinity only does rightly teach us
concerning the chief good.

XXII. The subordinate end of Divinity is our salvation, which consists in
the union and fruition of God.


The parts of Divinity are two: The first is of the knowledge of God; the
second, of the worship of God. The first contains faith, or the things to be
believed; the second, works, or the things to be performed.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD.
CHAP. I. Of the Essence of GOD.
GOD is a Spirit, existent eternally in himself; One in Essence, Three in
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

God is known in himself, and in his works.

In himself, he is known, absolutely in his Essence, relatively in the Persons.

Gods essence is known A. R. * The knowledge we have of God here, is nominal,
not real. 2. Confused, not distinct. 3. From his effects, a posteriori. 4. By
way of negation; we know what he is not, rather then what he is. 5. By way of
eminency; we know that what perfection is in the creature, is more eminently
in him. 6. By the motions of things, we gather, there must be a chief mover. 7.
From the degrees of entity, truth, and goodness in the creatures, we collect
that there must be one chief entity, truth, goodness, etc. 8. From the
possibilities and contingencies that are in all things, we infer, there must
be one chief necessary entity.


by his Names, and by his Properties.

The names of God are either taken from his essence; as Jehovah, Jah, Eheje, to
which in the New Testament, the name (...) Lord does answer for the most part;
or from his power, as El, Elohim; or from his Al-sufficiency, as Shaddai; or
from his Excellency, as Helion.

The RULES or CANONS.
I. The name Jehovah, is Gods chief and most proper Name.

For it is derived from the root Hajah, he was; So it is the symbol of that
Supreme entity which was, is, and is to come from eternity to eternity, Rev.
1.4.6. Because he remains still the same, Psa. 102.28. And is the cause of the
being of all things, Act. 17.28. Hence it is proper to God, Esaias 42.8. Neither
is it ascribed to the creatures but Metonymically, so far forth as they are
symbols of Gods presence: So it is given to the Altar, Exodus 17.15. to the Ark,
Psa. 47.6. to Jerusalem, Ezech. 48.35.

II. The same name in promises and Divine comminations or threatenings is of
great force.

Hence are these phrases: Thus says Jehovah, the word of Jehovah, etc. For
Gods Word is as sure, as himself is true, or as he endures still like himself.

III. The name Elohim, though of the plural number, yet is not the personal,
but an essential Name of God, and according to the Hebrew Idiotism, it is
spoken of one God, and of each Person: Hence there are not three Elohim or
Gods, but one alone.

As it is rightly said in the Creed of Athanasius: The Father Almighty, the Son
Almighty, and the Holy Ghost Almighty, yet not three Almighties, but one
Almighty: So because God is called Elohim from his power, there are not three,
but one Elohim, Psalm. 7. Elohim Zaddik, just God.


The Divine properties are Gods attributes, by which he is pleased to make
himself known to us weak Mortals, and is by them distinguished from the
Creatures.

The RULES.
I. The Proprieties of God are not qualities or accidents or real entities,
different from the essence, or from each other.

This will appear below, in the attribute of Gods simplicity.

II. The Divine Properties are neither separable from the essence, nor from
each other.

This Rule overthrows the Lutheran Tenet, concerning the transfusion of the
Divine properties into the Humane Nature of Christ: for if this be capable of
ubiquity, omniscience, omnipotency, why not also of eternity?


And these Proprieties are either incommunicable to the Creatures, or
communicable in some analogical effects: Of the first rank are his Simplicity
and Infinity.

Among these are reckoned his immutability and perfection; but these are only
Corollaries or Appendices to his simplicity and infinity.

His Simplicity is that, by which he is known to be an entity truly, one and
free from all composition.

His Infinity is that, by which he is known to be an entitie infinitely true
and good, and without measure or bounds.

The RULES.
I. God is A. R. * There is no composition in God, neither Physical, nor
Logical, nor Metaphysical, because in him there is no priority nor
posteriority, as in composition where the compositum is posterior to the parts
compounding. 2. In composition there is act and possibility; but God is all
Act. 3. In composition the parts differ from the compositum; but in God there
is no difference. 4. There is no composition in the form; but God is a most
simple form. 5. Whatsoever is compounded has a cause of that composition; but
in God there is no cause.


an entity, truly and most simply One.

Because he is not compounded of parts, nor of a genus and difference, nor of
substance and accidents, nor of a possibility and act, nor of entity and
essence.

II. There is then nothing in God, which is not God himself.

III. Gods essence is by us incomprehensible.

For there is no proportion between finite and infinite, no more then between a
nut-shell and the Ocean.

IV. God is altogether all, all in himself, all in all things, all in every
thing, and all out of every thing.

V. God is neither circumscribed, nor defined by place, nor is included within
it, nor excluded without it.

VI. God is eternal, without beginning, without end, without change.


The properties of the latter rank are, 1. The Life of God, 2. His Will. 3. His
Power. His Life is the attribute of his being; His Will, of commanding; His
Power, of execution.

The RULES.
I. The Proprieties of the latter rank, are ascribed to God, according to the
proprieties of the first, that is, most simply and infinitely.

II. Hence these are predicated, or spoken of God, not only in the concrete,
but in the abstract also.

For not only is he named living, wise, just, good; but also life, wisdom,
justice, goodness.

III. Whereas the life of God is most simple and infinite; it will follow, 1.
That his life, and his actual living is all one. 2. That though he has no
other cause then himself, by which he lives, yet he is the cause of life in
all living creatures, in respect of whom their life is but as it were begged
and borrowed. 3. That the life of God is most perfect, most blessed and
immutable.

IV. Whereas the understanding of God is most simple and infinite; it follows
that he, A. R. Whereas to understand is to comprehend the thing understood; God
does not properly understand, that is, comprehend himself, for so he should be
less then himself; but he understands himself negatively, that is, he is not
ignorant of himself.


understands himself primarily as an infinite object. 2. That he knows all
things most exquisitely, though they are not revealed to the Creatures. 3. That
he knows all things by himself. 4. And that by one and most simple act; for
he neeeds no revelation, nor discourse, either from the effect, or from the
cause, from that which is more known, to that which is less known. 5. Things
past, and things to come, are no less known to him, then things present. 6. His
knowledge is infinite. 7. Free from all ignorance and Oblivion.

V. Whereas the Will of God is most simple; therefore, 1. In him there are not
either two, or more, or contrary Wills.

There are indeed diverse distinctions of his Will, as shall be seen in the
Doctrine of Gods Decrees: but these distinctions are nominal, rather then real.

2. The primary object of Gods will, is God himself. 3. The Will of God is most
free. 4. Nothing is done against the Will of God. 5. The Will of God, according
to its diverse objects has diverse names, to wit, of holiness, goodness, love,
grace, mercy, wrath, justice, and such like.

VI. Whereas the power of God is most simple and infinite; it follows, 1. That
his power is one. 2. That he is truly omnipotent; for not only can he do what
he will, but also more then he will. 3. From the power of God, we must not
infer A. R. There is in God a twofold power, the one absolute, the other
ordinary; by that he can do all that may be done, by this he can do only those
things which his justice and will commands to be done.


the act or being of a thing, unless when his will and power are joined
together. 4. The object of Gods omnipotency is, whatsoever is not repugnant to
his nature, or implies a contradiction; and therefore is rather of not
impossibilities, then of possibilities.

Therefore to lie, to make the thing done undone, or to make man's body
infinite, and such like, can no ways be ascribed to God; for these are actions
not of power, but of impotency.

5. The power of God is altogether irresistible.


CHAP. II. Concerning the Persons of the Deity.
THE Persons of the Deity are subsistences, each of which has the whole
essence of God, differing notwithstanding in their incommunicable properties.

The RULES.
I. The words of Person, Trinity, or (...), that is, same Essence; although
they be not found in Scripture in the same syllables, yet they are consonant to
the Scripture, and are profitably used by the Church.

II. The word Hypostasis or Hyphistamenon, that is, Subsistence, are of a
larger extent then the word Person.

For Hypostasis or Hyphistamenon, is any individual substance; but the word
Person, signifies an individual substance, complete, rational, and differing
by incommunicable properties from another: yet the Apostle, Heb. 13. uses the
word Hypostasis for Person, by the figure called Metalepsis.

III. The Person in the Deity is neither the A. R. * Though this name Person be
common to all the three, yet it is not predicated as genus or species, because
the Persons of the Trinity differ not numerically, much less essentially; as
they must, of which genus and species are predicated.


species of God, or of the Deity, nor a part thereof, nor another thing besides
the Deity, nor a bare relation, nor the manner only of subsisting, but the very
essence of God, with a certain manner of subsisting.

IV. Neither yet is the Person a thing compounded of entity, and nonentity;
neither are the essence of God, and the manner of subsisting, two different
things, but a thing or entity, and the manner of the entity.


The Persons of the Deity are three; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The Father is
the first Person of the Deity, existing from himself, begetting the Son from
eternity, and with him producing the Holy Ghost.

The Son is the second Person, begotten of the Father from eternity, with the
Father producing the Holy Ghost.

The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the Deity, proceeding of the Father and
the Son from eternity.

The RULES.
I. The Trinity is not the number A. R. The number numbering may be understood
essentially God, or the Soul, or an Angel; for so Plato calls the soul a
number: or, Number numbering may be taken accidentally, for those discrete
quantities which we call numbers, as two, three, four; and in this sense the
Trinity is not the number numbering, because this is an accident.


numbering, but the number numbered.

II. The Doctrine of the Trinity is not a bare tradition of the Church, but a
Doctrine expressed in Holy Writ.

This is against the Papists, who to evince the insufficiency of Scripture, are
not afraid to affirm the contrary.

III. Although in the Old Testament, the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity was
somewhat obscure, yet it was not altogether unknown.

Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth: and ver. 2.
The Spirit of God moved upon the waters: and ver. 16. Let us make man. Psalm.
33.6. By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by the breath of his
mouth, all the host thereof. 2 Samuel 2.32. The Spirit of the Lord spoke in me,
and his word was in my tongue. Esaias 6.3. Holy, holy, holy Lord of hosts. Esaias.
63.9. The Angel of his countenance, (to wit of God the Father) saved them: and
ver. 10. They rebelled and grieved his holy Spirit. Which testimonies though
the obstinate Jews go about to elude, yet they will content sober Christian
minds.

IV. But there are clearer. Testimonies in the New Testament.

Mat. 3.16. And the heavens were opened to him (to wit to Christ) and he saw
the holy Ghost descending and coming upon him: and ver. 17. And behold a voice
came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
Mat. 28.19. Baptize them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Joh.
14.16. I will ask the Father, and he will send you another Comforter: and
15.26. When the Comforter shall come, whom I will send to you from the Father.
2 Cor. 13.33. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. 1 John 5.7. There are three which
bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit.

V. To these may be added the Testimonies which prove the Divinity of the Son
and Holy Ghost. 1. From their Names. 2. From their Properties. 3. From their
Works. 4. From their Divine Honors.

1. The Deity of the Son is proved:

1. From his Divine Names.

In the Old Testament, The Angel of the Covenant, Malach. 3.1. He who
oftentimes appeared to the Fathers to foreshew his Incarnation, was the Son of
God, and is every where called Jehovah and God, Genesis 16.13. and 18.1. and 32.1.
(which place may be compared with Hosea 12.6.) Exodus 3.15. Jos. 6.2. Zac. 2.12.
and 3.1, 2.

But for the Testimonies of the New Testament, they are very clear. Joh. 1.1.
And the Word was God. and 17.3. This is life eternal, to know thee the only
true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. Joh. 20.31. But these things
are written, that you may believe, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God.
Act. 20.28. God redeemed the Church with his own blood. Romans 9.5. God blessed
for ever. Tit. 2.3. The mighty God. Such phrases are frequent in the Revelation.

2. From the Divine properties, and

1. From Eternity.

Joh. 8.58. Before Abraham was I am. Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, which was,
which is, and which is to come.

2. From his Omniscience.

Joh. 2.24, 25. He knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of
man, for he knew what was in man.

3. From his Omnipresence.

Matthew. 28.20. I will be with you to the end of the world.

4. From his Omnipotency.

Joh. 5.19. Whatsoever the Father does, that likewise does the Son. Heb. 1.3.
He supporteth all things by the word of his power.


3. From his Divine Works.

Joh. 14.11. Believe that the Father is in me, and I in the Father; if not, at
least believe for the works sake.

4. From Divine Honor.

We must believe in him, Joh. 3.16. We must baptize in his name, Mat. 28.19. At
his name every knee shall bow, Phil. 2.10.


2. The Divinity of the Holy Ghost is proved,

1. From his name God.

Act. 5.3. Then Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart to lie
against the Holy Ghost? and ver. 4. Thou have not lied against man, but against
God.

2. From his Properties, and

1. From his Eternity.

Genesis 1.2. The Spirit moved upon the waters.

2. From his Omnipresence.

Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit?

3. From his Omniscience.

1 Cor. 2.10. The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God.

4. From his Omnipotence.

Which is known by his Works.


3. From his Divine works, and

1. From the Creation of all things.

Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 33.6. Joh. 26.13. and 5.44.

2. From the conservation of all things.

Genesis 1.2. He moved on the waters; a similie taken from a Hen, sitting on her
chickens, and cherishing them.

3. From the sending, and anointing of Christ.

Esaias 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me.

4. From the Gifts of Tongues and Miracles.

1 Cor. 12.4. There be diverse gifts, but the same Spirit.


4. From his Divine Honors.

1. We must believe in him, according to the Creed. 2. We must baptize in his
name, Mat. 28.19. To him we must direct our Prayers, 2 Cor. 13.13. Rev. 1.4.
Where are said to be seven Spirits, not in number, but in the diversities of
gifts; whence the ancient Church was wont to sing, Thou sevenfold Spirit in
respect of gifts.



V. The difference of the Persons, is seen in the Order, Properties, and manner
of Working: they differ in Order, because the Father is the first, the Son the
second, and the Holy Ghost the third person: they differ in Properties, because
the Father is from himself, not only by reason of his essence, but also of his
personality. The Son is A. R. The Son is from the Father, not as an effect from
the cause, for that were to infer a priority; 2. A dependency; 3. A diversity
of substances in the Trinity: but he is from the Father, as the understanding
is from the soul, the river from the spring, or the thing proceeding from its
original.


from the Father; the Holy Ghost is from the Father and the Son. They differ in
manner of working, because the Father works from himself, the Son from the
Father, the Holy Ghost from both.

VI. The trinity of the Persons takes not away the unity of the Essence: for
there are three Persons, but one God.

Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hearken Israel, the Lord our God is one God. 1 Cor. 8:4. We have
one God, the Father, from whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we through him, Ephesians. 4.6. There is
one God and Father of all, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God and one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 John 5.7. and these three are one.

VII. Hence the Word God is sometimes taken essentially, for the whole Trinity;
and sometimes hypostatically, for one of the Persons.

Act. 20.28. God has purchased the Church by his own blood. Here the name of
God is hypostatically spoken of the Son.

VIII. The unity of the three Persons in the Trinity, consists, 1. In the
identity of substance. 2. In equality. 3. In coherence or cohabitation (...).
.

IX. The identity of substance is, by which the three Persons being
co-essentiall or of the same essence, do exist.

For they are not of a like essence, nor of an essence unlike, nor of a
different essence, nor of the same specifical essence.

X. Equality is that by which the three Persons of the Deity are equal in
essence, properties, essential actions, glory and honor; whence the Son and
Holy Ghost are no less then the Father, God of themselves, life of themselves,
and Justice of themselves.

XI. Coherence or cohabitation is that by which the persons are most straightly
united, that the one remains in and with the other.

Joh. 14.11. Believe me, that the Father is in me, and I in the Father.


CHAP. III. Concerning the Works of GOD, and the Decrees of GOD in general.
THus God has been considered in himself; Now he is to be considered in his
works: which works are either Essential, or Personal. Those are essential,
which are common to the whole Trinity; but the personal, are those which are
proper to each person. Both these, as well essential as personal, are either to
internal, or external objects. The internal are they, which have no reference
to any object without God; as Understanding, by which God understands himself;
the Generation of the Son, the Production of the Holy Ghost.

Gods external work is that, which has reference to some object without the
Trinity: such are Predestination, Creation, and the like, which have relation
to the Creatures as objects without God.

The RULES.
I. One and the same external work in a different consideration, is both
personal and essential.

So the incarnation of Christ, in respect of inchoation or initiation, is the
essential work of the whole Trinity; but in respect of bounds or termination,
it is the personal work of the Son alone: for though the Father and Holy
Ghost are the cause of Christ's incarnation, yet the Son only was incarnate.
Even so, although Creation, Redemption, Sanctification are essential works of
the whole Trinity, yet in another respect they are called personal: For the
Father is called Creator, because he is the Fountain both of the Trinity, and
of operation; for the Son and Holy Ghost work from the Father. The Son is
called Redeemer, because having man's nature, he performed the work of
redemption: But the Holy Ghost is called the Sanctifier, because he is sent
from Christ as a Sanctifier and Comforter.

II. The external Operations are indivisible, or common to all the Persons.

This axiom follows upon the former: for as the essence is common to all the
Persons, so are likewise the essential operations.

III. Yet every operation remains one and the same, if we consider the
essential Original from which it proceeds, the Act by which it is effected, and
the Effect it self which is produced.


Gods operations which have reference to outward objects, are either immanent
and internal, or transient and external.

The immanent or internal operations are they which are effected within the
essence of God, to which sort belong Gods decrees.

The RULES
I. Every operation which has relation to outward objects, is not therefore an
external operation.

For the Decrees of God are such kind of operations, so farforth as they have
reference to the creatures or any thing without God; yet they are internal
operations, in that they remain within Gods very essence.

II. Gods immanent or internal works, are not things different from Gods
essence.

For whatsoever is in God, is God, as we have already showed out of the
simplicity of the Divine essence: and as in God, essence and actual being are
not different, so in him will and willingness are not different really.


Gods decree is the internal action of the Divine will, by which he has
determined from eternity most freely and certainly of those things which in
time are to be effected.

The RULES.
I. This is called his (...)
a Determined purpose, b The hand and counsel of God, c The good pleasure of
God, and Gods eternal providence.

a Act. 2.23. b Act. 4.28. c Ephesians. 1.9.

Now this is called his Eternal providence, that it may be distinguished from
Actual providence, which is nothing else but the execution of Gods decrees.

This is called, the Will of God, or The will of his good pleasure.

Indeed the Decree is the very will of God; yet for our better understanding,
the Will is considered as the cause efficient, the Decree as the effect. Now
whereas this word Will is taken diversely, it is diverse ways distinguished by
Divines: to wit, into the will of his good pleasure, and the will of the sign;
into an antecedent, and consequent; into absolute, and conditional; into
secret, and revealed. But these are not real distributions of the Divine will,
but distinctions only of the name: For to speak properly, there is in God but
one only will, which is called the will of his good pleasure, because out of
his most free good pleasure he has decreed what shall be done: It is called
also his antecedent will, because it had existence before any creature, and
from eternity with God it was established: It is named also A. R. The Schoolmen
take Gods antecedent will in another sense, for his velleity, and they call it
conditional; they make his consequent will absolute, and which is always
fulfilled, the other not always.


absolute, because it depends upon Gods good pleasure, and not from the things
which are done in time: Lastly it is called secret, because in respect of
priority it is known neither to men nor Angels. But these things are improperly
styled by the name of Divine will, which are comprehended in that ordinary
verse: Praecipit, and prohibet, promittit, consulit, implet:
Commands, forbids, promises, consulteth, fulfilleth.


For as the Magistrates commands are called his will; so the name of will is
attributed to precepts, prohibitions, promises, to effects also and events. And
this is it which is called the will of the sign, because it signifies what is
acceptable to God, and what he would have done by us. It is also called his
consequent will, because it follows that eternal antecedent will: And it is a
conditional will, because Gods precepts, prohibitions, comminations, and
promises, have the condition of obedience and disobedience annexed. Lastly, his
revealed will, because it is daily set forth in Gods word. This distinction of
the will is duly, to be observed, lest we should imagine that there are in God
either really different, or contrary wills.

III. What things are done against the will of God, are not done besides his
will.

For many things may be done against his revealed will, which notwithstanding
are consistent with his secret will, or will of his good pleasure. God by his
revealed will desired not man's fall, but most severely forbid it; yet he did
will and decree the same, by the will of his good pleasure, as it was a means
for manifestation of his glory.

IV. Therefore, by the decree and will of God, good and evil come to pass;
Good by efficiencie, Evil by permission.

V. Yet the decree or will of God is not the cause of evil or sin: although
what God has decreed, necessarily comes to pass.

For when evil is decreed by Gods will, not effecting, but permitting it; this
decree of God is not the cause of evil; neither again is the will of God the
cause of evil, because his decrees are without repentance and unavoidable; for
they come not to pass by the necessity of coaction, but by the necessity of A.
R. Gods will is immutable, because his substance is unchangeable, and his
knowledge unalterable: therefore God changes not his will, though he wills
change in the creatures; neither can God will evil, because it is not appetible,
and it is repugnant to his nature and goodness.


immutability.

VI. The necessity of Gods decrees, takes not away the liberty of the rational
creature.

The reason is, because there is no necessity of coaction, but of immutability.
The fall of Adam, if we look upon Gods decree, came to pass necessarily: In
the mean while Adam sinned freely, being neither commanded, nor constrained,
nor forced or moved by God, but rather most severely admonished that he may not
sin.

VII. Nor does this Necessity take away Contingencie in the second causes.

For many things are contingent in respect of the second causes, which in
regard of Gods decree come to pass necessarily.

VIII. No moving or impulsive cause can be given of Gods decree, except Gods
most free will and good pleasure.

IX. The chief end of Gods decree, is his own glory.

X. Gods decree in it self is one and most simple; neither is there priority or
posteriority in it.

XI. But in respect of the things which are decreed, is so distinguished, that
in what manner or order they come to pass, God is said to decree them that
they should thus come to pass.

These are idle questions: Whether God decreed this, or that first? Whether he
first ordained the end, or the means? For whereas the decree of God in it self
is one and a most simple action, there is neither priority nor posteriority in
it, but it is distinguished only in regard of the things which are decreed; in
which respect we say, that God, 1. Decreed to create man. 2. To bestow his
Image upon him, but so that it might be lost. 3. To permit his fall. 4. Of
those who were to fall, some he decreed to leave to themselves and others he
appointed to raise, and to save them eternally.


CHAP. IV. Of Predestination.
GOD's Decree, in respect of the Creatures, is either general or special. The
general Decree is that by which he appointed to declare the glory of his power,
wisdom and goodness, in the creation and conservation of all things.

The special Decree, called Predestination, is that by which he appointed to
manifest the glory of his grace, mercy, and justice, in the Election and
Reprobation of the reasonable Creatures.

The RULES.
I. Although Predestination in the mind of God be one and a most simple act;
yet by reason of the weakness of our understanding, it is distinguished into
that Predestination which decrees the end, and that which decrees the means.

II. He that is predestinate to the end, is predestinate also to the means.


Predestination is either of Angels, or of men.

The Predestination of Angels is that, by which God appointed to save eternally
some of them in their first happiness, and that in Christ their head: but to
leave others to themselves, and to punish them eternally fOr deserting their
station voluntarily; and this for the manifestation of the glory of his grace
and justice.

The A. R. Predestination is a part of Divine Providence, differing in this,
that Providence has respect to a natural end, Predestination to a
supernatural: man therefore being subject to Providence, is also subject to
Predestination.


Predestination of men is that by which God appointed, out of the race of
mankind created to his Image, but falling into sin voluntarily, to save some
through Christ eternally, but others being left to themselves in their own
misery, to damn eternally; and that for the manifestation of the glory of his
mercy and justice.

The parts then of this Decree are two Election and Reprobation.

The RULES.
I. Predestination is a Decree, partly absolute, partly not.

II. It is absolute, in respect of the efficient impulsive Cause, which neither
is Faith in those which were to be elected, nor sin in those which were to be
reprobated, but Gods most free will.

Foreseen Faith or Holiness, is nor the cause of Election; for man was not
elected, because he was to believe; but therefore he believes, because he was
elected. Act. 23.48. And they believed, so many as were ordained to life
eternal. Neither are we elected, because we were to be holy, but that we might
be holy and unblameable before him through love, Ephesians. 1.4. Neither is foreseen
sin the cause of Reprobation; for so we should be all reprobate but that God
according to his most free good pleasure has done what he did, as manifest by
that Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. and Romans
9.16. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and ver. 18. Therefore he
will show mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

III. It is not absolute, if we consider the matter or object, and the means by
which he puts this decree in execution.

IV. For the matter or object of election and reprobation, is not man
considered absolutely, but as he was to fall into sin of his own accord.

The reasons are most evident, because the decree of manifesting mercy, wrath
or justice, presupposes sin; for there can be no mercy, but toward him that
is in misery; and there can be no justice or just indignation, but toward him
that is a sinner. 2. Because that only can be reprobated, which may be
reprobated; but man is reprobable, or may be reprobated, not as by God he was
created, but as by Satan he was defaced.

V. Sin therefore is not the impulsive cause of Reprobation, but a necessary
condition of the matter or object; for though it be not the cause of
Reprobation, yet it is the cause of reprobability, or why a man should be
reprobated.

For Reprobation and reprobability, differ as the act and possibility. All men
are reprobable, or are liable to Reprobation for sin; but all are not therefore
actually reprobate.

VI. Reprobation then presupposes the decree of man's Creation. 2. Of the
donation of Gods image upon him, which Image was to be lost. 3. Of the
permission of man's fall.

VII. But the means of execution are so ordered, that albeit God works most
freely, and according to his good pleasure, yet neither have the Elect any just
cause to brag, nor the Reprobate to complain; for to those undeserved grace was
bestowed, and on these deserved punishment is inflicted.

VIII. These are different questions. 1. By what right does God reprobate man
which is his creature? 2. Why did he not choose all, but some, and reprobate
others? 3. Why did he choose this man, to wit Peter, and reprobate that man, to
wit, Judas? To the first, we answer from the material cause, in that Adam as
he was to fall, was liable to reprobation. To the second we answer from the
end, because God was willing to manifest the glory of his mercy and justice.
But to the third, from the cause impulsive, because it so pleased him.

To use the Apostles simile: If it be demanded why the Potter out of the same
lump makes vessels of such different conditions? it is answered from the end,
because there be different uses of these vessels in the house. If again it be
demanded, why out of one piece of the lump a vessel of honor is made, and out
of the other a vessel to dishonor? it is answered from the cause impulsive,
because it so pleased the Potter.

IX. Christ is to be considered either as God, or as God and man the Mediator.
In the former respect he is with the Father and Holy Ghost the efficient cause
of our election: but in the latter respect, he is the means of execution
thereof.

We are then said to be elected in Christ, Ephesians. 4. because by him we were to be
saved. The decree of saving us, is called Predestination to the End; but the
decree bestowing Christ upon us as our Head, is named Predestination to the
Means.

X. Although these words of Predestination, Prescience, and Predetermination,
are sometime taken for the same; yet or understandings sake they may be thus
distinguished. Predestination signifies the very purpose of God to save us:
Prescience, that free bounty by which he acknowledges us for his own: but
Predetermination imports Predestination as it has reference to Christ, and the
other means of salvation.

Romans 8.28, 29. But we know, that to those who love God, all things work
together for their good; to those I say who are called of his purpose: for whom
he foreknew, those he predestinate, that they might be conformable to the image
of his Son, etc.

XI. They are altogether A. R. Predestination is a part of Providence, so is
Reprobation: For as God by his providence has ordained some to life eternal,
so by that same providence he was to suffer some to fall away from that
happiness.


foolish, who acknowledge Election, and deny Reprobation.

Because the Scripture teaches, that there is Reprobation as well as Election.
Esa. 41.9. I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away. Mal. 1.3. Jacob have I
loved, and I have hated Esau. Romans 9.18. He will have mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will he hardens. Romans 11.7. The election has obtained it, and
the rest have been hardened. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. God has not appointed us to wrath,
but to salvation. 2 Timothy 2.20 Vessels to honor, and to dishonor. Jud. v. 4.
For there are certain men crept in, which were before of old ordained to
condemnation.

XII. As Christ is the cause not Christ is the efficient cause of Election, as
he is God equal with the Father; He is the meritorious cause, as he became our
Mediator. As head of the Church, he is also the cause of Election. Joh. 15.16.
I know whom I have chosen. and Joh. 13.18. I have chosen you. In respect of his
active and passive obedience, he is (...), the outward moving cause. And if he
be the cause of salvation, he must needs be the cause of election, on which
salvation depends; Causa causae, est causa causati. But because we are said to
be elected in him, as he became our Surety, he is called the medium or mean of
election, rather then the cause. As he is God, we are elected by him; as
Mediator, in him. As God, he is the principal efficient; as Mediator, the
secondary or mean of election.
of Election, but of Salvation; so Infidelity is the cause not of Reprobation,
but of Damnation.

Damnation differs from Reprobation, as the means of Execution from the Decree.

XIII. Damnation is not the end of Reprobation, but the manifestation of the
glory of Gods justice.

Therefore to say, that man was created, that he might be damned, is to say
amiss; for damnation is not the end, but the means of execution, of which man
by his voluntary disobedience has made himself guilty.

XV. For understandings sake, two acts are made of Reprobation; to wit, The
denial of undeserved grace, which is called Preterition, and the ordaining to
deserved punishment, which is called Predamnation.

XVI. In the trial of our Election we must proceed analytically, or by way of
resolution, from the means of Execution to the Decree, beginning from our
Sanctification.

Thus syllogistically: Whosoever feels in himself the gift of sanctification,
by which we die to sin, and live to righteousness; he is justified, called, or
endowed with true faith, and is elected: But by the grace of God I feel this:
therefore I am justified, called, and elected.

XVI. But this is a diabolical argument: If I am elected, there is no need of
good works; if I be a Reprobate, good works are needless.

For first, it is not the part of a Christian to say, Either I am elected, or
reprobated; but rather to make trial of his faith as the means of election. 2
Cor. 13.5, 6. Prove your selves whether you are in the faith, examine your
selves; know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
you be reprobates? But I trust that you shall know that we are not reprobates.
2. This syllogism disjoyns things subordinate, and conjoyns things
inconsistent: For good works are subordinate, and not to be separated from
Election; for they are the means of its execution, and of our assurance
thereof: But to be a reprobate, and to do good works, are things inconsistent.


CHAP. V. Of the Creation.
HItherto of GOD'S internal works; His external are those, which are without
the essence of God; and these are two, to wit, the Creation, and the
Government, or Gods actual providence.

Creation is that, by which God produced the world and the things therein,
partly out of nothing, and partly out of matter unapt naturally for that
production, for the manifestation of his power, wisdom, and goodness.

The history of the Creation is extant in Genesis, c. 1. and 2

The RULES.
I. Creation is not only a production of something out of nothing, but also
out of matter altogether unapt for such production naturally.

II. The work and honor of Creation belongs to God alone, and not to Angels,
or any other creature A. R. The reason is, because an infinite power is
required to produce things out of nothing. 2. Because entity or being is an
universal effect, and therefore must be produced by an universal cause, which
only is God, who created, that is, gave simply being to the creature.


.

III. Creation is a transition from the Possibility to the Act, not of the
Creator, but of the Creature.

IV. That possibility is not privative, but negative.

Because the matter of creation is naturally unapt to that which is created out
of it. For example; there was no aptitude or disposition in dust, to man's body,
which was so miraculously produced thence.

V. There was no accession of perfection in God, by creating the world; neither
did he create it, that he might be bettered or perfected by it, but that his
goodness might be communicated to the creature.

VI. Creation is either of the Species with all the Individuals; so the Angels,
Stars, Elements were created together: Or of the Species with some Individuals
only, having an innate power of propagation.

VII. A more particular knowledge of the Creatures we leave to Natural
Philosophers: it shall suffice in this place, to handle them according to each
Days production.

VIII. The first day of the Creation is famous for three works.

1. For the production of Angels, with the highest Heaven, called the Heaven of
the blessed.

It Is most probable that the Angels were created the first day, because when
God laid the foundation of the earth, He was then praised by them, Job 28.7.

2. For the production of this visible world, which was not altogether
destitute of form, but of perfection, separation, and beauty, which by degrees
then it received.

3. For sending in of the primitive Light; which was neither the Elementary
fire, nor a bright Cloud, nor any other body, but a Quality sent into the air
by God, who is that inaccessible light. This created quality of Light was
afterward the fourth day placed in the Stars.


IX. The second day, the Firmament was created, or the Aerial heaven, which by
its lower part separates the waters above, that is the Clouds, from the waters
beneath, that is the Sea.

X. The third day, God 1. separated the inferior waters which as yet covered
the earth, and gathered them into certain channels, that the rest of the earth
called dry land, might afford a commodious habitation for man and beast. 2. He
gave to the earth a fructifying power to produce herbs and plants, without the
help of seed or sun.

XI. The fourth day, the Stars and great Lumi^aries were placed in heaven:
whose motion proceeds not from a soul, or any assistant intelligence, as the
Philosophers affirm, but from that power which God gave them in the beginning;
no otherways then the earth by its innate power stands immovable.

XII. There is a threefold use of the stars. 1. To distinguish the day and
night. 2. To note the times and seasons of the year. 3. To impart their virtue
to inferior bodies.

XIII. The fifth day, were made the Birds, Fishes, and Creeping-things.

XIV. The sixth day, after the earthly Creatures were produced, and this whole
Universe as a large house was furnished with all kind of furniture, Man at
last was created.


Of all these Creatures, Men and Angels are chiefly considered in Divinity,
because on them God bestowed his Image.

THE RULES.
I. Although the whole World be the Looking-glass of Gods power, wisdom, and
bounty; yet properly Gods Image is attributed to Angels and Men only.

2. Gods Image does partly consist in natural gifts, to wit, in the invisible
and simple substance of Angels and men's souls, in their life, understanding,
will, and immortality; partly in supernatural gifts, to wit, in their primitive
blessedness, in the uprightness of their intellect and will, and in their
majesty and dominion over the other Creatures.


Angels are intelligent Creatures void of bodies.

The RULES.
I. Angels are not accidents, nor qualities, but true subsistences.

II. Angels are void of bodies, A. R. If the Angels were corporeal, the world
were imperfect, because there would be wanting incorporeal creatures. 2. God
made men and Angels to his own image, which consists not only in will and
understanding, but also in immateriality and immortality.


and are not subject to destruction.

III. The bodies in which the Angels appeared were not mere apparitions, nor
yet united to them hypostatically, but were freely assumed to perform some
service in.

IV. Angels are in a place, not by way of circumscription, but by way of
definition.

V. Angels cannot be together in many places.

VI. Angels truly move from place to place.


Man is a creature, whose body originally was formed of earth, but afterward
is propagated of seed by traduction, consisting of a reasonable soul, infused
into him by God immediately.

Here we disallow not the Philosophers definition, by which they call man a
reasonable creature; but we describe man in the Divinity-School more fitly for
our purpose, as we have now described him.

The RULES.
I. There is a threefold miraculous production of man's body mentioned in
Scripture: the first was of the dust of the earth, without father and mother;
the second production was out of Adams rib, without a mother; the third was of
the blood of the Virgin, without a Father.

II. The soul of man is not propagated of seed by traduction, but is
immediately created by God, and infused into the body.

Of man's Creation, Moses writes thus, Genesis 2. ver. 5. and 7. The Lord breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul: In this
place three things are mentioned: 1. The immediate Creation of the soul, for it
is called the breath of God: 2. His breathing, for he says, He breathed into
his nostrils: 3. The personal union of body and soul, in these words, And he
was made a living soul, metonymically, that is a living sensitive creature. But
that the souls now are immediately created by God, and infused into the body,
is proved by these subsequent Reasons. 1. Because otherways our souls should
have another original then Adams had; for ours must proceed of some
pre-existent matter, whereas Adams proceeded of none. Neither will that
objection hold, concerning the different way or reason of generation, and
creation; for nothing is generated of matter, but what in the beginning was
created of matter. 2. Because the soul of Christ was not formed of seed by
traduction, for he was conceived not by the help of man, but by the operation
of the holy Ghost, of the blessed Virgins blood. 3. Because the Scripture, when
it speaks of the original of our souls, it speaks as of a work of Creation, not
of nature. Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty has given me life. Zach. 12.1. The Lord stretches out the heavens,
and lays the foundation of the earth, and forms the spirit of man within
him; where it is plain that this is reckoned among the works of Creation. 4.
Such is man's generation, as his dissolution is; but man's dissolution is, that
his body returns to dust, and his Spirit to God that gave it, Eccl. 12.9.
Whereas then in man's dissolution, the Spirit returns immediately to God,
doubtless it was immediately formed by him. 5. Because the Scripture does
plainly distinguish between the parts of bodies and Spirits. Heb. 12.2. 6.
Because the soul is indivisible into parts, therefore cannot be produced but of
nothing. 7. Because if it were generated by traduction, either it must be
generated of a soul, or of a body, or of a soul and body together: but it is
not generated of a soul, A. R. The soul could not be produced out of any
pre-existent matter; neither corporeal, because it is not a body; nor
incorporal, because spirits and incorporeal substances admit no change or
transmutation.


because of that which is incorruptible nothing can be generated; not of a
body, because it is not corporeal; not of a body and soul together, because so
it should be partly corporeal, partly incorporeal: seeing then it is produced
of nothing, it must be produced by God alone, whose alone property it is to
make things of nothing.

III. These Physical Axioms, Like begets like, and, Man begets man; remain
true also in this case: both because man begets man, a person begets a person;
as also because by the work of the Parents the body is begot, as it were the
subject of the soul, and so is united to the soul, which is infused by God, and
so thus the whole man is brought into this world by generation.

It Is true, that man is the efficient cause of man; but not according to all
his parts: for as he is said to kill a man, that kills only his body; so man is
said to beget man, though he begets not the soul. Neither again is man in this
respect ignobler then other living creatures: whereas rather for this very
cause, man's generation is more excellent, in that Gods immediate operation
concurs with natures work.

IV. Man's soul is immortal; not simply, as though God could not annihilate it,
but by Gods ordination, and that it cannot be destroyed by second causes.

V. The faculties of the soul are really different from the soul, as qualities
or proper accidents from their subject.

The reason of this is taken from the event, because the essence of the soul
remains entire, when the faculties are shaken and weakened.

VI. The souls faculties are either merely organicall, as the vegitive and
sensitive faculty, or are such only in part and for a time, as the
understanding and will; the former operate not when the body is corrupted; but
these without the help of the body can exercise themselves, and operate when
the body is destroyed.

VII. Liberty from coaction, is an essential property of the will.

Otherways the will were no will.


CHAP. VI. Of Gods actual Providence.
GOds actual Providence, is that by which not only he preserves his creatures,
but also according to his great wisdom, goodness, power, justice, and mercy, he
governs all things.

The RULES.
I. To deny A. R. For he could not bo God, if he did not order things to their
end: but this is providence. 2. He were not God, if he were not good: but this
is seen as well in the ordering, as in the creating of the World. 3. He were
not God, if he were not prudent: but providence is the chief part of prudence.


this Providence, is to deny God himself.

II. Actual Providence differs from eternal, as Execution from the Decree.

III. As in Gods eternal Providence, the will of his good pleasure; so in this,
his revealed will is chiefly seen.

IV. Providence does not only consist in knowledge, but also in the Government
of all things both great and small.

V. Gods Providence takes not away, but establishes the second causes.

VI. What A. R. The world were not perfect, if all things were necessary,
nothing contingent; therefore God would have contingencies to depend from
contingent causes, and necessities from causes necessary; therefore what falls
out necessarily, is because God has so disposed it.


things are contingent in respect of the second causes, are necessary in
respect of Gods providence; but this necessity is of immutability, not of
coaction.

VII. Gods Providence is far different from the Stoics fatal necessity.

For the Stoical fate ties God to the connection of secondary causes: but the
Christian fate makes a subordination of the second causes to Gods most free
will, of which he makes use voluntarily, not of necessity, out of indulgence,
rather then indigence.

VIII. By Gods Providence both good and evil are governed.

IX. Good things are ruled by an efficacious action or effectual working, to
which belong the preventing, concomitant, and subsequent assistance of Divine
Power.

X. Evil things are ruled by an actual permission, and so they are permitted,
directed and determined.

XI. Gods Providence remains ordered and undefiled, even in those actions
that are disordered and sinful.

For in evil actions two things are observable, the action it self, and the
irregularity thereof. The action it self, as all natural motions, is performed
by Gods effectual operation; but the irregularity or vitiosity, comes to pass
by Gods actual permission. For sin is ordered, 1. By permitting it. 2. By
determining and containing it within its bounds. 3. By directing it to a good
issue. Now God cannot be said to be author of sin by any of these ways. Not by
producing the matter of it, or the natural action: for as there is one cause of
the horses motion, another of his halting; even so it is one thing to be the
cause of the action, another thing to be the cause of the adhering vitiosity.
Not by permitting the evil action, because God is not forced by any law to
hinder sin. Not by determining it; for as he who quenches a fire that it may
not spread further, is not the cause of the fire; so he that sets bounds to
sin, is not the cause of sin. Not by directing it to a good end: for as it is a
main skill to prepare wholesome medicines out of venomous creatures, so it is the
glory of God to create light out of darkness, and good out of evil: Hence it is
apparent how frivolous their device is, who that they might vindicate God from
any contagion of sin, they fly to a bare and idle permission of sin.

XII. Although the Scripture ascribes many times the same action and the same
work to God, to the devil, and to wicked men, yet sin cannot be in any wise
imputed to God.

In this case we must not have recourse to a bare permission, but we must give
an estimate of these actions according to their scope and end: for in one and
the same action, God has one purpose, Satan another, and wicked men another.
Jobs affliction is imputed to God; God gave, says Job, and God has taken; the
same is ascribed to Satan, to the Sabeans also and Chaldeans: but according to
the end we must judge of each of them. It was Satan's purpose to make Job
despair: It was the Chaldeans intent and Sabeans, to enrich themselves by
plundring that holy man: but God determined to try and make manifest the faith
of his servant. So in the crucifying of Christ, it was Pilates purpose to
continue in the favor of Caesar, and of the Jews: the Jews drift was to
satisfy their desire with hatred and revenge; but Gods end was to redeem
mankind. Hence they are said to do nothing, but what the hand and counsel of
God had determined, Act. 4.28.

XIII. The hardening of the wicked is ascribed to God as a most just judgment;
so as God can neither be blamed as faulty, nor can the wicked be excused.

The wicked are in this inexcusable; because God only hardens those who
harden themselves; neither does he harden the soft-hearted, but in his just
judgment he increases the hardness of them who were hardened before. Now they
harden themselves, by abusing those graces which should have softened them. I.
Gods long-suffering. Romans 2. v. 4, 5. Or despisest thou the riches of his
bounty, patience, and long-suffering, not knowing that the bountifulness of
God leads thee to repentance? But thou after thy hardness, and heart that
cannot repent, heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath. II. Gods
Word. 2 Cor. 2.28. For we are unto God the sweet savor of Christ in them that
are saved, and in them which perish; to the one we are the savor of death unto
death, to the other the savor of life unto life. III. Gods correction and rod,
by which as an anvil they are made harder. Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them,
but they have not sorrowed; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive correction; they have made their faces harder then a stone, and have
refused to return. For this reason then are they most justly hardened by God,
who harden themselves; who so often said of Pharaoh, I will hold, I will make
obstinate, I will harden his heart. For not only does he harden by permission,
but also, 1. By letting loose the bridle with which he held in their exorbitant
lusts. Romans 1.24. He delivered them up to their own lusts. and v. 28. God gave
them up to a reprobate mind. II. By delivering them to Satan as to a hangman. 1
King. 22.21, 22. And there came forth a Spirit who stood before the Lord, and
said, I will persuade him (to wit Achab) and the Lord said to him, wherewith?
And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
his prophets. And he said, thou shall persuade him, and prevail also; go forth
and do so. As therefore when the Magistrate delivers over to the Hangman a
guilty person to be punished; he is neither the cause of his wickedness, nor
of his destruction: even so when God gives up wicked men to Satan; neither is
the cause of their wickedness, nor of their ruin to be imputed to God.


CHAP. VII. Of the Government of Angels.
GOds actual providence does chiefly appear in the government of Angels and
men: This government is either of good Angels, or of bad; the government of
good Angels is that whereby God has established them in their original
integrity and happiness in his Son, as in their head, to the praise of the
glory of his grace.

The RULES.
I. The good Angels of their own nature were as apt to fall, as the bad.

II. Therefore they ought to ascribe not to themselves, but to the grace of God
the Father, and to the Son as to their head, their establishment or
confirmation in goodness.

III. The Son of God is the head of Angels, not by right of Redemption, but of
creation, and of that gracious union with God.

For they could not be endowed with the image of God, nor be adopted unto Sons,
but only in the Son of God, Who is the image of God made visible, and first
born of every creature, 1 Col. 15.

IV. That Angel who so often appeared to the Fathers in the shape of man, as a
Prologue or forerunner of his Incarnation, was not a created Angel, but the
very Son of God.

Genesis 18.13. The Lord said to Abraham, why does Sarah laugh? Genesis 32.28. the
Angel said to Jacob, Thou have prevailed with an Angel; which is thus
explained, Hos. 12.4. He prevails with God. Jos. 6. v. 14. That man whom
Josuah saw, said, I am as a Captain of the host of the Lord: and v. 15. And the
Captain of the Lords host said to Joshua. See Zach. 1. v. 2, 3.

V. Although then is no ataxie or confusion among the Angels, yet it is not to
be found in Scripture that they have any Prince, or other Head over them then
the Son of God: by Michael the Archangel, the Son of God is rightly understood.

For He is set in opposition to the Devil as to the head of evil Angels. Rev.
12.7. Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon: ver. 10. Now is
salvation in heaven, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ.

VI. The good Angels are ready executors of Gods will, especially in the
praising of God, and preservation of the godly.

VII. We are not carefully to enquire, whether or not particular men, or
Provinces are governed by certain Angels.

For out of Scripture it appears, that GOD uses sometimes the Ministry of one
Angel, sometimes of more.


The government of evil Angels, is that whereby God has thrust them out of
Heaven into infernal places and eternal destruction, as voluntary Delinquents,
having forsaken their first integrity, and become the enemies of Christ's
kingdom.

The RULES.
I. Evil Angels are such not by creation, but by their own voluntary defection.

II. What their first sin was, whether Pride or not, the Scripture does not
specify: yet it is certain that it was not committed without pride.

For Pride is joined to every sin that is committed with deliberation.

III. We may more safely with the Apostle, Jude ver. 6. call it, a defection
from their first original, and a desertion of their proper habitation.

IV. the evil Angels have a Prince, whom the Scripture by way of excellency,
calls the Devil, the old Serpent, Satan, and the Dragon. See Rev. 12.9.

V. Whereas the Scripture speaks nothing of the time when the evil Angels fell,
nor of the number, we ought also in this to be silent.

VI. Their punishment consists partly in the memory of their happiness lost
irrecoverably, partly in the perpetual sense of their misery and torments.

VII. The substance of the evil Angels remained invisible, and immortal, and
simple.

VIII. There remained also in them no small knowledge, and a sagacity also of
searching out future things, having these helps. 1. Their natural knowledge. 2.
Their long experimental knowledge. 3. Astrology. 4. The knowledge of
Scripture, chiefly of the Prophets. 5. Extraordinary revelation, so often as
God makes use of the service of these torturers A. R. There is in the evil
Angels a twofold knowledge; the one by nature, which they have not lost at all:
for their nature being simple, admits no dimunition; therefore that knowledge
which in them depends from their nature, as their other natural faculties do,
were not lost nor diminished. Hence they knew how to produce frogs in Egypt,
and do the other wonders that Moses did, only they could not produce the lice;
not as if they were ignorant of the occult seeds and causes of such production
(for the knowledge of the lice was not more difficult, then that of the frogs)
but because they were hindered by the power of God. Their other knowledge is by
grace, and that is either speculative, or practical; the former is not totally
lost, but much diminished; for of Gods secrets they know very little. But the
practick knowledge, which is joined with the love of God, and detestation of
evil, is totally lost in them: for such evil cannot consist with obstinate
malice; yet as they naturally know God, so they naturally love him as an
Entity, but not morally, as he is the fountain of all happiness, of which they
know themselves to be eternally deprived.


.

IX. As this their knowledge is far from charity, so it is void of all comfort,
and strikes in them a terror.

Mat. 8.29. What have we to do with thee, Jesus the Son of God? art thou come
to torment us before our time? Jam. 2.19. Thou believe there is one God; thou
do well; the devils also believe and tremble.

X. There remains also in them great power, which they show by removing huge
bodies out of their places, in raising of storms, in overthrowing houses and
mountains, in infecting the air and the bodies of creatures with a venomous
breath, in possessing of men, in bewitching the outward and inward senses, by
altering and changing the organ or object.

XI. But over the stars or celestial bodies they have no right or power.

Because to them is granted power to rule in the air only, Ephesians. 2.2.

XII. All their power over inferior things is so limited by Gods providence,
that without his power they can do nothing.

Mat. 8.31. But the devils besought him, saying, if thou cast us out, suffer us
to go into the herd of swine.

XIII. Evil Angels can do wonders, but not work miracles.

Because miracles are works exceeding all power of the creatures.


CHAP. VIII. Of the government of man, in the state of Innocence.
SUch is the Government of Angels. The government of man is seen in the state
of Innocence, of Misery, of Grace, and of Glory.

The government of man in the state of Innocence, is that by which God made a
Covenant of works with man, promising him eternal happiness, under the
condition of obedience; otherways, eternal death.

The RULES.
I. God made a double Covenant with man, the one of works, the other of grace;
that before, this after the fall.

II. The Covenant of works was confirmed by a double Sacrament, to wit, the
Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge, both being planted in the midst of
Paradise.

III. They had a double use. 1. That man's obedience might be tried, by using of
the one, and abstaining from the other. 2. That the Tree of life might ratify
eternal happiness to those that should obey; but the Tree of knowledge should
signify to the disobedient, the loss of the greatest happiness, and the
possession of the greatest misery.

IV. Therefore the Tree of life was so called, not from any innate faculty it
had to give life, but from a Sacramental signification.

V. Likewise the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, has this denomination
from signifying the chief good and evil, and from the event.

For in effect, and by experience, man found out how great that happiness and
good was which he lost, and how great evil and misery he brought upon himself.

VI. The happiness of man being yet in his integrity, consisted chiefly in the
Image of God.

VII. The soul is the principal Subject of this Divine Image, the body is the
secondary, so far forth as the operations of the soul do manifest themselves in
it.

VIII. The gifts of Gods Image were partly natural, partly supernatural.

IX. The natural gifts were the simple and invisible substance of the soul,
with its faculties, the intellect and will.

X. The supernatural gifts were the clearness of the understanding, the liberty
and rectitude of the will, the conformity of the appetite and affections, the
immortality of the whole man, and dominion over the inferior creatures.

XI. Such was the clearness of Adams understanding, that he knew all natural
things, which had a possible existence in the first principles, which are of
themselves known.

An excellent proof of this was showed by Adam, when he gave every creature its
name, according to its nature, Genesis 2.20.

XII. The will was free, indifferent to good or evil, so that man might have
persever'd in uprightness if he had pleased: he received power if he would, but
not will and power.

There is a foursold liberty of will, according to the foursold state of man:
In the first man, the will was free to good or evil; in man lapsed, the will is
only free to evil; In man regenerated, or in the state of grace, it is free
from evil to good by the grace of God, but imperfectly; in the state of glory
it shall be free from evil to good perfectly; in the state of innocence he
could not sin; A. R. When it is said here, that in the state of misery, man
cannot but sin, it is not meant that man is forced to sin, for he is free from
compulsion, both in the state of sin and of grace; but he is not free from
necessity; for freedom and necessity may be together in the same will; so it
shall be in heaven, when we shall necessarily, yet freely will that only which
is good, as the Angels do; and even here the will is necessitated, when it is
determinated by the last act or practical judgment of reason: why then may not
grace in our conversion necessitate, as well as reason determinate? but man by
his voluntary fall has brought the necessity of sinning on himself: So that
with Saint Paul, we do the evil which we would not do, in that we have lost by
the abuse of our free will, both our selves and our free will.


in the state of misery he cannot but sin; in the state of grace sin cannot
reign in man; in the state of glory he cannot sin at all.

XIII. The inferior appetites and affections agreed with reason.

XIV. Adam even in respect of his body was immortal, but not simply, as though
his body being composed of the elements could not be resolved into its
principles, but by Divine covenant; not as though it could not die, but because
it had a possibility not to die.

XV. Man's dominion over the inferior creatures was not only entire in respect
of possession, but mild also and gentle in respect of use and execution.

XVI. That labor which was enjoined to Adam to keep and dress Paradise, was
not toylsome, but most pleasant.


CHAP. IX. Of the fall of our first Parents, the beginning of man's misery.
SO much concerning the government of man in the state of innocence; the
government of man in the state of misery is, whereby God in his just judgment
has subjected man to diverse miseries, who of his own accord fell into sin.
This state of man consists in sin, and in the miseries which follow upon sin.

Sin is a transgression of the Law, or whatsoever is repugnant to Gods Law.

1 John 3.4. Under the name of Law in this place are understood both things
commanded, and things prohibited, in the beginning proposed to man, as also the
law of nature printed in his heart. But concerning the restoring and enlarging
of the Law after the fall, we are to speak in its own place.

The RULES.
I. By Sin is meant either the subject of transgression, with the transgression
it self in the concrete, or the transgression alone in the abstract.

II. The definition of sin by thought, word and deed; is too narrow.

For so it is defined by the Pontificians, but as it shall appear afterward,
this definition belongs nothing to original Sin.

III. God cannot be called the author of sin, without blasphemy.

IV. One and the same thing in a diverse consideration, may be both sin, and the
punishment of sin.


Sin is either primitive or derivative. Primitive, is the disobedience of our
first Parents, whereby they transgressed Gods commandment concerning the Tree
of Knowledge of good and evil.

The RULES.
I. Neither God, nor Gods Decree, nor the denial of special Grace, nor the
permission of sin, nor the stirring up of natural motion, nor finally the
government of that sin, were the causes of Adam and Eves transgression.

Not God; because he most severely prohibited the eating of the fruit; not his
Decree, because that infers a necessity only of immutability, not of coaction,
neither does it force any man to sin; not the denial of special Grace, by which
man should continue in his integrity; for God was not bound to give that Grace
to man, which he gave him; for he received possibility if he would, although
not a Will to that possibility: not the stirring up of natural motion; because
motion of it self is not sin: not the government of his fall; because to turn
evil into good, is rather to be the author of good then of evil.

II. God did both will, and nill the first Sin.

He nilled it so far forth as it was sin; he willed and decreed it as it was a
means of manifesting his glory, mercy, and justice.

III. The Procatartical or external A. R. The direct cause of sin, was man's own
will; the indirect cause was Satan, by persuasion and suggestion. For no
external thing can necessarily move the will, but the last end only. Satan may
internally work upon the fantasy, by representing forms to it; and upon the
appetite by moving it to passion by means of the spirits and heart; But he
cannot work upon the understanding and will.


cause, was the instinct and persuasion of Satan that subtle Serpent.

IV. The Proegumene or internal cause was the will of man, of it self
indifferent to good or evil, but by Satan's persuasion bent to evil.

V. There be certain degrees of that sin, by which Adam fell from God, not at
once, but by little and little; to wit, 1. Incogitancie and curiosity of Evahs
talking with the Serpent, her husband being absent. 2. Incredulity, by which
she began by degrees to distrust God, and to give assent to Satan's lies, who
called in question Gods good will toward man. 3. An inordinate desire to the
forbidden fruit, and an affection of divine glory. 4. The Fact it self. 5. The
seducing of Adam, and an inordinate affectation raised in him also.

VI. If you consider the parts of this sin, you way justly call it the
transgression of the whole Law of Nature.

For man sinned by incredulity, diffidence, ingratitude, Idolatry, whereby he
fell from God, and of himself endeavored to make an Idol of himself; by
contemning Gods Word, by Rebellion, Homicide, Intemperance, Theft, by laying
hand on that which was another, without the owners consent; by assenting to
false witness; lastly by an ambitious affectation of too high an honor, yea,
of that glory which belongs only to God: whence the definition of this sin by
Intemperance, Ambition, or Pride, is too narrow.

VII. Therefore with the blessed Apostle, we rightly call this sin, a
transgression, an offense, and disobedience, Romans 5.14, 18, 19.

VIII. Adam in this business is to be considered, not as a private, but as a
public person, and consequently as the Parent, head, and root of all mankind.

IX. Whatsoever therefore he received and lost, he received and lost it for
himself and posterity.

As the head contains Reason both for it self and the members; as a Gentleman
keeps or loses his Copyhold for himself and posterity; as out of a venomous
root nothing can proceed that is wholesome: so all that are come of Adam
naturally, are born guilty of that primitive sin.

X. That Primitive sin therefore is not only personal, but natural also;
because by it whole Nature is destroyed, of which also Adams posterity is held
g^ilty, to wit, all that are naturally sprung from Adam.

Christ then is excepted from this guilt, for he was born of Adam, but not by
Adam; not by natural generation, but by the Virtue of the Holy Ghost.

XI. As therefore the Person infected Nature, so afterward Nature infected the
Person.

XII. We religiously believe that our first Parents were received into favor
by God.


CHAP. X. Of Original Sin, and Free Will.
THat Sin which is derived from the first or primitive Sin, is either original
or actual; original Sin is that native corruption derived into the whole man,
and to the whole race of man naturally descending from Adam, whereby man having
utterly lost his freedom to good, becomes prone to evil.

The RULES.
I. This sin in Scripture is named by way of excellency, Sin, and the Body of
sina, Sinful sinb, Inhabiting sinc, The law of our membersd, The old mane,
Fleshf.

a Romans 6.6. b Romans 7.13. c Romans 7.17. d Romans 7.23. e Romans 6.6. f Joh. 3.6.
Gal. 5.17.

II. It is called also Concupiscence. Romans 7.7. I had not known lust or
concupiscence, unless the Law had said, Thou shall not covet or lust.

III. Therefore the Papists do erroniously exempt it from being a sin,
reckoning it among the works of God.

By the name of Concupiscence is understood, either that natural faculty of
desire which was in man even before his fall, or that corruption which
naturally adheres to it, as it is in the first act, and as it inclines man
only to evil.

IV. The proximate cause of original sin, is the guilt of the first sin, in
respect of which it is a most just punishment from God, to wit, a part of that
death which God threatened to man.

V. Although the soul is immediately infused by God into man; yet being united
to the body, it is made guilty presently of the first sin imparted to the whole
man, and therefore is infected with original contagion.

VI. Neither for this cause does original sin cease to be sin, in that it is
not wittingly nor willingly committed; for it is sufficient that the
irregularity of our nature is present, though spontaneousnesse be absent.

VII. From this original sin (except Christ alone) no man is free, not the
blessed Virgin Mary: Neither is it only in Infants, but it is in the embryo,
scarce at yet conceived, and before the birth; and it appears still more and
more, as the rapacity of wolves shows it self in their whelps.

Psalm. 51.7. Behold I was born in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived
me. 2 Cor. 5.21. for he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin.

VIII. Original sin does consist not only in an impotency, and ineptitude to
goodness; but also in pronenesse to evil; neither is it only the amission of
original good, but also the immission of the contrary evil.

IX. By Original sin our natural gifts are corrupted, but supernatural are
utterly lost.

X. The Understanding remained, but darkened; the Will remained, but depraved;
the inferior Appetite remained, but altogether vitiated.

XI. Hence it is, that in natural and civil actions, an irregenerate man can
do no good without special grace.

XII. Without this special grace, no excelling thing could be performed by the
Gentiles.

XIII. Whatsoever good then that was which they did, it was mixed with much
vanity; so that their chief virtues were in Gods sight, but glorious enormities.

XIV. For these are not good works, which are good in themselves, but which are
done well.

A work is said, to be good, either univocally, or equivocally: univocally, so
such a work is simply good in respect of all circumstances: equivocally, a work
is good in it self; but withal, vicious, either in respect of the subject, or
object; or means, or the end: for if we look upon the actions of the Gentiles,
we shall find, rhat they aimed more at their own, then at Gods glory in them.

XV. Although the affections of the wicked are kept in by God as with a Bit,
yet they are not healed.

XVI. But supernatural gifts were utterly lost, to wit, A. R. When it is said
here, that supernatural gifts were utterly lost; is meant, that Faith was
utterly lost; and Faith is the chief of all supernatural gifts: now that Faith
was utterly lost in our first Parents, is plain; because they gave credit to
the Serpent, therefore they believed not that God was either true, or
omnipotent: they thought to hide themselves from him; therefore they believed
not his omnipresence: and in a manner, Adam accused God for giving him the
woman, that made him sin; and in this, he lost the faith of Gods goodness and
justice: yet though man lost his Faith, he did not utterly lose all other
spiritual gifts; for he did not utterly lose the knowledge of God, nor did his
posterity; for that is learned by the things that are made, Romans 1.20. nor did
he utterly lose the fear of God; for Adam confesses, Genesis 3. that when he
heard that voice of God, he was afraid; which Fear, though servile, yet it is a
supernatural gift, but of an inferior rank.


the claritie of the intellect, the rectitude of the will, and the conformity
of the appetite with reason.

XVII. A. R. When it is said here, that there is no spiritual knowledge in us,
this must not be taken subjectively, but causatively: for there is knowledge in
us, because the soul is the subject of knowledge; but this knowledge or
performance of spiritual things is not of us, or from us; for of our selves we
cannot think a good thought. Again, when it is said here; that the principle of
this knowledge is not in us; the meaning is, that the prime or chief principle
is not in us, for that is grace; yet the secondary or subordinate principle of
knowledge is in us, and that is the mind. Lastly, it is said here, that this
principle is not in us, either in act, or in possibility; we must not conceive
that here is meant possibility passive; for there is in us a power to receive
spiritual knowledge, when it is infused, or else we are stones: but here is
meant an active possibility; for we are not agents, but patients, in the first
act of our Conversion, so that there is no power nor possibility in us to
illuminate ours own minds, or to rectify our own wills.


Hence there is no principle of knowledge, or performance of spiritual things
in us, either in act or in possibility.

XVIII. They seek then the house in the ashes, who ascribe to an unregenerate
man free will, or other faculties, by which he may do well, or prepare himself
to his own conversion, or to the acceptance of Gods grace.

For this is the error of Pelagians and Semipelagians.

XIX. Man's will remained free from coaction, but not to good and evil.

XX. Yea, it is free to evil only, and therefore deserves rather to be called
servile then free.

As for the understanding, the natural man comprehends not the things that are
of Gods spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. If you look upon the will, the imagination of man's
heart is only evil, Genesis 8.21. Finally, the Scripture cries out, that the
whole man having lost his spiritual life, lies dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. Col.
2.13.

XXI. Although this sin is pardoned in the sanctified parents, notwithstanding
by generation it is transmitted to posterity.

The reason is, because the corruption dwelling in us, ^ not altogether taken
away by pardon, although the guil^ be done away: and as faith is the gift, not
of generation but of regeneration; so man, not as he is regenerate, but as man,
begets man; even as seeds being winnowed from the ears, chaff and husks, do
spring up again with the same.


CHAP. XI. of Actual Sin.
SO much of Original sin; Actual sin is, whereby Gods law is broken by
thoughts, desires, words, or deeds.

The RULES.
I. According to the diversity of circumstances, there are diverse sins.

II. From the efficient cause; sin is either of public or of private persons,
as they are in more or less dignity.

III. From the matter; which are things thought, desired, said, or done.

IV. From the form; it is either of commission, or omission.

V. From the end; it is either of incogitancy, or of affectation, and against
conscience; and that rather of malice, then of infirmity; or contrarily, rather
of infirmity, then of malice.

VI. From the subject; it is of the soul chiefly, or of the body, or of both.

VII. From the object; it is either committed against God, or our neighbor.

VIII. Sin committed against God, is either with a kind of unwillingnesse, or
with a full desire: this latter sin, the scripture calls, the sin against the
holy Ghost, and to death.

Matt. 11.32. 1 John 5.16.

IX. The sin against the holy Ghost, or to death, is, when one is convicted in
his conscience by the testimony of the holy Spirit, resists notwithstanding
the same, spitefully, wantonly, and with a high-hand.

X. Sin against man, is committed, either against superiors, or inferiors, or
equals; being knit by fewer or more bands of blood, affinity, etc.

XI. From the adjuncts; a sin is either such of it self; or by accident.

Such are scandals, in things otherwise indifferent: see Romans 14.

XII. No sin of its own nature is venial, or so small, as not to merit damnation.

By this maxim, the Popish error, that some sins of themselves are venial, is
condemned; the reason is manifest by the object, and the effect: for there is
no sin, which is not conjoined with the offense of Gods majesty.

XIII. Yet in respect of the event, to wit, Christ's merits and Gods favor, all
sins are pardonable, except final infidelity, and the sin against the holy
Ghost.

Not as though these sins were greater then Grace, and Christ's merit; but
because they resist grace and Christ's merit, and despise both.

XIV. We are to judge of the degrees of other sins, by the circumstances; the
consideration of which does aggravate or lessen them.

Thus the sin of a superior is greater then of an inferior; for sin is so
much the more conspicuous, by how much the more eminent he is that sins. The
sin of desire is greater then the sin of thought alone; A sin committed in word
and deed, is greater then that which is in thought and desire; sin committed
with affectation, is greater then that which is done of incogitancy; the sin of
commission, is greater then o^ omission, if it be in the same kind; the sin
against God, is greater then against man; that sin is greater which is
committed against him, to whom we are most beholding for favors, then against
another; for example, A sin against our Parents is greater, if it be in the
same kind, then against a brother; a scandal against a weak brother, is
greater then against a stronger.


CHAP. XII. Of the miseries which follow sin.
HItherto of sin; now of the misery that follows upon sin: This misery is
either temporal or eternal; both which is either corporal or spiritual.

The RULES.
I. God comprehended all man's misery under the name of death.

Genesis 2.27. What day thou shall eat of it, (to wit of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil) thou shall dye the death.

II. There be four degrees of this death.

III. The first degree, is death spiritual, which is the privation of spiritual
life: of this man being destitute, he lives only to sin.

Rev. 3.1. I know thy works, in that thou art said to live, but thou art dead.

IV. The second degree is the death of affliction, which is the privation of
original happiness, and the inflicting of all sorts of calamities.

Exodus 10.17. Pray to the Lord, that be would remove this death from me.

V. The third decree is death corporal, which is the privation of this life,
and the resolution of the body into dust, and the reversion of the soul to God.

Eccles. 12.9. He shall return to dust, from whence he came, and the soul to
God that gave it. The soul returns to God either as to a Father, or as to a
just Judge: and although by the bounty of Christ, our death is become a passage
from this life to that which is eternal; yet in this place we consider it as it
is in it self.

VI. The fourth degree, is death eternal, or the state of the damned; which in
relation to death corporal, is called the second death.

Revel. 21.8.

VII. We must imagine nothing of the state of the damned, which is not in
Scripture.

VIII. This state consists in the privation of the chief good, and infliction
of the greatest evil.

IX. The privation of the chief good is, whereby they are for ever excluded
from the fellowship of God, and of the blessed.

Mat. 25.41. Go ye cursed.

X. But the chief evil shall be a communion for ever with the Devil and his
Angels.

Mat. 25.41. Into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil, etc.

XI. The place appointed for the damned, is Hell.

XII. But where Hell is, we are not to search or enquire.

XIII. It Is sufficient, that in Scripture it is named Gehennaa, a fiery
Furnaceb, the place of tormentc, a Prisond, a bottomless pite, the lake of
firef, burning with fire and brimstoneg.

a Matthew. 5.22. b Mat. 13.42. c Luke 26.28. d 1 Pet. 3.19. e Rev. 9.1. f Rev.
20.15. g Rev. 21.8.

XIV. In the pains of the damned, we are to consider the multitude, greatness,
and continuance.

XV. Their multiplicity is known, because their torments will be spiritual and
corporal.

XVI. The chiefest of the spiritual pains are, the worm of conscience never
dying:a and that which follows it, an extreme and inexpressible sorrow and
anguishb

a Esa. 66.24. b Romans 2.9.

XVII. The corporal pains are understood by the phrase of unquenchable fire;
for in this life there is no torment greater then that of fire.

Matthew. 13.42. Rev. 20.25.

XVIII. The greatness of the pains is understood by weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

For these be symptoms of the greatest pain and torture, Mat. 22.13.

XIX. But this misery is eternal, where by no deliverance is to be expected by
the reprobate.

Luke 16.26. Between us and you there is a great gulf, that they who would come
to you from hence cannot, nor from thence come hither. Rev. 14. The smoke of
the torment shall ascend for ever and ever.

XX. Those fopperies of the Papists, which they have borrowed out of the
heathen Poets, concerning the place of Infants in hell, and of the Fathers, and
of Purgatory, are savourless, and not worth the refuting.


CHAP. XIII. Of the Moral Law.
Hitherto of the state of Innocence and Misery; now follows the state of Grace
and Glory. The Doctrine of the state of grace has two parts: the one is
concerning a Redeemer, the efficient cause of this state; the other concerning
our calling to this state.

The Redeemer is known by the Law and by the Gospel: by the Law we know the
necessity, by the Gospel the verity of our Redemption.

The Law is that Doctrine whereby God manifests what he will have performed
by us, under the commination of death eternal, and promise of eternal life,
that by apprehending the inability which is in our selves of satisfying the
Law, we may be driven to seek help in Christ.

The RULES.
I. The Law of God given by Moses, differs not really, but in some respect from
the Law of nature planted in Adam, A. R. Therefore all men are bound to obey
the moral Law; not because it was given by Moses, for so the Jews only were
tied to it, but as it is the Law of nature.


the remainders of which are as yet to be found among the Gentiles.

Romans 2.14.15. The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law; these having not a law, are a law to themselves, which
show the work of the law written in their hearts.

II. No man except Christ, has, or can fulfill the Law perfectly.

III. But we are all guilty of the breach and violation of this Law.

Romans 3.23. All have sinned and come short of the glory of God.

IV. We are then doubly miserable, both in that we come short of the promise of
life eternal, and are made guilty of eternal death.

Levit. 18.15, Who does these things shall live by them. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is
he that confirms not all the words of this law to do them.

V. Therefore it requires of us a double satisfaction, if we would have it
fulfilled: for it obliges us to punishment, and to obedience: the commination
of the Law requires that, the Promise requires this.

Therefore these are falsely pronounced disjunctively, to wit, That we are
obliged either to punishment, or to obedience: the Law obliges us to both; for
there is no way to attain life eternal, but in fulfilling the Law, of which
Christ says, do this and thou shall live, Luke 10.28. Therefore albeit we were
free from the guilt and punishment of transgression, yet we cannot attain life
eternal without fulfilling the Law.

VI. Whereas we can neither way satisfy, it bids us seek for both in Christ.

VII. And for this end the Law is renewed after the fall, and as it were
restored from death to life.

For it was given to the first man that he might attain to eternal happiness by
his own obedience, if he pleased: but it is proposed to man since his fall,
that by perceiving his own inability to perform it, he may perform it in
Christ. Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the law unto righteousness, to every
one that believes.

VIII. Therefore the promulgation of the Law on mount Sinai, was a singular
benefit.

IX. The Law was mended by Christ, not as though it had been imperfect, nor as
though Christ had been another Moses to establish a new one, but he only
vindicated it from the Pharisees corrupt glosses.

The Pharisees did expound the Law according to the letter only, and did urge
only outward obedience, as it appears by the refutation of them, Mat. 5.
Therefore the Samosatenians, and their fellows, who accuse the Law of
imperfection, are deceived; for though it be imperfect in respect of us,
because by our fault it is made insufficient to save us; yet in it self it is
perfect, besides it is the perfect Idea of that Justice which is in the Kingdom
of heaven.

X. Therefore falsely do the Pontificians affirm, that the perfection of the Law
consists rather in councels then in precepts.


The Law is either Moral, Ceremonial, or Judicial: the Moral is that which God
comprehended in the ten Commandments.

The Rules for right understanding and explaining the Decalogue, are these
following.

The RULES.
I. The interpretation of every precept, is to be sought out of its next end.

II. Whereas the precepts are most brief, they are aslo Synecdochical: for out
of negatives we must understand affirmatives, and contrarily; so things forbid,
out of things commanded, and on the contrary; out of the species, the genus,
and contrarily; out of the outward worship, we understand the inward, and on
the contrary; out of things done and spoken, desires, counsels and actions; and
finally, out of relatives we are to understand correlatives.

III. One and the same thing may be reduced to diverse precepts in diverse
respects.

IV. A general Law yields to a particular.

V. There is a greater force or emphasis in negatives then affirmatives.

For negatives are of a far larger extent; whereas affirmatives include
circumstances: affirmatives oblige always, but not incessantly; whereas
negatives oblige both always, and incessantly. For example, we are always
bound to do our neighbor good, but not incessantly, for there is not
continually occasions to do him good: on the contrary, it is never lawful to
hurt our neighbor.

VI. Hence there are more negative then affirmative precepts.

VII. Every sin bears the name of that sin, which by name is prohibited.

The reason is, that we may take the more notice of the filthiness of sin; so
Christ's calls a wanton look upon a woman adultery; and John calls hatred
murder, Matthew. 5.28. 1 John 3.5.

VIII. Earthly promises are symbols of heavenly things.

Therefore the Servetans and Anabaptists do falsely dream that these promises
are only earthly: the earthly promises include heavenly: for so it pleased God
to apply himself to that ignorant people, and as yet under the Paedagogie of
the Law.


The parts of the Decalogue are two; the Preface and the Precepts.

The Preface is twofold; the one of Moses, the other of God.

The Preface of Moses is this; Then God spoke all these words.

Gods Preface is this, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of Egypt.

In which words he shows his self-power and full authority in commanding:
drawing reasons, 1. From his divine essence, the symbols whereof, are the names
Jehovah, Elohim: 2. From the Covenant of Grace; the sign whereof, is that
phrase, Thy God: 3. From the benefit of Redemption, the type whereof was, the
delivery of the Israelites out of Egypt.

Of the Commandments there are two Tables; the first is, concerning our duty
toward God, the other our duty toward our neighbor.

The sum of the first Table is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength; which words require both
sincerity and perfection in our love: sincerity, because there is mentioned the
heart, the soul, and all our strength; perfection, because we are bid love God
with all our heart, all our soul, all our strength.

To this Table there belong four Commandments: the first shows who is to be
worshipped for the true God; the second, after what manner he must be
worshipped; the third, how we are to honor his name all our life; the fourth,
at what times the public worship of God is to be maintained.

The sum of the second Table is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self:
this command is like the former; because as that is the sum of the four first
precepts, so this is the sum of the six last, concerning our love toward our
neighbor: to this then belongs the fifth command, of preserving the dignity of
our neighbor; the sixth, of his life; the seventh, of preserving our
neighbors chastity; the eighth, of his estate; the ninth, of his fame; the
tenth, of restraining vicious affections toward our neighbor.

Let this concerning the Moral Law, suffice to evince the necessity of
Redemption; for what good works belong to every Precept, shall be taught in the
second Book.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Ceremonial and Judicial Law.
THe Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, serve as handmaids to the Moral: that to
the first, and this chiefly to the second Table.

The Ceremonial Law is that, in which God commanded certain Ceremonies and
outward Rites, as Types of Christ hereafter to be exhibited.

The RULES.
I. The Ceremonial Law is a Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ, Gal. 3.24.

II. The Ceremonial Law gives place to the Moral.

1. Because it is in a manner the handmaid of the Moral Law. 2. Because it was
not to continue for ever. 3. Because Charity is to be preferred to Ceremonies.
Hence is that of Hosea 6.6. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

III. The Ceremonial Law was, as it were, a handwriting and testimony of that
gift, by which all men were held bound.

Col. 2.14. And putting out the handwriting of Ordinances, that was against
us, which was contrary to us; he even took it out of the way, and fastened it
on the Cross.

IV. The Ceremonial Law then was abolished by Christ's death.

V. The use of it before Christ's death was profitable; after his death, until
the Gospel was spread abroad, it was indifferent; but after the promulgation of
the Gospel, not only was the observation of Ceremonies unwholsom, but also
mortal.

Hence Paul, in the beginning, caused Timothy to be circumcised, because of the
weakness of the Jews, Act. 16.2. but after the Gospel was more fully
manifested, he would not suffer Titus to be circumcised, Gal. 2.2. And surely
at this day to observe Jewish Ceremonies, were to deny Christ's death and coming
in the flesh.

VI. Therefore as the opinion of the Encratites and other ancient Heretics,
whereby they prohibited certain meats as of themselves unclean, was damnable;
so the error of Papists is to be abhorred, who obtrude upon the Church,
Ceremonies partly Jewish, partly Heathenish.


The precepts of the Ceremonial Law, are either of holy persons, or of holy
things: holy persons were in general, all that were initiated by Circumcision,
whereby they were obliged to the observation of the other Ceremonies, and then
were put in mind of Sanctification by Christ.

In particular, holy persons were the Ministers, both ordinary and
extraordinary: the ordinary were the Priests and Levites; the Priests were they
who administered the Law by expounding, sacrificing, making intercession, and
blessing such things as were to be performed to God and men.

The RULES.
I. The High Priest was a type of Christ the High Priest.

II. His rich clothing and ornaments, almost equal to regal robes, were types
of Christ's dignity, and chiefly of his most perfect justice. Luke 3.5.

III. The chief ornaments were the Ephod, or Cloak, and Breast Plate fastened
to the Cloak: on the Ephod were the names of the twelve Tribes engraven upon
precious stones; on the Breast Plate were Vrim and Thummim; from whence the
Church received Oracles: the Cloak then represented the Church; Vrim and
Thummim, that is, light and perfection, did signify Christ the Word and
Interpreter of the Father, our light and perfection; the Ephod represented
Christ, as he performed the things that concerned us; the Breast Plate showed
him, as he performed the things concerning God.


The Levites were they, who being used instead of the firstborn, were to
attend the praises, to keep and to carry the Tabernacle with its utensils.

The extraordinary Ministers were the Prophets and Nazarites.

The Prophets were they, who by divine inspiration teaching and reforming the
Priests and People, were types of Christ the great Prophet.

The Nazarites were they, who by a special vow, abstaining from wine, and
consecrating themselves to God, were types of the holiness of Christ.

In the holy worship, we are to observe the instruments, and the manner of it:
the instruments were the Tabernacle, and the utensils thereof, to wit, the Ark,
the Altars, the Table, and brazen Laver.

The RULES.
I. The Tabernacle was the Type of the Deity, which was to dwell in Christ
bodily.

John 1.14. He dwelt amongst us, as in a Tabernacle, Col. 2.9. In him dwelt the
whole fullness of the Deity bodily.

II. The artificial structure of the Tabernacle, was a type of the spiritual
fabric of the Church, which was to be grounded upon Christ.

Ephesians. 2.20, 21.

III. The removing of the Tabernacle, did figure the Churches pilgrimage here.

IV. The uniformity of the Temple, signified the Unity of Christ and the Church.

V. The parts whereof were three, the Court, the Holy-place, the Holy of Holies.

VI. The Court in which the people met, was a Type of the visible Church, in
which are good and bad.

VII. The Holy-place, was the Court for the Priests, and a Type of the true
members of the Church, that elect and royal Priesthood.

1 Pet. 2.9.

VIII. The Holy of Holies, into which none entered but the High Priest, and
that but once a year, did shadow out the Sanctuary of heaven, into which Christ
was to enter for our good.

IX. The Veil of the Temple garnished with Cherubims, did signify Christ's
flesh, covering as it were the Divine nature.

X. In the Court was the Altar of Burnt-offerings overlaid with brass,
representing Christ's flesh united to the Divinity, and withal his strength of
suffering any thing for us: the Altar also of Incense, intimating Christ's
Intercession for us.

XI. There also was the brazen Laver appointed for washing, which signified,
that we are purged by the blood of Christ, that we may offer to God acceptable
sacrifices.

XII. In the Holy-place or Court of the Priests, was the Table, and on it the
Shewbread, and the golden Candlestick, by which was taught, that Christ is to
his people, meat, drink, and light to life eternal.

XIII. In the same place were the Vessels of Gold, ready for sprinckling, and
Incense; representing both Christ's death and Intercession.

XIV. In the Holy of Holies, was the golden Censer, proper to the High Priest
alone; and there was also the Ark of the Covenant.

XV. The Ark was made of Cedar-wood, and covered with Gold, which represented
both Christ's natures.

XVI. The Tables of the Law, the Manna, and Aarons rod kept within the Ark,
representing Christ, as he teaches, nourishes, and rules his People.

XVII. The cover of the Ark, called the Propitiatory, together with the
Cherubims, from whence God promised to speak with Moses; was the Type of Christ
covering our sins, defending us by his Angels, and expounding to us the word
and counsel of his Father.


The manner of the Levitical service consisted partly in the things that were
offered to God, partly in holy times.

The things that were offered to God, were sacrifices both Expiatory, or of
Propitiation; and Eucharistical, or of Thanksgiving.

The Expiatory sacrifice, or Peace Offering was, when the faithful witnessed by
the killing and offering of living creatures, that they, in themselves were
guilty of death, and that they placed their confidence in the blood of Christ
as of that immaculate Lamb, who was to be offered afterward for the sins of the
world.

The sacrifice of Thanksgiving was offered either for all sins, or for some
certain sins.

The sacrifice that was offered for all sins, was called a Holocaust or
burnt-offering; for it was performed by burning the whole sacrifice.

The sacrifice for certain sins, called the Sacrifice of Redemption, was either
for the sin it self, or for the guilt thereof.

The Sinne-offering was, when a sin was expiated, which had been committed
out of error or ignorance. See Levit. 4.2, 3.

The sacrifice for the guilt, called the Trespas-offering, was, when a sin was
expiated which had been done wittingly, yet out of infirmity. Lev. 5. and 7.

The Eucharistical sacrifice, or Offering of Thanksgiving, was to testify the
gratitude of the offerer. These were performed by offering of gifts only, or
by offering of living creatures also.

The sacrifice of gifts, called Libatio, or Meat Offering, was that, in which
meat, drink, oil, salt, frankincense, etc. were offered.

The sacrifice of Living-creatures, was performed either by burning the fat of
the sacrifice, or by killing and eating of the beasts also: That was called,
the Sacrifice of Pacification; This, the Sacrifice of Praise.

The holy times, were either of days, or of years.

Of days were, 1. The morning of each day, and the two evenings, in which the
daily sacrifice was offered. 2. The seventh or Sabbath Day, which was a type of
that sanctification and rest which was to be obtained by Christ. 3. The Calends
or New Mons, or first day of the month.

The times of the years, were either anniversary, or every year, or else
after the expiration of diverse years.

The anniversary Solemnities were either greater or lesser.

The greater were, the Feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and of Tabernacles.

The feast of Easter was celebrated the fiftieth day of the first month, as a
remembrance of the peoples delivery from Egypt, and as a type of their future
delivery by Christ.

The feast of Pentecost was kept the fifty day after Easter, as a memorial of
the Law given upon mount Sinai, and as a type of that new Law which was to be
written in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who was to be sent afterward in a
visible form. At this feast were off^red the first fruits: hence it was called
the Feast of the first fruits.

The feast of Tabernacles was solemnized the fifteenth day of the seventh
month, as a remembrance of that gracious preservation of the Israelites in the
desert in tents, and as a type of Christ's incarnation: Thanks also were given
to God, at this feast, for the fruits and harvest; whence it was called the
Feast of Collection.

The lesser solemnities were, The feast of Trumpets celebrated the first day of
the seventh month, in which the civil year had its beginning; the feast also
of Expiation, which fell out upon the tenth day of the same month: That did
represent the sounding of the Gospel; this, of our atonement to be made by
Christ.

The Solemnities that were kept after diverse years, were the Sabbathical year,
and the year of Jubilee.

The Sabbathical year, or year of weeks, was every seventh year, in which there
was a cessation from tilling the ground, and from demanding of debts.

The year of Jubilee was every fiftieth year, in which all possessions
returned to their owners, and the Hebrew servants were set free; A type of our
freedom from Sin and Satan by Christ.

So much for the Ceremonial Law: the Judicial Law was that which belonged to
the constituting of the Jewish Commonwealth.

The RULES.
I. As the Ceremonial Law had relation to God; so the Judicial, to our
Neighbor.

II. The Judicial Law binds us in those things that agree with the Moral Law,
and were of common right.

III. But what was of private right, and commanded for the Jewish Commonwealth
in particular, do no more bind us, then the Municipal Laws of other
Commonwealths.


CHAP. XV. Of the Gospel, and how it agrees with and differs from the Law.
HItherto we have seen out of the Law the necessity of Redemption: now we are
to see the truth thereof, in the Gospel.

The Gospel is the joyful news, or the Doctrine of the Son of God, being sent
into this world, that he might assume our nature, and might undergo the curse
of the Law for us; that by his perfect obedience to the same, he might obtain
life eternal to us.

The RULES.
I. The Law and Gospel agree in the chief efficient cause, to wit God, and in
the instrumental, namely the written Word; but they differ in their outward
instrumental causes: both because the Law was delivered by Moses, and the
Gospel by Christ fully; and also because the Law is by nature known to man, but
the Gospel is not, except by Gods gracious revelation.

II. They agree in their common matter, because on both sides obedience is
required by promises and threatenings: but they differ in their particular
matter; for the Law principally teaches what we must do, and the Gospel, what
we must believe.

III. They agree in their common form; because on both sides the Looking-glass
of perfect obedience is exhibited: but they differ in their proper form; for
the Law teaches, what is that righteousness which is perfect, and most
pleasing to God; but the Gospel shows where, or in whom we are to find that
perfect righteousness; the Law requires it of us, the Gospel shows where it is
to be found, namely in Christ.

IV. They agree in their principal end, to wit in Gods glory; and in the next
subordinate end to it, namely our salvation, which on either side is seen: but
they differ in their particular ends; for the Law was given to that end, that
it might drive us to seek Christ; but the Gospel, that it might exhibit Christ.

V. They agree in the common object, namely in man lapsed: but they differ in
their proper object; for the proper object of the Law, is man, as he is to be
terrified and humbled; but of the Gospel, man as he is terrified and humbled.

VI. They agree in their common adjuncts, to wit, holiness, goodness and
perfection, which both Law and Gospel have, being considered in themselves; but
they differ in this, that by accident, and by reason of our weakness, the Law
without the Gospel is insufficient to save us.

VII. It is apparent by this comparing of the Law and Gospel, after what manner
these two are proposed in Scripture as subordinate and opposite the one to the
other.

VIII. They are opposite in respect of man as he is regenerate or irregenerate,
but they are subordinate in the regenerate man.

They are proposed by the Apostle as opposites, Romans 6.14. You are not, says
he, under the law, but under grace. Here he points out the state of man, before
and after regeneration. The unbeliever is said to be under the Law. 1. Because
he is under the curse of the Law. 2. Because he is under the rigor of the Law,
by which it requires perfect righteousness, and obedience. 3. Because he takes
occasion to sin from the Law; according to that, We always incline to forbidden
things, and desire that which is denied us: see Romans 7.8. But the Believer is
said to be under grace. 1. Because he is freed from the curse of the Law. 2.
Because he is delivered from the rigor of the Law, and that exaction of
perfect righteousness; to wit, that which Christ has performed. 3. Because he
is delivered from the dominion of sin, so that he takes not any longer from the
Law occasion to sin, but begins to yield obedience to the Law, by the operation
of the Holy Ghost, that he might give witness of his thankfulness. But they are
set out as subordinate, when Christ is said to be the end of the Law, Romans
10.4. when it is called a Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. and
when the Law is said not to be contrary to him who does the works of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22.23. For that righteousness which the Law requires, that the
Gospel exhibites in Christ, to the believer; and albeit we cannot in this life
yield full satisfaction to the law, yet the regenerate begin to obey it, by the
grace of sanctification.


CHAP. XVI. Of the Person of Christ God and man.
THe parts of the Gospel concerning Christ our Redeemer, are two; the first is
of his Person, the other of his Office.

In respect of the Person, the Redeemer is God and man; that is, Gods eternal
Son, being incarnate or made man, in the fullness of time.

1 Ioh. 1.14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us. Gal. 4.4. But
after the fullness of time came, God sent his Son made of a woman. 1 Timothy 3.16.
and without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, God made manifest
in the flesh.

The RULES.
I. The Incarnation of Christ originally, is the work of the whole blessed
Trinity; but terminatively, or in respect of the object, it is the work of the
Son alone.

For the Son only assumed man's nature; which the Father in the Son, by the
Holy Ghost, formed of the substance of the blessed Virgin.

II. The Person of Christ is considered, either disjunctively, as the Word, and
the eternal Son of God; or conjunctively, as God and man: the first
consideration is according to Divinity; the latter according to Oeconomie, or
Gods gracious dispensation.

III. Likewise the divine nature is considered, either in it self, and simply;
or relatively, as it is in the Person of the Word by dispensation.

IV. Although then it be true, that Christ God is become man; yet it follows
not, that therefore the Divinity is incarnate; or, because the Son is
incarnate, that the Father also and Holy Ghost are incarnate.

V. The matter out of which the incarnation was effected, is the seed of the
woman, or of the blessed Virgin. Genesis 3.15.

VI. The form of it consists in the Personal Union, whereby the Word was made
flesh; and Christ remained the same he was, and became what he was not.

VII. The end is Gods glory, and our salvation.

VIII. Both the truth of God, as also our salvation, do evince the necessity
of Christ's incarnation.

IX. The truth of God: because in the Old Testament, it was uttered by diverse
Prophesies; and was shadowed by diverse types.

These are the chief Prophesies. Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and
thou shall bruise his heel. Genesis 22.18. In thy seed all nations shall be
blessed. Esai. 7.4. Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son,
and they shall call his name Emanuel. Esai. 9.6, 7. For unto us a Child is
born, and unto us a Son is given. Jer. 23.5. Behold, the days shall come, in
which I will raise to David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and
prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice on the earth: In his days
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is his name
whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness. But his types were the
Tabernacle, the Ark of the Covenant, and such like, of which we have said: but
chiefly Melchisedeck, without Father, without Mother, Hebr. 7.3. and, that
humane shape or form in which he appeared of old frequently to the Fathers.

X. Our salvation for this cause does evince and prove the necessity of his
Incarnation, in that we could not be saved, but by such a Redeemer, who was
both God and man in one person, or God-man.

XI. That he should be God, was requisite, in respect of both parties: on the
one side the majesty of God required it; on the other side, our wants, the
greatness of the evil that was to be removed, and the good that was to be
restored.

Such is the majesty of God, that no man could interpose himself, but he who
was one with the Father: the very Angels durst not do this, because they also
stood in need of Christ the Mediator, Col. 1.16, 17. Because they being
compared with God, are unclean, Job. 15.15. and for that cause, they cover
their faces in Gods presence, Isa. 6.2. How much less then could any man
intercede, whereas there is not one just Person? Romans 3.10. The evil that was
to be taken away, was sin; and the consequents of sin, the wrath of God, the
power of Satan; both temporal and eternal death: Now I pray, by whose suffering
could that infinite Majesty be satisfied, which was offended, unless by his
suffering, who was also Infinite? By whose Intercession could the wrath of God
be appeased, but by his only, who is that best beloved Son of God? By whose
strength could Satan with the whole power of darkness be overcome, except by
his, who in power exceeds all the Devils? who finally could overcome death,
except he who had the power over death? Heb. 2.15. But the good things that
were to be restored, were perfect righteousness, adoption into sons, the Image
of God, the gifts of the Holy Ghost, life eternal and such like: but now, who
could bestow that righteousness on us, except he who is justice it self? Who is
so fit to make us the sons of God, as he who is by nature the Son of God? Who
was so fit to restore in us the Image of God, as he who is himself the image of
the invisible God? Who can bestow on us the holy Spirit so assuredly, as he
from whom the Spirit proceeds? Who at last can give us life eternal, but he
who is life it self? Joh. 1.4.

XII. That he might be man, the justice of God required; which as it leaves not
sin unpunished, so it punishes not sin but in that nature which sinned.

The first branch of this Rule is plain, both by the justice, and by the truth
of God: By his justice, because God by this does not only resist, but also
punish sin, Psalm. 5.5, 6, 7. For thou art not a God that have pleasure in
wickedness, nor shall evil dwell with thee: the foolish shall not stand in thy
sight; thou hate all workers of iniquity; thou shall destroy them that speak
lies: the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man. Now by the truth of
God; because the threatening which was given before the fall, could not be in
vain: therefore Socinus is idle and foolish, who (that he might overthrow the
merit of Christ) feigns such a justice of God, which does not necessarily
inflict eternal death, or require satisfaction; and which in this respect can
be content to lose its own right: but if sins are to be punished, they were
surely to be punished in our nature: for to man the Law was given, and to man
death was threatened; therefore it lies upon man to suffer the punishment.

XIII. It was requisite that God and man should be united in one Person, that
he might be a Mediator between God and us.

He was therefore the medium between God and man, that is, he was at the same
time God and man, that he might perform those things which were to be effected
toward God and man, Heb. 5.1. These works of God and man do require both
natures in the same person, of which in the next Chapter more at large.


The parts of Christ's Incarnation are two; to wit, the Conception, and the
Nativity.

In the Conception three things, for the better understanding, are
considerable; the forming, the assuming, and the personal union of the humane
nature.

The forming of the humane nature of Christ, is that whereby it was produced
without the help of man, of the Virgins blood, by the operation of the Holy
Ghost.

The RULES.
I. The Holy Ghost is not the material, but the efficient cause of Christ's
conception: For he was conceived not of his substance, but by his power; not by
generation, but by his commanding force and benediction. Aug.

II. The next or proximate matter was the blood of the blessed Virgin.

III. the form of Christ's conception, consists in the preparing and
sanctifying of the Virgins blood by the virtue of the Holy Ghost, in the
forming of the body, whereby together at the same instant it was made perfect,
and not successively as the bodies of other men are: Lastly, in the inspiring
of the reasonable soul.

Whereas forty days are appointed in ordinary generation for the time of
forming the embryo; the body of Christ was perfected in a moment; otherwise not
Christ the man, but an embryo had been conceived.

IV. The end of Christ's miraculous conception was, that he might be free from
Original sin; for this sticks close to all that are of and by Adam, that is, to
all who are naturally descended from him: but it was needful that Christ
should be born without sin, that we might have a holy High Priest, Heb. 7.17.


The assumption of the humane nature is, whereby Christ assumed truly a humane
soul and body, with all their affections, proprieties, and infirmities, yet
without sin.

The RULES.
I. Christ assumed not man, but the humanity; not the person, but the nature.

For otherways he had not been God-man and one person, but two persons, and so
there had been two Christ's. The Scripture styles him Emanuel, because the same
who is with us, that is to say, who is man, is also God, Isa. 7.14. the same
eternal Word is said to be made flesh, Joh. 1.1. and the same is called both
David's Son and his Lord, Mat. 22.42.

II. And not only did he assume a true humane body, consisting of three
dimensions; and a true soul; but also the essential Properties.

III. Yea, and he took our infirmities too; but not those damnable ones; but
such as were faultlesse and miserable.

These infirmities are either of the body, or of the soul. Again, the
infirmities of the body are from external causes; as the calamities and
torments inflicted by enemies: Or they have their being from some internal
cause, and they follow wholly our nature, since it fell front its primitive
happiness; as to be cold, to be hot, to thirst, to hunger, to be in pain, to
grow weary, and such like: But the infirmities of the soul, are sadness,
fear, ignorance, etc.

IV. So likewise he took upon him our affections, but free from all disorder,
or inclination to evil.


The Personal Union is, whereby the Person of the Son of God did communicate
his Hypostasis or Personality to the humane nature; and he so knit it to
himself, and with his divine nature, that the propriety of both natures being
entire, he is in one Person God and man.

The RULES.
I. Christ's humane nature has no other, or particular Hypostasis or
subsistence, then that of the Word, that is, of the Son of God.

In this point, Christ differs from all other men; because every man has a
peculiar Hypostasis or manner of subsisting, by which he differs from other
Persons; besides his Essence, consisting of body and soul: but Christ's humane
nature wanting a proper subsistence, is assumed into the fellowship of the
Hypostasis of the divine nature: neither do we infer from hence, that the
humane nature in Christ, in this point, is more inferior then in other men;
for it is so much the more excellent in Christ, by how much the subsistence of
the Son of God exceeds other creatures.

II. For the better conceiving of this mystery, it is expedient that we show
how the humane nature was, and was not united to the Son of God.

III. It was not united coessentially, as the Persons in the Godhead are
united; not essentially, only, and virtually; as the essence of Christ is
present to all; not by way of assistance, or by the presence of grace only;
not naturally, as the matter and form are united; not by way of convenience, as
one friend to another; not mystically only, as Christ dwells in the faithful;
not Sacramentally, as he is in the holy Supper; but Hypostatically, and
personally; that is to say (that we may more fully explain our selves, for
avoiding the Eutychian and Nestorian Heresy) 1 Immutably, without changing of
the divine Person. 2. Indivulsably, without pulling asunder the natures, with
Nestorius. 3. Inconfusedly, without confounding the natures, with Eutyches. 4.
Inseparably.

IV. There are three effects of the Personal Union: the communication of
property; the excellency of the humane nature; and the cooperation of both
natures in these common works of God and man.

V. The communication of Properties, is a manner of speaking, whereby that
which belongs to either nature is predicated of the Person of Christ, which way
soever it is called.

This is either directly done, or indirectly: directly, when that which belongs
to the divine nature is predicated of the Person so nominated from the divine
nature; even so are things denominated from the humane nature, which belong to
the humane nature: John 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was
with God, and the word was God, etc. Luke 18.32. The Son of man shall be
delivered to the Gentiles; he shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and
spit upon. Indirectly, when that which belongs to the Divinity is enunciated or
said of Christ as man; and what appertains to the humanity, is spoken of Christ
as God: as Joh. 3.13. No man has ascended to heaven, but he that descended, to
wit, the Son of man which is in heaven. Act. 20.28. God has purchased the
Church with his own blood.

VI. This communication is verbal or real; verbal in respect of the manner of
speaking, but real in respect of the foundation; to wit, of the personal union.

For as both natures truly subsist in the Person of the Son of God, so the
properties of both natures are common to him.

VII. But here we must distinguish the concrete words from the abstract; for
those belong to the Person, but these to either Nature.

Therefore I may truly say, God is man, and man is God; but not likewise the
Deity is the humanity, or the humanity the Deity: for even in natural things
there is this difference, many things are opposite in the abstract, which in
the concrete, are but diverse or subordinate: for we say rightly, that is
corporeal which is animate; and something corporeal is animate; but we cannot
say, that the soul is the body, or that the body is the soul: so all Christ
is every where, but not all of Christ or both natures.

VIII. The excellency of Christ's humane nature, consists partly in those
gifts which proceed from the grace of union, and partly in the honor of
adoration.

IX. Among his gifts, we are chiefly to consider his Knowledge and Power.

X. Although that eternal knowledge which is an essential property of the
Divine nature, is not transfused into the Humane nature; yet in this humane
nature there is a threefold knowledge, to wit, a donative, an infused, and an
experimental.

XI. The donative, called also the Knowledge of the blessed, is that whereby
the humane nature being most nearly united to the Divine essence, sees the
same, though it cannot comprehend it.

For a finite thing cannot comprehend an infinite; it sees God all, but not
altogether or totally.

XII. The infused knowledge is that, whereby Christ being anointed by the Holy
Ghost, knows all heavenly things, which otherwise cannot be seen but by the
light of grace.

XIII. The experimental knowledge is that, by which Christ knows the things
that are intelligible by the light of nature; conceiving the effects out of
their causes, and the causes out of their effects, etc.

XIV. Albeit both in his donative and infused knowledge he excels Angels and
men, yet this differs from his eternal omnisciencie.

XV. Ignorance is opposite to his experimental knowledge: which A. R. It is
said here, that Ignorance is attributed to Christ; This cannot be meant
properly; for it was not fit there should be ignorance in him, who came to cure
our ignorance: And if ignorance be the want of that knowledge which ought to be
in us, 't must needs be sin in whomsoever it is. There is a difference between
these two phrases: Not to know, and to be ignorant: for ignorance is the
privation of knowledge, which is a habit; and that was not in him, in whom were
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And so Peter, Joh. 21. and all
the Disciples, Joh. 16. confess that Christ knew all things. But not to know,
signifies the suspension of the act of knowledge only, which can be no
privation in him that has the habit. To wink, is not to be blind; for he that
winks has the habit of sight, which a blind man wants. Again, to know in
Scripture is sometime to make known; as Genesis 22. Now I know that thou fear
me; that is, I have made it known. So, not to know, is not to make known, by
the rule of contraries. So, Christ knew not the last day; that is, he made it
not known, or he did not know that day to reveal it. So when Christ is said to
increase in knowledge, is not meant that he was ignorant, but that he attained
to the knowledge which he had before, after another manner then he did before,
that is, experimentally now, habitually before.


ignorance is attributed to Christ; for in this kind of knowledge he is said to
increase, Luke 2.52

XVI. Such is the power of his humane nature, that in this also it is superior
to men and Angels: for it received an instrumental power to work miracles; but
the principal or omnipotent power was reserved for the Word, which makes use
of the humane nature as of an instrument.

XVII. The adoration of the Humane nature is an honor that follows upon the
Personal union; yet this adoration is not of the flesh as flesh, nor of the
creature, but of God in the created flesh.

XVIII. The thing that follows upon the Hypostatical union, is the meeting of
both Natures in those works which are called (...), that is, of God-man; and
(...), or Perfections: in which these four things are considerable. 1. The
worker, Christ himself. 2. The principles by which he works, to wit, the two
Natures. 3. The force of energie, or the twofold action according to the
twofold nature. 4. The external work it self, in which those actions are united.

This is made clear by the similie of a Fiery-sword; in which, 1. We see the
unity of the sword. 2. The two principles of working, to wit the sword and the
fire. 3. Two actions, cutting and burning. 4. One work, the thing cut and
burned.


So much of Christ's Conception. His Nativity is, whereby Christ according to
the usual time being carried in the Virgins womb, was at length born and
brought forth to light.

Luc. 2.6, 7. So it was, that while thy were there, the days were accomplished
that she whould be delivered, and she brought forth her firstborn Son.

The RULES
I. We firmly believe Christ's nativity, against the Jews.

The confirmation is twofold, The first out of the Prophets: because the places
in which he should be born and educated, in which he should teach and suffer,
are wasted; and the time is past, in which according to Prophetical oracles he
was to come. For he was to he born in Bethlehem, Mich. 5.2. to be educated in
Nazareth, Esa. 11.1. and to enter Jerusalem while the second Temple stood,
Zach. 9.9. Hag. 2, 7.9. and that when the fourth Monarchy was abolished, Dan.
2.44. the Scepter not being totally departed from the Jews, Genesis 49.10. But
Bethlehem, Nazareth, Jerusalem, and the second Temple are long since destroyed,
that fourth Monarchy is abolished, and the Scepter totally departed from Judah:
The Messiah then is doubtless come. The second confirmation is taken from the
agreement of Luke's Evangelical History concerning Christ's nativity, with the
Prophetical oracles concerning the time of the Messiah's coming, Genesis 49.10. of
his Pedigree, Jer. 23.5. of the Virgin his mother, Esa. 7.14 of his Country,
Mich. 5.2. Lastly, concerning his condition, Esa. 53.2.

II. The Nativity (to speak properly) is not of the hummanity), but of the man
Christ; not of the nature, but of the A. R. The Nativity is of the Nature as of
the Terminus, but of the Person as of the Subject: for the Person is begot, and
so is the Nature; this terminative, that subjective.


person.

III. There be two generations of the Son: the one eternal, to wit of the
Father; the other temporal, namely of the Virgin his mother. There be also two
Filiations or Sonships; by the one whereof he is the Son of the Father, by the
other the Son of Mary.

IV. Yet we must not say there is a double Son, or two Sons; for he is not two
Persons, but one Person and two Natures.

V. Therefore Mary is to be named not only the Mother of Christ, with the
Nestorians; but also the Mother of God.

VI. The nativity of Christ is both natural and supernatural: Natural, as he
was born in the usual time by the opening of the womb; Supernatural, as he was
begot of a Virgin.

The Papists, under pretense of maintaining Mary's Virginity, affirm that
Christ was born of Mary without pain, the womb being shut. Now although we
leave it as a thing doubtful, whether Mary's Childbearing was without pain or
not, as the Ancients thought: yet we deny that Christ came out the womb being
shut; when in plain terms the Law is applied to her, which requires, That
every male which opens the womb shall be holy to the Lord, Luc. 2.23.
Neither does Mary's Virginity consist in this, that her womb was not opened in
her childbirth; but in this, that she was not known of man.

VII. We believe also that Mary continued a Virgin after her childbirth: For
her marriage with Joseph did not consist in the generation of children, but in
her education, and holy conjunction of life with him.

VIII. Although Christ had no other brothers born after him, yet he is rightly
called Mary's first-begotten Son.

In Scripture Christ is called the firstborn, four manner of ways. 1. In
respect of eternal generation, by which he was begot before all creatures, Col.
1.15. 2. In respect of election and dignity, whereby he is the firstborn
amongst brethren, Romans 8.22. 3. In respect of his resurrection, whereby he is
the first-begotten from the dead, Col. 1.18. 4. In respect of his nativity of
the Virgin, Luc. 2.7. Now he is not only called firstborn, whom other brothers
do follow; but he also who is born before others, although he be indeed the
only begotten, or he whom other brothers do not follow; whence such a one, even
before he had any brothers, was consecrated to God, as if he had been the
firstborn.

IX. The fruit of Christ's nativity is showed, both in ^he speech and song of
the Angels.

Their speech is, Luc. 2.10, 11. Then the Angel said to the shepherds, Fear
not; for behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy that shall be to all
people, that this day there is born to you a Savior in the City of David,
which is Christ the Lord. Now the song is, Glory to God on high, Peace on
earth, Good will toward men. Ibid. v. 14.


CHAP. XVII. Of the Office of Christ the Mediator.
HItherto we have spoken of the Person of Christ our Redeemer; the office of
his Mediatorship is that, whereby as God-man he was to perform those things
which for our salvation were to be performed between God and us.

The RULES.
I. Christ in respect of his Mediatorship is fitly called Jesus, Messiah,
Christ, and Lord.

II. Christ is the Mediator of Angels and men, but not after the same manner;
for he is Mediator to those in respect of their gracious union with God, but of
these in respect of reconciliation and redemption.

III. The efficient cause of this office, is the whole blessed Trinity; but the
Father, by way of excellency.

Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine el ct in whom my soul
delights. and 49.1. The Lord has called me from the womb. Psalm. 110.4. The
Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedek. Heb. 5.5. Christ glorified not himself to be made an
High Priest, but he that said to him, thou art my Son, to day I have begot thee.

IV. The subject of this office is not only all Christ, but the whole Christ,
for he is Mediator according to both natures.

This is denied by the Samosatenians and Pontificians, who teach that Christ
was Mediator only according to his humanity. But this rule is grounded upon a
most firm reason: for if the works of the Mediator be the perfect operations of
God and man, in which is required not only the action of man, but of God also;
then doubtless this office is attributed to Christ, even according to his
Divinity: but the former is true, and therefore the latter. The assumption may
be proved by examples; without the operation of the Deity, neither can he
declare the hid wisdom of God, nor illuminate our minds: without the power of
the Deity, neither could his satisfaction obtain the honor of merit with God,
nor could his Intercession be effectual: without the Deity, neither could he
have sustained that heavy burden of Gods wrath, nor had he been able to subdue
or abolish death and Satan: without the virtue of the Deity, neither could he
have saved his Church, nor have subdued his enemies. Neither is it any
hindrance to this Truth, that there is one Mediator of God and man, the man
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. for there the word man, is not the word of the
nature, but of the person: and when he is said to be the Mediator of God and
man, it is presupposed that the Mediation is hypostatical, as Christ is God and
man. In the interim there are many testimonies which prove the operation of the
Deity, Act. 20.28. God redeemed the Church by his own blood. Heb. 9.14. By the
eternal Spirit he offered himself. Joh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from all sin. And although the Son be the Party offended, yet it
hinders not but that he may be Mediator to himself. For as properly
Righteousness is called in respect of another, but analogically in respect of
us: so Mediation is properly in reference to others, but analogically in
relation to the Mediator himself. Christ indeed being absolutely considered is
the offended party; yet the same is Mediator, in that he has undertaken this
office in himself of an Intercessor by a gracious dispensation: No otherways
then if the son of a King, who being as much offended by Rebellion as his
Father, should notwithstanding plead for the Rebels, and reconcile them to his
Father.

V. The object of Christ's office is God offended, and man the offender.

VI. The manner whereby he is called to this office, consists in that
plentiful unction of Christ, by which he received the gifts of the Spirit
without measure in respect of us.

Psalm. 45.8. God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness,
above thy fellows. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he
has anointed me. Joh. 3.34. God gave him not the Spirit by measure.

VII. The end of this office is, that by whom God created all things, by him he
might to himself reconcile all things, Col. 1.20.

VIII. Christ is Mediator both in merit and efficacy; in merit, because he has
most fully satisfied for us; in efficacy, because he does effectually apply
this merit to us.

Hence again it is apparent that this office is administered by him, not only
according to his humanity, but according to his divinity also; to wit, without
which neither could his merit be of infinite value, nor could it be applied to
us. He does then save and quicken us, he pardons our sins, and hears our
prayers; in his humane nature by his merit; in his divine, by his efficacy.

IX. Christ is the sole and one Mediator.

Act. 14.12. For in no other is there salvation, nor is there any other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. 1 Timothy 2.5. There is
one Mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus.


This office of Christ is threefold, Prophetical, Sacerdotal, and Regal. His
Prophetical office was, to instruct his Elect in heavenly Truths: the parts
whereof are, the external Preaching of Gods will, and the internal illumination
of the mind.

His Sacerdotal office is, to appear for us before God, with full satisfaction,
and to intercede for us: the parts whereof are, Satisfaction and Intercession.

His Regal office is, to rule and preserve the Church: the parts whereof are,
the Government of the Church, and the destruction of his enemies.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Humiliation of Christ.
SO much of the Person and Office of the Mediator Christ: the State thereof, is
the condition in which Christ as God-man did execute his office of
Mediatorship; and this is either of his Humiliation, or of his Exaltation. The
State of Humiliation is, in which he took the form of a Servant, being in the
form of God, and gave obedience to his Father for us; he died, and was buried,
and went down to Hell: And in this state he so performed his Prophetical,
Sacerdotal, and Regal office, that in a manner he stripped himself of the form
and glory of the Divinity.

He did not cast off the Divinity, but had it in the assumed form of a servant:
And although the Deity of Christ did manifest it self in the state of his
Humiliation, chiefly by miracles; yet this was little in comparison of that
glorious manifestation of him in his Exaltation.

In the state of Humiliation he performed his Prophetical office, not only
mediately, by sendding John Baptist his Herald before, and by the Apostles
whom he called; but also immediately to his lost sheep, especially of Israel,
by preaching to them the heavenly Truth, with great constancy, patience, and
efficacy, both of his doctrine and miracles.

But his Sacerdotal office he administered in this state, making a most full
satisfaction, and an humble intercession for us.

The satisfaction of Christ is that, whereby he being subject to the Law for
us, did undergo the curse due to our sins, and performed most perfectly
obedience to the Law which was required of us, and so has freed us from the
curse, and has restored us to life.

This consists in suffering the pains, and in perfect justice; in that is
seen chiefly his passive, in this his active obedience.

I do purposely add this restriction, that we may not think his active and
passive obedience so to differ, as if the suffering of the punishment consisted
only in his passive obedience, and his perfect justice only in his active;
for they differ not in time, seeing both of them continued from the first
moment of his incarnation till his death. Nor do they differ in subject,
because the same obedience in a different respect is both active and passive;
and consequently Christ's obedience is an active passion, and a passive action:
for as passion is a receiving of the punishment, it is called passive
obedience; but as it is a testimony of his great love, it may be called active.
Neither is the division of obedience into active and passive, a division into
parts, but only a distinction taken from the end; to wit, the twofold
satisfaction, for punishment, and for life eternal: The curse upon the
transgressors of the Law requires the former, Deuteronomy. 27.26. The promise of life
under the condition of perfect obedience and righteousness requires the latter,
Lev. 18.15. Therefore we are said Analogically by that one and most perfect
satisfaction of Christ, both to be freed from the punishment, because he
suffered the punishment for us, and to be invested in the right of life
eternal, because he fulfilled the Law for us.

The suffering of punishment is, whereby he undertook upon himself the
punishment due to us, and offered himself of his own accord a holy Sacrifice to
God for us. This consists both in the sufferings which went before his great
and last Passion, but especially in this last agony.

The RULES.
I. No part of Christ's Passion must be excluded from A. R. Christ's passions
were truly satisfactory, if, 1. We consider the greatness of his love. 2. The
greatness and multitude of his sufferings. 3. The dignity of his Person. 4. The
holiness of his life.


his Satisfaction.

The reason, because he did not suffer for himself in any thing, but all for us.

II. Therefore those innumerable sufferings which Christ endured until his
last journey to Jerusalem, are not to be separated from the price of Christ's
redemption; for although the Passion of Christ which went before his last agony,
might be called a preparative to his death, yet it is indeed an integral part
of satisfaction.

As it cannot be denied, that the payment of an hundred pounds by him who owes
diverse tuns of gold, is an integral part of the payment, although it be but a
small sum in respect of the whole and principal debt.

III. Yet the Scripture synecdochically, and by way of excellency, does
describe his last passion as the price of our Redemption; and his death or
oblation on the altar of the cross, as an expiatory sacrifice.

Of this see the 9. and 10. chapters to the Hebrews.

IV. The principal efficient cause of this Passion was the Holy Trinity; the
ministering causes were Christ's enemies, both Jews and Gentiles.

V. The Person that suffered for us, is not the Father, nor the Holy Ghost, but
the Son of God.

VI. Although God is rightly said to suffer, yet the Godhead suffered not: God
suffered in the flesh, not with the flesh.

VII. The sufferings of Christ were diverse, of which there were three ranks; to
wit, some before his death, death it self, and some after death.

VIII. Of those that went before his death, some were internal, some external.

IX. The internal were his sadness, anxieties, and tortures, proceeding from
the fierceness of Gods wrath, and the conflict he had with that tentation of
dereliction, which cast him into that bloody sweat, and made him cry out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me!

X. But although he wrested with the tentation of dereliction, yet he fell not
into desperation; neither did he yield to the tentation, but overcame it by a
strong confidence in his God.

The undoubted argument of his victory was this, That in his greatest agony he
failed not to call God his God.

XI. His external sufferings were the tortures of his body, which he endured
in a manner in all his members and senses: for his head was torn with thorns,
and beat with reeds; his face was defiled with spitle, and bruised with
bufferings; his ears were wounded with scoffs and railings; his eyes were
troubled with the mourning of his Mother and his disciples; his tongue was
scorched with thirst, and poisoned with vinegar and gall; his body was stripped,
and torn with whipping, and the same was fastened to the Cross, his hands and
feet being pierced with nails, and was hanged between Thieves; his sinews were
racked, and his side was peirced with a lance.

XII. The Cross was chosen to die on, which was no ordinary kind of death,
but an accursed one; for of old it was made execrable by the mouth of God.

Cursed is he that hangs on a Tree. Deuteronomy. 21.22.

XIII. A. R. * In Christ's death, the Personal Union was not dissolved: This is
true; and the reason is, because the gifts of God are without repentance: now
the Hypostatical Union is the greatest of his gifts, which could not be lost
without sin; and sin could not be in him, who came to save sinners: its true,
Christ seems to grant a dereliction, when he says, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? But these words do not show any dereliction or dissolution of
the personal union in death, for Christ spoke them whilst he was alive: they
only show, that Christ was left to tread the wine press alone; and yet he was
not alone, for the Father is with me, says he. Christ was alone and forsaken
in respect of deliverance, but not alone nor forsaken in respect of the Divine
presence and assistance, without which he could not have performed that great
work of our redemption. In that the Father left him in the hands of his
enemies, and did not deliver him, he might be said to forsake him. But it may
be objected, that Christ's soul was the medium of the union between the
Divinity and Christ's body: This medium being gone, how could the extremes
cohere? I answer, in this union the soul was the medium of congruity, not of
necessity; for the Divinity was united to Christ's body in the Virgins womb,
before the soul was infused, or else he could not have bin conceived by the
Holy Ghost. So might the Divinity be united still to the body, after the soul
was separated. The soul indeed being aspirit, was a fit medium to unite the
Deity to the body, but not absolutely necessary.


In Christ's death, the Personal Union was not dissolved; the soul indeed was
severed from the body, but neither of them from the Personality, or Hypostasis
of the son of God.

XIV. The sufferings that followed his death, were not joined with any pain,
yet they wanted not disgrace or ignominy; such was his burial, and the three
days lying in the grave.

XV. His burial was a part of his sufferings, whereby Christ's body, no
otherwise then the carcasses of other men, was cast into the grave.

XVI. His three days detention or stay in the grave, is the last degree of his
Humiliation; at which time his soul being translated to Paradise, his body was
detained under the pains and bands of death, as if he had been altogether
overcome and swallowed up by it; his enemies in the mean while triumphing over
him, as if he had been quite cut off.

Act. 2.24. Whom God raised, having loosed the sorrows of death.

XVII. When mention is made of Christ's descent into Hell, in the fourth Article
of the Creed; it is demanded, of what part of Christ's passion that must be
understood?

That opinion of the Papists concerning Christ's local descent into Limbus
Patrum or the place of the Fathers, and their delivery from thence, is
fabulous: from which their opinion is not much different, who feign that Christ
entered Hell, that he might triumph there as a Conqueror. Both opinions are
repugnant to the story of the Gospel: for whereas Christ otherwise in respect
of his Deity is every where, his soul being recommended into the hands of his
Father by himself whilst he hung on the Cross, and his body being laid up in
the grave, it must needs be false that Christ did locally go down to hell.
Besides, whereas God does profess that he is their God after death, Exo. 3.6
there can be nothing more absurd, then that the souls of the Fathers should be
detained in that limbus or prison. Peter witnesses, 1 ep. 3.19. that Christ
preached to the Spirits of old that were disobedient: but this is to be
understood of that preaching which was before the flood by Noah, being
furnished or instructed for this purpose by the Spirit of Christ. Neither is
there any ground for that fiction of Christ's triumph in hell; both because he
triumphed not before his resurrection, as also because heaven was the fit place
of his triumph, not hell. Again, whereas the word Shc^l sometime signifies the
grave, and sometime Hell the place of the damned; hence it is that the phrase
of Christ's descent into hell has diverse meanings in Scripture: for either it
is the same thing that is to be buried; Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my
soul in hell. Or it is the same, that is to fall into extreme tortures and
anguish; 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord brings down to hell, and brings out. Psalm.
8.6. The sorrows of hell compassed me about; Or else it signifies the state
of them who are oppressed and swallowed by death. Ps. 49.15. Like sheep they
lie in hell, death gnaweth upon them. Isa. 14.11, etc. The first exposition
has no place in the fourth Article of the Creed; for it is unlikely that in so
brief an Epitome of Faith there should be any tautologie, or that a plain
speech should be declared by a darker. In the second, the inconvenience of a
disordered narration seems to resist, to wit, that Christ's extreme sadness and
anguish of mind are rehearsed to be after his death. But Calvin makes the
matter plain, showing that the order of things, and not of time is observed: so
that there are two members of that Article; the former is of the tortures of
the body, the latter of the internal torments of the mind. They who maintain
the third exposition, do chiefly urge the order of passages; both because the
detention of Christ in the grave is the last degree of humiliation, as also
because by this means the degrees of his joyful exaltation do answer the
sufferings of Christ; to wit, his Resurrection answers his Death; the
Sepulture, his ascension to heaven; and his descending to hell, the sitting at
his Fathers right hand. Now as this opinion is not disliked, so the former is
not rashly to be rejected; nor should we dispute contumaciously in this matter,
seeing this clause of Christ's descent to hell was not always added to the
fourth Article, as the Nicene Creed and diverse others do witness. So that this
may remain firm, that neither his spiritual agonies in his soul, nor his three
days detention in the grave, ought to be separated from his sufferings.

XVIII. For the form or manner of his Passion: He suffered, 1. Truly; 2.
Holily and innocently; 3. Voluntarily.

These three things are to be well observed: For if he had not truly suffered,
he had not satisfied; if he had not suffered holily and innocently, we could
not have a perfect High Priest, Heb. 7.26. If lastly he had not voluntarily
submitted himself, his sacrifice had been compulsory, not free: hence he says,
Heb. 10.7. Behold here I am to do thy will, o God.

XIX. The general end of Christ's pa^sion, is the glory of God, and chiefly the
manifestation of his wrath against sin, as also of his justice and mercy;
besid^s the declaration of the Divine and Humane na^ures: But the proper and
special end is, Satisfaction for our sins.

XX. In the end and use of every particular Passion, a regard is to be had of
that Analogy in which the Expiation is compared with the Sin, and the Passion
with the Punishment which we should have suffered.

For example: He sustained most grievous tortures in his soul and body; both
that the sins of soul and body might be expiated, as also that we might be
delivered from those spiritual and corporal pains which eternally we should
have suffered. His death upon the cross was execrable; partly that he might
expiate the sins by which we deserved to be accursed, partly that he might free
us from that curse and damnation. He was buried, to testify that our sins were
buried with him, and that he might sanctify our graves in which as in prisons
we were to be detained until the horrible day of Judgment, by turning them
into sleeping places. His three days detention in the grave, teaches that we
had deserved, that for our sins death had eternally reigned over us, if his
ignominious detention had not also satisfied for this punishment.

XXI. They do annihilate the end and fruit of Christ's Passion, who say that he
suffered only for this, that he might be an example to us.

It Is true, that Christ by suffering has left us an example; but the main
fruit of his Passion, is the satisfaction for our sins. The Socinians
acknowledge Christ a Savior, only in these things. 1. In that he preached
celestial Truth. 2. That he confirmed it. 3. That he was our example in his
Passion and Resurrection. 4. In that at length he bestows life eternal on us.
But when we allege testimonies out of Scripture concerning Christ's death for
us, they elude them, by saying, that he died for us, that is for our good; but
not for us, that is, in our place or stead. But this most pestilent Heresy is
refuted by these subsequent Arguments: 1. Because he so died for us, that he
gave his life as the price of redemption for many, Mat. 20.28. who gave himself
a ransom for all. 2 Timothy 2.6. that he is said, to redeem us with his precious
blood. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. You are, says he, redeemed. Now who knows not that it
is one thing to be an example of salvation and freedom, and another thing to
pay a ransom for any? for he that satisfies not for his slave or in his stead,
how does he pay a ransom for him? 2. Because he died so for us, that he was
made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. That he took our sins upon him, and he bore the
punishment due to our sins, Is^. 53.4. Is then the taking of another sin upon
him, and the suffering of the punishment due to another, only the showing of
an example, and not to satisfy, and to be punished in his stead? 3. If the
sacrifices of the Old Testament were offered by the Priests for the People, or
in their stead, then Christ's sacrifice also was performed in our stead; the
former is true, therefore so is the latter. They assever boldly, that in
Scripture there is no example where the particle (for) is the same that (in
another stead); but who sees not this in these subsequent testimonies? Joh.
10.11. The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep, to wit, by
fighting even to death in the stead or place of his sheep. Romans 5.7. Scarce
will one die for a just man. Romans 8.26. The Spirit makes intercession for us:
and ver. 13. If God be for us, who can be against us? and ver. 9. I could wish
to be accursed for my brethren. Neither does the eternity of pain due to our
sins make Christ's Passion an insufficient ransom, in that he suffered not
eternally for us: because though his punishment was not eternal in regard of
time, yet it is equivalent to eternal pain; both in respect of the infinite
majesty and dignity of Christ's Person, as also in consideration of the
greatness and infinite weight of his suffer^ngs, and the burden of Divine
wrath, which the world and all the creatures therein were not able to endure.

XXII. The Papists do overthrow the same satisfaction ^f Christ, in setting up
other Priests, and obtr^^ting the Idolatrous Mass for a Sacrifice.

They are refuted by these strong reasons: 1. Because there is one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.16. 2. Because Paul speaks only of one Priest, Heb. 7.26. Such a high
Priest became us..3. Because there was offered but one oblation, Heb. 7.25. he
performed that once: and 9.25. Not that he might offer himself often: and
10.10. by his offering once made: and ver. 14. By one oblation he has
consecrated for ever those that are sanctified: ver. 18. Where there is
remission of sins, there is no more offering for sin. 4. If therefore the
Priesthood of the old Law was abrogated, because the ancient Priests were but
weak men; then it must follow, that none in the New Testament was fit to be a
Priest, except the Son of God. Heb. 7.28. For the Law makes men High Priests,
but the word of the oath makes the Son. But they use this exception, to wit,
that Christ is the chief High Priest, and themselves secondary, and
consequently Christ's instruments: But either they offer the very same sacrifice
which Christ offered on the Cross, or another: If they offet another, then it
must be unfit, for the reasons alleged: if the same, then these absurdities
will follow. 1. That Christ offered for himself, because these offer for
themselves; for the High Priest, and the inferior Priests will do the same
things, though after a different way. 2, That they reckon themselves among the
torturers who crucified Christ. 3. Whereas in this oblation the Priest and the
Sacrifice are the same thing, they must be a Sacrifice, at least in the second
place: Neither is that distinction of a bloody, and an unbloody Sacrifice, of
greater moment; for so there should nor be one sacrifice, which thwarts the
former testimonies; and remission of sins should be obtained by an unbloody
Sacrifice, which the Apostle flatly denies, Heb. 9.12.

XXIII. As then much is detracted from Christ's sufferings by the former errors,
so they extend the object thereof wider then is fitting, who teach that Christ
died universally for all and every one man.

If we look upon the greatness and worth of Christ's merit, it is sufficient to
redeem ten thousand worlds; but if we consider Gods purpose and Christ's
intention, it is false that he died for all and singular. Hence it is, that he
is said to die for all sufficiently, but not effectually; that is to say, that
Christ's merit is sufficient for all in respect of his dignity, but not
effectual in all, in respect of application, seeing Christ died to that end
that his death should be applied to all: for why should he die for those for
whom he prays not? but he witnesses that he prays not for the world, Joh.
17.9. Our adversaries urge those places, in which mention is made of the whole
world, also of all men, 1 Timothy 2.4. and, 1 John 2.2. in which also all men
generally are called. But in 1 John 22. by the name of the whole world,
metonymically are understood, the elect dispersed over all the world: and, 1 Timothy 2.4. by all men are meant, as the words following show, all sorts of men,
whether Jews or Gentiles, Princes or Peasants; and consequently not every one
of the kinds, but the kinds of every one, in which sense the word All is
used, Genesis 16.19. Joel 2.28.


Perfect Justice, the other part of Christ's satisfaction, is that, whereby in
conforming himself to the Law, and performing perfect obedience thereto, he
has purchased for us the inheritance of life eternal. And this Justice is
partly original, partly actual: Original is the conformity of Christ with the
Law, in which he was conceived and born.

The RULES.
I. Original righteousness is opposed to original sin.

II. And this is not a bare innocence or freedom from sin, but an aptitude also
and inclination to goodness.

As original sin is not only a privation of justice, but an inclination also to
evil.

III. Christ's original justice is a part of his Satisfaction for us.

The reasons are, 1. Because the Law requires not only actual obedience, but
also a full conformity with the Law; otherwise original contagion were no sin.
2. Because Christ is all ours; and what he was made, or did, or was, he was
made, did, and was for us.


His actual Justice is that obedience whereby Christ did most perfectly fulfill
the Law in the act it self, and this is called active obedience.

The RULES.
I. As Christ's Passion was necessary to expiate sin; so was his active
Obedience and Justice, to obtain life eternal.

Reasons, 1. Because the Law obliges us both to punishment and to obedience:
to punishment, because it pronounces him accursed who does not all the words
of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. To obedience, because it promises life to them only,
who do perform all things. Lev. 18.5. who does these things shall live by them:
and Luke 10.28. Do this and live. Neither does the distinction of Justice into
Legal and Evangelical, hinder; seeing the Gospel exhibits in Christ the same
justice, which the Law requires. 2. Because this double satisfaction answers
our double misery; to wit, the guilt of sin and of damnation, and the want of
justice, Romans 3.22. All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. 3.
Because true Justice, properly so called, consists in actual obedience. Deuteronomy.
6.25. And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these
Commandments before the Lord. 4. Because he performed that actual obedience,
either for himself, or in our stead: but not for himself, therefore in our
stead. The assumption is plain, out of that relation which Christ has to us;
for whatsoever he was, or did in all the course of his obedience, he was, and
did that in our stead. But they who acknowledge his passive obedience only
satisfactory and meritorious, say that his active obedience makes toward our
Redemption and Salvation but only as a necessary help, or the cause without
which Salvation could not be obtained: for say they, this active obedience is
required for two causes: First, by the right of Creation; Secondly, that his
Sacrifice might be acceptable to God, and that he might be a holy High Priest.
But the first branch of this opinion is false; for Christ is not in this to be
compared with other men: for as the Son of God was made man and a creature for
us, not for himself, so he was made A. R. Christ was subject to the Law, that
he might free us from the curse of the Law. 2. That he might take away from the
Jews occasion of calumniating. 3. To show, he was the end of the Law. 4. That
by his example he might invite us to keep the Law.


subject to the Law not for himself, but for us. The latter branch confounds
his holiness or innocence, with his obedience or actual justice, which differ
as much as the habit and privation. Innocence indeed is necessarily required
in Christ's Sacrifice; but his actual obedience is not only required in Christ
as a Priest, but it is also a part of his satisfaction and merit: for if Adams
actual disobedience was the meritorious cause of damnation, why should not the
actual obedience of the second Adam be the meritorious cause of salvation?
except we will say, that the first Adam was more powerful to damn us, then the
second was to save us.

II. The Fathers command which Christ obeyed, was special and general: Special
in respect of the end, that he should obey not for himself, but for us: But
general in respect of the object; for he was subject to the same Law which was
prescribed to us, and in all things which the Law enjoined us to.

They who only make Christ's passive obedience meritorious, pretend that it was
performed so only by a special command from the Father, that he should die for
us. But this were not a special command only, but a partial: For Christ's
obedience does as far extend it self, as the Law does: Whereas then the Law
obliges us both to the punishment, and to obedience, he did satisfy both
these requisites.

III. Life eternal, is considered, either in it self, as it is a full
participation of celestial joy: or in opposition to damnation, as it is a
freedom from damnation: in the former sense, the perfect Justice of Christ is
the cause of eternal life; but in the latter, the suffering of the punishment,
is the cause of life eternal.

It is one thing to describe Life eternal privatively, and another thing
positively. To speak properly, there is no other cause of eternal Life, but
perfect Justice according to the Law, Do this and live: Yet Christ's death is
called the cause of eternal Life, so far as it is a delivery from all evil:
neither is freedom from damnation, and heavenly joys, parts of life, but only
different relations: Hence it is apparent in what sense Christ promises that
he will give his flesh for the life of the world, Joh. 6.51. Two things here
are objected. 1. If Christ's active obedience is the cause of eternal Life, then
he suffered in vain. 2. If Christ obeyed for us, then we need not yield
obedience. But in the first Argument there is no consequence; for there is one
end, which is common to both parts of satisfaction, to wit, our salvation;
another, proper to each one: for the end of his suffering, was our delivery
from evil; but the end of Justice is the procuring of right to eternal life.
The latter Argument against the merit of active obedience, is such a one as
Socinus frames against the merit of passive obedience: If, quoth he, Christ
died in our stead, then we need not die. But there is no consequence in either:
there is one death of Christ, another of the godly: that was joined with a
curse, this with a blessing; Christ did undergo that as the wages of our sins,
but we undergo this as a passage from this life to a heavenly: so there is one
obedience of Christ, another of man; that was perfect Justice which he
performed in our stead, to purchase life for us; but this is imperfect, and is
performed to show our gratitude for our redemption.

IV. The active Justice of Christ, in the Old Testament was shadowed out by the
glorious robes of the High Priest as a type.

They who deny the merit of active obedience, ask, By what type it was shadowed
out? For if, say they, it is a part of the Priests office, in what thing did
the High Priest type it out? But to what purpose was all that glorious attiring
of the High Priest, in which he appeared before God, if it was not to shadow
out Christ's righteousness? Hence we read, that not only were the filthy
garments of Jehosuah taken off from him, in sign of our sins removed from us;
but that new garments were put upon him, and a mitre or crown set upon his
head, Zach. 3.4, 5.


So much of Christ's Satisfaction: His Intercession in the state of Humiliation
was, whereby he offered Supplications and Prayers, not without tears and
groans, to his Father for us.

The Evangelical story tells us of whole nights that Christ spent in prayer:
but he performed this office chiefly in the time of his Passion. Joh, 17. Heb.
7.5. Who in the days of his flesh offered with strong cries and tears
supplications and prayers to him who was able to deliver him from death.

The RULES.
I. They annihilate Christ's Incarnation, who seek other Mediators of
Intercession, as they call them, besides him.

The Pontificians distinguish between the Mediator of Redemption, and mediators
of Intercession; and this latter office they ascribe to the departed Saints:
but it is no less sacrilege to ascribe his Intercession to the secondary
Intercessors, then to impart his Sacrifice to subordinate Priests: and whereas
they feign that the Saints profit us not by their Intercession only, but by
their merits also, their distinction falls to the ground; seeing they divide the
glory also of Redemption between Christ and the Saints, while they se^gn, that
by their merits, as it were by an auxiliary aid, our sins are purged, and the
defect of Christ's passion supplied.


Hitherto of his Priestly office: His Regal office he administered in the state
of his Humiliation, in gathering together a Church by his Word and Spirit, so
that in it there appeared no sign of Regal Majesty.

The RULE.
I. In vain do the Jews dream of the Messiah's earthly Kingdom.

Isa. 42.2. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in
the streets. Isa. 53.2, 3. But he shall grow up as a branch, and as a root out
of a dry ground: he has neither form nor beauty; when we shall see him, there
shall be no form that we should desire him: he is despised and rejected of men;
he is a man full of sorrows, and has experience of infirmities: we hid as it
were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Zach. 9.9.
Behold thy King comes unto thee: he is just, and saved himself, poor, and
riding upon an ass.


CHAP. XIX. Of Christ's Exaltation.
THus of the state of his Humiliation; the state of his Exaltation is that,
wherein Christ being raised from the dead, was exalted to Heaven; and being set
down at his Fathers right hand, was crowned with the highest degree of glory.

The RULES.
I. The efficient cause of this Exaltation, was the whole Trinity.

II. But Christ considered according to dispensation, is the object thereof.

III. The exaltation of Christ's person was according to both natures.

IV. According to his humane nature, he was exalted, by laying aside the
infirmities which he assumed, and by obtaining those gifts which before he
wanted: For he attained as great a perfection both in his body and soul, as the
creature was capable of.

V. He was exalted according to his divine nature, not by accession of any
dignity to it, being considered in it self; but by the manifestation of that
majesty, which before was hid under the form of a servant.

VI. A. R. It is said here, that Christ obtained his exaltation by his
obedience, nor by the way of merit. It is true, that Christ as God cannot
merit: Nor, 2. did he merit the grace of union as man, for that was infinitely
more then man or Angels could merit: Nor, 3. did he merit by the act of
free will in his conception, that plenitude of grace and knowledge which was
infused into him: Nor, 4. did he merit any thing which was not due to him in
respect of the Personal union. Yet we may not deny, but that he merited
whatsoever honor was conferred on him before his death, and likewise his
exaltation after his resurrection: for so the Apostle shows, that because
Christ humbled himself, and because obedient to the death of the cross,
therefore God exalted him, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. He shall drink of the brook in
the way, therefore shall he lift up his head, Ps. 110. Therefore S. Austin, in
Joh. tract. 104. calls Christ's humility the merit of his glory, and his glory
the reward of his humility. This glory then was Christ's due, both in respect of
the personal union, and also in respect of merit: for why may not a thing be
due in a double respect?


Christ attained to this exaltation by his obedience, not as it were by merit,
but as it were by the means or way.

VII. The end hereof was to witness, that he faithfully performed the office
enjoined him in his humiliation, and to manifest his divine power by which he
does powerfully apply his merit to us.


The parts or degrees of this are three: His Resurrection, his Ascension to
heaven, and his Sitting at the Fathers right hand.

His resurrection was the first degree of exaltation, by which Christ having
overcome the power of death, was raised the third day, in that very flesh which
he had laid down, that he might live to God for ever.

The RULES.
I. Christ was not only the object, but also the efficient cause of his
resurrection.

Romans 1.4. Being declared with power to be the Son of God, according to the
Spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead. 1 Pet. 3.18. He
died concerning the flesh, but was quickened in the Spirit.

II. The matter of the Resurrection is the same body that was crucified, but
endowed and glorified with new qualities.

III. Neither was it so changed, as to lose its quantity and three dimensions.

For otherwise it had been no body, nor had Christ remained man in his
Resurrection.

IV. The Form consists in a new and indivisible union of soul and body.

V. Although Christ's Resurrection was altogether miraculous, yet it is false
that his body passed through the stone which covered the grave, or that it
passed through the door, after his Resurrection.

Mat. 28.2. The Angel of the Lord rolled away the stone. Joh. 20.19. The doors
being shut; not, through the doors that were shut.

VI. The end of his Resurrection, besides that general end which was mentioned
before, is the assurance of our Resurrection both from the death of sin, as
also from death corporal.

Romans 6.1, 2. 1 Cor. 15.12. etc.


His ascension to Heaven was the second degree of his Exaltation, in which
Christ after he had conversed forty days with his Disciples upon earth,
ascended into heaven.

The RULES.
I. Christ ascended both according to his divine and humane natures: according
to his humane, at the object; according to his divine, as the efficient cause.

II. The Form consists in Christ's real and local translation from this world
to the highest heaven.

III. Here we need not trouble our selves about penetration of bodies; both
because heaven is not a solid, thick, or iron body, as the Philosophers would
have it; as also because one body can easily yield to another, and the creature
to the Creator.

IV. The doctrine of Christ's corporal presence here on earth, does utterly
overthrow that of his Ascension.

V. The special end of Christ's ascension, is to assure us of our threefold
ascension: the first is, of faith and godliness in this life; the second, of
our souls in death; the third, of body and soul in the last day.


The sitting of Christ at his Fathers right hand, is the highest degree of his
Exaltation, by which being placed in heaven, he is exalted above all power.

Ephesians. 1.20.21.22. He has set him at his right hand in the heavenly places, far
above all principalities and power, and might, and dominion, and every name
that is named, not in this world only, but in that also which is to come, and
has made all things subject under his feet, and has appointed him over all
things to be the head to his Church, which is his body, and the fullness of him
that fills all in all things.

The RULES.
I. To sit at Gods right hand, is to have the next power after God.

After the manner of Kings, who use to set them on their right hands, to whom
they will give the chief honor next to themselves. Psalm. 45.10. The queen is
at thy right hand. 1 King. 2.19. When Bathsheba came to Solomon to speak unto
him for Adonijah, the king rose to meet her, and bowed himself to her, and sat
down on his throne, and he caused a seat to be set for the Kings mother, and
she sat at his right hand. Mat. 20.21. command that my two sons may sit, the
one at thy right hand, the other at thy left in thy Kingdom.

II. Christ according to both Natures sits at Gods right hand.

III. The Humanity was so exalted, that yet it was not made equal to the
Divinity: he received glory above all creatures, yet not equal to that
essential glory which he has in common with the Father and the Holy Ghost.


In this highest degree of Exaltation, Christ has not left to do his office:
He performed his Prophetical office by furnishing his Ministers with gifts, of
old extraordinarily, but now by ordinary means, propagating his Gospel through
all the world with most happy success.

Ephesians. 4.11. Some he gave to be Apostles, etc.

His Priestly office he exercises, not in offering himself again, or in
casting himself with cries and sighs at his Fathers knees; but in appearing
before his Father for us with the merits of his most full satisfaction, and in
applying the same effectually to us.

Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a priest for
ever, after the order of Melchisedek. Heb. 9.24. He has not entered into the
Sanctuary made with hands, which are similitudes of the true Sanctuary, but is
entered into the very heaven to appear now in the sight of God for us.

Lastly, He uses his Kingly office not only by ruling the Triumphant Church,
but also by gathering together the Militant Church, by preserving, and
protecting, and delivering it, as also by overthrowing the enemies thereof.

Psalm. 110. The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool.

The RULES.
I. This Kingdom of Christ is not that essential, which from eternity he
obtained with the Father and Holy Ghost; but a personal, donative, and
ecumenical, which as our head and Mediator he had of the Father.

II. Yet he has for ever administered this ecumenical Kingdom.

2 Samuel 7.15. I will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever. Dan. 7.14.
Whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away. Luke
1.33. Of his kingdom there shall be no end: The words of the Father to Christ
do not oppose these sayings, until I make thine enemies, etc. For the meaning
is not, that Christ after his last coming shall reign no more; but it shows
this at least, that it shall come to pass that he shall subdue all his enemies:
For that clause, until, and the like, exclude not the future time, but they
are affirmatively and negatively spoken of it, and oftentimes they signify the
same, that always or never: for example, Genesis 28.15. I will not forsakes thee,
until I have performed that which I spoke to thee. 2 Samuel 6.23. Michal had no
child till the day of her death. Matthew. 2.25. He knew her not until she had
brought forth her first begotten Son. Matthew. 28.20. Behold I am with you till
the end of the world; nor is this saying against us, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. where it
is affirmed, That Christ will deliver up his kingdom to his Father, that God
may be all in all; for in that place, the delivering up of the Kingdom is not a
laying down of Christ's Regal office; but by the Kingdom there is meant (as
commonly in Scripture) the Church; he will then deliver the Kingdom to his
Father, when he shall present the whole Church to him: therefore that
subjection shall not abolish Christ's Kingdom; whereas Christ even as Mediator
is subordinate to his Father in glory, so Christ shall be, and shall remain our
King, that notwithstanding he will with us subject himself to the Father. But
you will say, that already he is subject to the Father. That is true indeed,
but not simply; for now the Head with the Church is subjected, yet not all the
Church; but then together with all the members of the Church, and consequently
all mystical Christ shall be subjected to the Father. That finally God is said
to be all in all, it is not so to be understood, as if he were not at this day
all in all, or that then he were only to reign: but this is spoken after the
Scripture phrase, in which, things are oftentimes said to be done, when they
are declared to be: The meaning then is, whereas in this world the Kingdom of
God is annoyed and obscured by the enemies thereof, these enemies being at last
subdued, it will be most apparent that the Kingdom will be Gods, and his
Christ's.


CHAP. XX. Of the common vocation to the state of Grace.
HItherto of Christ the Redeemer, who is the efficient cause of the state of
Grace: Now follows the Vocation to the same.

This is either common to the elect and reprobate, or proper only to the elect.

The common calling is, whereby all men are invited to the state of Grace, and
participation of Christ the Mediator.

This is also called the election of the whole people wheresoever. Deuteronomy. 7.6.
Thou art a holy people to the Lord thy God, he has chosen thee.

The RULES.
I. As election, so vocation is either to an office, or to salvation: the
latter is that which is here to be considered.

There is an example in Saul of Election and Vocation, to an office; 1 Samuel
19.24. Do you not see whom the Lord has chosen?

II. The efficient cause of this vocation is commonly the whole blessed
Trinity: but particularly Christ the Lord; who as in the days of his
ministration here on earth did immediately call sinners, so he does now by the
means of his ministers.

Matthew. 22.2, 3. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a King who made a marriage
for his son, and sent his servants who should call those that were invited to
the Wedding, etc. Mark 1.14, 15. Jesus came to Gal lee preaching the Gospel of
God, and saying, the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand;
Repent and believe the Gospel. 2 Cor. 5.20. Therefore we are Ambassadors for
Christ, etc.

III. The matter of this vocation are not all men, nor the elect only, but any
of the race of mankind.

That all are not called, the whole History of the Old Testament witnesses;
for God at all time passing by other Nations, called the people of Israel: but
in the time of the New Testament, not all, nor every one is called, seeing that
many never heard of Christ: and that the elect only are not called, the
parable of Christ does sufficiently witness, in which good and bad are invited;
many also are said to be called, but few chosen: Matt. 20.10, 14. Now all sorts
of men are called, of what state, condition, age, etc. they be.

IV. The form of this vocation consists partly in the proffer of the benefit
of Redemption, and partly in the precept of accepting it.

2 Cor. 5.20. Therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you through us, we pray in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to God.
For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.

V. The end of this is Gods glory, and the salvation of the Elect: now the
glory of Gods mercy is seen in the Elect obeying the vocation, and the glory of
his justice in the reprobate disobeying.

VI. Common vocation is principally for the Elect, secondarily for the
Reprobate.

VII. Yet both are called seriously, and without hypocrisy.

Of the Elect, there is no doubt; as for the reprobate, although they are not
called with any purpose in God to save them, yet they are called seriously, and
salvation is seriously promised to them on condition they will believe: neither
are they mocked in that they are deprived of the grace of Faith; but because
voluntarily they fell from the original grace, and with a malicious purpose
they despise the means of salvation: God notwithstanding may justly claim
Faith of them; and this right of claim which he he has, he does as justly use
as any other creditor, that their mouths may be stopped, and they made
inexcuseable, and Gods justice may be vindicated: therefore he does not call
them, that he might mock them, but that he might declare and make manifest his
justice upon them.

VIII. Therefore out of the common vocation, we must not presently infer an
election: both because it is common to the Elect and Reprobate, as also because
it includes the condition of Faith.

Although a whole nation is said to be elected, yet all in that nation are not
elected: as the Jewish people are called an elect people, and yet many of them
were reprobate.

IX. Neither are all therefore elected, because they are commanded to believe
that they are elected; for they are not absolutely commanded to believe that,
but with trial of their Faith.

2 Cor. 13.5. Try your selves whether you be in the Faith or not; prove your
selves: know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except
you be reprobates? but I trust, that you shall know, that we are not reprobates.


CHAP. XXI. Of the Covenant of Grace.
THe fruit and benefit of Vocation, is the outward communion both of the
covenant of Grace, as also of the Church.

The external communion of the Covenant of Grace is, whereby they who are
called, are accounted to be in the Covenant, and Gods people; yet analogically,
as some are truly Gods people, some only in outward profession.

In the Covenant of Grace we must consider both the offering of it, and the
confirming or sealing of it: the offering of the Covenant of Grace, is that
whereby God promises to the Elect to be their Father in Christ, if they
perform filial obedience.

The RULES.
I. By the name of Covenant we understand not that general, which God made with
all creatures; nor the Covenant of works made with our first Parents, but that
which after the fall, God of his mere mercy has made with us.

II. Therefore the Covenant of Grace is called a Testament or Disposition;
because by this, God has appointed to his sons an heavenly inheritance, to be
obtained by the mediation of his own Sons death.

Heb. 8.10. Therefore this is the Covenant that I will make, etc. and Chap.
9.15, 16. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that
through death which was for the redemption of the transgressions that were in
the former Testament, they which were called might receive the Promise of
eternal inheritance: for where a Testament is, there must needs be the death of
him that made the testament.

III. The efficient cause of this, is commonly the Holy Trinity: but
particularly Christ, God and man, that Angel of the Covenant.

Mal. 3.1. Behold I will send my Angel, (to wit, John Baptist) who shall
prepare the way before me; and the Lord whom you shall seek, shall suddenly
come to his Temple, even the Angel of the Covenant, whom you desire.

IV. The matter of the Covenant of Grace, are the things conditioned on both
sides; to wit, of God and man: God promises that he will be our God in Christ;
man promises the obedience of Faith and life.

V. The form consists in a mutual obligation; but so, that they are
Relatives of an unequal nature; for the promise and obligation on Gods part is
free, but on man's part it is a due debt.

VI. The end of the Covenant is the same that is of the general vocation, Gods
glory, and the salvation of the Elect.

VII. The subject or object of this proffered Covenant, are all that be called;
but properly, the Elect only.

This Covenant is proffered to all that are called, but the Elect only enjoy
the Promises of the Covenant.

VIII. Out of the adjuncts, we are to consider the administration of the
Covenant of Grace.

IX. The administration, in respect of time, is distinguished into the old and
new league, or testament.

X. The old Testament is the Covenant of Grace, administered in the time wherein
Christ was to be exhibited.

XI. The form of administering is threefold: 1. from Adam to Abraham: 2. from
Abraham to Moses: 3. from Moses to Christ.

XII. Between the first and last form of administration, this difference is, 1.
That that was made by words of Promise, which were very short, and yet long
enough; but this has not only a Promise, but an express condition of
Obedience also. 2. That had only the ceremony of Sacrifices; but this also of
Circumcision. 3. That was proposed to all mankind; but this was tied only to
Abraham's posterity.

XIII. Between the administration of the form in the third, and two former,
this is the difference; that the third is more perfect, and truly testamentary,
because enlarged not only with the Passover, but also with many other types
of Christ's death.

XIV. The New Testament is the Covenant of Grace, which is administered, Christ
being exhibited.

XV. The New and Old Testament agree in substance: for in both Christ is the
same Testator; in both is the same Promise of Grace in Christ; in both is
required the same obedience of Faith and Life.

XVI. They are deceived then, who make parallel distinctions of the Old and New
Testament; of the Covenant of Works, and of Grace; of the Law, and Gospel: for
in both, the Testament or Covenant is the Covenant of Grace; in both, the Law
and Gospel are urged.

XVII. But the administration of the Old and New Testament differs, 1. In time;
because the Old Testament was exhibited before Christ; but the New is
administered, Christ being now exhibited; that was to continue only till
Christ, this for ever. 2. In place, or amplitude; for that was proffered to the
People of Israel only, this extends it self through all the world. 3. In
clearenesse; because the free promises of Christ are more clearly preached in
the New Testament, and confirmed, the shadows of Types and Ceremonies being
abolished. 4. In faculty; because the administration in the Old Testament was
more laborious then in the New. 5. In sweetness; for in the Old Testament, the
perfect obedience of the Law is oftener urged, yet not excluding the promises of
the Gospel; yet to to that end, that they might be compelled to seek Christ by
that rigorous exaction of obedience, as is were by a Schoolmaster: but in the
New Testament, the promises of the Gospel are more frequent, yet not excluding
the Law, which drives us to new obedience, to be performed by the grace of
Regeneration.

XVIII. Hence then it is manifest, in what sense the new Covenant is opposed to
the old, in Jeremiah.

Jerem. 31.31, 32. Behold the days come, says the Lord, in which I will make
a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah; not according
to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers, when I took, etc. and v. 33.
But this shall be the Covenant, etc. I will put my law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts. v. 34. And they shall teach no more every one his
neighbor, etc. they shall know me from the least to the greatest. In these
words, regard is had to the third and fifth difference: to this, when mention
is made of the law written in Tables of stone, and afterward to be written in
their hearts: but to that, when he promises a clearer knowledge.


CHAP. XXII. Of the Seals or Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace in general.
HAving spoken of the Covenant proffered to us; now follows the Confirmation
thereof by Sacraments, as it were by Seals of the Covenant of Grace.

A Sacrament is a sacred action instituted by God, in which that grace which
Christ has promised to the Covenanters is s aled by visible signs on G^ds
part, and they are tied on their part to obedience.

The RULES.
I. The word Sacrament, which of old was used for a military oath, or for money
deposited in stead of a pledge by those who were in suit of law, is not unfitly
applied in the Church to the signs of Grace.

For by Sacraments, as it were by solemn oaths, we are bound to observe what
is promised in the Covenant; and the same are to us pledges of Grace, promised
in the Covenant.

II. It is called also a mystery, as it signifies some secret and divine thing
proposed in signs and types: yet the word Mystery is further extended, then
the word Sacrament; seeing every sacrament is a mystery, but all mysteries are
not sacraments.

III. Sacrament sometimes is taken properly for the whole action, as it
contains both the sign, and the thing signified; but Synecdochically it is
only taken for the sign.

IV. According to the first sense, it is already defined; but in the other
sense it is defined a visible sign of an invisible grace.

V. The principal efficient cause is commonly the whole Trinity; but
particularly Christ, that Angel of the Covenant.

VI. The instruments of administration, are the Ministers lawfully called.

VII. The instrument by which the Sacraments are effected, or by which the
signs are consecrated, is the Word of Institution, consisting chiefly of two
parts, to wit, a precept of the due administration and receiving, and a promise
of the fruitful efficacy of Sacraments.

VIII. The word of institution does not change the quantity, or substance of
the elements, but only their use: and that not by any secret virtue inherent
in the words themselves, as the Papists say, but by Gods ordination.

As a stone by the by the Magistrates appointment is changed into a landmark,
the substance and qualities thereof still remaining: so, as Austin says, the
Word being joined to the Element, it becomes a Sacrament, the quality and
substance remaining, only the common use is changed into a sacred.

IX. It is false also which they teach, That the Ministers intention is of such
absolute necessity, that without this there can be no Sacrament.

For if the Sacrament depend not more on Gods institution, then on the
Ministers intention; wretched consciences will be deprived of all comfort, who
know not the Ministers thoughts whilst he administers.

X. They do also foolishly set in opposition the Word Preached, and the Word of
Institution; for these differ not really, but in some respect only, seeing a
Sermon is but the explication of the Word: therefore the Word of Institution
belongs to the essence of the Sacraments, but the Word Preached to the manner
of administration.

XI. The outward and terrene matter of the Sacrament, is the visible Sign.

XII. The inward or heavenly matter, is the thing signified, to wit Christ with
all his benefits.

XIII. The external form consists in the lawful administration and
participation of the Sacrament according to Gods command.

XIV. The internal form is in the analogy of the sign, and thing signified.

XV. Therefore the union of the sign, and thing signified, is not physical or
local, but habitual, as the sign represents the thing signified; and while the
sign is given by the Minister, the faithful receive the thing signified from
Christ.

XVI. Yet we deny not the presence of Christ, and of his body and blood, in the
action of the Sacrament: for besides that he is present in his Divine person,
he is not wanting in the presence of his Spirit to his own body and blood, not
locally, but sacramentally.

There is a threefold presence, besides that which is local. 1. Symbolical;
when things are represented to the mind by some sign or symbol, as things by
words or voices, man by his image. 2. Spiritual; when we represent to our
selves by faith some spiritual thing not existent; as Abraham represented to
himself and saw the day of Christ, Joh. 8.56. 3. A Virtual; when that which is
distant in place, is present in power and efficacy: as the Sun. These three
ways of Presence meet in the Sacrament: for the body and blood of Christ are
present to us, 1. Symbolically, as they are represented by an external sign.
2. Spiritually, as we apply by faith to our selves Christ's body and blood with
his merits. 3. Virtually, as we perceive the fruit thereof by faith in our
hearts. The first degree of Sacramental presence, belongs also to the infidels;
the second and third, to the faithful only. Therefore although Christ's body by
local presence is far distant from the symbol, as heaven is from earth, yet
there is a sacramental presence. Presence is not opposed to distance, but to
absence.

XVII. Neither are therefore Sacraments empty signs, because the symbol and
thing signified are not locally united; for there remain notwithstanding, 1.
The signs signifying, 2. Exhibiting, 3. Applying, 4. Sealing.

We must carefully observe these four sorts of signs, against those who cry
out that we have nothing in the Sacraments but empty signs. Signs then are
either significant only, as a painted image signifies a man; or exhibiting
also, as a scepter, keys, and such like, which being exhibited, regal power is
also conferred, and leave to enter the house; or they are besides applying
signs, as that promise of God to preserve the 144000. this the Angel applies
to each one, by setting a mark on his forehead, Rev. 7.3. Or lastly, they are
confirming and sealing signs, as earnests, seals, and such like. Now these four
degrees meet in Sacraments: for, 1. The outward symbols do signify and
represent Christ's body and blood. 2. Together with the sign, the thing
signified is exhibited; yet not in the sign, but in the Sacramental action;
the Minister exhibiting the sign, and Christ the thing signified. 3. The thing
signified, generally promised to the faithful in the Gospel, by the exhibition
of the sign is applied to every one of the faithful. 4. The same promise is
confirmed by the Sacrament; whence they are not only called signs but seals
also. Romans 4.11.

XVIII. From the union and relation of the thing signified, with the sign;
there arises a sacramental phrase or speech, in which the thing signified is
predicated of the sign: In this manner of speech is expressed what these
outward signs signify, rather then what they are in themselves, or of their
own nature.

Genesis 17.9. Circumcision, by a sacramental phrase, is called the Covenant: but
v. 11. properly, the Sign of the Covenant. Exo. 12.11. The Lamb is called the
Passover: which place is vindicated from our Adversaries exceptions, by the
like sayings. Luc. 22.1. The day of unleavened bread came, in which the
Passover was to be killed. ver. 8. Go and prepare the Passover for us, that
we may eat. ver. 11. There is an Inn, where I must eat the Passover with my
Disciples. and v. 12. There prepare the Passover. v. 15. I have desired to eat
this Passover with you. To the purpose serve all those places, in which
Expiation is attributed to sacrifices, and Purificat^on to water and washings;
also in which the name Jehovah is given to the Ark, or to Jerusalem, Psalm.
47.6. Ezekiel. 48.35. Like testimonies are in the New Testament. Mat. 26.26, 27,
28. While they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed, brake
it, and gave it to his disciples, saying; Take, eat, this is my body: likewise,
taking the cup, and having given thanks, he gave to them, saying, Drink ye all
of this, for this is the blood of the New Testament, etc. See the like places
in Mark, Luke, and 1 Cor. 11. so, 1 Cor. 10.4. And the rock was Christ. Ephesians.
5.26. That he might sanctify his Church, having purged her with the washing of
water. Col. 2. v. 12. Being buried with him in Baptism. Hebr. 9.13. For if the
blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the
unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh. Yea, the very same is seen
in other speeches besides sacramental, as Genesis 41.37. The seven cows, are seven
years; that is, types and figures of seven years: Rev. 17.9. The seven heads,
are seven hills; and v. 12. The ten horns are ten Kings.

XIX. This kind of speaking, is called a Sacramental Metonymie of the thing
signified, for the sign. Now it is not material whether the trope be in the
attribute, or in the copula, or coupling of the words: for though the trope may
be in the attribute, yet the cause or ground of the trope is in the copula.

The material cause of a simple enunciation, consists in the subject and
attribute; but the copula being affirmed or denied, makes up the formal part;
by which it becomes true or false, proper or figurative: for as often as things
of different natures, are affirmed or joined by the copula, that speech is
false or tropical, the seal therefore of the trope is in the predicat; but the
cause thereof in the copula. Whereas then the copula (is) in this enuntiation,
This is my Body, conjoyns things of different natures, to wit, bread and
Christ's body: necessarily the speech must be false; but to say so were
blasphemy; or else tropical: Therefore the interpretation of such speeches is
plain; bread is the body of Christ, that is, a Sacrament of his body:
Circumcision is Gods covenant, that is, a sign or sacrament thereof: seven
Kine are seven years, that is, figures of seven years: so we are said to be
cleansed with waters sacramentally, because baptism or washing is the
sacrament of cleansing: so sacramentally, the sacrifices of the Old Testament
are said to expiate, because they were types of expiation by Christ.

XX. The end of the Sacraments, is the sealing of the Covenant of Grace.

XXI. The effects of the Sacraments, are not justification or sanctification,
as if it were by the work wrought; but the confirmation and sealing of both
benefits.

This is plain, by the example of Abraham, who before he was circumcised was
justified, Romans 4.11. Therefore the Pontificians falsely affirm that the
Sacraments confer remission of sins, and such like benefits, by their own
inward virtue out of the work wrought: These places then of Scripture, in which
such things are spoken of the Sacraments, are to be expounded by a sacramental
metonymie, as is said.

XXII. Sacraments are common to all that are in the Covenant, in respect of the
signs; but proper to to the Elect, in respect of the thing signified.

XXIII. Sacraments are necessary to salvation, not simply and absolutely, as if
they were the prime causes thereof; but hypothetically, as they are ordinary
means of salvation, to be used, as Christ has commanded.

Hence says Bernard; Not the want, but the contempt damneth.

XXIV. The Word and Sacraments agree in substance; for what the testament
promises, the seal confirms: but they differ, 1. In that the word is
received by the ear, the Sacraments perceived by the eye, so that the
Sacrament is a visible word. 2. Because the word of the Gospel is general; but
by the Sacrament, the promises of the Gospel are applied to every believer. 3.
Because by the Word faith is ordinarily begot, and confirmed by the Sacraments.


Sacraments are of the Old Testament, or of the New. Of the Old Testament,
there were two principal and ordinary; to wit, Circumcision, and the Passover.

Of these we have handled in the doctrine of the Ceremonial Law.

Of the New Testament, there are two; Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

The RULES
I. The Sacraments of the Old and New Testament agree in the thing signified,
in respect of substance, to wit Christ with his benefits, which is the kernel
of all the Sacraments.

Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day is the same, and for ever. Rev.
13.8. The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; to wit sacramentally, in
the Sacrifices and Passover.

II. Baptism does answer Circumcision analogically; so does the Lords Supper,
the Passover: For as Circumcision was the Sacrament of initiation, or of
ingraffing into the Covenant of regeneration, or spiritual circumcision, so is
Baptism; And as the Passover was the Sacrament of spiritual food, even so is
the Lords Supper. Hence the holy Supper succeeded the celebration of the last
Passover.

III. The difference between the Sacraments of the Old and New Testamen^,
consists in this. 1. In external signs. 2. In the manner of signifying; for
there was signified, that Christ was to be exhibited. 3. In number: For besides
Circumcision and the Passover, they had also other Sacraments; We have none
besides Baptism and the Lords Supper. 4. In amplitude; for the New Covenant
does not extend it self to one and the same people. 5. In continuance; for
those continued only till Christ's first coming, but these remain to the end of
the world. 6. In clearness.

IV. The difference then which the Pontificians feign, is false; That the
Sacraments of the Old Testament were types of the Sacraments of the New
Testament. 2. That the Sacraments of the Old Testament did only shadow out
justifying grace; but that ours have really in themselves the body of spiritual
good things.

As for the first difference; it is one thing to be a type of Christ, another
thing to be types of the Sacraments in the New Testament. That Circumcision and
the Passover were types of Christ, is said; but that they were types of our
Sacraments, I deny: for it were most absurd to think, that they were instituted
only to represent ours. The other difference also is false: for both in those
Sacraments, and in these, Christ with his benefits are the matter and marrow.
But the difference between the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament, is
rather this; that they were shadows of spiritual good things, whereof Christ
was the body, Col. 2.17.

V. Neither will it follow, that therefore the Sacraments of the New Testament
are not better then those of the Old, because they do not confer justifying
grace for the work wrought: for their prerogatives remain, as they are
expressed in the third Rule, chiefly the second and sixth.

Here it is wont to be objected, that if we acknowledge not this their
fictitious difference, the Sacraments of the Old Testament will be clearer then
these of the New; for the Passover represents Christ's death, clearer then the
Bread in the Lords Supper. But we must know wherein the clarity of a Sacrament
consists chiefly, to wit, not in external signs only, but in the Sacramental
word. Now are not these words very clear: This is my body which is given for
you; This is my blood which is shed for you? There is nothing so plain
concerning Christ's death, in the Passover. Besides, it is false that the
killing of a Lamb was a cleerer sign; because many more and obscure signs were
added to the killing of the Lamb; as also because the breaking of bread, the
pouring out of wine, and the receiving of both, do most clearly represent the
breaking of Christ's body, the shedding of his blood, and the participation of
both.

VI. In vain do the Pontificians reckon among the Sacraments of the
New Testament; Confirmation, Penance, Extreme Unction, Ordination of Ministers,
and Matrimony.

Three things are required to a Sacrament. 1. That it be instituted by God
under the Covenant of grace. 2. That it may have an external Symbol ordained by
God. 3. That the Promise of grace may be annexed to it. Now these three belong
only to Baptism and the Lords Supper, and not to any of the rest. Confirmation
is a Popish ceremony, in which the Bishop or his Suffragan having asked certain
questions of the party baptized, concerning the Heads of Religion, besmears him
with a little ointment, putting a linen cloth on him, not to be removed by the
witnesses before the third day; and he cuffs him, the better to remember the
matter, and that he may be sufficiently furnished with the Holy Ghost against
Satan's tentations. But where in Scripture do we read of the institution of this
Sacrament, and of its ceremonies? where is the Promise? We may more truly call
this the Popes excrement, then a Sacrament; and that mark which the Beast puts
upon the forehead of his worshippers, Rev. 3, 16. Therefore impiously do they
prefer this Sacrament to Baptism; for they teach plainly, that Baptism is
perfected by it, an that in this there is a greater measure of spiritual gifts
then in Baptism: and whereas any Priest or Pastor may administer Baptism, yea
any Layman, or woman; Confirmation must only be performed by the Bishop or his
Suffragan. Penance is a Sacrament with them, in which the sinner having given
trial of his repentance, is absolved by the Priest. We indeed acknowledge, that
repentance is enjoined to sinners, and that a power of absolving is given to
Ministers; though they feign a far other penance and absolution, as shall
appear hereafter: But in the mean while, there is no outward symbol instituted
by God which has a promise; neither can these words, [I absolve thee] be in
stead of a symbol, as Bellarmine would have it. Extreme Unction is a Sacrament
amongst them, in which the Priest having rehearsed some Letanies, anointeth the
party that is dying, with hallowed oil of the Olive, in those parts of the
body where the seats of the five Senses are; and this he does after the parties
confession and absolution, to the end he may recover his health, if it be
expedient for him, and that the remainder of his sins, after he has received
the other Sacraments, may be wiped away. Christ indeed promised his Disciples,
that the sick on whom they were to lay their hands, should recover, Mar. 16.18.
James also commanded that the sick should be anointed, after imposing of hands
and prayer by the Elders: which ceremonies were not Sacraments, but voluntary
rites joined with miracles, which together with the gifts of miracles are
expired. Therefore between Extreme Unction, and this, there is no similitude:
For, that I may say nothing of that magical exorcisme with which the oil is
hallowed, it is certain, that in the Apostles time, not only dying people (as
now in Popery) but any also that were sick, were anointed. Ordination is a
Sacrament among them, in which the Bishop alone or his Suffragan lays his
hands upon the Minister, and delivers to him with solemn words a Book, a
Platter, a Pastoral staff, etc. using also the ceremonies of Unction and
Shaving, and imprints on him an indelible character, to confer Justifying
grace, whereby he might rightly use the power of the Keys. Now although
Ministers may be ordained by imposition of hands and prayers, after the example
of the Apostles, yet this Imposition is a thing indifferent; but for the Popish
ceremonies, they are partly Jewish, as anointing, partly Heathenish, as
shaving, expressly forbid Lev. 19.27. Marriage is no Sacrament of the Covenant
of grace, both because it was instituted before the fall, as also because it is
common to all that are within, and without the Covenant: yet we deny not but
that Marriage is a representation of that spiritual wedlock between Christ and
his Church; but if for this it were a Sacrament, then there should be so many
Sacraments, as there be Parables and Allegories. Hence diverse Schoolmen have
denied this to be a Sacrament: And in what esteem it is among the Papists,
appears by this, that they make an irreconcilable war between Marriage and
Ordination, and forbid Marriage in their Clergy, as if it were an unclean thing.


CHAP. XXIII. Of Baptism.
Baptism is the first Sacrament of the New Testament, in which the Elect being
received into the family of God, remission of sins, and regeneration in
Christ's blood, and the Holy Ghost, are confirmed by the outward sprinkling of
water.

The RULES.
I. The word Baptism signifies a dipping and aspersing, or washing.

That it signifies aspersion, appears in Mar. 7.4. And when thy come from the
market, they eat not except they be washed.

II. Here are four appellations of Baptism to be considered. 1. The Baptism
of water a. 2. Of light or doctrine b. 3. Of the Spirit, or gifts of the Spirit
c. 4. Of blood or martyrdom d.

a Mat. 3.11. I baptize you with water. b Mat. 22.25. The baptism of John,
(that is, all his ministry both of doctrine and baptism) whence was it? and
Act. 18.25. Apollo knew only the baptism of John. c Act. 1.5. You shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost. d Mat. 20.22. Can you be baptized with the
baptism wherewith I am baptized?

III. Christ our Lord, is the principal efficient cause; but the instrumental,
is the Minister lawfully called.

IV. Therefore we hold not that baptism lawful, which is administered by any
private man, or a woman, as in Popery.

For if in earthly Commonwealths that is not accounted of, which a private man
does without command; how much less can Christ be pleased with such disorder
in his Church?

V. A. R. The outward matter of Baptism is water.] I will here add the
reasons why water is used in Baptism. 1. Because the dipping in water
represents Christ's death and burial, and withal our mortification; so the
rising out of the water, is a shadow of his resurrection, and our spiritual
vivification. 2. Water is a cheap and common element, therefore obvious, and
easily obtained. 3. In the beginning the Spirit moved on the waters, and was the
cause of generation; so in the baptism of water and the Spirit, is effected
our regeneration. 4. Water washes away the filth of the body, so does Baptism
the spots of the soul. I will pour upon you clear water, and you shall be
cleansed from all your iniquities, Ezekiel. 36. By this water, Ephesians. 5. Christ
cleanses his Church. 5. Water quenches the thirst of the body, so does
Baptism the thirst of the soul. 6. Water cools the heat of the body, so does
Baptism the heat of Gods wrath; and the fire of our lusts. 7. Baptism is the
Sacrament of illumination, Heb. 6.4. and 10.32. Therefore (...) to illuminate,
is used for baptising; and baptism is called (...) illumination; and the days
of baptism were called the days (...) of light. Now water is a diapharont
body, by which light is transmitted to us; so is mental illumination by the
water of baptism, in which now we are not dipped, but besprinkled, which is
all one: for the gifts of the Spirit are expressed by the sprinkling of clear
water, in Ezekiel, and by the sprinkling of water in the old Purifications, and
by the sprinkling of the Lambs blood in the Passover, to which the Apostle
alludes, Heb. 10. having our hearts besprinkled from an evil conscience.


The outward matter is water: But for oil, salt, spittle, and other things
which Papists join to this element, belong rather to the profanation, then
administration of baptism.

VI. The internal matter is Christ, with his death, passion, resurrection, etc.

VII. The internal form consists partly in actions, partly in wo^ds.

VIII. The action is, the aspersion of water; which is used for dipping.

The dipping in, and rising out of the water, was a clear symbol of Christ's
burial and resurrection; But because of the weakness of infants, in cold
countries, we use sprinkling; which probably was used by the Apostles, when
they baptized in private families.

IX. It is not much material, whether one aspersion or three he used: so it be
void of superstition, and that it be not performed drop by drop, or by the
finger, but so that the symbol may answer the sprinkling or washing.

X. The word by which Baptism is to be administered, is to be comprehended in
Christ's institution, especially in these words; I baptize thee in the name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Ghost.

XI. The Latin tongue in Baptism, and the superstitious consecration, or
exorcisme of the water; are repugnant to the form of Baptism.

XII. The internal form consists in the analogy of aspersion, and remission
of sins; as also of regeneration or sanctification.

In this, Baptism answers the legal aspersions, by which likewise remission of
sin by the blood of Christ was shadowed: Water also, as it cleanses from
filthiness, and moistneth the Plants does adumbrate regeneration, whereby we
die to sin, and live to righteousness: See Romans 6. v. 1. etc.

XIII. The end of Baptism, besides those which are common to it and the Lords
Supper, is the seal^ng of our regeneration, and of our reception, or ingraffing
into the family of God.

XIV. The subject of Baptism, are all that be in the Covenant; even the
children of those who are reckoned among the number of the Covenanters.

This rule is grounded, 1. on Christ's command, Matt. 1.14. Suffer little
children, and forbid them not to come to me: they ought not then to be kept off
from Baptism, whom Christ will have to be brought to him; The words used in
this place, and Luc. 28.15. Of little children and infants, are emphaticall. 2.
On the reason alleged by Christ, Matt. 19.14. For of such is the kingdom of
heaven: For if to them the kingdom of heaven, and the Covenant of Grace
belong, the seal of the Covenant must needs appertain to them also; but they
are capable of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God, and of thy seed.
Act. 2. v. 39. Te you and to your children is the Promise made. 3. On the
analogy of circumcision; for with this Sacrament infants were initiated. 4. On
the example of the Apostles who are said to baptize whole families, Act.
16.15.33 It were a foolish thing to apply that rule, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. If any will
not work, let him not eat, to Infants: so perversely do the Anabaptists wrest
the places of Scripture to a contrary meaning; which those that are of years,
are commanded to be taught, before they are baptized.

XV. Infants have both Faith and Reason: although not in the fruit, yet in the
seed and root; though not in the second act, yet in the first; though not by an
outward demonstration of the work, yet by the inward virtue of the Holy Spirit.

XVI. But concerning the Infants of Infidels, the case is otherwise; for they
are not to be baptized till they be of discretion, and are able to testify
their Faith.

XVII. The baptism of Bells, is a profanation of the Sacrament, and idolatrous.

XVIII. As naturally we are born, before we eat; so Baptism is before the
Lords Supper.

XIX. Baptism is not to be iterated, if the essentials thereof were used.

Hence it is, that our Church ratifies the Baptism of the Popish Church; not
as it is abused there, but as it is administered in the name of the Holy Trinity.

XX. Baptism is necessary, not absolutely, but in respect of Christ's command;
neither must we feign such a necessity, as permits any other besides the
Minister to baptize; or, to cause us think they are excluded out of heaven, if
they die unbaptised.

XXI. The Baptism of Christ, and of John, are in effect the same.

The Pontificians deny that John's baptism was instituted by God: against
these plain testimonies; Matt. 21.25. Luc. 3.2. and 7.30. Joh. 1.33. Neither
matters it that John distinguishes between his baptism, and Christ's, Mar.
1.8. For there the opposition is not between baptism and baptism, but a
comparison only between the office of the Minister in Baptism, and Christ;
for the Minister gives the Symbol, but Christ the things signified. They say,
that such as were baptized by John, were rebaptised, Act. 19.1. etc. If they
were rebaptised by the Apostle, we gather that they were not rightly baptized
by some, who were imitators of John: neither yet can we find out of the text,
that they were rebaptised: for those words, v. 5. are not Lukes concerning
Paul, but Paul's concerning John and his disciples: therefore this place
favors neither Papists nor Anabaptists.


CHAP. XXIV. Of the Lords Supper.
THe Lords Supper is the other Sacrament of the New Testament; in which
Christians that are of age, receive spiritually Christ's body and blood sealed
to them in the reception of Bread and Wine according to Christ's institution.

The RULES.
I. The Lords Supper is called metonimically the Eucharist, or Thanksgiving;
Sinaxis, or a collection; the Lords Table; the New Testament; and
Synecdochically, the breaking of Bread.

II. It has the same efficient causes that Baptism has.

III. The outward matter thereof, or Signs, are Bread and Wine.

IV. The Supper is lame, without both Signs; and to rob the people of the Cup,
is Sacrilege.

Mat. 26.27. Drink ye all of this. 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of Christ's blood? And 11. v. 26. As often as you
shall eat this Bread, and drink of this Cup, you declare the Lords death.

V. The inward matter is Christ, with all his satisfaction and merit.

VI. As it is Jewish superstition, to use unleavened Bread; so the Popish
Penny-Wafers are superstitious relics.

VII. Its outward form consists in Actions and Words.

VIII. The Actions are the breaking of Bread, and pouring out of Wine; the
distribution of both Signs, and the receiving thereof with the hand and mouth.

IX. The word is, the whole Institution, containing the Eucharist, the command,
and the promise; but the promise chiefly.

X. Therefore it is impiety to think that the Bread is turned into Christ's
body, only the bare accidents remaining; by the low mumbling of these five
words For this is my body, and that with one breath, and the Priests intention.

XI. The internal form consists in the Analogy of the sign, and the thing
signified: in which, by Bread and Wine are signified Christ's body and blood, as
spiritual meat and drink; but by the breaking of Bread, and pouring out of the
Wine, are represented the breaking of his body or crucifixion, and sheding of
his blood; and lastly, by the distributing and receiving of both, the applying
of Christ's death.

XII. The breaking of Bread is not a thing indifferent.

For Christ made use of this himself, and commanded it to be used; saying, do
this; which he himself explained, adding, This is my body which is broken for
you. From this the Supper is so called, by this also the Churches union is
showed. 1 Cor. 10.17. We being many are made one bread and one body, for we are
all partakers of one bread.

XIII. The words, This is my body, can neither be meant of transubstantiation,
nor of consubstantiation: but the meaning is, This (to wit the Bread) is the
Sacrament of my body.

The Papists interpret the words these: That which is contained under the kind
of Bread, is my Body. The Lutherans these: in, with under this is my Body. The
reason of our interpretation, is explained in the former chapter. They say that
it is absurd to use tropical phrases which are obscure, in Christ's Will and
Legacy, Bur, 1. This supposition of theirs is false, that tropical phrases are
obscure; for we use tropes oftentimes to illustrate. 2. It is false also that
tropes are not used in Wills and Testaments: for Jacobs Will shows the contrary,
Genesis 49. And Mose's, Deuteronomy. 33. David, 2 Samuel 23. Tobias 4. Matathias, 1 Mac.
2.3. If there be no Trope in the Lords Supper, then let them show how the Cup
can be called the New Testament in his blood, without a Trope. That saying of
Austins (Advers. Adimant. cap. 12.) is worthy here to be set down. The Lord
doubted not to say, this is my Body, when he gave the Sign of his Body.

XIV. It is one thing to say, that Christ is present in the Bread; and another,
to maintain his presence in the Supper: for Christ is present in his Deity and
Spirit; he is present also in his body and blood, by a Sacramental presence, 1.
Of the Symbol, not that he is present in the Bread, but that he is represented
by the bread as by a Symbol. 2. Of Faith, whereby we apply Christ with his
merits to us. 3. Of Virtue and efficacy.

XV. The proper end of the Supper (not to speak of others) is, to seal our
spiritual nutrition or preservation to life eternal, by the merit of Christ's
death and obedience; whence depends the union of the faithful with Christ, and
with themselves.

XVI. It is an intolerable abuse, to take this Sacrament to prove ones
innocence, in the courts of justice, to confirm men's covenants, to prosper our
purposes and actions, etc.

XVII. The Lords Supper must be often times taken.

As often as you shall eat this bread, etc. 1 Cor. 11.26.

XVIII. The Supper differs from Baptism, not only in external signs, but in
its proper end: because Baptism is the sign of spiritual Regeration; but the
Supper, of nutrition: also in the object or subject to which; for Baptism is
given to Infants, the Supper to those only who are of years, and have been
tried: they differ also in time, for Baptism is used but once, the Lords
Supper oftentimes.

XIX. The Popish Mass is altogether repugnant to the Lords Supper.

1. The holy Supper is instituted by Christ, the Mass by the Pope: 2. the
Supper is a Sacrament instituted in memory of Christ's sacrifice, which was once
offered; but the Mass among Papists is the sacrifice it self to be offered
every day: the Ancients indeed called the Lords Supper a sacrifice; yet not
expiatory for sins, but Eucharisticall, and such as is joined with prayers, and
charitable works, which are acceptable sacrifices to God. 3. Christ did not
offer himself in the Supper, but on the Cross; but they will have Christ to be
offered in their Mass. 4. Christ instituted his Supper for the living; but the
Mass is celebrated for the dead also. 5. In the Holy Supper, Christ's body was
already made by the virtue of the Holy Ghost, not of bread, but of the Virgins
blood: In the Mass Christ's body is made anew by the Priest, uttering his five
words; and that of bread. 6. In the holy Supper, there was and remained true
Bread, and true Wine; and it obtained this name even after consecration: In the
Mass, if we will believe it, there remains only the outward species of the
Element, and the accidents. 7. In the holy Supper, they all drank of the cup as
Christ commanded: in the Mass, the Lay People are denied the cup. 8. In the
Supper Bread was broken, to represent Christ's body broken on the Cross: In
the private Mass the bigger Host is broken into three parts: the first is for
the triumphant Church; the second, for the Church in Purgatory; the third, for
the Church here on earth.


CHAP. XXV. Of the nature of the visible Church.
HItherto of the outward communion of the Covenant of grace: follows, the
external society of the visible Church, whereby all that be called, are
accounted for members of the Church: Now the Church is considered either in it
self, or in opposition to the false Church; the Church is considered in her
self in respect of her own nature, and outward administration.

The visible Church then, is a visible society of men called to the state of
grace by the Word and Sacraments.

The RULES.
I. The name of Church and Synagogue, is the same with the Hebrew Kahal, and
Edah; but the society of Christans is more usually called the Church.

II. We must carefully here observe the distinction of the word, that we may
know of what Church we speak.

III. For whereas it is distinguished into the triumphan, and militant: that
belongs to the doctrine of the state of glory; this is for our present
consideration.

IV. The militant Church is divided into the visible and invisible.

V. The invisible Church, is the company of the Elect only.

This is called invisible, not as if the men that belong to her were not
visible as they are men; but that they are not perceived as they are elect: for
the Lord knows only who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.

VI. This belongs to the doctrine of special vocation; for by her proper
effects, to wit, faith, charity, and such like, the elect which are the
invisible Church are known.

VII. The visible Church is the company of all that are called in common, as
well Reprobates as Elect.

VIII. This word, Church-visible, is ambiguous: for properly it is meant of the
universal Church, dispersed through the whole world; more strictly, of any
particular Church, as of France, England, Holland, etc. but most strictly, of
the representative Church, or the company of Pastors and Elders.

IX. Her efficient cause in common, is the holy Trinity; in particular, Christ.

X. The matter of the Church are they who are called in common, and received
into the Covenant of grace, and Infants that are born in the Church.

XI. Neither unbaptised Infants, nor Catechumeni, nor excommunicate persons,
are to be excluded out of the number of the Churches members.

The two former sorts of Men belong to the Church by the right of covenant,
though not of profession; but for the third kind, though they be cast out of
some particular Church, yet they are not simply ejected out of the catholic,
though the Papists excommunicate them.

XII. The form of the Church consists in a double union; the first is, of
her conjunction with Christ her head; the other, of her members among
themselves.

XIII. The first union is in this, that in the Church not only Christ as the
head is eminent; but also as the head, he communicates his gifts and virtue to
the members.

Ephesians. 1.22. And he has appointed him over all things to his Church, which is
his body, and the fulfilling of him, who fills all in all. and cap. 5.23. For
the man is the head of the woman, even as Christ is the head of his Church: and
gives salvation to his body, etc. Col. 1.18. And he is the head of the Church,
which is his body.

XIV. They make a monster of the Church, who set up any other universal head
thereof besides Christ.

For as she is not headless, so she is not many-headed, for of one body there
is but one head, except it be a monster: neither must therefore the Church,
because visible, have a visible head on earth: for properly the elect only are
members of the Church; therefore though she be visible in respect of outward
administration, yet she is invisible in respect of the elect, and of their
union with Christ.

XV. The other union of the members, or of particular Churches among
themselves, consists in the unity of profession, faith, and charity.

Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. There is one body, and one spirit, as you are all led into
one hope of your vocation: there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God
and Father of all, etc.

XVI. The principal end of the Church is Gods glory; the proximate, our
salvation.

XVII. Of the adjuncts, we must observe her Titles and Notes.

XVIII. For her titles, she is called One, Catholic, and Holy.

XIX. Christ's Church is one, in respect of the form now explained.

XX. She is Catholic, in respect of the union of time, place and persons.

The Church Catholic has a treble signification, 1. A very general one, to
wit, of the whole society of men and Angels. 2. A more particular of the
company of all elect men: 3. Most special of all, of the visible militant
Church.

XXI. She is Catholic in respect of time, because she has not utterly failed
since the beginning of the world; but still there has been some visible Church.

As the light of the Moon decreaseth, though her substance never wastes: even
so although the light of the Church is sometime clearer, sometimes obscurer;
yet she remains the same still; and visible too; not to Hogs eyes, but to the
godly.

XXII. In respect of place and persons, she is Catholic; because she is not
tied to place and persons.

Matt. 24.14, 15. This Gospel shall be preached through all the world. Act.
10.34, 35. Of a truth, I perceive that God is no accepter of persons; but in
every nation, he that fears him and works righteousness, is accepted with
him.

XXIII. The Church is holy in common, because of her calling and covenant; but
particularly in respect of the Elect, who are holy in Christ, by an imputed
righteousness begun in them.

Concerning the holiness of vocation, God says to Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Thou art
a holy people to the Lord thy God. Of imputed and begun holiness, Paul, 1 Cor.
6.11. But you are washed, but you are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus,
by the Spirit of our God.

XXIV. The inherent holiness of the Church in this life is imperfect, except
in respect of Christ, who by his perfection covers her imperfection; and in the
hope of future perfection.

Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Christ has loved his Church, and has given himself for her;
that he might sanctify and cleanse her with the washing of water by the word;
that he might present her to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle or any such thing; but that she might be holy, and without blemish.

XXV. Therefore the Church is not free from all error, as the Papists say; for
although the Catholic Church does not so err in the fundamentals of Faith, as
to fall off utterly, yet she is not quite exempted from error, seeing there is
no member of her perfect in this life: as for a particular Church, she may both
err, and become a harlot.

Hence the Church of Rome, which in the Apostles time was like the woman
clothed with the Sun, having a Crown on her head, and the Moon under her feet,
is so degenerated, that she is likened to the Whore sitting upon the Beast,
Rev. 12.1. and 17.1. etc.

XXVI. The notes of the visible Church are the pure Preaching of the Word, and
lawful administration of the Sacraments.

We spoke above of the Notes of the invisible Church, that they depended upon
the works of Vocation: for the notes of the Elect specially called, and of the
visible Church are the same. But here these notes are only considered, by
which the Church is undoubtedly made visible: now it appears that these are the
notes of the Church, out of these testimonies. Matt. 28.19, 20. Go and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
H. Ghost; teaching them to observe all things which I have commanded you. Act.
2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. Some adjoyn Ecclesiastical
discipline; but this is contained under the two former; for this discipline is
required of both.

XXVII. These notes belong to all Churches alike, so far as concerns the
fundamentals of Religion: but in respect of accidentals, they are in some
Churches more, in some less.

XXVIII. Therefore we are not presently to doubt of the truth of any particular
Church, because of every error or abuse.

For there is not so much purity expected, as not to err in any one Article,
or in the administration of the Sacraments; so that there be not a falling off
from the hinge of salvation, to wit, from the two Tables of the Law, and Faith
in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12. For no man can lay any other foundation besides
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ: Now if any build upon this foundation,
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; every man's work shall be
made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by
fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is; if any man's
work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward; if any
man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be
saved, yet so as by fire.

XXIX. Of the fifteen Notes of the Church, rehearsed by Bellarmine, some are
true, and agree with ours, from which notwithstanding the Church of Rome is
afar off; but others are either strangers to the visible Church, or they are
the Notes rather of the false, then of the true Church; or they are not
convertible with the Church, for they neither belong to her alone, nor always.

1. His first Note is the name Church and Christians: But the imposing of names
is a matter rather of fact then of right; therefore, an argument taken from the
name is of no force, without the thing answer to the name, Rev. 3.1. Thou art
said to live, but thou art dead. 2. Antiquity: but this belongs not to the
Church alone, nor always. Not alone, because the World, the Heaven, the
Elements, have antiquity, yet are not the Church; Not always, because the
Church has not been always ancient, there was a time when she was new: true
Antiquity is the first principle of things, which as it is first, so it is most
true; therefore, in general, the Churches antiquity is to be reckoned from
Paradise; in particular, the Apostolical Church, from the preaching of Christ
and his Apostles. But the Church of Rome as it is at this day, arose long after
the Apostles times. 3. A constant duration without interruption. This indeed is
the property of the visible Catholic Church, but depending on Gods promises,
it does more appear to Faith then to sense; and as that is not true antiquity
which depends not from the first principle, so there can be no duration which
has not its original from the same. 4. Amplitude and multitude of Believers:
this belongs not always to the Church, as we may see in that Church that was
in the time of our first Parents, Noah, Abraham, etc. Yea this note is not
natural to the Church; for there is still the greater number amongst the
wicked, Mat. 7.13. Enter in at the narrow gate. and Luke 12.32. Fear not
little flock. 5. The succession of Bishops: But this also neither is the
Churches Note alone, nor always. Not always; for as it was not in the
beginning of the Church, so it will cease toward the end: not alone; for in
the false Church there is found a succession of Bishops; whence we must look
rather on the succession of Doctrine then of persons; and the persons are to be
judged by their Doctrine, not this by the persons; They have not Peter's
inheritance, who have not Peter's Faith, says Ambrose. 6. An agreement in
Doctrine with the ancient Church: This indeed is a true Note, but it is the
same with ours, to wit, the purity of the Word and Sacraments, as it was in the
time of the Apostolical Church, from which the Roman has fallen. 7. The union
of the members with their head the Pope, and among themselves. The first limb
of this Note belongs to the false and Apostatical, not to the Apostolical
Church: that Church is she that worships the Beast, Rev. 13.12. The latter
cannot be a tributed to the Church alone; for there is union also among Devils,
Matt. 12.8. The 8. is holiness of Doctrine, which is the same with the sixth.
9. The ninth is efficacy of Doctrine; this also answers the sixth, and our
Notes too; but it agrees no ways to the Roman Church. 10. Holiness of life in
the first authors and planters of Religion. Now this Holiness is either inward
or outward; if inward, it is not a mark of the visible Church. He is a true Jew
that is so in secret, Romans 2.29. God knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. if
outward, it is false; for Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light, 2
Cor. 11.14. Therefore the Church is to be judged by her doctrine, not by the
life of her Doctors, Mat. 23.2. Whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do, but do you not after their works. 11. The glory of Miracles. 12. The
light of Prophecy. But the gifts of Miracles and Prophecy were extraordinary,
given to confirm the Gospel, which are now vanished since the Gospel has been
propagated; wherefore the Apostles make no promises of other miracles and
prophecy, but they rather make this bragging of Miracles and prophecy a Note
of the Antichristian Church, 2 These. 2.9 Rev. 13.13. And Christ himself says,
that He will not know such, Mat. 7.22.13. The thirteenth Note, is the
confession of adversaries, as Heretics, Jews, etc. But the authority of such
testimonies is as great as the adversaries themselves are, by whose accession
nothing is added, and by the want nothing diminished. 14. The fourteenth, is
the unhappy end of those who have opposed the Church. 15. The fifteenth, is the
happiness of them who have defended her: But this Note is so uncertain, that
it deserves not the name of a Note; for of such, man knows not either love
or hatred, Eccl. 9.3. Yea it is rather a Note of the false Church; for it is
certain, that for the most part the Churches condition in this life is wretched
and sad, Joh. 16.20. Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament,
but the world shall rejoice.


CHAP. XXVI. Of the outward Administration of the Church.
HItherto of the nature of the Church; now follows its Administration, which
is either ordinary, or extraordinary: the ordinary is public or private; the
public is ecclesiastical, or politic; the ecclesiastical is that which
handles spiritual things: This is either proper to public persons in the
Church, or common to the whole Congregation.

The proper, is that which is executed by any Minister of the Church according
to his calling. The Ministers are they to whom God has committed the charge of
his flock.

The RULES.
I. No man can have the charge of a Church, but he that is lawfully called.

II. No man is to be forced to undertake the Ministry.

III. Ministers are not to be debarred from Marriage.

1. Cor. 9.5. Have not we power to lead about a wife, a Sister, as well as the
rest of the Apostles and brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? 1 Timothy 3.2. A Bishop
must be without reproof, the Husband of one Wife; and v. 4. One that rules
well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity.


Ministers are either ordinary, or extraordinary; They were extraordinary, whom
God raised upon extraordinary occasions, either to establish a new government
in the Church, or e se to repair the old government when it was decayed.

Such were the Prophets in the Old Testament: But in the New, John Baptist,
Christ, the Apostles, Prophets, that is, such as were furnished with the gift
of interpreting Scripture; Evangelists, that were the companions of the
Apostles, and supplied their rooms in their absence; Pastors to rule and teach
the Churrh, and Doctors for the Schools, Ephesians. 4.11.

The RULES.
I. The marks of extraordinary Ministers, were extraordinary gifts.

II. Such were the gifts of Prophecy, Tongues, and Miracles.

III. These extraordinary gifts continued so long as it pleased God, and the
Churches necessity required them; which being taken away, the ordinary
Ministry succeeded.


Ordinary Ministers are they who be furnished with ordinary gifts, and an
ordinary calling: And these are Pastors, Doctors, Presbyters and Deacons. The
Pastors are they who are set over a particular flock, to teach them, to
administer the Sacraments to them, and to watch over them.

The RULES.
I. The name of Bishop belongs to all Pastors, 1 Timothy 3.1.

II. Although this custom prevailed in the Church, that he who had the charge
of the Diocese of particular Churches, was named Bishop, yet the name of
Universal Bishop belongs to none.


There are Doctors, who in the Schools teach Youth the grounds of Truth, which
they may afterward profess in the Churches.

The RULE.
Pastors differ from Doctors, in this, That they have the charge of the Church;
these, of the Schools: They are to move the affections; these, to inform the
understanding of their auditors.
Presbyters are godly and grave men, joined to assist the Pastors in such
things as are fit for the good order of the Church, in visiting of the sick, in
observing disordered livers, and such like.

Deacons and Diaconesses, of old, were they, who had the charge to gather and
distribute the Church-goods.

Act. 6.1, etc. 1 Timothy 3.1, etc.

The RULES.
I. The collection and distribution of Church-goods, is of Divine right.

This appears by the Oeconomie of the Old Testament; for by the command of God,
Tithes were gathered for the Priests, Levites, and poor. In the New Testament,
Christ refused not the money that was offered by godly rich persons, Luke 8.3.
out of which he sustained his Disciples and friends, and the poor also, Job.
13.19. In the Apostles time the Deacons had charge of the Church-goods, Act.
6.1. etc.

II. As we reprove the covetousness of the Romish Church, supported with
horrible superstition and idolatry in the gathering of Tithes, and other
Church-duties, as likewise their profuse wasting thereof upon their pomp and
luxury; so among Protestants, they grievously offend God and the Church, who
unfaithfully dispense these goods.


Thus of the proper administration; the common consists in the calling of
Ministers, in the well ordering of the Church, in judging of Doctrine and
controversies, and in the use of the Keys.

The calling of the Ministers, is the choosing of fit men for the Church into
the Ministry, after trial had of their life and doctrine, and an introduction
of them by some solenm Rite into the possession of their Office.

The RULES.
I. The chief efficient cause of this vocation is God, who inwardly calls
Ministers, and furnishes them with his gifts: but the ministerial cause is the
whole Church, or at least the representative, consisting of Pastors and
Presbyters, or other Churchmen, and not the Bishop or Pastor alone.

For the Apostles never challenged to themselves alone the right of Election,
Act. 1.23. and 6.5. and 14.13.

II. Three things are required to a lawful calling; trial, election, and
confirmation.

III. Trial is both of life and doctrine; and the life must be first tried
before doctrine: for he is not to be admitted to the trial of Doctrine, whose
conditions are not to be endured.

IV. The manner of Election is this: After the pouring out of fervent prayers
to God, the persons being named out of whose number one is to be chosen; either
by the vocal suffrages of all, or of the greatest part, or else by holding up
of hands, that one is elected.

V. Confirmation is the introduction of the parties elected, in which public
prayers being premised, he is recommended to the Church, and his calling is
confirmed by imposition of hands.

VI. The Pontificians falsely say, that this is an unlawful calling, which is
done by the Presbyters without the Bishop.

For Bishops have not by Divine right, greater power and authority.

VII. The Reformed Church has ratified the calling of them, who in our
forefathers time reformed the Church; not as if it proceeded from Popery, as a
bunch or swelling of the Church, but as principally they were called by God,
and furnished with gifts.

They object, that such men were called under Popery, but that their vocation
is expired since they fell off: We answer, that they are falsely accused of
falling off; for they have not fallen off from the Gospel, to the preaching of
which they were called even in Popery, but from the corruption of the Gospel:
neither have they cause to cry out that they were called to preach the doctrine
of the Romish Church; for whereas they comprehend their doctrine under the
title of the Gospel, the Minister who observes that in very truth it is far
from the Gospel, he by the right of his calling might contradict the same:
Although then they have revolted from the Romish Church, yet they have not
revolted from their calling.

VIII. Neither can they produce any thing whereby they may infringe the calling
of our Ministers, performed according to the former Rules above handled.


For, 1. When they ask by what right we teach? We answer the same that Christ
did to those that asked the same question. Mat. 21.14. The Baptism of John,
whence is it, from heaven or from men? Even so we say, the doctrine of our
Ancestors, which is preached among us at this day, whence is it? Is it
repugnant to the word of Christ and his Apostles, or is it consonant? If it be
repugnant, let them show in what Articles; If it be consonant, they cannot
reprove our vocation. For where the true Doctrine has place, there the
vocation is lawful: besides, that calling which answers the example of the
Apostles and primitive Church, is lawful; but that our calling is such, cannot
be denied.

The power of judging Doctrines, is that whereby the Church enquires into men's
Doctrine, and cuts off the controversies that trouble her.

The RULES.
I. Every private man may and ought to judge of the Doctrine he professes, if
it be consonant to Scripture or not.

Acts 17.11. the men of Berea daily searched the Scripture, whether these
things were so. 1. Cor. 10.15. I speak as to those who understand; judge you
what I speak. 1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but ^^y the
Spirits if they be of God.

II. This ought to be done also by the Presbytery or Assembly, when any great
controversy arises.

III. As the holy Spirit is the chief Judge of controversies; so the Scipture,
which is the voice of the holy Spirit, is the rule by which the straight is
known from the crooked.


The power which concerns the well ordering of the Church, is that which
determines what things ought to be done decently in the Church.

The RULES.
I. The object of this power are the outward circumstances of Divine Worship;
to wit, time, place, and such like, which in themselves be indifferent.

II. If in these any inconvenience is found, the Church may lawfully abrogate
the old Ceremonies, and substitute such as are more convenient.

III. Yet the canons and customs of the Church must not equal the Scripture
canons.


The power of the Keys is that, which the Church uses for preservation of
Discipline whereof are two parts; to loose, and to bind.

To bind, is to denounce Gods wrath against impenitent sinners.

To loose, is to pronounce remission of sins to repentant sinners; both which
have certain degrees. The degrees of binding are: 1. A severe exhortation and
commination, after private admonitions have been rejected; this must be done by
the Presbyteriea. 2. A keeping off from the Lords Supperb. 3. The greater
excommunication, by which the sinner is cast out of the Church, yet not without
hope of pardon and return, if he repentc. 4. Anathema, or in the Syriac word,
Maran-atha, when he is cast out without hoped.

a Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. If they brother shall trespass against thee, go tell him
his fault betweent thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, then thou have
gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more, that in the mouth of one or two witnesses every word may be
established: and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but
if he neglect to hear the church, etc b Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy
unto dogs, nor cast your pearls before swine. c 1 Cor. 5.5. Let such a man be
delievered o^^^ to Satan to the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may
be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. d 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Chrrst, let him be Anathema Maran-atha. 1 John 5.16. There is a sin
unto death, I do not say he shall pray for it.

In loosing, the same degrees being observed, the sinner is by the Church
received again into favor. So by the Apostles advice, the excommunicated
Corinthian is received again into grace, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.

The RULES.
I. Christ is the author and founder of this power.

Out of the testimonies above cited.

II. This power of the Keys is in the whole Presbytery, not in the Bishop or
Pastor alone.

The Pope falsely arrogates this power to himself. For to say nothing of that
right which he claims from Peter, it is certain, that the Keys were not
delivered to Peter alone, Mat. 16.18. but the same right was imparted also to
all the rest. Mat. 18.18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth,
etc, and Ioh. 20.23. Whose sins ye shall remit, etc.

III. The object of this binding, is the sinner; who either was not amended by
private admonition, or whose scandal was greater then could be done away by
private exhortation.

IV. The form consists in the decent observation of degrees: for when the
first and second will prevail, we should not make use of the third, and very
seldom of the fourth.

V. Popish Indulgences, which are the fictitious treasure they brag of,
gathered by the Pope out of the merits of Christ, of the blessed Virgin, and of
the Saints, who suffered more (as they teach) then their sins deserved; are
far from the power of the Keys.

Let the treasure of Christ's blood suffice, which cleanses us from all sin,
1 John 1.7.

VI. Loosing, consists not in those Satisfactions which they enjoin sinners.

By satisfaction here, we understand not that which is given to the Church by a
serious testimony of repentance, and that publicly, when it is required; but
that which satisfies for sin, Besides, their opinion is grounded on a false
supposition, that the punishment is reserved, after the fault is remitted. Of
this we will speak in the doctrine of Justification hereafter.

VII. The end of this power, is the preservation of the Churches honor, and
the foreing of wicked men to repentance.

VIII. The power of the Church, and of the Magistrate, differ in these. 1. The
object of this, is any man; but of that, the members of the Church only,
without exception of the greatest personages. 2. The object of this, are the
body and outward goods; but of that, the soul. 3. This punishes even
penitents; that receives penitents into favor.

IX. Ministers and Presbyters should not divulge any secret offense, revealed
to them by him whose conscience is oppressed, except the safety and peace of
the Public require it; lest others be debarred of the Churches comfort.


Thus of the Church Government: the Political is that whereby the Church also
is governed by the Magistrate.

The RULES.
I. Magistrates are the Churches nursing-fathers, as they are keepers of the
two Tables of the Law, as they preserve Churches and Schools, and defend the
Truth.

II. The Clergy is not exempted from the Magistrates subjection.

Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. The examples of
Christ paying toll-mony, Mat. 17.27. and of Paul appealing to Caesar, Act.
25.11. witness this.

III. The Infidel-Magistrate must be obeyed in things that may be done with a
safe conscience.

IV. We must pray for Magistrates that be infidels, 1 Timothy 2.1. etc.


So much of the Public Administration: the Private, is, whereby each member of
the Church is coupled with one another in the bond of love, to the edifying of
the whole Mystical body.

See Romans 12.6, etc. 1 Cor. 12.12, etc. Ephesians. 2.20. and 4.1, etc.

Hitherto of the Ordinary Church Government: the Extraordinary is, when,
necessity requiring, a Council is gathered.

A Council is a Meeting enjoined by the Civil Magistrate, or the common consent
of the Church; in which men endowed with the gifts of the Spirit, and lawfully
chosen for this purpose, undertake the Churches cause, and out of Gods word
define it. And this is either ecumenical and universal, or else particular.
Particular is, National or Provincial.

The RULES.
I. A Council must be called by the Magistrate, if he be Faithful: If he be an
Infidel, either it is to be procured by Petition; or if he be an open enemy to
the Council, it must be held by the Churches common consent, necessity so
requiring it.

II. The Persons which should be present at the Council, are the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Presidents, so many Scribes, and fit men chosen for this
purpose: Neither are private men to be altogether excluded, who may be present
at the handling of Doctrinal points; but not in matters of Scandal, which
charity ought to cover.

III. The matter which is to be handled in the Council or Synod, are
Church-businesses which are of weight, and worthy of serious consideration.

IV. The form of the Council, consists in a religious and orderly
disquisition of the truth.

V. It will be religious, if after fervent prayers to God, all things be tried
by Scripture, as by an infallible rule.

VI. It will be orderly, if every man be mindful of his duty.

VII. It is the part of the Civil President, to gather the Council; to protect
it being gathered; to prohibit all violence and disorder; to cause proclaim the
Decrees lawfully made, and to curb the refractory.

VIII. The Ecclesiastic President, is to propose the Question; to moderate the
Disputation, by the advice of his Assistants; to ask their Opinion; and by
Notaries to record the Decrees.

IX. The rest of the Delegates are to propose their opinion calmly, and
roundly; or to assent to him that spoke before, if his opinion was right.

X. The presidencie that the Pope claims over Councels, is far from this form;
who neither consulteth with Scripture, nor asks the opinion of his
Assistants, but obtrudes his Dictates to be confirmed by the Council.

XI. The form of the Council of Jerusalem was far otherwise, in which every man
might lawfully utter his opinion: Paul and Barnabas had as much freedom to
speak as Peter; and after their opinions had been canvassed to and fro, James
at length concludes. Act. 15. v. 6.19.

XII. The end of Councels, is peace and truth in the Church.

XIII. As far as Councels agree with Scripture, so great is their authority;
neither are they more exempted from erring, then the Church her self.

What credit we are to give to Popish Councels, may be seen both by the
opposition of Councels one to another, as likewise by their impious Decrees.
The Councels of Constance and Basil subjected the Pope to the Synod: but that
of Trent on the contrary extols the Pope above all Councels. The second Council
of Nice impiously thrusts out the second Commandment; and that of Constance
sacrilegiously robs the people of the Cup in the Lords Supper.


CHAP. XXVII. Of the False Church.
THus in two Chapters we have considered the Church in her self: Now of the
False Church, which is opposite to her, and her enemy.

The Churches enemies are either open, or secret.

These are called, in Rev. 20.8. Gog and Magog; that is, covered and uncovered.

Her open foes are Heathens, Jews, and Mahumetans. The Heathens are they, who
feign, paint, and worship false and fictitious Gods.

The Jews deny the Trinity, and the coming of the Messiah, and interpret
carnally what is spoken of Christ's kingdom in the Prophets spiritually.

The Mahumetans prefer their Mahumet to Christ, and their Alcoran to the
Scriptures; which Alcoran that Impostor compiled by the help of a Nestorian
Monk and an Arrian, out of the sink of Gentilisme, Judaisme, Mahumetisme,
Arrianisme, and other heresies.

The hid or counterfeit enemies, are either false Christ's or Antichrists. False
Christ's are they, who brag themselves to be Christ.

As Simon Magus, Barcochab, Moses Cretensis, David Georgius, and such like.

Antichrists are, commonly, all Heretics; but particularly, and by way of
excellency, that great Antichrist.

1 John 2.18. Little children, now is the last time; and at ye have heard that
Antichrist would come, even now many Antichrists are begun. and 1. c. 4. v. 3.
Whatsoever spirit does not confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, he
is not of God; but this is that spirit of Antichrist, of whom you have heard
that he was to come, and that he is now in the world.

Heretics are they, who maintain stubbornly against the plain light of truth,
any doctrine which overthrowes directly, or by necessary consequence, the
fundamentals of Christian faith.

The RULES.
I. Not every Error makes an Heretic.

For either there is an error against the foundation; as that of the Arrians
and Marcionites, of whom, they denied the divinity of Christ, these his
humanity: Or about the foundation; so the Papists err, while they teach
Transubstantiation, which overthrows the truth of Christ's humanity: Or besides
the foundation; such errors are by Paul compared to hay, wood, etc. 1 Cor. 3.12.

II. An Heretic is made, 1. by an error in, or about the foundation, 2. by
conviction, 3. by contumacie.

III. Not every Schismatic is an Heretic.

He is a Schismatic, who without hurting the foundation of Faith, departs from
some Ceremony of the Church, out of ambition.


The great Antichrist, is he, who under the name of Christ's Vicar, persecutes
him.

The RULES.
I. The name Antichrist belongs not to one person alone, but to a whole state
or order of men, as it were in the same kingdom succeeding each other.

Even as the word of High Priest. He is not then opposite to Christ, as one
person is to another, in respect of substance; but he is opposite to him in
respect of quality or office.

II. The Papists will have Antichrist to be one particular man; a Jew of the
Tribe of Dan, the Jews Messiah, and the restorer of their Religion, who shall
reign at Jerusalem three years and a half, shall fight with Henoch and Eliah,
shall offer to ascend to Heaven from Mount Olivet, but shall be destroyed by
Christ.

III. But we out of Scripture describe Antichrist thus. 1. That he is a man at
one time one; but in succession of time, an order of men, in the same state
succeeding each other. 2. Raised by Satan. 3. A Christian in name only. 4. In
very deed Christ's enemy. 5. Sitting in the Temple of God as God. 6. Reigning
in that great City, which rules over the Kings of the earth. 7. Seducing the
Inhabitants of the earth with lying wonders. 8. Setting a mark on his
followers. 9. Full of idolatry, ambition, avarice, cruelty and impurity. 10.
Revealed in the last times. 11. He shall be destroyed by the breath of Christ's
mouth, and shall be overthrown by his own lovers, and utterly abolished at
Christ's glorious coming.

If these things be proved, the description of the Pontificians will vanish in
smoke. 1. He is not one particular person, but an order succeeding each other;
as appears by the appointed time of Antichrist, which extends it self even from
the time of Paul and John when this mystery began to appear, 2 These. 2.7. 1
Ioh. 4.3. even till the coming of Christ, 2 These. 2.8. whence that fiction of
three years and a half fails. 2. He is raised by Satan, 2 These. 2.9. his
coming shall be with the power of Satan, Rev. 13.4. The Dragon gave him power:
Whereas otherwise Magistrates are raised by God, Romans 13.2, 3. Thirdly, A
Christian in name only. 2 These. 2.4. He sits in the temple of God. Fourthly,
Christ's enemy. 1 John 4.5. He denies Christ to have come in the flesh; to wit,
by the sequel of his Doctrine. Rev. 13.11. He has horns like the Lamb; by
arrogating that to himself which belongs to Christ. Rev. 17.14. He fights
against the Lamb: and 19.19. and 20.8. Fifthly, He sits in the Temple of God. 2
These. 2.4. Not in that of Jerusalem, which is abolished without hope of
resurrection, Dan. 9.26, 27. But in the Church which is Gods temple, 2 Cor.
6.16. Sixthly, He sits, that is, he reigns. Rev. 18.7. She sits as a queen. He
sits as God, and exalts himself above everything that is called God, 2 These.
2.4. 6. He reigns in the great City, the type whereof is, The beast with seven
heads and ten horns, sitting upon many waters; where the seven heads are seven
hills and seven kings, or forms of Government, by a Metonymie; Ten horns
signify ten kings; and the waters, many people and nations, Rev. 17.1. etc.
Seventhly, Wonders are preached. 2 These. 2.9. Lying wonders. Rev. 13.13, 14.
He works great wonders, so that he makes fire to come down from heaven upon
the earth in the sight of men, and he seduceth the inhabitants of the earth,
etc. and ver. 15. And he had power to give life to the image of the beast, etc.
Eighthly, And he caused every one great and small to receive his mark on their
right hands or foreheads; and that none might buy or sell, but such as had his
mark or name, or number of his name, etc. and his number was 666. Rev. 13.16,
17, etc. Ninthly, Idolatry by a familiar Scripture phrase is shadowed out by a
Whore. Rev. 17.2. His ambition appears by that place in the Thessalonians; His
covetousness is noted by his gainful merchandising, Rev. 18.11. His cruelty is
set out by the Beast drunk with the blood of the Martyrs. Rev. 17.6. His
impurity, by sins heaped up to heaven, Rev. 18.5. Yea thus in general, by the
mystical name of Sodom, Egypt, Babylon and Jerusalem are described; in which
mystical Christ, that is, Christ in his Members, is crucified. Rev. 11.8. and
14.8. Tenthly, He is to be revealed in the last times; He that lets must be
taken out of the way, 2 These. 2.7, 8. that is, the Roman Emperor; for so long
as he lived in Rome, he hindered the revealing of the Antichrist. Eleventhly,
there be two degrees of destroying: 1. He shall be slain by the breath of
Christ's mouth, 2 These. 2.8. that is, with the sword of his word, which
proceeds out of his mouth, Rev. 19.21. The effect whereof shall be this, that
as soon as Antichrists fraud shall be found out, the lovers of the whore shall
hate her, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh and
burn her with fire, Rev. 17.16. 2. He shall be abolished by the glorious coming
of Christ, 2 These. 2.8. When he shall be cast into that Lake of fire which
burns with brimston, Rev. 19.20.

IV. This description shows not only what, but who this great Antichrist is;
for that must needs be the thing defined, to which the definition belongs:
but the definition belongs to the Pope; therefore he is the thing defined.

The Minor is proved by an induction or application of each member. 1. The
first member is out of question; for every one knows that the Popes succeed
each other. The second member is manifest both by its effects, as also by their
example who have attained that Seat by wicked arts and ways, as Alexander the
sixth, Sylvester the second, Benedict the ninth, of whom see Platina and other
Popish Writers. 3. By profession, the Pope will not deny himself to be a
Christian. 4. That he is Christ's enemy, and that he has made horns to himself,
like those of the Lamb, is apparent; because he claims to himself Christ's
Prophetical, Sacerdotal, and Regal offices, together with the titles of
High Priest, Prince of Pastors, Head and Husband of the Church, etc. while he
casts by Christ's word, as needless and obscure, like a nose of wax, equalling,
yea, preferring his traditions to it: He overthrows Christ's Prophetical office,
whilst he urges the merits and intercession of Mary and of the Saints: He
destroys Christ's Priesthood, and his Kingly office, whilst he takes upon him to
do what he pleases in the Church. But if you compare Christ's life with the
Popes, the humility of the one with the pride of the other, the doctrine of the
one with the doctrine of the other, concerning Free Will, Justification, the
Sacraments, and such like articles, it will appear that fire and water are not
more contrary. 5. That he sits in the temple of God, that is, in the Church,
which is his temple, as is said, is manifest. Now the Roman Church, as it is
Popish, is not called the temple of God. But 1. As in John's time it was the
true Church of Christ; and so the Temple of Jerusalem of old, was called the
temple of God, though it had been converted to a den of thieves, Jer. 7. ver.
11. 2. As God has there yet those that belong to election: The Pope is born in
the Church, he sits in her, not as her true and natural Son, but as a Monster,
a bunch or swelling, or as a canker cleaving fast to the body: Furthermore,
that he sits there as God, the titles which his Flatterers give him, make it
plain: they deny him to be a man; therefore they call him Admirable, which is
Christ's title, Esa. 9.6. etc. (Gloss. de Elect. c. fund.) Also their Lord God,
de concess. praeb. c. proposuisti. In the Council of Lateran, the acclamation
which they gave to Pope Leo the tenth was, To thee is given all power in heaven
and earth. But he extols himself above God, not only in preferring himself
before Magistrates, which are called gods, especially before the Emperor whom
he calls the Moon, and himself the Sun, but also by preferring his Decrees to
Gods Word, and consequently himself to God. 6. He possesses that city, which
has seven hills, and had seven kings. That Rome has seven hills all the world
knows; but the seven Kings, metonymically, are the seven forms of Government
which were in Rome before Popery: for there were, 1. Kings, 2. Consuls, 3.
Dictators, 4. Tribunes of the People, 5. the Decemviri, 6. Tribunes of the
Soldiers, 7. Emperors. Of whom the Angel says, Rev. 17.10. Five are now
fallen, to wit, the Kingdom, the Dictatorship, the Tribuneship of the People,
the Decemvirat, and Tribune-ship of the Soldiers. One, says he, is, to wit,
the Emperor with the Consuls, which remained under the Empire: therefore he
says, five, not six, are fallen: and another was not yet come, ibid. v. 10. to
wit, the Pope; and he is one of the seven; and is the eighth: ibid. v. 11. the
eighth, in respect of the seven that went before; of the seven, because the
power, tyranny, idolatry, etc. of all the seven governments or kingdoms have
met together in Popery as it were in a sink. He was, says the Angel to John,
v. 8. he is not, and yet he is; he was the Beast, or Rome; to wit, the Seat of
seven Kings: he is not, the seat of Antichrist, not as yet revealed: And yet he
is; to wit, the seat of the Emperor, reigning in John's time. These do agree
so fitly with Rome, that some Jesuits are forced to confess that Rome is that
Beast. 7. As for Miracles, there is no thing more usual in Popery then to brag
of miracles; but what are they? they are lying wonders: He makes fire to come
down from heaven; that is, by the thunder of excommunication, he brings the
fire of Gods wrath from heaven; in token whereof, when he goes about to
excommunicate Kings and Princes, he flings down from the Capitol burning
torches: but if you look upon the literal interpretation, Hildebrand was wont
to shake sparkles of fire out of his sleeves; And they record in the Legends,
that at the requests of holy men, fire has been brought down from heaven. But
he gives life also to the image of the Beast. By the name of image, idolatry is
understood, by introducing of which, the Gentile idolatry as it were raised
again out of the grave, was restored and quickened: but in a literal sense this
is true; for it is known how Papists have caused their images laugh, weep,
speak, etc. We read in the Legend of Thomas, that when he had presented to
Christ's image the third part of his Theology, He asked if he had written well
or not? The image answered; Thomas, thou have written very well. 8. He puts a
mark upon his followers, in which apishly, he imitates Christ, who signs his
servants on the forehead, Rev. 7.5. etc. Besides, the mark, the name, and
number of of the Beast are the same; to wit, the name containing the number
666. That name in Ireneus, the scholar of Polycarpus, who was Saint John's
disciple, is lateno, the letters of which do exactly make up 666. l 30 a 1 t
300 e 5 i 10 n 50 o 70 200 666 The name is very fit: for he reigns in Italy,
where heretofore was the kingdom of the Latins; he prefers the Latin Bible to
the Originals; his Ministers perform their Divine Service in Latin; and in
Latin they write all their Bulls, etc. he sets a mark generally on their
foreheads and right hands, in that they are forced by open profession (the
symbol whereof is the forehead) and by their actions (which are figured out by
the right hand) to witness that they belong to the Roman and Latin Church.
But particularly he sets a mark upon his followers, when in Baptism he signs
them with the Cross; and in Confirmation, when he puts chrisme on their
foreheads; and when in Ordination of Ministers he anoints their head and
fingers. 9. Concerning their idolatry and wickedness, read the History of the
Popes; for to rehearse more, is not now our purpose. 10. He was revealed about
the year 600. For after that Constantine the Emperor translated his seat to
Byzantium, Sylvester took possession of the Palace; since which time the
insolency of the Popes did so increase, that about the year 595. a most
bitter contention arose between Gregory the Great and John of Constantinople,
concerning the Supremacy. At length Boniface the 3. obtained of the Emperor
Phocas, a Parricide and Tyrant, that the Romish Church might be the head of all
the rest, and that he should be styled Universal Bishop. 11. As for his
destruction; the event now shows how much his power is impaired by the
preaching of the Word, and how many Kings have fallen off from him. Other
passages we must expect with patience.

V. The King of the Locusts, the swarms of which were raised out of the
bottomless pit, is a figure of Antichrist, and of his Clergy, Monks etc. Rev.
9.1.11.

VI. The two Beasts, Rev. 13. are figures of one and the same Antichrist. The
first with seven heads ascending out of the sea, etc. very fierce; paints him
out as he is in very truth. The latter like a Lamb, does shadow him as he seems
to be by his impostures.

VII. The Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet, (for the same is signified by these
names) sending out three impure Spirits like Frogs, called the Spirits of
Devils, showing signs, and stirring up the whole world to battle, Rev.
16.13.14. The event does so clearly show us of what this was the figure, that
he who sees it not is blind.

VIII. The Beast, c. 17. v. 1, etc. notes out the Seat of Antichrist; but the
Whore that sits on the Beast, the Church of Antichrist.

I have somewhat largely handled these things, because it is needful not only
to know Christ, but Antichrist also: and these passages conduce not a little
for the understanding of the Apocalypse.


CHAP. XXVIII. Of Vocation in special.
SO much of Vocation, as it is common to Elect and Reprobates: now the Special
follows; which belongs only to the Elect. And it is that vocation whereby God
calls the Elect, as yet in themselves miserable and corrupted; outwardly by the
Word of the Gospel; but inwardly, by illuminating the mind and changing the
heart, to be partakers of the grace of Salvation.

The RULES.
I. In Scripture, this is called A new Creation a, Regeneration b, a Drawing c,
Divine Teaching d, and Resurrection e.

a Ezech. 36.26. I will give you a new heart, and I will put a new spirit in
the midst of you: and I will take away the heart of stone, and will put in you
a heart of flesh. 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. b Joh. 3.3. If a man be not born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. c Joh. 6.44. None can come to me
except the Father draw him. d Joh. 6.45. It is written in the Prophets, they
shall be all taught of God; whosoever therefore has heard of the Father, and
has learned, comes unto me. Joh. 5.25. e Verily, verily I say unto you, the
time comes, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that hear it shall live.

II. In the Schools it is called Actual Election, Effectual Calling, and
Internal Calling.

It may be called actual Election, because by this God puts in execution the
decree of Election. For whom he predestined, them he called, Romans 8.30. So
Joh. 15.19. I have chosen you out of the world. It is called effectual Calling,
in respect of the calling of reprobates, which by their own fault is made
ineffectual to salvation. It is called also internal, because the calling of
reprobates is either outward only by the Word; or if they be any way inwardly
illuminated or moved, it is but a temporary change.

III. The principal efficient cause of vocation, is God; the impulsive is, his
free mercy; the instrumental, the Ministry of the Word.

Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has called you by our Gospel, 2
These. 2.14.

IV. The matter or object of vocation, is man elected, but in himself as yet
miserable, natural, carnal, sinful, estranged from the life of God, yea dead in
sin.

Ephesians. 2.1. And you together has he quickened, when you were dead in sins and
trespasses. Col. 2.13. And you that were dead in your sins has he quickened.
Tit. 3.3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and
hating one another.

V. Therefore the Semipelagians err, when they give to man a preparation, or a
propension to hearken to his vocation.

The reason is plain by what we have said: for how can a dead man raise
himself? no more can man further his own vocation.

VI. Yet man is not like a stock, when he is called: for he is the fit subject
of vocation; seeing he is not a Lion, or Dog, but a rational creature; yet his
reason helps him nothing to his vocation, till it be enlightened.

VII. It Is absurd to extend this grace of vocation to all men: where as common
vocation (of which already) happens not to all men, as the whole story of the
Old Testament teaches; for not the Gentiles, but Jews were called.

VIII. The form consists in the gracious change of man's mind and heart,
whereby not only is the mind illuminated, but our stony hearts also are made
fleshly, and framed to obedience.

This appears sufficiently out of what is said, especially out of Ezech. 36.

IX. Therefore the Arminian Novelists falsely teach, that the understanding is
endowed with knowledge, and that the affections are irresistibly excited; but
its left in the freedom of the Will to believe, or not to believe: that the
power to believe is given by irresistible grace, but not the act.

This error is plainly overthrown by that which God pronounces concerning the
change of the heart, Ezech. 36.26. so Christ witnesses that not only the
Elect are taught of God, but all that have been taught come to him, Joh. 5.44.

X. The grace of Vocation is plainly irresistible, not if you look upon our
corrupted nature, which is harder then a stone; but in respect of the Holy
Ghost, by whom the Elect are so drawn that they follow inevitably.

XI. This drawing is no ways violent, nor does it resist the natural liberty
of the will; which of its own nature being corrupted, and bent to evil only,
when the holy Spirit touches it, presently and freely it follows.

This drawing is like that of the Shepherd, when with a green branch he draws
the sheep after him, which follows not violently, but spontaneously: although
this be not altogether alike; because the sheep is allured by its natural
inclination; but man, by that propension which the Holy Ghost has put in him;
God indeed calls outwardly, but withal he illuminates the mind inwardly, that
man might know the excellency of his vocation; so God moves the heart, that it
might obey.

XII. The Novelists also falsely teach, that sufficient grace is given to all
men, but not the act it self of accepting and using that grace.

This opinion overthrows it self; for if the grace of believing is not given in
respect of the act, then grace is not sufficient, seeing no man is saved but he
that believes: we confess indeed, that common vocation is sufficient to make
the Reprobates excuselesse, but not to save them: hence God speaks, Isa. 5.4.
What can I do more to my Vineyard, etc.

XIII. A. R. The Pelagians absurdly teach, that by grace is meant our natural
abilities. This is true, if we take grace in that strict sense, as it is used
in Scripture for the grace of vocation, justification, or salvation by Christ;
which is no part effect, or property of nature, but altogether different from
nature: for by nature we are the sons of wrath, says the Apostle; But by grace
we are saved, says the same Apostle; by grace I am what I am, says he; not I,
but the grace of God with me: without me, says Christ, you can do nothing.
What have we which we have not received? Of our selves we cannot think a good
thought, says Saint Paul. Here nature and grace are distinct; yet in a large
extent, grace may be called natural, and nature may be called grace: the first
is plain, because whatsoever perfects nature, may be called natural; and such
is grace: 2. Whatsoever is in nature, as in its subject, is natural, but so is
grace; for nature is the subject of grace: 3. Whatsoever we bring into the
world with our nature, is called natural; Thus sin is natural, and hereditary
diseases are natural, because we bring them with us: so Adams original justice
is called natural; and so are all angelical perfections, because they were
created with them: so the sanctification of those in Scripture, who were
sanctified from the womb, may be called natural. Again, nature may be called
grace: for whatsover is not of due debt, is of grace; such is nature, and all
natural powers, and actions; for it is of grace that we live, and move and have
our being in God; who is the prime and universal cause, without whose influence
the second and subordinate causes cannot work: and therefore, even for the
actions and faculties of nature, as eating drinking, sleep, life, health, etc.
we are bound to give thanks, and to beg their continuance and preservation; to
which duty we are not tied, if these be of debt, and not of grace. But saving
grace is distinguished from nature, as the garment from the body; the one may
be lost without the other: and so when the Fathers speak of Adams original
justice, they say, he lost his garment, and was stripped naked.


The Pelagians absurdly teach, that by the grace of Vocation, we are to
understand our natural abilities.

For the Scripture never thus uses the word Grace: but means either that grace
which makes us acceptable, or that grace which is freely given: Ephesians. 1.5. To
the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved. Romans 12.6. Having diverse gifts, according to the grace which is given
to us.

XIV. The end of Vocation is Gods glory, and the salvation of the Elect.

XV. The time of calling is not tied to Baptism; for God calls some before,
some in and some after Baptism.

So Abraham before circumcision, was called and justified, Romans 4.

XVI. Out of these we may see what is the difference between general and
special Vocation: that is oftentimes outward only, this is inward: though
sometimes it be internal in Reprobates; yet the light of salvation which it
affords to the mind is but weak, and the joy with which it affects the heart
is but momentary; but this irradiates the mind with a full light, and seasoneth
the heart not with a bare relish, but with a true sense of spiritual gifts,
and fills it with true and constant joy: that may be lost, but the gifts and
graces of this can never be lost.

Of general Vocation, see Matt. 13.20. But he that receives the seed into stony
places, the same is he that hears the word, and anon with joy receives it,
yet has he no root in himself, but dureth for a while. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. It is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly
gifts, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew
them again to repentance. But of special Vocation, Paul, Romans 11.29. For the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance.


CHAP. XXIX. Of Saving Faith.
The effects of special Vocation, are immediate or mediate: the immediate
effect is saving Faith, which is the gift of Vocation, whereby he that is
elected applies to himself the free Promises of Christ in the Gospel, and
rests in them.

The RULES.
I. This word Faith in Scripture has five significations: for either it is
taken metonymically for wholesome doctrine, and this is the Faith which, not by
which we believe a; or for historical Faith b, or temporary c, or for the Faith
of miracles d, or for saving Faith e.

a 1 Timothy 1.19. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck b Jam. 2.19. Thou believe there is
one God, thou do well; the Devils also believe, and tremble. This faith then
which consists in a bare assent, is common to the Elect and Reprobate. c Mat.
13.20. He that receives the seed into stony places, the same is he that
hears the Word, and anon with joy receives it; yet has he not root, etc. d
Matt. 17.20. If you had faith but as a grain of mustard seed, you would say to
this mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and it would remove. This has
been given for a certain time, even to Reprobates, as we see by Judas, who had
this gift of miracles, with the rest of the Apostles, Mat. 10.8. e Saving
faith, which is proper to the Elect, is that which we defined.

II. The principal efficient cause of this is God; the impulsive, is that
saving grace by which we are elected and called.

Act. 13.48. And they believed, so many as were ordained to life eternal. Romans
11.7. The Election has obtained, but the rest are blinded.

III. Faith then is a free gift, both in that we have not deserved it, and
because it is infused into us by the Holy Ghost.

This is against Socinus, who calls faith a free gift, not because the Holy
Ghost has infused it, but because no man has deserved it: but that faith is
the gift or God, is plain; Phil. 1.29. For to you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for him.

IV. The instrumental cause by which Faith is given to us, is ordinarily the
Word of God, in those that are of years.

Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

V. Therefore the bare preaching of the Gospel is not the cause of Faith, but
as it is joined with the power of Gods Spirit.

Act. 16.14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to the
things that were spoken of Paul.

VI. The matter or object is commonly Gods Word; but properly, the free
Promises grounded on Christ.

The Pontificians deny this latter part, against plain Scripture. Romans 3.22.
The righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all
that believe. and v. 25. Whom Christ has set forth to be a Propitiation
through faith in his blood. etc.10.9. If thou do confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved.

VII. The form of Faith, for our better understanding, is divided into three
parts; Knowledge, Assent, and Confidence.

Knowledge is the understanding of things necessary to salvation. Assent is, by
which we firmly believe those things to be true, which are delivered in Gods
word. Confidence is, that whereby every faithful man applies the promises of
the Word to himself.

VIII. There is knowledge and assent, both in saving, and in historical faith;
but confidence is only in saving faith.

Confidence is called by the Apostle (...) persuasion, and (...) much
assurance, Ephesians. 3.12. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. By the name then of Confidence is
understood, either the apprehension and application of Christ with his
benefits, or the quietness of conscience. In the former sense, it is the form
of faith; in the latter, the effect.

IX. Implicit faith then, which is the belief of the Church of Rome, with a
blind assent, is no faith.

Faith cannot be without knowledge, 1. Because it comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God, Romans 10.17. 2. Because that is wisdom by which God
is known, Isa. 53.11. Jer. 31.34. Joh. 6.69. and 17.3. 1 Cor. 1.21.

X. Nor is that better then a mere historical faith, which is not joined with
firm confidence.

The Papists teach, that faith is only in the understanding, but not in the
will and heart: but the Scripture plainly teaches the contrary; Romans 20.23.
with the heart we believe unto righteousness.

XI. Yet we teach not such a firm confidence as is no ways tossed with
doubtings; but such a one as does not finally yield to doubtings.

XII. As for the effects or most proper acts of faith, S. Paul rightly tells us,
that Faith is the subsistence of things hoped for, and the evidence or
demonstration of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.

It is indeed the property of faith, to make future and not existent things
present, So Abraham is said to see Christ's day, Joh. 8.56.

XIII. The subject of faith, are the elect and called.

Of Infants faith we spoke in the doctrine of Baptism.

XIV. There are degrees of Faith; not only in different men, but also in one
and the same man: so that it is sometimes weaker, sometimes stronger, but so
that it can never be utterly lost.

Isa. 42.3. He shall not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax.
Phil. 1.6. I am persuaded, that he who has begun a good work in you, will
perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ. Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus Christ
the author and finisher of our faith.


CHAP. XXX. Of Justification.
THe mediate effects of Vocation proceeding from faith, are Justification,
Sanctification, Assurance of salvation, and Christian liberty.

Justification is Gods free action, whereby the Elect, through the most full
satisfaction of Christ, are absolved from their sins, and are declared
righteous, and inheritors of life eternal.

The RULES.
I. Justice in Scripture, is either of the Cause, or of the Person. Justice of
the cause is, when a man, otherwise sinful, is said in this or that particular
to be innocent and just. Justice of the person, is either begun, or it is
perfected. This is called Legal, as it is required by the Law, and Evangelical,
as it is showed in Christ by the Gospel. Begun justice, is that which the Holy
Ghost begins in the faithful in this life, and perfects it in the other. The
perfect righteousness of Christ, then, is the gift of Justification; but that
which is begun, is the gift of Sanctification.

II. To justify, in this place, is not to punish, nor to infuse inherent
righteousness, as the Pontiandteians will have it: but in the sense it is
taken in the Courts of Justice, it is to absolve from sin, and to pronounce one
just.

Prove. 17.15. To justify the wicked, and to condemn the just, both are
abomination to the Lord. Isa. 5.23. Which justify the wicked, and take away
the righteousness of the righteous. Mat. 11.19. Wisdom is justified by her
children. Luc. 7.29. When these things were heard, all the people and the
Publicans justified God. Luc. 10.29. He willing to justify himself.

III. The efficient cause of Justification, actively understood, is the whole
Trinity.

2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. 1 Cor. 6.11.
But you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

IV. The internal moving cause is mere grace, or Gods free favor.

That this is a free favor, and not an infused grace, will appear by these
testimonies. Romans 3.24. For they are justified freely by his grace. Ephesians. 2.8.
You are saved by grace through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God. Tit. 3.4, 5. But after the goodness and love of God our Savior
appeared toward man, not by the works which we had done (...) but by his mercy
he has saved us.

V. The external moving cause, is Christ God and man.

Christ as the Son of God, is the efficient cause of justification in common
with the Father and Holy Ghost: but as he is God-man and our Mediator, he is
the outward moving cause, because by his merit he has procured this gift for
us.

VI. The instrumental cause of this, is the word of the Gospel.

For it is the power of God to every believer, Romans 1.16.

VII. If we take Justification passively, in reference to man who is justified;
it has no other cause but faith, the instrumental.

VIII. This phrase, We are justified by faith, is metonymical, and equivalent
to this; We are justified by Christ's merits apprehended by faith.

IX. Faith only is said to justify in respect of works, which are effects
following faith, but not the causes of justification: for they do not precede
him that is to be justified, but follow him that is justified.

Although this particle [alone] is not found in Scripture, yet it is expressed
by like phrases: Such are; Without works freely by grace, Romans 3.24, 27, 28.
But by faith, Ephesians. 2.8. Gal. 2.16. Though then faith be not alone, but is
joined with works, yet it justifies alone: As the Sun is not in heaven alone,
yet he alone makes day.

X. Faith does not justify as if it were a work, or by its own dignity, but as
it is an instrument apprehending Christ.

The Papists grant, tha^ we are justified by faith: but then they take faith
here as ^ work. Now faith in Scripture has nothing ascribed to it, but as it
apprehends; as a Gold-ring bears a high price for the Jewel in it. And hence it
appears how finely those places of Scripture do agree, in which we are said to
be justified, now by grace, then by faith, then by Christ's merits: for we are
justified through Gods grace, for Christ's merits apprehended by faith.

XI. The matter of justification taken actively, is Christ's whole satisfaction,
whereby he suffered the punishment due to our sins, and yielded perfect
obedience to the Law.

We have showed above, cap. 18. that Christ's satisfaction is placed both in his
suffering, and in his actual obedience.

XII. The matter of this taken passively, is man, miserable in himself, but
elected in God, called and endowed with faith. Though then vocation naturally
is before faith, and faith before justification, yet in time there is no
difference.

For as soon as man is effectually called, he is endowed with faith, and
justified by faith.

XIII. The form of it, actively understood, is the imputation of Christ's whole
satisfaction, whereby it is made all ours, as if we had performed it our selves.

That justice which is imputed to the believer, is in Christ by inhesion, in us
by imputation. Our adversaries deny, that in Scripture there is any mention of
this imputation: But what can be cleerer then these ensuing places? Romans 4.6.
As David calls that man blessed, unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works. Phil. 3.8, 9. I account all things dung that I may gain Christ,
and may be found in him, not having my own righteousness which is of the Law,
but that which is by the faith of Christ, that is, the righteousness which is
of God by faith. This is chiefly seen in that an tithesis whereby our sins
are imputed to Christ, and his justice imputed to us. 2 Cor. 5.21. He made,
that he should be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. The Papists also think it as absurd, that we
should be justified by the justice of another; as if one should be called
learned, for the learning that is in another. But these examples are not like:
for one man is not so united to another, as the faithful are to Christ their
head. Again, they will not have Christ's justice imputed to them; and yet they
stick not to say, that the merits of dead men, and the justice of Monks are
imputed to them.

XIV. Yet, for understandings sake, the form of justification is expressed by
two acts; by remission of sins, and imputation of justice; by judging our sins
to be none, and our righteousness to be perfect.

XV. And although these two benefits be the same in subject and time, yet they
are indeed distinct.

For they differ, 1. In definition: for it is one thing not to account us
unrighteous, and another thing to esteem us righteous. Which that we may the
better understand, we must know how these terms are different: Not just and
just; Unjust and just; Not just and unjust; Not unjust and just. Not just and
just, are contradictories. Unjust and just, are partly privatives, partly
contraries. Not just and unjust, also Not unjust and just, are diversa. We must
also know, that Unjust and Just are not immediate contraries: for the medium is
innocent, who is neither unjust, nor just. Now whereas the remission of sins,
is a removing or putting away of our sins; but the imputation of justice, is
the adjudging of it to be ours: by that we are accounted for not unjust, or
innocent; by this, for just. Now who knows not, that it is more to be just,
then to be innocent only; and not only to have done no evil, but also to have
done good? But although these two now in man differ not in subject, but in some
respect only; yet heretofore they differed in subject also: For Adam in
Paradise was innocent, but not just; for he was at length to attain justice by
his perfect obedience. 2. They differ in their proximate and proper causes: for
Christ's death and passion are the cause or remission of sins, which are
expiated by them, Heb. 9.22. Without blood there is no remission. 1 John 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. But the cause of the
imputation of justice, is Christ's perfect obedience. Romans 5.19. For as by the
disobedience of one man many are made sinners, so by the obedience of one many
are made righteous. We have showed above, Cap. 18. that this obedience is that
actual, by which he fulfilleth the whole Law for us. 3. They differ in their
proper effects, for by remission of sins we are freed from damnation, Romans 5.9.
Much more then now being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him: But by imputation of righteousness, we attain over and above life
eternal. Romans 5.17. Much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the
gift of righteousness, shall reign, etc. so Gal. 4.5. both effects are put;
Made under the Law, that he might redeem them that are under the law (that is
under the curse of the law) and that we might receive adoption. It is then a
greater benefit to redeem a Slave, and being redeemed to adopt him, then only
to redeem; it is a greater favor to give and forgive, then barely to forgive;
therefore that justification is lame, by which only Christ's passion is
imputed, and which only consists in remission of sins.

Here diverse things are objected, 1. The Scripture in many places makes mention
of Christ's Passion, or Remission of sins only. But this is no wonder, for in
many places it speaks Synecdochically; its sufficient that it explains it self
in the above cited places. 2. The Apostle promiscuously uses these phrases as
equavalent; to forgive sins, and to impute righteousness, Romans 4.5, 6. But we
answer, that it is one thing for propositions to be equivalent, and an other
thing for one proposition to follow upon, or to conclude another: as Paul out
of this phrase of David, Psalm. 32.2. Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven
them, etc. collects this, that David does describe him to be blessed to whom
righteousness is imputed without works. The reason of the consequence is,
because if the remission of sins be free, then so is also the imputation of
justice; Although then that is not formally spoken by David, which Paul
affirms, v. 5. yet it is spoken by way of consequence: yea, it is an
argumentation, as Chrysostom says, from the lesser to the greater; for if he
be blessed whose sins are forgiven, then much more blessed is he to whom
besides righteousness is imputed. 3. To whom sins are forgiven, to him also
righteousness is imputed; and whosoever is freed from damnation, he is
inheritor of life eternal: therefore these benefits are not different. Ans.
Those things are not the same, which are in the same subject together: For so
it would follow, that Vocation, Justification, and Sanctification are not
different benefits, because every man that is called is also justified and
sanctified. 4. In the pardon of sins, there are the sins of omission pardoned;
and therefore by that man is made perfectly just: They add the reason of the
consequence; Because he performs all things, who omits nothing. Ans. The
consequence is false: because there is one cause why we are said to have
omitted nothing; another, why we are said to have done all things. We are said
to have omitted nothing, because Christ has suffered for our sins also of
omission: But we are said to have performed all things, because he has for us
performed all things. Besides, to have omitted nothing, and to have done all
things, differ in respect of punishment and reward: for although the fault and
the punishment are remitted to him who omits what he should do, yet for this
there is no reward due to him. 5. It is absurd, that the same debt should be
paid twice: If therefore satisfaction is made for sin by Christ's suffering,
satisfaction also is not to be demanded by active obedience. Ans. Here is
Ignoratio Elenchi: for there is is not a double payment of the same debt, but
two parts of one payment; Neither is Christ's active obedience required to make
satisfaction for sin, but to satisfy for our interest in the Kingdom of
heaven. 6. If it be the same thing to be liberal, and not to be prodigal nor
covetous; then it is the same thing to be just, and not unjust. Ans. The
Assumption is false, because these are not immediate opposites; for there are
men who are neither covetous, nor prodigal, nor liberal. 7. If it be the same
thing to be clothed, and to have nakedness covered; then it is the same thing
to have our sins remitted, and justice imputed; because by the garment of
Christ's righteousness our sins are covered. Ans. This is an unfit simile: for
the sinner must not only be clothed, but he must be first unclothed, to wit
from the rags of sin. Therefore as Joshuah the High Priest had his filthy
garments taken from him first, then new garments were put upon him, and a crown
on his head, Zac. 3.4, 5. So we also first must be divested of this dirty
garment of sin, then we are clothed with the glorious garment of Christ's
righteousness.

XVI. The form of Justification, taken passively, is, whereby believers lay
hold on Christ with all his merits, by the hand of faith, and apply him to
themselves.

XVII. The end of that benefit is, Gods glory, and our salvation.

XVIII. Out of this commemoration of causes, we firmly gather, That man is not
justified before God by his good works and merits.

Reas. I. For, to be justified by grace, and by merit, are repugnant. Romans
3.24. They are justified freely by his grace. and v. 28. Therefore we conclude,
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law, etc. 11.6. If by
grace, then not of works, otherwise grace were not grace. 2. So, to be
justified by Christ and his merit, and by works. Gal. 2.21. If righteousness
is of the Law, then Christ died in vain. 3. By faith, and by works. Romans 3.28.
We conclude then that we are justified by faith without works. 4. To be
justified by imputed justice, and by works. Romans 4.4, 5. To him that works is
the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt: But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. II. If by justification, all matter of bragging is excluded,
that God only may be glorified; then we are not justified by works. Romans 3.19.
That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God. and v. 23. They have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God. and
v. 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? nay, but
by the law of faith. The Pontificians here say, that in these places are meant
only ceremonial works. But he who will observe that catalogue of works
rehearsed, c. 1, 2, 3. ad Romans shall find, that not only ceremonial, but moral
works also are meant. III. If we be justified by works, then they are either
such as go before, or follow after regeneration. But with neither of these are
we justified: for before regeneration, our works are merely evil; and after,
imperfectly good.

XIX. The effects of Justification are, Peace with God, an access to him with
boldness, a rejoicing in tribulation, and freedom from sin, not only in
respect of guilt, as the Papists say, but in respect of punishment too.

Otherwise Christ had suffered for us in vain, Isa. 53. Neither are the Elect
chastised by God, that they might satisfy, but that they might be proved and
bettered.

XX. Imputed righteousness is perfect and equal in all believers.

The imperfection of our faith is no hinderance: for as the same Jewel is
touched by the firm and infirm hand, so is the same Justice of Christ obtained
by the strong and weak believer.

XXI. The same is never to be lost.

For the gifts of Vocation are without repentance, Romans 11.29.

XXII. It is also one.

Therefore when the Saints who are justified, pray for forgiveness of sins,
they do not so much respect or consider the act of justification, as the fruit,
certainty, and confirmation thereof.

XXIII. Justification before God, if by faith: Justification before men, is by
works.

Of this, see Jam. 2.24. You see then that man is justified by works, and not
by faith alone. Which saying is not contrary to that of Romans 3.28. We conclude
then, that man is justified by faith without works. For there, is meant that
justification which is before men; but here, that which is before God: there,
is understood historical faith which works not by charity; but here, that
faith which is true and lively. Others say, that man is justified by works, not
as by the cause, but as by the declarers and manifesters of justification.


CHAP. XXXI. Of Sanctification.
SAnctification follows Justification, as the light follows the sun.

This is that free action of God, which sets at liberty the faithful ingraffed
into Christ and justified by the Spirit, more and more from their native
corruption, and renews them to his image, that they may be fitted by good works
to glorify God.

The RULES.
I. To sanctify, in this place, is not to separate from profane use, or to
dedicate to holy uses; but habitually to make holy.

In the former signification, we are bid to sanctify the Sabbath.

II. It is called regeneration, renovation, conversion, penance, repentance,
and glorification.

Yet these words are ambiguous; for the word regeneration, renovation,
conversion, is either equivalent to vocation and the gift of faith, or it
signifies newness of life, when in the very act man dies to sin, and lives
to righteousness: in the first sense it goes before justification, and is the
cause thereof; in the latter it follows it, and is the effect thereof: it is
also named penitence and resipiscence, from the effect; which words do as much
differ, as the Hebrew terms, Nicham and Schubh; or the Greek, (...) and (...);
for that is of the mind, this of the heart; that wicked men may also have,
this only the godly; Albeit this difference does not still hold. It is called
glorification by way of inchoation or beginning, as it is a forerunner of
future glorification.

III. The efficient cause of this, is in general the whole Trinity;
particularly, and in respect of the terminus, the Holy Ghost, for this end sent
by Christ.

Hence he is called the Spirit of Sanctification, Romans 14.

IV. The internal impulsive cause, is Gods free bounty.

Tit. 3.4, 5. But after the kindness and love of God our Savior appeared
toward man, not by works of righteousness which we had done, but according to
his mercy he has saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost.

V. The external impulsive cause, is Christ with his merit and efficacy.

Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved his church, and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify it.

VI. The external instrumental cause, is the doctrine of the Law and Gospel;
but the internal is Faith, the root of good works

VII. To these we may add extraordinary means, whereby God casts down the
proud, and raises the humble; such are afflictions, miracles, terrors, etc.

VIII. In the first regeneration or vocation, man is merely passive; but in
sanctification, when he is endowed with saving faith, he is the chief agent of
his own actions, yet not without the special grace and motion of the Holy Ghost.

IX. The matter of sanctification is the whole man, with his intellect, will,
and affections.

1 These. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout; and I pray
God your whole spirit, soul and body be preserved blameless until the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

X. The form is expressed in two acts; in the aversion from evil, and
conversion to good a: that is called the mortification of the old man; this,
the vivification of the new man b: that, a crucifying and burying; this, a
resurrection c.

a Psalm. 34.15. Isa. 55.7. b Ephesians. 2.1. Col. 3.9, 10. c Romans 6.2, etc. Gal.
2.20.

XI. The end of this, is Gods glory, our salvation, and certainty thereof: for
there is no sign of election more evident.

2 Timothy 2.21. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a
vessel unto honor sanctified, 1 John 3.3. And who has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

XII. Sanctification in this life is not perfect; hence the works of the Saints
are imperfect, for they feel a combat in them between the flesh and spirit, so
long as they live.

Romans 7.19.23, 24. Gal. 5.17.

XIII. Sanctification differs from Justification, I. In their genus; for the
justice of that is in the predicament of Quality, but the justice of this in
the category of Relation. II. In their form; For, 1. In Justification, Faith as
a hand lays hold upon Christ's justice; in Sanctification it is considered as
the beginning and root of good works. 2. In Justification sin is taken away
only in respect of the guilt and punishment; in Sanctification it is by
degrees abolished in respect of its existence. 3. In Justification Christ's
righteousness is imputed to us; in Sanctification a new and inherent justice is
infused into us. III. In degrees; for Justification is one individual perfect
act, equally contingent to all; but Sanctification is a successive act, by
degrees tending to perfection, and according to the variety of the gifts of the
Spirit, shining in some more, in some less.


CHAP. XXXII. Of the Perseverance of the Saints.
SO much of Justification and Sanctification: Now follows the Perseverance of
the Saints, and Christian Liberty. The perseverance of the Saints, is the gift
of God, whereby the Elect being justified and sanctified, are so confirmed by
the grace of Christ through the Holy Ghost, that they can never utterly fall
from it.

The RULES.
I. By the word of perseverance, we do not here understand that, whereby the
Elect cannot fall into most grievous sins, whereby their Faith cannot be
weakened, whereby they cannot for a time lose the effectual presence of Gods
Spirit; but that whereby they cannot totally and finally fall off from Faith
and the grace of God.

II. The efficient cause of this, is God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Joh. 10.27, 28, 29. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me, and I give to them life eternal; neither shall they perish for ever, nor
shall any man take them out of my hand; my Father who has given them to me is
greater then all, nor can any man take them out of my Fathers hand: I and my
Father are one. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In whom also after that you believed, ye were
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise
of his glory.

III. The matter which has the nature of the subject, is man truly elected,
called, justified, and sanctified.

IV. The form consists, partly in the will to persevere, partly in the act it
self: the will is never defective in the godly; but the act is sometime more
intense, sometime more remiss.

V. Though then Faith may be lost in respect of the second act; yet in respect
of the habit or first act by which it apprehends Christ, it is never lost.

VI. The end of this gift, is the assurance of our salvation, and a true and
firm comfort.

VII. Out of all this we conclude, that the Elect who are called, justified,
and sanctified, are assured of their salvation.

Besides the Scripture testimonies cited above: 1. The certainty of our
Election confirms this; for the elect cannot perish, or become reprobate. Mat.
24.24. There will arise false prophets, and false Christ's, and will show great
signs and wonders; so that they shall seduce, if it be possible, the very
elect. 2 Timothy 2.19. Yet the foundation of God stands firm, having this seal,
the Lord knows who are his. 2. The certainty of Vocation. Romans 11.29. For the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance. 3. The certainty of Faith.
Isa. 42.1. He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. 4.
The certainty of Justification, by which there is no condemnation to those who
are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. 5. The certainty of Sanctification. Phil. 1.6.
Being persuaded, that he who has begun a good work in you, will perfect it
until the day of Jesus Christ. The testimonies which Bellarmine alleges to
the contrary, are either such as speak not of the faithful, but of hypocrites,
as Mark 4. ver. 12.13, etc. Luke 8.13. Joh. 15.2. Heb. 6. ver. 4.5.6. and
10.26. 2 Pet. 2.21.22. Or else of a falling off, not from the Faith by which we
believe, but which we believe, that is, from wholesome doctrine, which
hypocrites also believe for a time, as 1 Timothy 1.19. and 4.1. and 1 Timothy 6.19.
Or they are to be understood of those that are truly faithful, but
conditionally; as Ezekiel. 18.26. When a righteous man turns away, etc. and 1
Cor. 9.27. Gal. 5.4. The examples of evil Angels, and of our first Parents are
nothing to this purpose; for they received only possibility, if they would be
willing, but not will and possibility too; but there is another reason of the
regenerate, who by the grace of the Spirit both will, and can persevere.
Likewise the examples of Saul, Simon Magus, and Judas are impertinent, for they
were reprobates. David and Solomon fell indeed grievously, but they lost not
totally their Faith, as the repentance of both witness, Psalm. 51. and the Book
of Ecclesiastes. As for Peter's fall, we will say with Austin, Profession failed
in his mouth, but not faith in his heart. There be two Arguments of our
Adversaries chiefly to be considered. 1. It is temerity, say they, to boast of
the certainty of Faith, whereas our salvation should be wrought out with fear
and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Answ. The Elect are no ways to be accused of
temerity, because they ascribe not to their own strength the certainty of
salvation, by which they may a thousand times fall off, without Gods grace; but
they are kept by the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5. therefore fear and trembling are
not opposed to firm confidence in God, but to carnal presumption. 2. They say,
that all admonitions will be in vain, and so away will be made to carnal
security. Answ. This will not follow: for this Doctrine is so far from
occasioning security, that it rather draws us from it. 1. Because it is one
thing to stand, and another thing to seem to stand, 1 Cor. 10.12. 2. Because no
man can promise to himself the certainty of salvation, except he try his Faith
by his Sanctification. 3. Because, although the Saints do not utterly fall off
from grace, yet they may fall into most grievous sins, in offending God and
their neighbor, and may bring upon themselves diverse calamities.


CHAP. XXXIII. Of Christian Liberty.
CHristian Liberty is a spiritual manumission or freedom, whereby the faithful
are delivered from that slavery, to which they were bound before their
conversion, that they may freely and cheerfully obey God.

The RULES.
I. The efficient cause of this liberty in general, is the whole Trinity; but
in particular, Christ our Lord.

Joh. 8.31, 32. If you abide in my word, you shall be my disciples, and ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, and v. 36. Therefore
if the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

II. The instrumental cause of this, is Faith.

III. The matter or subject, are faithful men.

IV. The matter about which this is conversant, are the Law, the service of sin
and death, affliction of conscience in things indifferent, and men's
commandments.

V. The form is expressed by diverse conditions, as the objects are various.

VI. We have showed above in the doctrine of the Law, how we are freed from the
Law.

VII. We are not quite in this life free from the inherence of sin in us; but
we are freed from the guilt and dominion of it; from that by justification,
from this by sanctification.

Romans 5.12. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that you should
obey sin in the lusts thereof.

VIII. From indifferent things, that is, such as are neither commanded nor
prohibited, we are so freed, that our conscience is not bound to keep or break
them.

Romans 14.2, 3. For one believes that he may eat all things, another who is
weak eats herbs; let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and
let not him that eats not, condemn him that eats.

IX. Now in these cases a special care must be had of Faith and Charity: of
faith, lest we take things not indifferent for indifferent; of charity, lest we
offend our weak brother.

Of Faith Paul speaks, Romans 14.23. He that doubts, if he eat, he is already
condemned, because he eats not of faith: but what is not of faith, is sin: of
Charity, c. 14. ver. 1. He that is weak in the faith, receive you, but not unto
doubtful disputation, etc.

X. The same care of liberty is about men's commandments; for our conscience is
not obliged to those things which are against Gods commands, or being
adiaphorous are obtruded as necessary; but we must not for conscience refuse
obedience to those things that are consonant to Gods command.

XI. The end of this liberty, 1. Is true consolation arising out of our
freedom from sin, death, and solicitude in things indifferent: 2. The service
of righteousness, which indeed is true liberty: 3. The true worship of God,
free from superstition, or the scandal of our neighbor.

XII. Contrary to Christian liberty, is the liberty of the flesh and
wantonness.

Jud. v. 4. There are some men crept in now, of old ordained for this
condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into wantonness.


CHAP. XXXIV. Of the coming of Christ, and Resurrection of the flesh; which go
before the last Judgment.
HItherto of the State of Grace, now follows the State of Glory.

To this belongs the doctrine of the last Judgment.

The parts whereof are three: 1. Of its Antecedents: 2. Of the Judgment it
self: 3. Of the Consequents thereof.

The Antecedents are, Christ's coming, and the Resurrection of the flesh.

Christ's last coming, is his return from heaven to which he ascended, to judge
the Earth.

The RULES.
I. It is most certain, that Christ will return to judgment.

This was revealed even in the Patriarks times: Jud. v. 14. Enoch also the
seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord comes with
ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him. The rest of the Scripture is full of such testimonies. Psalm. 50.3,
etc. Dan. 12. Mat. 24. and 25. Act. 17. Romans 2. and 14. 2 Cor. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 4,
and 5. 2 Pet. 3. Rev. 19, etc.

II. Although no man knows the time of Christ's coming exactly, in respect of
the day and hour a; yet there are signs set down by Christ and his Apostles,
showing that that day is not far off b.

a Of that day and hour knows no man, not the Angels of heaven, except my
Father only, Mar. 13.32. Nor the Son himself, but the Father alone. 1 Thessalonians.
5.1, 2, etc. Concerning the times and seasons, brethren, it is not needful
that I write unto you; for you your selves know well, that that day of the Lord
will come as a thief in the night. b Mat. 24.32, 33. Learn a parable of the
fig tree: when its branch is yet tender and puts forth leaves, ye know that
summer is nigh; so likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that
it is near even at the doors.

III. These Signs are either common, or proper.

IV. Those are common, which were to signify both the destruction of
Jerusalem, and Christ's last coming.

Such were these predictions of Christ, Mat. 24.4, etc. when he speaks both of
his own coming, and of the destruction of Jerusalem as the type thereof; to
wit, False Prophets, false Christ's, wars, pestilence, famine, earthquakes,
persecutions for Christ's sake, treacheries, want of faith and charity, etc.

V. The proper Signs are, Extreme security and impiety a, The revealing of
Antichrist and his destruction by the breath of Christ's mouth b, The ruin of
Rome c, with the forsaking and burning of the Whore d.

a Luc. 17.26.27. As it was in the days of Noah, etc. And as it sell out in
the days of Lot, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. When they shall say peace and safety, then
sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel upon a woman with child, and
they shall not escape. 2 Timothy 3.1, 5. This know, that in the last days
perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, etc. b 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3. Let
no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come till there be a
falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition. and
v. 8. And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume
with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his
coming. c Rev. 18.2. She is fallen, she is fallen, that great Babylon, etc. d
Rev. 17.16. And those ten horns, that is, the ten Kings, shall hate the Whore,
and they shall forsake her and make her naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire.

VI. To these signs some add, A visible and general uniting of the Jews to
the Church of Christ, which they teach must be expected in the last times.

A. R. * This opinion of the calling of the Jews, is plausible, if it were
found in Scripture.] Here Wollebius strives to weaken the opinion of the Jews
conversion before the last day; so did of old Caesariensis, Greg. Nazianzen's
brother, Dial. 4. by denying, that in Scripture their conversion is expressed:
whereas indeed the Scripture in many places speaks of this general calling.
And though Hierome on Isa. 11. and Hos. 9. seem to contradict this truth; yet
we shall find, that he does not absolutely speak against their final
conversion, but against the manner of it, which the Jews thought should be
effected by Ellas, whom they dreamed would reduce them again into their own
Country, and re-establish the ancient Law of Moses, and the whole Judaical
worship. But to deny a total conversion of the Jews to Christ, is to keep up
the partition wall still, which Christ came to break down, represented by the
rupture of the veil of the Temple at Christ's death. Why was Christ called the
Cornerstone, if he did not mean to unite the two walls of Jew and Gentile? And
how can that prophecy of his be fulfilled, There shall be one sheepfold, as
there is but one Shepherd? That prophecy of Zachary, c. 12. v. 10. Rev. 1.7.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him; must be
understood of the Jews final conversion, which shall be with godly sorrow and
repentance, before the last day: for it is said there, He shall come wirh
clouds. Luke 21.27. Our Savior foretells, that Jerusalem shall be trodden
under, till the fullness of the Gentiles be brought in. We read in Rev. 7. that
besides the innumerable multitude of all Nations that stood before the Lamb,
there were of the Israelites also an hundred forty and four thousand on Mount
Sion; A definite number being used for an indefinite: by which is intimated the
Jews total conversion. In Malachi, c. 4. Elias is promised to turn the hearts
of the fathers toward their children: which Prophesies the old Doctors apply
to the conversion of the Jews by the preaching of Elias; and Christ tells us,
that Elias shall come and restore all things, Mat. 17.11. This prophecy indeed
is applied by Christ to his first coming, and John Baptist there is called
Elias; yet this hinders not the application of the same prophecy to his second
coming also: before which, either Elias shall come, or else powerful Preachers,
in the force and spirit of Elias, who shall convert the Jews: And so the
Fathers interpret these words, Psalm. 59.6.14. They shall return in the evening;
of the conversion of the Jews in the end of the world: And so they observe,
that their late entry into the Church of Christ, which is the house ot the
living God, was prefigured by the elder brother, Luke 15. who came not in till
he was entreated by his father; and that was after the younger brother, or
Gentiles had returned. But their conversion is more plainly foretell by Hosea,
cap. 1.11. The children of Judah and Israel shall be gathered together, and
appoint themselves one Head: This cannot be meant so much of their return from
their dispersion in their first captivity, as of their last conversion; for the
Israelites never returned from their first captivity. This is more fully
explained in Hosea, cap. 3.5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return,
and seek the Lord their God, and David their King; and shall fear the Lord and
his goodness in the latter days. Here by the latter days we cannot understand
Christ's first coming; for we do not find, that this prephesie has been yet
accomplished. Some few here and there have been converted; but what is that to
a general conversion of the whole Nation, or at least, of the greatest part?
which the Apostle expresses fully, Romans 11.25. I would not, brethren, have you
ignorant of this mystery, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until
the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall he saved: and
ver. 32. God has concluded them all in unbelief; that he might have mercy on
all: Now all the circumstances and words, preceding and following, do make it
plain, that Saint Paul speaks not of the spiritual, but of the carnal
Israelites, or Nation of the Jews, and of their total conversion; which ver.
12. he calls their fullness, as he calls the total conversion of the Gentiles,
the fullness of the Gentiles, ver. 25. And doubtless, Christ who came to save
his people from their sins, to whom he preached in his own Person, and sent his
Disciples, first of all to these lost sheep of Israel, (...) prayed for them on
the cross, and makes intercession for them still in heaven; will not forget,
when the time comes, to bring back these straying sheep into his sheepfold.
This is that Michael the great Prince, who stands up for the children of
Israel, and by whom Daniels people shall be delivered, every one written in the
book of life, Dan. 12.1. So certain and indubitable was this truth, that in the
primitive Church, as Saint Austin confesses, l. 20. de civ. Dei cap. 29. It
was ordinarily spoken and believed by the faithful, that the Jews by the
preaching of Elias should believe in Christ. Yet I deny not but that the Jews
hitherto have been like that fruitless fig tree in the Gospel which our Savior
cursed; but here is the difference, that the fig tree was never to fructify
any more, but we must not say so of the Jews: I grant also, that the Fathers
believed the Jews shall follow Antichrist; because he says, that if another
come in his own name, him they will receive: but it will not therefore follow,
that they shall never have their eyes opened to discern the falsehood of
Antichrist, and that they shall never follow Christ. Neither does Saint Paul
contradict himself, who having proved the conversion of the Jews, says, 1
These. 2.16. That wrath is come upon them to the end. For he speaks there only
of those perverse Jews who lived in his time, they having crucified Christ,
persecuted all his followers; therefore final destruction came upon them under
Titus; or else, (...) there signifies utterly, as we translate it; and so
extreme or utter destruction came upon them. And whereas it is said, Hos. 1.6.
That God will have mercy no more on the house of Israel, but will utterly take
them away; this was spoken of the ten Tribes captivity from which they were not
delivered, as the house of Judah was, ver. 7. But what is this to the final
conversion of the Jews? As for those imprecations of David against them, Psalm.
69. ver. 23, 24, 25. they have relation only to their temporal punishments and
outward afflictions; and not to a final or endless obstinacy. To conclude, the
Apostle proves out of Isa. 59.20. That all Israel shall be saved, because there
shall come to Sion, (or as the LXX. translated it) out of Sion, the deliverer,
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.26. This Prophecy has not
been yet accomplished, therefore it is to be fulfilled in the end of the world,
when the Deliverer shall turn away ungodliness from the whole Nation of the
Jews.


This opinion is plausible, if it it were found in Scripture. The Prophetical
testimonies which they allege were fulfilled in the Apostles times, when upon
the breaking down of the partition wall, the Jews and Gentiles were united into
one body. In the Revelation we find nothing that does solidly confirm this
opinion. Their chief hold is in that of Romans 11.25, 26. For I would not
brethren that you should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise
in your own conceit; that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved. The
Apostles scope in this is, to dehort Christians from insulting over the Jews
that are rejected, because they themselves are called. The reason is, because
by their ruin the Gentiles have received salvation, ver. 11. Yet so that all
hope of reconciliation is not cut off from the Jews. ver. 15. Nor are they
exempted from being rejected, who being Christians only in name, are puffed up
in their minds, ver. 20, 21. That former passage of the rejection of the Jews,
which was not altogether without hope of pardon, does show in a mystery that
the Jews were not totally, but in part only rejected; not in respect of time,
for it was to last only a while, but in respect of that part of the Jewish
Nation which contains the Reprobates: so that the meaning is this; blindness
has happened not to all the Jews, but to a part only, that is, to the
reprobates. Neither have these words, until the fullness of the Gentiles come
in, this meaning, that there shall be such a plausible calling of the Jews,
after the fullness of the Gentiles is come in: For there is nothing more usual
then that these particles until or till, being denied or affirmed, signify
the same that never or always: As we showed above, c. 19. Neither does that
which the Apostle subjoyns, v. 26. hinder any thing this interpretaton, And so
all Israel shall be saved: For by the name of all Israel, he understands the
Elect, which indeed are the true Israelites, as above c. 9.7, etc. he shows.
And also in the following places, v. 28, c. 11. he explains, saying, As
concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes; but as touching the
Election, they are beloved for their fathers sakes. The sum of the whole
place is this: The rejection of the Jews nation in part, (whereby blindness
shall remain upon the reprobate) does no ways prejudice the elect of that same
nation, but they also, and so all Israel shall be saved. See Calvin on this
place.

VII. The sign of Christ's presence shall be, doubtless, an incredible
brightness and majesty, in which he shall appear.

For he shall come in the clouds of heaven, Mat. 26.64. with incredible glory,
Mat. 25.31. accompanied with the whole army of his Angels, ibid. with a great
shout and voice of the Archangel, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. By reason of his brightness,
the Sun and Moon shall be darkened (as lesser lights by the greater) and stars
shall fall from heaven, that is, they shall seem to fall from heaven, and the
powers of heaven shall be shaken, Mat. 24.29. yea at his sight, heaven and
earth shall seem to fly away, Rev. 20.11.


Thus of Christ's coming: The resurrection of the dead is, whereby the bodies of
the dead shall be raised, but the bodies of those that remain alive, shall be
changed, and shall be again united to their souls by an indissoluble union.

The RULES.
I. The Resurrection, called by the Greeks (...) and (...), is First, or
Second. That, is a resuscitation from the death of sin to the life of
righteousness; This, is a revocation from death corporal to life.

Rev. 20.6. Blessed is he who has part in the first resurrection.

II. The Scripture proves the Resurrection of the dead, by testimonies a,
examples b, types c, and reasons d.

a Job 19.25, 26. Dan. 12.2. Hos. 13.14. Mat. 22.31, etc. and 27.52. Ioh. 5.26,
27, 28. Phil. 3.21. 1 Thessalonians. 4. and other such like places. b The example of
those that were raised by the ministry of Eliah, 1 King. 17.22. Elisha, 2
King. 4.34. 2 King. 13.21. by Christ also, Mat. 9.25. Luc. 7.14. Ioh. 11.11.
Mat. 27.52, 53. and by the Apostles, Act. 9.40. and 20.10. c The type of Aarons
Rod budding, Number. 17. of the Jews returning from Babylon, Ezekiel. 37. but chiefly
of Henoch and Elias, Genesis 5. and 2 King. 2. d Reasons are drawn from the
covenant of God, which is not broken by death, Mat. 22.30. from the promises of
life eternal; from the Sacraments which are seals thereof, which 1 Cor. 15. are
set down at large: but the chief reason is drawn from Christ, who is not only
the type and example of our resurrection, but the beginning also thereof; for
from the life of the Head, we undoubtedly gather the life of the mystical body.

III. Though the Resurrection of the dead is above nature, and man's corrupt
reason; yet it is neither against nature, nor against right reason.

For right reason teaches, that the dead can be raised, and shall be raised:
That, is gathered from his omnipotence; this, from his justice. For as it is
just, that some sins be punished after this life; so it is just likewise, that
what was the companion of sin, should be the companion of pain.

IV. The general efficient cause of the Resurrection, is the whole Trinity;
the particular, is Christ our Lord.

Christ is the efficient cause of this three ways. 1. As God. 2. As the Judge
of the world. 3. As Mediator. The first two ways, he is the efficient cause of
resurrection both in the elect and reprobate: but the third way, he is the
cause of the resurrection of the faithful, by his merit, efficacy, and
inchoation.

V. The matter, is the same numerical body that man had in this life.

Besides Jobs testimony, Job 19.26. the reason annexed to the third Canon,
taken from Gods justice, proves this.

VI. The form, consists in the reunion of body and soul, and restoring of the
dead to life, and in the sudden change of those that remain, and in their
freedom from corruption.

1 Cor. 15.51.

VII. The end, is the declaration of Gods justice, and mercy: of that, in
raising the wicked to condemnation; of this, in raising the godly to life
eternal.

Dan. 12.2. Joh. 5.28.29.

VIII. In the Resurrection, the godly shall be freed not only from corruption
and bodily defects, but shall be crowned also with glory.

1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. It is sowed in corruption, it is raised in incorruption;
it is sowed in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sowed in weakness, it
is raised in power; it is sowed a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.


CHAP. XXXV. Of the last Judgment.
SO much of the antecedents of the last Judgment: The Judgment it self, is that
most glorious act, whereby Christ shall judge the whole world.

The RULES.
I. The certainty of the last Judgment, is proved by the same arguments by
which we proved the certainty of Christ's coming, and of our resurrection.

II. The general efficient principal cause, is the whole Trinity; the
particular, is Christ our Lord in the assumed humane nature, but glorified.

III. The chief power of Judicature shall be in Christ; for to him all power
is given, and from whom no appeal can be made to any superior.

IV. This Judge shall be visible and conspicuous to all, both in respect of his
brightness and majesty in which he shall appear, as also of his humanity.

But so, that his sight shall be terrible to the wicked, joyful to the godly.

V. The instrumental cause, ave the Angels, whose service he shall use, both in
gathering together those that are to be judged, and in separating the godly
from the wicked.

Mat. 24.31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of the trumpet,
and they shall gather the elect from the four winds. and 25.32. And all nations
shall be gathered before him, and he shall separate the one from the other, as
the shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.

VI. The matter, shall be all men, who must appear before Christ's tribunal.

Romans 14.10. 2 Cor. 5.10.

VII. But the godly shall be judged one way, and the wicked another way: For,
they shall be judged, but not condemned; these shaall be judged and condemned.

In this sense, the Scripture denies that the faithful shall be judged, Ioh.
3.18. and 5.29.

VIII. Neither matters it, that the wicked are said to be judged already: for
it is one thing to be judged in private, another in public and openly.

IX. The form, is expressed by the manner of Proceedings in the Courts of
Justice; to which belongs, 1. The cognizance of the cause. 2. The pronouncing
of the sentence. 3. The execution thereof.

X. The cognisace of the cause, is expressed by the similitude of records or
books, in which their works are registered.

Rev. 20.11. And the books were opened, etc: A. R. By these books are meant
partly Gods omniscience, partly men's conscience.] God to whom all things are
naked and open, needs not books to help his memory, as men do; yet we read that
he has two books, the one is called the Book of life, the other of knowledge.
Of the former there are four kinds, the first is of Predestination to life
eternal, and in this Book some are so written that they cannot be blotted out;
others are wrtten but in appearance and hope; for when they live for a while in
the fear of God, they hope their names are recorded in heaven; but when by
their wickedness they fall from this hope, then they may be said to be blotted
out of this Book; this is the Book of Life eternal. 2. The Book of Life
temporary, which is nothing else, but the condition and estate of this life:
out of this Book did Moses, David, and Paul wish themselves to be blotted. 3.
The Scripture is the Book of Life, as containing those precepts and means by
which we may obtain Life eternal. The 4. Book of Life, is our Conscience
informing us of all the good and bad actions of our former life. This book is
opened sometimes in this life; but shall be fully laid open to us in the last
day. The other Book we read of, is of Knowledge: which is threefold. 1. The
Book of Gods general knowledge, whereby he takes notice of all men, whether
they be good or bad; of this every man may say with David, Psalm. 139.16. In thy
book are all my members written. 2. The book of Gods particular knowledge: of
this, Psalm. 1. The Lord knows the ways of the righteous; and 2 Timothy 2. The
Lord knows who are his: this is the knowledge of approbation: in this Book
they are not written, to whom Christ will say in the last day, Depart from me,
etc. I know you not: of this David speaks, Ps. 69.28. Let them be blotted out
of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous! The third
book of knowledge, is that wherein the actions of wicked men are recorded, and
which shall be laid open to them. Dan. 7.10. The judgment was set, and the
books opened. We may say then that God has two books, which like Ezekiels
scroll are written within and without: In the inside are the names of the
Saints, who persevere to the end; On the outside are the names of the wicked,
who fall from grace, who begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh. Of these
books, see Exodus 32.33. Psalm. 69.28, etc. Phil. 4.3. Rev. 3.5. and 17.8. and
20.15. and 21.27.


By these books are meant, partly Gods omniscience, and partly men's conscience.

XI. The wicked shall be judged according to, and for their works; but the
godly, according to the works of their faith, but not for their works.

Hence, Rev. 20.12. Another book is said to be opened, which is the book of
life. That we might know, that our salvation depends not on our works, but on
Gods eternal grace whereby we are written in the book of life.

XII. The infidelity and impiety of the wicked, shall be so laid open before
their eyes in their own conscience, that they shall not be able to deny or
gainsay any thing.

Psalm. 50.21. I will reprove thee, and set these things in order before thine
eyes. Mat. 12.36. But I say unto you, whatsoever idle word men shall speak,
they shall give an account thereof in the day of judgment.

XIII. Although the Elect shall remember their sins, yet they shall be so
filled with the joy of the Spirit, that the remembrance thereof shall not sad
them.

XIV. Both Reprobate and Elect, shall hear the sentence of the Judge; to the
one it shall be full of horror, to the other full of comfort.

Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for
you from the beginning of the world; and ver. 41. Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

XV. The execution of the Judgment will presently follow upon the pronouncing
of the sentence: so that the wicked in the presence of the godly shall be
carried away to hell; but the godly being caught up to meet Christ, they shall
with him enter into Life eternal.

Mat. 25. v. ult. 1 These. 4.17.

XVI. The end of the last Judgment, is a full and consummate execution of Gods
counsel, for manifesting his justice and grace.

XVII. We must not rashly define where the place of the last Judgment shall be.

Some will have it to be in the valley of Iehosaphat, which is between the
hills Sion and Olivet; and that Christ shall descend no lower then to that part
of the air in which a cloud took him up: which they gather out of the
Prophecy of Joel, cap. 3.2. But that place speaks nothing of the last
Judgment, but of a temporary judgment, to be inflicted on the enemies of the
Church of Israel; alluding to that great overthrow which was given in the
valley of Iehosaphat, which was in the sight of Jerusalem. But if this be
transferred anagogically to the last Judgment, this will be the meaning: As the
enemies of Iehosaphat and of the Jews were slain in the sight of Jerusalem; so
likewise shall the Infidels be judged and thrown down to hell, in the sight of
spiritual Jerusalem, that is, the Church: And in this sense the Apostles, Mat.
19. the Martyrs, Rev. 20. yea, all the Faithful, 1 Cor. 6. shall Judge the
world and the devils: not that Christ will share with the Saints the honor of
Judicature, but that they shall approve of the sentence, and shall praise the
wisdom and justice of the celestial Judge.


CHAP. XXXVI. Of the end of the World, and Life eternal, the Consequents of the
Judgment.
THere are two Consequents of the last Judgment; to wit, the end of the World,
and Life eternal.

The end of the World, is the destruction of this visible Universe, after the
wicked are thrust down to hell, and the godly elevated into the heaven of the
blessed.

The RULES.
I. This is called the consummation of the world. Matthew. 24.3. and 28.20.

II. The efficient cause of this consummation shall be God; for it belongs to
the same power to create and to destroy the world.

III. The matter is this visible world, heaven and earth, and the things
therein contained.

Peter expressly names heaven, earth, and the elements, and their contents, 2
Pet. 3.

IV. Neither Hell, nor the Heaven of the blessed shall be destroyed.

For there the wicked shall be eternally tortured, and here the godly for ever
glorified.

V. Concerning the form of this consummation, it is demanded, 1. Whether it
shall be mediate or immediate? 2. In the substance, or qualities only?

VI. Peter answers the first question, saying, that God will destroy it by fire.

2. Pet. 3.6, 7. The world that then was perished by water being overflowed:
but the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are kept in
store, reserved unto fire, etc. and ver. 10. The heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and
works therein shall be burned up: and ver. 12. The heavens being on fire shall
be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. But what kind of
fire this shall be, he only knows who is himself a consuming fire.

VII. Concerning the other question, there be diverse opinions: for some will
have this world destroyed in its substance; others, in its qualities only.

They who think it shall be destroyed only in qualities, by this word
consummation, mean a purging and instauration. Being moved, I. By testimonies.
Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22. For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for
the manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the same in
hope, because the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: for we know that the
whole creature groaneth, and travelleth in pain together until now. 1 Cor.
7.31. The fashion or figure of this world passes away. 2 Pet. 3.13. But we
look for new heavens, and a new earth according to promise. Rev. 21.2. Then I
saw a new heaven and a new earth. II. By reasons. 1. In the deluge, the earth
was not destroyed in its substance. 2. Because man shall not be changed in his
subsance, but in his qualities. But they who are of the contrary opinion, I.
Rely on these Scriptures, Psalm. 102.27. Heb. 1.11. They shall perish, but thou
do remain; they all shall wax old as does a garment, and thou shall change
them as a vesture, etc. Isa. 51.6. Lift up your eyes to heaven, and behold the
earth below; the heavens shall vanish as smoke, and the earth shall wax old as
a garment. Matthew. 24.35. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall
not pass away. 2 Pet. 3.7. But the heavens and the earth which now are, by the
same word are laid up in store, and reserved for fire, etc. and ver. 10. The
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
servent heat; the earth and all therein shall be burned: and ver. 12. The A. R.
The heavens shall not be purged with fire, because they are not capable of an
elementary impression. 2. Because they are not subject to the vanity, motion,
and corruption of inferior bodies. 3. Their innovation shall only be in their
rest and cessation from motion. 4. The heavens that shall be purged by fire are
the aerial only. 5. The fire shall purge no more, then what the water did purge
in the Flood of Noah.


heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt, etc.
Rev. 21.1. The first heaven, and the first earth passed away, and there was no
more sea. II. Reasons. 1. Because this visible world was made for man to
sojourn in whilst he was a traveller; but when his journey is ended, and he in
heaven, there will be no more need of this world. 2. Because this stands with
the order of things: For seeing eternity belongs to God, who is without
beginning and ending; but to Spirits, aevum, which is that duration that has
beginning, but wants ending; to Physical things time is ascribed, consisting
both of beginning and ending. To the former objections thus they answer: The
place of Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22. is not meant of the restoration of this world,
but of its freedom from vanity to which it is subject, which vanity consists in
this, that most men do most wickedly abuse the service of the creatures; hence
by Prosopopeia or fiction of the person, they are said to desire liberty. The
place in 1 Cor. 7.31. teaches rather the contrary, to wit, that this world
shall not remain; although in that place mention is not made of the world it
self, so much as of worldly things, to wit, riches, pleasures and such like.
They teach, that the new heaven in 2 Pet. 3. and Rev. 21. does as it were point
out the new world, which the Elect shall inhabit in their heavenly country.
For there is nothing more frequent then that allegory, whereby the heaven of
the blessed is likened sometimes to the earth, sometimes to the visible heaven:
and to this purpose, is that which Peter says of righteousness, which shall
dwell there. For it is certain, that after this world, justice shall dwell no
where but in heaven. To the first reason, they answer, that there is no
consequence from the Flood to the last Judgment, because the Flood brought not
with it the end of the world: so likewise in the other reason, they deny the
sequel from man to the world; because the world will be no ways available to
man, when he is advanced to life eternal, for it was made only for him whilst
he was a traveller here. Now although in controversies of this nature, which
overthrow not the Articles of Faith, it be lawful to suspend our assent; yet,
without prejudice to other men's judgments, the understanding Reader may
subscribe to the latter opinion: for it is one thing to be restored, and
changed unto a better estate; and another thing to wax old like a garment, to
vanish like smoke, to be dissolved, to melt, to be burned, to pass away, to be
no more, as the former testimonies affirm.


So much of the end of the world; Life eternal is the highest degree of
blessedness, in which we shall be made partakers of Christ's glory, enjoying the
sight of God, and heavenly joys for ever and ever.

The RULES.
I. The general efficient cause of Life eternal is the whole Trinity, but
particularly Christ our Lord, who by his merit obtained life for us, and by his
efficacy applies it to us, and bestows it upon us.

Hence he is called the everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. and metonymically, Life
it self, Joh. 14.6.

II. Good works are not the meritorious cause of life eternal; although life is
promised to them as a free reward.

A reward is promised to good works, not as a due debt, but as a free gift; not
that by them we can merit life, but that we may be provoked to them.

III. That eternal happiness consists in our freedom from all evil; in the
variety, magnitude, and eternity of joys.

Rev. 21.4. And God will wipe all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor shall there be any more pain; for the
first things are past.

IV. The variety of joys, shall be in the delights of heavenly mansions, in
the blessed society of the Saints, but chiefly in the union with God.

V. There shall be a glorification both of body and of soul.

VI. In the body shall be, 1 Clarity, 2 Impassibility, 3 Subtility, 4. Agility.

VII. The soul shall be far more perfect then it was in the state of
innocence; for in it shall be understanding without error, light without
darkness, wisdom without ignorance, reason without obscurity, memory without
oblivion; the will also shall be without perverseness, joy without sorrow,
pleasure without pain. In the state of innocence, there was in man a
possibility not to sin; in the state of glory, there shall be no possibility to
sin.

VIII: The beauty of heavenly mansions, was shadowed by the type of Solomon's
temple, and Jerusalem.

Psalm. 84.1, etc. Rev. 21.22.

IX. The communion of Saints, which shall be with joy, is expressed by the
similitude of a feast.

Matt. 22.2. etc.

X. Neither shall we have communion only with the Angels, but we shall be also
like the Angels.

Matt. 22.30. Luke 20.36.

XI. There shall be such a communion with God, that we shall see him without
end, love him without tediousness, and praise him without wearisomnesse.

XII. So great shall be that joy, that neither our tongues can express it, nor
our minds conceive it.

For in this life, neither has the eye seen, nor ear heard, nor mind
conceived, that which can equal that glory, 1 Cor. 2.9.

XIII. Neither shall any bounds be set to this happiness, nor shall we ever
fall from it; but it shall continue for ever.

Psalm. 16.11. Thou shall show me the path of life, for in thy presence is
fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for ever more.

XIV. There sall be degrees of eternal happiness.

This is gathered from Daniel cap. 12. v. 3. They that be wise shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as
the stars for ever and ever. Neither is this opnion overthrown by that place of
Matthew. 13. v. 43. whereas the just in general, are said to shine as the Sun:
for though the glory of the Elect being considered in themselves, is likened to
the brightness of Sun and Stars; yet in Daniel cap. 12. this is promised to
Doctors above other men; neither can any other reason be given why there
mention is made chiefly of them that instruct others: That place 1 Cor. 15.39,
40, 41. Is alleged but to little purpose for proof of this for the simile
concerning the diversity of brightness in the stars does not prove the
degrees of future glory, but the difference only that is betwixt a mortal, and
a glorified body; as it appears by what follows. In the mean while we allow
not that manner of different glory, which the Papists teach; to wit, diversity
of merits. For as the gift of Faith and Sanctification, according to Gods mere
grace is unequally distributed to the Saints; so he will according to his
gracious pleasure impart glory; but so, that no man shall have cause to
complain of any want of glory in himself, or why he should envy it in
another.


The SECOND BOOK, Concerning the WORSHIP of GOD.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of good works.
IN the former Book we have spoken of the Knowledge of God; now we are to speak
of his Worship.

The true worship of God, consists in true holiness, and righteousness, or in
the study of good works; which good works are performed by the grace of the
Holy Spirit, out of true Faith, according as the Law requires, to the glory of
God, the certainty of our salvation, and edification of our neighbor.

The RULES.
I. Good works are called Virtues.

But we take this word virtue in a larger sense, then it is taken by
Philosophers: for here we call virtues, holy affections, holy thoughts and
actions.

II. The same Synecdochically are called by the name of Charity.

For so Christ says, that the whole Law consists in the precept of love
toward God and our neighbor: whereas love toward God, belongs to the first
Commandment; but love to our neighbor, to the second Table.

III. The principal efficient cause of good works is the Holy Ghost in respect
of beginning, continuation, and perfection.

For it belongs to the same power, to begin in us a good work, and to perfect
it, Phil. 1.6. as also, to give both to will, and to be able, or to do, cap.
2.13.

IV. Their instrumental cause is Faith, the root of good works.

Romans 14.23. What is not done of faith, is sin.

V. The matter of good works are the affections and actions of a regenetate man.

VI. The form of them is their agreement with the precepts of the Decalogue.

For sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4.

VII. Therefore these are not good works, which are conformable to the
commandments of men, and not of God.

Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.

VIII. Neither are those good works, which the Papists call works of
Supererogation, by which they say more is performed then by the Law is required.

IX. This opinion is grounded upon their conceit of counsels or things not
commanded, but left to our liberty; the omission of which is not punishable,
but the performance is greater then legal obedience, and therefore meritorious.

They say, such counsels may be seen, Mat. 19.11. where they teach, that the
counsel of single life is not contained within the command; and ver. 21. where
they say, that to the young man a counsel was given, not a command, that he
should sell his goods, and give them to the poor, and then follow Christ: and,
1 Cor. 7. where they say, that the single life is counseled.

But this opinion of counsels, and works of supererogation is false. 1. Because
so the Law is made imperfect, whilst the performing of counsels is preferred to
the fulfilling of the Law. 2. Because if no man is able to fulfill the Law,
much less able is any man to fulfill that which is heavier then the Law. 3.
Because to beg daily for pardon of our sins, and to brag of such works, are
things inconsistent.

The places above alleged are to be understood of commands, and not of
counsels which do not oblige men: these commands indeed, are particular, and
given only to certain men, according to the exigence of their condition and
gifts; yet they are subordinate to general precepts. Mat. 19.11. Single life is
not only counseled, but commanded; two conditions being required. 1. If the
Kingdom of heaven does so require it. 2. If any be assured that he has the
gift of continence: so ver. 21. It is not a counsel, but a command that is
given to the young man, that his hypocrisy might be manifested, who bragged
that he was able to fulfill the Law: and 1 Cor. 7. Celibate is enjoined to them
that have the gift of continency, not simply, but because it was expedient in
those times of difficulties. Now I pray, what is more consonant to Gods Law,
then to renounce all earthly things for the glory of God? therefore in these
places nothing is counseled, but what by the Law is commanded.

X. The end of good works is threefold, to wit, the glorifying of God, and the
testifying of our gratitude toward him; the certainty of salvation; and for
our Neighbors edification.

We are taught, Mat. 5.16. that we must study to do good works both for Gods
cause and our neighbors: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. They are to be
performed for our own sakes; because we can have no assurance of salvation,
election, vocation, and justification, but by good works, as the effects of
Faith, Justification and Sanctification: whence John says, He that does well
is of God. 1 Ep. 3.11.

XI. The subject of good works, is man regenerated.

This was proved in the former Book, cap. 10. out of our natural corruption;
whence appears the vanity of the School-mens Doctrine, concerning merit of
congruity and condignity: they ascribe that to the works of an unregenerate man
before the first grace, but this to his works done after the first grace is
received: That they call the merit of congruity, because it is fit or congruous
that reward be given to him that works virtuously; this they call merit of
condignity, because there is a proportion between the merit and the punishment,
of which opinion Bellarmine and Stapleton were ashamed.

XII. The adjuncts of good works, are their imperfection and necessity.

XIII. The good works of the Saints are imperfect while they are travelers
here; but they shall be perfect in the state of glory hereafter.

This Doctrine is not thwarted by those places in which the Saints are said, To
walk perfectly, and not to turn toward the right hand, or to the left hand:
for in those places is understood not so much perfection it self, as the
desire of it, and the perfection of parts rather then of degrees; or their
sincerity and integrity are meant, whereby the faithful (though the Scripture
elsewhere speaks of their sins) study to serve God in the simplicity of their
heart, without hypocrisy.

XIV. Yet this imperfection is covered with Christ's perfection; hence our half
perfect works, and which are joined with infirmities, are reputed for perfect;
in this respect the Church is said to be without spot or wrinckle.

XV. Good works are necessary, by the necessity of precept and the means, but
not by the necessity of the cause or merit.

By the necessity of precept they are necessary, because the study of good
works through all the Scriptures is most severely enjoined to us: They are
necessary in regard of the means, because they are sure marks of Vocation,
Election, and true Faith; and because they are the way and means to attain
heavenly bliss: As if a man should make a journey from York to London, to
obtain an inheritance, the way or journey is the medium or means, but not the
meriting cause of the inheritance; even so it is in this matter. Works would be
truly meritorious if they had these three conditions. 1. If they were our own.
2. If they were not due. 3. If they were proportionable to life eternal; But in
our good works these conditions are wanting, 1. Though good works be done by
us, yet they are not of us, 2 Cor. 3.5. 2. We are bound to do them, so that if
we should do all, yet we must confess, We are unprofitable servants, Luke
17.10. 3. They have no proportion, if they be compared to life eternal.


CHAP. II. Of Virtues pertaining to the Decalogue, and whole Worship of God.
Virtues or good works, are either general or particular. Those, belong to the
whole worship of God, and so to the whole Law: these, to either of the Tables,
or to each Command.

The virtues of the first Command, are either of the Understanding, or the Will.

The virtues of the understanding, are Wisdom and Prudence.

Wisdom is that virtue, by which we know Gods will, and our own infirmity;
that we may do what is conformable to Gods will, and may seriously beseech God
for strength to perform this will.

Romans 12.2. That you may prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect
will of God. Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, because thou art my God;
lead me by thy good Spirit through the right path.

To this is opposite foolishness, or ignorance of Gods ways, or an opinion of
wisdom.

Jer. 5.4. These are foolish, for they know not the ways of the Lord, nor the
judgments of their God. Pro. 3.7. Be not wise in thy own conceit. Eccl. 7.16.
Be not too wise.

Prudence is a virtue, whereby we foresee how things are to be done in respect
of time, place, and manner, and what will be the event of each business which
is undertaken.

The RULES.
I. Prudence is the director or guide of our counsels and actions.

II. It is prudence, to distrust the world, and not rashly to believe every man.

Jer. 9.4. Let every one take heed of his friend. Mat. 10.16. Be wise as
serpents, and innocent as doves.

III. It is prudence, to counterfeit, and to dissemble.

Yet here we must know, how and for what end we may counterfeit and dissemble:
the end is, either the edification of the Church, or the trial of things
needful, or the avoiding of dangers, or the desire of eschewing vainglory or
boasting. Then it will be lawful to do this, when it can be done without
prejudice to Gods glory, to the truth, to charity, to justice, to our calling
and duty, and without fraud.

IV. It is prudence, in the evils of sin to choose none, in the evils of
punishment to choose the lesser.

So David, of the three punishments proposed to him, he chose the Pestilence
rather then war and famine, 2 Samuel 24.12. Cyprian being willed by the
Governor to advise with himself, whether he would obey, or die? He answered,
that in a matter of such holiness, no advice was to be used. When the French
King Charles 9. had proposed three things to the Prince of Conde; the Mass,
Death, and perpetual Imprisonment: his answer was, that by Gods assistance he
would never choose the first; as for the other two, he left them to the Kings
own pleasure.


To Prudence is opposite Imprudence, Craft, and a Conceit of Prudence.

Mat. 25.3. But those that were foolish, took their lamps, but did not take
oil with them. Luke 16.8. And the Lord commended the unjust steward, that he
had done wisely. Their craft is called prudence, abusively. Romans 12.16. Be not
wise in your own conceits.

So much of the virtues of the mind: The virtues of the will in general are,
Sincerity, Readiness, and Constancy.

Sincerity is, whereby we perform obedience to God, although imperfect, yet
with a serious purpose, and without hypocrisy, as in the sight of God.

Deuteronomy. 18.13. Thou shall be perfect (or sincere) with the Lord thy God. 2. Cor.
1.12. For this is our boasting, even the testimony of our conscience.

To this is opposite the contempt of Conscience, or a dissembling and
hypocritical Conscience.

1 Timothy 1.19.20. Retaining faith and a good conscience, which some having put
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck, of whom are Hymeneus and Alexander.
Joh. 18.28. The Priests went not into the Judgment-hall, lest they should be
defiled, but that they might eat, etc.

Readiness and promptitude, called also cheerfulness and alacrity, is a
virtue whereby we obey God freely and joyfully.

Psalm. 40.9. I delight to do thy will, O my God. Ps. 110.3. Thy people shall be
willing. 2 Cor. 9.7. God loves a cheerful giver.

To this is opposite Precipitancie and Co-action.

Mat. 8.19. And when there came a certain Scribe to him, he says to him,
Master, I will follow thee wheresoever thou go. 2 Cor. 9.7. Every man, as he
is purposed in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly or of necessity.

Constancy is a virtue, whereby man is prepared to persevere to the end in the
knowledge, profession, and worship of God.

Matt. 24.13. But he that continues to the end, shall be saved: see the
examples of Prophets, Martyrs, etc.

To this is opposite, Inconstancy, or pertinacy in an error or evil purpose.

Luc. 9.62: No man that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is
meet for the Kingdom of God: Act. 7.51. Stiff-necked and uncircumcised in
heart, etc.

CHAP. III. Of the Works belonging to the First Commandment.
SO much of the general Virtues or Works: the special, belong to the immediate,
or mediate worship of God.

Gods immediate worship, is that which is performed to him immediately, and is
taught in the first Table.

This is either internal only, or else external and internal both.

The internal worship only, is that which resides in the heart, and is
enjoined in the first Precept.

The sum whereof is, that we worship and know him alone for the true God.

For the precept is negative, Thou shall have no other Gods but me: from this
is gathered an affirmative, Know and worship me alone for God.

Therefore to this precept belongs the knowledge of God, and a religious
affection toward him.

The knowledge of God is, whereby we acknowledge him to be the only true God,
as he reveals himself to us in Scripture.

Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear o Israel, the Lord our God is one God. Isa. 46.9. Have not I
told you from that time, and have declared it, etc. Is there a God besides me?
Yea, there is no God, I know not any.

Contrary to this is Atheism, and multiplicity of gods or Polytheisme.

Ps. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. Gal. 4.8. Even
then when you knew not God, you served them which by nature were not gods.

Religious affection toward God, consists in Faith, Hope, Charity,
Confidence in God, Fear, Repentance, Patience, and Thankfulness of mind.

For to acknowledge any for God, is to believe, to place trust and confidence
in him, to love and fear him above all things, to submit patiently to his will,
and to acknowledge all good things for his gifts.

Faith is, whereby we lay hold on God, as our God and Father, and firmly
believe his Word, Promises, and Threatenings.

We considered Faith before, as the instrument of Justification and
Sanctification; but here, as a virtue and internal work of God in reference to
his worship.

To Faith is opposite (...), or Infidelity, and doubting of the goodness and
power of God; as also the presumption of Faith.

Psalm.78.22. The Israelites believed not, nor trusted in his salvation. Number.
20.12. Because ye did not believe me, that ye might sanctify me, etc. Jam.
2.14. What avails it, my brethren, if any man say he has faith, and have not
works? Can his faith save him?

Confidence is a virtue, whereby we rest in God and in his Promises, and
totally depend on him in all things both corporal and spiritual.

We have already spoken of Confidence, as it is the form of Faith, and applies
to the heart the Promises concerning Christ: Here it is considered, as the
effect of Faith; Of this, Solomon says, Trust in the Lord with all thy heart,
Prove. 3.5.

Contrary to this, is distrust in God, and trust or confidence in Idols.

An example of distrust, is in the Israelites: Psalm. 78.19, 20. in David, 1 Samuel 27.1. in the Kings Captain, 2 King. 6.35. in Ahaz, Isa. 7.12. in those
that are too careful what they shall eat, Mat. 6.25. Idolatrous confidence is
that which man puts in the Devil, as Witches do; or in Idols, as Ahazia, 2
King. 1.2. or in men's inventions, as Papists; or in the arm of flesh, Jer.
17.5. or in Covenants, Fortifications, Physic, etc. as Asa, who implored the
help of the Syrians, and consulted with Physicians, not with God; 2 Chronicles.
16.7. and 12. Yet it is lawful to make use of outward helps and aid, so we
place not confidence in them; we must use them as servants, not trust in them
as gods.

Hope is that, whereby we expect undoubtedly Gods future favors, especially
the accomplishment of our relying on Gods promises, and Christ's merits.

Hope differs from faith, as the effect from the cause: for the object of
faith, is the promise on which faith relies; the object of hope, is the thing
promised, which hope expects.

Contrary to these, are doubtings, desparation, and idolatrous hope.

Sometimes the godly fall into doubtings, 1 Samuel 27.1. David said in his heart,
I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul. But the wicked only fall into
a total and final desperation: so did Cain, Genesis 4. Saul, 1 Samuel 28. and 31.
Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17. Judas, Matt. 27. and such like: Idolatrous hope is in
Papists, who call the Wooden Cross, Mary, etc. their hope; and expect life
eternal for their merits, satisfactions, indulgences.

Charity is that, whereby God is loved sincerely, and above all things else, as
the chief good.

For so it is commanded, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.

Contrary to this, is the hatred of God, and idolatrous love; whereby the world
and the things therein, are loved more then God.

Joh. 15.18. They have hated both me and my Father. 1 John 2.15. If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

The fear of God, whereby we so reverence Gods word and majesty, that by all
means we are loath to offend so bountiful a Father, not so much out of the fear
of punishment, as the love of God.

The fear of God is sometimes taken for the whole worship of God; but here that
virtue is understood, which is called filial fear.

To these are opposite, carnal security, servile, and idolatrous fear

The security of the godly, differs far from that of the wicked: for in the
one, the fear of God is not lost; in the other the fear of God is not found.
Servile fear differs from filial: I. Filial fear proceeds from the love of God;
but servile, from the fear or hatred of God. II. In filial, we fear to offend
God, because he is a Father; in servile, we fear to be punished by him, because
he is a Judge. III. Filial, draws a man to God; servile, drives a man from God.
Idolatrous fear is, when one is more afraid of men and the world, then of God,
Mat. 10.28. Fear not them that can kill the body.

Repentance is, whereby we acknowledge our sins, and bewail them being
acknowledged; and withal cheer up our selves in the assurance of Gods mercy
through Christ's merits, and resolve to obey God, and to refrain from sin.

We have showed in the former book, cap. 30. how Penitence, and Resipiscence
differ: now this word resipiscence, is taken either for the whole change of
man, or special vocation; or else for sanctification, or for the effect of
sanctification, and part of Gods internal worship; in the third signification
it is here considered.

There are three parts thereof; 1. Contrition, 2. Confidence, 3. Purpose of
amendment.

To this is opposite perseverance and induration in sin; as likewise feigned
and idolatrous repentance.

An example of feigned repentance, is in Ahab, 1 King. 21. Idolatrous
repentance is that of the Papists which they place, 1. in contrition, 2. in
confession, 3. in satisfaction; and by which they think their sins are
expiated: but these three were in Judas his repentance, Mat. 27.

Gratitude toward God, is whereby we humbly acknowledge his goodness and
blessings bestowed on us undeservedly; withal purposing to glorify him
seriously.

Genesis 32.10. I am unworthy of the least of thy mercies, says Jacob.

To this is contrary, (...), or ingratitude toward God, when we show no
thankfulness to him; when we ascribe Gods bounties either to our selves, or to
the creatures, or to Idols.

Isa. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. Jer. 44.17. By burning incense to the queen of heaven, and putting
drink offerings to her, etc. We had plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw
no evil. Hab. 1.16. The wicked sacrifices to his own nets, and offers
incense to his own yearn.

Patience is that, whereby we are sustained in the faith of Gods providence,
power, and bounty; and when he visites us with afflictions, we submit our
selves with humility to his correction.

There be diverse kinds of afflictions for the exercising of our patience; for
besides the vengeance that God does pour out on the wicked; the affliction of
Gods children is either chastisement, or trial, or lastly martyrdom, bloody
and unbloody.

To patience, are opposite impatience, hypocritical patience, and stoical
Apathies, or want of passion.

To impatience belongs complaining or grumbling in afflictions, as if they were
underserved; and softness. Hypocritical patience is perceived in them who
torture themselves, as the Priests of Baal did, 1 King 18.28. the Eremites, the
Whippers, etc. The Stoical Apathie is rejected, because patience can well
consist with the sense of pains, with mourning and complaints; if so be we do
not murmr against God, and that our complaints be rather for our sins then
for our sufferings.

CHAP. IV. Of the Works belonging in general to the II, III, and IV,
Commandments.
WE have spoken of Gods internal worship: Now follows that worship which is
partly internal, partly external; which is usually called the true Religion,
and is commanded in the three following Precepts.

True Religion is, whereby God is worshipped by Rites and Ceremonies prescribed
by himself; and his Name truly sanctified both through the whole course of our
life, and chiefly at the times by himself appointed.

The RULES.
I. Religion and Piety, called by the Greeks, the Worship and Service of God:
in general, it signifies the whole Worship of God; in special, the immediate
Worship; but most specially, either the internal alone, or the internal and
external together.

II. This is called in Scripture, Dulia and Latria.

The Pontificians ascribe Dulia to Angels and men, Latria, to God, Hyperdulia
to Mary. But this is without, yea, against Scriptures: for Matt. 4.10. Latria
is given to him; and Matt. 6.24. Dulia, to him alone.

III. True Religion is divine, in its Original, Matter, Form, and End.

IV. True Religion is only one.

For that Religion is only true, which agrees with Gods Word; for verity and
unity are convertible.

V. Religion should be cared for by all, chiefly by Magistrates and Ministers.

For they are the Churches nursing Fathers, by preserving Schools and
Churches, and by maintaining of Ministers, etc.

VI. The true Religion is most ancient, for it began in Paradise.

VII. It is not only external, but internal also.

Romans 2.28. etc. For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart.

VIII. A. R. Religion is to be taught, not to be forced.] The reasons are, 1.
Because Faith comes by hearing, says the Apostle: But the acts of hearing,
reading, meditating, praying, by which Religion is both begot and nourished,
are voluntary. 2. The proper seat of Religion is the will; but the will cannot
be forced. 3. In propagating of Religion, we must imitate God in our
conversion, who uses not to force us, but gently to persuade, incline and move
us. 4. No force or violence has any continuance; neither has forced Religion.
5. Religion is the free gift of God, which as it is freely given, so it must be
freely received without constraint. 6. As he is not to be esteemed an Heretic
or an Idolater, that is forced thereto; neither is he Religious, that is
compelled to embrace it. 7. Christ and his Apostles never used any force in
propagating of Religion; not the Sword, but the Word was the instrument used to
propagate Christianity. 8. Christ is so far from using violence, that he will
rather suffer the tares to grow with the good corn, then pluck them by force.
9. We find, that violence is rather a hinderer then a furtherer of Religion;
for the more that men are persecuted for their conscience, the more eager they
are to hold it: The stronger the wind blows, so much the faster does the
traveller hold his cloak. The blood of Martyrs has evermore been the seed of
the Church. 10. The forcing of Religion has been the cause of much mischief,
murders, disorder, and changes in States: therefore the wise Romans permitted
the Jews, after thy were subdued, to use freely their own Religion; neither
did they force any of their conquered Nations to accept the Roman religion. 11.
Where violence is used, there can be no justice. 11. Nor God: for he is not to
be found in earthquakes, whirlwinds, and fire, but in the soft and still voice.
13. The forcing of Religion, is the maintaining of hypocrisy; for all such are
hypocrites, who are forced to profess outwardly what inwardly they hate. 14.
The forcing of Religion is the undoing of Religion; for, its most dangerous
enemies are the secret enemies that lurk in the bosom of the Church; they will
kiss Religion with the mouth, and in the interim stab it with their hidden
knife. 15. Faith is the gift of God, being a theological virtue infused, not
acquired: if it be not then in our own power to believe, till it be given us
from above, how can it be in the power of any other to make us believe? how can
they force us to take that which is not given? to profess that which we have
not received?


Religion is to be taught, not to be forced.

IX. Religion may be defended by Arms, but not propagated by Arms.

Examples of pious Kings, the Macchabees, Emperors, as Constantine and
Theodosius, show this.

X. Reformation of Religion belongs to the Prince or Magistrate.

After the examples of Moses, Joshua, David, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Constantine, Theodosius, etc.

XI. If a Magistrate proves the Churches enemy, and will not be entreated to
give way for a Reformation; then it lies upon them to reform, whom God has
furnished with necessary gifts for that purpose: neither in such a case must we
stay for consent of Church or Bishops.

Examples are, in Gideon, Jehoiadah, Macchabees, Apostles, etc. Sure, if our
Predecessors had stayed for the Popes consent, there had never been a
Reformation.


Contrary to true Religion, are Epicurisme and false Religions.

CHAP. V. Of works belonging in special to the Second Commandment.
IN true Religion, we must consider its parts, and time, appointed by God.

The parts are two: to wit, the Form or rite whereby God will be worshipped in
his Church; and the Sanctification of his Name, all the rest of our life.

The form of his worship, is that which he has prescribed to us in his Word,
which is handled in the Second Precept; the sum whereof is this, That God
should be worshipped in such manner as he has prescribed.

This appears by the right Analysis of the second Command, which is foolishly
confounded with the first: For as in the first Command is set down, who must be
worshipped for God; so in this second is showed, after what manner he will be
worshipped: And as in the first, internal idolatry is contrary; so in the
second, external is opposed to this worship. The parts of this Command are two;
a Prohibition, and a Confirmation. Of the Prohibition there are two branches:
the first is, of the making; the second, of the worshipping of Idols. Of the
making he says, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, or
likeness, etc. which he illustrates by enumeration of particulars following,
to wit, of any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters
under the earth. The veneration of idols is declared two ways: 1. By bowing to
them, 2. By worshipping of them. The Confirmation contains a threatening, and a
promise; both are illustrated from the nature of God, and from the object: In
the one he describes himself to be a jealous God, visiting iniquities, etc. In
the other, merciful. In the one, he denounces punishment to the third and
fourth generation of them that hate him; but in the other, his mercy to the
thousand generation of them that love him. It is easy then to see what is the
sum of this precept, by the proceeding thereof, 1. From the particular to the
general; for Idolatry is forbid, with all such rites as are either contrary to,
or not contained in the Word of God. 2. From the negation to the affirmation of
the contrary: for it is commanded that we worship God in that way which he has
prescribed to us.

In the rites prescribed to the Church, we must observe both the helps and
parts thereof.

The parts are, the right use of the Word and Sacraments, and Prayer.

The right use or handling of the Word and Sacraments is, when the one is
preached, the other administered according to Christ's institution.

Prayer is, whereby we speak to God in the true and humble contrition of heart,
of such things as are agreeable to his holy will. This consists in calling
upon God, or in giving of thanks.

The Rules.
I. The common efficient cause of Prayer, is the whole Trinity; but in
particular, the Holy Ghost.

Whence he is called the Spirit of Prayer, Zach. 12.10.

II. The impulsive cause on Gods part, are his Commands a, Promise of being
heard b, his majesty c, his goodness d, his benefits e: But on our part, is
out need; which is gathered by the consideration of our wants, calamities,
tentations, and dangers, etc.

a Psalm. 22.8. and 50.15. Isa. 55.6. b Mat. 7.7. 1 Timothy 2.1. Jam. 1.17. Isa.
65.24. and other places now alleged. c 2 King. 19.15. d Psalm. 86.4, 5. e
Psalm. 34.5. and 103.2, etc.

III. The matter of Prayer, are things obtained, and to be obtained.

IV. The form or Idea of true and religious Prayer, is the Lords Prayer.

The parts of this are four; the Preface, the Petitions, the Confirmation, and
Conclusion. The Preface is this, Our Father which art in heaven. Set down to
this end, that our minds may be disposed, 1. To docility; for it shows who is
to be invoked, to wit, that God who in Christ is made our Father by adopting us
for his sons. 2. To humility; because he is not an earthly, but an heavenly
Father. 3. To assure us we shall be heard: For he will hear us, because he is
our Father; and can hear us, because he is in Heaven. 4. For charity; because
we are taught to say, Our Father. Of the Petitions there be two ranks: the
first is, of them that concern God, the first and chief whereof is, Hallowed be
thy Name; to this the the two latter are subordinate, Thy kingdom come, thy
will he done on earth as it is in heaven. The latter rank is of those Petitions
which concern our needs, as well for this as for the next life. For the
present, belongs the 4. Petition, Give us this day our daily bread: For the
future, the two latter; And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us; And lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil.
That has reference to the gift of justification, this, of sanctification. The
Confirmation fellows in these words: For thine is the kingdom, the power, and
the glory, for ever and ever. By which we are taught, 1. that God likes our
Prayers, because he is our King, for His is the Kingdom. 2. That he can hear
us, for His is the Power. 3. That he will hear us, for His is the Glory. 4.
That his love toward us is unchangeable, for he is so for ever and ever. The
Conclusion is in the particle Amen; by which we witness that we have prayed
seriously, and with confidence to be heard.

V. The end of Prayer, is Gods glory, and our salvation.

For this is the Alpha and Omega of Prayer: hence the Petitions of the Lords
Prayer begin with Gods glory, and end in our salvation.

VI. Great are the effects of Prayer: not as if there were merit in it for the
work wrought; the force is in Gods promise, rather then in the prayer.

VII. The Object to which Prayer is directed, is the whole Trinity; yet so,
that all the Persons conjunctly, or either of them severally is called upon.

That the Father is to be called upon, is not doubted. The Son is called upon
by Stephen, Act. 7.59. yea, all the Angels worship him, Heb. 1.6. The Holy
Ghost is called upon with the Father and Son, by John, Rev. 1.4, 5. And that
Angelical hymn, Holy, holy, holy, etc. is applied to the Son, Joh. 12.41.
and to the Holy Ghost, Act. 11.26, 27.

VIII. The object for which we pray, are the living, not the dead; and such as
sin, but not to death.

For God will not be entreated for those who sin unto death, 1 John 5.16. For
the dead we must not pray; because they are either damned, or blessed: if
damned, our prayers are fruitless; if blessed, needless.

IX. The object against which we pray, are Gods open enemies.

We ought not presently to pray for their eternal destruction: but we are to
beseech God, that with his mighty hand he would humble and convert them;
otherwise eternally to plague them, if they will not be converted. The
imprecations of the Prophets are not to be imitated by us rashly; for it is
hard to discern those who sin to death, and those of whom we have good hope.

X. Prayers should be joined with an humble confession of our sins, with a true
and firm confidence, and a constant purpose of repentance.

XI. External gestures decently used, avail much both to excite and to
testify the devotion of our souls.


So much of the parts, and of that form whereby God will be worshipped of us:
the outward helps follow, whereof be Fastings and Vows.

Fasting is an abstinence from meat and drink undertaken for a time, that the
lasciviousnes of the flesh may be subdued, and God with the greater fervencie
may be called upon.

The RULES.
I. Fasting is either forced, or voluntary: That, is the poor man's, for want
of meat; this, of them who want not meat. The voluntary Fast is either Natural,
Civil, or Ecclesiastical; Natural, is that which is undertaken for healths
sake; the Civil is that which is enjoined by the Magistrate in some public
affairs: Ecclesiastical, is that we defined.

II. Ecclesiastical fasting, is private or public.

III. Private, is that which one enjoins to himself, or his family, for some
private causes.

Examples are, Job 1.12. 2 Samuel 3.36. and 12.16. Nehem. 1.4.

IV. Public, is that which is commanded by the Magistrate or the Church for
some public causes, especially, when calamities are at hand.

Examples, 2 Chronicles. 20. Hest. 4.

V. In a true Fast, the manner and end are to be considered.

VI. For the manner, true fasting consists not in choice of meats, but in
abstinence from all meats: 2. Not in external abstinence from meat, but in
abstinence from sin.

Isa. 58.6, etc. Joel 2.12.

VII. There ought to be no other end of Fasting, but only to give our selves
more earnestly to prayer and divine worship, to beat down the lasciviousness
of the flesh, to witness our humility before God, and our repentance before
our neighbor.

VIII. Fasting is not tied to certain times, as in the Old Testament; but ought
to be undertaken freely, upon urgent causes and necessity.


So much for Fasting. A Vow is a promise made in a holy manner to God, of
things lawful; to witness our readiness to serve God.

The RULES.
I. A Vow in this place signifies a religious Promise, not prayers or desires.

II. A Vow is either general, or particular? That is, of things commanded, and
is required of all men; such is the Vow of Baptism: this is of things lawful,
and is undertaken for some private cause: that is a part of divine Worship;
this is only a help thereto.

III. A particular Vow is considered in its efficient matter, form, and end.

IV. For the efficient, they are excluded from making a vow, who want as yet
the use of judgment and reason: 2. Who are not masters of themselves, but are
subject either to Parents, or Husbands.

Numb. 6.

V. The matter of a Vow, is a thing lawful, and in our power.

VI. The form consists in the deliberation of the mind, in purpose of the
will, and in the promise either internal or external also.

VII. The end is, to testify thankfulness of mind, or to exercise some
private discipline.

A Vow of the first kind is, when one that has escaped a sickness or danger,
does consecrate to God something by Vow as a token of his gratitude: A Vow of
the latter sort, is, when one by Vow abstains from something in it self lawful,
yet dangerous to him, as Wine, etc.

VIII. The subject to whom we ought to Vow, is God only.

IX. A Vow before it is made, is arbitrary; but being lawfully made, it is to
be kept.

Psalm. 76.12. Vow and pay unto the Lord your God.


Hitherto of the true manner of worshipping God; to which are contrary, the
intermission of it, and false worship. And this is threefold, in respect of the
object: for either it is not commanded by God; or else it is expressly
prohibited by him; or being commanded, is directed to some other end.

The manner of worshipping God not commanded, is called Will Worship; to wit, a
worship devised by man's brain.

Paul opposes this kind of worshipping God to Christian Liberty, Col. 2.20,
21, 22, 23. Therefore, if you be dead with Christ, you are freed from the
rudiments of this world: Why, as though living in the world, are you subject to
ordinances (touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish, with
using) after the commandments and doctrines of men? which things have indeed a
show of wisdom in will worship and humility, and neglecting of the body; not
in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh. Such are those ceremonies brought
in by Popery in Baptism. etc. and their five Sacraments by them devised;
canonical hours, beads, and the Latin tongue in Prayer; Fasts placed rather
in choice of meats, then in abstinence, chiefly Lent fast: the Vows also of
Poverty, Monkish obedience, and Religious continency. The Vow of Poverty is
impious; for whereas man by Gods command should eat his bread in the sweat of
his face, by such voluntary poverty, this command is slighted: No better is
the Vow of Obedience; for by it, man who is redeemed by the precious blood of
Christ, is made a slave to money, and is drawn off from his lawful calling. As
for the Vow of Continency, it is rash; for it is a rare gift; and by this Vow,
many under pretense of chastity are entangled in the snares of Satan.

The manner of Religious worship forbid by Gods Word, is Idolatry, and worship
of Saints. Idolatry, is, whereby an Idol is made, kept, and religiously
worshipped.

There be two kinds of idolatry: one is, when that which is not God, is
accounted and worshipped for God; and this is contrary to the first Precept:
the second kind is, when the true God indeed is worshipped; but either in
idols, or in Saints, Angels, or dead men.

An Idol is an Image, Picture, or Statue, made for Religious worship.

The RULES.
I. A. R. An Idol differs from an image or similitude, as the species from the
genus, though the Church has appropriated the word Idol to the Heathen
superstitious images: so that every idol is an image, but not every image an
idol: yet in truth (...), and imago, are the same: for (...), is from (...),
the species or form and shape of a thing, and this from (...), to see; whence
comes the word idea, which is the species of a thing in the mind or sense: so
imago, is as much as imitago, or, eum ago, an imitation, representation, or
acting of any thing: whence comes the word imaginatio, which is all one with
idea: therefore (...) in Homer is expressed by imago in Virg. as Aen. 2. not a
major imago, Aen. 4. Magna mei sub terras ibit imago: and indeed these words
imag^, simulachrum, umbra, effigies, are taken indifferently one for another in
Latin Authors: yet in scripture, we find a great difference; for (...), or
imago stands in opposition to (...), or umbra. Heb. 10.1. the Law has the
shadow of good things to come, and not the ve y image of the things: where
image is taken for the reality and truth of the things; but shadow, for the
appearance only and show. Hence Christ is called the image of the Father; not
his shadow, picture, or idol. Rupertus makes some difference between image and
similitude, or likeness; in saying, that Christ is the image of the Father,
and the Holy Ghost his similitude: because God says, Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness. Rupert. l. 2. de Trinit. c. 2. But this is a
nicity; For indeed, the word image likewise there signifies the same thing,
the one word being used to explain the other.


An Idol differs from an image or similitude, as the species from the genus.

The Papists in this err doubly, 1. They will have an Idol, and image or
similitude, to be the same; their reason is this: because simulachrum in
Latin, is, say they, derived a simulando; but it should be rather a similando,
from likeness: but an Idol is not the same that an image; for man is Gods
image, (which Tertullian calls Simulachrum) but he is not Gods Idol; in vain do
they allege the Greek word (...), which say they, the Latin translates
simulachrum always: for even in the Latin Bible we have testimonies to the
contrary, Exodus 34.15. Levit. 26. v. 30. Act. 17.73. Secondly, they say, that
images are of things existent, but idols of things not existent: but we know
that the Gentiles had idols not only of things feigned, but also of things
truly existing; nor will Paul's phrase help them, 1 Cor. 8.4. We know that an
Idol is nothing in the world: for this is not spoken with reference to the
object which is represented by the idol, but in respect of the virtue and
efficacy of idols, which indeed is none.

II. The three degrees of Idolatry are, the making, the keeping, and
worshipping of them.

III. The making of an Idol is, when an Image is made for religious ends.

IV. But every making of an Image is not idolatrous: for such may be made for
memory, delight, or other civil ends.

V. The Cherubims, Brazen Serpent, and such like, were made by Gods
appointment, not for religious worship, but to be types of Christ.

In vain therefore do Papists defend their idols under such pretenses: For, 1.
God commanded the making of them, He forbids the making of these. 2. No
religious worship must be given to them: therefore as soon as the brazen
Serpent began to be worshipped, it was broken in pieces, 2 King. 18.4. But
these are religiously adored. 3. Whereas all types by Christ's coming are
abolished, such can have no place in the New Testament.

VI. The Images of Christ, of Angels, of Mary, and of the Saints, made by
Papists, are doubtless Idols.

The reason is, because they are made for religious worship. The Papists deny
these to be idols, 1. Because they are not images of things not existent. 2.
Because they are not acknowledged for Gods. 3. Because a humane face and wings
are ascribed to Angels. 4. Because the Saints were truly men. 5. Because these
are Laymens books. Answ. In the first and second Argumens, there is no
consequence, because in both an Image is falsely defined; for not only is that
an Idol which is a thing not existent, or which is acknowledged for God, seeing
the Gentiles had Idols of things which were truly existent, and they put
difference between the Idols and the things themselves. 2 The Antecedent in
both is false, if simply understood: For it is certain that the Papists make
images of them that never were, as of Saint George, Christopher, and such like:
it is also certain that many do take these Idols for Gods, seeing they bestow
both divine virtue, and divine honor on them. In the third also there is no
consequence from those lively images which God did exhibit in Visions, to dumb
images. In the fourth, this only follows, that the images of the Saints may be
made: so they be not made for Religious worship. In the fifth, the consequence
is false; for what kind of books these are, may be seen in Jer. 10.14, 15. Hab.
2.18, 19. Where Idols are called the teachers of lying and vanity.

VII. To make the Image of the Trinity, is most horrible Idolatry.

The reasons are, 1. Because God has forbid the making of such Images, Deuteronomy.
4.15. etc. 2. Because the Trinity cannot be represented by an Image, as is
expressly showed, Esa. 40.18. and 46.5. 3. Because it is a dishonor to the
Majesty of God, to represent him in the likeness of a man, in wood or stone;
Esa. 40.19, 20. and 46.6. Romans 1.23, etc. They object, 1. The images of the
Holy Trinity do not represent Gods essence, but only his properties and
actions. 2. Such Images have been presented in Visions, therefore they are not
Idols. Answ. In the first Argument, Gods essence is falsely separated from his
Properties, whereas indeed they are his very Essence; and the consequence is
false; for he will not have himself, nor his properties and actions expressed
by Images, Deuteronomy 4.15, etc. In the second, the Antecedent is false, for the
images that were presented to the holy men of God, were not dumb and made with
hands, but living, which notwithstanding they neither painted nor carved.

VIII. As the making, so the keeping of Idols is condemned in Scripture.

Deuteronomy. 7.5. Thus shall ye do to them, ye shall overthrow their Altars, and
break down their images, ye shall also cut down their Groves, and shall burn
their carved Images with fire, Esa. 30.22. Ye shall defile the covering of thy
graven images of silver, and the ornaments of thy molten images of gold, thou
shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, get thee
hence. 2 Cor. 6.16. What agreement is there between the Temple of God and
Idols? See the examples of Jehosophat, Ezechia, Josia, etc. But our
adversaries, on the contrary reason thus. Who retain Images in the Temple for
ornament only, not for worship, are not Idolaters; But we etc. Answ. The
Proposition is false. 1. Because though images be not worshipped, yet there is
danger that they may be worshipped. 2. Because that cannot be an ornament to
the Temple, which is a dishonor to God; this is a whorish ornament, and the
badge of the old Fornication. They object that the brazen Serpent was first
worshipped, before it was broken. Answ. There is great ods between the brazen
Serpent and Idols; for that was not erected to be religiously worshipped, but
to represent Christ; now as soon as it was adored, it became an Idol; if then
the retaining of the brazen serpent wanted not danger, how much less can these
be without danger, which have truly been, and are Idols.

IX. Idolatrous worship consists in adoration and service; Adoration is by
uncovering of the head, bowing of the body, bending of the knee, kissing, and
such like gestures. Religious service of Idols is, when they are trimmed up
with gold, silver, and jewels; when incense is burned to them, and they are set
on high places; when Vows are made to them, when they are honored with
Pilgrimages, Gifts, Wax-Candles, Tapers, Altars, Temples, Festivals, and other
such like Religious Ceremonies.

This worship is most severely forbid in this second Precept: Thou shall not
bow to them nor worship them; also, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, 17. Psalm. 115.2, etc. Hab.
2.19. 1 Cor. 10.14. 1 John 5. v. last. Here the Papists say, that these places
speak only of the Gentile Idols. 2. That they worship not the Image, but God in
the Image, as it is in that verse, Nam Deus est, quod Imago docet, sed non Deus
ipsa;
Hanc videas, sed mente colas quod cernis in ipsa.
It Is God which here is taught, but yet this Image is not he;
Look on the Image, and in it adore God mentally.


To the first exception we answer, that in the alleged places, chiefly in
this Command, and Deuteronomy. 4. all images made for Religious ends are condemned. 2.
The same reasons why the Gentile Idols are abominable, belong also to Popish
images; for these also are of gold, silver, brass, wood, stone, etc. Neither
can they see, nor hear, nor walk, Rev. 9.20. To the latter expression we say,
1. Images are truly worshipped in Popery; seeing there is no part of religious
worship expressed in this ninth Rule, which they do not exhibit to their
images. 2. They are not excused, who pretend they worship God in the image,
because he has forbid such worship, and he will be worshipped in Spirit, Joh.
4.23. Otherwise by this reason the Israelites might have excused themselves;
for they were not so mad as to think a golden Calfe to be their God, but they
would worship God in the Calfe as in a symbol or sign.

X. The adoration of the consecrated Host is like the worshipping of Images.

The ground of this adoration is no less idolatrous; to wit, Christ's presence
in the bread or outward accidents thereof, by which they say boldly, that the
bread is deified or become God; as in that Hymn: Thou art not Bread, but thou
art he, who being God-man saved me.

XI. And so is the adoration of the Image of the Cross.

For so they speak to it in their Anthymnes. All hail O Cross, our only
hope! increase righteousness in holy men, and pardon the guilty.

XII. No less idolatrous are those little Images which they call Agnus Dei
consecrated in Popery, and to which they ascribe the same power in cleansing of
sins, dispelling of lightning, etc. as to Christ.

XIII. The Relics of Saints is honored in Popery with much imposture and
idolatry; for that they are supposititious, is plain by this, in that that
there is no Saint who has not two or three bodies showed in diverse places by
Papists.

See Calvin's Admonition of Relics.


Hitherto of Idolatry: the adoration of Saints is a Religious worship or prayer
directed to Saints, Angels, and dead men.

The RULES.
I. There is a twofold adoration, Civil and Religious: that is an outward and
civil honor; this, a religious invocation.

II. We may lawfully adore, or civilly worship the Saints whilst they are
present.

Examples in Genesis 10. and 19. 1 King. 18.7. 2 King. 2.15.

III. Yea the dead also which are in Heaven are to be honored, 1. By thinking
reverently of them. 2. By declaring their virtues, as the gifts of God. 3. By
imitating them.

Mat. 26.13, Verily, verily I say to you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be
preached through the world, this also shall spoken as a memorial of her.

IV. But neither Saint or Angel must be adored or called upon religiously.

Because 1. for this we have neither precept nor example, nor promise in
Scripture. 2. By invocating the Saints, we make them omniscient and omnipotent,
which are only Gods attributes. 3. Because we must not believe in the Saints.
Now how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14. 4.
Because they refused religious worship by the example of Peter, Act. 10.25.26.
and of the Angel, Rev. 19.10. and 22.8. The objections of Papists are
frivolous, for that saying in. Genesis 48.16. is to be understood not of a
created, but of an uncreated Angel, to wit the Son of God, Genesis 48.16. For,
Jacobs name to be called upon by his Sons, is to have their name from Jacob,
and to be received in number of his posterity, as Isa. 4.1. That place in Job
5.1. in the vulgar Latin is corrupted; For Eliphas there does not exhort Job
to call upon the departed Saints, but he appeals to the testimony of the
Saints alive. Neither will it follow, that dead Saints must be called upon,
because we are commanded to have recourse to their Prayers whilst they are
alive, Jam. 5.14. For the condition of the Saints here and hereafter is not
alike; because in this life they know our wants, in the other they know not,
Isa. 63.16. in this life they are not invoked, but invited to pray for us; but
the departed Saints are religiously called upon, and their help implored by
Papists: the pound of the Popish opinion is, that the Saints are mediators, at
least of intercession; but how false this is, we have showed, Lib. 1. c. 18.


So much of the form of Religious worship, as it is forbid by God. That form
which is commanded by God, but directed to another end, is either superstitious
or hypocritical.

Superstitious worship is, when a certain force and efficacy is ascribed to
external Rites commanded by God, as if it were for the work wrought.

As when force is attributed to certain words, voices, and writings, to drive
away Satan, to cure diseases, etc. When they feign that there is in the
Sacraments a virtue by themselves to free us from sin, and to save us: When
they think by their babbling and multitude of words, and such like to please
God: when they judge one day, or one kind of meat holier then another; when
they think to merit by their Vows.

Hypocritical worship is, when the outward form prescribed by God is observed,
but without internal worship or devotion of mind.

This displeases God exceedingly, Psalm. 50.8. etc. Esa. 1.10, etc. 29.13. and
66.3, etc. Jer. 4.5, etc. Mat. 15.8, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of the Virtues and Works belonging to the Third Commandment.
SO much of the manner of Gods Worship; the hallowing of his Name in all the
rest of our life, is enjoined in the third Commandment; The sum whereof is,
that we must study in all things to sanctify the name of God, even out of the
times of his ordinary Worship.

There be two parts of this command; a prohibition, and a confirmation of it.
The prohibition is: Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain.
The Name of God does not only signify the titles which are given to him, but
his properties also, his word, works, and whatsoever else belongs to the
glorifying of his Name; out of this prohibition is gathered a precept: Thou
shall sanctify the name of thy God: the confirmation is a heavy commination;
For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

The Sanctification of Gods Name, is considered either in affection, or in
effect.

In affection is zeal for Gods glory; to wit, a vehement affection of the mind
to maintain and enlarge the glory of Gods name, with just sorrow and
indignation against those things that are contrary to his glory.

Examples of this are in Lot, 2 Pet. 2.8. in Moses, Exodus 32.19. in Phineas,
Numb. 25.8. in David, Psalm. 69, and 119.53. in Elijah, 1 King. 19.10. in
Jeremiah, Jer. 33.9, 10, 11. in John Baptist, Mat. 14.14. in Christ, Joh. 2.14,
etc. in Paul, Act. 14.14, and 17.16, 17.

To this is opposite, Stupidity careless of Gods glory a, erring zeal which
is without knowledge b, inconsiderate zeal c, and counterfeit zeal d.

a 1 Samuel 2.29. Thou have honored thy sons more then me. and 3.13. His
sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not b Romans 10.2. For I
hear them record, that they have zeal, but not according to knowledge. c
Jonah 4.1. And Jonah was displeased exceedingly, and was very angry; and he
prayed unto the Lord and said, I pray thee O Lord, was not this my saying, etc.
Luke 9.54. And when his Disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord will thou that we speak for fire to come down from Heaven and consume them, etc. d
Esa. 7.12. Ahaz said, I will not ask a sign, nor will I tempt the Lord.

The Sanctifying of Gods Name in effect or actually, is either by words, or by
deeds; Sanctifying by words, is a holy using of Gods name, and a constant
confession thereof. The holy using of his Name is, whereby we never speak of
him but in cases of necessity, and that with great reverence and admiration;
praising the glory shining in it.

Deuteronomy. 28.58. Thou shall fear that most glorious and terrible Name of the Lord
thy God.

To this is contrary, the superstitious silence or concealing of Gods Name, the
taking of it in vain, jests made of Scripture phrases, and blasphemy or
disgrace cast immediately upon the Name of God.

An example of horrible blasphemy is in the Assyrian King, Isa. 10. and in
Rabshekah his Captain, Esa. 37.

The holy using of Gods Name, is in three kinds; to wit, in Consecration,
Swearing, and casting of Lots.

Consecration is, when things for our use are sanctified by the Word of God and
by Prayer.

To sanctify, in this place, is to separate for a good and lawful use: thus
Temples, Ministers, the works of our vocation, meat and drink are consecrated,
1 Timothy 4.5, 6. For whatsoever God has made is good, neither is any thing to be
rejected, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the Word
of God and by Prayers.

To this consecration is opposite, besides the intermission of it,
superstitious consecration, when in certain forms of words, there is believed
to be a singular force and efficacy; so likewise Magic enchantments and
consecrations.

This consecration is intermitted by them who eat and drink without Prayer and
Thanksgiving. Among Papists there are many examples of superstitious
consecrations of water, salt, wax, etc. Magic consecrations and enchantments
are not excusable, because the words are good; For Gods Word is abused when it
is not used in a good way.

By Swearing, Gods Name is sanctified, both in a simple Oath, and in adjuration.

A simple Oath is the taking of God to witness in weighty matters, as a
Testifier of the truth, and the revenger of lying.

The RULES.
I. An Oath in it self is good and holy.

First, because it is commanded by God, Deuteronomy. 6.13, and 10.20. Esa. 65.15. Jer.
12.16. Secondly, because God and his Angels have sworn, Genesis 22. Psalm. 95. Heb.
3. and 6. Rev. 10, etc. To this purpose is that of Tertullian: O happy are they
for whose cause God swears! and O miserable are we, that will not believe God
when he swears!

II. The person swearing, must be such a one as may lawfully swear: and not,
1. Children. 2. Madmen. 3. Such as are convicted of Perjury.

III. The matter of an Oath should be things weighty and lawful.

IV. The form of it is explicated or unfolded by contestation and imprecation,
abridged and contracted, or consisting of either part.

V. The end if the confirmation of truth, the decision of strife, the
illustration of Gods glory, and the salvation of man.

Heb. 6.16.

VI. The object of an Oath by which we must swear, is God only.

For so it is commanded, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
swear by his Name. Because 1. God is the only searcher of hearts, who sees all
things, who is alone omnipotent, and who revengeth Perjury. 2 Because an Oath
is joined with invocation, which only belongs to God, as is said above.

VII. Where the Saints in their Oaths mention the creatures, metonymically
either God himself is understood, or his vengeance which man wishes to
himself.

So Genesis 31.33. Jacob swore by the fear of his Father, that is, by God whom
his Father Isaac feared. So Paul, 2 Cor. 1.23. I call God for a record upon my
soul; that is, that he will punish me if I willingly deceive.

VIII. In respect of adjuncts, an Oath is divided into that which is public,
and solemn, and enjoined by the Magistrate; or private and voluntary, yet not
rashly offered; Also into an assertory, and a promissory Oath.

IX. Oaths must be kept, though they be extorted from us, and be hurtful to us.

Psalm. 15.4. That swears to his hurt, and changes not. But here it is
demanded, if an Oath made to a thief, to free our selves from him, ought to be
kept. Answ. Either the Oath is only to redeem our selves, or else it is to
conceal the whole matter; we are bound in the former to keep our promise, but
not in the latter, seeing we are first and more strictly bound to the
Magistrate, whose office it is to suppress thieves and robbing; therefore,
whosoever out of fear of death, binds himself to a thief in this respect, he
may declare the matter to the Magistrate, and by reason of the tie and
obligation to him, he may be absolved by public authority.

X. Near to swearing is a weighty asseveration.

Such Asseverations are, Genesis 42.15. By the life of Pharaoh: that is, as truly
as Pharaoh lives, and as I wish he may live. So 1 Samuel 1.26. As thy soul
lives, my Lord, I am that woman. To this purpose is that usual asseveration of
Christ's, Verily, verily.


To swearing in the defect, is opposite the denial of it, or refusal to take it
being lawfully proffered.

The Anabaptists offend the former way, pretending Christ's saying, Mat. 5.14.
Swear not at all; and that of James, Jam. 4.12. But they observe not, that in
both these places idolatrous and rash Oaths are forbidden, not such as be
lawful. The latter way they offend, who when they may by an Oath promote Gods
glory, or the safety of their neighbor, yet they refuse to do it.

In the excess, are opposed to Swearing, 1. Perjury. 2. A rash Oath. 3. An
unjust. 4. An idolatrous Oath.

Perjury is, when a things is falsely assevered, or a promise is made without
purpose of performance, or when the purpose of performance is not performed.

This sin must be avoided, 1. Because of the grievousnes thereof; for a
perjured man offends against God, whom he calls upon to be witness to his lie,
and so profaneth his most holy name: he offends against his neighbor, whom he
circumvents with his perjury, and grievously scandalizeth: he offends against
himself, having wished so many evils to fall upon him. 2. Because of the
grievousnesse of the punishment; for perjuries are never unrevenged: examples
are in the Kings of Sodom, etc. Genesis 14.4. in Hosea King of Israel, 2 King.
17.4. in Zedekiah, 2 King. 25.3. etc. in Rodolphus Duke of Bavaria, in
Ladislaus King of Hungaria, and many others: it was also detestable among the
Gentiles, as Tibullus shows:

Ah miser etsi quis primo perjuria celet!
Sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus.
Thought thou hide thy Berjury,
Yet slow-paced Plagues come silently.
The Jesuitical and Sophistical interpretations of Perjuries, are equivalent
to perjuries themselves; neither shall they escape the sin and punishment of
Perjury.

A rash Oath is that, which is taken when there is no necessity to swear.

Saul is an example of a rash and continual swearer, 1 Samuel 14. v. 40. and 45.

An unjust Oath is, when we swear of things neither lawful nor honest.

Such was David's oath, when he threatened destruction to Nabals house; by
revoaking of which, he has taught us that unlawful oaths are rather to be
broken then kept: 1 Samuel 25. such are the Monkish oaths of fidelity, obedience,
etc. in Popory.

An idolatrous Oath is, when men swear by false gods, or the creatures.

Such are these oaths that are made by Heaven, Earth, etc. which are forbid,
Mat. 5.14. and oaths also made by the Saints; for without idolatry, we can
neither give to them the honor of invocation, nor of an oath: neither do the
Papists metonymically by the Saints understand God, but they swear by the
Saints themselves.

So much of swearing: Adjuration is an obtestation in the name of God, being
made either by command or entreaty; that according to conscience, and as it
were in stead of an oath, the truth might be spoken.

Example, Jos. 7.19. Then said Joshua to Achan, my Son give glory to the Lord,
God of Israel, and confess to him.

The RULES.
We must yield to an adjuration, in such things as are neither contrary to Gods
glory, nor the love of our neighbor.

We have an example in Christ, who professed himself to be the Son of God, upon
the adjuration of the High Priest, though a wicked man: Mat. 26.24. If then a
Tyrant should adjure us to reveal our brethren or their meetings, we should
refuse it.


To this are contrary rash adjurations, magic adjuration of devils, wicked
imprecations, whereby God and the creatures are adjured to man's ruin.

The adjuration of Devils, which they call exorcisme, is magical, and no ways
answering the Apostles casting out of Devils, which they did, not by
adjuration, but by commanding them in the name of Christ.

Sortilege or casting of lots, is a trial or finding out of that which God has
appointed to each man in divisions; and this is done by external signs, to
compose strife.

Lots are either divine or humane. Example of those are in Levit. 16. Jos. 7. 1 Samuel 10. Nehem. 10. Joh. 1. Act. 1. and these are not to be imitated, because
we have no command. But these lots called also divisorie, may be used; but so,
that we assure our selves that they are guided by Gods hand. Prove. 16.2.

To this are opposed superstitious elections, and consultations, and deceitful
lots.

Hitherto of the taking, of Gods Name: the profession of it is, when freely and
openly, in the sight of men, we confess the truth as it is known by Gods Word,
to his glory, when we are required.

Matt. 10.32. Whosoever confesses me before men, him will I confess before my
Father who is in heaven. Romans 10. v. 10. With the heart we believe unto
righteousness, and with the mouth we confess unto salvation. 1 Pet. 3.15. Be
ye always ready to answer to every one that shall ask a reason of the hope
that is in you.

To this is contrary, 1. A dissembling of the truth: 2. The open denial of it:
3. An unseasonable confession thereof.

An example of dissembling is in the Jews, that would not profess Christ for
fear of being excommunicate, Joh. 12. v. 34. Peter is an example of an impefect
denial, proceeding of infirmity, Mat. 26.69, etc. Concerning unseasonable
confession, Christ warns us Matt. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto Dogs,
neither cast ye your Pearls before Swine, lest they tread them with their feet,
and turn upon you, and tear you.

Thus we have showed, how Gods name is sanctified in words: it is sanctified in
fact, when our life and actions answer our holy profession.

Matt. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

To this is opposite, the omission of that action which agrees with our
Profession, and Impiety.

An example of the former is in Moses and Aaron, who are said not to have
sanctified God in the sight of the children of Israel, when he gave them the
water of strife out of the rock, Number. 20.12. An example of the latter, is in
the Jews, of which Paul speaks, Romans 2.24. For the name of God through you is
blasphemed among the Gentiles.

CHAP. VII. Of Works appertaining to the Fourth Commandment.
HItherto of the Parts of Gods worship: Now follows the Time peculiarly
appointed for Divine worship.

This is handled in the Fourth Commandment; the sum whereof is, That we
sanctify the Sabbath.

There are two parts of this Precept; the Precept it self, and the Confirmation
thereof. The Precept is, that we sanctify the Sabbath: which is illustrated,
1. By an Admonitory particle, Remember, etc. by which it appears, that the
Israelites before this had been warned to sanctify it, but that it had been
slighted and neglected by reason of Pharaohs oppression. 2. By declaring the
Precept, in opposing by an antithesis the works which were to be done the six
days, to those that should not be done the seventh day. 3. By a distribution
of the subjects: for they are either men, or beasts. The men are either
natives, or strangers; and both are either superiors, or inferiors. Six
days (says he) shall thou labor and do all thy work; but the seventh is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, or
thy son, etc. The Confirmation is grounded on Gods example; For in six days
the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is, and rested
the seventh day, Wherefore etc.

The Sanctification of the Sabbath is, whereby man rests from his external
works and labor, that he with his family and cattle might be refreshed, and
that day spent in Gods service.

The RULES.
I. The Precept of sanctifying the Sabbath, was not first given on Sinai, but
in Paradise; showing, that the manner of Divine worship was prescribed to Adam
even in the state of innocence.

II. To sanctify the Sabbath, is, not to make that day holy, but to separate
it from profaneness, and to dedicate it to divine worship.

III. The impulsive causes of this Sanctification, are, 1. Gods command. 2. The
equity of the command. 3. The promises made to them that obey.

This fourth Command is urged also in Lev. 19.3. and 23.1. Jer. 17.22. and
elsewhere. The equity is seen in two things. 1. In that God has separated only
one day of seven for Divine worship. 2. In that he goes before us by his own
example. The Promises are, in Isa. 56.2, etc. and 58.13.

IV. The matter or object of this Sanctification, is the Sabbath or seventh
day, in the Jewish Church: to which succeeded the first day, called, from
Christ's resurrection, the Lords day; from the Lords supper, the Day of bread;
and from the administration of Baptism, the Day of light, anciently.

V. In the Precept of sanctifying the Sabbath, we must distinguish between that
which is Ethical or moral, and that which is typical or ceremonial.

It was Ceremonial, 1. To sanctify the seventh day precisely. 2. By this means
to separate Jews from Gentiles. But Moral, in that one day of seven must be
sanctified for Gods service. Now the Church has sanctified the first day, by
the example of Christ, who has sanctified it by his resurrection and
apparition, Joh. 20.19. and 26. By the example also of Apostolical Church, Act.
20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Rev. 1.10.

VI. The form of sanctifying this day, consists in omission, and action.

VII. Things to be omitted, are the works of our outward and temporal callings.

These are opposed to the works of divine worship, in that six days we must
labor.

VIII Yet some things are permitted, which without great damage cannot be put
off till another day.

Luke 14.5. Which of you having an ox or an ass fallen into a pit, will not
take him out on the Sabbath Day? The Macchabees knew this, Mac. 2.41. For
having received an overthrow on the Sabbath, they resolved to defend themselves
against the enemy. In such cases of necessity, Christ's rule must be observed:
The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath, Mar. 2.18.

IX. On the Sabbath those works must be done, for which that day was appointed;
to wit, to repair to the Church, to meditate on Gods word, to receive the
Sacraments, to invite one another by exhortations and example to godliness, to
visit the sick, to help the poor, etc.

X. The end of this sanctifying of the Sabbath, is either natural or spiritual.

XI. The natural end, is, that men and beasts might rest and be refreshed.

XII. The spiritual end peculiar to the Jews, was, 1. To shadow out to the
Jews that rest which they enjoyed in the Land of Canaan after their toylesome
labors in Egypt, and troubles in the Desert. 2. That by this part of their
beggarly rudiments, they might be led to Christ the Author of our spiritual
rest from sin, and the works of the flesh.

XIII. But now the spiritual end of it, is, 1. That the Congregation may be
seen, and that the faithful may flock together into the Church, as into the
Arc of Noah. 2. That by meditating on this new birth of the world, and Christ's
resurrection, we might praise God our Creator and Redeemer. 3. That by our rest
from labor, we might be admonished of our rest from sin. 4. That we might
more and more aspire and raise our selves for the enjoyment of that perpetual
rest and Sabbath in the life to come.

Hence arises a threefold Sabbath; a typical or temporary; a spiritual, but
only begun here; and a heavenly or eternal.

XIV. The Sanctification of the Sabbath belongs to all, chiefly to Magistrates
and Pastors.

The Magistrate, by the example of Nehemiah, must take care that the Sabbath be
not wantonly abused, Neh. 13.15, etc. The same also must so moderate the strict
observation of that day, when need requires, tha there be regard had to
Charity: by the example of the Macchabees, Mac. 2.41. and Constantine the
Great, who in extreme necessity permitted Husbandmen to follow their
Country-work.

XV. The Christian Holy Days have affinity with the Sabbath, appointed not for
Will Worship, but for a commemoration of Christ's benefits; so that the
conscience be not entangled with the snare of absolute necessity.

Col. 2.16. Let no man condemn you in meats and drinks, or in respect of a
Holy Day, or of a New-Moone, or of Sabbaths.


To this Sanctification of the Sabbath, are contrary its neglect and
profanation.

The Sabbath is either simply neglected, when no regard is had of it: or in
some respect, when it is spent merely by ceasing from our own works, and
consequently in idleness, omitting those works for which the Sabbath was made
(of these in the seventh Rule) or these works are performed but
perfunctoriously, and without any inward and mental devotion; which kind of
Sabbath is deservedly called hypocritical.

See Isa. 1.13, 14.

The Sabbath is profaned, 1. When we do the works of our outward calling
needlessly, as when we make journies, or exact debts then, etc. 2. When we spend
the Sabbath in carnal works, as in gaming, dancing, revelling, idle talking,
Stage Plays, and such like sins. 3. In idolatrous works.

Such a profanation is a most grievous sin, Exodus 31. 13, 14. Numb. 15.35.
Neh. 13.16. Jer. 17.27.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Virtues in general belonging to the second Table.
IN the former Chapters we have spoken of Gods immediate Worship; now follows
the mediate, consisting in the virtues and works of the second Table. Of which
Worship we are to speak generally, and particularly.

To the mediate Worship, and second Table in general, belongs Charity and
Justice. Charity toward men, is either of man toward himself, or toward his
neighbor: toward himself, is, whereby each faithful man next to God, loves
himself; seeking his own temporal and eternal welfare.

Mat. 7.12. Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do ye the same.
Ephesians. 5.29, No man ever hated his own flesh, but rather cherishes it. Phil.
2.12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

To this is contrary self-hatred and self-love, being inordinate.

We see examples of perverse hatred, in them, who obstinately rebel against
God, and run headlong to their own ruin; but the sin of self-love is found
in them, who being too much drunk with love of themselves, not only despise
their neighbor in respect of themselves, but also love themselves above God.
Of these Christ speaks, Joh. 12.25. He that loves his life shall lose it. On
the contrary it is said of the godly, Rev. 12.11. And they loved not their
lives unto the death.

Charity to our neighbor is, whereby we love our neighbor as our selves.

The RULES.
I. The efficient cause of this love, is God the Father in the Son, through
the Holy Ghost.

Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the Spirit is love.

II. The instrumental cause or root, is Faith woring by love.

Gal. 5.6.

III. The matter or object of it, is our neighbor, that is, every one to whom
we owe duty or aid.

Luke 10.36, 37.

IV. But chiefly we must love those that are of the household of Faith.

Gal. 6.10.

For we are tied to them both in a natural and a spiritual tie, Ephesians. 4.1, 2,

V. Nor in this case must we exclude our enemies.

For this Charity is commended particularly to us, Exodus 22.4, 5. If thou see
thy enemies Ox or Ass go astray, etc. Prove. 25.21. if thy enemy be hungry,
give him bread to eat, etc. See Romans 12.14, 20. Mat. 5.44, etc. For this duty,
we have the example of our heavenly Father, doing good both to the just and the
unjust, Mat. 5.48. even giving his Son to us his enemies, Romans 5.8.

VI. The form of Charity toward our neighbor, consists in the proportion
of Charity toward our selves.

Lev. 19.18. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

VII. The end is, to witness our love toward God, and to certify our
regeneration and salvation.

1 John 4.20. If any man say he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a liar;
for if he loves not his neighbor whom he has seen, how shall he love God whom
he has not seen? 1 John 4.7. Whosoever loves is born of God, and v. 12. if we
love one another, God dwells in us.


To Charity are contrary, 1. The want and neglect of it. 2. Hypocritical
Charity. 3. The unjust hatred of our neighbor. 4. Inordinate Charity, whereby
we love one more then is fitting.

Of the first vice, Paul says, 1 Cor. 13.1. If I should speak with the tongue
of men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am a sounding brass, and tinkling
Cymbal. Of the second, Jam. 2.15, 16. If a brother or sister be naked, and
destitute of daily food; and one of you say to them, depart in peace, be warmed
and filled, notwithstanding ye give not those things that be needful for the
body; what does it profit? Of the third, 1 John 3.13. Whosoever hates his
brother, is a murderer. Of the fourth, God himself, 1 Samuel 2.30. Thou have
honored thy sons more then me. Mar. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother
more then me, is not worthy of me. Yet here we must know, that in two respects
we may hate men: first when they are Gods enemies, Psalm. 139.21. Do not I hate
them O Lord, that hate thee? Secondly, when they draw us from Christ, or the
constant profession of him, Luke 14.26. If any man comes to me, and hates not
his Father, etc.

Charity is considered either absolutely, or reciprocally. There be three kinds
of it considered absolutely; to wit, humanity, benevolence, and mercy.

Humanity is, when we are ready to testify our love to any one, by exhorting,
admonishing, comforting, and helping.

This is called (...), affection or care toward one another, 2 Cor. 8.16. it
is called also duty; and as it is exhibited to strangers, hospitality. this is
recommended to us, Isa. 16.3, 4. Romans 16.2, 3. 3 John 8. Heb. 13.2.

To this is opposite Inhumanity, by which either the works of humanity are
omitted, or cruelty exercised; as also unseasonable humanity, when courtesies
are performed to those who are unworthy of them, or they are not performed in a
right manner.

It were inhumanity, if one should lay a stumbling block before a blind man, or
should rail against a deaf man. Examples of inhumanity are in the Edomites,
and such like, adding affliction to the afflicted Jews, Amos 1. and 2. In the
Levite and Priest that passed by the man half dead. To be surety for any man
unadvisedly, is an unseasonable humanity, Prove. 6.1. and 11.15. or to give
alms to every one, without regard had of their worth, 2 These. 3.10.

Benevolence or favor is, whereby we so incline to the good and weal of our
neighbor, that we pray for his prosperity, and rejoice at it.

Isa. 66.10. Rejoice with Jerusalem, etc. Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that
rejoice. There be examples in the blessed Angels, Luc. 3.10. and 15.10. in
Paul, Romans 1.8. and many other places, in John, 2 Ioh. 4. and 3.3 Ioh. 4, 5.

To this is opposite, Envy or displeasure at another man's good; Malevolence
also, when one wishes the ruin of another; and Counterfeit benevolence.

There are four degrees of Envy. I. When one cannot endure that another should
enjoy the same happiness with him. Examples we have in the laborers that came
first, Mat. 20.11, etc. and Act. 13.4, 5. in the Jews envying salvation in the
Gentiles. II. When one envieth that in another, which he cannot obtain himself.
Examples are in Satan, in Cain, Genesis 4. in Esau, Genesis 27. in Joseph's brethren,
Act. 9.7. in Mary Moses sister, Number. 12. in Saul, 1 Samuel 18.7, 8. in the Nobles
of Persia, Dan. 6. in Pompey and Caesar, of whom Lucan: Caesar cannot brook a
Superior, nor Pompey an Equal. III. When we cannot endure that another should
enjoy that good, which he enjoys whom we love. An example of this is in
Iosuah, who envied Eldad and Medad, because they did prophecy as well as
Moses, Number. 11. in John's Disciples, Ioh. 3.26. and Christ's, Mar. 9.38. IV. When
one envieth another, or out of malice destroys that which he does not desire
he should enjoy: As when the Philistines stopped the wells which Abraham's
servants had dug, Genesis 26. Like dogs in the manger, not eating hay
themselves, bark at the cattle that eat it; Or like that spotted beast called
Stellio, devouring his own skin which every year he puts off, that it may not
help man troubled with the Falling Sickness. This sin of envy must be avoided,
1. Because it is earnestly forbid, Psalm. 37.1. Pro. 3.31. 2. Because it is
joined with a disdain of Gods goodness, Mat. 20.15. Is thine eye evil, because
I am good? 3. Because it is the author of much mischief; as of murder, Genesis 4.
2 Samuel 3.20. of seditions, Number. 12. of heresies. 4. It also disquieteth a man's
life, Iam. 3.16. An example of malice, envy, counterfeit love, is in the
Pharisees inviting Christ, Luc. 14.1, etc.

Mercy is, when we take another man's misery to heart, so that we study by all
means to assuage or remove it.

Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, etc. Luke 6. Be ye merciful. Romans 12.15.
Weep with those that weep. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Help the poor. The kinds of this
mercy are rehearsed Mat. 25.35, etc. Examples are in Joh, c. 30.25. in David,
Ps. 40, etc. in Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. in the Samaritan, Luke 10.

To this are contrary, Unmercifulness; when we pity not the afflicted, or when
we add affliction to them. 2. When we rejoice in other men's miseries. 3.
Counterfeit and unlawful pity.

Unmercifulness is forbid, Pro. 3.27, 28. It deserves judgment without mercy,
Jam. 2.13 Of rejoicing in other men's evils, we have examples, in Doeg, Ps. 52.
in the Edomites, Ps. 137. in Christ's enemies, Mat. 27. It is most earnestly
forbid, Pro. 24.17. Counterfeit mercy is seen in David's enemies. Ps. 41.7. This
is called the Crocodiles pity, who weeps when he intends to devour a man.
Unlawful mercy is condemned, Jer. 15.16.

So much of the kinds of Charity, considered absolutely. Being considered
respectively, it has for its kinds, Brotherly love, and Friendship. Brotherly
love is that which mutually is entertained by Christ's members, and the household
of faith.

This reaches so far, that we should lay down our life for our brethren, 1
Ioh. 3.16. Examples are in Jonathan, in the Macchabees, in Paul, etc. This is
to be used toward the dead, in burying them, and mourning for them, etc.

Friendship is love between two or more, whereby they mutually and truly
embrace each other with special benevolence, to perform such duties as are
honest and possible.

The RULES.
I. We are bound to show our selves courteous, benevolent, and merciful to all;
but not to entertain friendship with all.

The reason is, because friendship consists in mutual and reciprocal
benevolence, and in such a singular tie, that we ought to impart to our friends
our most secret resolutions* but we cannot with safety trust every man;
therefore we are commanded to walk wisely, Zach. 7.5. Let no man trust his
neighbor. Ephesians. 5.15. See then that ye walk warily, not as unwise, but as wise;
redeeming the time, because the days are evil.

II. True friendship is judged by its end; to wit, if it be entertained for
piety and honesty.

Aristotle teaches, Ethic. 8. that friendship is entertained either for
pleasure, or profit, or virtue; and of these three ends, he only approves the
last: for the vulgar people measure friendship by profit; but the godly must
chiefly look upon virtue or honesty.


To true friendship is opposite that which is counterfeit; also that friendship
which entertains covenants and company with infidels and wicked men.

An example of counterfeit and false friendship, is in David's enemies, Psalm.
41.7. and 55.13, 14, etc. and in Judas the traitor. As for making covenants
with wicked men, we must know that they are either of peace, or of war. A
covenant of peace, is that which is entertained on both sides, for preservation
of public quietness: such was the covenant that Abraham made with Hamor and
Escol, Gen: 14.13. and with Abimelech, Genesis 21.27. and Isaac with the same
Abimelech, Genesis 26.20. of Solomon with Hiram, 1 King. 5.2. The covenants of
war, are such as be made for offense and defense; and these either with
believers, or unbelievers: the former are permitted, but so that we trust not
in them; the latter are most severely prohibited by God, Exodus 34.12. Take heed
that thou make no covenant with the inhabitants of that land. 2 Cor. 6.14. Be
ye not unequally yoked with the wicked. The unhappy events of such covenants
are seen in Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.20. in Asa, 1 King. 15. and 2 Chronicles. 16.
in Ahaz, Isa. 7.8, 9. in the Jews, Ezekiel. 16.27, 28. It Is lawful to converse
with infidels and wicked men, if we have hope to reclaim them, and if we carry
our selves prudently, that we be not corrupted by their familiarity.

So much of Charity. Justice is that virtue, whereby we give every man his due.

This name of Justice is ambiguous: for sometime it implies the whole Law;
sometime it has relation to the second Table, as it is exercised toward our
neighbor.

This is either commutative, or distributive. This is employed in distribution
of goods, rewards, punishments, and such like; observing a Geometrical
proportion, according to the condition, merits, or dignity of the person.

That is, whereby we give to every one his due, by an Arithmetical proportion,
according to the equality or inequality of things.

To Justice, Injustice is opposite, both privatively, and contrarily.

This is to be avoided; for it excludes men from the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor.
6.9.

CHAP. IX. Of Virtues and Works belonging to the Fifth Commandment.
OF the mediate worship of God, of which we have now spoken in general, both
the parts, and degrees are to be considered. The parts are two: The first is,
of the Superiors duty toward his Inferiors, and contrarily: The latter is, of
every man's duty toward another.

The duty of Inferiors to their Superiors, and contrarily, is set down in the
Fifth Precept; the sum whereof is, That between superios and inferiors that
order may be kept, which is pleasing to God.

This Command consists of a Precept, and a Promise. The precept is, Honor
thy father and thy mother. By the name of Parents, synecdochically are meant
all Superiors, as the word Honor contains all things that are like honor. The
Promise is, That thou may live long in the land which the Lord thy God has
given thee. In this promise is understood both the condition of Gods will, and
of our salvation: for oftentimes God recompenceth the shortness of this life,
with the happiness of the other.

The persons considerable in this precept, are Magistrates and Subjects, in the
civil state; Pastors and Parishioners, in the Ecclesiastic; Parents and
Children, Husband and Wife, Masters and Servants, in the Oeconomick; among
which by way of Analogy may be reckoned, Masters and Scholars, Tutors and
Pupils, old men and young, and such as have more or less of other gifts.

The duties of Inferiors to their Superiors, are reverence, obedience, and
gratitude.

Reverence is whereby we bestow upon our Superiors due honor; thinking well
of them, speaking reverently to them, bearing with their infirmities, and
giving them the first place, and leave to speak or do first.

This reverence is to be given to Magistrates, Romans 13.7. Fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor, etc. To Ministers, Mat. 10.40. He that receives you
receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. To Parents,
Lev. 19.3. Let every one of you fear his father and mother: See Prove. 23.22.
Ephesians. 6.1. To the Husband, Ephesians. 5.33. and the Wife see that she reverence her
Husband, To Masters, 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many servants as are under the yoke,
count their Masters worthy of all honor. To the aged, Lev. 19.32. Thou shall
rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, etc. The
same account must be had of those whom God has honored with some excellent
endowments, who morally are called Elders, not so much for their years, as for
their gifts.

To Reverence is opposite Irreverence, and contempt of Superiors.

Examples of irreverence in Subjects, 1 Samuel 10.27. But the children of Belial
said, (speaking of Saul) how shall this man save us? and they despised him. In
hearers, Jer. 43.2. Thou speak false (said the Jews) the Lord thy God did
not send thee. In children, Genesis 9.22. But Cham the Father of Canaan looking
back, showed the nakedness of his Father to his brethren without. In the Wife,
Job 2.9. Then said his Wife to him, do thou still retain thine integrity?
curse God and dye. In servants, Genesis 16.4. When Hagar saw she had conceived,
her Mistress was despised in her eyes.

Obedience or subjection is, whereby we obey our Superiors in things lawful
and honest, as the Lord, and pati^ntly bear their admonitions and corrections.

The Magistrate must be obeyed, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, etc. Ministers, Heb. 13. Obey and hearken to those that are set
over you, for they watch for your souls. Parents, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your
parents in the Lord. Husbands, Ephesians. 5.22. Wives be subject to your own
husbands, as to the Lord. Masters, Ephesians. 6.5. Servants, be obedient to them that
are your Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of heart, as unto Christ.

The RULES.
I. We must obey, not only godly Magistrates and Masters, but also Tyrants.

1 Pet. 2.13. Be subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lord, and v. 18.
Servants, be subject with all fear to your Masters, not only to those that are
good and just, but also to the froward; for this is praiseworthy, if any man
for conscience toward God suffer trouble, being unjustly afflicted. Examples
are of the Israelites obeying Pharaoh, Exodus 3, etc. In Daniel obeying
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.

II. But they are not to be obeyed in things contrary to Gods Word and a good
Conscience.

An example we have in the Midwives, Exodus 1. in Saul's servants, 1 Samuel 22.17.
in Daniel, Dan. 6. in the Apostles, Act. 4.19. saying, Whether it be right in
the sight of God t^ obey you rather then God, judge ye.


To obedience is contrary, Disobedience, rebellion, impatience of correction,
and obedience in things unlawful.

We have examples of disobedience and rebellion in Miriam and Aaron, Numb. 12.
in Corah, Dathan and Abiram, etc. Numb. 16. in the Israelites, Numb. 13. in
Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. Seba, 2 Samuel 20. and such like; in the Israelites
contemning the Prophets, in Elies sons, 1 Samuel 2. Lots wife, Genesis 19. Gehazi,
2 King. 5. Of unlawful obedience, an example is in Doeg, 1 Samuel 22.

Gratitude is, whereby inferiors in acknowledging the good will and bounty of
their superiors, do testify their thankful mind in will and deed, where and
when they can.

This is to be performed to the Magistrate, by rendering Tribute, Custom, etc.
Romans 13.7. and by praying for him, 1 Timothy 2.1, etc. to Ministers, 1 These. 5.12.
We beseech you brethren, that you will know them who labor among you, and have
the charge over you in the Lord, and admonish you, that you would have them in
exceeding great love for their works sake. To Parents, Prove. 23.25. thy Father
and mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice. Examples are in
Joseph, David, etc. Which gratitude in special is called (...), signifying that
gratitude of the young Storkes toward the old, in feeding and bearing them.

To gratitude is opposite, Ingratitude, whereby Superiors are either not
requited, or ill requited: Examples of which, the Scripture is full.

So much of the Virtues or duties of Inferiors; the Virtues of Superiors, are
benevolence, justice, and sedulity. Benevolence is whereby Superiors carry a
good affection to their Inferiors, which they declare when occasion serves.

An example of this benevolence is proposed to Magistrates in Moses, Exodus 32.
to Ministers in Paul, Romans 9.1. The same is commanded to Parents, Ephesians. 6.4. and
you Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; and this good will of Parents
is called (...) among the Gentiles, which is from (...) to love, a word used
properly to express the affection and natural love of parents and children,
the same is urged by Paul to husbands, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands, love your wives, as
Christ loved the Church, etc. And to Masters, Ephesians. 6.9. And ye masters, do the
same things to them, forbearing threatenings, knowing that your master also is
in heaven, etc.

To this is opposite the contempt of Inferiors, the want of love, astorgie and
such like.

Of the contempt of inferiors God speaks, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 20. Let not his heart
be lifted up above his brethren: of Astorgie or want of affection, Christ
speaks, Mat. 7.9. What man among you is there, that if his Son ask him
bread, will give him a stone?

The Justice of Superiors is, whereby they endeavor that every inferior have
his due.

This is performed by the Magistrate, whilst he keeps both Tables of the Law;
whilst he promotes and defends the true Religion, as we showed in the former
Book, in the doctrine of the true Church: they practice the same justice, in
making laws, punishing offenders, rewarding the keepers of it, and in defending
their Subjects against unjust force.

To this is opposite, the neglect of justice, and tyranny.

Of the neglect of justice, see Esa. 1.23. They judge not the fatherless;
neither does the cause of the widow come unto them. Of injustice and tyranny,
in the same place: Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves. God
reproves this mos severely, Ezech. 34. in the Pastors of the people of Israel:
Parents also offend either by too much indulgence, as Eli, 1 Samuel 2. or by too
much rigor, as Saul, 1 Samuel 14.

Sedulity, which is also called diligence, fidelity, vigilancie, is a virtue
whereby Superiors willingly undergo the labors of their offices, and
endeavor by the gifts they have received from God, to help their Inferiors.

Of this virtue, the Apostle speaks, Romans 12.8. He that rules, let him rule
with diligence; the same is urged by Paul to Ministers and Elders, Act. 20.28.
Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock in which the holy Ghost has
made you overseers: Parents show this, when they nurture their children in the
fear of God. Ephesians. 6.4. and when they lay up for them things temporal, 2 Cor.
12.14.

To this is opposite, Sloth, and business about impertinent things.

Against Sloth, God cries out, Jer. 48.10. Cursed is he that does the work of
the Lord negligently: of impertinent business Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 4.15. Let
none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evil doer, or as a
busie-body in other men's matters.

CHAP. X. Of Virtues and Works belonging to the Sixth Commandment.
HItherto of the duty of Superiors to their Inferiors, and on the contrary.
Now follows the duty of each man to his neighbor: and this is employed either
about the inward, or outward good things of men. Their inward good things are,
life, and chastity: Of life we are to handle in the sixth precept; the sum
whereof is, that we preserve our own, and our neighbors life.

Thou shall not kill, is a negative precept; out of which is gathered this
affirmative, Thou shall preserve thine own, and thy neighbors life.

The virtue then commanded here, is the study of preserving our own and other
men's lives: The conservation of our own life, consists in the lawful use of
lawful means: of which kind are meat and drink, recreation, physic, avoiding
of dangers, and driving away of injuries.

The RULES.
Then is the repelling of an injury lawful, when it is done, 1. In the
continent or sober. 2. In case of necessity. 3. Without desire of revenge or
hurt; but so that we intend only our own conservation and defense from
injuries.


To this conservation of our own life, is opposite the neglect of it; as also
the d^stroying of it violently by our own hands, and unlawful preserving of it.

They who neglect the means of preserving life, they sin by omission; but they
that put violent hands on themselves, sin by commission. Now there be certain
degrees of self-murder; for either it is done directly by Sword, Halter, or
Poison, or any such way, or else indirectly: so they kill themselves, who
rashly and wantonly expose themselves to danger, as Wrestlers, Rope-dancers,
Drunkards, Gluttons, etc. the unlawful preserving of life is, which is done by
lying, or such like means.

The study of preserving our neighbors life, is, when not only we abstain
from hurting it, but we love his life, and preservation, and defend it
according to our power.

To this is opposite the neglect of it, and unjust slaughters, hatred, cursing,
and railing, or upbraiding of any offense committed, or inhering infirmities.

An example of neglect is in them who when they may defend those that unjustly
suffer death, do not: Prove. 24.11. If thou forbear to deliver them who are
drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain; if thou say, behold
we know it, etc. How grievous unjust slaughter is, which is done not of private
desire, and not by the Magistrate, or public authority; and how grievous a
punishment this deserves, may be seen, Genesis 9.6. Who sheddeth man's blood, by
man his blood shall be shed; because God made man after his image. Of hatred,
thus says John 1 Epist. 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslayer.
Of evil speaking or cursing, Christ says, Mat. 5.22. Whosoever shall say to
his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say,
thou fool, he shall be in danger of Hell fire.

To this study are subordinate two kinds of virtues; some whereof conduce to
withold our selves, and some to withold others, and deter them from
murder.

Of the first kind are, Innocence, Mildness, Clemency, Moderation.

Innocence is, when we avoid all means of hurting our neighbor.

To this is opposite, Injury in word and deed, and counterfeit innocence.

That words are injurious and hurtful to man's life, is manifest; for he is not
esteemed to live, but he that lives well: Hence Christ accounts evil words
murder, Matt. 5. of counterfeit innocence we have in Pilate an example, in
washing his hands, Matt. 27.

Mildness is a virtue whereby we curb and bridle our anger, that it may not
wax inordinately hot.

Matt. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit, etc.

To meekness is opposite, Anger, unjust wrath, too much gentleness or want of
just anger, and desire of revenge.

Of anger Solomon says, Eccles. 7.9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry:
Of unjust anger Moses, Levit. 19. v. 18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear a
grudge against the children of thy people: Of Eli the Priest's too much
gentleness, we read 1 Samuel 2. The desire of revenge is condemned in the place
of Levit. 19. above alleged.

Clemency is a just moderation in inflicting of punishments.

To this is opposite Cruelty and fierceness, and too much Indulgence.

Both sins are kinds of murder: for by too much rigor, and too much
indulgence, we sin against the life of our neighbor: He hurts the good, that
spares the evil.

Moderation is a virtue much like to Clemency, whereby we are content to part
with our right, either for the public good, or for the good of them who
offend, or for avoiding of scandal.

This differs from Clemency; because this is properly ascribed to the
Magistrate, but moderation is required of all Christians, Phil. 4.5.

To this is opposite, too much Right; which is commonly called, too much Wrong.

Of the latter sort are, Vindicative Justice, and Fortitude.

The former is, when offenses are curbed with fit punishments, that one rather
may perish then unity.

To this is opposite too much Lenity, which begets too much liberty in sinning.

Not only is it a sin to kill, but also not to kill, when the Law requires it:
Of this we have an example in Saul, 1 Samuel 15.

Fortitude is that, whereby according to the strength and vigor of a high and
unconquered mind, we endure difficulties, and undertake high matters, to Gods
glory, and our neighbors safety.

To this, Sluggishnesse is opposite, or Pusillanimity, arising out of fear of
dancers, or desire of pleasures; Temerity also, and too much boldness. To this
also belong Duels undertaken for deciding of doubtful rights, or upon other
light and rash occasions.

Such Conflicts may be fitly reduced to Self-murder.

Both these, to wit Justice and Fortitude, appear either in Peace, or in War.

War is public hostility, which the Magistrate exercises with armed power,
for ends pleasing to God, and profitable to the State.

The RULES.
I. It is lawful for Christians to wage war, as it was of old for the Jews.

The reason is, because it is no where prohibited in the New Testament; And
that Captain of the Capernaites, Mat. 8. and Cornelius the Centurion, Act. 10.
are reckoned amongst the faithful. Neither did John dehort the soldiers from
wars, but from injustice, Luke 3.

II. War is to be managed by the Magistrate, not by private authority.

III. War must not be made, but that which is just and necessary.

IV. It will be just in respect of the matter, form and end, if it be made in
a just cause, for a good end, and according to the prescript of Gods word.

V. It will be necessary, if the matter be tried by Council, before it be
handled by Arms.

VI. When war is undertaken, it matters not whether it be managed by strength
or policy.

VII. Policy joined with lying and breaking of covenants, is not to be
allowed; but it may be approved with dissimulation.

VIII. Although the Church is built by the Word, not by the Sword; yet being
built, is justly to be defended by the sword against unjust violence.


CHAP. XI. Of Virtues and Works belonging to the Seventh Commandment.
THus of our duty toward the life of our neighbor. In the Seventh Precept is
set down, how we must preserve our own and neighbors Chastity; the sum
whereof is, that the Heavenly Lawgiver would have our own and neighbors
chastity preserved inviolable.

This Precept is negative, Thou shall not commit adultery; and Synecdochical
also: for under the name of Adultery, all lust and intemperance is understood.
Hence arises the Affirmative; that by endeavoring temperance, we preserve our
own and others chastity.

There be two means to preserve chastity; Temperance, and Wedlock: the first
is enjoined to all men; the other, to those who are called to wedlock.

Temperance is a virtue moderating the affections of our mind, in persuing and
avoiding bodily pleasures.

Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. The grace of God which brings salvation to all men, has
appeared, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly justly and godly in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope and glorious appearance of the mighty God, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ.

To Temperance is opposed Intemperance and Insensibility, whereby honest and
lawful delights are despised; also Hypocritical temperance of Monks and
Eremites.

Temperance is, both Sobriety and Chastity, as also Modesty and Honesty. The
former virtues have relation to us, the latter to our neighbor.

Sobriety is temperance from superfluous meat and drink.

We must study to Sobriety, 1. Because of Gods command. 2. Because of the
reasons annexed to it, taken from our calling, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. But let us who are
of the day be sober. From the necessity of Prayer, and from the end of the
world, 1 Pet. 4.7. But the end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober
and watch unto prayer. Lastly, from the snares of Satan, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober
and watch, for your adversary the devil walks as a roaring lion seeking whom
he may devour.

To Sobriety is opposite, Delicateness, whereby dainties and delicacies are
fought for imoderately in meats and drinks: Gluttony also, of Voracity,
Drunkenes, and hurtful Abstinence.

Of daintines Solomon speaks, Pro. 23.1, 2, 3. When thou sit to eat with a
Ruler; consider diligently what is before thee; and put a knife to thy throat,
if thou be a man given to appetite: be not desirous of his dainties, for they
are deceitful meats. Gluttony and drunkenness are to be avoided, 1. Because
they are prohibited by God, Pro. 23.20.31. Luke 21.34. Romans 13.13. 2. Because
the effects thereof are most pernicious; for they hinder the meditating on Gods
works, Isa. 5.12. and thinking upon Christ's coming, Luke 21.34. Prayers also, 1
Pet. 4.7. It stirs up anger and strife, Pro. 20.1. and 29.30. It kindles lust,
Pro. 23.31, 32. It causes scandal, as the example of Noah shows, Genesis 9. and
shuts out of Gods kingdom, 1 Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.21. Hurtful abstinence is, when
we refrain from meat and drink to the prejudice of our health.

Near to Sobriety is Vigilancie, when we abstain from untimely and too much
sleep, that we may serve God with cheerfulness, and follow the works of our
vocations.

1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober and watch. Now as under the name of Sobriety, sometime
abstinence from pride and evil affections is meant, Romans 12.3. so oftentimes
spiritual vigilancie is understood as an abstinence from the sleep of security,
to which Peter has respect in the place above cited.

To Vigilancie is opposite Sleep, and Monkish superstitious Watchings.

Chastity, or Sanctimony so called, Romans 6.19. is temperance from lust.

We must follow chastity, 1. Because God commands it, Lev. 19.2. Be ye holy,
for I the Lord you God am holy. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. This is the will of God, even
your holiness, that ye abstain from fornication. 2. Because they that follow
it shall see God, Mat. 5.8. Heb. 12.14.

To Chastity is opposite, both Dissembled chastity, as is that of them who are
tied with the Vow of chastity; as also all Impurity, as Fornication, Adultery,
Whoredom, Incest, Rapes, Softness, Sodomy, Bestiality, etc.

Although there be degrees of these sins, yet all of them exclude from the
Kingdom of heaven, as is taught plainly 1 Cor. 6.10, etc. And how grievously
God is offended at these sins, let the Flood, the fire of Sodom, the
destruction of the Israelites, Number. 23. the miseries of David, the ruin of
Troy, and the like bear witness.

Modesty is temperance from filthy words, and lascivious gestures.

Heb. 12.28. Let us have grace whereby we may acceptably serve God, with
reverence and godly fear, (or modesty.)

To this is opposite, Filthy communication, lascivious and unclean gestures,
Dances also, obscene Pictures, and Songs, and filthy Sights.

Pro. 6.12.13. A naughty person, a wicked man walks with a froward mouth, he
winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with his fingers.
and v. 25. Lust not after her beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee
with her eyelids; for by means of a whorish woman, man is brought to a piece
of bread, etc. Ephesians. 5.4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting,
which are not convenient.

Honesty, is temperance from filthy and lascivious trimming and clothing of the
body.

Exodus 20.26. Neither shall thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy
nakedness may not be discovered. 1 Timothy 2.9. Let women adorn themselves with
modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety.

So much of the former means of preserving Chastity; the latter is Wedlock.

Wedlock is an indissoluble conjunction of one man with one woman, by lawful
consent; instituted for Gods glory, and the good of the parties so conjoined.

The RULES.
I. Marriage is not only grounded on the Law of Nature and of Nations, but also
on the Law of God; for it was instituted and commanded by God, and was by
Christ vindicated from abuses and corruptions.

Genesis 1.28. and 2.22. Mat.19.8, etc.

II. Neither is it made rashly, or without Gods particular providence.

Pro. 19.14. A virtuous woman is from the Lord.

III. The proximate efficient cause, is lawful consent.

IV. This consent is both of the Parents, and of the Parties to be married.

V. In respect of time, the consent of Parents should go before, for the
preservation of filial reverence.

Exodus 22.17. If the father refuse to give her. Deuteronomy. 7.3. Thou shall not give
thy son to any of their daughters, neither shall thou take any of their
daughters for thy son. Jer. 29.6. Take you wives for your sons, and give your
daughters to husbands. By the events, we find that marriages made without
consent of parents, prove oft-times unhappy.

VI. But in Law, the consent of the parties to be married is of greatest force.

The reason is, because if there be not a conjugal consent, there would be no
love nor mutual benevolence, and consequently no marriage. Therefore as it
belongs to filial reverence to require the parents consent in the first place;
so it is the part of fatherly love, not to debar tyrannically their children
from honest matches, nor to force them being unwilling, to marry. Therefore the
marriage is not nullified because the parents do not consent to it, unless the
parties to be married be under years, or some other weighty causes do hinder:
But if parents have not sufficient causes either of hindering or forcing the
marriage, yet their consent must not be therefore slighted; but Magistrates,
Ministers, and friends shall do well to put Parents in mind of their duty,
that at least they may give their consent.

VII. As consent should be free from coaction, so should it be also from fraud.

Diverse frauds are used in making of matches: which either concern the Person;
so Jacob was cozened by taking Leah instead of Rachel; or the chastity of
either, as if a man should ignorantly marry her that had lost her maidenhead;
or their estates, as if one should be made believe, that his Bride were rich,
or nobly descended. The first kind of fraud dissolves the marriage; for Jacob
might have repudiated Leah, because there was no consent given before. As for
the second kind, it is Moses his verdict, Deuteronomy. 22. that such a woman should be
held for an adultresse, and stoned to death: but our usual custom is, that if
the man had carnal commerce with the woman, he is to retain her. But the third
kind of fraud, does not dissolve the marriage.

VIII. If there be an absolute consent given, it is called a Contract in the
present; but if with condition, of Parents consent, dowry, etc. it is called a
Contract for the future. The first kind of consent is the true beginning of
the present marriage; the latter makes not marriage, except the condition
required be kept, or else when impatient of staying for the accomplishing of
it, there be carnal commerce.

IX. The matter of Wedlock, are the parties to be married; in whom we are, 1.
To consider their Number, 2. Their Age: 3. Their neernesse in blood, etc. 4.
Their Religion.

X. As for the Number, Marriage is of one Male and one Female; hence Bigamie
and Polygamie are condemned.

The reasons are, 1. Because bigamie and polygamie are repugnant to the first
institution; whereby God joined to one Adam but one woman, not two, nor more,
Genesis 2) 2. Because it is repugnant to the restoration of the Law given by God
in the beginning: Man shall cleave to his wife, they two shall be one: which
restoration was done by Christ, Matt. 19.5. And they that were two, are made
one flesh: 3. Because a wicked man was the inventer of bigamie and polygamie;
for the first that had two wives was Lamech, Genesis 4. 4. Because true peace and
polygamie tannot consist, as Jacobs example shows, Genesis 30. and Elkanahs, 1 Samuel 1. Now albeit God at first tolerated Concubinate and Bigamie, yet he did
nor therefore approve it: for the contrary appears by Christ's words above
cited; that place in Levit. 18.18. as Junius translates it, plainly forbids
polygamie.

XI. Convenient age is required, for procreation sake, for oeconomical
prudence, and for the honor of such a holy institution.

XII. By what degrees of neernesse marriage is hindered, see Levit. 18.

XIII. This is either Consanguinity or Affinity; that is of them who come from
the same common stock; this is either of the Wife with the Husbands, or of the
Husband with the Wives kindred.

Properly there is no affinity between the kindred of the Husband and Wife.

XIV. In these we must observe the degrees and line: the degree is the distance
from the stock or common Parent: the line is the series and order of the
degrees either among the ascendents and descendents, and this is called the
right line; or among the collaterals, and this is called the transverse line;
and it is named, either equal or unequal.

The degrees and line are chiefly considered in Consanguinity, but in Affinity
by way of analogy; for in what degree one is near in blood to his Wife, in the
same, is she in affinity to the Husband.

XV. The degrees of marriage are not to be judged by the Canon law; (because
the Pope advancing himself above every power, adds degrees not prohibited, to
those which God has prohibited; and for money dispenses with those degrees
which God has prohibited expressly) but out of Levit. 18. and Deuteronomy. 27.

XVI. In the straight line of ascendents and descendents, there is a perpetual
hinderance of marriage.

Hence, if Adam were alive, he could not marry to any other but to Eve, nor she
to any other Husband besides Adam.

XVII. In the equal collateral line, by divine right, the Brother and Sister in
Consanguinity are debarred from marriage: the Husband also and Sister of his
deceased Wife, or the Wife and Brother of the deceased Husband.

The law of God does not disallow the marriages of Cosin-Germans, by the Father
and Mothers side; but the Canon Law does, and so do the Statutes of other
Commonwealths, as that of Basil. The rason of this is, that with the greater
reverence we might abstain from the degrees prohibited by God.

XVIII. In the unequal collateral line, they cannot marry who are in stead of
Parents, who are collaterally joined to the stock or their superiors.

Therefore the Nephew cannot marry with either Aunts, nor the Niece with either
Uncles. As for Affinity; marriage with the Wives Sister, or with the Husbands
Brother, is forbid by the law of nature: in others, affinity does not extend it
self so largely; the Husband should abstain from the Wives kinswoman, but not
the Husbands kinsman from the Wives kindred, and on the contrary. Therefore two
Brothers may marry with two Sisters; the Father and the Son, with the Mother
and the Daughter; but not the Father with the Daughter, or Son with the Mother,
for so the order of nature should be perverted: Sons in law also may marry with
Daughters in law, but the Father and Son cannot marry two Sisters, for one of
them should be mother in law to the other.

XIX. Regard must be had of Religion, that marriages be not made between those
of different religions.

It is one thing to speak of a marriage already made, and of that which is to
be made; of the former, the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.7. but the other is most
severely prohibited, Exodus 34.12, etc. Deuteronomy. 7.3. where a reason is added,
taken from the danger of seducing: to which Paul's saying agrees, 2 Cor. 6.14.
Be ye not unequally yoked with the wicked. Sad examples we have of the events
of such marriages; of the first world, Genesis 6. of Solomon, 1 King. 22. of Ahab,
1 King. 21.15. of Jehosaphat, who married Ahabs daughter to his son Joram, who
was seduced by her, 2 King. 8. Of Valence the Emperor, who by his wife was
seduced and drawn to Arianisme.

XX. The form of marriage consists in the mutual benevolence of the married
couple: under which word we understand mutual love, help, comfort, and suck
like.

See 1 Cor. 7.3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 5.22, etc. 1 Timothy 2.8. 1 Pet. 3.5, etc.

XXI. Although the rite of public consecration is not expressly commanded by
God, yet it is religiously observed among Christians.

XXII. The chief end of marriage, is Gods glory; the subordinate, is natural or
adventitious: natural is that for which marriage was at first instiuted, to
wit, for procreation of children, and for mutual help; the adventitious is,
that now since our nature is corrupted, it may be a help to preserve chastity
and modesty.

XXIII. The precept of marriage is not simply necessary, nor does it tie all
men, but binds them only who out of marriage cannot live chastely, and
therefore in a manner seem to be made for marriage.

Matt. 19.11. All cannot take this saying, but they to, etc.

XXIV. Therefore as marriage is honorable, so it becomes all orders among men.

Impiously then do the Papists forbid the Priests to marry. That it is
honorable in it self, is plain, by the Apostles saying, Heb. 13.4. and by the
divine institution of it in the state of innocence, Genesis 2. by the defending of
it from abuses, Matt. 19. and by Christ's honoring of it with his presence, and
first miracle in Cana of Galilee, John 2. that it is also decent in Ministers,
is said, lib. 1. c. 26. can. 3.

XXV. If one marry her with whom he has committed Adultery, this is not
marriage, but a continuation of Adultery.


Some things are repugnant to marriage simply; other things only in some
respect.

Those things are repugnant to it in some respect, which disturb the peace and
mutual benevolence of the married couple; of which sort are, 1. Jealousy. 2.
Sloth in houshold-affairs. 3. Peevishnes and bitterness. 4. Stubbernnesse,
idle prating, procacity. But to marriage are repugnant simply, Adultery, and
malicious deserting.

So is Adultery described in those places, in which it is forbid as a deadly
sin, Levit. 18.20, and 20.10, Deuteronomy. 22.22. Prove. 5, and 6. Therefore that is
only adultery which is committed with an other man's wife, whether he be a
married or unmarried man that commits it; but if the husband go to bed to a
single woman or a whore, that is called Fornication in Scripture, Prove. 23.27,
28.

A. R. Divorce is caused by either of these; Divorce is either in respect of
the Bed, or in respect of Cohabitation; and the Adultery is either publicly
known, or else, but suspected and hid: known Adultery is to be punished by the
Magistrate with divorce from bed and cohabitation: for suspected and close
Adultery, the parties married may divorce each other from the bed, not from
cohabitation; because this is a public punishment, and it is to be inflicted
by a public Magistrate. But in every case of Adultery, Divorce is not
requisite or lawful: For, 1. If the party offending repent, the party offended
ought to forgive and be reconciled. 2. If there be danger lest the offending
party fall into some desperate course upon divorcement. 3. If the Husband
prostitute his Wife to another, he being the cause rather of the Adultery then
she. 4. If the woman is ravished by another man against her will. 5. If the
man, after the woman has committed Adultery, and he knows it, admits her again
unto his bed; in this case, he is not to divorce her for the former fact. 6. If
both the husband and wife be guilty of adultery, the one is not to divorce the
other. 7. If the husbands long absence and silence has occasioned the wife to
conceive he is dead, and she many another; in this case, if he return, he is
bound to receive his wife again. In all these cases then, Divorce is not to be
used; for Christ commands it not, but permits it. Again, if a man intending to
marry one sister, unwitingly marries the other, being deceived as Jacob was by
Laban in marrying Leah in stead of Rachel, he is not bound to divorce her.


Divorce is caused by either of these.

Matt. 19.9. But I say unto you, whosoever puts away his wife, except it be
for Fornication, and marries another, commits Adultery: 1 Cor. 7.15. But if
the unbelieving depart, let him depart; a Brother or a Sister is not under
bondage in such cases.

CHAP. XII. Of Works belonging to the Eighth Precept.
AFter our duty in preserving our own and neighbors Chastity, follows our duty
toward our own and neighbors Goods. Of this in the eighth Precept; the sum
whereof is, That we endeavor justly to preserve our own and neighbors goods.

The Precept is Negative, and Synecdochical: Thou shall not steal: where by
the name of theft, Synecdochically is meant any kind of injustice toward the
goods of fortune; whence the Affirmative is inferred, that in earthly things we
deal justly.

The Virtues of this Precept, have relation either to our neighbor, or to our
selves.

To our neighbor are referred Justice and Benevolence. The Justice belonging
to this is commutative, whereby we deal so with our neighbor, that neither he
nor our selves receive any wrong.

1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Let no man oppress or circumvent his brother in business; for
the Lord is the revenger of all such, etc.

To Justice is opposite Injustice, which in this Precept is called Theft.

Theft is, when one makes another man's goods his own, without the owners
knowledge or consent.

The RULES.
I. Theft is diversely committed, if either we look upon the manner, or the
object.

II. As for the manner, Theft is committed either directly, or indirectly.
Directly, by taking away another man's goods privately, or without the owners
knowledge a; or by open violence without the owners consent, though not without
his knowledge b. Indirectly theft is committed, either in deeds, or in words:
In deeds, when the thing found is not restored c, or when it is parted among
thieves d; in words, when in the Courts of Justice, Lawyers and Judges either
pronounce an unjust Sentence, or pervert Justice and Law e.

a An example of private theft is in Micha the Ephraimite, who without his
mothers knowledge took away eleven hundred shekels of silver, Judge. 17.2. b
They that commit theft with open violence, are called robbers, whether they be
soldiers or others, Luke 3.14. But the soldiers asked John, saying, And what
shall we do? and he said, strike no man, neither oppress any man, but be
content with your wages c Deuteronomy. 22.1. Thou shall not see thy brothers ox or
his sheep go astray, and bide thy self from them; thou shall in any case bring
them again to thy brother: d Prove. 29.24. Whosoever is partaker with a thief,
hates his own soul: e Isa. 1.23. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions
of thieves; every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards; they judge not
the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow, etc.

III. As for the object, theft is committed either in persons a, or in things
whither, private or public: hither may be reduced the perfidious administering
of the public goods in a Commonwealth b, or in the Church, and things
consecrated to God c; the removing of bounds or landmarks d, the fraudulent
detaining of the hirelings wages e.

a Such kind of theft is called plagium in Latin, See 1 Timothy 1.10. b 1 Cor.
4.2. It is required of a Steward that he be found faithful. c This theft is
called sacrilege, Prove. 20.25. It is a snare to the man who devoureth that
which is holy. An example of this is in Achan, Jos. 7. and in Judas, Joh. 12.6.
d Prove. 22.28. Remove not the ancient bounds which thy Fathers have set. e Jam.
5.4. Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped your fields (which is
of you kept back by fraud) cries.


Commutative Justice, according to the variety of bargains and contracts, is
threefold: for either it is exercised in things to be bought and sold, or in
things to be used, or in things to be kept. Justice in buying and selling, is,
which observes the equality of things, and of their price.

To this is opposite injustice, which is practiced, 1. In things not vendible
a. 2. In things vendible; and here the seller offends, when he sels things
corrupted for sound b, using false weights and measures c, raising the price of
things when there is no need d, by forestalling the Markets, to set up
monopolies e: but the buyer offends either by crafty seizing upon the thing
sold f, or by not paying g.

a Act. 8.20. Thy money perish with thee, who think the gift of God may be
obtained with money, says Peter to Simon Magus: therefore they are not
followers of Simon Peter, but of Simon Magus who make Merchandise of holy
things; like to these are they who sell Law and justice, and offices, and such
like, b as when chafe or such like trash is mingled with wheat, and water with
wine; Amos 8.6. That we may sell the refuse of the wheat, c Deuteronomy. 25.13. Thou
shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, Amos 8.5. Making the Ephah small, and
the Shekel great; and falsifying the balances by deceit. d Amos 8.6. That they
may buy the poor for silver. e These are like wanton sheep, who when they are
filled, tread the remaining sodder under their feet. Ezekiel. 34.18. f Prove.
20:14. It is naught says the buyer, but when he is gone he praises himself.
g Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borrows, and pays not again.

Justice in the use of things, is, when in letting and hiring, the use or fruit
is equal to the profit.

In such a contract let the rule prevail, 2 Cor. 8.13. Not that other men be
eased, and you burdened, but by an equality.

To this is opposite injustice, both in the letter and hyrer; the letter
offends in demanding the price of that which he ought to let freely a, or in
asking too great a price b, or requiring the thing let, sooner then he should
c; the hirer offends in denying to give the just price, in not restoring the
thing hired whole again, and at the due time, or in circumventing his creditor
by dissembling or concealing his own debts d.

a God of old forbade the Jews to exact a price of their brethren, Exodus
22.25. So Christ, Luke 6.35. Lend, looking for nothing again. Which rule is
then in force, when our neighbors estate is so mean, that he is not able to
pay, b 2 Cor. 8.13. Not that others may be eased and you burdened: and on the
contrary. c Experience witnesses how hurtful this kind of injustice is. d
Hither belongs the sin of stellionate or couzenage, when one sels or pawns that
which is already pawned or mortgaged to another.

Here fitly we may speak of Usury, which is the fruit that the thing Let or
lent brings in to the letter or lender.

The RULES.
I. Usury is either lawful or satisfactorie, or unlawful and only gainful or
lucratorie.

II. Lawful is known by the object, end, and manner thereof.

III. The object of usurie, is, man so well to pass in his estate, as that he
is able to recompense in some measure his creditor.

IV. The end, is, a respect to a man's own gain, and the help of his neighbor.

V. The manner is, that the lender may be moved with charity, and the borrower
with justice and honesty, to acknowledge the good turn received, and his
thankfulness by retribution.

VI. If these conditions be observed, Usury cannot be reproved.

That Usury of it self and simply is not unlawful, is apparent, 1. Because if
it were simply unlawful, God had not suffered the Jews to take use of
strangers, Deuteronomy. 23.20. 2. Because if Lands, Houses, Horses and such like may
be let for benefit, why may may not money also? It Is true, that God would not
have Use raised upon the fruits of the Land of Canaan; but that was a part of
the Ceremonial Law; so he would not have the Lands thereof sold, but to return
to the owners, Lev. 25.23.

VII. Unlawful Usury, is, which is practiced on the poor, or for gain merely,
having no regard to charity and equity.

This Usurie is called by the Hebrews, Neshech, from biting or knowing, and it
is most severely forbid, Exodus 22.25. If thou lend money to any of my people
that is poor by thee, thou shall not be to him as an userer, nor shall thou
lay upon him usurie. Psalm. 15.5. Who has not lent his money upon usurie. Ezekiel.
18.8. He has not given forth upon usury, neither has he taken any increase.
Luke 6.35. Lend, looking for nothing again.


Justice in the custody of things, is, whereby equity is observed in remanding
and restoring of Pawnes or pledges.

Exodus 22.7. If a man shall deliver to his neighbor money or stuff to keep,
and it be stolen out of the man's house, if the thief be found, let him pay
double; if the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be
brought unto the Judges to see whether he has not put his hand to his
neighbors goods. The same Law follows, v. 10, 11. concerning the Ass, Ox
and small Cattle: he that receives a Pawn, let him take heed he do not receive
one of a poor body, or retain that pawn which the poor man cannot be without,
Exodus 22.26. If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall deliver
it to him by that the Sun goes down, for that is his covering only: Deuteronomy.
24.6. No man shall take the nether or upper Millstone to pledge, for he takes a
man's life to pledge. and verse 10. When thou do lend thy brother any thing,
thou shall not go into his house to fetch his pledge, thou shall stand abroad,
and the man to whom thou do lend, shall bring out the pledge abroad to thee.
Ezekiel. 18.7. And has not oppressed any, but has restored to the debtor his
pledge.

So much of Justice; Beneficence is, whereby we help our neighbor with our
means freely. This virtue is called liberality, in lesser gifts; in greater,
magnificence: in relation to the poor, alms, to banished men and strangers,
hospitality.

To this the Scripture invites us, 1. By command, Luke 6.30. 2. By the example
of holy men, yea of God himself, who is the fountain of all goodness, Luke
6.36. Be you merciful, as your Father is merciful. 3. By most sweet promises,
Luke 6.38. Give, and it shall be given to you, etc. Especially by promising
life eternal, Mat. 25.34, 35. Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. I was hungry
and ye gave me food, etc.

To this is opposite the neglect of bounty, as also baseness,
hard-heartednesse, and unseasonable bounty.

See above, cap. 8.

So much of Virtues as they have reference to others; the virtues which have
respect to our selves, are, Contentation, Parsimonie, and Industry.

utrcheia, or Contentation, is a Virtue whereby man contents himself with his
own condition, and with the estate which he has justly got.

1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness is great gain with contentment.

To this is opposite unbelieving care concerning the sustaining of this life a,
covetousness b, and a loathing of ones present condition c.

a This is excellently refuted by that famous Sermon of Christ's, Mat. 6.25,
etc. b Covetousness is far worse then excessive care, for a covetous man: the
more he has, the more he desires: therefore this vice which is called (...) a
desire or heaping up of too much, and (...) the love of money, is to be avoided,
1. Bcause it is forbid by Christ, Luke 12.15. Beware of covetousness. 2.
Because it is idolatry, Mat. 6.24. and Col. 3.5. and Ephesians. 5.5. 3. Because it is
the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. c Jude v. 16. These are murmurers,
complainers. But Paul, knew how to want, and how to abound, Phil. 4.12.

Parsimonie or frugality is a virtue whereby we so moderate our expenses, that
we spend not but what is needful, and reserve the remainder for future uses.

We must aim at this, 1. Because commanded, Joh. 6.12. Gather up the fragments
that remain, that nothing be lost. 2. Because it is a remedy against poverty,
and a means to exercise our bounty.

To this are opposite too much sparing, and profuseness.

Industry or love of labor, or the care of getting means honestly, is a Virtue
whereby one gets an estate by honest labors, that he may be the better enabled
to live comfortably to himself, and to others.

This was enjoined in Paradise, Genesis 3.19. the same is commanded by Paul, Ephesians.
4.28. He that stole, let him steal no more; but rather let him labor, working
with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that
needs.

To this are opposite, Idleness, and a disordered life, dishonest ways of
gaining, Usury, Dice, Mercenarie soldiery, and other ways of getting wealth
by right and wrong.

See what is said of the idle, Prove. 6.1. and 12.11. and Eccl. 4.1, 2. The rest
appears out of what is said before.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Virtues and Works belonging to the ninth Commandment.
HAving spoken of our duty toward our own and neighbors estate; now follows
that we speak of our duty toward our own and neighbors fame, in the ninth
precept. The sum whereof is, that we preserve our own and neighbors fame and
good name.

This precept is negative and Synecdochical; for under the phrase of false
witness, is understood every thing whereby our own and neighbors fame or
estimation is hurt; hence is collected an affirmative precept, That we study to
preserve our own and our neighbors fame.

The virtues of this precept are also twofold; some have relation to our
neighbor, some to our selves; those which have respect to our neighbor, are
truth and sincerity; Truth is a virtue whereby we are bent to know those things
that be true, and to utt r or signify the things known as they are.

Zach. 8.16. Ephesians. 4.25. Let every man speak truth to his neighbor.

To these in the defect are opposite, the neglect of truth a, and naughty
dissembling b; but in the excess, lying c, and false witness d.

a Psa. 58.5. Their poison is like the poison of a Serpent, like the deaf
Adder that stops his ears. b Not every dissimulation is culpable; for we
are not forced still to speak the truth, as shall appear in what follows; but
that dissimulation is understood, when we conceal the truth to the prejudice
of Gods glory, and of our neighbor. c A lie is, when a false thing is
signified by words or deeds, with a purpose to deceive. By this definition it
appears, 1. That Schemes, Metaphors, Allegories, and such like are not lies,
seeing the truth of them depends not from fictions, but from the similitude
they have with true things; the same reason is of Ironies, which are used not
to deceive, but to instruct; such were used by Elijah, 1 King. 18. and by
Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 2. That it is one thing to speak an untruth, another to
lie; for one may speak an untruth, by relating other men's sayings, or by
speaking that which he thinks to be true; but he lies, who utters a falsehood
either by word or gesture, or any other way purposely to deceive. 3. That
dissembling, deceits, and stratagems in war are not lies, so there be not
perfidiousnesse and perjury joined. The distinction of lies into officious,
jocond, and pernicious, shows only this, that one lie is more grievous then
another; however no lie is excusable, but by all means must be avoided, both
because it is most severely forbid by God who is truth it self, Zach. 8.16. as
also because it is a diabolical sin, Joh. 8.44. to whom the punishment must be
added that is prepared for liars, Psalm. 5.6. Thou will destroy them that speak
lies. d A false witness is made either out of the place and time of
judicature, or in judgment, by the Judge, or by the parties in suite, or by
the Lawyers, or by the witnesses. Concerning which, God has made a most severe
Law, Deuteronomy. 19.16, etc. If a false witness rise up against any man testify
against him that which is wrong, then both the men between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the Priests and Judges
that shall be in those days; and the Judges shall make diligent inquisition,
and behold, if the witness shall be a false witness, and has testified
falsely against his brother, then shall ye do to him, as he thought to have done
to his brother, etc.

Sincerity is a virtue whereby we deal plainly and ingenuously with our
neighbor, acknowledging Gods gifts in him a, taking in good part his sayings
and doings b, not giving rash credit to doubtful evils in him c, but concealing
his known evils d, or making the best construction of them e.

a Phil. 2.3. In lowliness of mind let each esteem others better then
themselves. b 1 Cor. 13.7. Charity believes all things, hops all things. c 1
Cor. 13.5. Charity thinks not evil. d Prove. 10.12. Hatred stirs up strife,
but love covers all sins. e Mat. 7.1. Judge not lest ye be judged, etc.

To this diverse sins are opposite; to wit, evil suspicions a, curiosity in
prying into our neighbors faults, not out of any desire to amend them, but to
calumniate b, calumnies ^^^s^lves c, and flattery d.

a 1 Timothy 6.4. Whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, etc.
examples are in Eli, 1 Samuel 2. in Saul, 1 Samuel 22. in Hanon and his Courtiers,
2 Samuel 10. in the people of Malta, Act. 28. b Luke 6.41. What do thou seek
the moat that is in thy brothers eye, but do not observe the beam that is in
thine own eye? c Calumnies arise either by spreading lies of our neighbor,
Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not raise a false report; put not thine hand with the
wicked to be an unrighteous witness; or, by making a malicious construction of
our neighbors words and deeds, Matt. 26.61. This fellow said, I can destroy
the temple of God, and raise it up again in three days: or by speaking the
truth, but purposely to hurt our neighbor, 1 Samuel 22.9. Then answered Doeg the
Edomite, which was set over Saul's servants, and said, I saw the son of Jesse
coming to Nob, to Abimelech the son of Ahitub; and he enquired of the Lord for
him, and he gave him victuals, and the sword of Goliath the Philistine. Basil
says well, that a calumniator hurts three persons at one time: for he wrongs
the party whom he calumniates; he wrongs the hearers by possessing them with a
lie; and he wounds his own conscience: So Bernard to the same purpose says,
The calumniator or backbiter, and the hearer, both of them have the Devil, the
one in his tongue, the other in his ears. d Prove. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds
of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.

To Truth and Sincerity; as to the chief virtues, are subservient, Faith,
Gravitie, Silence, Gentleness, Courtesy, and Freedom of speech.

Faith or fidelity is a constancy in our words and deeds.

This is called sincerity, Ephesians. 4.15. Carrying your selves sincerely in love;
for so the word (...) is translated by the best Interpreters.

To this is opposite, the double tongue, when a man speaks one thing, and
thinks or does an other a: Imprudent simplicity, when a thing is rashly
promised, before the matter be sufficiently tried b: also counterfeit
simplicity and fidelity c.

a Psalm. 12.2. Truth has sailed amongst the children of men; they speak vanity
one to an other, they flatter with their tongues, and dissemble with a double
heart. b Matt. 26.35. Peter says to him, although I die with thee, yet will I
not deny thee: in like manner said all the Disciples. c Mat. 2.8. Make enquiry
after the child, and when you have found him, let me know, that I may come and
worship him also.

Gravity is which utters nothing but what is well weighed, savoring of
Christian wisdom and tending to edification.

Col. 4.6. Let your speech be seasoned with grace and salt, that you may know
how to answer every man.

Opposite to this, is idle prattling a, foolish speaking b, and counterfeit
gravity c.

a See a notable place for bridling the tongue, Jam. 3.2. etc. b Ephesians. 4.19.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth. c 1 Cor. 2. And
brethren, when I came unto you, I came not with entising words.

Silence is a virtue which faithfully conceals secrets committed to it.

Matt. 18.15. But if thy brother trespass against thee, go and reprove him
between thee and him alone.

To this is opposite, Perfidiousnesse, whereby secrets are revealed a; and
naughty silence, whereby things are concealed that should not be concealed b.

a Prove. 11.13. He that goes about as a slanderer, discovers a secret; but
he that is of a faithful heart, concealeth the matter. This virtue becomes all
men, but chiefly Ministers, least the secrets committed to their breast be
rashly divulged; except they be such secrets as may tend to the hurt of the
Church or State: for in that case, greater regard must be had of unity, then of
one man. b 2 King. 7.7. Then said the one to the other, we do not well; this
is a day of good tidings, and do we hold our peace?

Gentleness is a virtue, whereby we show our selves affable.

1 Pet. 3.8. Finally, be ye all of one mind, one suffer with another, love as
brethren, be pitiful, be courteous.

To this is opposite Peevishness a, and counterfeit gentleness b.

a Luc. 18.3, 4. And there was a certain Widow in that town, which came to the
Judge, saying; do me justice against mine adversary, but he would not for a
time. b 2 Samuel 15.3, 4, etc. Then Absalom said to him, see, thy matters are
good and righteous, but there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee.
Absalom said moreover. O, that I were made Judge in the land, that every man
which has any matter of controversy might come to me, that I might do him
justice! And when any man came near to him, and did him obeisance, he put forth
his hand, and took him, and kissed him.

Courtesy in speeeh, is, whereby our words are seasoned with honest mirth and
wit, with a good decorum or grace.

To this is opposite, Rusticity, when one can neither utter witty jests
himself, nor with patience hear them: Scurrility also, and Dicacitie or biting
jests and scoffs.

Ephesians. 5.4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are
things not comely.

Freedom of speech, is a virtue by which we speak the truth, and reprove
offenders without fear of danger.

Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall
plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin.

To this is opposite preposterous fear a, and too great love of censuring
others b.

a 1 Samuel 3.15. Samuel was afraid to tell Eli of that Vision. b Luke 6.41. Why
do thou look upon the moat that is in thy brothers eye? This vice is seen in
them who censure and reprove their neighbor out of preposterous affection, or
having no warrant thereto. What is fit in this case for Ministers, may be seen
in 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.

So much of virtues as they have reference to our neighbor: the virtues that
have relation to our selves, are self-praise, and an unblameable life;
self-praise is when we speak moderately of our selves, and rehearse our own
praises only when necessity urges us to defend and maintain our own
estimation.

Romans 12.3. For I say by the grace given to me, to every man that is among you,
not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think, but to think
soberly, etc.

To this, Impudency is opposite, when one is not ashamed to boast and glory in
his wickedness a; so is confident and foolish bragging b; and an Hypocritical
lessening of our own worth and abilities, under show of which either we hunt
after vain praise, or refuse to be bountiful, and to show mercy c.

a Isa. 3.9. The show of their countenance does witness against them, that
they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. b Pro. 27.1. Boast not thy
self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. and v. 2.
Let another praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own
lips. c So they do, who pretend they are in want themselves, when they are
desired to help their neighbor. Pro. 24.11, etc. If thou forbear to deliver
them that are drawn unto death, etc. if thou say, behold we knew it not:
does not he that pondereth the heart, consider it?

An unblameable life, is, whereby we desire not only to keep a good conscience
toward God, but also a good report among our neighbors.

Pro. 22.1. A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, and loving
favor rather then silver and gold. Eccl. 7.1. A good name is better then
precious ointment.

To this, Impiety is opposite, or the contempt of fame and a good conscience a;
and the hypocritical affectation of fame or popular breath b; and want of
patience in bearing slanders c.

a Luke 18.2. There was a Judge in a certain city, which feared not God, nor
regarded man. b Mat. 23.5. But they do all their works for to be seen of men. c
2 Samuel 16.9, 10. Then said Abishai, why should this dead dog curse my Lord the
King? let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head. Then the King said,
what have I to do with you, ye sons of Zerviah? so let him curse, because the
Lord has said unto him, curse David; who shall then say, wherefore have thou
done so?

CHAP. XIV. Of the Virtues and Works belonging to the Tenth Commandment.
HItherto of our duty to our Neighbor; or of the parts of Gods mediate
worship: Now of the highest degree thereof, in this tenth Precept.

The sum of it is, That our mind be free from evil destres, thoughts, and
affections toward our selves or neighbors.

Thou shall not covet] is a negative precept, in which inordinate appetites,
thoughts, and affections are forbid. The rest conduce to the declaration taken
from the object, which is set down either particularly, by naming the house,
wife, servant, maid, ox and ass of our neighbor; or in gross, in this
clause, Nor any thing that belongs unto thy neighbor.

The RULES.
I. As the confounding of the two first Commands is unlawfully; so the dividing
of the tenth into two precepts, concerning our neighbors house, and his wife,
is naught and frivolous.

The reasons. 1. The general closure, Nor any thing that belongs to thy
neighbor, shows it is but one command. 2. The substance of the precept is in
these words, Thou shall not covet; as Paul cites them, Romans 7.7. 3. They are
contained in one verse and sentence; whereas the rest, though short, are set
down in distinct verses. 4. Deuteronomy. 5. the coveting of our neighbors wife, is
first handled: if then these were two precepts, Moses of the tenth had made the
ninth. 5. They who maintain the contrary opinion, explain these things
conjunctly, and by examples declare them. David Chytraeus de Regul. Vitae, and
Hondorsius in Promptuario.

II. The tenth Command belongs to the second Table.

For in the first Command of the first Table, is handled our inward affection
toward God.

III. Original Justice is the object, not of this Command, but of the whole
Decalogue.

For original justice is a conformity with the whole law; as original sin is
that deformity which is repugnant to the whole Law.

IV. The proper object of this Precept, are men's appetites, thoughts, and
affections toward themselves and neighbors.

V. The end of it is, to show that Gods mediate worship is to be performed not
in outward actions only, but in inward affections also.

VI. As then the first Precept is the rule of the first Table; so is this of
the second Table.

For as the first Precept directs the heart, but the rest the actions also; so
the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth Precepts order our actions, but the
tenth our very heart. Hence it is clear, that this Precept is not superfluous.


The virtues belonging to this Precept, are, the ordering of concupiscence, and
our wrestling against evil desires.

The ordering of concupiscence is, whereby our appetites and affections are so
ruled, that by them we neither offend against our selves, nor against our
neighbor.

1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Now the God of peace sanctify you throughout, etc.

To this is opposite inordinate concupiscence, which in Scripture by way of
excellency is called Concupiscence.

Romans 7.7. For I had not known concupiscence, if the Law had not said, Thou
shall not lust.

The parts of this ordering are two; The one is employed about the appetites,
the other about the affections.

This word concupiscence, among Divines is taken in a large sense, both for the
appetites and affections; of which the former are ascribed to man, as he is a
sensitive creature; but the latter, as he is man. But by Philosophers it is
taken more strictly; so that they reduce the inferior appetites to the
concupiscible faculty, but the affections to the irascible.

Ordered appetites, are, whereby man desires meat, drink, rest, sleep, and such
like, moderately, and to the end appointed by God.

1 Timothy 5.23. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs
sake and often infirmities.

To this is opposite, Inordinate appetite, whereby more is desired then nature
or Gods ordination do require, or for another end then that to which God has
ordained natural things lawful.

Romans 13.13. Not in surfeting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness.

The chief affections, are, Love, Hatred, Joy, Sadness, Hope, Fear, and Anger.

Ordered Love, is, whereby we sincerely love our neighbor, and desire the
things that be good, fair, and of good report.

Romans 12.9. Let love be without dissimulation, abhor that which is evil, cleave
to that which is good. Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and
if there be any praise, think on these things.

To this is opposite the too much love of our neighbor a, self-love b, impure
love c, and the love of this world d.

a 1 Samuel 2.29. Thou have honored thy sons above me. b 2 Timothy 3.2. Men will
be lovers of themselves, c Prove. 6.25. Desire not her beauty, neither let her
eyelids entice thee. d 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, etc. And v. 16.
Because whatsoever is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the world.

Ordered hatred is, whereby we only hate those who hate God a; in other men,
and in our selves, we hate not the person, but by all means we hate and avoid
the sin b.

a Psalm. 139.21. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? b Mat. 18.15. If
thy brother offend thee, reprove him between thee and him alone, etc. Romans
7.19. For I do not the good which I would, but the evil which I would not do,
that do I:

To this is opposite the unjust hatred of our neighbor a, and the hatred of
good men b.

a 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother as a murderer. b Psalm. 41.5. My
enemies said of me, when shall he die, etc.

Ordered joy is, whereby man rejoices moderately for his own prosperity a, and
heartily for his neighbors felicity b.

a Psalm. 30.12. Thou have turned my mourning into joy. b Romans 12.15 Rejoice
with them that rejoice.

To this is opposite carnal and immoderate joy a, also rejoicing at our
neighbors misfortunes b.

a Luke 6.25. Woe to you that now laugh, for you shall weep and mourn. b
Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not at thy enemies fall.

Ordered sadness or sorrow is, whereby we moderately bemoane our own
afflictions a, and heartily condole our neighbors calamities b.

a Jam. 5.13. If any amongst you be afflicted, let him pray. b Romans 12.15.
Mourn with those that mourn.

To this, immoderate sadness is opposite a, sadness also for our neighbors
prosperity b, and too much sadness when wicked men are punished c.

a Prove. 17.22. A merry heart does good like a medicine, but a broken Spirit
dries the bones. b Mat. 20.15. Is thine eye evil because I am good? c 1 Samuel
16.1. How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him?

Ordered hope is, whereby we expect better things for our selves, and by the
law of charity also for our neighbors.

Of hope as it is a virtue, we have spoken before. 1 Cor. 13.7. Love suffers
all things, believes all things, hops all things.

To this is opposite disordered hope, when we place more trust in our selves
and neighbors then is fit.

Jer. 17.5. Cursed is he that puts his trust in man.

Ordered fear is, whereby we walk carefully, neither trusting too much our
selves, nor others.

Prove. 14.8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way.

To this is opposite disordered fear, whereby man fears himself and others
too much.

Mat. 10.28. Fear not them that can kill the body, etc.

Ordered anger is, whereby we are offended ordispleased with our selves and
others, upon just cause, yet moderately, and with hope of amending.

Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry but slane not.

To this is opposite inordinate anger, whereby we are incensed upon light
causes, or more then is fit; or when we intend private revenge.

Jam. 1.20. For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.

So much of the ordering of concupiscence. Wrestling against tentations and the
assaults of an evil conscience is, whereby a Christian man denies an evil
conscience, crucifying his flesh with the lusts thereof; and against the
assaults of the flesh, the devil, and the world, watches, and stoutly fights.

There are many reasons that induce us to wrestle stoutly, 1. Because the
Scripture forbids evil desires and lusts, Pro. 6.25. 1 Cor. 10.6. Gal. 5.6, 26.
Col. 3.5, 1. 1 These. 4.5. 2. Because he that is given to lusts, loves not God,
1 John 2.15 16. 3. Because lusts in regenerate men are hateful, Gal. 5.16, 17.
4. Because they inconse God to anger, Col. 3.5, 6. 5. Because the Apostle
furnishes us with the whole armor of God against them, Ephesians. 6. Invisible
lusts are overcome by us, says Austin. 6. Because the fire of lusts is most
hurtful, and breaks out into most sad events; the Scripture is full of
examples; there was never yet any sin committed which did not spring from evil
lust.

To this is opposite carnal security, whereby man flatters his own flesh,
whereby he willingly entertaineth lusts, whereby he gives himself to idleness
or sloth which is the devils cushion, whereby he omits holy exercises, whereby
he burdens his soul with intemperance, covetousness and such like Vices.

There are three degrees of our wrestling against lusts; to wit, against
suggestion, delight, and assent.

To understand these degrees, that of James helps, c. 1. 14, etc. Every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed; then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when it is finished, brings
forth death. We must then first resist suggestions and thoughts, which are
either ascending from the fuel of concupiscence, or descending, being
suggested elsewhere: the first are not without sin, the latter are not
sins, being cast in by Satan, if so be we let them pass, and entertain them
not. We cannot avoid the first degree; let us shun the second, lest we come to
cherish evil thoughts with delight: but we must chiefly beware of the third
degree, that we give not our assent; for the more we obey the sin of
concupiscence, the more it increases. Which that we may more and more avoid,
we beseech God the Father, in his Son, through the Holy Ghost: to which one
God in Trinity, be praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE. Of the Principal Matters and Words.
ADam and Eves fall, 58 Adam in his fall not a private person 61 Adjuration,
what, and how we are to obey it, 281 Adjuration of Devils ibid. Adoration of
idols, of the host, of the Cross, of Relics, of holy Angels, and dead men,
270, etc. Adoration of Saints, 272, etc. Adultery what, the cause of divorce,
312 Affections how manifold, 336 Agnus Dei, idolatry, 272 Alms, 324 Angels,
when created, 39. what, 42. in what bodies they appeared, ibid. the head of
good Angels, their felicity, order and office, 50, 51. if their adoration be
lawful 272 The apostasy of evil Angels 52. their sin, ibid. their Prince, ibid.
their remaining qualities, 53 Anger 304 Antichrist, what and who, 185 his
ruin, how a sign of the last judgment, 186, etc. Appetite ordered or
disordered 336 Arc of the Covenant 83 Assurance, vide Salvation Astorgie or
want of natural affection 300 Atheism 250 Avarice vide Covetousnes.
Baptism what, 152. how it differs from the Lords Supper, 160. if to be
administered by a private man, 153. if in Baptism one or three sprinklings be
required, 154. if children are to be baptized, 155. how Baptism is necessary
156. if the Baptism of Christ, and John be the same, ibid. Bargains how to be
made, 320 Beatitude, its degrees, 240 Beneficence, 324 Benevolence, 300
Boldness vide Fortitude. Foolish Bragging, 332 Bread in the Eucharist, what
157, etc. Busy bodies, 301
CAlling how manifold 133 Calling common to elect and reprobate, 134 Calling
proper to the elect. 192. how it differs from the common, 197 Calumnies, 329.
impatience in bearing Calumnies, 333 Censuring 332 Charity toward God, 252.
toward our neighbor, 289 Chastity, 309. how preserved, 307 Christ eternal
God, 19, 20, etc. his incarnation, 90, 94. how the first born, 103. his
conception, 94. the union of two natures in Christ, 96. communication of
properties, 97. the excellency of Christ's humane nature, 99. if equal to the
divine nature, 130. his adoration, 99. his knowledge how manifold, ibid. his
perfections what, 101. his generation twofold, 102. his nativity, 101. fruit
thereof, 104. his exinanition, 108. Christ's office in his humiliation, ib. and
124. and in his exaltation, 130. his office of mediatorship, 104. in what
nature he was mediator, 105. how manifold, 106. our mediator, ib. works of
mediation, 94. his active and passive obedience 109. the necessity of both, ib.
and 120. his active how shadowed, 123. his passive how the cause of life
eternal, 122 his passion, 110. each part thereof satisfactory, ib. how
attributed to Christ, and how manifold, 115. if he despaired on the cross, 111.
his death what, 112. if he died for all, 119. his sepulture, 113, 114, etc. his
three days detention in the grave, 113. his descent to hell, 114. his
intercession, 124. his exaltation, 125. his resurrection, 127, etc. what body
he had after his resurrection, 126, 127. his ascension, with its fruits, 127.
etc. whether yet on earth, 129. how present in the Supper, 143, 160. his return
or second coming, and its signs, 220, etc. Christ's kingdom how to be delivered
up to the Father, 131. Christ's justice, vide I. works, vide W. Church what,
162. her form and head, 163. how one, holy, catholic, 164, 165. her marks or
notes, 166. if she can err, ibid. her administration, 158, 170. her office
concerning controversies of Religion, 175. false Church what, and what sorts
183, 184. Church goods. 172 Clemency, 304 Complaints in affliction, 254
Concupiscence original, 335 actual, 336. to beresisted, 339 Confession of the
truth, 276, 282 Confidence for the form of faith, 200. for the effect of faith
and good works, 251 idolatrous confidence, ibid. Conscience, 248 Consecration
true and superstitious, 276, 277 Constancy, 248 Contempt of superiors, 297
Contentation, v. self-sufficiency Covenant of works, and the seals thereof, 55
Covenant of grace, 136, etc. how the new and old differ, 138. the seals of
both, 146 Covetousness, 325 Councels how to be convened, 180. Councels
Papistical, 243 Courtesy, 331. Craft, 247 Creation, 39. Cruelty, 291, 305
Curiosity, 328
Damnation, if the end of reprobatio^, 37. the pains and state of the damned,
70 Death of man fourfold, 69 Decalogue its parts and rules of interpreting it,
75 Deceit when lawful, 306 Gods decree what, 28. its causes, objects, if one or
many, 31 Denial of the truth, 282 Desperation, 251 etc. Destruction of the
world, 234 Diffidence or distrust in God, 251. Diligence, 301 Disobedience to
superiors, 299 Dissembling, when lawful, 247 when unlawful, 282 The Praecognita
of Divinity, I If malicious desertio^ may cause divorce, 317
Double-mindednesse, 329 Doubtings of Gods goodness and power, 250, 251
Drunkenness, 308
ELection, for calling to an office, 133. for spiritual calling, 192. for Gods
decree, what it is, 31. its causes and marks, ib. the Elect if they may become
reprobate, 216 Envy, 292. Of two Evils what is to be chosen, 247
FAith, for a part of Gods worship, 250. for constancy in words and deeds,
329. of miracles temporary, historical, 198, Saving faith what, ibid. and
whence, 199 its quality and degrees, ib. how it justifies, 204 implicit faith
what, 200 presumption of faith, 250 Fall of Adam, 59 Fasting what, 262. and how
to be kept, 263 Fear of God, 252. servile and filial fear, ibid. Feasts, 85.
Flattery, 328 Folly, 246. Fortitude, 305 Free Will, 57, 62 Friendship true and
counterfeit, 294. Frugality, v. Parsimony.
Gentleness, 331 our Glorification, 239 God his names, essence, and
properties, 12, 13, 14 Gospel what, and how it differs from the Law, 87
Gratitude toward God, 253 toward our superiors, 299 Gravity, 330
Happiness, v. Beatitude. Hardening, v. Induration Hatred of God, 252 Hatred of
our neighbor; 290 Hell where, 71. Heretic who, 184. Honesty, 310. Hope, 251
Humanity, 291. Hypocrisy, 248
Idleness, 326 Idolatry what, and how manifold, 266, 268 An idol what, how it
differs from an image or picture, 266 Images of Christ, and of the Saints,
idols, 268. also the painting of the Trinity, 269 vid. Worship. Image of God
what, 41. of what gifts it consists, 56 what of it remains since the fall, 64
Impatience, 254 Impatience of correction, 299 Imprecations, 281 Imprudence, 247
Inconstancy, 249 Indulgence too much, 304 Induration, how ascribed to God, 49,
253 Industry, 325 Infants baptism and faith, 155 Infidelity, 250 Ingratitude
toward God, 253 toward our superiors, 300 Inhumanity, 291 Injuries how
lawfully repelled, 302 Insensibility, 308 Integrity, 248 Intemperance, 308
Intercessors of the Papists, 124 Christ's intercession, vid. C. Irreverence to
superiors, 297 Last Judgment, with its circumstances and signs, 230 Justice
how used in Scripture, 210 Christ's justice, 119. how manifold, 120 Justice
toward our neighbor what, and how manifold, 295 320. Justice commutative how
to be exercised, 295 300, 320. of superiors to inferiors, 300. Vindicative
justice, 305 To justify, in Script. what, 202 The causes and parts of
Justification, ibid. and 203 The Keys and power thereof what, 176, etc. how it
differs from the power of the Magistrate, 179 Knowledge of God, 250
Labor before the fall, 58 Law what, 72. why renewed since the fall, 74 if it
be corrected by Christ, ibid. how it differs from the Gospel, 87. ceremonial,
78 political, 86, etc. Levites office, 80 Liberality, 324 Liberty essential to
the will, 45 Christian liberty, 218 Liberty of speech, 332 Life eternal, 238
First Light, 40 Limbus Patrum, and of infants, 72 Lots, 282 Love ordered and
disordered, 336, 337 Evil Lusts, 335 Luxury in food, 308 Lying, if any be
lawful, 327
MAgistrate how to be obeyed, 180 Magistrates nursing fathers to the Church,
179 Magnificence, 324 Malevolence, 292 Man's creation, 41. his foursold estate,
ibid. Man what, 42 how immortal before his fall 58. what he is before his
calling, 193 Mary, Mother of God, remained a Virgin, 103 Marriage what, how,
and between whom it is to be contracted, how to be dissolved, 310, 311 Mass,
vid. Sacrifice. Mercy, 293 The conditions of Merit, 245 Merit of congruity and
condignity, 244 Mildness, 304 Ministers of the Church, 170 and their calling,
173. their duty to conceal secrets, 179 Our Misery how manifold, 58 Moderation,
305 Modesty, 310 Multiplicity of Gods, vide P. Murder, 303. Self-murder, ib.
Nazarites, 81
OAths what, and how manifold, 277, etc. of whom, and how to be performed, why
to be kept, ibid. and 279. being offered, their refusal, ibid. Obstinacy in
evil, 249 Opinion of wisdom, 246
PArsimony, 325 Patience, 254 Pawns, vide Pledges. Persidiousnesse, 330
Perjury, 280 Perseverance of the Saints, 214 Perseverance in sin, 253 Persons
of the Deity what, 18. their trinity and unity, 24, 25. how Person and
Subsistence differ, 18, 19. Person of Christ how considered, 90 Pledges to be
taken or restored, 323 Polythelsme or multiplicity of gods, 250 Prattling, 330
Self-praise, 332 Prayer what, 260. its parts, ib. its impulsive causes, ibid.
the Lords prayer a perfect form, ibid. for whom and against whom we must pray,
262 External gesture in prayer, ib. Predestination what, 32, 33 whether
absolute, ibid. the means of its execution, 34 Priests of the old Law, 80 The
Highpriests ornaments, ibid. Popish Priests, 118 Prescience and
Predetermination how different, 35 Profusion, 325 Promptitude in Gods service,
248 Propitiatory, 83 Providence of God eternal, 28. How it differs from Fate,
ibid. and 47. His actual Providence, 46. How it uses sin, 47 Prudence, 246
REdemptions necessity by the Law, Verity by the Gospel, 72. Redeemer who, 95
Why God and Man, 92, 93 Regeneration diversely taken, 211 Rejoicing in evil, 293
True Religion what, 255. It Is Antiquity, 256. If to be defended by Arms, 257.
The word Religion diversely, taken, 255. Reformation of Religion, 257. If the
Reformers were lawfully called, 174, etc. Relics, vide Idols and Worship.
Repentance, 253 Good Report, 333 Reprobation and its causes, 36 Resurrection of
the dead, 227. Desire of Revenge, 304 Reverence to Superiors, 297 Rusticity,
331
Sabbath its Sanctification, 284. It Is Profanation, 287 Sacraments before the
fall ^5. Sacraments of the New Testament clearer then of the Old, 147, etc. Five
Popish Sacraments, 149. Sacramental phrases, 144, etc. Sacraments how differing
from the Word, 146, etc. Sacraments of the Old and New Testament their
difference, 148. Union of the sign and thing in Sacraments, 142. Signs in the
Sacraments of four sorts, 143 Sacrifices of the Old Testament, what and how
many, 83, etc. The Mass contrary to Christ's Sacrifice, 118, 160, etc.
Assurance of Salvation, 215, 216 Sanctification what, 211. The causes of
Sanctification, 212 Sanctification of Gods name 275, 276 Scripture or Word of
God unwritten and written, 3. Scriptures Divinity, 4. It Is Authority, 5. It Is
perfection, 8. Translation, 9. Meaning and sense, 9, 10 Scurrility, 331 Cornal
security, 252 Silence, 330 Sedulity vide Diligence. Simplicity fained, ibid.
Sin what, whence, how manifold, 58, 59. First Sin, 60. Sin original, 62. Sin
actual, 67. Sin against the Holy Ghost, 68 Sincerity, 328 Sloth, 301 Sobriety,
308 Soul of man its original, 42 its immortality and faculties, 45 Stars their
creation and use, 41 Spiritual Stupidity, 275 Self-sufficiciencie, 324
Superstition, 274 the Lords Supper, 157. Its difference from Baptism, 160 the
Cup to be given to the people, 158. Tropes in the words of the holy Supper,
145, 159.
THe Tabernacle and its parts, 81, etc. Temperance, 307 Testament old and new,
vide Covenant. Theft what and how manifold, 319, 320 Holy times, 84, 85, etc.
Tree of Knowledge what, 56 Truth, 327 Tyranny, 301
VIgilancie, 309 Watchings superstitious, ibid. Unmercifulness, 293 Voracity,
308 A Vow what, and how manifold, 264 Usury lawful and unlawful, 322, 323 War
how lawful, 306 Watching, vid. Vigilancie. Wisdom, 246 False witness, 327,
etc. Word of God, vid. Scripture. Works of God how manifold, 26, 27 Good works
what, 241. if they justify, 209, if performed by the irregenerate, 64. 244.
how necessary to salvation, 245. Christ's works of mediation, 93, etc. 104.
Works of supererogation, 242, 243. the World its end, 234 the true Worship of
God, 258 ready Worship, 248 Worship of idols, 270 Adoration of the Host, 271
Worshipping of Relics, 272 vide Idolatry. Will Worship, 265,
ZEal for the glory of God 275
THE ANATOMY OF THE BODY OF DIVINITY.
DIVINITY speaks of GOD,
As he is to be known In himself, in regard of his Essence, by His Names.
Properties, Incommunicable; such are his Simplicity. Infinity.
Communicable, in analogical effects; such are his Life. Will. Power.


Of the three Persons, Differing in Order. Properties. Manner of operation.
Agreeing In the same e Essence. In the same Equality. In the same Union or
Cohabitation.


In their works, which are First, Essential. Personal.
Secondly, Inward, Outward, Immanent: see B. Transient: see B.


As he is to be worshipped: see A.
B. Immanent: His Decree Of all things, called His eternal Providence.
Of reasonable creatures Angels. Men.
called Predestination, consisting of Election. Reprobation.

Transient: The Creation in six days. Actual Providence. General, by which all
things are governed; Good, by effecting of them. Evil, by Permitting.
Determining. Directing.

Special, governing Angels God. Evil.
Man in the state Partly Of Innocence; where The Covenant of Works.
Sacraments: the Tree of Life, of Knowledge of God and Evil.



Of Misery, which is of offense, or sin. The first derived from the first
Original Actual, of Infirmity. Malice.


Of Punishment, which is either Temporal or Eternal.
Partly, see C.



C. Partly Of Grace in Redemption, the necessity of which is known by the Law.
Moral, Ceremonial, Politic.
The truth by the Gospel, concerning Christ's Person, which from eternity the
Son of God, In time, Incarnate by his Conception. in the power of the Holy
Ghost, of the blood of the Virgin.
By his Nativity.
By his Office, Prophetical, Sacerdotal, Regal.
By his State of Humiliation, Exaltation.

In Vocation to the Redeemer, which is common to Elect and Reprobate, to the
outward communion of the Covenant or Testament of Grace; which in substance
from the first preaching in Paradise is the same. In Administration different,
to wit, the old, more obscure. Offered by the doctrine of Prophets. Sealed
Ordinarily by Sacrifices, Circumcision, Passe-over.
Extraordinarily in diverse types.
The new more manifest; See D.
To the communion of the Church; See E.
Proper to the Elect; See F.
Of Glory See G.
D. The New more manifest Offered by the doctrine of Christ, Sealed by the
Sacrament. Of Baptism, The Supper.

E. The communion of the Church considered in it self, in respect Of Nature,
according to that part which is, Militant, Triumphant.
The marks, to wit, the pure Preaching of the Word, and administration of the
Sacraments Of Administration, Ordinary; Public, Ecclesiastical, Civil.

Private.
Extraordinary.
Oppositely, in respect of enemies, Manifest, Heathens, Jews, Mahumetans.
Secret. False Christians, Antichristians; of which
Some are common; Heretics, One so called by way of excellency.
F. Proper to the Elect, the fruits, whereof are Saving Faith, The effects of
Faith, Partly, Justification by which a. Sins are pardoned. b. Righteousness is
imputed.
For the imputation of Christ's a. Passion, b. Obedience.
Sanctification by which, g. Sin is in part abolished, d. New righteousness
infused.
By the power of Christ and of his g. Death, d. Resurrection.

Partly Perseverance in the grace of God. Christian Liberty.

G. Of Glory which shall begin in the day of Judgment, the Antecedents of
which shall be Christ coming, the Resurrection of the dead. The concomitants,
A most glorious proceeding toward the wicked, In their Condemnation, In their
imprisonment in Hell.
Toward the Godly, In their Absolution, In their Translation to Heaven.
The consequents, The Consummation of the Word, Life eternal.

A. As he is to be worshipped, which worship contains these, General Virtues Of
the Understanding, Wisdom, Prudence,
Of the Will. Sincerity, Promptitude, Constancy.

Special belonging to the Worship of God. Immediate, according to the 1. Table,
and that, only Internal, according to the first Command, in which is enjoined
The knowledge of God, Religious affection toward him, Faith, Confidence, Hope,
Charity, Fear, Repentance, Gratitude, Patience.
External joined with Internal: The Parts whereof, out of the 2. Command, the
solemn rite of worshipping God, The parts whereof are, a right handling of the
Word, the Sacraments.
Prayer,
Helps, Fasting, Vows.
The third Precept, See H. The time. See I.
Mediate. See K.

H. In the third Precept, the sanctifying of Gods name, which is In affection,
or zeal for Gods glory. In effect. By Words, using Gods name, in Consecration,
Oaths, Lots.
in Confession.
By Deeds, in holiness of life.
I. Time; the Sabbath, which by the 4. Command is sanctified in forsaking our
own works. In doing what God enjoins: such are
Religious Worship. Works of Charity.

K. Mediate, according to the 2. Table, which contains. these general virtues;
such are, Charity, Toward our Selves, Toward our Neighbor, which being
considered, absolutely, is; Humanity, Benevolence, Mercy.
Reciprocally is, Brotherly love, Friendship.

Justice, Distributive, Commutative,

Special. L. Special pertaining to the parts of the Mediate Worship, concerning
the duty of Superiors and Inferiors. For there is required by the V. Command
From Inferiors, Reverence, Obedience, Thankfulness.
From Superiors, Good will, Righteousness, Diligence.


Of each one toward another in goods, Inward Life; for preserving of which in
our selves and neighbor, by the sixth Command are required virtues having
relation to us, Innocence, Mildness, Clemency, Gentleness.
To others, Vindicative Justice, Fortitude.
Modesty; for preserving of which by the VII. command are required, those
means, which are enjoined to all:
Temperance consisting in Sobriety, Chastity.
Also Shamefastness, Honesty.
To some Marriage.
Outward. See M.
To the highest degree. See N.
M. Outward Abilities: hence by the 8. Command Are those virtues which relate
To our neighbors; Justice in Selling and buying. Using. Keeping.
Beneficence, which in Things Greater, Magnificence; Lesser, Liberality.
Persons Poor, Alms. Strangers, Hospitality.


To our selves Contentment. Parsimony. Laboriousnesse.


Fame, to which by the 9. Command belong those virtues which relate To our
neighbor, Veracity. Candidnesse.
to which are subservient Fidelity. Silence. Gravity. Gentleness. Civility.
Free speech.

To our selves, Modest self-praise. An unblameable life.

N. To the highest degree, by the X. Command, In ordering Our natural
appetites, of Meat, Drink, etc. Our affections, of Love, Hatred, Joy, etc.
Combat against concupiscence*

FINIS.

