BEATEN OIL FOR THE LAMPS OF THE SANCTVARIE; OR The great Controversy
concerning Set Prayers and our Liturgy, examined in an Epistle to a private
friend: with an Appendix that answers the Parallel, and the most material
objections of others against it. Unto which are added some useful observations
touching Christian Liberty, and things indifferent.

1 THESE 5.21. Prove all things [but] hold sast that which is good.

IAM. 4.3. Ye ask and have not, because ye ask amiss.

MAT. 6.9. After this manner therefore pray ye.

Requirit eliam aedificatio and ordo Ecclesie, ut ad preces publicas, cert is
non tantum diebus, sed and horis fideles conveniant, in quibus etiam nec
illicitum, nec inutile est, certam precum ordinararium for mulam usurpare, modo
fiat absque superslitione.

Disputat. Theol. Festi Hom. Eccles. Lugdun pastor. adversus pontificios,
Disput. 68. number. 5. Peter Martyr loc com clas. 3 c. 5. sect 6. Cavenda etiam
infirmorum scandels, quibus it a accommodare te d^bes, ut sacilius a sua
infirmitate ad meliorem statum traducantur. Quod si tua servitute abuti
voluerint, ad suam infirmitatem defendendam, ne redigaris sub eorum potestatem:
tua utere liberate,

LONDON, Printed by I.D. for I.W. and are to be sold by William Beesley in
Charles street in Coven garden near the Peates. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord PAGET, Baron of Beau-desert.
Right Honorable and my very gracious Lord,
AMongst the rest of troublesome Petitioners, I most humbly address my suite
unto your Lordship, hoping to find a protection, in your Justice for my Cause,
in your Goodness for my self. Of all those grievances that have opened the
mouths, and sharpened the pens of Complainants, none can be greater then to
have our prayers turned into sin. And yet this is done in effect, and by those
too, that would needs seem Pillars of the Church. Their dark perspective
cannot survey hearts, and yet men's devotions are doomed by their act of
Reprobation. It Is the common form is quarreled at, and through the paper sides
of that, they wound the chief (because public) practice of your piety.
Something I have written formerly upon this argument, that proved not
altogether unsuccessefull; What discharged it self then, under a private
superscription, now requires a public Dedication, and in that imploreth
Patronage: and whiles your Lordship holds up a shield before it, you do but the
right of self defense to your own conscience; you do but vindicate the
reputation (and how dear should that be to you!) of your own reasonable
service of God. This advantage I shall procure from your name, (which is not
more honorable in the Nobleness of title, then of desert) that I shall have
the credit to be read, and to be believed. For, as it is known you will not
have a hand, so it may be well presumed, that you would not willingly have
your name in a cause that carries an appearance of injustice.

The Lord preserve you to his glory, and the good of Church and Kingdom, and
bless you with the blessings of this life, and that which is to come; as it
becomes him to pray, who is

Your Lordships most humble servant, and Chaplain. L. Wemocke.

To the Reader.
REader, before thou proceedest any further, let me salute thee at the door;
and acquaint thee with two things for thy satisfaction. The first concerns the
matter; the second concerns the publication of this discourse.

There are but two sorts of evils in the world, the one of sin; and the other
of punishment, and both these are fastened upon our Liturgy. Some fly from it,
that can wink (I am sure) at greater appearances of evil; In their opinion it
is sinful to communicate in the use of it. Others (that would seem to be of
a milder temper) would have this used rather as a rod of Discipline then as a
rule of devotion. If any (though it please God to deny this supernatural gift
to him) prone insufficient to discharge the duty of prayer in a conceived way;
they Smect. page 14.
would have it imposed on him as a punishment, to use set forms and no other.
A strange thing that this wholesome provision made for the advancement of Gods
glory and the benefit of the people in their Regular service of God, should be
turned into a Schedule of penance for the shame of the Minister. By this we
may perceive what disesteeme they have of a set form of Prayer; But whither
it be guilty of so high a provocation, the ensuing discourse will (as I
suppose) determine. My confidence is not so transcendent, as theirs, that
pretend a commandment of the Lord, for their assertions: 1 Cor. 7.25.
Yet I give my judgment as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord [hitherto]
to be faithful. Sure I am, our Liturgy has passed the muster often, and
marched through a field of untainted blood, under the conduct of many glorious
Martyrs: And it is pity goodness should be ever the worse reputed for being of
a diffusiue nature; and yet we see Manna, of a heavenly descent, and at first
accordingly entertained, with the sociable affections of delight and
admiration, even this, when it was grown common (notwithstanding ministered by
the hands of Angels) became loathsome; Howbeit the change was not in the bread,
but in them that gathered it. We see Gods Attributes are never the less
glorious, because communicable. But our comfort is (and yet it should be our
sorrow also) that some of those which except against our Liturgy, are not very
well affected, to that prayer of our Lords own making. It were to gather grapes
of thorns, to expect their liking unto any that are not wound up with their
own key, and made tunable to their humor. Whole Squadrons of Quaeres are set
in battle array against us; but I hope those shall never so much triumph over
reason, as to lead the public forms of our devotion captive. If every
trivial claim were a good plea, against those that are settled in possession,
we should then have no petitions but for warrants of ejection. It Is true a
fardle of grievances have of late been extracted out of the book of common
prayer; but it is with as much faith, and as good success, as the Philosophers
stone is by the Chemists, from the Sun, the Moon, and Mercury. Yet this blaze
(kindled of Stubble not worth the gathering up to the scandal of our Religion)
has warmed and strengthened the hands of our adversaries, that were before
enfeebled, and by the light hereof, they see into the distempers of men's
bosoms to their advantage.

Two days are not yet expired, since I heard a Papist vpbraid the folly and
injustice of one of this way, that they did inflict punishments upon the
Catholics with severity for not frequenting that Service of the Church, which
themselves disgusted. Those passages at which offense is taken, are not so
considerable, that we should need to fire the beacon upon their discovery, as
if a whole army of Church-trained soldiers were to be raised to encounter them
(though I confess, in other respects, this might be very useful.) The
honorable house of Peers has set a watch The Committee for Religion.
of so many flaming eyes piercing into every quarter, tha. it is scarce possible
any scruple should escape vnweighed. Whosoever stumbles at the stone of
scandal, may there find hands enough, both ready and of ability to remove
it. Me thinks this might be a super sedeas to all paper quarrels, that they
have the Sovereign horns of such a sacred Altar to repair unto for
Sanctuary, where all doubts may as well have a calm, as they shall have a just
trial. We do see the honorable Court has done the Dominicall letter
justice, for whereas it had worn black too long, (for the funeral of that
Sabbath, which was not dead but slept) now it is reinvested in a festival robe
of scarlet. And other things abused, if they find no redress here, will
appeal and cry to a higher throne for vengeance. That Liturgy which has been
sent of so many sacred messages to heaven, and so often had Audience with the
Almighty, does their errand daily, who are enenies to her employment, and will
be as ready to join with the word John. 12.48.
in their judgment hereafter, as it is now to cooperate in the work of their
Salvation. If we see some passionately religious, aginst this useful and holy
furniture, this wind (though it blows with an high gale) should not shake the
well settled. St Paul advises us, not to admit of Zeal, but upon trial and
distinction. Romans 10.2. Gal. 1.14. Gal 4.18.
That zeal of Gods house that eats up us is well qualified: Psalm. 69 9.
But that Zeal in us, which eats up Gods house is not commendable. Zeal, is
like fire, a good servant but a bad Master, even in matters that concern Gods
worship. John 16.2.
When the blind zeal of Saul flamed highest, it burnt up the Church of God;
Act. 9.1. Phil. 3.6.
It was well observed by a most learned man of our Church, that Hooker Eccles.
Polit. l. 5.. 3.
zeal except it be ordered aright, when it bends it self unto conflict with
things either in deed, or but imagined to be opposite unto Religion, uses the
razor many times with such eagerness, that the very life of Religion it self
is thereby hazarded, through hatred of tares, the corn in the field of God is
plucked up. And with this agrees that of another worthy writer in a work set
forth lately amongst us: Mr. Leyes Sunday a St bath in the Preface.
There is, says he, a sinister zeal in some against superstition, which
proves many times prejudicial to the practice of Religion. For (as our late
learned Sovereign has observed) under color of weeding out superstition, it
will pluck up by the roots many plants of paradise K. James his Cign. cant p.
8.
If any man has gone about to repair Rome amongst us, this hand (that knows
no artillery more offensive then the quill) is as ready as any other to cast
the first stone at him. But as I must curse him that brings one stick to
re-edifie the Popish Jericho: Joshua 6.16.
so (upon the instigation of the same conscience.) Genesis 11.7.
I shall endeavor to confound their language that would build up Babell. We
shall find the common maxim true in this case, it is no thriving way to frame
new buildings. And there is no probability of good success, where not so much
as the Model is agreed upon. Our Ancestors, thought it good husbandry to
reform and repair, and yet (God be thanked) we that succeed have no great
cause to complain against them for delapidations. Though I am confident, there
are more bloodshotten, then tender eyes that complain amongst us, I could wish
the Church were purged from all the dust that is offensive. But I am jealous a
new Broom let who will make it) will not sweep so clean here, as is imagined,
Besides, why should any man dream of a new way to prevent offenses when God
himself has revealed a necessity of their occurring? Mat. 18.1.
Shall we dis-beleeue Gods word? Or can we disappoint his purpose? Let us (as
far as we can) improve those divine directions that are authenticke, and
leave the success to the Almighty. They are decived that think to make the
Church on Earth, Heb. 11.10.
triumphant. We must remove to that city, whose maker and builder is God.
before we find perfection: and when no blocks; obstruct our way, to remove
strawes is but an impediment to our progression. God preserve my eyes clear
from beams, and I shall be content to dispense with atoms, that are
unavoidable in this state of imperfection.

In the next place let me tell thee Reader that this discourse was never
designed to face posts and doors but to settle souls and consciences. It was
at first intended for the satisfaction of a private friend, but is now made
public for the view and I hope, for the use of many: And I Will assure thee, it
had not come forth in Print, had not the Author been pressed before it. His
modesty was not of proof to resist, or at lest not of ability to prevail
against that importunity that assaulted him; therefore look upon it, but as
upon a poor spoil that strength has forced from weakness. Perhaps thou will
not find every knot untied here: The Author knew that has been performed by
sundry hands of more skillful dexterity. Many such pieces have bin discharged
already to the battering down of the strongest Holds erected by our
adversaries, and it is a work may require a volume which cannot be comprised in
a short Epistle.

This relates chiefly to such scruples as as were suggested and objected in a
private conference, and though it may seem of no small value, yet considering
the coin that pass for current on the other side, I find it may be put into
the balance with them, without allowance: and yet because the law affords that
liberty, it might be construed too much presumption, in me to neglect it.

Farewell.
A PRIVATE EPISTLE to a Friend.
SIR,
AS you have been accounted a burning and a shining light amongst us, so I
desire you would still justify that opinion, by continuing your flaming and
devout appearance in the Candlestick. For (not to flatter you which the
sincerity of my love forbids) I assure you, many begin to think you are no
star, but a Comet that can blaze no longer, because they see you are not fixed.
And I must tell you this wandering in mists and darkness will give just cause to
the wise observer to suspect you for an Ignis fatuus. You were lighted up for
the church, and will you put your self under the bed-straw.

I wonder of how many Articles your creed consists. If you retain the
ancient Twelve, they are a Jury will condemn you. But surely you have of late
abridged your faith, and omitted the Communion of Saints, or else you profess
to believe more then you can find in your heart to practice. If your heart and
tongue confess this branch of faith why do your works deny it? He is not well
affected to the inward communion, that separates from the outward, when it may
be held with a safe conscience. Open and unanimous profession has been the
holy ostentation of Gods true Worshipers.

I am sure you will not embrace Rome, for you know too well that were to seek
fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness, whether will you go? you will
not communicate with us, and yet you are afraid to renounce us. Me thinks you
multiply their number, whose humor will neither let them go to Church, nor be
at home; For you are gone out from us, and yet you will be of us. Revel. 12.
Had the Dragon stirred up persecution, and driven your mother into the
wilderness, or into woods, when she was in travel with you, you might have
plucked some figge-leaves there to excuse your invisibility. If you be a member
of our Church as you profess your self; why must you be concealed? The
secrecy and sheltring of parts, 1 Cor. 12.23
is (in Saint Paul's opinion) an argument of their uncomeliness, as well as a
sign of modesty.

Do not think you may be betrothed to Christ in a wedding garment of your
own fashioning. Clandestine contracts are not fit for Christ's Spouse, John
18.20.
and therefore 'twas long ere the Church did admit of private Baptism, and
still private Eucharists are rejected, where public ones may be administered,
by the Orthodoxall Churches. Aditus missis privatis est patefactus quae
excommunicationem quandam magis referrent quam communitatem illan^ a Domino
institutam. Calvin. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 18. 7.
A devout soul may discourse with Christ, and Christ may make love to her in
private, but when he concludes the match he will have the contract published,
and his wedding celebrated with a solemn visibility.

But I perceive where the shoe pinches you; It Is our set Liturgy that is
offensive because you think it bereaves you of your Christian liberty. Is it
so? I am sorry that threadbare cloak worn for color sake is so much in
fashion. Had the primitive Christians, that lived under the iron Age of
persecution, had they had such forms prescribed them, under a command of exact
obedience, doubtless they would not have complained against them as pressures
upon their liberty, but have construed them as happy licenses for the exercise
of their Religion. They would have kissed those hands of Authority, that had thus
restrained them, and worn such chains about their necks with a cherefull
fredome. I would we had as much of their Zeal, as they wanted of this our
happy Liberty.

Your quarrel to set prayers and to our liturgy in particular, is but the same
which St. Peter had to the sheet which was let down from heaven to him, viz.
because you think it brings you things common and unclean. I wish this
discourse may be as a voice from heaven to awaken you out of that fond
distemper, that you may arise, and eat. If you do not, yet I am persuaded our
devotions will be received up, in this vessel into heaven.

I know you have not so resigned up your reason to this opinion, but still you
have reserved to your self a power to desert it, when you see it overthrown
upon fair grounds. If not, you will manifest by effect, that only for an
opinion of liberty, you have altogether quitted the freedom of your judgment.

Halt no longer between two opinions, be something either fish or flesh; and
live wholly on the land, or in the water. Hazard not your self alone in that
new found way, you treavell in. Either return to us, or make me your Proselite
to bear you company. I Will assure you, I am loath to leave you, though you make
a light matter of it, to forsake a Church. I am contented to go along, if you
can assure me, I shall have Gods speed with me. But if you cannot pass that
assurance to another, I doubt you have not obtaind it fully for your self; and
if it be so; I should think it pains well bestowed, if I could make my self
an instrument of your diversion. For which purpose I have here sent you
certain considerations, that may happily prove a Remora to your ship, and
cause you to sound a retreat, and return to your former station.

The Considerations are these.
I come into no house, but I meet with a Manuell of devotions, a poesy of
godly prayers, Helps to devotion and the like. And I conceive this is like a
Passeover-marke, to secure the family from the destroying Angel. Did not the
Saints that bound up these bundles of Hysop dipped in the blood of the Lamb, to
besprinkle our souls, did they not do well in it? Who doubts it? And if it
were well done their forms were lawful and useful to us. I wonder any man
can shelter himself from such a cloud of witnesses? Did they compile these for
the use of themselves or others all is one the argument will hold strong for a
stinted form of prayer.

But we have a more sure word of prophecy to confirm us, might Aaron or his
sons bless the people as their own fancy led them? they might not, there is a
form extant of Gods own prescription, and a strict charge laid upon them to
observe it, Numb. 6.22. etc. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, [ther's the
Author,] Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, saying, on this wise ye shall
bless the children of Israel, saying unto them, [then comes the form) The
Lord bless thee and keep thee: The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace.

When thou come to the house of God look to thy foot says Solomon Eccles.
5.1. 2. he drives at our expressions as well as our affections: so he unriddles
himself in the words following, Be not rash with thy mouth etc. An I am sure
they are those upon which our souls do travel into the hearts of ot ers. The
Prophet bid the people take words with hem, but they may not be their own
choosers, Turn unto the Lord and say thus unto him etc. Hosea. 14.2.

If we take the wings of our thoughts and ascend to the Church Triumphant we
shall find that those burning lamps of zeal, the blessed Angels of God, never
ring those changes in their devotions. They have a perfect knowledge and large
hearts to express their thankfulness to their maker, Exodus 15.1.
and yet they think it no disparagement to sing a song of Moses setting, while
he lived this in valley of tears, Revel. 15.3. In the margin of Bibles.


That song spoken of ( Revel. 5.9.) is not styled new in respect of the matter
or composition, but because the joy of the Choristers is uncessant in it is
satiety. How often do those flaming Seraphins repeat their Allelujahs and yet
not guilty of a vain Tautologie. Revel. 19.
Why has the spirit of God endited so many Psalms of praise and petition? not
so much to be rules of faith as forms of devotion, and so David and his
followers ever used them.

But to produce evidence beyond exception, our Savior himself prescribed a
form that was always had in veneration, else the Canker-fret of superstition
could never have eaten so deep into it.

Let not us run so far from the folly of the Church of Rome, till we be
driven into the other extreme by Antiparistasis. J know there is a safe medium
betwixt the pinnacle of the Temple, and headlong precipitancy: and it is Satan
tempts and carries men from one of these extremes to the other, while the
golden mean is rarely pitched upon. Let not Our Father be excommunicate
because others have played the Harlots with Pater Noster. This is a sum and
rule to teach us to compile our devout thoughts into form and method: and the
holy scriptures are not without presidents to this purpose. A form is the
first furniture that Timothy must provide for the house of 1 Timothy 2.1. I
exhort, ['tis not that you pray for all but] that first of all prayers be made
for all men, they must be made i.e. set prayers.
God.

Saint Paul prayed thrice against one infirmity, and if we pray for the same
thing, why may we not use the same words? Do we pray to redress our language
or our wants? or is God taken with the variety of our expressions? Surely
Christ would then have used it in his Agony. He prayed earnestly, and yet said
the same words Mat. 26.44.
Why should the holy Ghost tell us this, if it were not for our instruction?
Let a man use the oldest forms of prayer extant (if no prejudice lie against
his person, and his intentions be undiscovered in this trial) and you will
find they sound as well in your ears, and I am persuaded in Gods to, as those
extemporary ones, which pretend the prerogative of a free Spirit.

You do but put your self into more private Chains, while you seek to
obtain your liberty. Let a man pour out his soul with never so much
freedom, vet his words to others are a stinted form, and set limits to his
Competitioners that assist him.

Do you think that God sheds and infuseth the Spirit of supplication into all
his Saints in that measure that he did the gift of prophecy into the Apostles?
That Is a privilege proper to his extraordinary ministers, whom he furnished
with immediate and infallible inspiration. The ministers of the Church that
wait in Ordinary, have no gifts conferred upon them, that exempt them from
means, meditation, and industry, much less can others of the Saints pretend
to such an absolute assistance.

It Is confessed that a Habit of prayer may be acquired by use and exercise, and
this is the holy usury, by which we make a gain of grace infused. But then I
must tell you this very Habit is an Idea, an internal model, or platform of
prayer, if not, it must needs be Mother of a disorderly and deformed
offspring. So that this very habitual prayer has a formal Romans 2.20. Which
have the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law.
impression in the soul, as well as that other has in paper, and hereupon the
mind (as it is often styled in Scripture Apoc. 20.12
) is in stead of a book to him that prays; And therefore thus much must be
granted, that if a blind man officiates according to a set Liturgy, he prays
with as much freedom of Spirit, as he that vtters nothing but the dictates of
his bosom.

We busy our thoughts to sum up and suggest our wants before we address our
selves to our devotion, and why not our words also? without the first we know
not what to ask, and so are apt to run beyond our line of sobriety, with the
Sons of Zebedee, Mat. 20.22. without the latter we know not how to ask, and so
stand upon equal terms of exigence with the Disciples when they besought
Christ to prescribe a form for them, Luke 11.1.

It Is the work of the spirit to give the affection, rather then the utterance
of prayer, we have tongues of our own, we want but a gracious affection, to
employ them. Grace does not destroy, nor exempt, but perfects nature. God
indeed must open his prophets lips before his mouth can show forth his praise,
because he gives both authority and ability to his ministers. But I do not
remember he is any where said to give the tongue, though he be said to give
the Spirit of supplication. And this Spirit helps the infirmities of our hearts
rather then those of our language.

The Messengers of God are assisted by the Spirit as well in preaching as in
prayer, and yet we see their best Sermons are set, or written ones. God will
have his Prophet eat the Roll, before he utters it. Ezekiel. 3.1. And 'twas no
blemish to Romans 8. That of Psalm. 45.1. my tongue is the pen, etc. and Luke
12.12. and St Paul his door of utterance were gifts extraordinary.
St. John that he was commanded to eat the book before he prophesied, Apoc.
10.10. If the Church by the Spirit of God assisting it, put a Liturgy into our
mouths, why can we not digest it.

Is it a form you stick at? The words of every minister you join with do
confine you. Is it the intention of the minister you call for (which you
suspect is wanting in a familiar form?) that is Popery. Gods promise has
entaild his grace upon his ordinance, not tied it to the qualification of the
instrument. Is it the repetition of the same prayer that is offensive? Christ
said the same words thrice in prayer almost without intermission. And if you
will read a Chapter, or hear the doctrine of salvation, read familiarly to
increase your faith, why will you not make your self familiar with a form of
prayer to exercise your charity? especially considering the heart does her
work with more attention, when there is least employment for the
understanding, See Granods advise for meditation.
The soul should not be in travel with words, when she is conceived with
devotion.

Do you scruple at authority which commands it, as if that bereaved you of
your Christian liberty? Consider if your self have not had a singer in this
hand of Authority, and so are become a Lawgiver to your self. There is not a
member of the Kingdom, but is interpreted to consent to the Acts of the three
estates of Parliament, which have confirmed our Liurgie. Did you protest
against it or any for you, when it was a voting? If you will be like others of
the Saints of God, why should you except this chain.

The Gospel will admit of some compulsion, [ Luke. 4.23.] and nothing but
obedience can exempt you from it. Gal 5.23. Outward obligations do not violate
our inward freedom. Spiritualis libertas cum politica servitute optime stare
potest, Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 20.. 1.
The Law is not made for the righteous. There is freedom indeed in in Christ:
What no law therefore? no Commandment? Yes, but it is not grievo s, and
therefore can consist with liberty. There is a constraint of love as well as of
Authority [2 Cor. 5.14.] And yet you know that affection does not so arrest the
will, but bail is ever put in, that preserves the freedom of her working.

St. Paul says, Let all things be done to edification. Let all things be done
decently and in Necesse est ut in domo deiomnia ordine fiant cujus ordinis vna
quidem est vniversalis ratio ex verbo Dei petenda, sed non vna et eadem forma
quibusvis circumstanitis conveniens. Beza Confess. fidei. cap. 5.. 17.
order. These general rules bind you to every particular that the church
enjoyne when those ends he prescribes (and no other) are directly aimed at,
though the things so ordered be indifferent in their own nature, else why is
the Apostles charge so peremptory and imperative, let it be done, says he,
without contradiction, without scruple.

He is no obedient, Son of the Church, who contemnes that Motherly Authority,
wherewith Christ and his Apostles have invested her. And therefore the Apostle
who upon just grounds contended most sharply for his privileges obtained by
Christ, yet even he seems to chide and control this tempest that you have
raised, and to becalme that Sea, that grows too boisterous, to be confined
within those limits that are appointed for it. Has Christ made us free? then
we are free indeed, but let us not use our liberty, (says the Apostle) for an
occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5.13. Quae in altis libertas est, in alijs (...)
vocatur. Quintilian. Nam fi^^i potest, dum sector carnis libertatem utt^ cidam
in duram servitutem qua ventris g^^^ aut libidints, prauarumque effectionais
meipsum mancipium abjectissimum faciam. Pet. Mart loc. com clas. 3 Ca. 5.. 6.
et p^u lo post. Cavendi sunt in terim affectus, ne illis nos ipsos subijciamus.
Some have reckoned fornication amongst things indifferent, whom the Apostle
confutes 1 Cor. 6.13.
Much less for a cloak of maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2.16. Least by any means it
become a stumbling block to them that are weak. 1 Cor. 8 9. Here by the way,
give me leave to note thus much concerning Christian liberty, and weakness.
They were in those days things inconsistent, and in such opposition that they
did even mutually expel each other, but now they are become termini
convertibiles, and of so near a relation that this weakness, is made the
exegesis, or explication of that liberty. Those which were well acquainted
with the nature of this happy freedom, that knew from what thraldom Christ
had vindicated, and unto what glorious prerogatives he had restored them, those
were never scandalized Non enim offendentur si fortes fucrint. Pet Mart. loc
com. clos 3. c 5.. 6.
at the use or omission of any thing indifferent, they were not apt to take,
though they might unadvisedly stretch the line of their liberty (beyond that
which was expedient) and give offense to others, as it appears, 1 Cor. 8.7.9.
unto the end, and in other places. Romans 14. per totum.
This infirmity in those days proceeded from want of knowledge. (Ignorance I
confess) was the mother of that frail devotion. But now Christian liberty is
become the mother, and knowledge the very midwife to this weakness. And they
that would be the most knowing, think they cannot maintain the great Charter
of privileges, which Christ has left us, unless they pretend to be wheeled
with the Bias of a weak and tender conscience, we have a saying, that if a
horse knew his own strength, he would never be tamed: I am sure to make the
knowledge of our Christian liberty, Consequitur cum abuti christianae
libertatis bereficio, qui vel suis magistratibus vel prepositis suis, sponte
non paret vomino, Beza Epist. 24 ad pereg. Eccles in Angliae fratres. Pij autem
hominis est, cogitare sibi liberam in rebus externis potestatemideo esse
concessam quo sit ad omnia charitatis officia expeditior. Calvin. Instit. lib.
3.6.19.. 12.
a means to abuse it, is too much to resemble the horse and mule that have no
understanding, whose mouth must be held with bit and bridle. I confess, I
cannot think that the things which God has left indifferent to us, can
(though armed with man's Authority) shed a perpendicular influence into our
consciences, neither can I like to have them urged under an Anathema, as if
their omission were a demerit in Gods construction, that makes us liable to
damnation; yet I know the Church has a power (which is not to be contemned) to
appoint such things as tend to the outward decent and orderly frame of policy.

It Is the Apostles charge Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ
has made us free: but Christ has not purchased our immunitie from every
ordinance of man, they are still in force, and therefore We must submit for
the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. and if so in things civil, why not in things
appointed for the advancement of the Lords glory? No man doubts of the
Magistrates power to enjoyne a fast (except those by whom magistracy it self
is denied) and a fast is cultus divini adminiculum, an appendix, yea an
assistance to Gods worship, and why may not other helps to devotion, (as forms
of prayer are) be imposed upon us? That Religion which allows them to be
enjoined, commands them to be observed.

If we were to take the Character of those weak ones (in the New Testament)
which are fenced in with a hedge of Apostolical precepts, lest they should be
wounded with scandal about things indifferent: we should find no indulgence
given, none demanded, for an omission or relaxtion, for the freedom to use, or
not to use things prescribed, for order, for decency, for edification in the
Christian Church Their weakness enclind them to the other hand of
supererrogation, if I may so call the practice of that Ceremonial Law, which
was dead and buried with our Savior. Their weakness was, that they desired
still to walk in a vain shadow, and therefore vain, because now the sun
himself had appeared in his meredian brightness. These were those that are
borne up by the hands of the Apostles, lest they should dash their feet against
any stone of scandal, as it appears in the quotations in the margin. Romans
14. 1 Cor. 8.7.9. Gal. 5.1.2 Act. 15.20, 24, 28, 29. Act. 16.3. Act. 18.18.
In other cases the Apostles condemn the abuse of christian Liberty, as as a
turning of that grace of God into lasciviousness, as was before observed.

A conscience truly weak and scrupulous after an humble and diligent search
for a satisfactory information, may challenge our charitable and christian
condescension: But there is no yoke of bondage, that does so much entangle us,
as the wilful and froward obstinacy of an intemperate humor: To return
whence we have digressed.

If a constant form of prayer be a vain repetition, we must condemn the
Saints of God in all ages, the Church triumphant, and Christ Christ used that
great Hallelujah which the Jews used at their Passover. Mat. 26.30. Vid.
Bezam. Sup. Mat 26.20.
himself.

We of the same Church must not only speak the same thing in respect of
Doctrine, but also with one mind, and one mouth glorify Romans 15.6.
God. Which is done as well (if not more) in prayer then in preaching. A
harmony of confessions ring a loud peale in the ears of men, and a sweet one
in the ears of God, when all the devotions of a whole kingdom are twisted
into one Cable, it must needs be strong and almost invincible with the Almighty.

You will say, he that ties us to one form of prayer, in the Church, might
with as much reason tie us continually to one and the same Sermon. I answer the
comparison is lame, being made between a form of prayer, that is, (or may be)
perfect in all parts essential, and a sermon that consist only of some few
points of doctrine. Let face answer face in your comparison, and institute it,
between prayer and doctrine, (as it should be) and then the argument will of
it self fall to nothing For thus it must run (if you will make reason of it)
All things necessary to salvation may not be preached at once, therefore I may
not at once pray for them. And now we may discover falsehood as well in the
Antecedent, as in the Consequence. Falsehood in the Antecedent, which says all
things necessary to salvation may not be preached at once; May not? Who says
so? Has God forbidden it? The whole Scripture is Gods epistle, whereby he
discloseth his mind to us. It Is his intent (and that witnessed by command) that
we should read it over. If you could have the patience, or the minister take
the pains, it might be dispatched at once. That they are delivered to us but in
parcels is our own fault, but Gods goodness; for God willing more abundantly
to show to the heirs of promise the riches of his goodness; does fit his
yoke to our necks, that it may be easy, distilling his heavenly doctrine in
the ministry, by proportions suitable to our capacity, and suspending the rest
till our infirmities may admit of another measure. Christ spoke the word, pre
anditorum Captu, as they were able to hear it, Mark. 4.33. And he tells his
Disciples, Ioh. 16.12. I have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
them now. The best soil may be over-seeded: and therefore the prophet says,
precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon
line, here a little, and there a little, Isaiah 28.10.

Thus you see it is not so much Gods will, as our own frailty that renders us
incapable to carry away this gold, as it is compact in the wedge; we must take of
the Lamb according to our eating, proportionable to our faculty of disgestion.
The Commandments of God are exceeding broad, says David, it will take up our
whole life, yea eternity to survey them: But we are little shallow vessels,
and may pour out our whole souls at once in prayer. And hereupon we see our
savior who preached so many sermons, taught us but one form of prayer. Oh let
me escape to this Zoar, is it not a little one? and my soul shall live:

The end and the means by which we attain unto it, make up that string on
which we hang all our petitions, as so many holy jewels. The end has a double
aspect, Gods glory and our own salvation. The means are woven of a party
colored thread. Some directly tending to that end, others removing obstacles
that would hinder us. The direct means are our obsequiousness to the will of
God in chief, and accommodations for this life as subsidiary; we desire but
two sorts of obstacles should be removed: those are the evil of sin, and
the evil of punishment. All these accomplished set us above mount Nebo, they
give us possession of the heavenly Canaan: and all this Christ has summed up
in six or at most in seven petitions. The Lords prayer.


Preaching has a larger field, or scope then prayer to run in. I may preach of
the Virgin Mary. I may no more pray for her, then to her. I may not pray for
the dead, though I preach a funeral sermon. These two duties are like the two
sisters that entertained our Savior; preaching like Martha is cumbred about
many things; prayer like Mary sits quietly at the feet of Christ in possession
of the better part; and why should it be so often taken from her. We think it
a great sacrilege, in rude Soldiers, to ravish a prayer book from the hands
of a Disciple and make a spoil of the devotions of their captives.

If you will still contend, that the comparison may hold between prayer and
Doctrine, then our prayers not only may, but must be stinted, for we are tied
to a form of doctrine, and if an Angel from heaven should bring any other,
we must reject it. It Is a form of prayer you desire should be renewed, I am
sure you would not have every Sermon a new form of doctrine. Why may we not
say the Collect, as often as the Epistle our of which it is taken, and to which
it is ad-apted?

But to drive this nail home, and fasten it it upon your self; you could have
said nothing more directly against the extemporary prayer you sue for; For the
best sermons are elaborate, and your divine Orator must study to retain the
form of sound words. Tit. 2.8. Sound speech that cannot be condemned.
Let Solomon award this difference, and submit to his determination. And
because the preacher was wise; he still taught the people knowledge, yea, he
gave good heed and sought out, and set in order many proverbs. The preacher
sought to find out acceptable words (or words of delight) and that which was
written, was upright even words of truth. Thus says the inspired Oracle of
wisdom, Eccles. 12.9.10. And the Prophet denounces a curse against him, that
does the work of the Lord negligently. Ier. 48.
Shall we be less careful to compose our selves in our adresses to God, then
we are in our discourse to men?

You will say, we have emergent evils which a set form can neither include,
nor provide for. I answer [Ecclesia non judicat de occultis,] it may include
them as far as the Church can discover them, and she cannot be less
conscious to them, then a private person, if they be public and notorious. If
it be not convenient that the Church should know them, it is not necessary, she
should provide (in her public service) an antidote against them.

Christ knew the chief wants of his Disciples, when they begged that faculty
and form of prayer, yet he delivers it in general terms because it should be
public; and such must all our prayers be, when our charity walks from home,
(as it ever should do at the hour of prayer) and fetch in our neighbors
wants also.

If you will weave all private wants into your public devotions, you must make
the minister the secretary of your thoughts, which you cannot do, but by doing
what (I am sure) you will not, viz. by introducing Auricular confession.

Upon special occasions which the Church takes notice of, she applies a
special remedy in part of her service, as in time of war, and the needful
time of sickness: But to comprise the particular necessities of every member
of the congregation were impossible, and to contract all our devotion to the
disposition of one, were incongruous. It had been an unseasonable charity for
Christ to have spoken plurally (as all public prayers must do) Let this Cup
pass from us: that would have employed a partnership in his sufferings. When he
trod the wine press alone, it was requisite that his devotions for it should
be made by way of sequestration, and therefore he withdrew himself from his
Disciples. S. Paul's thorn might have wounded the sides of the weak
disciples, if it had been inserted into a public form of prayer.

If we knew how to pray as we ought we might expect a form absolutely
perfect: but we are denied that grace, and yet God supplies that want with his
Spirit helping our infirmities. This spirit makes intercession for us with
gronings, not audible, to fill up a great hiatus, or supply the defect of an
extemporary expression, not occurring presently: not Audible to be heard of men
(though that be the Pharisees sickle to reap the cares of men's good opinion)
but they are gronings unvtterable, our bosom infirmities and the gronings of
the Spirit for them, are not communicable to the congregation, but to God
only, who knows the mind of the Spirit, Romans 8.26.27.

There is a form (as I remember ascribed) to Xenophon. Grant us this day,
things that thou know to be good for us, whether we ask them or ask them
not, and turn evils from us, though we do ask them. Yea, that form of
Christ's own setting (which the Church has ever acknowledged the most perfect:
and therefore so frequently and not impertinently used it in her Liturgies, to
supply the defects of her other prayers) yet even this consist of general
ingredients. Physic administered in pills may work as well as that which is
given in powder, when Gods honor and our own salvation, with the means
conducing unto both, are propounded as the mark in general, that aim is
assuredly indevious: but when we descend unto particulars, we have more ways
to wander, and pray amiss, looking upon Gods glory through our blind zeal, or
with an eye of self-love upon our selves. For this our Savior checked the
sons of Zebedee. Ye know not what ye ask.

We may be too importunate for the removal, even of sinful infirmities,
because they may be part of that mineral, out of which Gods skill intends to
extract gold, to varnish his own glory, and crown our souls. Romans 8.28.
The threefold cord which S. Paul had twisted to draw out his thorn in the
flesh, was broken with that reply, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect in weakness: 1 Cor. 12.v.9.
and this takes up the suite of the great Apostle.

I speak not this in a dislike of all supplications accommodated to the
occasion, for under what pretense soever it comes colored, I cannot approve of
your Bishops interdicting the use of prayer to the ministry, as if he would
not have the spirits of the Prophets subject to the Prophets. It Is a quenching
of the spirit in respect of a degree, and contrary to that injunction of the
Apostle, 1 Thessalonians 5.19. which (as many learned men conceive) is to be
understood, of that grace which the School call gratis data, which is given to
every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. God forbid that I should cease to
pray for you, says Samuel) and God forbid that I should discourage any from
praying for themselves, let us a Gods name kill the Cockatrices that infest our
bosoms, as they are in hatching: and for this purpose, Jn every thing by
prayer and supplication, withthanksgiving, let our request be made known unto
God, Phil. 4.6. But I would not have private infirmities ingrosse our whole
devotions, to the neglect of general and public wants, and the disparagement
of these assembly-duties, that should be a means to redress and releeve them.

When any public accidents befall us, we may have recourse again to the
Church, her breasts are not exhausted, but may be drawn again to our comfort,
as we see they have been upon weighty occasions, or else the Ministers may have
a due liberty to remove this business to be scanned amongst other duties of the
pulpit.

For my part, let those whose tongues are tipped with divine oratory pray freely
as occasion is offered; only remembering the wise man's Caution, Eccles. 5.2.
Let not their mouth be rash, nor their heart hasty to utter any thing before
God, lest they offer a sacrifice of fools instead of one salted with salt, and
seasoned with discretion; For we must consider we want infallible
inspiration, as much as we hate heathenish enthusiames. Offer no strange fire,
and you shall have my assistance to preserve that which is derived from heaven,
upon the Altar of your heart: The pure oil olive, for the lights of the
Sanctuary, was to be beaten by Gods appointment ( Exodus, 27.20.) and we are
to trim our Lamps before we go to meet the Bridegroom ( Mat. 25.7.) If our
oil be not beaten it is not fit to ascend in holy flames to heaven, and if we
trim not our Lamps with this oil advisedly, I fear we do too often
profusely spill it, whiles we think to power it forth more liberally. God ever
looks more after the qualification; then the quantity of the sacrifice: He
accepts as well of a pair of Turtle-doves, as of a Hecatombe; but they must
be entire, not blind, not lame, not sick, as many of those Calves of the lips
are, which are offered upon the Altar at their first conception, before they be
formed into any due proportion. A prayer that has a blind eye, a a lame hand,
a superfluous tongue, or any disjoynted member in it, is not a fit oblation for
the Almighty. A carnal sacrifice guilty of such defection was rejected (
Malac. 1.8.) How much care then should we take, for a sincerity of parts in
our spiritual sacrifices, wherein many degrees of excellency are abated by
our imperfections! The Lord so grant me a broken heart that I may have a sound
devotion.

Perhaps some can power out their soul before God in private, that cannot in
public use this liberty, being hindered by the infirmity of a modest
bashfulnesse: Let us not contemn the care of that mother, who, as she gave us
birth and breeding, so she would provide a medicine appliable to all our
infirmities.

To make a part greater then the whole, is an impossibility in nature: and it
may seem monstrous to prefer the beating of one violent pulse of the Church,
before the judicious, unanimous, and well-tempered constitution of the body
representative.

A stinted form, we see must be granted, and and why not that which is now
established amongst us? I remember you scruple at her pedigree, you say her
mother was a Roman Catholic, and cannot but derive some of her poison to all
her issue. Is this all? and will you visit those sins of the Parents upon
the children, whereof they are not guilty by imitation, but abandon, renounce,
and with their very soul detest them? Dur us est hic sermo: this is a hard
saying. That which is our Sabbath (so I dare be bold to call it) was once
hallowed by the Heathens to the Sun, is it therefore rendered, any thing the
more unfit for Gods service? The whole Alphabet has been abused to
profaneness, and not a syllable can be chosen, which has not passed through
the lips of Papists in their devotions. Must we therefore coin new Elements
to ourselves? And is it a charm to spel our religious thoughts by the same
syllables (that they used) though purely refined? and put together never so
innocently? If we do this, we may, (with Herod in another case) proceed
further, and take Peter and Paul, and the four Evangelists, (I mean their
Writings) and put them in prison also. Must we demolish all ancient Churches,
because of their original dedication unto Idols? The Muses snatched feathers
from the Sirens, and weaved them into their own Garlands. And the Israelites
by Gods appointment brought spoil from the Egyptians; from whence some Authors
of good account, have collected, that we may gleane the flowers of learning
from profane or heathen Writers, for the service of Divinity. So Saint Paul
himself did from the Poets, Act. 17.28. 1 Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12.
and Moses from the Act. 7.12.
Egyptians: We see gold and silver may be extracted out of dross by the help
of a discerning Element. And why may not we use forms of devotion taken from a
Church, to which God himself once committed his lively Oracles, and made the
faith thereof renowned in the whole world, Romans 1.8. considering how many
devout fiery Spirits have been employed to try them, and purge them from the
filth contracted in her Apostacy? you cannot compare her corruptions to a more
noisome thing then leprosy; and so they are: yet Lepers might be cleansed, and
received again into the Congregation, and all things else that were infected
with this contagion, Levit. 14. Numb. 19.
after the Priest had pronounced them clean, were restored to their first use,
and admitted by a general approbation: yea the holy vessels might casually be
defiled, and yet after they were baptized with the water of separation, they
were pure in Gods account for the service of the Sanctuary. We may take the
same exceptions against the persons of papists, after they be converted, and
have renounced their errors.
. Look upon your own writings, and see if you cannot find your hand to some
Retractations. If you cannot, you are more happy then: S. Austin and many
others. If you can, will you make waste paper of your corrected copy, because
the original was erroneous? either do justice upon your self, or let others
taste your equity.

I see you shake your head, and would fain cure you of this palsy of
coffeehouse. I know you have another stone to cast at this supposed, and so
much accused Adulteress. Is it the shape, or the dressing, or the body it
self that is offensive? If you know the woman chaste, let her not suffer for
the new fashion, the strumpets attire of innovation, that is forced upon her.
It Is her pride to be seen in her naked innocence. If she has of late bin
adorned too gaudily with Ceremonies, strip off those that are scandalous rags,
(which have been a burden to her self) and blame such dressers.

Perhaps your distaste lies against the very platform, and your blood rises
against the thing it self, as at the apprehension of some ugly monster, what
will you say! are those prayers plain? are they short? If this be all, they are
the more useful. I confess there are constitutions, that can convert strong
meat into wholesome nourishment, but all are not of that temper; and the dishes
that are served up in the. Church at public meetings, must be such as Manna
was, that gave a savoury relish to every palate. And therefore you must be so
charitable in this case, as to abate the interest of your great parts and
christian liberty too, that you may condescend to weakness. We that are
strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves, let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification,
Rom 15.1, 2. We ought to do it, and let us do it, faith the Apostle. And he
that walks according to this rule, peace be upon him and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God.

Will you admit none but great wits into your communion? or will you become
impropriate to the Church, and be a synagogue to your self? many poor souls
(whose education has not bin so happy, as to stamp the Characters of learning
upon them) will be glad of some daily crumbs of comfort. And surely you will
allow some forms of Piety for their practice. Give them leave to serve God as
well as they can. They have not a Philip always at hand to guide them; for the
Church provides not for every man a Chaplain to administer his devotions: But
she teaches them to speak after her language in the Congregation; and
therefore her prayers must distill upon them as dew upon the tender herb Deuteronomy.
22 3.
) according to their capacity; They must be short and often repeated, unless
you will hatch and foster that fond opinion, that God does miraculously supply
their defect of learning with the Art of memory. If to this purpose, we
either have, or may have a good form of godliness, let us not deny the use
and power thereof, Romans 1.2.
lest we hold the truth of God in unrighteousness?

Would you have a form of devotion reduced unto one continued prayer? you know
the soul will have her excursions, and evagations; if you would have these
prevented, she may more easily restrain her gadding till the end of so short a
prayer. Rather let her employ that intervall of time between the prayers to
her vagaries, then be guilty of an abruption in the midst of her long devotion.
And this is not a giving of the soul her head, that she may break loose the
sooner; for if she be so piously inclined, she may improve that Mite of time
by a good thought to prepare for the prayer following. If we conform our
prayers to the pattern on the Mount the Lords prayer) they must be short and
pithy. Christ knew what provision was best, to be made against our frailty: and
the Church (as I conceive) aimed at a twofold end in following his example.
Whereas the Papists go not to the common Benefactor, but have hewed out for
themselves a several cisterne Ier. 2.13.
to furnish them with the several waters that they thirst for, and repair to
several Saints to releeve them in each infirmity; our Church on the contrary
puts her wants particularly into the hands of her only Mediator, and hopes to
obtain nothing but through Jesus Christ our Lord. This is the cloze of every
prayer.
And builds her faith upon that promise, Ioh, 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask
the father in my name, he will give it you. And again, she would have all the
people set the seal of their Amen to every blessing that is requested. And
this is not only significant but useful. It witnesses their vigilancie, it
declares their faith, and so confirms their joint communion in the external
profession of their pure Religion. The Church has learned from Christ, that
where the spirit is willing, the flesh may be weak, Mat. 26. v. 40.41.
and cannot watch long in Gods service without some moniter to supervize over
her, and therefore (that the Sabbath be not kept as a rest of sleep) she
would have the people to stir up themselves, and assist the supplications of
the Minister, with that patheticall ejaculation (so often used by our Savior,
that he is therefore, as many think called Amen Apocal. 3.24.
) that so their desires burning together in one flame may ascend the swifter
with multiplied wings to heaven The same may be said for the other Responsals.
.

God makes not his construction of our prayers by their length, but by their
ardencie. The Pharisee will for a pretense make long prayers. Mat 23.14
And the Heathen think to be heard for his much speaking, Mat 6.7.
the strong cries of Christ were short, yet carnest ones, Heb 5.7. Luke 22.44.
and so are the ejaculations of the faithful. Luke 18.13.
The hottest springs send forth their waters by Ebultion, Eructaburt lebia mea.
Psalm. 119.171.
Devotion is the length, and faith the eloquence of our prayers. They are like
Coin, it is not the bulk, but the Image stamped upon them, and the excellency
of the metal makes it current. One golden line that has passed through the
Furnace of a devout heart, is of more value then a whole sheet of dull and
leaden thoughts. We are Petitioners for our wants to God, and not
Interpreters. We do not pray to expound our will to him, but to make an
atonement with him, to pacify him, to please him, that so we may put a holy
engagement upon him to fulfill his promise in fulfilling our desires. And if
God be to be pacified, Opus imperf. super Mat. Hom. 13.
not instructed (Non est necessaria long a narratio sed bona voluntas) there is
no necessity of a long discourse, but of a good affection.

To put a period to this Argument. I should think them indiscreetly scrupulous
that should leave the outward communion of the church for some inconvenient
ceremonies Possunt te etiam debent multatolerari puetames non recte
praecipiuntur Beza ep. ad quosaam Anglic. Eccles. fratres. 1 Cor. 12.
and it is more blameable to separate from the maine substance of Gods worship.
His house is the house of prayer, and shall we make it a house of preaching
only? that were to be all ear, all hearing, (no mouth no heart) which is the
Apostles monster in the Church.

I cannot tell wither I should more pity or wonder at those men, that pretend
a transcendent love to truth and unity, and yet effect an unreasonable
diversity in the forms of their devotion. When a good head looks awry, the
best ornament is the greatest, and the most unseemly deformity.

The Pythagoreans set a brand upon the Duall number, because it was the first
that durst depart from unity. Romans 16.7.18. The Apostle will have us mark
those that cause division as well as those that cause offenses.
But all this must be fathered upon the jealousy of a tender conscience,
whence I take this observation, that no men may preserve their Christian
liberty (about things indifferent) so entirely as those, who are obedient to
the Authority that order them; for these men confess them alterable, and
therefore as the discreet hand of government shall wind these strings up or
down, they can omit or use them without reluctance. Whereas on the other side,
those that strain at these gnats. do so entangle their consciences with
needless scruples, Some men, to satisfy their weakness do rob themselves of
their christian liberty. Nam ubi semel sein laqucum conjecerunt conscientiae,
lorgum and inextricabilem labyrinthum ingrediuntur, vnde non facilis postea
exitus patet etc vid. Calv instit. lib. 3. cap. 19. 7.
that the things, which are acknowledged by themselves, to be indifferent in
their own nature become dangerous and unlawful to be used by them, and so
with striving for it, like birds in the lime twigs, they do the more loose
their liberty. Non solum spectare debeo quid proximis, quid ecclesiae, and
quid honori Christi conducat: sedetiam providendum est, ne praetextu
libertatis, solidam and sinceram libertatem christianam amittam. Pet. Mart. vbi
supra.


But let me expostulate with you a little further. Do we not assemble together
in Gods house, in Gods name? Are not our prayers collects gleaned out of Gods
word? are not many of them very occasional, and all put up in and through
Jesus Christ? Do they not aim at Gods glory, and our own salvation? What is
the scandal you take yet against them? If you think me too much wedded unto
Liturgies, I Will assure you, it is, not my superstition, but my pious constancy;
for I know in some cases we must tolerate a bleare-eye and other blemishes
that are pardonable: It Is no less then the crime of adultery, that can make a
divorce legitimate. Mat. 5.31.
But that is a business of Gods own institution, this of man's; And therefore,
though I acknowledge it good and lawful, useful and effectual (in the kind,)
yet I am not so inseparably devoted to it, as to Gods immediate ordinance. I
should be more indulgent unto all these words, (the devise of man) then S.
Paul was unto some men, (the work of Gods hands) If I should not wish, that
those were cut off that trouble you.

I read in the 14. Levit. 14.39. etc.
of Levit. That when a house was tainted with the leprosy, and the plague
spread in the walls thereof, the Priest had an order from the Lord to view it.
And upon discovery of the infection, he was to command them to take away the
stones in which the plague was, and put other in their places, and to cause the
walls to be scraped and plaistered with other mortar. And if (after all this)
upon the Priests review, the plague had not spread in the house, verse. 48.
he was to pronounce it clean, the plague was healed. But if the plague brake
out again after the Priest had caused it, to be swept and garnished, as
aforesaid, then the Priest was to demolish it, and the ruins thereof were to
be carried forth out of the City into an unclean place: for it was a
fretting leprosy. So I may say of the old Roman Liturgy. verse. 43.44.45.
It was a leprous house, the plague was spread in it: but our wise Reformers
purged it from all appearance of infection. They picked out all the stumbling
stones of Idolatry, those bricks (the workmanship of the spirit of infernal
bondage) were broken down, and their Room was supplied with hewne and well
polisht stone, the walls were scraped and cleansed from the dust of
superstition, and new plaistered with well tempered mortar. If after all this
pains, the plague should appear to spread again in it. I should submit to
have it rendered as inhabitable as the torrid Zone that no soul, no affection
of our Communion, may lodge in it. That the leaves thereof may be shut up and
have a seal stamped upon them, that may mark out their infection; that the
contents be never understood amongst us, but by that fatal superscription
(usually affixed to those doors, by which the destroying Angel's entered) Lord
have mercy upon us.

But I must tell you, that although you have visited this body your self, and
brought it to Friest after Priest to be reviewed, and accused it of many
plague-sores, and pricked those sores as deep as your charity would suffer you;
yet hitherto no corruption has appeared, and therefore it is to be judged
clean by law, and to enter into the holy Camp.

If we do find some defects in it, we must consider the Compilers, were no
moro inspired then our selves. They had many woulds and sores to heal, and
those very old and deep festered; and therefore no marvel if upon the sudden
healing the skin was a little contracted and tuckt up with wrinckles. A man
driven with sickness and desperately diseased, will admit and embrace health,
though attenaed with deformity. When you view the scarres in this body, you
should look back upon the sores that caused them, and learn to be thankful
for the present soundness to which it is restored. Before, the people were led
to hell blind-folded, by the way of superstition and Idolatry, understanding
nothing of their devotions, but the number of the beads they prayed by: but now
your hearts are made acquainted with their own desires (which theirs in a
manner were not) and you know what you do, and wherefore. The vastness
(besides the benefit) of this alteration, may seem to make some small defects
pardonable.

Though Rome was not built in a day, she was, soon pulled down here; That
alone was a work of wonder, though the structures, built upon her ruins,
wanted more of that state and comeliness which is desired. Be but candid, in
your interpretation of them, and there are no blemishes, but are more
tolerable, then a violation of the sacred bond of peace; for the untying of the
girdle of Christ's Spouse is a great step to her deflowring.

The time will come, when the Church shall ascend up to the Mount of God, like
our Savior, and be transfigured in her devotions, til her face shine more
gloriously then the face of Moses, but to forsake Primum te, hortor, ne oblat^e
functio^^ te subdacas -- extrasunctioxem permanentes con emendabitis quae
displicent imo vix concessa retinchitis. Quodsi ad guvornacula ecclesiae
sedcatis spes est multa, et sinon omnia p sse corrigi. Pet. Mart. Amico cuilam
in Angliam inter Epistolas ad sinem, loc. com page 1 127.
her is not the next way to further, and hasten her ascension. Is there still
that Antipathy betwixt you, that either your self or this Book of Common
Prayer.
book must be banished from the holy Congregation. I desire you would take up a
serious resolution to bethink you, and not suffer your self to be transported
or misled by fancy: Sense is apt to be deluded, being so much subject to
fallibility, look with a single, sted-fast, and discerning eye, before you
give your judgment. If you discover any spots that are assuredly
plague-tokens; you have just cause of fear administered, and a firm ground
raised for your removal. But if not (I beseech you) remember the words of the
Apostle, Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith
without wavering, and let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to
good works: Not for saking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is: but exhorting one another. Surely the Apostle, or the spirit
that directed him, foresaw what strange opinions you would dwell upon, or else
he could not have brought this piece so home to your very threshold; yet I am
persuaded no man press the footsteps of the Apostle, in the former part of
that exhortation, with a more upright foot then your self: but take heed your
foot slip not in the latter, and so deceive you; for if you take a fall now,
your bones will feel it, and make you complain hereafter. Job 20.11.


To conclude, those may make sweet music that play by book. And it was the
water of a standing poole, which was troubled, by the descending of an Angel,
and received the gift of healing. No man when he has drunk old wine desires
new, Luke 5. v. 39.
(if his palate be as well affected as our Saviors) for he says the old is
better. Look not after a new vintage when the Church has preserved old
bottles of spiced wine for you.

In his Church God breaks 'to us the bread of life: Cant. 8.21.
in our private houses we are indeed, under Gods Table, but there we can find
fragments only, some few scattered crumbs of his spiritual refection. As long
as I have my teeth to chew it, I care not much for having my bread grated. I am
sure Gods ordinances are wholesome for me, if I have but a heart to receive and
ponder them, and therefore I will take my portion thankfully, as God
distributes it in his ministry; And Lord, evermore give me this bread.

Now the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, who also is able to build you up; direct you, make you perfect,
stablish, 1 Pet. 5.10.
strengthen, settle you, which is and shall be the prayer of

Your assured Friend, and servant in Jesus Christ. L.W.

FINIS.
An Appendix
AND now by way of an Appendix, I think it not amiss to set down, with what
zeal and pains this Liturgy has been compiled, with what thank fullness
received, and to what good purposes it has been alleged by good Protestants.
For the framing of it.

We read that those which were appointed by King Edward 6. and his Council to
compile the Common-Prayer-Booke, Acts and Mon. printed Land. 1631. vol. a. f.
660.
had as well an eye and respect unto the most sincere and pure Christian
Religion taught by the holy Scriptures, as also to the usages of the Primitive
Church: They did not make the Mass book their rule: and it does not symbolize
so much with that Popish form, as the Testament of Boza's translation does with
that of Rhemes, and yet that is not a sufficient ground for us to dislike and
reject it.
(and so guided went on) to draw and make one convenient and meet order, rite
and fashion of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments to be had
and used within this his Realm of England, and the dominions of the same. Who
after most godly and learned conferences, through the aid of the Holy Ghost
with one uniforme agreement did conclude, set forth, and deliver unto the Kings
Highness a book of Common Prayer, etc. which being exhibited by the King to
the Lords and Commons in Parliament, November. 4. 2 Ed. ann. 1548. they
considering the godly prayers, orders, etc. and the altering those things that
were altered, and retaining those things, which were retained in the same; as
also the honor of God, and great quietness which should by the grace of God
ensue, etc. gave his Highness lowly and hearty thanks, and prayed him, it
might be enacted, etc. And page 667. Col. 2. lin. 20. In an answer to those
insolent demands of the Rebels of Devonshire against this form of Religion,
the King says thus: Whatsoever is therein ordered, has been long debated, and
consulted by many learned Bishops, Doctors and other men of great learning in
this Realm concluded, In nothing was so much labor and time spent of late
time, nothing so fully ended. Now that you may not doubt of the aim of the
King and his Parliament: consider, 1. the Kings sincerity and constancy, in
that speech to the Rebels, moving against an act of Parliament, page 668. Col.
1. What is our power if Laws should be thus neglected? Yea what is your
safety, if Laws be not kept? And for his piety, we read of his purpose to
abolish popish Religion, and reform the Church according to the word of God
Mortuo Henrico Rege Angliae Edoardus ejus filius de consilio tutorum and maxim
Edoardi Ducis somersetensis auurculi sui, ac Thomae Cranmeri Archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis, and to tius Anglie primatis, pontisiciam religionem abolere, and
ecclesias juxta verbum deireformare statuit. Orat de vita and obit. Pet.
Marrytis.
at his first entrance to the Crown, and his speech, Act. and Mon. p. 667.
Col. 2. lin. 51. discovers his zeal in the execution: If any wise, says he,
we could advance Gods honor more then we do, we would do it.

And that the Parliament was zealous to cut off both root and branch of Popery,
that not so much as any shadow or footestep of it might remain. We may
collect from letters sent by In hoc Parliamento (nisi valde fallimur veram
Religionem restituetis. Divirum profecto concilium, and nos vna Deum rogannus
omnes ut nevestigium quidem papisticae fecis in ulla part Religionis,
quaecunque illa fuerit, amplius residear, Thetrue subject to the Rebel.
preface.
the whole University of Cambridge, to the Lord Marquess of Northampton. And
as for the divines entrusted with the composing of it, you heard before, out of
the book of martyrs, they had respect herein, unto the most sincere and pure
Christian Religion taught by the holy scriptures. And how this should become
guilty of so much popery now, that was so clear and innocent then I cannot
imagine, unless we have more zeal, more knowledge, take more pains and have
a better touchstone then they had to try it.

If we descend to Qu Mary's days. The Archbishop of Canterbury assisted by
Peter Martyr (not guilty of the lest grain of popery) and some other offered
to defend the doctrine of the book of common Prayer, both by Scriptures and
Act. Mon. vol. 3. p. 18.
Doctors. It should have needed no great defense, if it had been so popish as
is pretended. Calvin to the Lord protector of England. Quod ad formam precum
and Rituum Ecclesiarum, valde probo, ut certa illa extet, a qua pastoribus in
sua functione discedere non liceat. To which I might add the approbation of
Bucer, Grindall, etc. See the Defensive vindication, pa. 5.6.7.8.
And it should seem Qu. Mary and her adherents could not sympathize with it,
for in her days, the act by which it was authorized was repealed, and that
with no great contentment to the Protestants, if we may believe Q. Elizabeth of
blessed memory, and her Parliament which tells us it was taken away in the fifth
year of the reign of Qu. Mary to the great decay of the due honor of God, In
the beginning of the Act for the uniformity of Common prayer, bound up before
the Book of Common Prayer.
and discomfort to the professors of the truth of Christ's Religion? Whereupon
it was again established by Act of Parliament. And King James of famous
memory tells us concerning this business: We found mighty and vehement
informations, (such as those in these present times) supported with so weak
and slender proofs, as it appears unto us and our Council, that there was
no cause why any change should have been at all in that which was most
impugned, the book of Common Prayer, containing the form of the public
service of God here established, neither in the doctrine which appeared to be
sincere, nor in the forms and rites, which were justified out of the practice
of the primitive Church. Notwithstanding we thought meet, that some small
things might rather be explained then changed, not that the same might not very
well have been borne with by men, Read the proclamation for Authorizing, etc.
before the Book of Common Prayer.
who would have made a reasonable construction of them: but for that in a
matter concerning the service of God, we were nice or rather jealous; that the
public form thereof, should be free, not only from blame, but from
suspicion, so as neither the common adversary should have advantage to wrest
ought therein contained, to other sense then the Church of England intends,
nor any troublesome or ignorant person of this Church, be able to take the
least occasion of cavil against it. Thus that oracle of wisdom. And how
should we think that service guilty of any known popery, in King Edward 6. his
time, when we find this clause in their Letany. From the tyranny of the Bishop
of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, from all false doctrine, etc. good
Lord deliver us. And although this clause was left out in Queen Elizabeth's
time, perhaps for avoiding of scandal: yet in one of the prayers of our
public Service f we still pray unto God, to root out that Babylonish and
Antichristian Sect, and to cut off those Workers of Iniquity, Prayer for the 5.
of November.
whose Religion is rebellion, whose faith is faction, etc. And surely a
Liturgy, that directs us to pray thus, carries not a Pope in the belly of it.
But I should rather incline to the opinion of Mr. Burton, that the Jnnovation,
alteration, Mr. Burtons Apol.
and dashing out of some of the prayers of our Liturgy, was a sign of some
dangerous plots to change the Orthodoxe Religion established in England, and to
bring in Romish superstition in the room of it. And to him I shall join this
opinion of Mr. Prin concerning this Book of Common Prayer. In his
Anti-arminianisme, Mr. Prin his Anti-Arminian, Edit. 2.
wherein seven Anti-Arminian Orthodox Tents are evidently proved; their seven
opposite Arminian (once popish and pelagian errors) are manifestly disproved,
to be the ancient, established undoubted doctrine of the Primitive and modern
Church of England. So in the title of his book. Then alleging the Book of
Common Prayer (says;) In this Book of Common Prayer established by Act of
Parliament in our Church; there are sundry passages to prove these several
Anti-arminian positions. See page 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. And concludes thus:
you see now by all these premises, that these our Anti-arminian, not their
opposite Arminian assertions, are the apparent and resolved doctrine of our
Common Prayer Book, composed by the first Reformers of our Church, who
concurred wholly in opinion with us; Therefore they must needs be the undoubted,
the established, the received doctrines of our Church. Thus that learned man,
where I desire the Reader at least to believe Mr. Prin (of whom the world is so
well persuaded) that he is not guilty of the least tang of Popery) I say,
believe him, that those which composed our Com. Prayer Book concurred wholly
in opinion with us; and therefore we need not have a suspicion, that they give
us Rats-bane in our prayers. To him I may add a Book put forth since the
sitting of this honorable Parliament (which I pray God to direct and prosper)
by Fran. Tailor B.D. Rector in Clapham in Surrey, He gives the Book of common
Prayer, the first place amongst the Authentic Records of the Church, as he
calls them.
it is dedicated to Sir Edward Dering, and bears this title: The faith of the
Church of England, concerning Gods work on man's will, wherein he proves all
these several points against the Arminians out of the prayers of our. Liturgy.
Gods omnipotency in our conversion.

Gods special grace. Gods work in Infants. Giving of internal grace to men.
The internal effect of grace.

The Purification of the heart.

The external effects of grace.

Gods governing us.

Gods preserving us in godliness, and from sin.

The progress of the Begenerate.

Gods grants. Other proofs he might have produced for our own insufficiency,
as the Collect for the second Sunday in Lent, etc. and likewise for the
confirmation of, almost all, our Doctrines against Popish and Arminian errors.
And indeed neither our Homilies, nor our Articles are so good, so inviolable
evidences of the Churches doctrine, as her prayers: for we see what glosses and
Coments both Papists and Sancta clara.
Arminians Mont.
can make upon those of the first sort to countenance their assertions, but
it is not possible any man should so befoole us out of our devotions, as to make
us believe, we did not understand the sense and meaning of our prayers. And
therefore it were good Christian policy to retain our forms of prayer, though
it were done only upon those grounds, upon which, says Smectymnus, Answer to
the Remon. page 7.
set and imposed forms were introduced, which was not, says he (how truly let
the defense of the Remonstrance witness) until the time that the Arian and
Pelagian heresies did invade the Church, and then, because those Heretics did
convey and spread their poison in their forms of Prayer, and Himnes, the
Church thought it convenient to restrain the liberty of making and using
public forms. And for as much as too much poison may be vented this way; and
in the opinion of some has been, and is in these present times, I should
think it would not be amiss to retain the use of this Liturgy amongst us,
that it may be as a standard to regulate the rest of our devotions.

This book has been accused of swearing often, though many that have as good
ears, and have been as diligent observers of it, as others could never hear
it, but I never knew that it had been convicted of perjury before, that the
testimony of it should now grow invalid amongst us. But whether it be fit, that
that which has been alleged so often as good evidence for our Doctrine, in
Queen Mary's days against the Papists, in our own times against Arminians
and Innovators, whether it be fit, I say that this without any fault committed
(for its own part) should now be arraigned at the Bar of life and death (I
will not say as our late Sovereign does m upon the frivolous suggestions of
any light spirit, but) upon so weak an accusation, and be as it were,
condemned before it can be heard speak for it self, whether this be justice I
leave to every wise and indifferent Reader to consider. But for my part I must
say Amen to that curse, that has been lately sealed by so very great
Authority Babilons downfall. published by order of the honorable house of
Commons.
Cursed shall he be that removes the ancient Land-markes, and let all the
people say Amen. What is the ancient Land-marke of England, but our Laws and
Religion, (which contains as well facienda as credenda, and has as well the
Liturgy, as the Articles and Homilies for her Boundaries:) and therefore if any
man shall remove this Land-marke, cursed shall he be, of the Lord cursed; and
let all the people say, Amen.

And although the Author of that Book entitled Christ on his Throne, Case 6.
p. 23.
thinks it enough to startle Christians (as he terms it) that this is an
extract out of Romes Latin Service; yet he might remember how himself seems
to unfold, that command given us; to come out of Rome, Ibid.
by our having no Communion with her idolatrous service; And he needs not
recant that exposition; for the best protestant Divines unanimously profess to
renounce, Iuel Apol. Eccles. Anglio. p. 88. etc. Mr. Calvin. In stit. lib 4.
ca. 2.. 9. Dr. Rivet. Cathol. orthod tom. 1. Tract. 2. quaest. 2 page 289.
nothing of that Church, but her errors, her contagions, her corruptions, her
idolatry, superstition and tyranny: And albeit these would not permit us to
abide joined with her in Communion, and the outward exercises of Religion; yet
even these never removed us from a purpose of persevering constantly in those
things, which she has, that are good, as we learn from that learned and famous
Doctor Rivet. Variae ipsius (Ecclesiae Romanae) haereses, Idolatria multiplex,
and horrenda Tyrannis, nobis minime permiserunt, ut cum ea, in religione, and
exercitio conjuncti perwaneremus, quam vis nunquam nos dimoverint a proposito,
conslanter in cis, quae et ipsa bona habent perseverandi. Riv. loco citato. See
Hooker Eccles. pol. l. 4. 7. ad fin.


If, as some affirm, Christ on his Throne. page 24.
the Surplice, Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Sacrament, standing at the
Creed be popish dross, Romish superstitious Ceremonies, this indeed might
breed a quarrel against the Rubric: but to take this occasion to vent our
disaffection to the prayers, is to make a quarrel against them. A wise man
will not rent his clothes, though he rips off that lace that is offensive. And
truly, I am verily persuaded, that if those offenses found in the Common Prayer
Book (which are complained of, as so many Grievances and pressures upon men's
consciences) I say, if they were rightly scanned and weighed in the balance of
an impartial judgment, even by no other then Mr. Calvin's own distinction we
should find most of them, deserve rather our neglect then our consideration.

Hear what that judicious man and notable instrument of Reformation says. Pr.
London 1634. infolio.
In his third book of Instit. chap. 19. sect. 11. translated thus by T. N. If
thou do any thing by unseasonable lightness, or wantonness, or rashness,
not in order, not in fit place, whereby the ignorant and weak are offended,
that same may be called an offense given by thee: because it came to pass by
thy fault, that such offense was stirred up. And it is always called an offense
given in any thing, the fault whereof came from the doer of the thing it self.
It is called an offense taken, when a thing which is otherwise, not evilly
done, nor out of time, is by evil will, or by some wrongful maliciousness of
mind, drawn to occasion of offense. For in this case was not offense given,
but these wrongful Construers, do without cause take one. And upon whom shall
that we light in this case. Mat. 18.7.
With that first kind of offense none are offended but the weak; but with this
second kind, sour natures, and pharisaicall scornful heads are offended.
Wherefore we shall call the one the offense of the weak: the other (the
offense) of the Pharisees: and we shall so temper the use of our liberty, that
it ought to give place to the ignorance of the weak brethren, but in no wise
to the rigorousness of the Pharisees, thus far Mr. Calvin. Now let this, of
that worthy man's impannelling, be the Jury, and we will join issue, and
proceed to a trial, even our Adversaries being judges. Where, is the
lightness, where is the wantonness, the disorder, the unseasonablenesse that
gives offense in our public form of prayer? Can you charge any of these
crimes, upon the glorious Reformers of our Church, which composed it; or upon
the numerous company of Orthodox and grave pastors that have constantly used
it? I do verily believe you will not, you cannot. But if you ask me, where
the evil will, the wrongful maliciousness of mind, wrongful Construers,
sour natures, and pharisaicall scornful heads, which draw things by
misconstruction to occasion of offense: If you ask where these are, I am loath
to be rash in judging; yet I think (if a tree may be known by the fruits, I
could go near to give you the description of such an one in a few characters.
Letthe Reader look over the Book of grievances, and tell me if he cannot easily
discover occasions, very poor occasions snatchtat, to vilify, scorn and jeere
our sacred Liturgy.

To give you but one instance: In Churching of women, when the Minister has
said, O Lord save this woman thy servant; the Clarke answers, which puts her
trust in thee; would any head imagine (besides L. H'es) that the Clarke tells
the Minister, the woman puts her trust in him, or when the Minister says,
Be thou to her a strong Tower, would any man, that has so much as common
sense, suppose that this saying had reference to the Clarke; as if he were to
be a tower to her? It Is an old caveat, Noli ludere cum sacris. Our Savior
calls them swine that will turn, and rent those, that have cast pearls
before them. If men would have us comply with them, let them lay aside their
maliciousness, and sinister interpretations, and make their ignorance and
weakness their plea to draw us, which are like to be the strongest, and (in
Mr. Calvin's opinion) should be the only motives.

Now for as much as the Idolizing of our Christian liberty, (and not the
Idolizing of our Liturgy only) is the maine ground of these, and many other
jarres, I shall for the conviction of some, the satisfaction of others, and the
moderation of all, add the opinion of some learned and judicious Divines, (and
such as are, as I think beyond exception) to this purpose: first

Herein also many men do err, because as though their liberty should not be
sound and safe, unless it had men witnesses of it, they do undiscreetly, and
unwisely use it. By which unseasonable using, they many times offend the weak
brethren, (so that there is offense on one side as well as on the other, which
is now a days not considered, as if but one sort of men could be offended. You
may see at this day, some which think that their liberty cannot stand, unless
they take possession of it by eating of flesh on Friday. I blame not that they
eat, but this false opinion must be driven out of their minds. For they ought
to think, that by their liberty, they obtain no new thing in the sight of
men, but before God; and that it stands as well in abstaining as in using If
they understand, that it makes no matter before God, whether they eat flesh or
eggs, whether they wear red or black garments, that is enough. The
conscience is now free, to which (and not so much to the outward man) the
benefit of such liberty was due. Therefore although they do afterward abstain
all their life long from flesh, and wear always but one color, yet they are no
less free. Yea therefore because they are free, they do with a free
conscience abstain. Thus M. Calvin, which speech of his, if it were well
considered and digested, would put an end to the controversies about kneeling
at the Sacrament, and almost all other differences of that nature amongst us.
The other Author I promised is Doctor Saunderson, Sermon. 1. Pet. 2.16. 19.
whose words are these.

This we must know, that as it is injustice to condemn the innocent, as well
as it is injustice to clear the guilty, and both these are equally abominable
to the Lord, ( Prove. 17.15.) So it is superstition to forbid that as sinful,
which is in truth indifferent, and therefore lawful, as well as it is
superstition, to enjoyne that as necessary which is in truth indifferent, and
therefore Arbitrary. Does that heavy woe in [ Esa. 5.20.] appertain (think
ye) to them only, that out of profaneness, call evil good, and nothing at
all concern them, that out of preciseness call good evil Does not he decline
out of the way, that turns aside on the right hand, as well as he that
turns on the left? They that positively make that to be sin, which the Law
of God never made so to be: how can they be excused from Symbolizing with the
Pharisees and the Papists, in making the narrow ways of God, yet narrower,
then they are, in Mat. 15.9. 1 Cor. 7.35.
teaching for Doctrines men's precepts, and casting b a snare upon the
consciences of their brethren? If our Church should press things as far, and
upon such grounds, the one way, as some forward spirits do the other way; if
as they say (it is a sin to kneel at the Communion, and therefore we charge
you upon your consciences not to do it,) so the Church should say (it is a
sin not to kneel, and therefore we require you upon your consciences to do
it) and so in all other lawful (yet arbitrary) ceremonies; possibly then the
Church could no more be able to acquit her self from encroaching upon
Christian liberty, then they are that accuse her of it. Which since they have
done, and she has not, she is therefore free, and themselves only guilty.
Thus that judicious Divine solidly, and moderately.

As I am of Peter Martyrs opinion on the one side, Ad Eccles. Anglor. ad finem
loc. com. page 1099.
Nec esse videtur christiana pietatis, tantum audere, ac velle consequi,
quantum per leges liceat, (for all things are lawful, 1 Cor. 6.12.) Si quidem
nonnanquam oportet fratrum causa (but not for false brethrens sake,) de sure
suo cedere, praesertim in iis rebus, quae pro indifferentibus habentur. So on
the other side I must hold with Calvin Instit l. c. 19. 12.
Habemus and necessitatem vindicandae libertatis, si per iniquas exactiones
pseudo apostolorum, ea infirmis in conscientijs periclitatur. And never was
Christian liberty in greater danger amongst us then now, when not only the
cross in baptism, the Surplisse, receiving of the holy Communion kneeling,
etc. but also Nam ubi semelse in laqueum conjecernut conscientiae, longum, and
inextricabilem Labyrinthum ingrediuntur ut supra.
Gowns, Cassocks, long cloakes are reputed sinful amongst us, for pious
worthy men are upbraided in the streets (nay some are not spared in the time of
divine service) as if it were a sin, and consequently a shame to wear them. I
am sure St. Paul teaches another doctrine, 1 Cor. 6.12, All things are lawful
unto me, but all things are not expedient: things indifferent, are lawful,
though they be not profitable. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be
brought under the power of any. And I would feign have any man resolve me,
whether they be not equally in bondage under the power of things indifferent,
as well those that think it a sin to use them, as those that think it a sin
to omit them?

Calvin affirms against the Anabaptists, that one maine use of political
administration is Vt inter Christianos publica religionis facies existat. And
he tells us, that there is some Authority requisite in the Governors of the
Church, that they may be able to order it aright. Whiles he disputes against
the tyranny of popish prelates, he says, Ibid. c. 10. 6.
Si very essent Episcopi, he would grant them, Aliquid authoritatis, non
quantum sibi postulant, sed quantum ad notitiam ecclesiae rite ordinandam
requiritur. And else where he tells us, that some constitutions, Ibid. 3. c. 19.
15.
quae ad spirituale regnum videntur pertinere, legitimae habendae sunt, ut dei
verbo consentance. The reason is sound why those rules of our superiors
touching the use of things indifferent are to be obeyed, In confess. fidei c. 5.
16.
because as Beza says, Ejusmodi constitutiones, quod attinet ad finem and
fundamentum, nempe generale illud decorum, quod nobis observandum praecipitur
divinae sunt ac caelestes. And although, if we respect the special form, they
are humane and mutable, and do not per se proprie obligare conscientiam, yet
Si quidem probae et justae sunt, hactenus nos illis obligari ut ecclesiae
aedificationi tedant and offendiculum vitemus. Not those which are obedient to
Authority, but the refractory should be reputed scandalous. See the imitation
of Christ lib. 1. c. 9.


Smectymnuus tells us, many conscientious men have conformed to ceremonies upon
this ground as supposing that Authority did not make them matters of worship,
but of order and decency; and thus they satisfied their consciences in
answering those Texts, Col. 2.20.21.22. Mat. 15.9. From whence we may gather
thus much.

1. That Authority may command. 2. That conscientious men will obey, 3. That
conscience may be satisfied about things indifferent. And I hope this may
satisfy the Reader. Finis.

The Parallel Surveyed.
THere was a Book brought lately to my hands bearing this Title, A Parallel,
etc. And though it be but a contingent line drawn over our Liturgy (for he
professes he does not write against that The Protestation Protested is
mistaken, that call, it a parallel between the English Liturgy and the Mass
book; for it is the Scottish, etc.
) yet I make no question, but I shall even by this, find out the right Meridian
of Gods pure worship, without enclining to the East of Innovation, or declining
to the West (the night) of superstition.

The whole Book I will reduce to three heads. 1. Somethings that seem to make
against our Liturgy. 2. Somethings that make for it. 3. Some gross errors and
abuses discovered. I shall answer and clear the first sort of things, take the
benefit, or advantage of the second, and join with him in the condemnation of
the third, following the method of the Author. And first, of that which seems
to make against the English Liturgy.

First, he says, the Papists call their Mass by the name of Service and
Liturgy, Cap. 1. p. 1.

I answer. They call a Bible, a Bible; the Scriptures, they call the
Scriptures. The Apostle accounts him a proud, ignorant fool, that delights in
strifes of words. 1 Timothy 6.4. The contention about (...)and (...)was a matter
of greater consequence. Besides the word Liturgy is a wholesome word, 1 Timothy
6.3.
even a word of our Lord. Luc. 1.23. As Soon as the days (...), the days of
his Liturgy, or ministrations So that to style the form of Gods public
worship a Liturgy or Service, is very sound and consonant to the Scriptures.

But, Page 1.
2. The Prelatical men call their Liturgy the Mass, see Pocklington, etc.

Answ. So they have called the Communion Table an Altar, the Presbyters
Priests, the Lords Supper a Sacrifice: We must not conclude from hence a
necessity of abolishing the things, but a convenience to redress the language.

But from the words, Page 2.
our Author passes to the matter, and tells us that our men approve the
matter of the Mass.

Answ. We must distinguish of this matter. All good matter in the Mass (or
elsewhere in that Church) the soundest Protestants will allow, and embrace, as
I showed before out of Doct. Rivet. And I must say they are of a very hard
belief toward our Savior, that think no good thing can come out of Nazareth.
If the Author think nothing can be good which smells of the Mass, in what
esteem shall his book be.
If M. Rogers had been of that opinion, he would not have translated those
books of the Imitation of Christ, made by a Monk, into English. Luther was a
Monk too, and his principles of Faith and Devotion he learned from Rome, and
of them he lost none, save the corruptions. Shall we be ashamed to
acknowledge him, or to make use of his Writings, because of his extraction? The
Author himself seems to be of the opinion, that it is not necessary a prayer
should be therefore altered, because it is taken out of the Mass. For
speaking of the fourth Preface of Pentecost, he concludes thus: Page 41.
What here our Book changes is of their mere pleasure, without any necessity.
2. If some amongst us (going beyond our Liturgy and so against it) have
returned like Dogs to the vomit, and resumed into their practice or opinion the
corruptions of the Mass, they are of age let them answer for themselves.

We are informed further that the Papists do approve the matter of our
Liturgy, Page 3.
and therefore surely it cannot be very sound, etc.

Answ. So they do the matter of the Creeds and the Scriptures: are they the
worse for that? A truth is never the worse for having the devils attestation to
it. 2. I must tell you, that, although Pope Pius 4. gave his faith to Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, that he would confirm the English Liturgy by his
Authority, yet it was but upon this condition, that she would join her self
to the Romish Church, and acknowledge the Primacie of the Chair of Rome. The
Pope will promise and do much too for a Crown; and that this was his aim,
appears not only by the condition of his promise, but also in that they of
the Council of Trent, being consulted by the Popish Nobility of England, if it
was lawful for them to countenance the Liturgy, they would not give any act
of their approbation, when there was no condition of advantage propounded to
them. And this does further appear by that which is cited out of Doct. Abbot.
Page 4.
At solet ex indulgentia sua sanctissimus pater, quae videntur duriora
nonnunquam concedere, quo facilius secreta sut cordis desideria amplissime
consequatur. And the Author himself tells us, that the kind Mother Church of
Rome can well dispense with some difference, Page 42.
yea, with a greater variety, then is betwixt our [hee means the Scotish]
book and theirs, especially when upon such terms they may gain subjection. I
would feign know what that man of sin in his height of pride would not do,
that his Supremacy might get footing again amongst us. Rather then a Tenent
should not acknowledge his dependancie, we see a Lord is willing to accept of
a Pepper corn only. He that will in policy dispense with marriages against
the Law both of God and man, with Murder, Stews, etc. may at a very easy
rate dispense with our Liturgy, that contains nothing in it repugnant to the
word of God, or the practice of the Primative Church. This is no new, nor
strange thing with the Church of Rome. Basiliense consilium concessit Boemiae
utriusque speciei usum, modo fateremur id sibi concedi ab Ecclesia, non autem
ad hoc teneri divino jure Bellar. l 1. de sacr. in genere. c. 2.. 2.
. That the Pope never had any such affection to our Liturgy (setting aside his
then hope of advantage) appears in that he having given many of his children
license to read the Bible, yet never allowed to any of them the use of our
Liturgy. Whence we may gather that in the Popes opinion the Bible is fitter to
nourish them in their Popery then our Liturgy.

In his second Chapter, Chap. 2. Page 6, etc.
the Author descends to the parts of the common prayer, following the division
that is made of the Mass. But truly, I can find nothing in it, that ought to
impeach the credit of our Liturgy. For the Ave Mary's, the Introibo ad Altar,
etc. Let them answer who are concerned in them. But if our Liturgy have spoken
evil (it was the speech of Truth for himself) bear witness of the evil:
but if well, why should it be smitten with any slanderous tongue or pen? 2. The
Author seems to condemn some things, because they are not so ancient. If his
reason be good, it will hold much stronger against any form that shall be
newly devised. 3. If superstitious Romanists have given foolish reasons for the
use of many things in their Church, this cannot in equity he imputed to our
Liturgy, wherein the goodness of every prayer (clear in it self) is
sufficient to justify the use of it. And hence we may see how much the fingers
of humane reason are too short when they come to scanne the things that
appertain to God and godliness. The rest I leave to the judgment of the
Reader.

In his third Chapter he finds no less then three abuses in the Epistles.
First, Chap. 3. Page 19.
because against the order of the New Testament the Epistles are set before the
Gospels. 1. I know not what order he means. The word of God has given no order
(to my remembrance) that the Gospel should be read before the Epistle (and
both cannot be read first.) If he understands that order of binding them up, I
conceive the Ancients caused it so to be ordered for the dignity of the
Gospel. And the Church may for the like reason order, that in the reading, the
Gospel should be ushered in with an Epistle. 2. If the Author were put to that
straight, that he should have but one part of the new Testament, I am persuaded
that he would prefer the Gospel of our Savior, and yet I should have more
charity in me then to conclude (in his words) That hereby, The Epistle was
contumeliously debased, but the Gospel superstitiously exalted. Page 21.


A second abuse is, Page 20.
(and surely it is a great one) that the Acts, Revelation, etc. are styled
Epistles: and surely he abused the Scripture very much, that said, It was the
Epistle of Almighty God sent to his Church.

The third abuse is, Page 21.
that never a full passage is read, but a shred. And I pray why? Why, because
we begin after the beginning of a Chapter. And truly he might have said as
much of a Chapter, if he had pleased, that it is but a shread (though I dare
not say so) for all men know, the holy Penmen of the Scriptures did not divide
their Writings into Chapters, but it was done afterward, and we see that men
have differed too in the division of them: and I see no reason, but any
particular Church may appoint, what portions of Scripture she thinks fittest to
be read at several times. Now whereas he says there is not a full passage
read, because they cut off before the end of a Chapter, I would feign have any
man instance in any one Epistle or Gospel, where the sense shuts not up as
fully as the 21 Chapter of the Acts does. As for the Gospel in particular I say
but two things. 1. That he may find better reasons for the choice of them,
then conformity with Sarum, if he would take the pains to consult with Hooker
who has abundantly answered all cavels about the Liturgy. 2. If there be any
foolish superstitions in the heads of some men about the Gospel, we must not so
far run into profaneness, as to make the Gospel guilty of it, nor faulty
for it; for upon such grounds we should shortly have cause to abandon our
whole Bible as well as our Liturgy.

I think there is no man will speak against the Page 22.
Creed (which is produced in the next place) except Jo. Turner would have his
inserted in stead of that which was drawn up by a Council. Page 24.
For the predication (as he calls it) or Sermon, I think none can speak
against it, but Shelford and birds of the same feather, that commonly sing the
same note too. Thus I have done with that which seems to make against our
Liturgy: which perhaps the Author did not intend to such a purpose, for in
other parts of his book he has been a good compurgator, as I shall observe
in the second place.

His whole book, I may style a perfect glass, in which we may see, how clean
the face of our Liturgy is washed from all Popish superstitions; how decently
dressed. Page 6.
We may see (to use his own words) how that black body, that most mistie and
dark piece is cleared. And who can see this change (from darkness to light)
and not be thankful? In the first place:

He says of the Homilies of the Church of England, Page 26.
they are most orthodox, The same is said at the Assembly in Glasgow p. 88.
and composed by the most sound Fathers of that [English] Church, since the
Reformation: And why shall not the Liturgy composed by some, and approved by
others of them be of the same stamp?

Concerning the offertory. Chap. 4. Page 31. He says that all the Rubricks in
our English Liturgy hinder the abuse and misapplication of the alms of the
people.

Page 33. The Church of England detesting this abuse [offering up of the bread
and wine] plucked it up by the root, and put it far away from their book. Page
36. But no ways the English, for in this place they pass the honor of the
Saints, they speak not of the benefit of the dead, and the blessings they
crave to the living, have no reference at all to the oblation of bread and
wine, for they have plucked up by the root that pestiferous weed.

Page 43. Cap. 5. Page 43.
Speaking of those pieces of the Canon whereby the consecration and oblation of
the great Sacrifice (as they call it) is performed, he says: This unhappy
heart the English had pulled out, that the serpent might never again revive
amongst them. Page 44. Page 44.
A Rubric for consecration alone, then had been suspicious, especially here
where the English, Page 44.
yea no reformed Liturgy had any forms of consecration. [Note here he
acknowledges that there are reformed Liturgies besides ours.] Page 47. Page 47.
When the prayer which stood here in the English Liturgy, is some impediment
in their way, opposing their Popish consecration, etc. Page 50. The English
book has two sentences, (which cross transubstantiation) and are against the
corporal presence in the elements.

Page 61. Cap. 6. Page 61.
A Rubric for oblation they [the English] have none. The most of this prayer
in the English, is put after the Communion to be a thanksgiving and a
spiritual sacrifice of praise to God, for the blessings in the communion
received.

Page 62. Page 62.
These words [Accept this our Sacrifice, etc.] as in the English Liturgy they
stand in a thanksgiving after the Communion, have no such show, [of a proper,
outward, unbloody Sacrifice.]

Page 75. The English avoid all these superstitions. Cap. 7.
Innocents rule, Page 75.
to say it [The Lords prayer] on the consecrate hostie, they abhor, and put
the prayer in a place where it cannot be possibly so abused. Page 76. Page 76.
The English have indeed this prayer, [That our bodies may be cleansed by his
body, etc.] But in a place that puts it out of all suspicion, to wit, before
the consecration. Page 82. Page 82.
That golden sentence of the English Liturgy, that served much to hinder what
ever evil imagination people might have taken of a gross corporal presence
of Christ's body and blood in the elements, or on the Altar, either from the
words in hand, or any other, that golden saying [Eate this in remembrance of
me,] The Speech at Glasgow. p. 60.
For fear of Popish transubstantiation, the English put to this sentence
[Drink this in remembrance, etc.]

These words of the Mass [Vt fiat corpus and sanguis] whence all Papists this
day conclude Transubstantiation, the English put out of their book for fear
to further by them this heresy. page 93. Page 93.
The golden sentences of the English which here were put in as Antidotes to the
venom of Transubstantiation.

Reader, by this thou may see the great evils wherewith (says R. B. K. In
the Preface to his Parallel.
) the English Liturgy has afflicted both Church and State. Surely that was
one (which he speaks of page 47.) That some of these prayers were an
impediment in their way, [that compiled the Scottish Booke] opposing their
Popish consecration. Me thinks our Liturgy might take up the words of our
Savior against his enemies, Many good works have I showed you, for which of
them do you stone me?

Touching the third part (which I made of the book) a Discovery of errors, I
shall heartily join in evidence with the Author, and sue for Justice. But yet I
must profess, that notwithstanding all that is demonstrated against it, I can
see no reason, but that all those most abominable passages of the Mass may in
good reason be refused, and abhorred too, by those that do cordially embrace
the [English] Liturgy.

Lord we beseech thee to keep thy Church and household continually in thy true
Religion, that they, which do lean only upon the hope of thy heavenly grace,
may evermore be defended by thy mighty power, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Read (through every page) An Epistle to a private friend. p. 6. l. 28 r. in
this valley. p. 23. l. 23. r. to be beaten. p. 30. l. 36. r. ebullition. p. 31
l. 13. r. affect.

In the Margin.
Page 10 r. Granad. p. 13. r. in Domino. --


