GOD IN THE FLAMING-BVSH.

EXODUS 3. 2. Moses looked, and behold, the Bush burned with fire, and the Bush
was not consumed.

EXODUS 3. 3. And he said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why
the Bush is not burnt.



DEUTERONOMY. 33. 16. Blessed of the Lord be His Land, for the precious things of
Heaven: And for the precious things of the Earth; and for the good will of Him,
That dwelt in the Bush.

ESA. 63. 9. In all their affliction He was afflicted, and the Angel of His
Presence saved them.

Published for a memorial of the first wonderful year, The day of the LORDS
vengeance, and year of Recompenses for the controversy of Zion.

THE CHVRCHES THANK-OFFERING To GOD Her KING, and The PARLIAMENT, FOR Rich and
ancient Mercies; Her Years of Captivity; Her first Year of IVBILE;

THAT IS, For the Marvelous Deliverances Wrought with God the first Wonderful
Year (since the Year 88) beginning at September 1640. and ending the ninth of
the same Month following: In all which time, The Lord appeared for His Church,
as in the days of old, out of the midst of the BVSH, so the Church burned
with fire, and was not consumed.

In the PREFACE, The THANK-OFFERING is vindicated, and set free, from all the
Cavills and Charges against it; Where also it is cleared To be, as every Man's
Duty, so every Man's purpose, To Offer Willingly now, who does not make full
proof, that he falls short of Pagan, Papist or Atheist; and is wilfully
resolved to walk cross to the most SUPREME Law, The HIGHEST Reason, and The
unquestionable WILL of GOD.

1 Chro. 17. 19. O Lord, for Thy Servants sake, and according to Thine own
heart, have Thou done all this greatness, in making known all these great
things. Psalm. 1^6. 17 I will offer to Thee the Sacrifice of thanksgiving: and
will call upon the Name of the Lord. Nehem. 5. 19. Think upon me, my God, for
good, according to all that I have done for this people. London, Printed for T.
V. at the sign of the Bible in Wood street, 164^.

TO THE LORD, the most high GOD, Possessour of Heaven and Earth. TO JESUS
CHRIST, His only Son our LORD, Prince of Peace, King of Saints. To the blessed
SPIRIT, the Truth, and leading thereinto.
BLessed be Thy glorious Name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.
Thou alone workest wonders, and in so doing have magnified Thy Self and
honored man: Thou shewedst signs and wonders upon Thy Adversaries, for Thou
knew they dealt proudly against Thee: So did Thou get Thy self a Name, as
it is this Day; and herein did Thou use man as an instrument, Dust and Ashes
he is, give him grace to magnify Thee. Blessed Savior, Rock of our Salvation,
Desire of the Nations, Hope of Israel in time of trouble, Thou wast content to
be made of no esteem, that Thy people might be greatly beloved; to be made a
curse, that Thy people might become a blessing; content to be made low, that
Thou might exalt man. So Thou have done, Thou have exalted him, even to sit
in Thrones next to Thy self; Give him an heart to exalt Thee, to honor Thee,
to love Thee much, for Thou art worthy. Blessed Spirit, Thou have done great
things and mavelous, not by Nihil aliunde mutuatur Deus ad Ecclesiae suae
conservatione^, ergo vult sibi Vni acceptam referri Ecclesiae sature^. Call.
(humane) might, nor by power, but by Thy self Zach. ^. 6. Nec tamen omnia
immediate and per se agit Deus, sed tantum ostendere v^l^ Ecclesiam erigi et
conservari non humano and vulgari modo, sed mirabiliter and praeter omnes spes
and sensus nostres, Call. in locum.
, o blessed Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts, take to Thy self the Glory, even
all.

Almighty Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity;
unspeakably Three in One, and One in Three, One in Authority, Will and Worship
of all Three; King of Kings, Lord of Lords; Spare Thy Servant according to the
greatness of Thy mercy. Thy handmaid is recording Thy ancient thoughts of
Grace and Peace toward Thy Servants, her Sons and her Daughters: Ancient
mercies toward them, when they lay in their blood, for that was a time of love
Ezech. 16. 8.
. Mercies toward them, exceeding Mercies, when they were in the furnace of
affliction, for then Thou did DWELL with them and they had ENOVGH. Mercies
toward her Land and People this former year, strange Rescues, wonderful
Deliverances, admirable Discoveries; what then can Thy Servant say now? Even as
Thou shall be pleased to open her Mouth, and give her enlargement. She would
take with her words Hos. 14. 2.
, but from Thy own mouth, and of Thy own choosing; Thou must give first; for
all things come of Thee, and of Thine own have we given Thee 1 Chro. 29. 14.
. Thy servant must now speak Thy high Praises; then Thou, Lord, must tune my
spirit, and raise it up, else it will flag; or like a Bird without wings, now
up and presently down. How insufficient Thy Servant is, for so high and
excellent an employment, Thou know, for Thou even Thou only know the
hearts of all the children of men 1 Kin. 8. 39.
. At this present indeed, now that I have some high thoughts of Thy glorious
excellencies, Thy Servant can speak, as one brought down to the ground, whose
speech whispereth out of the dust; yet, as one presently stolen away from her
self, she can, with that Sorcerer, think her self some GREAT ONE Act. 8. 9.
. Lord, rebuke this proud spirit, and cast a spewing upon Selfe-glory Hab. 2.
16.
: for truth Lord, something it would be, and something it would do, though a
thousand experiences have told us, that nothing it is, nothing it can Ier. 3. 5.
, but sin against Thee. Thy grace in us does all, no more power in self, no
more canning except the contrary way, then can the instrument of late held in
the worke-mans hand, but now cast-out, or lying by him. Lord, leave me not, no
not a little, work all in me and for me, then work by me, for what we give to
Thee is from Thy own hand to us first. And though flesh and blood would share
here, yet suffer it not; but say (where Thy voice is, there is power) it shall
not be so, and so take to Thy self Thy proper right, all the glory. Let not so
excellent a thing as the Spirit is, so vast and capacious, be lost in self,
which is nothing; but, let it run forth to Thee, and though it will be lost
there also, amidst such an Ocean, yet there it finds a proportionable good,
even all in Thy self, for Thou art All.

Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto my Lord, that am but aust and
ashes, Thou will suffer this once, and lead me into Thy Treasure-house, to
behold Thy mercies there, which I am no more able to understand, then I can the
treasures of the snow and of the hail Job 38. 22.
; nor comprehend, no more then I can measure the wind in my fist, or Heavens
with my Span: for I must look back to the days of eternity, and Thy ancient
thoughts toward Thy Sons and Daughters before the foundation of the world. And
behold Thy ways there, as undiscernable as the way of an Eagle in the Air; or
of a Serpent upon the Rock Pro. 30. 19.
: as is the path which no foul knows, and which the vultures eye has not
seen Job 28. 7.
. But blessed be Thy Name, though there in that dark path, the soul can find
no rest, nor feels any bottom, yet, in Thy Christ De praedestinatione
d^sputaturu^ incipe ^ Christi vulneribus, Mel. Ad. in vita Sta^^p. Vera est ea
poenitentia quae ab amore justitiae and Dei incipit.
, we have a foundation, even according to the good pleasure of Thy will,
toward us in Him, to the praise of the glory of Thy Grace Ephesians. 1. 5.
. For Him we bless Thee, we praise Thee, we adore Thee, for Thy glorious
manifestations, secret inspirations, immediate workings; for all the means of
conveyance, whereby Heaven is pleased to condescend and to have communion with
earthly creatures, and earthly creatures have fellowship with the FATHER and
the SON. For Thy Sons sake all this, therefore we bless Thee for that
unspeakable gift, with Whom Thou give all things, a subduing of iniquity,
victory over sin; (sin is not left to bring forth its own cursed fruit, an
exceeding mercy) pardon of sin; communion with Thy self; joy in the Holy
Ghost; then the strongest, when we are weakest, and our sufferings the
greatest: Then the highest elevation of spirit, then the flood of consolation
runs highest, when the flood of wickedness runs over the head, and seems
ready to swallow up. This is that the world stumbles at; nay, we shrink at
too, at sufferings, at persecution, though yet a thousand experiences tells us,
Persecution is the sign of a These 1. 7.
the true Church, and to them, who are persecuted, Rest with us (and our Rest
is in Thee and with Thee) at last; and then, even in that hour of temptation,
then do Thou administer abundant consolations, even according as the
sufferings are; through fire, yet not consumed; through water yet not drowned
Esa. 43. 2.
; Surely this is because Thou do guide Thy Servants by Thy Council; we are
not careful whether we go, when Thou have us by the hand, being assured, the
end of the way is GLORY.

And now, that the people may flow in hither, cause them to turn aside and
behold this sight, why the BVSH burns and is not consumed. All that look on
must resolve it thus, because Thy GOOD WILL DWELLS IN THE Esa. 63. 9.
BVSH. In all their affliction Thou wast afflicted, and the Angel of Thy
presence saved them. O blessed be the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for Thy
GOOD WILL That dwells in the Bush.

O let not my Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once; we Thy people
have said in our haste, Our hope is cut off, we shall be termed FORSAKEN, and
our Land DESOLATE. But we behold and wonder, Thou have shown grace unto us, to
give us a nail in Thy Esa. 62. 4.
Holy place, and have revived our hope, That we shall be called HEPHZ^BAH and
our Land Beulah. Truly Lord Thou have comforted all my waste places, Thou have
made my WILDERNESS like EDEN, and my DESERT like the Garden of the Lord, joy and
gladness is found therein, Thanksgiving Ezr. 9. 8.
and the voice of Melody Esa. 51. 3.
. But, Lord, why is it so? Why such severity toward our sister-Churches, and
such goodness toward us and our Land? Even so, because it pleases Thee; It
is Thy good will so. Be it so, but we are overcharged with the consideration
thereof, and are silent. Truly, Lord, we stand wondering at Thy works,
beholding terrible things Esa. 64. 3.
, which our Fathers saw not, and we looked not for; The turning councels upside
down, etc. (for had Thy Servant the tongue of an Angel she could not express
it) but at our selves we wonder most of all, at the drossinesse, the
dregginesse of our spirits, not yet resolved into a spirit of Thankefullnesse;
no, not yet, though we have seen such and such things, above all, such
forbearance; such a patient suffering our manners Act. 13. 18.
, at such a time as this. Why Lord God, Thou did send unto us Saviors, we
should have looked through them, as through a thin covering, to Thy arm made
bare for our Salvation; we did not so, it was a thick covering before our
eyes, it hid Thy Almighty Arm quite from us. We did lean upon that Reed (such
is the help of flesh) yet did it not pierce nor break. O wonderful! it is
not Thy manner so, the prop of flesh did not break, though we laid so great a
weight of expectation thereupon: notwithstanding it has held, etc. for Thy
Servant is overcome; more she would speak to that point and is not able. But
she has wherewith to answer Thy Adversaries (as follows.) The Enemy
reproacheth Thy Name daily, and asks, where is now your God? Our God is in
Heaven, and thence Thou have declared Thy self against Thy Enemies,
confounding them: and for Thy people, reviving their hope. Thou have exalted
THY CHRIST before our Eyes: and received Thy people into COVENANT; these two
things Thou have done this last year. And if Thou do no more in our days,
yet thy Servants have ENOVGH: And by Thy good hand upon them, they have
out-plotted all their enemies. Thy Servants have no more to say, but, Remember,
Lord, Thy Covenant, and keep the hearts of Thy Servants close with thee
therein: Thou art Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and only art able to make
Thy Servants to perform the words of Thy Covenant, and to STAND TO IT 2 Chro.
34. 31, 32.
; and then, though the Enemy rage, he shall not hurt; though he conceives
mischief, he shall bring forth a lie.

God in Covenant defeates all their hellish counsels, weakneth all their power,
answers all Arguments against Thy people, or their Cause, nothing shall do
them hurt, every thing shall do them good. It is Thy Promise, Lord, I will not
turn away from them to do them good Ier. 32. ^0.
, All shall work together for their good; losses in the World, for their good;
troubles in the flesh, for their good; come what can come, all is sanctified,
by all Thou will do Thy children good; Reproaches, wants, necessities,
Persecutions, Captivities Ier. 24. 5.
, All to do them good, even so Amen.

And yet, Lord, we remember Thou have spoken good words and gracious concerning
the Church for the time to come. We humbly conceive now is the time, when Thou
art making good this good word to Thy people; not only because they do set
their faces unto Thee to seek by Prayer and Fasting Dan. 9. 3.
(a great and good sign that Deliverance is comming-on, that Thou art
appearing in Thy glory Ps. 102. 16, 17.
, because the Fatherless, the Destitute pray unto Thee for this thing, and are
resolved to give Thee no rest.)

But there are other Reasons, why we should set our hope in Thee, and that it
is Thy meaning we should so do, which we shall speak of before Thee now, and
(if it could be) in the ears of all the Christian world, for they are legible
in all the peoples sight, and most commanding, we think, to draw in others
that are not willingly ignorant, and to make them fall down, kiss Thy Son,
and trust in Him.

1. We humbly conceive that Thine Adversary and Enemy shall proceed no farther.
Surely, we say, that is Thy meaning and purpose of Thy Heart, because His folly
is manifest unto all men 2 Timothy 3. 9.
.

2. We conceive, that Thy Adversary (a Legion) has been at the highest, his
vertical point, and we see he is fallen thence. Truth, Lord, he falls slowly
now; when his fall is like a millstone Rev. 18. 21.
, with violence, then it shall be mighty, quick and irrecoverable; there is
that in his fall now, which, in our haste, we call slacknesse, and we say, in
the same haste, we may fall before him: If so, yet so, as we shall rise with
more strength and in more glory; but he never to rise again to that same
point. We conclude so (for so Thy manner has been) when the Adversary begins
to fall, he shall fall yet lower Est. 6. 13.
; when he ascends again (if he falls not low in humiliations) it is up the
Gallows. 7. 9.


3. The Adversary has been proud, as Moab, VERT PROUD Esa. 16. 6.
, exceeding proud I^r. 48. 29.
, as proud waters, which went over the heads of the righteous. We humbly
conceive now, they must be brought LOW, VERY LOW; now they must be made Base,
EXCEEDING BASE, even now.

4. Prayer has commanded (we look above all means to Thy glorious
Right Hand) as strange a standing still of the stars in one place of the
HEAVEN, as was the standing still of the Sun upon Gibeon, and the Moon in
the valley of Aialon Josh. 10. 12.
. We humbly conceive, Thy meaning thereby is, and Thou will have it published
to the whole Christian world; That the great Court of Nobles and Worthies shall
not arise from their place, till Thou do arise in all Thy peoples sight, to
avenge Thy self upon Thy Adversaries, for all the dishonours they have done to
Thy House, Thy Day, Thy Servants, Thy Service, etc. Come Lord Jesu, Thy
Servants wait Thy coming; Praise waits for Thee in Sion. The souls under the
Altar say COME; multitudes, we cannot number, thousand thousand souls on the
Earth, wearied out, because of these Murderers Jer. 4. 31.
, all these say come. The sighing of the needy and the oppression of the poor,
says come. Thy Day so profaned, says come; The spirit so grieved, says
come; Thy Spouse (so often forced before Thy face) says come; and because of
the present feeling, she doubles it, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly; ease Thy
self and Thy poor flock of those Adversaries, who have fed themselves and
fleeced Thy Sheep; have made void Thy Law, have taken peace from the Earth;
have valued precious souls no more then they do old shoes Am. 26.
. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and work so, that a man shall say: verily
there is a reward for the Righteous, verily He is a God That judges in the
Earth. Ps. 58. 11.


Thy Servant has spoken, do Thou according to the greatness of Thy power and
mercy, for Thy words sake, Thine own sake, Thy Names sake, Thy Christ His
sake, Thy Churches sake, His dear one (the price of His blood) His near one
(as the Apple of His eye) His only one, His beloved one, the Crown of His
sufferings, the Glory of His shame; and then will the Church ascribe power,
riches, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, blessing to Him. Who is worthy to
receive all this; for of Him, and through Him and to Him are all things, to
Whom be glory for ever, Amen.

TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, The LORDS and COMMONS there assembled,
NOw the Church has tendered Homage to her Lord, you will give me leave to be
her mouth to you; and to neglect Titles, when your works render you truly
Noble, and Right Honorable, so praising you in the Gates. I know not how to
give flattering Titles, said Job Job 32. 27.
, for in so doing, my Maker would soon take me away. Since Thou wast precious
in mine eyes, Thou wast honorable Esa. 43. 4.
, says the Lord, and you will believe Him. I cannot crave your Honorable
Patience neither, to hear me out: let that be as your leisure serves, I must
do my duty; and, being the mouth of the Church, whose heart is full, and
thoughts not so composed, I cannot so contract as I would: others may read,
who need information, and receive benefit therefrom, while you work.

Follow on your work, in Gods Name, you work for a good Master, whose wages
are sure, and like Himself; He gave an Heathen King for serving a great
service, no less then a great Kingdom, the wages for his work Ezekiel. 29. ^8.
: You have done a greater service, you may expect greater wages, A Kingdom
that cannot be shaken, for so God will honor you. We say surely, you have
honored Him, so blasphemed in the world, so slighted and dis-regarded there.
You have got your selves a Name: Verily, we conclude, you have wrought singly
and purely to advance the Glory, and to get Christ a Name in the world, which
as it is the end, so should it be the work of the whole life.

Worke-on, You shall prosper yet more, though you have prospered already to a
miracle; and know for encouragement (if you needed any) That, while You are so
working, not Man only, but God also is Recording, whose Records are never laid
aside, being ever in His eye. While you are giving out for the public Good,
all good people are giving in to you, PRAYERS and THANKS; great matters both;
The one turns and wheels about things to Admiration, being the strongest
engine in the world, and the greatest stock you have upon Earth, always
gaining, because always trading Heavenward.

Certainly the PRAYERS of the Church, of all her Sons and Daughters, all the
world over, are for you (a mighty consideration, these only make Prayers, the
other party speak only or curse rather, they do not pray) And all their
BLESSINGS (as mighty and prevailing now, as were the BLESSINGS of the Tribes,
that stood upon Mount Gerizzim) are upon your heads and endeavors, a Deuteronomy. 27.
12.
shower of blessings. Much may be gathered touching the strength and nobleness
of those blessings; to bless did belong to the children of the free-women (the
Church and her freeborn can bless, and they only) but yet, though these
were appointed by Moses to bless, yet there is not one blessing expressed, and
that is very notable by the way. For by such silence, Moses would have Gods
people expect great Mr Ans.
blessings, such as cannot be expressed by the tongues of Men or Angels: but
yet this good people must look for those blessings by another, that is Christ.
For the Curses, these are mentioned, not the people, who must curse; as if
Moses were loath to name them for such a misery. But the curse not causlesse
must come Pro. 26. 2.
. The point and comfort is (which required clearing notwithstanding the haste,
for I would be very short, though in such a business I cannot well frame to
it) the viols of the Saints, so full of prayers and blessings are all powered
out upon your heads, and the Lord smells a savor of rest and peace from these
odours, for such they are, being presented by the hands and through the
Mediation of His Beloved Son CHRIST JESUS.

The Nations will rush now, as the noise of many waters; There will be a
shaking in the Earth; much strife and contention there. Who shall have the Day,
and overcome? who shall return ashamed from the battle, with their hands upon
their heads, as Mourners? A foolish question this; I might as well ask, what
will prevail most with God, PRAYERS or CVRSES? Who shall tread down most,
the feet of the proud and lofty ones, whom God resists, and has now cast out
of their places: or the feet of the poor and steps of the needy, whom the Lord
guides with His eye? yet I determine not. It suffices me, and you too, I
believe, that all the prayers in the world are for you; all the blessings of
all that can bless there are upon you, as assured yours, as if they were
pronounced by the very mouth of Christ: and all the curses in the book of God
are upon your enemies, and shall over-take them in due time, if hearty
Repentance prevent not.

So much touching the first great thing, so prevailing in the world, PRAYER:
You will be remembered of it again anon; For, as with Esther Est. 4. 16.
, you have commanded it, so with her, you will pray likewise. THANKS follow,
and that is the subject of this Treatise; a gaining commodity also, freely laid
out, and the more freely so, the more they receive-in, the fuller are the
returns and In-comes every hour.

These you have here from a most considerable person (for I take a single word)
The CHURCH, who can prise mercies, speak them forth with rejoicing; can skill
in giving thanks, for the time, matter and manner, and order in the same,
excellently well.

Thanks! You may say; That is a poor Return. No, A rich Return, considering
who offers them; The Church, and from her They never go alone; her hand goes
with them, she works for you (never was there a greater, a better, a more
hopeful cause to set all on work) and her heart also, she prays for you too
she cries in the cares of her God, night and day, though you hear her not,
for so you read of Moses, he cried Exodus 14. 15.
, and yet there was not a syllable of a word heard.

Some doubts are to be cleared here, the Method also which is easily done.
Another work there is, not so easy, the answering some grave questions about
the THANK-OFFERING: Churchmen (so in name) question it very much; set
themselves against it; plead rather, not for a return of curses, we hope, but
mightily set against a return of thanks: here they have indignation also,
saying, to what purpose is this waste? And some are so pinched gnawing their
tongues, that they know not what to say, only they mutter, that the LAW is
against a Thank-offering too. The Lord knows how willingly I would have
stepped over these blocks; but He knows, so I could not do, and not offend the
Church, and the Reader both, so great is the offense in the way, which by His
strength, I shall remove from before his eyes, who is not resolved to shut
them, that he may stumble with less excuse, and more impudence in a Sunshine.
But I have so much wit and manners both, to reserve this for him, that has
leisure, disposition, and reason to hearken to it anon. It will be sufficient
for you, if you take leisure for two things; and, whatsoever the employment is,
they must take place, Consideration and Prayer: the one will take up some
length in your thoughts not more then may be thought necessary in this Paper;
the other may be lengthned also in your closet, it shall be very short here.

Consider, for it is also HIGGAION-SELAH Psa 9. 16. Rem meditand^^ sum. Jun.
, A thing much to be considered on; That there has been no undertaking, no
Design of yours, all this time, which God has not prospered: and no design
of the Adversary, which God has not cursed. You do consider this, and is it
not wonderful, That you should go over such Mountains, all along through a
Sea, so full of straits and and rocks on every hand, and yet not dash the
foot? No, for you consider this with it, That you have managed the cause of
Christ all this while; you have carried all things, your Counsels and
Consultations and Actions, level to that Mark, the advancing that STANDARD
(call it what you will) that GLORY: Your Adversaries have done the clean
contrary. Not any one ACT has passed through your hands all this long Session;
not any one Vote from your mouth, that has sadded those hearts, which should
not be sadded Eze. 13. 22.
. The Church has high thoughts of this, thus she thinks, Nay, she knows;
That never was there such a PRICE put into men's hands; nor more wisely managed
then by you, for ye have set your hearts to it Pro. 17. 16.
. You naturally Phil. 2. 20. (...).
cared for the CHURCHES state; as Sons, ye served with her in the GOSPEL. The
Church wonders not at all this; for, (1.) You naturally cared for her,
therefore you work and are not weary. Love feels no more burrhen; then the
Woman did, taking the Child into her Arms, being the true Mother Exo. 2. 9.
; She did it heartily. (2.) Here we can discern GODS hand with you: We
must say, as the Heathen did, GOD IS Gen 21. 22.
WITH YOU IN ALL THAT YOU DO; GODS hand has been with your KING, therefore
has His Hand been so gracious to you, and his heart is still in the same
Hand, not as Iron and Brass (and yet all is one to an Almighty Hand) but as
waters there Prove. 21. 1.
, easily bent and called forth TO HIS FOOT Isa. 4. 1. 2. Vt aqua in areola
quocunque dux ris sequitur Hier ep. 16.
. You that have God for your Pilot, if He steer your course (certain enough
He does) what ever straits or rocks there be, you shall not dash against them.
Yea, but there is the Leviathan, he takes his pass-time in this Sea, A mighty
and grievous Adversary, we mean LEGION, for he is Many; They hear and see,
that the walls of Jerusalem are made up, and the breaches begin to be stopped
Neh. 4. 7.
, They will be, as then they were, very wrath: As then the Adversary reported,
faining out of his own heart, That Nehemiah was King in Judah, and the Jews
think to rebel: very likely he will say as much now, for malice boyles as hot
in his heart now as then; Therefore such scumme must run over at his mouth. You
have tormented him, casting him forth, and so have cheared the hearts of the
Righteous, and gauled the wicked, yea, cut them to the heart: you do expect
now, they will gnash on you with their teeth Act 7. 54.
, and bite, yea, swallow you up if they can, for they will speak devouring Ps.
5^. 4.
words; their mouth being an open sepulcher Ps. 5. 9.
, and the poison of Aspes under their tongues. But let malice draw her bow with
full strength, and shoot forth her arrows, yet she shall not be able to wound
you; or if she do, these considerations will yield you sovereign balm,
whereby to cure the venom thereof, or to turn it into balsome, and that is
better.

1. It has been the manner always, To take away the Righteousness of the
Righteous from him Isa 5. 23.
. A notorious wrong that; A little consideration will serve here, for there is
but one way to turn now, ye will TURN to the LORD our RIGHTEOUSNESS Jer. 23. 6.
; That is a garment, which all the unclean spirits in the world cannot defile.
There is one Consideration.

2. Here below, things are miscalled now, as in former time; The greatest
Idolatresse and Murderesse, that ever was in the world; (She had killed all the
seed Royal, excepting one, and he was wonderfully rescued and preserved in the
ISLE of PROVIDENCE) calls out TREASON TREASON: what was the matter? This and no
more; she heard a noise saying, GOD SAVE THE KING, singing and praising, for
all the people of the Land rejoiced, and the City was quiet. This was Treason
doubled from her 2 King. 11.
mouth, TREASON TREASON.

So also, True Piety, a sense of Duty, is called Rebellion; This opprobry has
been cast, like dyrt, into the face of all the true Ministers of Christ, with
this addition, that 7. times washing in Jordan shall not wash it off. No? what
had the Ministers done? They would not proclaim a liberty for sports Siccine
exprimitur pu^licum ga^^iam per p^^l^cu^ de^ec^^ etc ^e^tul. cap. 37.
on the Lords day, etc. Well, you have been judge in this case; you have outed
that blasphemer, his places shall know him no more; You have cast him out,
where the unsavory salt is, for he is not like unto it but the very same. So
let all thy Adversaries be cast out, O Lord, who blaspheme Thy Name daily,
calling good evil, and evil good; Thy servants by their OWN Exulem me de suo
nomine vocat Cicer. Parad.
Name, and that is as bad as can be. But now, this is the point we have in
hand, how persons and things are miscalled here below; Loyalty is called
Treason; and so backward, Oppression is called Justice; that which is truly Law
is called Violence; and Violence is called Law. The vile person is called
liberal, and the churl bountiful Isa. 32. 5.
; The Messengers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ, are miscalled,
blasphemed, as we hear and read. Thus we call things and persons now. It
shall be otherwise here on earth toward the end of the world, as it was in the
beginning, when every thing shall be called by it is proper name, and according
to it is nature. The vile person shall be called as he is, and the churl as he
is: And as it shall be done here below on earth, so it is now done above in
Heaven. That consideration yielded much comfort to the servants of God in
ancient time, and so it will do now Quae hic mala putantur: haec sunt in coelo
bona. Lact. 5. 15.
.

3. We read of Petilians tongue, as fiery a flying serpent, as any is now in
the world. It stung Augustine exceedingly, it scorched the Church, as it could.
Augustine seems either not to feel it, or not to care for it two strawes; for,
using another Metaphor, he says thus; Petilian blows hard, but all his wind
blows away nothing but the chafe. Thanks be to God, PETILIANS TONGUE IS NOT
CODS Lingua Petiliani non est ventilabrum Dei.
FAN. He will not loose one grain of wheat by all this blustering wind. That
was his consideration then, and very comfortable it was then; it is yours now,
and it is as comfortable now.

4. Consider Days of old, since man was created upon the earth, and you will
find the proverb true, An unjust man is an abomination to the Just Pro. 24. 21.
: and he that is upright in the way is abomination to the Isa. 32 5.
wicked. And so, though you cannot ward off a blow from the tongue, for it
wounds suddenly and undiscerned, and more deeply then any sword Quovis gladio
acutior calamnia, etc. Lips. Orat. de Calum.
, being as an arrow shot out Jer. 9. 8.
; yet you know a Dogs tongue is healing, if he be not mad; and grant he be so,
and so goes about the City grinning, yet these considerations yield you balm
enough to cure the poison thereof.

You have but Angers first weapons Prima semper irarum tela male^^cta sunt: and
quicquid non possumus imbecilli, optamus irati. Salv de Gub. l. 3. page 81.
yet, Devouring words; you must expect violent hands, hard and ungodly deeds,
whole Armies against you, while you are for Christ; Troops after Troops from
all quarters; such a Muster, or Combination rather as you read of Psalm. 83.
: for the Lord Almighty has taken to Himself great power, and has reigned.
What then? It follows, And the Nations were angry Rev. 11. 17, 18.
. So they are now, and for the same reason, very angry and full of wrath.
Consider now, the Lord Christ is King; be the earth never so unquiet, Yet he
reigns then most gloriously amidst His enemies Ps 110.
, When they make a tumult, and speak in their pride, Zion shall be defiled,
and our eyes shall look upon her Mich. 4. 11.
. Consider now what that zealous Reformer said, who set his face like a flint;
Be not afraid, remember the LORD who is GREAT Neh. 4. 16.
; great in power, great in wisdom, etc. This answers all. Great tumults, great
rage, great wrath, The Enemy comes in like a flood, with open mouth to devour
all; REMEMBER the Lord Who is GREAT, His Spirit will set up a Standard against
them Esa. 59. 19.
. When the sons of Belial do, as their Name imports, break bands, and cast
away coards, then the Lord will laugh Psalm. 2.
: And then, said Luther well, he would not cry like a child; he would be merry
as a Man, and sing for joy of heart, the 46. Psalm: For he remembered the Lord
WHO IS GREAT; It follows, and TERRIBLE, To his Adversaries, fury to them Isa
59. 18.
; and He has them under His feet already (like unto fine brass Rev. 2. 15.
) and He can stamp them to powder (but He is patient, He will endure a little
while their wrigling) sooner then you can a worm under yours. Nay you have had
assurance ever since the days of Joshua Josh. 10. 25.
, That you shall set your feet upon them too. It seems the Lord is fulfilling
this good word to you now; nay, doubtless, He has fulfilled it even now; He
has done as He promised to His worm Jacob, He has taken you, a company of
worms (ye are no better) worme-like men; He has given you arms of steel,
and feet like brass, and you have threshed the Mountains like straw, and
have come upon the Princes as upon Mortar, and as the Potter treads clay Isa.
41. 15, 25.
.

Thus the Lord has done, Who is GREAT and TERRIBLE even now in all the peoples
sight. Remember Him, you cannot be afraid. And remember where you are. And yet,
as one says Nihil interest ubi sitis in saeculo qui extra saeculum estis.
Tert. ad Martyrs. chap. ^.
, no matter where you are in the world, who have your thoughts above the world,
and managing the great things of Christ there. But yet to tell you what you
know, and what your security is, you are in Gods hand Deuteronomy 33 3.
.

Now put all together and consider on it; God, He is GREAT and TERRIBLE; He is
your God; you are His by covenant; you are in His hand; your enemies under His
feet; nay under your foot. The Result from hence is; A Glorious Dependence
upon this Lord, Who is Great; yea, a TRUST FOR EVER in Him, Who is EVERLASTING
STRENGTH Isa. 26. 4.
, and that is a sure ground for EVERLASTING CONFIDENCE; That, though the earth
should shatter to pieces, and the mountains be taken off from their
everlasting foundations, yet God is good to Israel; you shall not be greatly
moved; your head may ache, but you may repose it in the Lap of your EVERLASTING
FATHER; certainly He will sustain you; you may lay your selves down in peace,
He will make you dwell in safety. The enemy shall not be able to come near you
to do you hurt, no nor to sad your spirits, who in all this time, have not
spoken one word, whereby to sad the heart of the Righteous. Ye must (the
promise is so Isa. 65. 13, 14.
) rejoice, when the Adversary shall be ashamed: ye must sing for joy of heart,
when your enemies must howl for vexation of spirit; your Name must be a
blessing, theirs a curse. This is glorious matter for faith to work upon; it
will make you pray in the Holy Ghost. You need not be entreated to take leisure
for that, it is the very breath of faith, and it hinders nothing at all, but
sets forward businesses exceedingly, it makes them glide-on. I give my self to
prayer, said David Ps. 109. 4.
, when he was in the very case you are in ver. 2, 3.
; He made prayer his work, what ever he was doing; and so his work slided-on;
he had an easy pass through all; he could leap over this wall, and that
mountain was a plain before him; and his enemies were given into his hands,
for he gave himself to prayer. What ever we omit, we must not omit prayer. It
commands your Mark, that, betwixt the Kings Question to Nehemiah, and his
Answer, there is a prayer; his Answer was as ready as the Question was, but he
would pray first Neh. 2. 4.
. A hint only is enough to wise men. Your prayer shall be short, you may
lengthen it in your closset; pray as Nehemiah did; he believed as you do, and
you have done as he did, and you have as many enemies as he had, and so envious
against you; They would make you afraid too; they would weaken your hand from
the work that it be not done, pray; now THEREFORE O GOD STRENG THEN OUR Ne. 6.
9.
HAND; AND REMEMBER US O OUR GOD, FOR GOOD. Now there is a voice gone up (that
never returns in vain) and cries aloud in the ears of the Lord, like the
sound of many waters, saying, AMEN; Mercy and Truth be with you, AMEN: And the
God 2 Samuel 15. 20.
of both these give you favor in the eyes of the Man, Amen: wipe not out the
good deeds that you have done for the Ne. 13. 14, 22.
house of your God, and for the Offices thereof; AND SPARE YOU ACCORDING TO THE
GREATNESS OF HIS MERCY, AMEN, AMEN.

The PREFACE clearing the way through this Treatise, and the READERs
understanding, touching the proceedings in Parliament, the clearness of the
Laws and Justice therein; his Knowledge also of the times, and clear WILL of
GOD, and what Israel ought to do, notwithstanding the contradictions of
sinners, and cross wills of Malignant Men.
Reader,
I Understand well the use and Law of a Preface, it should contain no more,
but what could not be put into the book; that is observed here. And yet it
will be very large, and that I could not help. I have an hundred sheets
tending much the same way this Treatise goes; If a Providence should call
forth, all or any part of it; I might trouble thee with an Epistle, but never
more with a Preface. How willingly I would have forborne it here. I know, and
God knows; but then I strongly conceived: I had left thee in the dark; but now
I shall show thee the way in much clearenesse, if thou will not blindfold thy
self, and render thee in the close, a Thankful man, This is the tendency and
purpose of all this: And so, that thou may read with profit, understanding
what thou read, and then show thy self an understanding man; I shall
endeavor to clear the way before thee, and give thee clear resolution to the
matters in debate, some more easy and quickly resolved; other some more hard
and admitting more contention;

1. Touching the Person, who offers Thanks, that is easily cleared.

2. Then the Thank-offering, there will be the knots, for Collegiate men, the
Eyes of the Land, these are set against it, and, some say, the Law also; we
must examine their reasons, and clear the proceedings against these men, and
that will take up some time.

3. In the last place, the Method, the clearing of that is very necessary, but
it will be quickly done. I shall now d^ssolve a continued Discourse into a
Dialogue. The first Doubt to be res^lved, is,

1. I personate the Church here, an excellent and glorious woman, whose
clothing is as we read Rev. 12. 1.
. And is it not presumption in me, the lowest and vilest of ten thousand, to
take upon me to be the mouth of the Church? upright Ps. 33. 1. 119. 7.
in heart, the Church, can render a THANK-OFFERING acceptable to the Lord. The
Devil and his servants neither can nor will; They can curse and blaspheme,
that they can and will do; Thank and Praise God, that they will not, they
cannot do. The Churches heart is prepared, she can arise and give thanks;
they and they only, can call upon all that is within them to bless His holy
Name Ps. 103. 1.
. And if they, like good Stewards, are not careful at this point, to maintain
their Lords Royalty and Right, his Tribate and Impost, their Lord will loose
all, Thanks and Praise both. And that is all He looks for, for all His rich
mercies and glorious works done to the children of men. Therefore His children
will look narrowly at this point, That they fail not therein.

2. I am here the mouth of the Church; he must have her spirit that knows her
mind; How does silly man know what the Church will say?

well is deep, and I have no bucket to draw; and in this case I cannot dive
into the bottom, nor attain to the height of her expressions, being so filled
with the Holy Ghost: Yet I know her mind so far, that I can more then guess
at what she will say He that has but a common light (I do not say, I have
more) very ordinary abilities, cannot but conceive the subject matter of such a
work, and the manner of prosecuting the same very well. He must conceive also,
unless he has put out all his eyes, inward and outwa^d every one, that the
Church considers and ponders these mavelous works in her heart, wrought for
her, and conveyed to her by the hands of her Lord and King (for, what ever the
conveyance is, the Church looks up to her Lords hand,) Surely he cannot but
think and know, that the Church accounts these works wonderful, and her
recording, thanking, praising, all these must hold an answerablenesse too; the
man whose eyes were a little opened; what o^ him? See how he was taken with the
won^er^ull administrations of God toward His people (seeing none of his
enchantments nor Divinations could take) and hear his words, How Numb. 23. 23.
goodly are thy Tents, O Iaco^, and thy Taberna^^es, O Israel! As the valleys,
etc. for it contains much. He has the strength of an Unicorne, etc. Blessed
is he that blesses Thee, and cursed is he that curses Thee (...). 24 5, 6. 8,
9.
.

Look ye! Balaam could ^ay this, and yet his eyes were but a little opened and
presently shut again; Covetousnes had closed them, he loved the wages of
iniquity, and yet the works of God toward His Church dazeled his eyes, they
were so glorious in his sight, and made him break out to admiration. Certainly
such have been Gods works, so strange, so wonderful, so glorious toward His
Church this Year; so as the blind and the lame, and the fool must say now,
WHAT HAS GOD DONE? Surely even These men must know, that Thou, Whose Name
alone is JEHOVAH art the most High over all the Earth Ps. 83. 18.
, These are forced now to ascribe strength unto God, saying, His excellency is
over Israel, and His strength is in the clouds. O God Thou art terrible, out of
Thy holy places, the God of Israel is He That gives strength and power unto
His people. Blessed be God Ps 49. 34, 35.
. It is no presumption then to do as all should do, and as fools are forced
to do, no nor boldness neither; for secondly,

The Lord knows with what care and diligence I have done this (if it may be
said, it is done; for he that comes after, and does much more, with more skill
and more strength of parts, will not happily say of such a work as this, it is
done, and yet I may say) with care and labor enough, and with fear too much,
least something should slip out unbeseeming a Thank-offering, or the person
presenting the same. And not to belie the work, the Lord knows with what
SEEKING also, out of myself unto HIM: and when there was no answer in supply
of strength, then I wrought with the strength of a man, and did drive heavily.
He will find it thus, that reads over the work, and then finding something
that is good, he will say, THE FINGER OF GOD IS HERE, and he will make much of
it; where he finds weakness, (for I will not call it bad or ^ll) there he
finds a man and no more; no matter how he deals with him, so he remembers
himself, and considers, That in many things we offend all: and he that offends
not in his tongue, (especially when he speaks much) (the Pen is but the tongue
in print) is a perfect man. And this may suffice to clear the answer to the
first Doubt, That any man, who has common principles may know the mind of the
Church at this point, what her Sons and Daughters will do now at this time,
now that their Lord has dealt so like Himself, so graciousl^ with His people.
We have heard what Balaam said, a vile person, blinded with covetousness, an
Aliant from the Common wealth of Israel, and a stranger to their joy. Who
knows not then, what the Church will say, for whom her Lord has wrought such
Deliverances as these?

And now, Reader, supposing thee no Malignant one but alooker on the affliction
in the day of calamity Obad. 13.
, not knowing what side to turn to, nor which way to take because of the
Dilemma of the Time; so thou say for which way soever thou shall turn, a
horn may meet with thee, and push thee, yea gore thy sides, so thou say in
effect. Let me tell thee now in much love, though in plain English, That thou
do not seem to have so much Logic as a Dog has; for when he comes to the
place, where two or more ways meet, his little Logic serves his turn, and
reselves him, which way the Beast went. I know thou have more Logic, but
certainly thou have made no use of it hitherto; Try thy skill now, and put
Reason to it, that is natural Logic, Ask thy self now, which way goes the
BEAST, I mean the Pope and all his sworn s^rvants? Thou need not smell
here, though the savor of the Beast is very strong; thy eye ^^ ill tell thee
which way go all the Atheists and Papists all over the Christian world; All the
Prelates, all that love to have the pre-eminence Ioh. 3. 9.
, all that seek honor from Men, thy eye will tell thee which way those go
Why then, as sure as thy soul lives, thou must go a cross way to all these
now, if thou seek the right way, the way of the just, and look thy soul
shall live hereafter for ever with the Lord. But I will wind up thy
understanding by degrees, I see thou art but carried on, as others are, by the
example of thy betters, who think themselves the two cleared eyes of the Land;
I will show you the vanity and danger of following such persons, and then
answer what those persons (that take themselves to be such clear sighted men)
have to say: And all this, that thou may join with the Church in her
THANKE-OFFERING, take hold of her skirt, saying, I will go with you, for we
have heard (and seen) That God is with you Zach. 8. 23.
.

THANKE-OFFERING, for you see others do not, who account themselves the
cleared EYES of the Land. Scholars you mean, Collegiate Men.

confidence in a guide Mic^. 7. 5. Esa. 55. 4.
, It is o^ everlasting use to remember, That we have but one LEADER given us,
and He is our COMMANDER; other leaders we may follow, but as they lead us to
Christ; and other Commanders we must obey, but as they command from His mouth
The poor ignorant people of old, looked what their Rulers did; and hearkened to
what the Scribes and Pharisees, Rabbis and Great Clarks spoke, and so were
miserably seduced, and rejected the council of God against their own souls
Ioh. 7. 30.
. A good warning this for you and for me at this time.

Secondly Consider, Are these clear sighted men? They say so, They say, They
SEE; Therefore you may say, and say truly, their sin remains Ioh. 9. 41.
. And that you may know what you say, observe them in their practice.
Certainly that old Sorcerer, did not blunder more blindfolded then they have
done, for they look to be promoted to honor; they mind the wages of iniquity,
they love to receive honor of another; and seek not the honor that comes
from God Ioh 5. 44.
only. Lactantius says well Lib. 7. chap. 1. Qui ambitione inflati, etc.
, your ambitious man, BISHOP WOULD BE, he that is all for his wages, he will
blunder on, and though you should tell him, he is out of the way, and the sword
will meet him there, and show him as clear reason, that so it will be, as if
you should carry the Sun in your hand, yet he will reject your counsel: he
minds his wages, and honor from men: Luther said as much long ago; I will
never regard what the Monks say; and less what they do, they plead for their
bellies, their ease, etc. light prophets, put them upon the balance, and a
penny weight upon the other scale (that is their bargain, so they indent with
the Lord,) and that will way them down. We had our lesson a little before, But
on LEADER, and on COMMANDER.

But we must give these clear sighted men fair quarter, and hear their
Objections first in the gross and full lump.

Trent) the ILIAD of this age; Therefore they had small reason to render them a
THANK-OFFERING.

IN EVERY THING GIVE THANKS; then for imprisonment too: 1 These. 5. 18,
To God they will say (for they are not past grace.) Nay to man, if we follow
the light side of the Cloud. I remember Mr. Bradford (but he had another
spirit, an excellent spirit) was of that mind, and so he could do; If the
Queen will send me to prison said he, I will thank her there; if from t^ence
to the stake, I will thank her there also. There was a thankful Man.

But if we cannot draw men on to be Thankful for blessings; surely we must
expect they will murmr and curse too under crosses: And yet it will be as
clear anon; when I come to clear the Method, as the Sunnebeame, That we must
be Thankful for all, for imprisonment, for stripes, etc. Thus in the
general: We must now hear the particulars of their charge, and those are two.
1. What the Parliament have done touching Church Livings. 2. Then touching
Churchmen. I must remember I am in a Preface now, and would not exceed it is
bounds. When my pen did take full scope touching this double charge, I am
persuaded, that I have cleared the proceedings in Parliament against both
these, double Benefices, and perverse Men, to be the most advantageous for the
Church, truly so called, the most just and equitable of any proceedings, that
ever were heard of since a Parliament was heard of in the world: for to say so
much as may satisfy the Reader, touching the first Charge; how reasonable a
thing is it first; That he, who has an Office, should attend upon his Office?
Again, how just and equitable a thing is it, that Watchmen should be stirred
up, and not suffered to sleep in the day, loving to slumber, nay to snore in
their Cabines? And it was strange, Isa. 56. 10.
(but yet so it was) They could sleep so soundly there, who had blood for
their boulsters. They slept soundly, while souls, purchased by the blood of
Christ, are murdered at their elbow. Surely this was because their beds were
too soft, and because of the sweat and rankenesse of their prosperity Vitium
long pacis and oputentae sec^^^itatis. Sal.
. But He, who makes inquisition for blood, will require this of them, who
slept, where the envious man made havocke and destroyed: or if they were awake,
then they drowned their Cates in wine.

Pretty and Learning. Though we should note this, there is encouragement enough
in doing our Duty, in working the thing that good is, for we work for a good
Master (...), etc. He shall have the greatest reward, who works not for a
reward Isid. p^ll. l 2. p. 184.
. But I speak to them, that will bargain with their Lord, and well know their
wages, else will dee no work. I demand of these, why should this Discourage
them in their studies, or cut them short in their hopes, that some men with
their Et cetera^s, shall not be ^uffered any longer, to ingrosse or enclose the
rich and fat pastures of the Earth; to eat the fat and cream of the Land, as
those their Brethren before them, Abby-lubbers, evill-beasts, flow-bellies have
done, while the good Scholars feed upon a poor pittance the while; nay, are
almost starved? I pray ^^u might not good Scholars pick out many a good bit
from such a place as ^au^s, were it rid of these, etc. and their singing men?
And a very good riddance; how well might they be spared? no fitter (some of
the^) for a Church, then a Swine for a Parlour. And yet we do not think, that
there ought to be an equal divident, an equal d^stribution of honors and
preforments in the Church; but according to Desert and proportion in gifts: yet
we think the Proverb has some use here; They are merry in the Ha^l, when
beards wagg all: And not when the one table have their full messes, even to a
surfitting and vomit; the other none at all, or in no proportion. And so much
to the complaint touching Church livings; now touching Churchmen.

Ob. Titularis no^ Tu^elaris Rex; desuit non praesuit reipublicae. (...). Naz.
complained that in his time, they were made Bishops, who made themselves the
basest servants, servants to their lusts. ep. 10.
. They cannot give thanks to the high Court, for they have cast forth of the
Church their Churchmen?

Ans. Churchmen! As the Judges, the chiefesto them, were Commonwealths men;
they so sought their own private-wealth, that they left the poor subject,
nothing he could call hi^ own, but his misery: So these Churchmen, they called
out the Church, the Church when they stab^ed her to the very heart. Put we
these together for they be M^^ches, Churchmen and Commonwealths men; then you
may say worse of them then was said of Chilperick^d a bad King of Fran^e, my
English will not be so good as the Latin, but too good for them, He was a
nursing Father, not in deed, but in^rame so: He was set over the Commonwealth,
as a golden head there; but he did not the office of an head, of a foot rather,
and so stamped the Commonwealth to powder. These good men are cast-out, and
good reason, for they were as unsavourie salt, neither fit for the Land, nor
yet for the Dunghill, but men cast it out Luke 14. 34.
; as the unprofitable wood of the fruitless vine, were they meet for any
work Ezech. 15. 4.
? But who cast them out, and how? It is worth our labor the inquiring out.
Surely, the Lord God did it, the God of recompenses, for the controversy of
His Zion Esa. 34. 8.
. He did it even by His own right hand. But so (and there we set a mark) as
their own mischief did return upon their own head, And Ps. 7. 16.
his violent dealing came down upon his own pate. The conclusion is, The
Lord cast them out, by the help and violence of their own hands. It is true,
and but equitable, That we should give all dues to man here, for he was a noble
and glorious instrument in Gods hand for the effecting this work, and
disburthening the Church of these oppressors; but we must resolve all into
Gods Hand, and unto the violence, that was found in their own hand. It was the
Lord, That BENT Judah Zach 9. 13.
for Himself, and FILLED the BOW with Ephraim (we may fitly allude to that
place) He has raised up thy sons, from the North and from the South, O Zion,
against thy false sons, and made them as the SWORD of a mighty man, against
those mighty Adversaries: His arrow went forth as the lightning against them.
He went out with VVHIRLEWINDS of the South and North, a CONTINUING Ier. ^0. 23.
Whirlevvind, and it fell with pain on the head of the wicked. We may read
on, The fierce anger of the Lord shall not return, until He has done it, and
until He perform the intents of His Heart: For see what the intents of these
Churchmen were against the Lord, even to make His Land desolate, and His
Church forsaken: To set Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim,
snatching on the right hand and on the left, so eating every man the flesh of
his own arm; And yet their wrath is not turned away, no not yet; The same
Ier. ^0 23. ver 24. Esa. 9. 20.
malice boyles still and runs over; This is their work at this Dait, and
these the intents of their hearts;

That the sword may be bathed in our HEAVEN; That the Land may be filled with
blood from corner to corner. Observe again, what they have done, and how they
have prepared their own way, for the bringing in the Deluge of wrath. They have
let the vineyard of the Lord lie waste; and have broken down the Hedge (now a
Serpent has bit them according to the threat Eccl. 10. 8.
) removed the ancient Land mark, made the Heritage of the Lord, as a speckled
bird Ier. 12. 9. (...) Vol. bom. 31.
, exposed it to the spoil of Foxes and to grievou^ Wolves. Here Chrysostomes
words would astonish them were they well pondred on; I will but point at them
in the margent (...), etc. in Ep ad 1 Cor. 3 Hom. 3.
. The same Father does make it clear to the whole world, even now i: That they
have taught, yea commanded Atheism all over their Diocesses, so Preachers do,
says the Father (indeed they preach not at all) when they spend an hour in a
day (in Chrysostomes days, they preached every Day) in laying the Foundation
of Repentance, from dead works, and of Faith toward God Heb. 6. 1.
: And the rest of the Day, and whole week after, turn their backs upon what
they said, in a lewd and wicked carriage. This makes their hearers Atheists, it
commands Suade^ lingua iubet vita. Genesis 18 19. An example has the virtue of a
Command; nay it is a Compulsion. Cogi cos dicit, qui exemplo Petri iudai^aba^t,
Gal 2 14. Beza.
Atheism; and so we have a little of that much, whereby the Father reproves
the blasphemy of Minister^ in his Days, whose examples destroyed, what their
preaching built up, and so they taught flat Atheism. Our Churchmen have done
so too, as is clear to all the world; and their judgment will be as manifest.
Now the Lord is beginning with them, no^ is the year of Gods vengeance against
those treacherous Priests and light Prophets; now He will recompense upon them
all their abominati^ns, which they have committed in His house before His face.
Now He will raise up Carpenters, which shall strike off those horns, that have
pushed and goard, and scattered the servants of the Lord Zach. 1. 20.


And surely all the undertakings of that High Court, have gone ou^ all along
with God in His way: And have the very stamp and seal of His Hand upon
theirs, to make H^s worship truly spiritual, according to His will; and not
clogged and mixed with humane Inventions, Ecclesiastical and Civil charges.
And he that shall look upon them (the actions, I mean, of the High Court)
with an impartial eye: that shall be but willing to understand them, the
meaning and tendencie thereof, he will be forced to believe, (as was said in a
higher case Qui studuerit intelligere cogetur ei credere. ^ertul. de Deo cap.
17.
) That all this has been suggested to them by God, and managed by His
right hand. They have been but as noble instruments, bent unto His purpo^e,
and as the bow and sword in His Hand. But remember this with it, which was
intimated before, He has brought upon them their own iniquity Ps. 94. 13.
, and so has cut them off; Their own wickedness has helped forward this
great work; the casting out of these Churchmen; nursing Fathers in Name and
no more, for they starved their children; They helped forward Zach. 1. 15.
the wrath, for the slaying a whole Nation: Now His own wrath kills the
foolish man, and envy slays the silly one Job 5. 2.
. So as we may say, in allusion thereunto, and conclude as of old, These
Church-mens iniquity, makes full proof of the Justice and innocence of that
High Court Probatio est nostra innocentiae impietas vestra. Tert. cap. 48.
.

If you will ask me now in the close, what I can say against the office?

My answer is ready: but yet I will say no more here, but as St. Paul says,
touching the LAW, we know the Law is good if a man use it LAWFULLY 1 Timothy 1. 8.
. The next Objection scorcheth, for it is from a tongue set on fire of hell.

Ob. That now they have cast forth Church men, they will cast forth their King
too out of the inheritance of the Lord: They will rise up in batt^ll against
their King, and can they expect that we should tender them a Thank-offering for
that?

An. No sure, the Axe rather, or a rope; let one or both be tendered to such
Philistines, who deal vilely with their King, as if he were not anointed with
oil 2 Samuel 1. 21.
; and then shall these servants of the Lord be free, for they can call God to
record upon their souls, that they rise up for their King against spoylers;
for their Religion against Papists; for their lives and liberties against
murderers; for their Church and Nation against them that would make fenced
Cities, ruined heaps, and bring utter desolation to the King and Kingdom,
Church and Commonwealth and all.

The contrary is suggested to his sacred Majesty, and so forced, that he dares
protest (see how wicked Counsel may prevail!) in the face of Heaven and
Earth, that they who seem to be on his side, and with him, shall maintain the
Laws, just Liberties and Rights of the Church and Commonwealth.

Mark, Reader, Sons of Belial (so much malice has suggested, and, so far
prevailed) shall maintain the Laws; and Papists the true Reformed Religion;
men of bloods, like Irish Villains, nay the very same, shall safeguard your
lives. Read on, Those, that are gone out to battle against these enemies,
vvhither soever the LORD shall send them. What are these men? 1 Kin. 8. 44.


Ob. Malice has suggested (but she was foully out) That most of them are
ANABAPTISTS.

Ans. Nay, not one, I say again, not one. Malice may suggest, That some one or
two there, is a Samaritan and has a Devil, for that has bin suggested against
the Captain of the Host Ioh. ^. 48.
; but that there are ANABAPTISTS there, that is false sure; because they are
gone forth to war, and will maintain it to the Death; No ANABAPTIST then:
No nor Rebels, nor Traitors neither, though suggested so. Like the dirt of
Oysters, it will not stain; the righteous have bin slandered so of old, but
never has been heard or seen such contradictions of sinners, such
contrarieties of Tongues and Wills as now a days.

They can read much written in commendation of folly and to some purpose; They
can read also some sheets blotted in the commendation of the Ague, the Fever
and the Gout: Yea and one whole sheet in the praise of a Louse, and three
sheets in the praise of the vilest person, (but he was an Emperor) that ever
went upon two Legs: All this they may find and read in Books; but they
never heard or read, till of late, nor their Fathers before them, That an Army
most of Papists, and the other looking steadfastly toward Rome, in the same
Kingdom, have bin commended for loyal Subjects, to a Protestant King: And an
Army of Protestants charged with Treason and Rebellion against the same King.
But the Righteous are not careful, they can turn, as aforesaid to the LORD
OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, and seeing there is no vvrong in their Hands: They can say,
as David so persecuted before them, The God of their Fathers look thereon and
rebuke it 2 Chr. 12. 17.
. This has been the good man's comfort evermore, when he has been smitten at
with the tongue; My Adversaries can say much against me (for he thinks his
tongue his own) but he cannot say, I HAVE FORSAKEN THE LAW OF MY GOD: So now,
malice may suggest, that there be Traitors in Gods Host, and most of them
Brownists and Atheists; she is not so shameless to suggest, that most or any
of them are Papists (no Anabaptists:) If so be malice could have suggested
that, and have made the charge good, where had our Hope been? Certainly had
this Host consisted most of Papists, it had gone out under the guilt of all
the righteous blood, shed upon the earth from the blood of righteous Abell unto
the blood of Zacharias; and so down ward unto this Day Mat. 23. 35.
; but not one PAPIST, no not one in the Host of God, the enemies themselves
being Judges; the Papists are all on their side, all the world over: And that
it is so, is ^n clear as the Sun, when he shines in his strength; All the
Papists are on the other side, and not one with the Host of God.

Surely, here is matter for high praise to our God, Blessed be the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, that Satan the accuser of the Brethren, has condemned
his own cause and justified theirs: for behold all this is granted, that all
the Papists in the Land, nay all the world over are on that side: why then we
conclude first, nay the experience of all ages concludes for us;

1. That there on their side are all the Rebels against their King, his Crown
and Dignity: There are all the Traitors against the Church and Commonwealth:
For Papists have been the Fomenters, the Actors of all Rebellions, treasons,
murders, massacres, in all ages since that Church had an appearance on the
Earth; and so are they now, and so will be till their great Prophet be cast
into the great wine press of the wrath of God.

2. That our Host is gone sorth, whither God shall send them 1 King. 8. 44.
against ^ Revel. 14. 19.
His enemies, which are the people of His curse, and against whom we are
charged to maintain war for ever.

3. This Host is gone forth in the strength (I will say nothing of the Prayers
of Gods Host abroad and at home, but) of the BLESSING of the ALMIGHTY. Some may
ask, how do I know that? Very well, and I would have the poor Countryman
know it too, for that is my aim; The Host is gone forth under the curse of his
Holiness, the Pope, I mean. Now it has been concluded as follows ever since
there has been a Pope in Ro^e and a Papist in England. Look which way goes
the Popes curse, that way goes GODS BLESSING, for they go contrary, as Christ
and Antichrist. And this is enough to set the Countryman in his way, if his
guts be not in his head, and his brains in his belly Cuim cerebr^^^ est i^
ventro ingenium i^ pa^i^is. Agr ep. 2^.
, and if so, yet he can discern which way the Papists go, and that it is a
cursed way.

4 This Host shall be victorious, that it shall, for it is the Host of GOD and
His CHRIST, against Antichrist, it must go on and do valiantly, for the
BLESSING of God goes with it, and the curse of the Adversary.



blessing. They have miscarried so as to make them more victorious over
themselves at present, and over the enemy at the last. True it is, The Sword
devoureth one as well as another 2 Samuel 11. ^^.
It may devour Gods dearly Beloved Ier. 12. 17.
and as dear to us, as the blood in our veins; and yet it is His Host for all
that; who created the Smith that formed the vveapon ver. 26.
. I solemnly protest in the ears of the God of Hosts, and could be content I
could be heard over all the Christian world, that, if this Host were all
wounded-men, yet could I not doubt of the victory. I may doubt, e Iud, 20. 23.
nay I do doubt, That we have not wept enough, nor prayed enough; or if so (I
doubt it) that may be wanting now, which answers to burnt-offerings and
peace offerings f once: I may doubt of all this, but I cannot doubt of the
victory, in the best Time, Gods Time: For it is Gods Host, a slandered Host,
cursed by the Pope, and his vassals, therefore Gods blessing is there; it must
prevail and be victorious.

And this is all the answer they shall get to this, and it may suffice. How can
I give a direct and single answer to a double tongue and a double heart, for
their language is different. No man can imagine, That the Adversaries speak as
they think; for who can conceive that Noah's flood was sent upon the Earth to
allay the dust there: or, that the Devil stirred up the Arabians, Sabeans, and
Chaldeans to be a wall unto Job, to safeguard him, his children, his house and
goods? And so I have done with these Collegiate men; Removed the offense, taken
from their example; answered their double charge, and their notorious slanders.
And yet there is one Objection more, which truly I had clean forgot to answer
in it is due place, therefore it must be done now.

Ob. The title of honor is taken away from Churchmen.

Ans. That cannot be said to be taken from us, which belongs not to us. Will no
title serve the turn, but please your Grace, or your Lordship, thereby
quenching Grace, and Lording it over the consciences of men? Another Title will
serve better: as a Rod also for Discipline, and yet not made of Iron. Let them
Lord-it over themselves, and their own lusts (which they have served) and then
they shall be Lords and Princes too, nay most Prince-like men (...) Isid. pel.
l. 2 Ep. 147.
. Why may not those Titles serve them, which the Holy Ghost has given: I dare
say, though you read much in the Fathers touching Titles of honor given to
Church men; and a Churchman of late, but none now, tells us the Bishops seat is
a Throne Pocklington Alt. Christ. p. 33 and 95. Thron^^ propri^ principi ^ribui
solet non s^rvo. Be^. Heb. 18.
, yet none of all these have reached to that height of honor, as those Titles
do, which the Holy Ghost has given them, Stewards, Ambassadors, etc. To say
all in two words, Messengers of the Churches and the glory of Christ 2 Cor 8.
23. (...), 2 Timothy 4. 5.
. Let a Minister answer these Titles, make full proof, they belong unto him;
let him fill them up, as the word implies, and then I will not say, what he
shall be, for he shall shine like the Sun, but what he is for the present,
the most honored person that is in the world.

We must note now in the close two things, one for our information, the other
to learn us our Duty.

1. Schoole-learning is not of virtue sufficient to unscale the eyes or unvaile
the heart, an annoynting from above does that. Humane learning if not
sanctified, closes the eye the ^aster; it is a great snare, and like an ignis
fatuus (a mock fire, a sancied light, kindled by our own sparks Esa. 50. 11.
, and a busy leader in these Days) misleades strargely.

2. We must learn our Duty now. Though they revile, we must bless; though
they defame, we must entreat; though they persecute, we must pray; that the
Lord would not deal with them, as they have done; there was none to guide the
Church among all the Sons she has brought forth; neither were there any
that took her by the hand; We pray, deal not so with them (good Lord) guide
Esa. 51. 18.
them, take them by the Hand, that they may walk in strait paths. Though they
did rise up against Thee; yet do not Thou rise up against them; but pardon
them according to the exceeding largess of Thy abundant mercy, which can
multiply pardons, as we have multiplied sins. Lord, cleanse those fountains,
heal those bitter waters, that such may run thence, which may refresh (not
poison) the City of God. Amen.

Now recall what was said at the beginning of this contention, we have but one
LEADER and COMMANDER.

And so I have done with the Divines, whom I honor very much and heartily, so
be they are Divine, magnifying their office, exalting the Scepter of the Lord
Jesus Christ^ these not so, but the contrary; the Lord lay it not to their
charge: He will not, if, in truth of heart, they can charge and shame
themselves with it. I should now come to the Lawyers, the chiefest of them, for
they have made the THANK-OFFERING to be questioned very much in point of Law;
but they are run away, turning their backs upon the Law, yes, the supreme Law,
and the highest reason.

Thanks be to God, we have the Law on our side, and in more strength energie
and virtue, now these Lawyers be gone: And by help of God and the
forementioned, I shall clear the THANK-OFFERING, and the Readers
understanding touching the Cavils about it, and render him also, in the close,
a very thankful man, that is, he shall give us his heart, and his purse too,
if need require, his life also, if Law or Reason can persuade with him, or the
WILL of GOD; all this shall be cleared in order.

All appeal to the Law, I shall appeal thither too; and yet not to the Law of
Nature, which teaches a poor worm to Earth-it-selfe against the foot of
pride; nor to the Law of Nations; no nor to the Laws and Constitutions of this
Kingdom, whereby we have a privilege beyond the Christians in Primitive
times, living under those Emperors, whose Constitutions (I had rather call
them so then Laws) were flat against the Christians, and their Religion, and
that is very considerable now. But all this I leave to the good Lawyer, I
mean, the honest man; and truly he has cleared the case soundly and well; so
much I knew and I do profess my self; No Lawyer you will say. Yes but I am,
for I understand the Law, as the Proverb is; Every man is a fool or a
Physician; he understands something touching the state of his body, what is
good or hurtful for him: so he is a simple man, that knows not so much Law
(and I presume no more then) as may fit him for a civil life in his Society
or Neighborhood. But that I may keep within my own bounds, and be sure to
go right, I will ask and return such an answer, as shall be to the mind and
heart of every honest man.

Q. What is the Law? we have heard much of the common Law, we have seen and
felt something from the Civill-lavv; but what is the SVPREAME LAW?

A. The answer is this, and you shall hear no other, if you shall ask till
Doom^ Day, THAT THE SVPREAM AND SOVEREIGN LAW IS THE SAFETY OF THE PEOPLE
Suprema lex salus populi.
.

We argue, Then the Nobles all (we need no other word, they all are so, so
their Votes for Christ, and actions to promote His glory have innobled them)
have proceeded according to LAW, the SUPREME Law: For I ask, and let malice
answer, Did ever any before them sweat as they have done? Did ever any work so
effectually, for the safety of their Nations? We thought (such fools we were)
That safety it self Salus ipsa.
, as the simple Proverb is, could not have saved the Nation. We said, Our hope
is perished; the house of Esau shall be a fire, and the house of Jacob as
stubble: Behold by their noble endeavors and contrivements, they have so
wrought with God this Day, That it is otherwise, they have snatched us as
brands out of the burning: and now we may say, as we read, The house of Jacob
shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for
stubble Obad. 18.
. And have they not Law for this? No Law for keeping down the fire, that
vvild-fire, from kindling upon our Bodies, our Houses, our Towns, our Cities,
our Nation, our three Kingdoms? No Law for saving all these from utter ruin
and Destruction? Doubtless they have Law on their side, which will justify
them, and their actions, The Supreme law; It cannot be clearer, but it is as
clear as the Sun, that glorious Creature shining in it is strength. Nay, I
must go higher, and quite stop the mouth of malice it self. Did ever any
contend so heartily, work so effectually with one lip, and one shoulder, as
these Nobles have wrought for the SVPREAME safety of the people? I mean, the
SALVATION of our SOVLES, that is Supreme, a Salvation indeed. If we will be
fullen, and will not answer here (as men hating to be Reformed) I can tell who
will answer with indignation and wrath enough; the Prelates will, those, that
labor not in the Word and Doctrine, those I mean, All that Antichristian
Tribe, the Devil and all his servants. The Votes and actions of the Nobles
this way, have tormented the Devil and his Angels; A sure evidence, That the
Nobles have done right; They have wrought for the safety o^ our bodies and
souls hoth, that is a Salvation indeed. It were ^ol^y to ask now, and
blasphemy to doubt, whether they had not a Law, a Supreme Law for all this?
And so I would leave the Law (but it will not be left) and come to Reason, so
to argue the case.

What is the best Reason? The Answer is, and we have no other, That is the
chief, the prime, the principal, the highest REASON WHICH MAKES FOR RELIGION
Summa Ratio quae pro Religione fa^^^.
, that it is: come then, let us argue the case like reasonable men, keeping
close to our Reason, yet honoring the Law (of the Land) just and good; and the
good Lawyer, for he is a good man: and be knows himself to be so, or the
contrary, no man in the world more clearly then he, because, though he could
tread the Law under his foot (as the bad Lawyer has done) yet he cannot
put-out the light, which he has set up in his understanding.

All call out law, law, as if all their help were in God and the law. It is
indeed, but if we forsake right Reason, and yet expect help from God and the
Law, we shall fail of our expectation, neither God nor the law will yield us
any help, for God is holy and the law is just.

Consider then, what party (for there be two parties in the world, deviding
all betwixt them, and carrying all before them, so they have done ever since
the world was, and so they will do while the world stands.)

Which of the two do act according to right Reason, that we called the highest
Reason? Who of them do make it their work, to do Justice and Judgment? But
I will come to the highest step, which of them do labor to advance Religion;
to ^et up the Standard of Jesus Christ? He is blind and will not see, who sees
not his answer hereunto. Why then, they have God on their side and the law on
their side (I might say, Gospel too for there comes in the highest Reason) and
therefore by help of God and the law, and right reason also, they will do
exploits. Observe we how the Worthies in the managing of their great affairs,
have walked (by the same help, and steering their course by the same hand,
level to the same mark) how exactly, how blamelesly, how harmelesly, as the
Sons of God, (according to the line of men) so as Momus himself, an envious
and prying person once, and now, and yet cannot rebuke them Phil. 2. 15. (...).
. How comes it to be so, That these Worthies have carried themselves so exactly
well? There can be no other reason given but this, by help of God, the law,
and the highest Reason. For as was said, God is their Pilot, He steers their
course, and the law was their land-marke, their boundary, their hedge (had they
broken that a Serpent had by Eccl. 10. 8.
them Eccl. 10 8.
) therefore, etc. for every man knows it; they with such help, must steer
their course as exactly as the King does, who does according to his charge,
seek help from God, and direction from his Law-book Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
. But now on the contrary; when a man shall slip his hand from out of Gods
hand; will have none of Him, none of His help, will desert the Law, the
supreme Law, that old Land-marke, remove that out of it is place, and forsake
Reason, the highest reason; what will he do? blunder on as the old Sorcerer
did (Prophet is too good a name) Balaam, I mean, so he will blunder on, though
a flaming Sword stand in their way, turning every way to stop them in their
course: Like the Duke of Arabia, Leader to the S^beans, so they will do; And
he was a wild Duke, some say, mad, for, careless of his own desert Country,
he commanded in chief over those, who, carrying their right upon the Swords
point, robbed, spoiled, pillaged all places and persons they came to; though
their best friends, they served all alike, as they did Job. How so? By help of
the Devil (he stirred them up) and by help of his Laws, which are written in
blood. They forsook the supreme law, and were forsaken of right Reason. So
they went on in a cursed way, the path of the Destroyer, wasting and
destruction was there; and this is the way of the wicked now, the old paths
that the Papists have trod in through all Generations; the way of peace they
have not known, and cursed are they that walk therein; nay he shall not escape
punishment that stands still, walks not, but allows of that way. Mark this
good Reader, (for I would gaster thee at the very thought of this way) he shall
not escape punishment that allows (or consents to) this way. I will cause
them to be removed into all Kingdoms of the Earth, because of Manasseh the son
of Hezekiah King of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem Ier 15. 4. You
will find part of this answer in the large English Bible, more fully in Iunius,
but most fully, clearly and usefully explained in Calvin upon this place.
. Might we question the Righteous judgment of the Lord, we would ask here;
Why must the people be removed for that which their King did? And why must the
after-generation (for this was long after) be sorely visited for the sins of
their Forefathers?

There is a double answer unto this double Question, and it will clear the
just proceedings of the Lord, The Judge of all the Earth, and shall not he do
right Genesis 18. 25.
? Because the people then when Manasseh was living, allowed of what their King
did in the alteration of Religion, purged and settled by his good Father; and
persecution of Gods servants: He was the Author of bloody Decrees, but the
People were the Ministers and Executioners thereof, and woe to both Tum
auctoribus maleficiorum, ^um administris. Isa. ^. 10. Iun.
. 2. And the generations following, allowed of all this, for they went on
securely not humbled for what their Fathers had done. This is the answer, and
the note, and if it be noted well, it will be as a flaming sword to keep our
foot from the path of the destroyer; nay more, from allowing of that way, for
as sure as our souls do live, they shall fall, they and their companies, that
walk in this way, that allow and consent to such a way, where wasting and
destruction is, forsaking the help of God and the Law, and forsaken of right
Reason: For the blessing of the Pope goes along with them and the curse of the
Al^ighty: That was the point, and it cleares forth the way unto us, what way we
must avoid, if we would escape the curse of God; what way w^ must take (for
there is no standing still, a N^^ter, that is to allow of a ba^ way) if we do^
expect a blessing from Him. And this I hope is cleared out unto thee, ^o is thy
judgment therein, Thou see clearly what way thou art to take by the help of
God, the Law, and the highest Reason. I shall ^leare the WILL of GOD unto thee
next, for I do suppose th^re is a th^cke c^oud betwixt thine eye and it thou
art not clear at that point. By the help of God, I shall make it as clear
unto thee as is the Sun beam. But I do believe already thy mind is so
cleared now, That thou do think it but a point of mere duty, that the
Church should render a Thank offering to Her God (that cannot be questioned
now) and to man also (that is questioned) by whose hands the Lord has wrought
so wonderfully this last year: Nay, I am persuaded better then so, Thou will
do, as the Church does, thou will offer too; Yes thou will say, thou will give
thanks, for that is as easily done, as thy Cap is moved, an easy motion that.
No, but it is not; it is the Churches THANK-OFFERING, and she offers willingly;
therefore if thou will do like her, we must have thy tongue and thy hand, and
thy heart: A Thank-offering is not a Lip-labor, no, there is in it the very
labor of love, the work of faith; and, (because we look to see our thanks
again) the patience of hope. Come now, what will thou do? (For words and no
more, are like Nuts, they nourish not) Mark what follows; If I knew the will
of my GODS, I would do what they would have me do; and they should have
what they would have from me. A notable speech, and yet a Heathen spoke it,
Seneca, whom because of this and something else he said and did, Erasmus calls a
Divine-man, and is so charitable, as to register him in the Catalogue of
Saints. Indeed this saying contains much, and we must make much use of it; we
will hear it again; If he knew the will of his gods; What then? Then they
should have the strength of his parts, and the chiefest of his Riches, they
should have what they would have. So he said. What were these gods? Stocks
and Stones, some of them Devils; few did him a little good, at sometime in
conceit; the most a great deal of hurt, but he offered so liberally to all,
because he would please all, that some might do him good, others might do him
no hurt Aust. de civit l. 8 13. Plac^ndi sunt Dij mali ne laed^nt, bo^^i
invocandi ut profi^^.


Enquire now and so thou shall understand His Will the better. What is thy
God? As we read, The God That made the Heaven and the Earth, The Father of the
Lord Jesus Christ, the God before whom thou do walk Gen 49. 25.
, the God Who has fed thee all thy life long unto this Day; The God Almighty,
Who has blessed us with the blessings of Heaven above, blessings * Genesis 4. 15.
of the deep that lies under, blessings of the breast and of the womb. But when
I have said God, I have said all, Mercy goodness, wisdom, power, riches, all;
only this was not said, That He so loved the world, that He gave His only
begotten Son, etc. What will thou do now for this God and His Christ? Thou will understand what His will is first: Thou do well, So thou shall; His will
shall be cleared unto you, as the Sun beam. This is His will, even thy
Sanctification 1 These. 4. 3.
, His will, the very Law of His will (but His will is His Law, an holy Law; and
His will revealed is our Law) that we should sanctify His Name and His Day,
hear His word, and do it, that is His will; walk as people in Covenant with
Him, as children of the light, honestly Romans 13. 13.
, as in the Day, soberly, righteously and godly in this present world Tit. 2.
12.
: not in rioting and drunkenness, not in strife and envying, not as Arabians
(Sabeans) and Chaldeans, Papists and Atheists, men without God in the world,
robbing, spoiling, pillaging; not as the fishes in the Sea, where the greater
devour the lesser Hab. 1. 14.
; not as Devils 1 Timothy 2. 12.
, slandring each other; not as his eldest sons children of Beliall, breaking
yoakes and casting away bands, and girdles, under a pretense of being freed
from fetters: not so, for this is after the lust of the Devil, most contrary
to the will of God, which is as was said, Holy, just and good. It is impossible
we should be ignorant of it Why then Thou know what the will of thy God is,
and Thou see Who steer their course thereafter, by the help^ of God and the
Law. You see who do contend for the Faith, for Religion, for the Gospel, call
it what you will; It is that whereto the Prophets and Apostles have sealed, and
so transmitted it to the generations following, and from them it came streaming
down unto us in the blood of the Martyrs, under the shadow whereof this Church
has enjoyed her Sabbaths, rest and peace these foure-score years and upward:
So long have we set in peace under this cove^ing. For this the Nobles have
contended, and are resolved to resist the opposers of it unto blood. And is it
not Gods will they should so do? Yes, more cleared unto them, then if it could
have bin written with the Sun beam. And is it not their bounden duty so to
do? No question to be made of that, when it is clearly the will of God. But I
would rather their children should answer here: Certainly ha^ these Nobles
failed at this point, had they not given out their Male, their strength in the
managing thi^ great business; had they not contended here, then had their
Descendents put up a complaint against them doubled, the same, as we read,
Bloody Fathers have ye bin to Exodus 4. 25.
us, bloody Fathers ye are. Ye contended not for Religion, ye neglected that,
ye were careless thereof, and so of the good estate of future times, unnto
which ye knew, ye must transmit and commend-over, us; your dearest pledges;
bloody Fathers ye are, so they had complained.

Blessed be God, they knew the will of their Lord, and their bounden duty, and
have done thereafter; they have contended for this Faith, and they will
contend: what is their life to them? o^ what regard to a new b^rne son? If
ICHABOD, where is the glory? that is gone. They will contend for the Glory,
they will keep it, they are resolved so, so to contend even as for life.

contend against their King! Is that the will of God?

wicked; They contend for the King, for the maintaining his Crown, Peace and
Dignity. They contend for the maintenance of Religion, and that is like the
maintaining a Ship in a Tempest; a silly will^ull man, and let him perish (if
he be not a sleep) that will not put forth his hand to maintain the Ship now
in distress of weather* if that lives he lives; if that drowns be drownes.
Truly, I have said all I can say; They that contend to maintain Religion, do
as those, who contend to save their ship, save that and that will save them.
The Nobles do contend to maintain Religion (that ship) and in so doing they
contend for their King; his life and peace, for his everlasting Crown, for the
peace and honor of his people; for the safety of his Kingdoms, that they may
be the head and not the tail^, the most honorable of Kingdoms. All this they
do contend for, for they contend for Religion, that ship which carries three
Kingdoms in it at once, peace, safety, lives, liberties and all. And is it
not the will of God they should so contend? It were folly to answer, for it is
blasphemy to doubt. Then what will thou do to help them and their cause,
against the Mighty. It is the greatest, the most hopeful cause, the best, the
plainest and clearest (as clear as the Sun beam) the most legible cause
that ever was heard or read of in the world What will thou do now to rescue
thy King from out of the hands of Murderers? The Land from out of the hands of
spoylers? The Laws of God and man from sons of Belial, who would make all void?
What wilt thou do, to help the Lord against these Nimrods, mighty hu^ters?
What will thou do, I say, to help God and the cause of Christ? Neither of
them both do need thee, He, Whose cause it is, can manage it without thee; But
so He is pleased to honor His Servants, by calling them forth to help Him
against the mighty. And what will thou do for Him and His cause, Who was made
a curse for thee, gave His blood for thee, what will thou do for Him? It is
His will and command both, that thou should give in thy help, the Male of
thy flock, thy strength and chief of thy substance to Him, and thou have
heard what an Heathen will do in such a case; then thou will bid freely, Thy
Religion, thy Faith, never put thee to cost, till new, what will thou do now?
A Papist shall not out-bid thee, for the maintaining, his Idol-service, a
cursed service* yet see how forward he is, he will give all to his skin; nay
skin and all, for ^e will venture his precious soul, he loves not his life
unto death in his blind zeal, so he may maintain the Man of sin, a
despicable man; and his cause, a desperate cause. The Atheist bids roundly too
(the man without God in the world, who bel^eves not that there is any Spirit
good or bad) he carries his soul in his hand too, he fights himself into
slavery, that he may maintain his Idol, his ^ride and Ambition, for Honor in
that way there is none, no nor ease, nor peace neither, yet see what he does,
how impatient Omne peccatum impatientiae ascribendum: Nemo impudicus non
impatiens pudicitiae, n^c iniustus non impatiens iustitiae. Tert. de pat. cap.
5.
he is in traversing his way, that cursed way! The Papist shall not exceed
thee now, no nor the Atheist neither. Why then thou must be very active and
liberal too, thy hand and thy heart and all must go, else they will go beyond
thee. I ask agai^e, what will thou do? Before thou can answer me, I must
resolve thee in one doubt more.

Ob. I could act with a more free spirit, with more enlarged affections, If he
be a Clerg^man, that scrup^es here, either ^t the will of Man, or at the
offering, believe him not: he is a counterfeit, he has satisfied his
conscience and rocked it a sleep, resolved in a more scrupulous case; that he
may receive h^^ offerings next Easter; his Tithes all the year after, and more
a great dealt from two places, though he ministers at neither: there he is
pinched now, but no scruple there.
because with more clearenesse of judgment, if so be Gods will were concurring
with the will of my ^ur^ing Fathers and spiritual Lords.

An. These were no^ spiritual once, nor Lords now. But this is a strange
speech if we mark it, that Gods will must concur with man's will, else we
will not do there after. This is preposterous indeed. What must yield here?
Without all contradiction, as the less is blessed of the better Heb. 77.
: So the less must yield to the greatest, and the worst to the Best. Gods will
is an holy, a good, a just will, as you heard; man's will is cross, stubberne
and perverse, as you shall hear, it is affianced to carnal wisdom and humane
reason, and so it is, as it has bin; and it does, as it has done, all the
mischief in the world. Man's will, by the help of carnal reason, and the Law
of sin in the members, has rebelled against God ever since there was a man
upon the Earth. This will, says one Bernard: Ochr: Sermon. 3.
, was the Serpent in the Garden; it made Cain kill his brother; persuaded the
old world to do as we read, and provoked Pharaoh to rush into the Sea: It made
Gods people murmr, it made Solomon lose his wits amongst his strange wives;
and stirred his Father to kill Uriah; this very will with her confederates,
persecuted the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles in former ages, the Messengers of
the Churches and the glory of Christ ever since, down ward to this day Nothing
so much as this will favors the Kingdom of Antichrist, introdu^ing all the
superstitions, Hypocrisies, murders, massacres, etc. This will persuades a man
rather then stoop to fall, though he is but to stoop to Law and right Reason;
This will makes the most worldly wise, the most fool, most wicked, most
persecuting. And so the Author goes on. Testimonies from latter times can tell
us as much; Man's will by it is helpers, before said, will bring a city into a
snare, So in English Pro. 29. 8. Sufflant sufflando inflammant,
: Will set Cities on fi^e, and whole Kingdoms in a flame, so Iunius reads it,
and so we, for so this will would have done. As then, it is wilfulness to
say: This shall be for I Will have it so, the Will is the Reason: So also, it
is wickedness, to look unto man's will (further then it is subordinate to
Gods will) for it is as the carnal mind, enmity against God, not subject to
His Law, neither indeed can be Romans 87.
. It is then sufficient, abundantly sufficient, That we know Gods will, and
this is our wisdom, to resolve all thereinto; That it is His WILL we should
contend for the Faith; (for the safeguarding that Ship) strive, even unto
death, for the rescuing our King, Parliament, Nation, Laws, Liberties,
Religion, Lives, out of the hands of Spoylers.

Ob. Spoylers! why so? Those of our own Nation, and those called in unto us,
endeavor with all their might to establish our Religion, Jaws, Liberties: God
forbid I should deny it, for they affirm and vow it too.

Ans. I thought this had been answered before, but some men will not be
answered. In earnest, tell me, Art thou so credulous as aforesaid? Yes, Then
do thou believe, as aforesaid, that Noah's flood came-in to allay the dust:
And that the Duke of Arabia with his companies of Sabeans, were stirred up to
safeguard Job and his house. It is not Gods WILL we should believe lies; not
what the tongue says, but what the hand does. Man's WILL is cleared here to be
perverse and wicked, GODS WILL so cleared also, that we cannot plead ignorance
thereof. I will hold my Candle no longer before that Sun.

This is GODS WILL as before said, and we kn^w it so to be, and They that do
know it, and are engaged to do thereafter, have such a sense of Duty, that
they would rather loose their Heads, then that their King (so we touching King
and PARLIAMENT) should loose one hai^e of his (or their) Honor.

And so I have cleared (as I could, and as briefly) the maine doubts, touching
the Thanke-offering, the person that offers it, our Duty thereupon, and grave
questions thereabouts, for the settling of the judgment therein, that we also
may offer Amemus Christu^ and facile videbitur omne difficile, parvum etc.
Hier. ad Eust. ep. 17. p. 207. Sequitur hunc affectum membra omnia and omnes
parts etc. Call. in Dan. ^. 4.
, THANKS to GOD, His King and His faithful Servants (i e.) our Tongues and
our hands, and our hearts to serve them in LOVE, and Love is a great Commander,
it commands all; it does all, it believes all, it gives all, d etc.

The method is questioned next, not where I am to begin, for surely that is out
of all question, with prime and ancient Mercies, and with the bottom or top
Mercy (express it you, for I cannot) the (...) Chry. in cap. 29. Genesis
root-Mercy. The Church fixes thereon, therefore I must remember that; for I
could not raise a Pillar, and make it stand in the ^yer without a bottom. He
that builds without hands, upholds without pillars: So God does, man cannot do
so. I am right thus far.

Indeed the maine Question is, touching the Method; and the good stumble at it,
Why there is a Thank-offering, for days of Captivity?

I conceive there is great reason for that, and had I failed at that Point, I
had no way answered the mind of the Church: Therefore it was my chief care and
I knew it was the Churches pleasure so, To remember her Nights of Affliction,
for she never profited so much as in that School, though she sat in the
dark; her days of e Zach. 1^. 10.
Captivity, for she never felt such enlargements as then; The time when she
sat as a widow, for then she remembers the Lord was a Husband unto her, when
she sat an Orphane, fatherless and motherlesse, nay childlesse, for then she
was in bitterness e. A Father and Mother both are carried forth to the place of
silence, laid in their dark beds, and little is said, and less is done, but
for ostentation and show for the most part, but the child is carried ^orth to
that place, and behold there is Lamentation and bitter mourning, as Rachels was
Ier. 31. 1^.
: This sad time must be remembered too, for the Church can say now, That then
the Lord was to her better then ten Sons. The immediate comforts are the
strongest comforts, and are then powered in, when the vessel is emptied,
Creature comforts are denied, or drained forth, and self confidence is
gone-out, for then prayers are powred-out too Isa. 26. 16.
(at other times there was but a dropping, a pouring forth now) when she is in
bitterness, or a sufferer, in bonds or imprisonment, for the cause of her
Christ, etc. Enquire of him or them that have been pillored for the cause of
Christ (it must still be remembered, The cause makes the Martyr) then separated
to the winds; these will tell us the same, which my ears have heard, that then
came-in the greatest Springtide of comfort, when they were at the lowest eb^e
of distress; then their souls were ravished, then they felt a joy
unspeakable, when the Adversary had made them a GAZING STOCK by Reproaches and
afflictions Heb 10. 13.
, A SPECTACLE, to the world, Angels and men 1 Cor. 4. 9.
. It was so with our brethren, as with the Apostles in ancient times, when the
Adversary stopped up every crevice, that no light might come-in, then behold a
light shines Act. ^^. 7.
; when the Adversary lays load upon the loins, and makes fast the bars,
then behold strange enlargements, for God works then; all difficulties remove,
and the irongate opens ver. 10. Hab. 3. 18.
. When there is no supply from the Field, nor from the Fold, nor from the
Stall, Then God comes-in. What then? Then it follows, I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation.

I could fill the Margin and line both, and to some purpose, but the cas^ is
plain, and the du^y is evident, The Church has thrived best, when 2 Chro. 28.
22.
her pasture was shortest: Adversity has slain a thousand (and yet I cannot
tell that, for I read but of one that was not bettered by it, and that was
King Ahaz; his name is doubled, for he rebelled under Gods rod in a time of
distress) But prosperity has slain it is ten thousand; perhaps more, for I
never read of any more then one, that had his eyes opened by eating honey 1 Samuel
14. 7.
: Few or none have bin battered by the sweets of prosperity; many have bin
undone. But I forbear, only noting this; He that feasteth upon the sweets the
Creature yields, takes full liberty there, is not acquainted with the
righteous man's joy, who then, and never but then, sceles rivers of living
waters flowing-in; floods of bony and butter, when he has stopped and dommed up
(in affection and judgment) all his fresh springs from below. And so much to
clear the Method at that point, as the Church is preparing still for the hour
of Temptation, so they are joyful in it, and thankful for it. This is of
great concernment to us, who are at the heights in our joys and at the depths
in our sorrows.

For the Remainder, let it answer for it self, Surely, I stood bound to God
and man both, undertaking that work (fitter for another, but another did it
not, till I was so far, as past hearing a callbacke) to begin with that year
and mouth, when God did work most wonderfully, for then ^ee wrought alone, His
arm was bare, there was no covering of flesh. Thence I proceed to those
works, that man WROUGHT with God, and I bring them in as the bearers did
the fruits of a good Land, thrust and throngd together, like Grapes in a
cluster: Yet so as all may see how pleasant the Land is our Nobles would bring
us also to.

The meaning is, you shall have but an Abstract here, an abridgement of many
particulars largely debated on in their place, and there making up a full
Volume, which the Author keeps entire, knowing very well, if there be cause
of it, He that suggested it, and br^ught it to his hand, will bring it forth in
due time: In the mean time he could not forbear, but he must send forth this
Abstract in the Churches name: For though Epitomies are deemed, by a nob^e
Scholar, the Moates and Cankers of History, yet considering the season, that
the time is quick and may be short, they are the fullest in sense and quickest
for use. It is indeed in two or three h^ads too large for an Abstract, but it
is considerable, whether there was not just and necessary reason I should give
it enlargement there, more then ordinary But whether it pleases or not, I am
not careful: I was careful with all my care to do my duty, and I have done
it according to my measure, with all my strength, and above it; and, if my
heart deceives me not, in truth and uprightness.

I would not deny to man one grain weight of his dues: Nor can I give him one
grain more, then what my soul can goe-out with in tendering unto him; no not
for a return of a pound weight of his Favor. I esteem man's favor, as the
favor of a man, can thank him for it, and heartily: And man's frown, as the
frown of a man, can make use of it, and yet neglect it.

If I might make a short Apology for my long Preface, it would be this; The
vile Priest and his brutish people did press me with very hard words against
them, That have done us all the right that could be: And Pamphlets from their
side were stuffed with such contradictions, such an inconsistency in matters,
such incongruities as these; That all they, who contend for the cause of
Christ, are Rebels, and yet not one Irish amongst them, hardened and brawned in
villainies: All Traitors, who contend and will contend for the Truth, and yet
not one Rev. 11. 7.
Iesuited HEL-HOWND (it is a Kings word contending with a Cardinal) not one
Catholic (murderer) in our Host (so he has bin accounted in all times and
places, making no more conscience to out his Kings throat, then to cut a piece
of bread) These Irish Romish Catholics, universally bloody and monstrous
Savages all the world over, so brawned in cruelties, are accounted now the only
loyal Subjects, ever since the Lord Christ has taken to Himself great Power,
reigning more visibly upon the Earth, demanding His Rights there. And His
faithful Servants are resolved to give these Rights unto Him, Whose they are,
not withholding a hoof, nor dishonourably compounding His matters, so
forfeiting Truth for Peace; but resolving to maintain both with honor, or an
honorable war: ever since this contestation for Christ, and His Truth;
Rebellion, which is as the sin of Witchcraft, against God and His Christ,
has been accounted obedience, and loyal subjection: And a true sense of Duty
to God and man, and to do thereafter, even what God commands, and will have
done, is accounted Rebellion and Treason both. The comfort is, Wisdom is
justified of her children, yes, (and in this point) of all, that are not
unreasonable and wicked men. The Truth is, I could not bear this, at such a
time as this, being to render a THANK-OFFERING in the Churches Name, but I must
Preface to it against such contradictions of Sinners; and render the
THANK-OFFERING free, and the Churches Servants as cleared of these blackes, as
was the Snow in Salmon. And what is wanting here shall be supplied else where;
for I will go on from this Preface to another Treatise, where, by the help of
God, And His Law, I shall clear this very way, wherein the Nobles have walked,
so spoken against now, and blasphemed, as a way of Rebellion and Treason, to be
the very way, wherein all the Nobles, that ever were in the world, have walked,
who walked uprightly with God, dealt faithfully with His people, not
treacherously and as Traitors to King and Kingdom, and their own souls; for,

I have a most comprehensive mercy to treat on, and enlarge upon, which I may
call the Abridgement of this last years wonders, containing, as in a most
fruitful womb, all national blessings, which the Nobles and Worthies have
hitherto, or their children after them, shall travel with, and bring forth to
the Nation. And this they are completing, and in so excellent a way; as that,
though we shall never say of it in this world, the work is done, and
completed (of that comprehension it is) yet, I say, they have so orderly
proceeded in it, by that line and plummet, aforesaid, of all the truly Noble,
that ever were on the Earth, as that it is fully to the Mind of the Lord, and
the heart of the Nation. And now let the Devil rage and his Servants roar
(for in that they glory) though by a woeful prolepsis, here, in sport, for
hereafter in earnest, when they, and their King of the bottomless pit shall
roar there to all eternity: Let the Arabian Dukes with their companies of
Sabeans; let the noble Monsters of these days (so they were called anciently
who are Gentile and noble in the root, but monstrously degenerate in the fruit
of their conversation Nequitiae sordibus imbuta Nobilia portenta, Valor* Max.
l. 3. c. 5.
) let these do their worst, rob, spoil, pillage, shed blood, to their power,
yet by the help of God and the Law, the work shall be carried on, and the
workmen shall prosper, and overcome by the blood of the Lamb Rev. 12. 11.
.

But what is our work now? Work and Pray; or pray and work, no matter which
is first, so both go together. Work with hand and mouth and heart and all. We
have a noble pattern before us of Work men, who (blessings be upon them both
from above and beneath) have offered themselves willingly to this work, and
will very gladly spend, and be spent for us (in this work) though (they may
read on) the more abundantly they love us, the less they are beloved 2 Cor.
12. 15.
. But we have our pattern, and we see our duty; work we as men, who can very
gladly spend and be spent for this cause; for it is His cause, Who did say
indeed, and did as He said, (for H^^ zeal eat Him up He was a whole
burnt-offering) I WILL VERY GLADLY SPEND AND BE SPENT for you (so it was
indeed) the cause of the Lord Jesus Christ, Who was made for us a curse once,
That He might make us, as He is, blessed for ever; having such an example
before us, and such a cause in our eye, we will work now or never. Work we
now as we are able, and let the Lord work as He pleases, He will work like
Himself. Truly He works wonderfully in all His peoples sight: But if He
wrought in the dark, as sometimes He does; if His footsteps are in the waters
(as M Bradford expresses it) a man can see no prints where His Hand is, or
which way His feet go, whither toward us or against us; yet, said that good
man, My hand and my spirit should work after Him; for I am sure I am in the
way, though I see it not; my God goes right, though I discern not the path.
Work we, I say, as we can, and let the Lord work as He will; He does work
gloriously and in sight; work we and pray too, else our work is vain, and
to no purpose; work we, but say, BLESSED BE GOD, first;

Blessed be Thy Name for the Governors among the people, and for them, that
offered themselves willingly. It was, because Thou command and so it is, the
North gives, and the South keeps not back: Sea and Land comes in for Thy
Churches help (peace, peace be to her helpers) to deliver us from the Heathen,
that we may give thanks to Thy holy Name, and glory in Thy praise, Amen. Now

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall (still) prosper that love her;
Pray in Prayer, pray earnestly, our children shall reap the fruit thereof, if
we do not now, for now we have reaped what our forefathers have sown, the
fruit of the prayers of many Generations; Pray we, That the Lord would own His
own cause (certainly He will, and so He does, but He must be sought unto for
this, and enquired after) That His eyes would be for good upon His Children and
servants all over the world; for their eyes and hearts are set steadfast toward
Him and His Jerusalem here below, and there they fix, waiting what God will
do, at such a time as this, and harkening what God will speak now; It is
their confidence, He will speak peace, and do according to His own word,
give His Servants the opening of the mouth, that the enemies may know, HE IS
THE LORDs. The Churches all over the ^ Ezekiel. ^^. 21.
world are resolved now to give their Lord no rest, till He shall give them
rest. The Lord has given His people the greatest mercies, which they prayed
not for, ELECTION before time; His SON in the fulness of time: How can He
with Him deny His people any thing? They forsake not their confidence, there
ore they are importunate with their friends, as they have been in former
years, the day of Jacobs troubles, and treading down, saying, Pray, pray,
pray;

Pray for the King, That the Lord would deliver his soul from the snare of the
Hunter: And pray for the Parliament, who have sought the peace of the King and
his Kingdoms, as their ^wne peace, nay more then so, they have preferred it
before their own: And seeing it is clear to every man, that will see, that
thus they have done, They have sought and wrought effectually for the peace
(that contains all) of their King; or the Salvation (a comprehensive blessing)
of King and his Kingdoms: for maintaining this Ship (RELIGION) wherein our
lives, our liberties, our estates, our peace, and the Churches all over the
world, and our Generations after us are bottomed and maintained; seeing, I say,
their Care, Piety, Zeal, is manifest to all men in the maintaining this Ship:
And all this by the line of the Law; the Plummet of right Reason, the Rule of
their Lords will: Seeing we know it to be so, and do know also in all our
hearts and souls, That not one thing has failed of all the good things, which
the Lord has spoken concerning His people: Nor any of Josh. 24. 14. 1^.
the evil things, which He threatened against His enemies, but all came to
pass: We will close with the word of the Lord, which He has spoken to the
heart of all His faithful Servants in all Generations, I WILL BLESS THEM
THAT BLESS Genesis ^2. 3.
THEE: and CURSE HIM THAT CURSES THEE, even so, Lord, let the curse they have
called for fall upon the wicked; but Thou have promised this goodness unto Thy
Servants: Now therefore, Let it please Thee to bless the house of Thy Servants,
that they and their house may be before Thee for ever: For Thou blessee, 1 Ch^.
17. 26, 2^.
O Lord, and it shall be blessed for ever. Amen and Amen.

THE CHVRCHES THANK-OFFERING To GOD, Her KING and the PARLIAMENT.
CHAP. I.
Recording, thanking, praising, an high employment; who fit for it; how great
the engagement to it; who the fountain of mercies; whence received, thither
returned.

SECT. I.
Thankes-giving and praise a sacred employment.

THe old manner was, that a certain number were appointed, to record, to
thank, and to praise the Lord God of Israel 1 Chronicles. 16. ^.
; These must b^ Levites, such as did minister before the Ark of the Lord. It
was a sacred employment, a work (as some Psalms are) of Degrees. To Record
was the lowest, and required little clevation of spirit: To Thank was an
higher Degree, and commanded more life of affection. To Prai^e, that it, to
sing the high praises of our God, there comes in Selah, a winding-up of the
spirit to the highest. It may be said, What need all this? Such a liveliness
of affection? Such an activity of spirit to thank and to praise God? It is as
ordinary a thing, and as easy a work, as is done in the world; Kings of the
Earth and all people, Princes and all Judges of the Earth, both young men and
Maidens: Old men and children Ps. 148. 11, 12.
. All these do as they are commanded, they thank the Lord and praise Him too;
if we could hear the aforementioned speaking one after another, we should
hear nothing but Thanks and Praise. I am in health says one, I thank God: I
am increased and prosper in the world, says another, I praise God: I have had
many crosses and troubles in the world, I bless my God. They have well spoken
in all that they have said, but o that there were such an heart Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
! All creatures praise God, for so they are commanded, Dragons and all deepes,
etc. Beasts and all Cattle, creeping things and flying soul; all praise Him
in their kind. But man is a more excellent Creature, he stands charged to do
it in a more excellent manner, else as good not done; he has a tongue for that
end, and called his glory; and yet the fewest of all do praise God, as they
should, and all, because they think it so easy and ordinary a work to praise
Him, whereas tongue and heart both must be well tuned for this work, for it is
the most heaven-like of all the services performed by Man here below. As to
Praise is comely, so is it a clean, pure, heavenly, lasting action: None but
the Righteous, whose hearts are cleansed from sin, and emptied of Self, they
only do it, the upright in heart Ps. 33. 1. Ps. 119. 7
; and what they do now on Earth, they shall do hereafter in Heaven; it is
their work to all Eternity.

SECT, II.
Who the Person is that is fit for this work.

WE must then find-out a fit person for this work, so high an employment; a
person that can do it to purpose decently and in order, that ministers before
the Lord continually, they that walk with Him, cleave to Him, trust in Him:
the people of God, such as fear Him only, serve Him only, so walking in his
ways. These many are but one, one House, one Body, so single they in
conversation, so useful they in their communion each with other, as members
one of another. And so I shall take them all under a single Notion, as one
person, whom I shall properly call the Church. The Church indeed (...).
, having more then a name, for that and no more is nothing. She has a Name
that she lives and she does live: and this life is the more spiritfull and
active, because as light was brought out of the womb of darkness; so her life
from death: She was dead, but she is now alive and lives for ever, her life
being hid with Christ in God Col. 3. 3.
. A very fit person for such a work, an heavenly work, an heavenly person;
who, might she deliver her own words with her own mouth, would do it exactly
well: but howsoever she will do it decently and in order, after she has told
us her engagement to the work, how she does record it, and to whom she pays
the tribute of praise and thanks.

SECT. III.
The Churches engagement to record, to thank, to praise.

HItherto all fits very well, the Person and the Work. Now see the engagement
thereunto, that is very strong and binding: For behold, how great the loving
kindnesses are? how rich the mercies? how mavelous the works, which the Lord
has done for this Nation (whereof in due place) and conveyed to it, through
the hands of man? It is God Who makes two of one mind in one house; and the
same God, Who has made two Houses one, to go together, as one man, hand in
hand, heart with heart, in the same way perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment 1 Cor. 1. 10.
. I shall then take these many under one single Notion also, as one person and
so go on to tell the Churches engagement, but to her God first. As the King
said, if the Lord do not help, whence could he help? out of the Barne-floore
or out of the wine press 2 Kin. 6. 26.
? The same may be said touching all created power; if the Lord had not helped,
neither this nor that could have helped. The proud helpers do stoop under
Him. Job 9. 13.
. But when the year of Recompenses for His Zion is come Esa. 34. 8.
, when He will be avenged of His Adversaries, who have made void His Law; when
He works salvations 1 Samuel 11. 13.
in Israel (as He has done this Day;) when He does arise to judgment, to save
all the meek of the Earth Ps. 76. 9.
: What then? Then He breaks the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield ver. 3.
and the Sword, and the battle (aye God does it, and so does it, that all may
say, The hand of the Lord is here, He has done it of a truth.) Then he spoils
the stout hearted; then he cuts off the spirit of Princes; so as when they
would oppose the way and work of the Lord, those men of might shall not find
their hands; but it shall be with them as once it was, when the Charet and
Horse were cast into a dead sleep, ver. ^. 6.
and then the weak shall say, They be strong Joel 3. ^0.
, their Armor, though as contemptible in man's eyes, as David and his Armor
was, is of proof, and shall do exploits upon His Churches enemies. He goes
not unweaponed, that carries the revenge of God along with him, though he
carries but a sling, a scrip and a pibble Sam 17. 40.
Such despicable instruments are chosen of God, whereby He will perform
exploits, so as He may have all the glory, putting into them Heroical Motions
for atchieument.

Surely all this has the Lord done for His people this last year; all these
Scriptures have bin fulfilled in our eyes. How has H^e disappointed the Hopes
and Helps of the Adversary? how did He rise u^ against the help of evil
doers Esa. 31. 2.
? how did He starve the gods of the Earth? how did He make the faces of the
wicked as flames Esa. 13. 8.
? And that this last may not be forgotten: how did He set the face of the
Righteous like a fl^nt, against the faces of them, who turned their backs upon
God, and went contrary to Him in all His commands? Truly it is wonderful in
our eyes; but behold we therein the Churches engagement to their God.

Surely, if we shall well consider what deliverances the Lord has wrought this
year, we must say of this day, as was said in ancient days, The Lord has
wrought Salvation in Israel. But we shall r 1 Samuel 11. 13.
find our Deliverance exceeding that Salvation, and parallel with that
Deliverance in the following Chapters, where we read thus; That the
Philistines had so beslaved Israel, that they had neither weapon nor Smith left
amongst them ^ Sam. 13. 19.
. And yet in this miserable low condition, This naked, peeled people marched on
(two leading the way, and over-comming the difficulties therein; for the
terror of the Lord went before, and then no matter whether few or none
followed after) against a mighty Legion, a nume^ous and well furnished
Adversary, thirty thousand Charriots and six thousand Horsemen, and people in
multitude, as the ^a^d on the Sea sh^re ^ Sam 13. 5.
, and returned from those ad^ersaries laden with arm^s and vict^^y ^oth. The
^hurches victory over her Adversar^es, this last year, equals that in some
things, and exceeds it in other some. There the Lord ^rmed a naked people with
the rev^nge of a God, and behold they did exploits. Here He did as much, for He
raised up the fallen spirits of a beslaved Kingdom also. He wro^ght ex^loits
by a few chosen instruments, and put into their he^res heroical motions for
achievement, so as a few went out against mighty Legion, a numerous and proud
adversary against light and treacherous Prophets, against herds and droves of
Priests, and of Malignants, as the sands of the Sea-sh^re are for multitude:
But being ^rmed with the revenge of a God, they did expl^its, as appears this
day. So far the Salvation wrought then and now run parallel. Here now our
Salvation exceeds: for, behold the Lord wrought the greatest Salvation by
contrary means, such as threatened a sore desolation: and so only a God can
do, Who at the first brought light out of the womb of darkness. By a most
idolatrous Service-booke, composed of purpose to establish that abomination,
has he confounded that Idolatrous Service and cast it out. By the works of an
imperious whorish woman Ezra 26. 30.
(such were the works of the Bishops) has he confounded them and their works.
By the strength of the Adversary, He has trod down his strength. By giving
Scope to the foot of pride, He has spoiled the proud and stout-hearted. By
lawless men, their violent deeds and devouring words, He has wrought forth
the redemption of our Laws, and establishment of the same By a Popish Party, a
most malignant generation, He has confounded them and their abominations. By
sons of Belial, who know no yoke, nor will bear any, He has wrought for
the vindication of our Religion, Lives, Laws, Liberties. Thus Jehovah can do,
The great and dreadful God; He can by most contrary means and Wills, bring to
pass the good pleasure of His own Will He can by such cursed Instruments,
which threaten d^solation to a Land, work forth Salvations for the same. Thus
God can do, and no god besides Him: For man to say, that so he will do (by
outlawed men maintain the Laws) were blasphemy in his mouth. Thus far to
show the Churches engagement to their God.

The Church will tell her engagement to you, but first she blesses God, Who
has instructed you to discretion; That you do so well understand your
engagement to Him, which is, To walk before Him, and to be perfect. God has
wrought gloriously by you, ye will walk honorably before Him. The Church is
confident you have engaged your hearts upon this thing Ier. 30. 21.
. Ye are workers together with God, ye will labor to be Holy as He is Holy.
What ye condemn in others, ye will hate in your selves; knowing well; He that
will cast a stone at an offender must be free himself, otherwise he condemns
and executes himself in another person. Ye are, as good Samuel was, he did
first clear his own Innocence, ere he duist charge the people with their
sin 1 Samuel 12.
. Innocence and uprightness becomes every man, especially those that must take
a liberty of controuling offenders. Ye have well considered all th^s; Ye have
begun to reform in your own hearts and families: This is the true method of
proceeding ^cc^rding to the Order and a Statute in Israel; Ye are the Lords
Host, His Warriors, His Worthies, They that fight his battles must keep
themselves from every wicked thing Deuteronomy. 23. ^.
. That is the Order; The judgment upon breach of that Order, ye may read ^ud,
^o. And he that reads and considers will conclude his Duty thence, That a true
and orderly Reform^r, reformes at he me first, and in his own heart, then his
Family, That the one may be kept as the Temple of the living God; The other
ordered as the Church of Christ. And he that considers it not, as amongst many,
more then one there may be; This Scripture will have a keen edge against him,
which we may read with some alteration in the words, but none in the sense;
Thou therefore who correct est another, correct est thou not thy self Romans 2.
21.
? Thou who seem to reform abroad, reformest thou not at home? Certainly,
there the Reformer begins, when he begins decently and in order, Great and
mighty reason there is that he should do so; and pressed upon you all by the
Captain of your Host: The very same that was for the Host of the Lord going
forth against the Lords enemies; The Lord your God walks in the midst of your
Camp to deliver up your enemies before you; therefore shall your Host, your
House, your Court, your Deuteronomy. 23.
Camp, your Fleet be holy, that He see no unclean thing in you, and turn Ver.
14.
away from you. The Church has told you your engagement, now she will tell her
engagement to you.

Great reason the Church should record your labor of Love, work of Faith,
patience of Hope; for in all these you have been abundant. The greatest reason
in the world, she should be exceeding thankful; for you have been exceeding
careful. How? you have often refreshed her; You were not ashamed of her Chain;
when she was in Rome, you sought her out very diligently and sound her 2 Timothy
1. 16. Mat. 4. 1.
: The Churches prayer is, The Lord grant that you and yours may find mercy of
the Lord in that day. What Day? A Day that shall burn like an Oven; nay, more
terrible then so; A Day when the wicked shall be at their wits end for
expectation, and call to the Hills to fall upon them. O it is a mighty matter to
find mercy of the Lord in that Day, that terrible Day; that all searching, all
quickening, all opening, all manifesting Day: I cannot express what a mercy it
is to find mercy in that Day. But so the Church prays, That you may find
mercy in that Day, That you may lift up your heads with joy in that Day; Behold
Him in that Day, Whom your soul loves, Whom you serve, Whom you fear, and
Whose Rights you have maintained with all your might. So the Church prays; And
good reason the Church should pray so, That you may find mercy in that Day; for
in this Day, in how many things you have ministered to her, her Lord knows, she
knows not; but in very many, that she knows, and she does Record them with
rejoicing: And she wishes you prosperity in the Name of the Lord, that you may
ride on with your honor and do valiantly; The greatest Reason that can be,
She should wish even so, your prosperity; for therein are involved Peace and
Truth, the safety and prosperity of the whole Kingdom.

I must observe, as they call it, decorum Personae, The Church is never lav^sh
or large in praises to Man; She likes not to strike much upon that string,
least it should affect too much, and make too sweet Music in the ear: Yet
She cannot but add this, and then She will put in for Caution, That many
Parliaments have done worthily; Many very worthy deeds have been done for the
Nation thereby, but you have exceeded them all. Indeed you have done so much,
so many worthy deeds, that, as was said wittily, the Church may say truly, You
have made the Church the greatest Usurer in the World; for you have turned all
her estate into Obligations. Truly She has nothing She dares call her own;
all her Estate lies in Bonds indeed, whereby She is tied fast to her King and
You. She thanks you heartily, so well content is She with her Bonds; her Estate
is good enough, and sure enough, and rich enough; her Bonds are her Freedom
and her Riches both.

SECT. IV.
Abundant Thanks and Praise tickle the ear; therefore the Church puts in
Caution for that.

FOr Caution now, and there is need of it: For we low men can exalt man very
high, and give him high praises, more then is comely. We can say, That Gods are
come down to us in the likeness of men, and we can offer sacrifice unto them,
such as is only due to God: And so mighty men have fallen even by the applause
of man, as well as by the tickling of their own hearts. This is a dainty
point, man had need to look on strait, lest he trespass upon Gods peculiar
Right, which he may do before he is aware.

I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the most High,
so the great King of Babel thought and spoke in the pride of his heart I^^. 1^*
. And yet we do not conceive, that he thought himself able to clamber up
above the clouds, and there set himself in the Throne of God; He was not so
brutishly confident as to think so. We find him guilty but of stout words
against the Lord, and high thoughts; and so we also may, though we think not
so, ascend above the height of the clouds too: For (I borrow M. Perkins words
which will explain Perk. on Genesis ^. 21. c. 5. sect. 1.
these) we may do all this two ways.

First When we think we have power of our selves, whereby we can match or
countervaile the power of God. This thought rises in the heart very often,
when we trust in our Mountain, and it is a strong City and an high Wall in our
conceit Prove. 18. 1^.
; and in our counsel and strength, that it shall prevail against God.

Secondly, When we take to our selves the honor of God and think^ it our own
proper due. Such thoughts as these rise very often in good hearts, but upon
wiser thoughts they put it from them as a cursed thing, and give not place by
subjection thereto, no not for a minute. They can consider with all their
hearts how stout those words are, we have read, and how high and abominable
such thoughts. But yet we may note, That the wisest have not always these wise
and considering thoughts before they be beaten into them first, by some sore
affliction, whereby they are put into fear, and know to purpose; That they are
but men Psalm. 9. Vehementissime agnoscant. Iun.
; and therefore what they did was not by their own strength. It is a passage
surely to be noted, how brag Sampson was of what he had done. What had he done?
With the jaw bone of an Ass heaps upon heaps Judge. 15. 16, 17.
; With the jaw of an Ass have I slain a thousa^^ me^: ^^ doubles it, that the
b^^enesse of the instrument might add to his praise, and then he cast away the
Instrument as a contemptibl^ th^n^, that the victory might be given wholly to
his own hand. Next news we hear, Sampson is sore athirst. Then he speaks
more sa^ly and wi^ely; Thou have given ^his deliverance into the hand of thy
servant And then he lo^ked toward the bone that he had cast away with scorn,
and behold water thereout, whereby his spirit revived; That he might know (and
be humbled) the same hand which gave him drink now, gave him the victory
before. But such a proud spirit Man has, it will not down till it be beaten
down; he is seldom made wise but by strokes.

The Church speaks as unto wise men, who can ju^ge what She says, and account
it but a point of her zeal and wisdom to put in Caution here, and to show
her care and fear, least praise and applause should do you hurt; least having
done so much and so worthily, and being so famous in Israel, you should not be
able to look through all; a^l you have, and all you are, and all you have
done, through all to Christ, and through Christ to God; for indeed the Church
finds it by experience to be an hard thing; nay, without a great measure of
Grace, impossibl^ to do as aforesaid, That is, To say as one did, I have
labored more abundantly then they all; and then to conclude heartily I have
done nothing at all: yet not I but the grace of God which was with me 1 Cor.
15. 10.
: To say in w^y of glorying as a man has done, and as you may do; In nothing,
am I behind the very chiefest, that have formerly or now have sat in
Consultation; and the^^ in the close of the work, think truly as he says,
though ^he nothing ^ Cor. 12. 11.
, A hard matter this to all that are made of one blood Acts 17 26.
, to that part we properly call flesh, a great incroacher still upon Divine
Right. If God be pleased to honor flesh a little, and to cast Hi^ quickening
Beams upon it, then commonly flesh will honor it self a great deal, it will
come in, carve liberally to it self, All the Glory Indeed if we do not look
well unto it, and with a strong hand command and charge it: so flesh will do,
it will (Bishop like) take a large shar^; at le^st, it will incroach far upon
Gods peculiar Right. And then it does just as if the Wall should, now the
Sunbeams are upon it, boast, That the Beams were produced by some excellent
virtue and power in the Mud wall and not by the Sun Perinde ac si parts radium
se par^^rire dicat Calv. Instit. 3. Cap. 12.
.

This is enough to show the Churches engagement, and to keep Man from
incroaching upon Gods Right, or from boasting in himself In God we may boast
all the day long, and spare not, there is no danger there, for in Him shall all
the seed of Israel be justified and shall glory Isa. 45. ^3.
.

And this could not be well omitted here; for in very deed, the Church will
Record very great things, admirable works, rich mercies, mighty Deliverances,
strange Discoveries, etc. and She will enlarge her self very much in
thanksgiving and praise for all this; therefore the Caution was necessary.

SECT. V.
How the Church records Mercies; Who the Fountain; to whom She pays Tribute.

THe Church records these things in her heart; There she weighs and ponders
them. She can be content there might be a Pillar raised, and a perpetual
Remembrance written thereon of the wor^s of her God, and in great Charecters,
so as he that runs might read them: But nevertheless She records them, as was
said; and She writes upon them all, Asked of God, and the gift of God through
Christ: She Records them as the purchase of Blood, and so streaming down to
her; Which quickens her up very much, and raises her Spirits high in the
receiving and Recording of them; And then She is fitted and well prepared for
the high work of Thanksgivi^g and of Prai^e. O S^e is abundant in Thanksgiving
and in pr^ise for Christ as the bottome-Mercy, Which bears up all; The
Foundation, Whereon She is established mightily, even with the strength of God;
and in that strength, She holds up all her Mercies, and Records them from the
least to the greatest; from the first to the last; He is the Root, That bears
all her sweets; All her Fruits are in Him, and some She gathers up, and picks
from the earth; but the full Vintage (all below is but as the first fruits and
gleanings) is where the Root is, in Heaven: He is the Sun to her little World.
If He hide His face, She is in the Dark, though all the other Stars shine
upon her, though there be an influence of all earthly Comforts toward her
habitation: Still His Presence makes the Day; His Absence, the Night. The
Church does sometimes reflect upon her old Condition; She would not be in it
again f^r a world, for therein She can behold now the very utmost of misery;
What is that? and without God in the World Ephesians. 2. 12.
. It was s^id before, as the Sun to the great World, so the Creator thereof to
our little World: If that be eclipsed but for an hour, see how the Creatures
droop and hang down the head: so it is with the Church; Let her be without
health, if her God please; without liberty; without any thing in the world, so
She be not without God in the World, all is well; for it is Day with her,
notwithstanding all her Nights of sorrow: For He i^ the fountain of Light, and
of Life too; All her fresh Springs, the very being of life, the joy and
comforts of her life are in Him. And if some of her Rivelets, some one or more
streams be cut off or tu^ned another way; yet the Springhead runs clear, The
fountain is the same, and She is sure, That is her^; She has an interest
therein; Therefore She can make her boast of God all the Day, and all the Night
of her sorrow also; For in Him She is justified and will glory: And for Him her
heart would be enlarged as wide as are the two Poles one from the other; such
an enlargement She would find in Thanksgiving, but She is a poor straightened
handmaid; yet so She would be enlarged to her God: For She has all from Him,
Blood to justify, Water to sanctify; She can desire no more, and all this She
Records here; for all this She will Thank and praise her God to all eternity.
To conclude, She receives all from Him; She returns all to Him; She Records
all for Him, that He may have all the Glory. So we have the bottom and
foundation whereon to raise the Pile of Mercies, and our Sacrafice of Thanks
and Praise.

CHAP. II.
The Church, in Recording, looks back to the Ancient of Days, and those
ancient Mercies hid with Christ in God; exalts free Grace; Thence receives
all concerning this Life, and the Life to come; Then Records her
forgetfulness of Mercies and is humbled.

SECT. I.
The Righteous Nation advances free Grace. God is to be praised for the least
of His Mercies. He is to be admired in the glorious ways of Redemption.

THe Church cannot fix the time where She begins to thank and to praise, no
more then She can the just period or end thereof; for her Thanks and her
Praises are as her Mercies are, from everlasting to everlasting. But yet She
may speak to our capacity and purpose here, to show us the method which She
uses in Thanksgiving, and where She begins; Not, as the usual manner is, at
the present time only, for Mercies in sight, and for all the sweets and
comforts to sense. She is not all for present Mercies, though She can be
enlarged for them; These move upon an everlasting foundation; And in the virtue
and by the strength of old Mercies, She, receives and carries on the new. We
must observe the order. The Church then begins to Record, to Thank, to Praise
her God, looking back as far as her understanding can carry her, and beyond
it, even to the days of Eternity, before the foundation of the World: There,
according to her measure, beholds free Grace, Mercy, and Love; Love to His,
because He loved them Deuteronomy. 7.
; Grace, because He will be gracious; Mercy so free too, even because it
pleased Him Ephesians. 1. 5.
. It was according to the good pleasure of His will. What is ^reer then Grace?
and behold what Grace! Is there any vain boaster in the World? Yes, thousands:
She can confound him and them, that they shall never open their mouth a^y more
because of their shame Ezekiel. 16. 63.
; If they will remember with her the Time, when She, as they, lay in her blood
to the loathing of her Person; and that her good Lord, said even then, this is
a Time of Love Ezekiel. 16. ^.
. An admirable and free Love. She was even as others, by nature the children of
wrath Ephesians. 2. 3.
, in the same lump and transgression, no difference there Romans 3. 22.
. Free Grace came, made her to differ from another 1 Cor. 4. 7.
. She was dead, and then her eye was closed, and her ear stopped to all that
man could do or say; Say what you will, the dead hear not: But the dead can
hear a creating and quickening voice, and so her Lord was pleased to speak
unto her, with a strong hand Isa. 8. 11.
, as the expression is, which speaks and draws too, and then She was obedient:
And as her Lord spoke with a strong hand to her at the first; so, with the same
hand has He commanded in her ever since, therefore She is not rebellious: her
Lord rules in her heart as he does in the world, in the midst of his enemies
Psalm 110. 2.
; and through the greatness of that power shall those enemies submit
themselves unto Him, Psalm. ^6 3.
and be subdued in her. But here is free Mercy still, free Grace; She is called
by a very proper Name, The Church; Persons called and culled out, not for any
worth that was in them: (...).
The Lord cast aside a thousand on the right hand, and ten thousand on the
left, as honorable, as wise, as good as they, within and without the Pale,
pitched his Love upon her. And now She is a select, choice and peculiar people;
nay a more choice and peculiar people yet (as one says) Clem Alexandr. Strom.
6 p 485. (...).
which ingageth mightily to walk more peculiarly. The Church has another
Name, which me thinks is very significant, and must keep her very humble all
her days; Thou shall he called, Sought-out Isa. 62. 12.
; Sought out indeed from amidst a refuse multitude, when as She was no better
then they, as Children of the Aethyopians unto me, says the Lord Amos 9. 7.
. Sought out, as you seek your Wheat amidst tares, or covered over with ^n
heap of Chafe; or as you seek Fish in a Drag-net, amidst rubbish and heaps of
dirt. Phil. 3. 9.
Thou shall be called, Sought out, and it is her Glory, That She is found in
Christ: She Records that, and is humbled, and so well fitted to Thank and
Praise, wherein She is too much straightened: But in this She is comforted, That
what She does, She does heartily; and what is wanting to that work now, shall
be made up hereafter; for it is the work the Saints shall be employed in to
all Eternity.

SECT. II.
Common expressions suffice not to show forth Rich and precious Mercies.

NOw the Church should Record her strong Consolations, when ^^r Beloved brought
her to the Banqueting house, when His left hand was under her H^ad, and His
right hand did embrace Her. Then I should come to Revelations, clear
Manifestations of Cant. ^. 4. 6.
her Beloved unto her, still with sweet distillations, droppings of the Spirit
upon her heart; Then His hiding of Himself, for that made her ask more
earnestly after Him whom her soul loves: She Records all these, and calls in
all her sweet experiences, gracious and rich Promises, for these are the
Pillars that bear her up, her hands and her heart: All these she does Record,
for these she does Thank and Praise: I leave her before her God, and to her
own expressions, for truly they are unspeakable, they cannot be uttered by any
other but her self. Besides, I should speak Parables, and dazzle my eye with
an amaze. We will conclude here, That her vessel is filled, and her house with
the glory of the Lord, as full as an habitation on earth can be; so as the
Glory of the World is darkness to her, and the fullness of the Creature there
but emptiness, her mouth then is filled with praise, and her heart shall be
kept as a chaste Matron for her Beloved, even as the Holy of Holies. She will
praise the Lord while She has any being here, and hereafter the high Praises
of her God for ever.

SECT. III.
The Church overcome with the loving kindness of her Lord, giving her all
things richly to enjoy, charge her self with unthankefulnesse.

ANd now that this fountain is opened, this Wellhead of Mercies and loving
kindnesses; The streams flowing toward her therefrom, do carry her down as
into an Ocean of Love; for now behold what a rich portion She has! All things
are hers, God is hers, and She has enough, for He is all things; All things in
Heaven and in Earth work for her good: She looks abroad in the World, and
behold ^ercies before and behind, and on each hand. Truly the Church cannot
tell what to record next; but much is to be recorded before She comes to that
which is expected. Indeed her good Lord, blessed for ever, has dealt to her
such a largess of good things, according to His rich bounty, even in earthly
matters, under Moon comforts; That She can resolve upon no other way but this,
being amidst a throng of Mercies, which now press in upon her, even to Record,
Thank, and Praise the Lord for H^s free grace toward her, so abu^dantly
showed in this; That He has not charged upon her the days of her
forgetfulness; When She did not record and render back, according as She had
received. Her Lord has forgiven much this way unto her; and therefore She
loves much; for how few of many Mercies are recorded, and fewer yet had their
full weight of Thanks and praise from her. Mercies! When She speaks of them,
She is confounded, and as one in a maze: Mercies cloathe her; Mercies feed her;
Mercies uphold her every moment; She lies down with them, rises up with
them: Mercies privative; Mercies positive; Preventing Mercies; Following
Mercies; Crowning Mercies; Mercies to the outward man; Mercies to the inward
man. How many? Ask rather how many Sands there be, and the number of the
Stars: But there is One for all, A comprehensive Mercy indeed, and the
fountain of all; From Him (that is, from Christ) All flow down unto her, and
are a purchase of blood. And truly She says heartily, She is not thankful for
Christ, not for that unspeakable gift, not according as She has received; and
that is her shame and trouble both. It is her wonder, and shame, and sorrow,
all three, That Mercies should be continually in her sense; She sees them, and
tastes them, and feels them, and yet so little in her mind. O blessed be God,
Who has not charged upon her the days of forgetfulness.

Recording, Thanking, Praising, is the only Tribute, Taxation or Impost which
the Lord has set upon all things, He gives us richly to enjoy. The Earth shall
give in unto thee her fruitfulness; not the least herb there but is for thy
meat or thy medicine: So the Waters, so the Air, the variety of Inhabitants
therein: So the Heavens, the Stars and influences therefrom. All shall give
forth their strength, besides their homage and Tribute to man their Lord; But
now he must remember this Tribute to God And yet how is that forgotten? Hear
what the Lord says; My flax and my Wool (all are His, even the Beasts upon a
thousand Mountains) are to cloathe thee; My Oil and my Wine to refresh Thee;
My Wheat and my Barley to be a stay and staff unto Thee: Only record these
Mercies, acknowledge the Giver, and pay Him His Tribute, Thanks and Praise.
Good Lord, how short are we herein in rendering back! Nay, the Church does say
so, and yet her Lord has passed it over, and in this way of loving kindness
has forgiven much; She has no more to say, but this: Therefore She loves
much. And yet I must add this; for it is according to the mind of the
Righteous, They remember notonly, Their forgetfulness of mercies, but their
unfruitfulnesse under them; Their abuse of them; Their security; Yea and their
rebellion also; The more the Mercies were, the more secure they were; The
fuller the Pasture was, the more they kicked with the heel, fighting sometimes
against God with His own weapons. But since their God has passed over all this;
Therefore they love much.

CHAP. III.
Days of Affliction, Days of blessing; for so the Lord has altered them, and
sweetened these to the Church.

SECT. I.
Afflictions must be reckoned among the Blessings.

ANd thus for Mercies, which properly and in their own Nature are so, and
sense can relish so. Now the Church must record her afflictions and sorrows,
for these She can call Mercies now; Not so in their own Nature, but through
the Mercy of her God, so ordering her and them; And this must be recorded; for
this She stands most bounden to Thank and Praise She could surfeit on her
sweets as we may with honey; Her sorrows allayed the lushiousnesse thereof.
She expected an Heaven upon Earth; her unquiet motions there told her it was
not the place of her rest. She had comforts upon the Earth, and She would build
Tabernacles upon them; A Cloud overshadowed them, and She feared. She blesses
God for all this, but more of this anon.

The Church then looks back and beholds Mercies, and calls them so, which the
world calls evils: Her God made them good to her, and a blessing; therefore must
She bless God for them in the first place, accounting them fit matter to stir
her up to Record and Thank. Gall and Wormwood yielded sweets to the Church;
She found Honey in the carkase of the Lion; Therefore She remembers the time,
when She said, This is my death Ps. 77. 10.
. No indeed it was her mistake, and she sees (...), ^^r it was but her
infirmity, and wrought very effectually to the st^engthning of her, so that she
can now glory in that she, in her h^ste, called her Death, knowing that it
wrought Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope Romans 5. 1, 4.
. She records the days of her Wid^w-hood. She cannot leap over that time,
when she sat Desolate, alone, and as forsaken. There she said well, as
forsaken; for indeed there is but a sicut, an as, in all which she suffers, and
in all she enjoyes here below, she weeps as though she wept not; she rejoices
as though she rejoiced not; she possesses as though she possessed not 1 Cor.
7. 3.
. So also she knows now, by experience, that there was but an as in her
greatest sufferings, as unkowne 2 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
, as dying, as chastened, as sorrowful, as poor, as having nothing: and so,
as forsaken, but then God was with her, working most powerfully for her
establishment, and most effectually for her comfort; therefore she remembers
that time, even when she spoke in grief of heart, as Jacob did; All these
things are against me Genesis 42. 36.
. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take my Benjamin also; All
these things are against me. No indeed Jacob was deceived, so has the Church
been these ten times, and now she sees her mistake and must record it, that
all these things were for her; This dear child was snach'd away; and this so
suitable a comfort, this staff and this stay all gone; and yet for all this, as
her long Captivity was, all for her good Ier. 24. 5.
, that the stream of her affections might run the clearer to the Fountain;
That He, Who alone is Worthy might have all, all her Love, and all her delight,
and all her joy, as near as can be in this world; That her Lord and Christ may
be, if not All in All, yet above all Beloveds, the chiefest of ten thousand:
Why then all those things She thought against her were for her, promoting her
good very much. Therefore She does record that time, and speaks of it with
rejoicing, finding by many good experiences, That there is no Condition, how
uncomfortable soever, but what is ordered according to Righteousness and
faithfulness. This ce^tains much, we will then proceed in it.

SECT. II.
As the Righteous now do, so have all done before them: They have recorded
Days of Trouble, for that was a means to settle them the faster on their
Rock; and have been thankful for their Hell here, for that made them look
for Heaven where it is.

THe Church must remember the former years, when they called her Marah,
because the Almighty had dealt very bitterly with her Ruth 1. 20.
She cannot passe-over that Time, as if a Time let forth like water, to waste.
Plowing and harrowing time is as seasonable for the Church, as it is for the
fallow-ground, and she does record that time thankfully and with an heart full
of Praises: for the deeper the furrows are, and the longer, the fuller the
Sheaves will be at the Harvest.

Chrysostomes words are remarkably notable. Evermore in your (...) Chrysostom Hom.
10. Col. 3. See ^hil. 4. 6.
prayers give thanks for known and unknown mercies; for mercies which
appear to you so to be, and such which appear not: for mercies you received
with a willing mind, and for those, which God did for you against your will, be
exceeding thankful for them. For your good things, your comforts, your
refreshments, your strange Deliverances, your rich mercies, yea and for your
lucida intervalla, for your well nights and your good days. Yes, who would not
be thankful for all this? All are not, nay the fewest of many. But the Father
has not raised up his children to the height of thankfulness yet. You must be
thankful for your turbida intervalla, sick days and wearisome Nights; for
your aches and your pains, for your troubles in and to the flesh; the knotty
racking Gout, the tormenting Stone, the bloody torturing Strangury, the burning
Fever: In a word, you must be thankful for your Hell here. For Hell! who can
be thankful for that? they that are of another (...). Humb. 14. 24.
spirit. Their Hell here made them not to look for Heaven here, which else
they had done, though they have their Lords express word for it. In the world
ye shall have tribulation, in Me peace Ioh. 16. 33.
. Their Hell here made them to lift up their heads and stretch forth their
necks (...). Romans 8. 19.
, and to stand, as it were, on tip-toes, so earnestly looking after things,
which are not seen. And this earnest expectation of glory hereafter, even to
see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living, this assurance of hope
caused their very Hell here to seem a very light affliction, and its
continuance very short, but for a night, an hour, nay, but for a moment, a
little small moment. ^ Cor. 4. 17.


To conclude; Their Hell here made them flee from the wrath to come, and that
is hell indeed, and the sense thereof raised up their thoughts and endeared
Christ unto them, the chiefest now of ten thousand. O how precious are their
thoughts concerning Christ? A drop of wrath burnt their flesh, and was sore
upon them, though but for a night: how are their he^rts enlarged after Christ,
who redeemed their soul out of all adversity, and from the wrath to come.

I have added a short paraphrase on Chrysostomes words, he goes o^ (...)
Ch^y^. T^m. 6. ^e (...). judic.
and gives us an example I knew a man said h^, a very pious Man he was, who
prayed thus (as we have heard) and the first word was Thanks: and that he
first thanked his good God for, was for his afflictions, his Hell here So we
have that we come for so fitted to this place, which is, They put afflictions
into the Catalogue or Register of Gods mercies, and in the first p^^ce. Indeed
it is no hand matter to open the mouth in way of Thankefullnesse, for the goo^
things of this life, as we call them; but to be thankful for the ^vils, that
is an hard task, but yet the daily work of a true Christian.

SECT. III.
The Church records her evil Days, when She saw Affliction.

HEnce we also may learn our Duty and see our pattern; for according
thereunto the Church Records and Thanks her Lord for her afflictions, her
pressures, her tribulations, her anguish, her sorrows. She gives thanks for her
nights of mourning, as well as for her morning joy; for her Egypt in this life,
as well as for her Goshen here. She thanks her God for her treading down by
the foot of Pride, for that made her rise more victoriously: for the blood was
drawn from her, because that watered her, and made her more fruitful. She
thanks her God for the Courts of Inquisition, though bloody Courts, and all
the Purgatory she looks for: because the oppression she felt therein, and the
violent perverting of Judgment and Justice, pointed her eyes and set them
steadfast toward Him, Who is higher then the highest; and made her to stay,
fix and settle her self at that high Throne, before which the Judges must be
judged, and from which there is no appeal. She gives thanks for her mockings,
Eccl. 5. 8.
scornings, revilings, buffetings; for all the hard words and deeds she heard
and felt there. O how thankful is she for all that, thereby she was made
conformable to Her Lord and Head; so He was dealt withal. O, how did She
rejoice at all this! (though perhaps not at that present) all this makes their
Crown the more massy ^^d weighty. It added much to their consolations, which ^
2 Cor. 15, 7.
are ever after the me^sure and is their sufferings are. The Righteous do
conclude thus, That after the rate of their sorrows and sufferings shall their
comforts and consolations be And by the measure of their shame and reproach for
Christ here, shall their Robe o^ Glory be cut out hereafter, wherewith they
shall be vested in H^aven; Therefore, The Church thanks her God for her
weaknesses and many infirmities; They made her lean more st^adily upon her
Beloved, That strong Arm: For her sl^ps and falls too, they made her stand ^
These. 1. 10.
more strong in her God, and in the power of His Might: For her fears, they
pointed her to her rock, that is higher then her, above all: For her troubles
without, and her terrors within; For now She can admire her Savior, the
mighty God of her strength: For her anguish of spirit, and pains in soul,
when She traveled with her Christ first, and now with her afterbirth: For all
this made their birth more vigorous, strong and Man-like.

SECT. IV.
The Church returns Praise and Thanks for all the good She received from
That, The World calls evil.

IT is not possible to reckon up the heads and particulars of the Churches
accounts; nor how She has gained by her losses; nor what ^ealings She has had
from her stripes; nor how enriched by her poverties; nor how enlarged by her
straights. But abundantly thankful She is for former years, and for all that
which happened to her then, and was, as She thought, against her, being evil
days, and the years of her captivity: for all that which happened to her
then, helped marvellously to clear her vessel; and She is as thankful for
that, as for filling the same with Glory. All that fitted, made her meet a for
after Glory. (...) Col. 1. 12.
All that their Adversary did against them then, his madness and rage, his
breathing out threatenings, all tended much to their advantage. These smitings
of the hand and tongue, hewed them, polished them, as the stone^ of the Temple
in the out-Court, so making them as lively stones built up a spiritual house:
These preparations; These fittings; This making meet for glory, are more to the
Church, though these are blows, prisons, inquisitions, fire, faggot, sword and
the like; These, I say, are more, and of more account with the Church then.
Glory it self. Their way thither, to Glory, I mean, sometimes hedged about
with thorns, and blocked up against them, as with hewn stone: This way is as
pleasant to think on (when it is passed over) as is the Crown at the end. The
Sum is; The Church gives thanks unto the Father, Who has strengthened Her
with all might, according to His Glorious Power unto all patience, and
long-suffering with joyfulnesse, and so has made her meet, has fitted, has
prepared her to be partaker of the inheritance of her Brethren and Sisters, the
Patri^^kes, Prophets, Apostles, Disciples, Martyrs, of all the Saints by
Calling, while here below in this dark world, now Saints in light.

And so the Church has after her measure, offered to her God the sacrifice of
Praise and Thanks for His good and gracious dealing with her in former times,
the days of her captivity. O what her enlargements then! Their straights helped
to set their feet in a large place; Their bonds made them free indeed; Their
wounds healed them; Their distractions united them; Their unquiet motions
settled them; Their ^eaths quickened them; Their sorrows comforted them; The
sh^me for Christ is their Glory; Their reproach for Him their Crown. Who would
not serve this God? Who would not fear Him? He turns sickness into health;
weakness into strength; mourning into Songs of rejoyc^ng; The shadow of Death
into the Morning Amos 5. ^.
Who would not seek this Lord? Who would not fear Him? This by the way, we
go on.

This is written for our instruction, whose minds are taken up with present
things, which fill us with so much hope as that we cast away fear; o^ with so
much fear, that we cast away hope. We are in an extreme about them still,
either over-grieving or overjoying; full of stirs we are, a tumultuous people
the Lord knows. A Gracious heart not so, he can indite Psalms not only when
out of ^fflictions, but in the night of his sorrow, even the deepest
afflictions; When flying before the enemy; When persecuted and distressed; When
in darkness of spirit, yet then he can indite a Psalm: Heman did so, for he
was the wisest man upon earth, next unto King Solomon 1 King. 5. 4, 31.
; but so sorely ^fflicted, and suffering such terrors, that (in his sense) he
was distracted Psalm. 88. 15.
A Good heart can make the greatest sorrows that he has felt, or does feel,
matter of blessing and praise, always an hint for prayer. How-ever it is to
sense, yet God is good to Israel still, and does good; Therefore all the work
he has to do with his own spirit is this, To serve His God heartily, and to
submit to Hi^ will patiently, yea comfortably; for many experiences have told
him, That the end will be good. The Righteous know well, That no Condition here
below is like the Hill Olympu^ (some say) wholly clear (...)
, without clouds. No, They expect winds and storms both, which when blown
over, The air is the clearer and wholsomer for it; They have made application,
and counted their Cost, and those happy who endure, and so can wait patiently,
having seen the end of the Lord Iam. 5. 1^.
.

CHAP. IV.
Before the Church can Record the late wonderful Works wrought for her by the
ministry of Man, She will put some things to our Consideration, which
observed, may make us wise, and fit us for the Times, how hard, fierce and
perilous soever.

SECT. I.
What the Church is most taken with; Whom She looks unto in all
administrations; What settles and calmes her spirit in the greatest Commotions.

THus we have cleared, That the former Days, Days of trouble, are to be
recorded, for Gods Deliverance out of them is wonderful; and they have yielded
the Church in all ages, a peaceable fruit of righteousness.

Now before She can Record these fresh and late works of wonder, wrought with
God this Day, The Church will give us some Considerations from her own
practice, to take along with us, first; so shall we understand the works, and
our selves and the Church the better.

1.
One Work only wonderful, and to be admired.

THe Church can muse on the works of God, and ponders them in her heart; She
can call them wonderful works and mavelous: But She can admire nothing but
the riches of Grace, those hidden, misterious and unsearchable ways of her
Redemption. There is matter of admiration, and there only; for other Works, She
labors to search them out; and her Thoughts thereon are very precious: But
in this light path, which so dazleth her eyes, and amazeth her, She stands
admiring, and it is her Lords pleasure She should do so 2 These. 1. 10.
.

2.
A Gracious spirit is not much taken with under-moone matters.

IF at any time we find the Churches mouth wide open to Praise and Thanks,
Then we must know her heart is much more enlarged. About what? yes, that is a
necessary Question, so is the Answer; Evermore about spiritual matters, such
as concern the soul, the welfare and prosperity thereof. At that point She is
enlarged; She is not overmuch taken (as we of the common sort are) with
under-moone matters; She is not taken with the fl^wing in of Oil and Wine; nor
with the recovery of Flax and Wool, of Soape and Salt, and Leather, and the
like; She observes the crooked ways of men, and carriage of things very well;
rejoices and mourns in her measure; but I say She is not taken with them as
we are: For we find quick flesh, lively and stirring affections only there:
If we have our outward Liberties and Privileges as free Subjects, and Citizens
here, of the Jerusalem below, then we are well and marvellously appayed: Indeed
we say Genesis 33 9. (...)
as Esau said, We have enough, that is, much or a great deal. The Church not
so; give her the liberties of sons and daughters of Jerusalem above, or else,
but that Christ lives in her, She will dye: So unsatisfiable are All things
here below to her everlasting soul; But if She have her God, though with Him
captivity, fire, sword, what other evils you can name, if with these She has
her God, She is well enough, and with Jacob She has enough, for She has All
Genesis 33. 11. (...)
.

3
The Church referres all to the first Cause, and thereon fixes.

WE must note, That the Church beholds all the Works wrought by Man, not as
Man's works, but the works of Him, Who only does wonders. She looks through
them, and through Man also unto God, There She terminateth her sight. Whence it
is, That whatsoever thing comes unto her, through the hands, and by the
administration of Man, She accepts with all thankfulness, but She writes upon
it, upon every thing (what ever were the means of conveyance) the Gift of God.

4.
The Righteous are calm and settled what ever the news is, or troubles are in
the World; and thankful for all.

WE should observe her quiet and calm deportment and carriage in all
administrations of God; for She looks upon them as His Administrations; and She
accounts all good, nothing evil, except sin; and by the good hand of God
toward her, even sin shall work for her Good; God be thanked that ye were
the servants of sin. All is well, She says, and will end well. Well, What
ever Romans 6. 17.
News She hears; What ever Troubles and Tumults, unquiet Motions there are,
yet the Church is not full of stirs, not a tumultuous City Isa. 22. 2.
for all that; She is quiet notwithstanding all that can be said or done: Her
Sons and Daughters are as well contented with the News they hear, as the
honest Shepherd with the Weather; his judgment was asked, What weather it
would be? He answered, It will be what weather it shall please me. The Answer
seemed dark, and to contain a Riddle; therefore he was courteously requested
to explain it, which he did thus: It shall be (said he) what weather pleases
God, and what weather pleases God pleases me. Truly just so are the Righteous
pleased with their News; It shall be what pleases God, and what pleases God
pleases them. If News this day be, as we call it, good, They are cheered at
it, but not over-joyed, they say, It is well. If the next Day (such turnings
there are and tides of things) the News be contrary, they are the same, they
were the Day before; for they know their God is the same, He is not changed;
Therefore they conclude, notwithstanding that cross News, It shall be well in
the Morning, perhaps before night. They are not troubled about the fixed time,
it is not for them to know that; they know it will be well. Straitnings serve
very much to widen the way for enlargements: and stops toward the Springhead
make the waters rise the higher, and anon will cause them to stream the
faster. Blocks in the way make them walk more warily, and lift up their feet
the higher. It is so with the spirits of Men. But yet the Church looks not to
Man, for He is full of Changes; but her eyes are to her God who changes not;
and, according to the Counsel Exodus 14 13. Ne commoveami^^, ac fluctuetis
animo; ^ed spe firm^ open D^mini expecta^e. Iun.
, stands still, waiting the salvation of her God, and is not greatly moved
Psalm. 62 2.
; nor does She faint in her mind; She does not float, nor roll this way and
that way, but roules her self upon her God. In firm hope her mind is anchored
and fixed upon Everlasting strength, and lapt up in a promise within Everlasting
Arms, expecting His Salvation, which She is confident to see in the fittest
time.

SECT. II.
We that have not fixed spirits feel unquiet Motions.

NOw let us observe our own spirits; ours of the Common-sort; it is a thing
worth our observ^tion. If we observe right, we are in Deaths often; not as
Paul, in real Dangers, but imaginary only and in conceit; for as often as
cross News comes we die In extremes still, either all hope and no fear; or
all fear and no Hope. We cannot cast away our confidence Heb. 10. 3^.
, for we have none, unless it be in the Creature; and i^ that ^ailes us, we
sink, and our spirits fail too. A miser^ble condition this, and a trembling
posture to stand in; Indeed we do not stand, we totter like drunkards,
because we are so filled with the sweets of the Earth, and so empty of the
comforts of Heaven. We are as weak as water, carried and t^ssed as C^rke
with the tide there; Just so hurried are our spirits with wind and tide. As
the water rises or falls at the Parliament-staires, just so do our spirits
at the hearing the News thence. As the wind and gale of breath sits there, so
our minds turn, just like a weather-cocke. If the news thence be pleasing to
sense, then we rise high, that is well, say we; and then we are all Hope. If the
contrary, That troubles are like to abide us, then we are down the wind, and
make conclusions as men do, that have no Hope. This is to have spirits as
weak as water, and a mind not standing-still, but turning like a weather
cock.

SECT. III.
The Reason of the Churches settlement, and of our unquiet Motions, very
necessary and considerable at this time.

WE must note what causes the Churches stability and our floating. What is
the reason, that the Church stands still, quiet and calm in her spirit, when
trouble is on every side: while we are at our wits end for expectation,
troubled and moved, As the Trees of the Wood are moved with the win^ Esa. 7.
^.
. We must I say, enquire into this thing, and find out what is the reason
hereof. The Resolution must be this; Because the Church stays her self on
the Arm of God; Therefore she stands still, is firm and steadfast. Whatever
changes are below, whatever turnings and windings of things here with us, yet
there is no change in that Arm, no diminution tall of that power; It is the
same yesterday, to day, and the same for ever Esa. 59. 1, 2. -40. 27. -- 51. 9.
. Sin causes some change in us, but there is no change in God. The Churches
eye is upon her God, there she fixes, she will not trust in charets nor in
horses Ps. 20.
, because she has asked from one end of Heaven to the other; she has
enq^ired of all ^ges, what became of them that so trusted, that made flesh
their Arm? The answer is, They that so trusted are brought down and fallen.
But the Church remembering the name of the Lord, and in that Name se^ti^g-up
Banners, she rises and stands upright; she must needs have a firm standing;
for sh^e has a sure foundation, she is well under-laid, underneath the
everlasting Arms. Therefore Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
though her outward House be battered down over her head and about her ears,
yet according to the promise, she is a quiet habitation Esa. 33. 20.
. How boisterous soever the vvindes are, and troublesome the vveather is, she
is quiet notwithstanding.

Indeed we may observe some times have been so hard with her, fierce (...).
Mat 8. ^8.
and perilous 2 Timothy 3. 1.
, that she has complained, My soul is bowed down to the dust Ps. 44. 25.
; I am covered with the shadow of Death, yet we must observe from the same
place, how the Church beares-up her self by Experiences and Promises, those
great pillars staying up her Hands in Faith: and then she resolves to beast in
her God all the day long. SELAH. It is an high note, and her voice is greatly
exalted in Praise and Thankesgiving.

Object. Why then the Church is borne up by Experiences from Days of old,
what God has done: And by Promises, what God will do in after times?

An. True, but these Experiences have a bottom, the Almighties arm; they were
wrought by Him, Whose power is still the same, an everlasting God. And these
Promises touching that, the Lord will do in after times, have the same
foundation too, made unto her in and through Christ her Lord and everlasting
Father. There is her strength, her staff and her stay. And now though the
Pillars of the Earth are out of course and continue so, yet the Church is where
she was, upon the same foundation. She knows whom she has trusted: she
rowles her self upon God, vvaiteth his salvation, knows He will come-in for
her help in due time (she would not have it sooner) and praise vvaiteth for
Him in Sion.

Thus in Quietness and confidence is her strength Ps. ^46. 10.
. She can now, according to her Lords command, Be still and know that I am God
Ps. 46.
. She can stand still, calm in her mind, for she knows that her God reigns,
with Him is power and faithfulness Ps. 146. 6.
. He can, He will, nay, with reverence be it spoken, He must help His Church,
and seasonably too, for He is bound so to do; He has engaged His
faithfulness upon it; there is the Churches confidence; she bears her self up
upon it, and walks on by Faith.

And so we see the difference in our walking and place of confidence; such and
so great is the difference in our comforts and peace; the Churches peace full
and lasting, ours but empty and momentany, like the laughter of fools: for,
we walk by sight; we must see or else we cannot believe. We cannot rest
upon the Almighties Arm, unless we see it clothed with flesh. One God is
not enough for us, we must see Many on our side, and whole Countries come in
for our help, or else we can see no hope of Victory, though the Lord has
said, The People are too, many Iud. 7. 4.
. We verily believe, That the race must be to the swift, the battle to the
strong Eccl. 9. 11.
, though a thousand experiences have told us the contrary, when the battle
has been against the Church. Fools as we are, when will we be instructed?
We trust in means, likelihoods and probabilities, thereon we bottom our
selves, therefore it is, that we are in Deaths often: our spirits are up and
down, full of changes; for such changes and tides of things there are in that,
we place our confidences. Our hearts are not fixed, not up-wards where they
should be, therefore we must needs reele like a drunken man, or a Ship in a
tempest. We do not trust in the Lord, therefore we cannot be established 2
Chro. ^0. ^0.
: we do not believe H^s Prophets, we shall not prosper, nor see when good
comes Ier. 17. 6.
. Had we the arm of flesh with us, then we could believe; nay, that is not
Faith, for Faith is of things not seen. My meaning is, for I must speak like
a fool to make otherswise; Had we thirty thousand Chariots, and six thousand
horsemen, and people as the sand on the Seashore in multitude; all these
coming in for our help: And were we to march-on against a feeble folk, a
peeled, beslaved, unarmed people, that had neither Sword, nor Spear, nor
shield; O how confident would we be of the victory! We would rush on as
terrible as an Army with Banners: and as fierce and fearelesse as the
warre-horse. O how we would boast* The Glory of our nostrils would be terrible;
we would rush on upon such a people as thunder; we would rejoice in our
strength, mock at fear, and swallow them up with fierceness and rage. A
brutish people we, for we have not considered this in all this time; that
the Battle is neither yours nor ours, but Gods 2 Chronicles. 10. 15.
: And He has taken all this strength before mentioned, and given it into His
peoples hand, when they were a feeble, beslaved, unarmed people; these have
houghed the Horses and burnt the Chariots in fire, Josh. 11.
that is, The weak have taken all this prey Esa. 33. 2^.
; And all this has the Lord done; Why? that Jonathan and his Armor-bearer
(the Lords Worthies) may not be discouraged at the mountain^ of straights;
Where there is a s^^^p Rock on the one side, and the same on the other; The
our s^itua^^ Northward: the other Southward 1 Samuel 14 4, 5.
. God does drive His People to exigency, That they may show themselves what
they are. Then a man ^^ves by faith in God, when means dye, and he is q^ite
forsaken of them, Certain it is, God will bring His Church to the Mountain of
Straits; but they shall see glorious things there; What? God appearing in H^s
Glory; His Arm made bare of flesh. God is never seen so glorious as upon That
Mount; Then He lifts up Himself on high; Then He appears in all the peoples
sight. This is a mighty Consideration even now, it follows.

SECT. IV.
How necessary the consideration hereof is at this time, that our eyes may not
fail with looking upward; nor faint when we are corrected; nor make haste when
troubles are upon the heel.

ANd this was necessary to be noted here, That we might behold the Churches
stability and firm standing, see our error all this while, and vain
confidence; Correct our selves, take off our hold, and hasten to the Churches
Rock, that we may be as She is, a quiet habitation also. What troubles soever,
and how strong soever the tide of things is against her, yet not greatly moved;
Though standing at the foot of the Mountain of Straits, and before a Sea of
dangers and difficulties; yet standing still notwithstanding, calm and quiet
in her spirit. I say, it is necessary we should note this; for,

Though by the good hand of God upon our Worthies, We have the great work of
Reformation as it were within ken, and in sight; yet this Mount of God is
before us as a great Hill in the Travelers eye; The Hill may be afar off,
and he must take many a weary step before he comes at it: so, before the Church
be thus exalt^d and set up, as it were, upon a Hill, She may pass as through
valleys, low and dangerous bottomes, so as She may be much obscured, and almost
hid there. Before She be refined and purified in her worship and Ordinances.
She may pass through the fire. But how perilous soever her passage be to her
promised Land, though through fire and water both; over the Lions den; hole of
the Aspe, and Mountains of Leopards; how perilous soever her way is; how
strait, foul, thorney soever, Though many changes in her, and in her way, yet
no change in God; His power, wisdom, love, the same, from everlasting to
everlasting, no change there. Her Lord will bring her into a wealthy place,
that is certain, no doubt of that. For the means and manner how, and the time
when, The Church is not careful about that; She commits all this into the
hands of ^er good God and faithful Redeeme^. She does believe that her wealthy
L^^d lies beyond as howling Wilderness, and the Red Sea; And yet She is not
careful, nor does She say, there is a Lion in the way, and he will devour:
no, her Lord has commanded her, saying, be still. Be still? what can still her
spirit then, when a bloody enemy is behind her, a devouring Sea before her,
Mountains on each hand, what can still her spirit now? This, and know that I
am God Ps. 46. 10.
. A God That can stop the Lions mouth; He that made the Leviathan can make His
sword approach unto Him, even through his scales, though they are his pride;
and to his heart, though as firm as a stone, yea as hard as a piece of the
nether Millstone Job 41.
. And for the strong tide of opposition against her passage, She is not
careful about that neither. She knows God can divide the waters; for the
Adversary he thinks, so wise were his thoughts once; The Red Sea opened a way
for him: Yes, that he may march on feircely and hopefully a little way, and
then in the midst of his way sink into the bottom like a stone. The Sea is
divided for the ransomed to passe-over, and so He made a path in the Seas: so
can He also through the fire, the Church knovves it full well, for she knows
whom she trusts. Ancient and present experiences has assured her, that
wherein the enemy deals proudly, therein the Lord ever has been, is, and
will be above them Exo. 18. 11.
. And there the Church rests, her heart is fixed trusting in the Lord. A cold
Winter makes the Spring more delightful, the year more fruitful, and the man
more healthful. The Church is (...), Dion. de Reg. Orat. 3.
not displeased with the days, because evil days; These make her the better
now, and, when good come, they will be the more pleasant and comfortable. In
this quietness and confidence is her strength; she beholds what God has
done, and gets assurance for after times: and she is stayed up with promises
too, as with strong consolation, for these she sees even now fulfilling.

And so the Church addresseth her self to make her acknowledgment unto man for
present deliverances, which she takes as pledges to assure and ascertaine her
the future, what her Lord will do in after time. For though she boasts of
God all the day long, and will praise His Name for ever; yet she forgets not
to return all that is due to man in full weight and measure, through whose
hands her God has conveyed loving-kindnesse and mercy unto her.

CHAP. IV.
The Church wisely considers her two Sister-Churches; The people amongst whom
she dwells (for the most part enemies to peace;) The straits that now are. The
Church looks through all unto God.

SECT. I.
The Church remembers how it is with her Sister-Churches; and Gods gracious
dealing toward her, which raises her spirit to praise and Thankesgiving.

THe Church being now to give in a Catalogue of wonders, cannot but remember
her two Sister-Churches, the Palatinat, which has been under wrath now these
24. years: so long the anger of the Lord has burnt against that people; so
long he has stretched forth His hand against them and smitten them. The Hills
did tremble and their carcases were thrown in the midst of the Streets Esa. 5.
25. See Psalm 77.
. For all this his anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched-out
still. This Church seems to stand with her Records in her hand, written within
and without, Lamentation and Mourning and Wo^. But the sum and abridgement of
her sorrows is contained in these two words, her Sabbaths and her God, both
gone. Time was when she hid her eyes from her God, and from H^s Sabbaths,
turning her back upon both. Now God turns to them the back and not the face;
and His Sabbaths are now hid from their eyes.

Her other sister, the Church of Ireland, speaks forth bitter complaints and
supplications; that her land is dunged with her carcases, and watered with her
blood: That whatsoever was pleasant in her eyes, the enemy has put into his
hand, and taken it away.

All this time, the day of Jacobs trouble, the Church of England stands still
beholding and accounting the salvations of her God coming in unto her like the
Rivers, mercies over-taking mercies, and loving kindenesses over-taking loving
kindenesses; Deliverance upon Deliverance, and discoveries upon discoveries.
The Church is straightened in her self here, she wants expressions, but what
engagements are there in all these! How does she stand bound to Record and
Thank and Praise her good God, Who has done all these things for her! What a
mercy is this? How unspeakable? That at such a time as this, when the Lord has
been to these sister-Churches, as a Bear lying in wait, as a Lion in secret
places, He has pulled them in pieces, has made them desolate; has bent his
Bew upon them, has set them as a mark for the Arrow; has filled them with
bitterness, and made them drunken with worme-wood: so as now they are
recording, their afflictions and their misery, the wormwood and the Gall,
their soul has them still in Remembrance, and is humbled in them. I was
speaking; that at such a time as this, a time of treading down and perplexity,
the day of Jacobs troubles, yet now this Church should stand up with Records in
her hand, written within and without, mentioning the mircies and loving
kindnesses of her God. O! what an exceeding mercy is this, at such a time as
this, when she thought verily she should be termed also forsaken, and her Land
Desolate; Her Lord said, no; But thou shall be called Hephzi-bath, and thy land
Beulah Esa 62. 4. Deliciae meae oblectatio mea.
, for the Lord delights in thee, and thy land shall be married. What loving
kindnesses are these! how wonderful! how unutterable!

Again, The Church looks over the land and Nation, where we live, and behold
corruptions in Doctrines, and manners have leavened the land from corner to
corner, and have eat and consumed the heart thereof as does a canker; whence it
is that we see strange vanities, horrible impieties; abominable Idolatries;
vile Priests, and almost as unclean a people: All setting themselves and
taking council together against the Lord and against His anointed, saying,
let us break their hands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. And yet
see the exceeding goodness of the Lord, they prevail not with their number,
nor with their strength; they assemble themselves, and are broken; they take
council, and God turns it into foolishness, and their recompenses upon their
own head Joel ^. 7.
.

Thus the weak overcome the strong, and the fewest in number prevail: We know
not how, but so it is, the Lord has set His King upon His holy Hill; and if
the Lord the Captain of His Host, march out before, it matters not, whether
few or many of Gideons soldier march after, but the fewer they are, the more
is the strong arm of the Lord exalted.

And what cause has this Church to speak good of the Name of the Lord, and
to exalt His Arm, Who has made her to stand upright and above her Adversaries
with a Catalogue in her hand, wri^^e^ within and without, as aforesaid: and
which hightens the mercies, at such a time as this, when her other sisters
are recording their days of trouble, she is recording the loving kindnesses of
her God. The Church here must stand still a little to behold the severity and
goodness of God Romans 11. 22.
, toward her sister* Churches, severity; toward her people, Goodness: And
that the may the more magnify free Grace, exalt the Riches thereof, the
go^dnesse and exceeding patience of God, All His excellencies, the Church
reasons out the case, and asks, why is it so? why such severity toward
her sister-Churches? And yet toward her people such goodness?

Did Thy wrath burn-out against them, because Thy Sabbaths were profaned
there? Here they were profaned too, and more, by a Law and Statute in Israel;
notvvithstanding, a fire did not kindle in our gates, nor devour our palaces
Icr. 17. ^7.
.

Was it because the people there turned Grace into wantonness, they slighted
the offer and means of Grace, they would have none of Thee; they turned their
backs upon Thee, and the Gospel? was it for this? Here we sit down
astonished, for here we have done so too.

Was it because of their unfruitfulnesse under the means of Grace? H^re we
stand astonished, considering how hig^ we have bin lifted-up in respect of
the means, no Nation under the Sun like to us; and then thinking of our
casting down, how lovv that will be.

Was it because of their unthankfulness for, and abuse of mercies? Here also
our Tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean
Esa. 28 8.
: And we reele and fall down in the Streets at Noonday.

Was it because the Messengers of the Churches, and Glory of Christ 2 Cor. 8.
23.
, Thy faithful Ministers there were villanously used? We hear of no such
matter; they were contemned in deed and of no account with them: but with us
they have been used worse then David's Messengers; Their Beards and Garments
were cut by halves 2 Samuel 10 4.
: But here they were smit on the cheeks, and, as Swine, lug'd by the ears.

Were they brutish Pastors Esa. 56 9. Ier. ^0. 2^. and 12. ^.
, who broke down the Hedge, and laid open gaps, vvhereat men after the
manner of Beasts, skillfull to destroy, might enter in? The same Pastors are
with us, vain men, treacherous Prophets, light Priests.

Was it, because violence was done to the Law Zeph. 3. 4.
? Because they did as they could to their power to shed blood Eze. 2^ 6.
? Because their Judges were as Evening Nic 3. 11, 12.
Walves, ravening the prey? so it was here, such judged here. Why then is not
our Zion plowed like a Field Esa 9. 5
? Why are not our garments rolled in blood l? Why are we not long before this
time dashed to pieces one against the other, Brother against his Brother, and
Neighbor against his Neighbor, in all our Cities and Countries, in all places
and corners of the Land? Why is it not so? She knows the answer must be,
because is pleases the Lord, it shall not be so Amos 7. 2.
, ^aith the Lord, It is His good pleasure so, He loves the Land, because He
loves it: He will rejoice in showing mercy: and, it may be, will overcome us,
and lead us captive with loving kindnesses; and give gifts to the Rebellious.
Be it so good Lord, because it pleases Thee: Amen. Thi^ is all the Church can
say to all this.

SECT. II.
Some light Objections blown away, and a grave Objection cleared.

BUt now there is something said against the Church, that she need not be so
b^ag of her mercies, her tranquillity and peace, for she may now look to the
end thereof; her peace is taking from her; she is sinking now, down, down,
down she goes, so her adversary boasts, so he puffs at the Righteous Ps.
10. 5.
. The Church answers hereto in order, and blows away this, as you will a dust
from your sleeve. The Adversary says, first

Ob. The Church may see now to the end of her mercies?

An. No, but she cannot, her mercies are the mercies of a God, and they have no
end.

2. He says, Her peace is taken from her?

No, that it is not ^ her peace cannot be taken away: it shall flow in like the
Rivers, and come-in unto her as the waves of the Sea Esa 4818.
. Though the Assyrian should come in to her Land, and tread in her Palaces
Mic. 5 5.
, yet he cannot take away her peace. When the enemy shall come in like a
(...), the Spirit of the Lord shall lift-up a standard against him Esa. 59. 19.
.

3. The Adversary says, That the Church is falling?

No, The Adversaries flesh shall consume away first, and his eyes consume away
in their holes, and his tongue consume away in his mouth Zach 14 1^.
; but the Church shall not sink nor fall away; she is well under laid, as well
this present year as the last, yesterday, and to day and for ever, The
eternal God is her Refuge, and underneath her are the everlasting Arms Deuteronomy.
33. 17.
. She is well underlaid then; her enemies themselves being judges.

Ob. But it is said, here is more need of Prayers then of praise^. Things that
seemed to be in so forward a way, are now set back, God now seems to stand
still; or if he goes forward, it is in carrying His Church to the Mountain of
straits.

An. I might answer, things are never in so good and settled an estate, but
there is matter for prayer: nor never in so bad and low an estate, but there is
matter for praise, as in the case of Iehosaphat d. But this would not be to the
mind and sense of the Objection, which is this, That the Church should be so
much taken up now with her streights, that s^e might very well forget
prosperity; all the good that God has shown her these former years. Now God
forbid.

There be some indeed, upon whom you loose all your formet courtesies, unless
you still follow them with new and fresh favors every day Nonnulli ita
comparati sunt ut antiqutora benefici^ subvertas nisi nova posterioribus
cumules, and quamlibe^ sape obligati, si quid unum tamen neges, hoc unum
meminerunt quod negatu^ est. Plin. epist. 2 King. 20. 19.
. Some there be who have an hundred blessings, and with them but one Cross;
but that one Cross sowres all their sweets, clouds and hides all their
blessings from their eyes. The Church not so, Good is the word of the Lord,
said the good King, which thou have spoken. What did he speak? Heavy tidings;
yet says the good King, Good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken;
Is it not good if peace and truth be in my days? The good King was not
careless, what would befall the Church and His House, when he must be taken
thence and gathered to his Fathers. O no, doubtless those tidings went to his
very heart, touching those things which should befall to the House of God, his
house and his sons after him. O, it was bitterness, bitterness; but yet the
Word of the Lord is good. It was matter of Admiration and everlasting praise;
That God had shown him so much good, had wrought such Deliverances for him;
That his eye had seen such salvations; That, when his Father Abaz had wrought
such abominations in Judah, yet his son should see such salvations in Israel;
and, which is the vision indeed, peace and truth all his days. This was matter
of wonder, yea of praise and thank both. It is so with the Church; they
consider well of their straits now, and that these may be yet greater (and yet
a sign for good.) They can consider that the Church is not cast so farre-backe
yet, but she may be cast yet farther even to the place of Dragons, she has not
seen nor heard the worst yet, so it may be; nor is she careless of what she
sees or hears. No, she feels them, and ponders things in her heart; but so as
she holds fast her confidence; and she must show her self exceeding thankful
for all the Good her Lord has done for her the last year, That when her people
were ripe for judgment, as the corn for the sickle, yet there was not a
cutting down. Truly when she does but think of it, she is as one in a dream,
her spirits fail her. But this she would say; if Desolations should follow
such salvations as these (which she cannot believe) if the Lord should send
unto her sad tidings, such as would make the hearers ears tingle, Why yet, The
word of the Lord is good, and He is good to Israel Blessed be His Name for His
salvations notwithstanding; for what He has done, for ever blessed be His
name; And because we have Peace and Truth ^n these days. these fierce (...)
Mat. 8. 28.
days, these perilous 2 Timothy 3. 1.
days, yet Peace an^ Truth in these days. But yesterday almost, not a year
ago, we thought that Truth was perished, and Peace was taken from the earth;
We should never hear of that any more; no more peace; no more Truth in our
days. 1 Samuel 4. 21.
I-CABOD was in every man's mouth. The Glory is departed; yet not so, Behold
Peace and Truth even in these days!

You will say no, Wars and rumors of wars in these days. True, and yet
Peace and Truth in these days. The Church contends for Truth, she maintains
it, and will hold it fast till she dies, and not let it go. Why then, Though
the mountains be removed, and hu^led into the Sea, yet her peace cannot be
shaken. Though the Kingdoms be moved, she stands still Reader, you and I may
learn from thence; Maintain we Truth; contend we for that, and Truth will
maintain us; Hold fast Truth, and we keep Peace God has joined these
together, Man shall not be able, no nor the Gates of Hell, nor power, nor
policy, to separate these; they are still together, they kiss each other. And
that is the Reason, That when we are full of stirs, a tumultuous people, The
Righteous at such a time stand still, and are a quiet habitation. But I recall
my self, Thus the Church concludes; Though the Lord should make Desolations
now in the earth; Though He should stretch over us, The line of Germany, and
the plummet of Ireland; yet the Righteous stand bound to Record the Salvations
He has wrought. The Righteous are not a sullen froward people, as we are; All
the mercies we have are nothing in our eyes, because there is something
wanting, as still there will be in the most accomplished, the most completed
condition here below. But I say, because it is so, some want there is still;
therefore all our mercies, so great, so many, lie buried in us under that clod
of discontent. As I said before, so now, The Church not so; Though she should
walk in the shadow of death; Though she were stricken into the place of
Dragons, yet would they Record the year of the Right hand of the Lord, when He
wrought so wonderfully, such salvations in Israel. And this is the task she is
addressing her self unto, but she cannot hastily recollect her spirits as she
would do, for she would call upon all within and without to praise his Holy
Name.

SECT. III.
The Church opens the Records, begins to read, but must pause a little, being
taken off with Admiration.

THe Church is taken with the works of her God, as the Queen of Sheba was with
the wisdom of Solomon, and the magnificence of his Court; When she had seen
all that, There was no more spirit in her 2 Chronicles 9. 4.
. Fame, which creates something of nothing, has made whose Kin^doms, and
peopled them with her own inventions, reported not the half of Salomons
wisdom. It exceeded the Fame that was heard 1 King 10. 7.
. Fame falls as short in these Transcendents which we are upon; Therefore there
is the same reason, and greater, That the Church should be so affected now, as
that Queen was at that time: For behold, a greater then Solomon is here; and a
greater Glory is put forth in His works now, then could be seen in Salomons
Court. She must be in an amaze when she beholds the admirable, strange and
unsearchable ways of Providence toward her this last year: He made a path
for her in a wilderness; turned the drought of her Summer into fresh Springs.
A poor blind Isa. 42. 16.
Handmaiden, She; her Lord leads her in paths, she could never have discerned,
never have spyed out with all her search, by a way she knew not, never thought
of: No, as hid from her eyes as were the unsearchable ways of her first
Redemption. Her Adversary led her more then once, as they did her Lord, to the
brow of the Hill Luk 4. 29.
, thinking verily to cast her down headlong. But her Lord wrought gloriously
for her escape: For as her Lord then, so She now passed through the midst of
them, and went away; She wondered how she escaped, and was at that time as one
in a dream; but being well awakened, and coming to her self, she remembered
her Lord, whose she is, and whom she serves, He upheld her with His hand.

But what thanks and praise are due to her God? Who let out the wrath of man,
and gave it the more Scope, so as the more it was let out, the more it might
praise Him! Who so ordered the work of an imperious whorish woman Ezekiel. 16. 30.
(such was the Church in name so) and her works such; for she was impudently
bold, and past all shame (whom they commonly called the Church) to work
thereout good to his people; To cause the summoning of a Parliament; To make it
hold; and that a caution was put in for aftertimes. What a confluence of
mercies is, in all this! What abundant matter of praise! And that, when the
Priests, for the most part, were brutish, and the people but a little more
reasonable, as froward as that Israelite, who co^nted reforming a killing Exodus
2. 4.
; Yet such a Parliament notwithstanding, Who have laid a foundation of mercy
for themselves, and their posterity, even for all the generations to come.

But I must not huddle up things so, nor throng them together, remembering, That
the greatest wonder, which most engages the hearts of the Righteous, was
wrought before the Parliament sat; Therefore I shall take leave to begin
according to my proposed Method, and to set down two Months, which are not in
our late Kalenders; and then the Churches collections there-out, in the same
order.

Surely, September (there I shall begin) it shall be to us the first beginning
of Months, the first Month of our Iubile to us: For in that Month the Lord
began to bring His Church out of Egypt, with a mighty hand, and to set His face
against His Adversaries, and toward His people. And because He proceeded on
toward the accomplishment of what He had begun, and to make Himself known,
and to get a Name and everlasting praise all the Months after; in allusion to
the Spirits words touching Moses, I will say of this year There has not been
a year since the Redemption like unto this year, in all the signs and the
wonders which the Lord has done in the Land of Egypt, To the Pope and to all
his servants, and to all his Land. And in all that mighty hand, and in all the
great terror, which the Lord showed in the sight of all Israel Deu^. ult ^.
.

CHAP. VI.
September, 1641. The Product thereof. The Overtures, and strange turnings of
things therein.

SECT. I.
September. The Product thereof.

AFter a strong commotion the waters will be sometimes swelled and unquiet* so
likewise in our Sea. This Month came in boysterously partaking very much in
the malignancy of the Constellation then reigning; The Soldiers (for we must
speak plain English in the Countrey-mans ear) busled after their manner, but
against all expectation. The Priests (high and low) did more hurt (good I
should say, yet no thank to them for the good, God ordered ^t so, and produced
it, as He did the light, out of darkness) for they were more cordial then the
soldiers, they prayed against the Scots heartily, and would set their people a
praying too. They would force the people to impossibilities: To bless God, and
curse Man; perhaps because the Priests could skill in it* Bless with their
mouth, and curse inwardly Psalm 62. 4.
. But so the Bishops ordered it, and so there was praying on both sides; one
side prayed in paper, the other in prayer Iam. 5. 17.
. And that the contrary side might pray in more faith, the Scots were written
Rebels upon every Post and Pillar by the Secretary himself; It was time to
rage and pray too, for he had but a short time: But when the cry against the
Scots was great, and the clamor against them very grievous, it pleased the
Lord to come down and see, whether they had done according to the cry, and
behold they had not: But the oppression, violence, and wrong done against them,
was according to the cry. So He stirred up the hearts of the Nobles and
Commons, both to fall upon their knees, and petition God and their King, That
matters might be heard, and a way thought on to stop the great wrath, that was
pressing in like a flood. Then the Nobles went toward the North (there the
Clouds of blood gathered, and there the Heavens were darkest) with a select
company of the Commons; And by the good hand of God upon the King and his good
people, a Parliament was resolved upon, and news thereof spread apace, and
came posted to London the 23d. of this Month. About this time there were many
meetings of Ministers every where, and grave consultations about a new Oath;
and damned it was by every mouth to the very pit, whence the Bishops with
their, etc. dug it; for there was a digging to Hell to hide their counsel,
etc.

At this time also the Bishop visited by his Chancellor; and the new Oath was
so corrupt, that it made the old one very unsavory. So the business was
carried in a great deal of heat and hurrey, just as it is when two sturdy
Rogues fall a swearing, that which comes next to hand is their weapon, and then
no wise man Will come near them; Then the Chancellor with etc. turned their
backs and shifted. Here began the troubles which shrowdly shaked the Hierarchy
with etc.

Thus we have the product of this Month, as it were in the gross sum, and
how the end tended to a calm with them, who heartily prayed for fair weather.

SECT. II.
The Churches Collections hence yielding matter of praise, and wonder, in the
strange Overtures and turning of things upside down.

WE were now full of stirs, a tumultuous Nation indeed, but the Church a
quiet habitation still: Notwithstanding the contrariety of wills and motions in
the World, She could stand still, waiting the salvation of her God; though
indeed she s^w plainly, That she was in a wilderness, where she saw no path.
Then the Church remembered the Lord, and was comforted; He is wonderful in all
His Administrations, but especially in these, which He works in a
wilderness. Now the Church could lean on her Beloved; O how willingly did she
reach forth her hand to Him, who is given a Leader and Commander to the people
Isa. 55. 4.
. Mark that, He is a sure Leader to His Church: Who? The Lord Christ; for He
commands her: The Church hears no other voice, obeyes no other, but as
commanding from His mouth, and leading unto Him. This in passage: But I say,
how willingly and confidently did the Church reach forth her hand to this
Leader and Commander; she did assure her heart 1 John 3. 13.
, He would lead her because He does command her; He could and is able to lead
her, because He makes a way in the Sea, and a path in the mighty waters? He
brings forth the Charet and the Horse, the Army and the Power, Isa. 43. 15,
16.
. etc. The Lord did the same thing now; He made a way in the Wilderness and
Rivers in the Desert: So He lead His people, even those Ver. 19.
that are commanded by Him. The manner how commands our Mark; He brought the
blind by a way; He lead them in paths that they have not known; He made
darkness light before them, and crooked things straight; These things He has
done unto them, and not forsaken them Isa 42. 16.
.

Truly, This Scripture is this day fulfilled in our eyes. The Church commands
us to observe it in these particulars, wherein it will appear, That the Lords
Thoughts (Thoughts of Mercy and of Peace) were as high above mine or yours, nay
above the Churches Thoughts, as the Heavens are above the Earth. It appears d
Isa. 55. 8. ^.
thus.

SECT. III.
What our Thoughts were: how high the Lords thoughts were above the Churches
thoughts.

1.
OUr eyes were in the Heavens (as in such times it is our manner Sol nisi cum
de sicit spe^tatorem non ha^. ^, etc. Sen.
) and behold they were very dark and covered with thick clouds. Our thoughts
were, and strait-way thus we said; there will be a great storm. So it was; a
Starme indeed, haile-stones and coals of fire, beating sore (against all
expectation) upon the hairy scalpe of the wicked Man; but a sweet shower to the
City of God, sweetly and seasonably refreshing them, as the after-raine the
parched ground.

We looked up again to Heaven (whether else should we look, for peace seemed
to be taken from the Earth) but behold it was very red (I purposely speak in
the Almanack-M^kers Dialect) strait way we said, for such our Thoughts were, it
will be wind; and so it was against all expectation, and that which was
threatened Ier. 4. 11.
; a wind indeed, but not a dry wind, for it did fan and cleanse; even a f^ll
wind against high places, scattering the wicked as with the breath of Gods
mouth; and so they did flee as the chafe before the vvind, or as they fled
from before the Earthquake Zach. 14. 5.
: So they did flee; but hearken what the Lord such, He that flees of them
shall not flee away: and he that escapes o^ them shall not be delivered Am. 9.
1, 2, 3.
. Thus the Lord h^th said for after-time, and thus He has done now, ever
blessed be His Name.

2.
WE heard of wars and nothing but rumors of wars, preparation thereto on
every side: strait way we said, for our thoughts were, The Sword will be bathed
in Heaven Esa. 34. 5.
, it will be made drunk with the blood of the slain. And so it was in part,
but it was in the blood of the Men of bloods that were to call forth to battle,
and to be leaders thereunto. A wonder this also, and wrought by Him, Who spoke
of old, and made it good now: Behold, they shall surely gather together, but
not by Me; whosoever shall gather together against Thee shall fall for thy sake
^sa 44. 15, 16, 17.
, etc.

3.
WE beheld here a Troop, and there a Troop: straightway we said, Lord,
these are called forth to destroy Thy Judah, and to curse Thy Israel And it was
so in the intention of the Adversary; and a ^^kely choice he had made, for they
were of that number, and choice ones for that purpose, to whom their
spiritual Fathers (so they will be called, because they savor so much of the
Spirit) gave an Advousion of liberty, and choice of sports (cried down by the
Heathen Aug. de civ. Dei. cap. 31, 32, 33.
) which they might take on the Lord's Day.

Certainly, said Dion (...). Dion. Orat. 79.
, speaking of Liberty, He made bad Laws indeed, he gave a wicked Liberty, and
writ grievousnesse, who prescribed such Decrees, and gave such a Liberty, which
could please none but the bad. Such a Liberty was this on the Lord's Day, which
the Bishops gave to the people. And see the luck of it, the Bishops grant was
too large, it gave the people more scope then in manners they would take on the
Lord's Day; and so thus they requited their great Dons; when it was expected
that these people, who had such an Advousion of Liberty as this from the hands
of their good Lords, should now gratify the said Lords in fulfilling the whole
pleasure of their will, they did clean contrary: for, vvheras they were called
out to curse, even these (in their manner) blessed altogether Number. 23. 11.
, and threw-out what the Bishops had brought-in, the Rails and Mock-gods
there. What this people did more, needs not my Relation; ^t is well known
every where, all the Land over; and well observed it was, even as a vvonder
in the eyes and ears of all.

4.
WE saw some of these Troops hasting toward the North, gathered into a
mighty body there: Instruments of cruelty prepared and sent down. All means
used, which Achi^ophel could suggest (we remember what his council vv^s,
even to make an irreconcilable difference between Father and Son) all to
set Ephraim against Manasses, and Man^sses against Ephraim, both against THY
IVDAH. And so it was in the intention of the Adversary. But to say so now, as
one has done (when he praid too) were a bold, arrogant and impious speech,
if not blasphemous: for behold to the admiration of the world, Angels and Men,
the Breach made up, a peace concluded, and so concluded, That it is a Statute
now and an Ordinance in Israel, That Judah must rejoice, and Israel must be
right glad. So they will, and they will tell it to their children, and so
down-ward, and not barely so and no more, but they will speak thereof with
rejoicing, what the Adversary intended, how the Lord disappointed him, and
that there is now a Statute in Israel, that all Judah should meet together sing
and rejoice, when they tell forth the loving kindnesses of the Lord, That
according to this time, it may be said of Jacob and of Israel, What has GOD
WROVGHT? What has He wrou^ht? Speak it out if ye can. Truly Reader, I
cannot; I can fill a sheet or two with the Records thereof, but, me thinks,
it is an empty work, no way sufficient to set forth the vvonderfull work of
God therein. So I leave it, and leave thee, Reader, to muse upon it, being
resolved; that this Treatise shall not cloy thee nor fill thy hand. It is
intended but to when thy Appetite if thou happily meetest with these Heads
largely treated on in time to come; and to raise thy heart for the raising of a
PILLAR to the everlasting Praise of the KNOWN GOD. There is one or two
Observations more, which the Church charge us to gather-up, from the
scatterings of this Month.

5.
THe Bishops had a Court; They called it the High-Commission-Court; Others, the
bloody Inquisition. Certainly (The smartest Purgatory, the sorest tyranny,
that ever the Church felt-upon Earth; but her comfort is, it is all her
Purgatory here, and it cease with the Earth: This bloody Inquisition (for so
they perverted Judgment and Justice there, turning such sweet blessings into
Gall and Hemlocke Amos 6. 12.
) received it is fatal blow this very Month, languished the Month following,
and dyed shortly after.

We must enquire now, who gave this Court this deadly blow? The Answer is, The
Judges there. Yes, that is the Answer, the enemies themselves being Judges. With
their own hands they vvounded themselves, and gave their Court that deadly
blow. I must correct my words a little; I did but mistake the hand for the
tongue; there is a smiting with the tongue too; I should have said, with their
own tongues they smote themselves and destroyed their Court. See Reader, how
they brought the blow about; but observe vvithall observation, the Retaliation
of the Lord; What is that? (For it is not English) how the Lord, the Lord God
of Recompenses Ier. 51. 5^.
, retal ated those Men, that is, returned their Recompense upon their own head
Joel 3. 7.
But yet for the glory of this vvonderfull work of Retaliation, they
themselves with their own Tongues, must retaliate, as it were, Eye for Eye,
Tooth for Tooth Exodus 21. 24.
; they must, with their own tongues, Return Recompense upon their own
Heads, for thus it was.

6.
THe Bishops had an Oath which they forced upon the righteous in homage and
mere duty to their Court, and it was a gin and a trap and a snare to His
people; as a Serpent by the ^ay, an Adder in the path, that bite^h the Rider so
that ^e falls back ward Gen 4^. 17.
. The Lord, Who commands us to swear in Truth, in Judgment and in
Righteousness Ier. 4. ^.
, looked upon this opp^^ssion, and required it; how? They must Retaliate
themselves now, Oath for Oath. Their chain must be let out now; the rope must
be lengthned (give some men rope enough, they will go near to strangle
themselves, as in this case) they must have full scope given them, and what
must they do? Hammer out another Oath, and that must be as the other was to
the righteous, a gin, a trap and a snare, to take their own foot in; as a
Serpent, to make those Riders, that marched so furiously to fall back-ward. I
hat Oath must retaliate them, it must recompense all their evil upon their
own heads. That Oath, like a Mushrome (that miracle in Nature, for it grows
and has no root In miraculis vel max^mum est, aliquid (...) aut veve^e sine
ul^a^ ^adice Tub^r^ haec vocantur, etc. Pl^^. Hi^ l. 19 cap. ^.
) So this Oath, that had no root; neither in Nature nor in Grace; neither i^
Law nor in Gospel; neither in Reason, then nor in Religion sure; This
Mushrome-Oath, this rootlesse thing, must come in, and help to carry out head
and tail* the Bishops with, etc. it must be a means to root out them and
their Courts. Take we all in two words, and in Scripture language, and then see
the Retaliation of the Lord; They had killed the Righteous there in that Court
as they could; they scorched him with the breath of their lips See now! The
Lord ordered it so, That their own breath as fire did devour them Esa. 33. 1^.
. They spoke devouring words; indeed they swallowed up the Righteous there. See
now the Retaliation of the Lord! and muse on the work of His hands P^. 143. 5.
, for so it was according to the saying. The words of a Wise-mans mouth are
gracious: but their lips did swallow up themselves Eccl. 10. 1^.
. They fell upon the righteous like a Mil-stone, they would have ground him to
powder: See now! They shall make their own torgue to fall upon themselves Ps.
^4. ^*
. So I have pointed at the Remarkables in this Month, as befits an Epitomy or
Abridgement. The Et cetera*s here are very notorious, which I have reserved to
a place where they may take more Room, then they can do in this Treatise,
which I intend as aforesaid. So we go on.

CHAP. VII.
October, The Product thereof; Many Mercies, and yet but one mavelous work
wrought for the Church at that time.

SECT. I.
October, The employment thereof.

NOw the Lord Keeper was busily employed in issuing forth Writs to summon a
Parliament, which service he did more out of duty than affection to that high
Court.

This Month was much of it spent in enquiring after, or reading news out of
the North; and in choosing Knights and Bargesses for the several Counties,
Cities and Towns; Where there were a poor people also, who had no voices but
in corners, and there they might be bold to send up strong cries to Heaven,
which furthered the business not a little.

Now the people having chosen a Man to stand for ten thousand, they transmitted
unto him the great Trust, their Estates, their Liberties, their Lives, their
all, that was theirs, Religion and all: And they, who understood what they did,
prayed, That the service he had to do for his King and Country, might be
thoroughly thought on and accepted: And that he might go up and return in the
fullness of the blessing of God.

SECT. II.
Many Mercies in one Parliament. A comprehensive Blessing. Why called a
Parliament. The Honor and Antiquity of that High Court. Long vacation there
makes sinners impudent.

THis Month the Church heard the news, That a Parliament must be summoned
again. Very comfortable news That, and another manner of sight then to see
the whole world represented in a M^p: That Is but a dead representation: In a
Parliament we see the Body of a Kingdom, not, as sometimes you see in a Table,
head and shoulders only and no more, but the entire Body represented and
compacted together as one man. And my self I see there, though but as the foot
in the Body, yet there I am, my interest there, my estate there, my liberty, my
Religion (so far as man can command it) all is there, that I have below, as
in a joint stock: there it is managed and carried about by that great Body.

We cannot wonder now, that we hear such shootings in every corner, besides
those we hear from the Pulpit, Grace Grace Zach. 4. 7.
unto it; The Good Will of Him that dwelt in the Bush Deuteronomy. ^3. 16.
be upon it, Lord bless the King and the Parliament.

It is the highest Court on Earth, it can call all other Courts to account, how
they have proceeded, whether according to or against Law. It is the great
Assembly gathered from all the quarters and corners of the Kingdom, whether
all the people from Dan to Beersheba come up to present their sores (there they
look for balm) their grievances and pressures, there they expect help and
ease.

It is the great Council of the Land, there they consider, take advice; and
speak their minds. Every man there does as the purpose of the word is,
PARLER-LA-MENT, speak judiciously his mind, neither to flatter prerogative,
nor ^o extend privilege Nec praerogativis blandientes, nec privilegia
dilatantes. L. Cook ^p. 8. be-his Reports.
, being wisely valiant and zealously wise. Therefore (if I might use the Sages
word) christened a Parliament; the highest House on Earth, (we cannot properly
call it two Houses,) if we do respect the Antiquity of it, it is most
venerable and ancient Si vetustatem est antiquissim si dignitatem est
honoratissima si iurisdictionem est capacissima, Ep 9.
: if the honor and dignity of it, it is most honorable: if Jurisdiction and
Power, we remember the old saying, The KING and the PARLIAMENT, what cannot
they do? Even what they please: and we stand still and hearken what that will
be; The Church is resolved already, That shall be done which plea^eth them; for
sh^e is of the Shepherds mind, That shall be done which pleases God, and what
pleases God, pleases her: But the Church counted it a mercy to hear news of
another Parliament. If we should outlive Parliaments; if a Parliament should
be denied us; or, being granted, should be destroyed, then I-C ABOD, where is
the glory? Then call the Church desolate, and her Land forsaken: The wicked
would walk on every side, for the vilest men should be exalted Ps. 12. 8.
.

The long vacation given to the high Court, has given all the advantage to the
Adversary, whereby to work their own ends in the ruin of the public. Then
was their time to sow tares, and to give them rooting, when they could cast the
Laws into a dead sleep; when they could cause jealousies, between Prince and
people; when they could raise an evil spirit (their own familiar) a fire of
Contention, which should come forth on the left hand, and devour upon the
right, and then from the right, and devour upon the left.

O what an exceeding Mercy to have a Parliament in England! like the great day
of Judgment to the wicked; when by the good hand of God upon it, there is a
full discovery of things; the ways, yea the hearts of men are laid open;
Things represented as they are: the upright person, as he is, The vile, as he
is: When Mephibosheth comes in, but of late, represented as an enemy unto his
Prince, but now sound at the heart, (though lame in his feet) and forgetting
himself wholly for joy that the King is in safety, and his Kingdom like to
prosper; when there is a right understanding of things between the King and
his Subjects. The King beholding his good peoples he^rts, truly loy^ll and
faithful; and they the face of their King, as an Angel of God O! A
Parliament, it is a fundamental Mercy: So the Church allows us to call it, and
to put it to that head, and then reckon on, A great Mercy to have another
PARLIAMENT, a Mercy, but no wonder. For,

SECT. III.
Things were so far out of frame, that they could not be set as rights, but
by a Parliament: The having one or two in one year, is not a wonder, but a
Mercy.

COnsider we how it stood with the Church (as it is commonly and (...) be
cal'^) and no^ with the Commonwealth; we consider there two, the Church (as
then it was called) and the Commonwealth (as then it stood) a part and
divided, for so they are; The Church standing against the Commonwealth, as the
one Pole against the other. The Church (so they were called) the Governors,
Seers, Overseers, chief Over seers, commonly called Priests, Bishops,
Archbishops and their ETCETERA'S, made their loins so strong and fortified
their power so mightily, as they thought they might rule with a rod of iron,
and still prevail, breaking in pieces the Lords Jewels, as they pleased; and
making-up in the place thereof, the basest pieces of the Earth. The Holy Ghost
has fitted us with a most fit and full expression, none like it, Their works
were the works of an imperious whoorish woman Ezekiel. 16. 30.
, They were grown so impudently bold, so past all shame, so far beyond all
bounds of civility and modesty; that they could not be longer endured. They
laid such loades upon the people. That the stomach of the Land was so
overcharged, that it must spew them out, without putting finger into the
throat, or else die of a Sur^et. No Remedy, but by a PARLIAMENT. I shall be
corrected, a CONVOCATION, you should say, let the Priest correct the Priest. A
Convocation! that were to send the Jesuit to be tried in a Conclave of
Cardinals, they would never find him guilty sure. The whole Body of the Land
was so ov^r-charged with the last Convocation, that they cannot think thereof
without loathing. It Is so uns^voury at this day. There must be a Parliament, if
it were for no other end, but to advise about this whoorish woman, so imperious
she was. And a Covocation, in all likelihood, would make her more imperiously
proud They would have reformed the Church (they were about it) as the Reformers
did in the Council of Trent, who made the greatest Deformation that ever was
heard or read of in the world. But it is pleaded. Let Churchmen determine
Church matters; Let spiritual men have to do in spiritual things* And let
them ^o; ^ut let them know, that there is a Council above them, that can call
them to an account, how spiritual they have been. And how like Churchmen,
they have kept to the rule in their Determinations about Church matters This is
not above the Power and Wisdom of a Parliament, called together to advise, DE
ARDVIS REGNI and ECCLESIAE Then surely the Lord Christ, Hi^ Religion, Worship
and Service; the matter and manner of it is one of the greatest and most
weighty things, and of the highest concernment.

N^w every considerate man was very jealous of the Clergy of England, as
corrupt then every whit, as once it was in the Jewish Church, when head and
heart, all was sick and faint, from the sole of the foot ^ven unto the head,
there was no soundness in ^t, but vvounds and b^u^ses and putrified sores So
it was in the Church Esa. 1. 5.
.

No better in the Common wealth, for where Gods Law is insulted over, Man's law
will be trodden under; such a confusion there was in the Kingdom: The Pillars
were so wrested out of place; Prerogative so strayned; Privileges so broken,
and underfoot; such vexations there were, on every hand, such breaches in the
great house, such clefts in the little house Am. 6. 11.
; such a howling for v^xation and oppression; That it had been a wonder if a
Parliament had not been summoned.

Ai, but to see two Parliaments in one year, and to see one hold so long, and
to give Cauti^n against so long a vacation, to that High-Court, is a wonder
sure.

No, none of all this; time was, when a Parliament was called twice a year and
oftener, as the aff^ires of the Kingdom might require: So I remember a great
Sage of the Law r^p^rts. Therefore I have no warrant from the Church to call
this a wonder, the having two Parliaments in one year, or the having ^ne every
third year; it is rare with us; but every thing that is rare is not a Wonder:
Natural causes can produce, and so did, all this. The breaking of the one,
Naturally and Rationally worked for the producing of another, and to make it
hold, and to put in Caution for after-time. We never exclude the first cause,
That we suppose goes along with us still, as the Needle before the Thread, and
then no wonder is all this, but a very great Mercy, as we heard, and shall
hear. And all this we have heard, is but to prepare the ear to let in the
Wonder, and that it may not stay there, but link down into the heart.

SECT. IIII.
Gods mavelous works for the Church, and with the PARLIAMENT, That it
wrought for her Liberties and enlargement every way.

YEs, that is the mavelous work indeed; not that she has a Parliament, and
that continued, etc. But that the Church has received so much good from a
Parliament; the finger of God is there, most remarkably there. The Church has
as much cause to complain of Parliaments, as to speak good of them, though
she can bless God for all. She was never trod down, never set under-foot,
till a Parliment had set their foot upon her. You may believe her; the Church
did tremble, and had fainted, but that the Lord was her staff and stay, when
she heard news of a Parliament. Therefore she bestirred her self, and used her
weapons to purpose, Prayers and Tears, and so became Israel, a prevailer with
God. The Church does acknowledge, That she never received such enlargements
from any means here below of humane institution, as from the hands of a
Parliament: nor ever cast into such straits and bondage, as by the same hand.
That Court ever made her happy, or miserable; it laid the foundation ever,
either for the greatest blessing, or the sorest curse: either it lifts up a
Nation, making it honorable; or sinkes a Nation, making it the basest of
Kingdoms. That this Parliament did not do the later, make her Desolate, and
leave her as forsaken, That will be the Wonder, the mavelous working of a God
toward His People, if we consider,

I might say first, the Trust and Confidence we put in that High-Court. We
rested-upon it, more then upon God; we waited for it as for the rain, and
opened the mouth wide, as the parched ground for the latter rain. So we did
well; but our eyes, which should be single to God only, were single Job 29. 23.
toward it, as the only means that could do us good and recover our sick and
languishing State, And this our vain Confidence might have spoiled all; for,
as God does curse bold and daring Attempts: so he does shrinke-up and wither
the Arm of flesh, when man will make it his arm, depend and rest upon it; for
then his heart departs from the Lord Ier. 17 5.
. There is but one thing, wherein is assurance and strength, strong confidence
Pro. 14. 26.
, and the Lord does commonly reject all other confidences, so as man shall not
prosper in them Iet. ^. 37.
. But I pass this; for the Lord has passed it over, not charging upon His
servants their vain Confidences.

1.
THis we must chiefly consider; That it was the great Design of the Adversary;
This they plotted and contrived; for this they spent their precious spirits,
that such might be chosen, who might draw to their side, and establish their
wicked and mischievous Devices by a Law; wherein the HEAD and TAIL, both
worked together; the HEAD contrived; the TAIL, put forth it is sting, and
therewith did much hurt: All conte^^ed and contended, and altogether, not only
to make the hope of the righteous Null (as they call it) invalid and of no
force; but to take them away from the Earth, Root and Branch, that they might
be no more a people; or, if so, then the most despicable and peeled people on
the face of the Earth: Thus HEAD and TAIL contrived and contended. Who are
they? I thank the Reader, that he will not conster my words* before I have
explained them. By the Head I do not mean the Ruler of the People; but him,
that presumes to rule the Nations, and that with a Rod of Iron (which he calls
seeding Romans 2. 27. (...).
.) Not him, that bears the Sword, but him, that challenges two Swords, and
has right to neither I mean him, that is the Head of Heads and Lord of Lords,
the POPE, I mean. I confess I never heard him speak; but I have heard some
of his flatterers say; That a Priest is so much above a King, as a Man i^ above
a Beast; Tantum Sacerdes praestat Regi, quantum homo praestat Bestiae, quantum
Deus praestas Sacerd^ti, tantum Sacerdo^ praest as R^gi; Qui Regem anteponi^
Sacerdo^^, is anteponis Creatu. ram ^reato^^ Stanu laus Ovichovius. I find it
in M Iu^ls Apol. 4 par.
as much as God is better then the Priest; so much is the Priest better then
the King: He that sets the King be ore a Priest, sets the Creature before
the Creator: Then how far think you, does a Pope exceed Kings and Emperors?
How much then is that Head above other Heads? It is answered, with liberty
enough (for they take leave to pen their own Ch^rter) He is as much higher
above Kings, as the Sun is above the Moon He sits i^ the very ZENITH of the
Church, in the highest place there; as hi^h above your Head, as you can look
with your eyes. There Is a tall Man indeed. True, but he was a woman once, and
that they may not be couz^ned the second time, he must set upon a stool, (so
it is related) and before he must know himself to be Pope, the st^^ders by must
know him to be John, not Ione. And tru^y, bu^ that he goes to the stool every
day, he would quite forget that he were a man, for he is above the Sacred
Scripture too.

This is the HEAD, a monstrous Head, he is MANY, a Legion and more, for I join
the whole Body with this Head, and all those Heads too, be they Kings, or be
they Emperors, or what heads you can think off, who have given up their Head
ship to this Head, I mean their power unto the Pope; have made themselves
Servants to that SLAVE. Slave! What a word is that to give to such a tall Head?
The Pope in a voluntary humility gives himself that Title, SERVVS SERVORVM.
What Is that? In plain English, the basest Servant, S^ave; for a^ a Song of
Songs, is an excellent Song; The God of gods, is the true God; the Lord of
Lords, is the excelling Lord; the Master of Masters, is our Master in Heaven:
So a Servant of Servants, is the lowest Servant, the vilest, bas^st Servant, a
true Slave. But there is the Head with all the appurtenances and adherents. And
see how he contrived and plotted to enlarge his Dominions, to dethrone the Lord
Christ, to take from Him, His possession, not only the ends of the Earth, but
the head of Kingdoms. See I say, how he wrought to establish mischief by a
Law! How he sought to curse the people of God! For that purpose his Balaams
were posted to every place, and Altars built up there; and all to curse those,
whom God had blessed, and they must be blessed; but considering the height, the
power, the policy of this Head, and yet he could nor prevail, he could not
curse, that is the wonder, and yet we hear not the half.

2.
WE must descend to the TAIL, that Nadar, that despicable part, as that Earth
is, whereon the foot stands (if it stands upon a muck-hill) that stinging part;
the Text says, and we feel, the sting is in the Tail; What is that? the
sacred Scripture interprets it, The Prophet that teaches lies, he is the TAIL
Esa. 9. 15.
. Reader, look about thee, and observe in passage, where he or they are, who
teach Lies: They that do so, though they be dignified with Titles and Honors,
and Preferments; though they have their Schools and Colleges for their
encouragement, and to engage them the more to their God; yet if they teach
Lies, they shall not be called by Him, Who gives to every man his dues and
right name, not Seers, not the Eyes of the Land, but the TAIL. The Prophet
that teaches Lies, he is the TAIL. And he is many too; and how did he
wriggle, I cannot express my self, how did he struggle, and strive, and
contend, to wriggle-in that Head the Pope, to sting the Church and to curse
those, that stood on her side? Truly, this was told in Gath; what? What
Prophets we have: it was published in the streets of Askelon, and the daughters
of the Philistines did rejoice, and the uncircumcised did triumph: True, but
their rejoicing was but short, for the TAIL could not sting His People. Of the
sting in the Tail and poison in the mouth, the Lord made a preservative, a
sovereign medicine, and He turned the curse into a blessing; Blessed be His
Name.

Now the Church prays, the Lord unscale the eyes and unvaile the hearts of
those Prophets, that they may see and consider what they have done and do, and
pardon them according to the multitude of His compassions. Amen.

3.
THat the mavelous works of the Lord may be raised in our thoughts yet
higher, that we may have an high and honorable esteem of them, we must
consider, as follows.

Here was a Head which thought to establish wickedness by a Law; here was
Tayle-Prophets, who taught lies, and these prevailed so far, that they brought
the people on their side, as the sand on the Seashore for multitude: These made
the People glad with their lies, and he was a Prophet unto them, that could
prophecy of wine and strong drink Mic. 2. 11.
. See here, Council and Strength is for the war, the Adversary had both, and
multitudes so many as we heard, and yet see the overruling hand of the Lord
Almighty; these prevailed not, neither by their strength nor by their council,
nor by their multitudes, as appears this Day. There is the mavelous work
of God and a wonder.

To make the wonder yet more complete, we must take-in a third person the most
chief and principal, BE LZEBVB their Prince and King, the Angel of the
bottomless pit; he keeps his nature still, so he keeps his name still; in
the Hebrew ABADDON b; in the Greek APOLLYON Rev. 9. 11.
; two names different in language and in sound, but in signification one and
the same, A man slayer, a Soule-devourer. He has his name so in the Hebrew,
because he is a mighty let to the comming-in of the Jews (no such offense to
them in the world as your Images and Image-makers. And he has his name so in
the Greek, because the head of this faction mightily opposes the completing
or filling up the number of the Gentiles: For he opposes with all his might,
the spreading of the Gospel, the revealing that mighty arm of the Lord.

We have the principal now, the King and Prince, we will put all together, the
Head, the Tail, the bulky-Body, with the King over them. What is the
mavelous work now, what is the wonder? This, That the gates of Hell
prevailed not. Wisdom, mighty for plotting and contriving, was turned into
foolishness. Strength, mighty for action, was turned into weakness.
Multitudes did fall as drunkards; had not so much power as women, or as wounded
men. We have not all yet, this must be considered also, for this is our
design, to advance the name of God in confounding such a Troop, by such weak
means.

The Righteous, who seemed a very few, a thin scattered people, these spoke
often (not only, as in an evil time) one to another ^, but openly, and to the
Adversaries face. These I say, though Prudent men, Mal. 3. 16.
did not keep silence, no, not in that time, such an evil time Am. 5. 13.
. I should go on, but here an Objection will thrust in upon me, to take off
from this wonder, and to shorten, if it could be, the Arm of God, even the
right hand of the Almighty.

SECT. V.
The Objection, That the Arm of the People was strong here, and the Arm of
God not so glorious.

SEe the manner of Men before we hear them if we can see any cranny or chinke,
whereat light and comfort comes in unto us, to that we will look, not minding
the Sun, whose beam it is. If our net be quite broken all to pieces, we will
scarce cast it away; we will think it may catch and hold something, and so to
our Net we will sacrifice, that is, to our own strength and wisdom; That did
it, God did nothing Adrete re^^rr^^, hoc est, pu^a^^ Diu^ nihil esse. Hab. 1
16. vid Calv.
, If the arm of flesh be strong, we look not after, we regard not at all the
Arm of the Lord, the Right Hand of the Almighty. But was the arm of flesh
strong now? nay, was it considerable? surely, the Lord seemed now to cut Israel
short 2 Kin. ^0 30.
. Jacob was then very low, as a worm now, very small; Surely it might be
questioned now as once it was, O Lord God forgive, I beseech thee, by whom
shall Jacob rise? for he is SMALL Am 7. 2.
. But see, I say, what hearts we have, still warping, nay, still departing from
the Lord. If there be any thing of the arm of flesh discernable, whereat to
take hold, there we take our hold-fast, and thereon we rest, Just so we did
here; Here we saw Head and Tail, and multitudes, and their King also, all
confounded. Thank the Countryman for this, so they say, and so they abate of
the wonder, and from the glory of the work. We will examine the truth of that.

It is said, the People in the Country were at this point wise enough and
provident enough. That Is true, wise enough in their Generation, wiser then the
children of light; and provident enough too; for what? For their own
private-wealth, their particular interests; Take them otherwise and in the
lump, and out of their own tractes, and they have little wisdom or
providence at all. True it is, they were pinched now, and that made them look
up from the ground, whereon they are still poring. They did howl, because of
their Taskmasters, which made them look out for help, and be a little more
provident then ordinary. They that pressed Ship Money, should never have their
voices; so they were resolved, so tender they were in their own ease, and
where it pinched; but for the cause of Christ and His Church, it is little in
their thoughts. I know the manner of men well enough, by making enquiry into
mine own heart, and the manners and customs there. As our interests lead us,
and our relations stand, there is the BIAS, that way we go, and there we cast
our voice, considering no more, but that he is our most honored Lord and
Master. Thank the Countryman, who will; the Church will not, till she hear
of such an one, who, against his own interest, private-wealth, and special
Relation, minded the Commonweal, and so cast his voice, She will praise the
Lord, as well as she can, and call upon all so to do; and bless His Name for
His good Servants, whose voices were sent up in corners. And so we may count
it a mercy, that such a choice was made; but for the mavelous work, and the
wonder we read it before, and this, that follows, makes it yet more wonderful.

That when the Worthies came altogether, and made a full Court, then and
there, The Lord did so stirre-up their spirits, as that they were carried some
of them above themselves, yea, and (I appeal to themselves) against
themselves: I mean, against what they thought and intended, when they were
entering the doors of the House. Doubtless so it was, else such things had
not bin done, as are done, had it not been even so. But it is wonderful in
our eyes, for it is the Lords doing, Who when His work is in hand, will
frame and mould the spirits of Men, according to His good pleasure. There is
yet something more in it, and greatly to be observed, that the Lord sent forth
a dry wind, which sifted and sifted this Court; now one was blown away, anon
another: Now this man went his way, and the other did flee away. All this,
that it might appear to all the world, that the Lord intended assuredly to
do His Church good by this Court, with His whole heart, and with His whole
soul Ier. 32. 41.
. We must learn now from all these (...) great things, wrought these two
Months, these vvonderfull administrations; and pick out great lessons
therefrom.

CHAP. VIII.
Certain Uses or Conclusions from the premises, clearing forth unto us, The
Church, by the DEFENSE that is still upon the GLORY; their stability and
innocence; then our duty from all.

SECT. I.
We know the Malignant Church by their envy at the People: the true Church,
because, they are the But against whom Malice bends her Bow, and yet is not
able to overthrow them. They are delivered still after that sort, etc.

1.
THis will help us to decide a great controversy. There are two parties, both
say, They are the Church, not in name, but in de^d whom may we believe?
Enquir^, and we shall have full satisfaction. What party have a Malignancy in
them? both you will say; that is true enough; but I mean, a professed enmity
against God and goodness. If we can resolve our selves in this point, Who
these are? We may take full satisfaction to that question. It is said, There
are no Malignant persons in our Church, none that have a professed Malignancy
in them. No! Is there no Malignancy in that monstrous Head? nor in it is
app^^rtenancies and adherents? None in that Tail, those lying Prophets? Is
there no Malignancy in their ungodly deeds, and hard speeches? None in those
words, which corrupt and eat, as does a Canker 2 Timothy 2. 17.
. None in all this? Perhaps it will not be granted, that there is a Malignancy
in the Devil, who is their King, and has the keys of the bottomless pit.
But in courtesy I demand, and let them answer me as Men; actions we say, make
the fullest discovery what spirit we are of: was not that a fruit of utter
enmity, of desperate Malignancy and madness, to hurry the Church, to drag her to
the very brow of the Hill, there shocking her again and again, that she might
(3 Kingdoms at one shock) fall down headlong from that precipice, or pinnacle?
Certainly this must be granted to be a fruit of Cankered Malice: Surely then
by the fruits you shall know them to be no Church, but in name so, and that
name is, a Malignant Church. Wickedness ^ 1 Samuel 24. 13.
proceeds from the Wicked, as says the Proverb, and that is the first
Conclusion, clearly evidencing Who is That Church, and Who is the Church
indeed And now I proceed to make further Discovery at this point, Who is the
True Church?

2.
We must enquire, Against whom does Malice bend her bow with full strength, and
shootes her Arrows? Against whom do these Malignants bend their hand (V^godly
Deeds) and their Tongues (hard words) and their hearts (destructive
intentions?) Who is the Butt, The white, the Mark? Who are they, against whom
(in the pu^suance of their most Destructive Designs) these Malignants do carry
all their ungodly Words, and hard Deeds level unto? Look which way is the
Malignants aim, and that will point your eye directly to the Righteous Man.
Whom do they hurry and drag unto the Brow of the Hill? The righteous evermore,
and because they do the thing that is right: therefore does that Head, that
monstrous Head and Tail, that Serpentine generation, and those multitudes,
with the King over them, bend all their counsels, policies and strength
against these people, because they see the thing that good is. So it has
been from the beginning, so it will be to the end of the world. And so we
conclude from the sacred Writ, and from the present times, where are clear and
manifest proofs, That the Church must be tried, as Silver and Gold is tried:
That Legions of Adversaries do seek and vvait her destruction; that whole
Armies of troubles, afflictions and sorrows do abide her; but Her God will
deliver her, from and out of all, that is her comfort, The Gates of Hell are
against her, but shall not prevail, that is her conclusion We proceed on to
give hints of things, that we may magnify the arm of the Lord, and raise our
spirits in the high praises of the Churches God.

3.
When we have made full enqu^ry into these present and last Times, let us
search the Records of all times, and enquite there, Who it is over whom the
fire has no power? Who it is that God does rescue out of the Mouth of the
Lion? Whom does He suffer to be carried to the brow of the Hill, and then makes
way for escape? Whom does He bring to the mountain of streights, and there is
gloriously seen in their Salvations? For whom does He divide the Sea, and
makes paths in the great waters? For His enemies you will say. Yes, that they
may pursue, then fall and sink like a stone, and rise no more. But for whom
does He open a way, that they may go over? It must be answered, He does this,
for His Church, His Israel, His ransomed ones. The redeemed of the Lord will
say so; He delivers them so, such Salvations He works for them and them
only: He delivers them after THIS SORT Dan. 3. 29.
. What sort? None delivered as are these, after such a strange, vvonderfull and
miraculous way, after THIS SORT. The fire had no power over them. But for their
enemies, the flame of the fire slew them, and for those enemies, that are
suffered to go on in their furious March, He takes off their Charet-wheeles,
makes them drive heavily then: When? When they are upon the very heel of the
righteous; then the waters over-whelme them, and they are made as still as a
stone Exodus 15. 16.
. The Conclusion is, the Lord never made His Arm bare of flesh, He never
appeared in the Mount of straits; but for His Church, and against His
Adversaries; but so He has appeared this day.

4.
Who are they whom we see guarded, fenced, hedged about ^; what more? There
needs no more, and yet to assure their security, and that there is not a chinke
open, whereat danger shall enter to do them hurt, there is more added, and on
every side Job 1. 10.
. See their security! Whose security? the Churches, the Righteous man's security
ever-more. They are hedged about, and on every side, not a cranny hole left
open, whereat danger can come-in to do them hurt. No? no.

Object. This carries not the face of Truth, you will say. See we not these
sort of men hurried, and spoiled, and peeled, exposed to all danger from the
tongues and hands of violent and bloody men? Are they then hedged about, and on
every side, when dangers come in upon them at every turn? and they are made
now Magormissabib Ier. 20. 3.
, beleaguered-about, and terror on every side.

Answ Yes, and yet notwithstanding all this, they are so hedged, as was said,
and nothing shall come unto them for their hurt.

They may be hurried, and peeled, and spoiled, and killed too, and yet all for
their good. Reader, this will not seem strange unto thee, if thou read and
considerest with all thy heart, that seventy years Captivity was for their
good Ier. 24. 5.
. Therefore we must set a mark upon these words; No cranny is left open,
whereat danger can enter to do this people hurt. They are a protected people
still; hedged about still, and on every side. God keeps their persons from
troubles; or He delivers them by troubles; or supports them in troubles (as He
did Job, a miracle of patience; never any man so tried as he, never any man so
supported, as he) or opens a door and passage through dangers, so bringing His
Servants to the place where they would be. The Devil spoke good Divinity, the
Servants of the Lord will say so; Thou have made a hedge about him, and about
his house, and about all that he has on every side This then is the
conclusion; Surely there is no enchantment against J^cob, neither is there any
divination against Israel: according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and
of Israel, what has God wrought Numb. 13. 2^.
*

SECT. II.
From what God has done, The Church gets assured confidence for time to come.

SEe again, for we have observed the premises; here was an Head against the
Church, that monstrous Head; the Tail against Her, That serpentine Tail; that
bulky-body, as the sand for multitude, all these against Her, with their King
over them, yet could do Her no hurt. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on
Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall
by any means hurt you Luke 10. 19.
. These are good words and comfortable, and now are they fulfilled in our eyes.
All these enemies did what they could to sting and poison the Church, but they
were not able: All these blowed hard to quench the light of Israel, yet could
not do it; the Lord kept His Church alive as a spark (which is said of Noah
(...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Ser. 6.
) in the midst of the roaring Ocean. Who would not fear this God? Who would
not serve Him? None, but a God can deliver after this sort: That was the
conclusion, and none are so delivered, but His Church; He reprooveth Kings, nay
He breaks the Head of the Leviathan in pieces for His Churches sake. And
this is the Churches confidence for ever, from all these things, which her God
has done, they can assure their hearts for the time to come, That when they
shall be brought again to the Brow of the Hill, to her mountain of straits,
their God will appear there. He that brake the Heads of the Leviathan to
pieces, Pharaoh and his great Host Ps ^9 14. Annona fuit hu^^ reposita, qua
vesceretur populus, Call. in loc.
, gave that deliverance for meat to His people inhabiting a wilderness (i. e;)
that when they should be in straights, then they might remember that
deliverance, and be encouraged. He that gave them such a Deliverance as was
that, would not suffer them to sink now; That which God has done, was a
cordi^ll unto them in their fainting fits: Verily, verily, That God Who had so
delivered would never never leave them nor forsake them Heb. 1^. ^. (...). Five
Negatives.
, Thus the Church concludes now from the premises, which she calls experiences;
God, Who did deliver from so great a death, and does deliver, in Him they do
trust, that He will yet deliver 2 Cor. 1.
, even so, Amen.

1.
This we must add to the former Conclusion; as we must learn to trust in Him,
to set our hope upon Him Ps 78. 7.
, Who is Mighty: So also to set our heart upon Him; He is Mighty, and has done
for us mighty things, therefore we must serve Him with all our Might. He has
done His Church good assuredly, with His whole Heart, and with His whole Soul
Ier 32. 41.
; that we might serve Him so with our whole heart, and with our whole soul. He
has not like a warfaring Ier. 14. 8.
man, stayed with His Church for a night, and then away: No, He has made His
abode with her (He dwells in the flaming-bush) He sets. up His rest there,
because there His soul delights: All this, that we might be steadfast with
Him, and turn back no more in the Day (of Trial) of battle. It is much to
be thought of, that God dwells in His Church, when they are as a flaming Bush,
in the furnace of affliction, then He dwells with them; which mightily
engages His people to Dwell, to delight themselves in the Lord, Who so
regarded them in their low estate. He followed His Church with mercies after
mercies, and deliverance after deliverance, and discoveries against
discoveries, these followed hard, and over-tooke one the other Why so? That we
might follow after righteousresse Esa. 51. 1.
, that v^e might foll^w on to know the Lord Hos 6. 3.
; That our souls might follow hard after the Lord Ps 63. 8.
, and not cease till we have taken hold of Him, and resolved to cleave unto
Him, to close with Him in all His Commands and Promises: And so to say of the
Lord, as He has said, Who has chosen Zion, The Lord is our Rest for ever,
here will we dwell, for we have desired it Ps. 132. 14.
. The poor man that was possessed with a Legion of Devils, but now delivered
and in his right mind, prayed the Lord Christ, that he might be with him Mar.
5. 18.
. he remembered his old bondage, how the case was with him, when under the power
of that cruel Lord, and feared the like again, if he should depart from
Christ, or Christ from him. I will repeat the former conclusion and join this
with it, for we find them together, Because thou have been my help, therefore
in the shadow of Thy Wings will I rejoice. My soul follows hand after Thee,
Thy Right hand upholdeth me Ps. 63. 7. 8.
.

SECT. III.
This will serve to clear the Churches Innocence as the Noonday.

THe Church has been so and so delivered, after such a sort: They have been
in Deaths often; yet, behold she lives, is confident and strong in her God and
power of His Might Nay, the Church has bin as the Bush, (that is her Type) all
in a flame, and yet, as then, so now, which appears this day, not consumed.
Let us turn aside, and see this great sight; Certainly, then we must behold
GOD IN THE BVSH. When I say, GOD, then I have said all, the Love, the Wisdom,
the Power of God, all exceeding toward His Church, the sons of Jacob, in
whom He beholds no iniquity, neither has He seen perverseness in Israel Number.
23. 21.
. If we shall well consider this, and ponder it in our hearts, we shall be well
able to clear the Churches innocence. I mean, if this, which has been said,
shall sink down into our hearts, it will be more cleansing then Fullers-sope
to wash-off a foul imputation, a notorious slander cast upon the very face of
the Church, and to render her, as white and clear thereof, as the Snow in
Salmon, or as raiments, white as the Light, so as no Fuller can white them.

It is said, her people are enemies to their King; they seek not his peace;
they have driven him from them. Nay, the slander rises higher; as high as that
of Saul against David. That imputation then, and this now, run together like
parallel lines, We will see then how David cleares his innocence; and how God
cleares him; and then we shall see the very same thing done now. Thus David
was slandered, That he conspired against his Master; That he lay in wait to
catch him in a 1 Samuel 22. 8.
Snare, etc. See how David cleares himself. Now the Lord forbid that I should
do this thing unto my Master, the Lords anointed, seeing he is the anointed
of the Lord 1 Samuel 24 6.
. Moreover, my Father, see, see here a good token, yea, see the skirt of this
robe in my hand; had an uncircumised (a Jesuited) person come so near thee, he
would have taken away thy head, and have rejoiced when he had done: for
wickedness proceeds from the wicked, as says the Proverb. But my heart
throbs within me, because I have cutoff the lap of thy garment: Know thou now
and see, that there is ver. 13.
neither evil, nor transgression in my hand; So David cleares himself. Yes,
if a man's own words will clear him, who will not ver. 11.
appear innocent? True, but here are more then words, yet they are clear and
simple; here is more then a single proof, for here are deeds too, as we may
read, if we will pe^use the Story. But the maine thing and to our purpose
here, is this. How does God clear him? Thus; And David behaved himself wisely
in all his ways, and God was with him. 1 Samuel 18. 14.


Was that the clearing of David's innocence? Yes, none like that: David behaved
himself wisely, and God was with him; he could strengthen his hand in God; he
could encourage himself in the Lord his God 1 Samuel 23 16. 30. 6.
: A wicked person cannot do so; if he do; it is presumption, and an
unwarranted confidence. God will not take part with the wicked; He will not
shine upon their councels. Yes, He does, and so He i^ said to do Job. 10. 3.
. True, and we will answer that by the way.

God may shine upon the Councels of the wicked, and cross the proceedings of
the just commanded and warranted from His own Mouth. He may do the first, as
to make them confident, so to ripen the design, and to hasten it is ruin; and
to make Himself more glorious in confounding them and their designs. He has
done the latter more then once, to quicken up His servants to more caution
about themselves, and their work, and the manner of performing their Masters
charge.

But here is the point we drive unto; when Deliverances come-in unto His
people with the seal and impression of the wisdom and power of God upon them,
this is ever, because they are His people; He delights in them; there is
innocence in their hearts, and their hands are pure from that great evil
suggested against them. Such Salvations the Lord wrought for David, They had
the impresse of the Almighties hand upon them. Saul hunted him like a
Partridge: God would not deliver him into his hands; He rescued him here and
there and every where. It had not been so, if innocence had not been found in
his hands, and integrity in his heart toward Saul, his peace and dignity, for
he was the Lords anointed. The Text is plain, it needs not my Comment, but
I Will apply it comparing the Salvations then and now together; for their
accusation is the same; crimes objected the same; their defense or apology the
same; and God the same in rescuing them, and clearing their innocence as the
Noon day.

The servants of the Lord are thus accused at this day; they are enemies to
their King, they seek his hurt; they have driven him away, etc. These servants
of the Lord answer, God forbid, for who can do so against the Lords anointed
and be guiltless? They seek the hurt of their King, their consciences bears
them Record, and God also, they seek God for the King, and are not weary;
Grace, Grace unto him, Peace, Peace unto him (and that is all) Peace be both
to him; peace to his house, and peace be to all that he has 1 Samuel 25. 8.
: peace, peace unto him, and peace be to his helpers, for their God helps
them 1 Chro. 12. 18,
.

They enemies to their King the Lords anointed! So they are to their own
souls, for so they pray for him.

They have driven him away from them! As a man drives away the candle, when he
is in the dark, and must walk, but would not stumble. They quench the light
of Israel! As they would the light and influence of the Sun, without which
they could not move the least finger: As they would quench the light and
motions of Gods Spirit in them, without which, they sit in miserable darkness,
and move not, or move to their own destruction. They secke his life! They do
indeed; hear them in the Church, or in the Closet, O King live for ever. The
eternal God be thy Refuge and underneath the EVERLASTING ARMS, Deuteronomy 33. 27.


They deliver their King up into his enemies hands! they set him in the Front
of the battle! As they would set themselves at the mouth of a Cannon, or
thrust themselves into the mouth of a Lion or Bear, bereaved of her whelps,
which will tear the Cawle of their hearts. So they clear themselves and their
innocence at this point. Ai, but a man is not justified by the words of his own
mouth.

Well, be it so, that their own words clear them not. See how the Lord
cleares them. How? They behave themselves wisely, and God is with them; They
proceed on and do exploits, as Men made wise by the wisdom of God, and
mighty in the strength of His power: They can strengthen their hand in God;
They can encourage themselves in Him. He has made an hedge about them; and
about their house, and about: all that they have on every side: He has blessed
the work of their hands; and prospered the very thoughts of their hearts,
These were to promote Christ, the Glory, for He is worthy. He has constantly
shined upon their counsels. He or they that can observe, and can speak by the
Spirit, must say concerning this people, as Amasai did concerning David, Thine
are we (thou blessed of the Lord) and on thy side thou daughter of Zion; Peace,
peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers, for Thy God helps thee 1
Chro. 12. 18.
Indeed He does, and in all the peoples sight; They can see the Salvations of a
God coming in unto them with the seal, impresse and inscription of the
Wisdom, Power, Majesty of a God upon them. These servants of the Lord can say
as David did, My soul was among Lions, but the Lord shut the mouth, that
Devourer could not swallow-up Ps. 57. 4.
: They did lie among them, who were set on fire; yet their garments did not
smell of the smoke. But for the wicked it shall not be so with them, not so
with them, that seek the hurt of their King. They may triumph for a short
time, and joy for a moment; but how often is their candle put out, how often
comes their destruction upon them Job 21. 17.
? God distributeth sorrows in His Anger. The wicked shall be as stubble before
the wind, and as chafe that the storm carries away: The Lord rewards the
wicked, and they shall know it. Thus and thus shall it be to the wicked, but
thou Lord Ps. 5. 12.
wilt b^esse the righteous: with favor will thou compass him, as with a
shield. That Is the Conclusion, That the salvations of God, great salvations,
are evermore the portion of the Church, the Israel of God, who seek the p^ace
and life of their King; and so they can commit their righteous cause unto a
righteous God, Whose eyes are upon the Truth, and will bless those that are
children of blessing, even according to the innocence of their hands, and
integrity of their hearts in this matter, even so. Amen.

1.
I shall passe-over now a chief thing, which must be concluded also from the
premises and contains much: I shall name it only and no more, and so put a
Mark upon it for observation.

1. That the Lord has a time to bring down H^s Adversaries. When? Then when
they are a float, when the flood of their pride rises to the highest; When
they say in their hearts, They will climb up above the heights of the clouds,
and be like the most high Esa 14. 14.
; They had an arm like God (such were their proud thoughts) Who changes the
times and the seasons, ramoveth and sets up Dan. 2 21.
; they could sl^y whom they would, and whom they would they could keep alive.
They could set up whom they would, and whom they would they could put down Dan.
5. 17.
When their heart was thus lifted up, then they came down mightily; then the
Lord was above them, in all wherein they dealt proudly Exo. 18. 11.
; and made them know that they are but Men Ps 9. 10. Vehementissimeag. n^scant.
Iun.
. But this knowledge is too high for them; they will not know in good earnest,
that they are but Men. For truly we are a stubborn Generation, as our
Forefathers; who when they saw their fellows killed with plagues, yet they
Repented not of the works of their hands, neither of their murders, nor of
their Sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts Rev. 9. 20, 2^.
. When men have ascended to that pinnacle and height of wickedness, seldom do
we read, that they have repented. But then we read, as we now see, they have
been tumbled down thence even then, and great must their fall be, when the
time comes, that God must ease Himself of His Adversaries.

2. God has a time to raise up His People. When? Then, when Jacob is very l^w,
very small, little in all men's eyes and less in his own. Then, when the Worm
Jacob, lying at the mercy of the foot of pride, trampled upon, insulted over.
Then, when the Giants and proud men of the Earth said to Jacobs soul, Bow
down that we may go over, and he laid his body as the ground, and as the
street to them that went over Isa. 51. 23.
. Then God raised Jacob up; then He makes them Israel, for then His people
will ascribe Salvations to their God; to His right hand all the glory. The
Earth mourns and languisheth, Sharon is like a Wilderness, now will I rise,
says the Lord, now will* I be exalted, now will I l^ft up My Self Isa 33. 9,
10.
. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
rise, I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him Ps. 12. 5.
. I should be larger here, whereas I have set but a mark for observation upon
it.

2.
Now the poor Captives, who believe, will not hasten, that they may be loosed
Isa. 5^. 14.
. They can wait now Gods time, for He waits the fittest time to give
Deliverance, when His children are fittest to receive it, and to let it sink
down into their hearts, which they never do, till they are emptied of self
confidence. If Deliverance came not when they would have it, yet they did not
die in the pit, nor did their bread fail. Rescues and Deliverances did come at
such a time, when they were most sweet and seasonable Blessed is the man that
makes the LORD his trust: And respects not the proud (not how many, nor how
fierce they be) he respects the Promise, and waits Gods time in confident
assurance, that God will Ps. 40. 4.
come, bring Deliverance with Him in His own time, that is seasonably, ever
the fittest time. And so I p^sse on unto other Uses and certain Conclusions
here from.

SECT. IV.
We cannot partake of the Churches Privileges, but we must be free of her
Corporation.

NOw we will be on the Churches side too, for we expect such salvations: We
will lay hold on her, and will be called by her Name, and expect the some
Almighty hand to be put out for us, and against our enemies. Surely, this is a
good resolution, to come under this shadow, for here is safety, notwithstanding
all the noise, hurry and tr^ubles that are abroad. This is the sure side, her
Redeemer is strong, He will give rest to her Land, and He will disquiet the
Inhabitants of Babylon Ier. 50. 34.
. The Church shall stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, that is
certain, notwithstanding all the shockes, they shall stand; notwithstanding
all the contrivings and policies to bring them to the Brow of the Hill, they
shall escape, and the nearer she is brought, the more glorious will her
Deliverance be. It is our wisdom to join our selves to the Churches side, for
it is the sure side. Peace, Peace unto her, and Peace be to her helpers, for
their God helps them.

But stay a little, Let us not run away with the comfort, as our manner is,
and neglect the duty: the Lord has wrought and does work great Salvations,
as becomes a great God; and seasonably in the day of trouble. For whom? for
His Church, yea and for me and thee for His Churches sake. But our comfort will
be small, and of small continu^nce, if we do not our Duty as the Church does,
She has been delivered, I say, marvellously delivered, that is true enough;
but see, she prayed for this thing, she was importunate, she gave her Lord no
rest. Indeed He told her, He would be enquired for that thing Ezech. 36. 37.
, so they wrestled and wept too, and prevailed, as we see this day. H^ does
guide her by His Council. Whether? For that she is not careful, whethet
through thick or thin (as we say;) whether through rough places or plain,
she is not careful for that, her Lord has her by the hand, that is enough, He
guides her, and will bring her to glory, she is sure of that; Glory is the end
of her way, what troubles so ever are in the middle of the way, and in that her
heart is assured. Take all with it; He guides Her; He leads her; yes, and He
commands her, a LEADER and COMMANDER to His people; that is the point, and our
lesson of everlasting use. Would we be a protected people; would we be guided
by His hand? (He is a sure Guide) would we be carried as upon Eagles wings? We
must then hear His voice; we must obey Him, He must command us, and no other,
but as they command from Him and lead to Him He is a LEADER and COMMANDER to
His People. Take we this comfort and feed upon it, but remember the duty too, a
LEADER and COMMANDER to His people. We would be as the Church is, for we would
be in as safe a condition and harbor, as the Church is. Ai, but surely a
VELIETY, a would so, will not serve the turn. There is not a Balaam in the
world, not such a sluggard, but he has a veliety, a would so; he would have
plenty and peace both; he would have protection and safety; he would have it
now, but at his end, when he must be taken from the Earth, then he would in
good earnest. No matter for plenty then, but for peace. O, but let him lay this
to heart, and muse upon it, when he turns upon his bed, like the door upon
it is hinges, expecting that salvation will come unto him, and drop into his
mouth. If he would have peace (for that contains all) he must up and be doing,
he must stir up himself with all his might, he must come out of himself,
and thrust out his Idol, whether one or many, his ease, his profit and his
pleasure.

His excuse will not serve the turn, that there is a Lion in the way, a
difficulty he cannot overcome; therefore he will not endeavor it. If he says
so, and is resolved to be lazy, and sit still, I pronounce against him this
Day, from the mouth of the Lord, That Peace shall not b^ his portion, but the
contrary. When he expects peace, behold trouble; he shall have wrath with his
sickness; Tribulation Eccl. 5 17.
and anguish shall come upon him like an armed man; and when he would solace
his soul with peace, when he would see the Rivers, the Floo^s the Brooks of
Honey and Butter Job 20, 17.
; he shall see the contrary, that which shall amaze and astonish him, if his
heart be not as a stone within him: Heaven above him, shut against him; the
grave open to receive him: His soul lanching forth into the Ocean of
Aeternity, where he must vvallow in the streams of brimstone, and flames of
fire; how long? The answer thereto sinkes the spirit, for it is the very Hell
of Hell, FOR EVER and EVER. We have not a thought that can ^each half way to
the bottom of that Ocean. But this thought of perishing FOR EVER, of
everlasting burnings shall drink up the spirits of a Man, and be within his
bowels as the gall of Aspes. But the serious thoughts thereof, now, now, this
present time, the acceptable time, and day of Salvation, may be very effectual
to awaken him, that lies down NOW, as in the midst of the Sea, or as he that
sleeps upon the top of a Mast Pro. 23. ^4.
: To stir him up to arise, and call upon his God, if so be that God will
think upon him, that he perish not Iona. 1. 6.
, FOR EVER, punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the
LORD, and from the glory of His power 2 These. 1. 9.
.

The Conclusion is; if a Man would fly from the wrath to come; if he would
assure his heart, that everlasting consolation shall be given unto him; if he
would have peace now, which all the Malignants in the world cannot take from
him; if he would have a defense, a shield over his head now, which the most
fiery darts cannot pierce through; if he would have assured confidence of all
this, if he be in earnest and will have it indeed; He will get assurance, that
he shall stand now and hereafter, as the everlasting Hills, and perpetual
Mountains; if this be his will indeed; if this be the very purpose and
resolution of his heart, then he will give all diligence, to the full assurance
of Hope Heb. 6. 11, 12.
(that proves his will whether true or not) to do as the Church does, to obey
heartily, to trust perfectly, to be guided by Him, to walk before Him, and to
be perfect. So the Church does do, and if we do as she does, we shall be as
she is, though the Rain desce^d and the floods come, and the winds blow, and
beat upon her house, yet a QVIET HABITATION notwithstanding.

SECT. V.
We cannot expect to be delivered AFTER THIS SORT, unless we walk in THIS
WAY, the way of Gods Commandments.

LAstly, learn we from hence, to keep our selves in Gods way, there is safety
in those paths; the Angels carry us, we cannot dash the foot therein. We are
sure of protection so far, as we keep our selves in that path, though it
seems over-clouded with the shadow of death. In that dark path the Church can
walk on boldly and considently, though through fire and water, for she walks
under the shadow of the Almighty, and in the fear of God all the Day long Pro.
23. 17.
: Therefore she finds comfort, even where she sees no light. But if she does
find comfort and light both, yet then she fears the Lord and His goodness
Hos. 3. 5.
. She fears at all times, she presumes at no time; she walks boldly, but
humbly; she does not lead her self into temptation; no, she is lead to the
Brow of the Hill, or forced rather; but then she is sure the Adversary cannot
force her down.

We may note this by the way; it is one thing when a man is driven upon
straits; and another thing when he drives himself upon straits. It is one
thing to be brought to the brow of an hill; and another thing for a man to
bring himself to such a precepice. I may be c^st into the arms of God, and be
assured to be held up by them; but if I presumptuously rush-in upon them, I
shall not find those arms underneath; I shall not be held up by them. To
presume, that God will keep me, when I walk not in His way, is as if a man
should hang himself in hope, that one would come and cut the halter.

To close up all; We find safety no where but in Gods way, for therein with
Jacob, we find a Command and a Promise both (these are still together) The Lord
which said unto me, Return unto thy country, and Gen 32. 9.
to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee. The Conclusion then is; if in
this way, Esau, a bloody persecutor, will come out against the Church, he shall
not be able to do them hurt, though his wrath should not abate: but ^t may be
the Lord w^ll so overpower his spirit, that he shall not dash against the
Church, but meet them, as becomes a Brother, with embracings.

SECT. VI.
An Apology for this digression, if it seems so; And a short view or
recollection of what was last said.

I May seem here to have digressed not a little in discontinuing the Calender
by these Uses or Conclusions, so largely insisted upon: If so it seems to the
Reader. I would desire him to consider this; and then if he thinks it a
digression, he will think it necessary also, first;

1. Tha^ (which was intimated before) God wrought then like Himself, (...)
wonderfully, before man was called forth to help Him against the Mighty. He
alone does wonders: but they are not wonders in our eyes, unless He works
alone. Though we have not many to work with Him, though but a few, yet these
few take off much from the wonderfulnesse of His works Miram^r si nobis
coelestis manus aliqu^ non prastet, cui quicquid prasti^ terit derog (...).
Sal. de gub. l. 7. p. ^47.
; such a regard we have to the arm of flesh, though a weak arm, and often
broken in all the peoples sight. But, I say, before the Parliament was
summoned, He wrought alone; and then was the Adversary confounded, his snares
broken; then was the Church plucked (three Kingdoms at once) as a brand out
of the fire Zach. 3. ^.
; then, at that time, the Church passed from the brow of the Hill, through the
midst of her Adversaries, and went her way. The Lord knows how she escaped,
for she knows Luke 4. 30.
not. but she passed through the midst of them, and went her way: A flaming
Bush then, as once she was. But see this great sight! The Bush burned with fire
and was not consumed. Then came help from Heaven, when there was none from
the Earth: Then rowled-in streams of consolation, floods of honey and butter,
when the enemy and adversary had stopped and damned up all her fresh springs
below. Then came in the springtide of Deliverance, when she was brought to
the lowest ebb of Distress. See the workings of a God (...), Chrysostom. Tom. 4.
ep. 1.
.

I could not passe-over this, and not set marks upon it, for it clears forth
unto us as the Morning light, (no such demonstration as this) who are the
Church indeed; who but in name so, and that the MALIGNANT Church. It cleares
the Churches innocence also, as the Sun beam: and cleares our duty, to walk
exactly, as a peculiar people, if we look to be delivered; how? So
miraculously, after THAT SORT, that all must say, The Right Hand of the Lord
did This.

2. The Reader may consider, that in the following Month, I met with that ROOT
(the PARLIAMENT, I mean) which bears all our sweets (here below) our Religion,
our Laws, our Liberties, our Lives; by the good hand of God upon that High
Court, the KING and PARLIAMENT (accursed be they that divide them, and accursed
be they also that strike at that Root) we gather all the forementioned, for
our selves and our children after us, even all that blessed fruit; for there it
is as in a common root. Therefore I staid the longer upon that fundamental
blessing. Now I can go on apace, for I am but to bring in these after fruits,
as they did the Grapes, all in a cluster: but we must view over the lessons
we took forth last, and make a short collection thereof. 1 The Lord has
triumphed gloriously; H^s right Hand has dashed to pieces the enemy: In the
greatness of His excellency, He has over-thrown them, that rose up against
Him. 2. We have seen the Salvations of God, great Salvations, therefore the
Israel of God is here amongst Exodus 15. 7.
us, a people greatly beloved, Saved by the Lord, for whose help Herideth upon
the Heaven, and in His excellency on the Sky. Deuteronomy. 33. 26.


Lastly, Would we be so saved, then we must be guided as the Church is,
according to her Lords WILL, and so commanded by Him; if we would be carried as
upon the wings of Eagles, then we must be found walking in His way. Thus we
have seen the strange Overtures and turnings of things in these two Months;
and we have observed the certain Uses and Conclusions therefrom, Now we
go on, to set down the Heads of the after proceedings.

A Transition to the next Chapter.
Hitherto we have observed what God has wrought vvorking alone, and by His
own Arm, bringing Salvations. Now we must observe with the same observation,
what Salvations Man has wrought with God, the following Months, as strange as
was that Salvation, which Jonathan wrought for Israel 1 Samuel 14. 45.
. I have treated thereon severally, not according to the excellency thereof,
but after my measure, as I was enabled, and am resolved not to mutilate or
maim that continued Story by taking any part thence: But which is more suitable
to this place and my scope, to set down the Heads thereof in as narrow a
compass, as may be, and, as the matter can be contracted, to give an abstract
only, leaving the specification of the set time (when the Salvations were
wrought) the Month and the day, to those Diurnals, which are written before
me (where also I blotted a few sheets of paper) but specially to the worthy
pains of good M Vicars, worthy all acceptance. So I proceed.

CHAP. IX.
The Heads of proceeding the following Months to the end of the first Jubilee,
holding forth the wrath of God, fury to His Adversaries; His mavelous works
of Grace to His people, breaking bands and taking off yoakes, and bringing them
into the band of a Covenant: engaging His Church for ever to Record, to Thank,
to Praise.

SECT. I.
The Church blesses God for you, That you did not join your selves with the
Men of the Earth; nor after the manner of Men, forsake her in her low estate:
That you did not establish iniquity by a Law; that ye read her petitions and
heard her complaints; that you opened her prisons and mouths of the Ministers;
And had Dominion over the Mighty.

NOVEMBER, a Month specially to be observed. The third Day the High Court
assembled, things were done after the Manner, etc. At this point others begin,
and here I shall not break off; but dissolve a well continued Story into some
chief Heads, which will contain the chief works of wonder, and so yield
us matter enough of praise to God, and thanks to Man. The Lord tune our spirits
to the setting forth the high praises of the Lord. The first Head will lead-in
all the test (for it contains much Ezekiel. 23. 32.
) therefore, that we may begin right, the Church would have us consider, That
her enemy and adversary, the Head and the Tail, (who these are is now fully
manifested and declared before) had wrought effectually in the children of
disobedience; They had carried all before them level to their own mark; They
had levened the Land (they thought) from corner to corner with most impure
Doctrines, and as unclean practices. Indeed, as was said, they had wrought
very effectually, as appears this day. They had prepared their own way, made
it so strait. plain and level, so as they thought verily, they could find no
rubb, no opposition, none at all; they might go on smooth away, the Angel of
the Lord could not meet with them; at least, could not stop, control, nor
cross them in the way, no not with the Sword in the hand. They had now set the
BVSH on fire round about (I mean the Church) a flaming Bush was her Emblem
once, and it must be her Emblem (there you see the Church) to the Worlds end.
They had set the Church all on a flame, and thought verily, if Gods dwelling
were there (which they thought not of) they could, if not thrust Him out of His
House, yet they could fire Him out, for they looked wistly when His House would
sink down and fall into ashes. Indeed this is notable by the way, and
engages the Church mightily; That God dwells with her, when she is all on a
flame, in the furnace of afflictions; then He DWELLS in the BVSH, therefore it
consumes not. But the Adversary and enemy thought not of this; they looked when
the House should fall as aforesaid, and hastened, what they could, the Ruin
thereof. They would put to more wood, and make the burning yet greater. This
then is the first Head, for this the Church blesses God and thanks you.

1.
That you did not join with the stronger side, I mean in appearance: That you
did not join strength to strength, and add more fuel also, to make the flame
the more fierce and raging: for this is the manner of men, To oppress the
oppressed; to add to the affliction, and, like Mice, as to run out, when the
House is on fire: So to judge of Gods works before they be ripe, I mean
before the FIFTH ACT, and that is against the Rule De operi^us Dei (...) quintum
actu^ (...)
. If a storm lie upon the Ship of the Church, and she be tossed with tempests,
men will not wait till the fourth watch; commonly so long the Lord deferrs His
coming, but then He comes. That you did now, as wisemen, strike in to help,
to quench the burning; to help the Lord against the mighty; that you did
regard the Church now, as the Lord regarded you once, in a very low estate. for
this she blesses God and thanketh you. To speak in plainer English, for this
she blesses God and you;

That, having but one Priest, one Altar, one Sacrifice, you did not defile all
this at this time, making many Priests; setting-up many Altars; commanding many
Sacrifices; all this, as the statutes of Omri, by a Law; That when many Altars
(the same of other provocations) were made to Sin; Altars were not made by
you, unto the whole Nation to Sin Hos. 8. 15.
. That when the ROD of the wicked, lay heavy upon the back of the Righteous,
you did not turn it into a Scorpion: and when blood was upon the Earth, upon
the Church falsely so called, you did not FEOFFE it upon HEAVEN, the true
Church. So you might have done, and have left the Church, as a Widow forsaken
in the Earth, and comfortless there. That all this was not done, but the
contrary, she accepts in all thankfulness always, and blesses God, Who kept
you from the paths of the destroyer Ps. 17. 4.
.

If this be not plain enough, this, which follows, will make it as plain as
can be. Ireland did contribute money toward the WAR. What war? A War that
would have ruined Scotland; a War, that would have sheathed a Brothers Sword
in the heart of a Brother. Ireland contributed money toward such a WAR. Behold
now! The Sword is hathed in that HEAVEN; it is drunk with the blood of those
slain, who contributed money to maintain that WAR: Their Land is now full
of the fury of the LORD, the Rebuke of Thy GOD.

You would not contribute thereto, no not 20^, for it had bin too heavy upon the
loins of the Church by a pound weight. Behold now, this Kingdom has
weathered-out the storm, lies at Anchor, cast upward, and is the very miracle
of Gods patience to all the world. I have heard that some say, for some will
be willingly ignorannt, What great matter have you done? I think verily no
man is so foolish, so forsaken of all his wits, but he may receive satisfaction
herein anon. I will answer but this now; What ye have not done. Ye have not
engaged the Kingdom in that War, which would have dashed the people one
against another, even the Father and the sons together Ier. 13. 14.
. Blessed be your Council and your Wisdom; and blessed be you of the Lord,
for what ye have not done; for it has cast a sweet savor over all the
Churches in the world. But with your good leave, I would rather ascribe all
to your good God, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders
Exodus 15. 11*
: He councelled you; His right Hand was upon you, therefore your feet were
kept from the path of the DESTROYER. The Church would make her acknowledgement
very full at this point: That, though there are strange vanities, etc. as was
said, yet not countenanced by law. Though the Tayle-Prophets as they are, and
the Priests as they will be called, both high and low, are most vile, and have
made themselves and the people so, having leavened the whole Land from corner
to corner with poisonous and cursed corruptions in their Doctrines and
practices: though so, yet there are no Statutes for all this, but Orders
against it. Praise be to her good God for all this, and all due thanks to you.
So also,

2.
That you received the Petitions from all Quarters of the Land, heard the
groans of the oppressed, made to serve under cruel Taske-Masters; that you
rebuked their Lordships; took off their yoke from off the jaws of the
Ministers and People; that you opened the prison doors, and mouths of the
Ministers. This the Church could record with more words, but not with more
thankfulness: yet you shall hear more of it anon.

3.
That by your Wisdom and Providence, the Church had such freedom the last
year, and such communion and fellowship with Jesus and His Disciples; more the
last year then 20 years before. Time was, and but as yesterday, when they that
feared the Lord spoke often one to another, but so as their voice might not be
heard, for it was an evil time. The Messenger of Satan was abroad, buffering
the Servants of the Lord in every place; his ear was under their window, Mal.
3. 16.
and his foot at the door, and the sound of his Masters feet behind him: So as
it was the hardest thing to serve God without fear: for it was a crime to be
godly Si fuerit sublimis, fi^despicabilis: si fuerit splendidissimus, fit
vilissimus: si fuerit totus honoris, fit totus iniuria. Sal. de gub. lib. 4. p.
113. Under whom it was always unsafe to dee well. T^^it. sup.
. This the Church acknowledges with all thankfulness, and behold the benefit;
you have commanded Prayer; Prayer shall command for you, for now this follows,
which the Church records with all thankfulness, and some wonder.

4.
That the mountains have flowne down before you, and the Hills did melt and
tremble. My intent was but to name things, yet the Church commands us to stay a
little here, and behold the great, high, lofty ones, (they are Mountains and
Hills fast upon their bottom) behold the Lord has shaken them, given power to
His Servants to overtop them, to have Dominion over the mighty, and to tread
down strength Judge. 5. 13, 21.
, I say, the Church commands us to observe all the pieces of the Lords
providence here, look upon them apart, then put them together. She says, and
is confident; That, this being done, you shall see the most admirable work,
that ever was wrought since the Creation, and that AMAZING work of REDEMPTION.
Next place to these two works, this work will take; and in every good order;
for it is most fruitful and big with mercies, and brings forth every Day. Had
You not over-topt the Mountains and the Hills, and over-shadowed them, (You
began well, You shall go on and prosper) You could never have refreshed the
weary, and parched valleys: for those high places kept off Rain, and Dew and
Sunshine altogether. But now that these are taken down, behold a shower of
blessings upon the Land, by your care, conscience and vigilance, all this,
follows, first.

SECT. II.
The Lords Day, a comprehensive blessing to a Nation; Indignation and wrath
from the Lord against the prophaners of it; And yet the Priests most notorious
this way; Your Zeal for it; how necessary it should be fervent.

. 5.
1. THe Church records and thanks, That ye rouled away the reproach of Egypt,
and restored to her sons and daughters their Lords Day. That she sees That Day
again in it is beauty, and in honorable account, from which the wicked hid
their eyes, and she her face for grief of heart, because she saw it is visage
marred, spit upon, vilified, trampled on more then any Day. Oh it joyed her
heart, That you, who, next to God, maintain her spirits and life, you
accounted her Lords day honorable; that was, because you honored the Lord of
the Day. And indeed how could you not? For He is worthy, and you look to be
honored.

The Church will look upon this mercy again and again, and reckon the
restoring to her the Sabbath among the chiefest and choicest of your good
deeds, which, by Gods good hand upon you, you have done. Had the Adversary
taken away the Sabbath, as he had almost done, tantum non; he h^d taken away
all, The Word, the Sacraments, God, and all. All goes, when the Sabbaths are
gone, as you may see in our sister Churches. What is left them now?
Lamentation, and Mourning and Woe. What hear they in their Temples now?
Howlings instead of Songs. What are their Towns and Cities now? Ruined heaps;
a Golgotha, a place of dead Men's sculls; or, to speak as Salvian does in the
like Desolation Omnis Civita^ ^ustum, etc. Sal. l. 7 210.
, Their Towns are like our new Churchyards, scarce large enough to bury in.
The Lord has stretched out upon the Land, the like of confusion and stones of
emptiness; They shall call the Nobles thereof to the Kingdom, but none shall
be there: And all her Princes shall be nothing Isa. 34. 11, 12.
. Wherefore has the Wrath of the Lord burnt out against that people so
fiercely? Surely because the Land had greatly provoked the Lord of the same.
Where great Desolations are, there are great provocations: so we may conclude,
though Gods Judgments are as the great deep. And this we may say more, That
our English Commanders noted this still, and it was to be noted with all
observation, That still, on the Lords Day, the Enemy got much ground; And that,
which opened the floud-gate to all their misery, fell out thrice upon the
Sabbath Day; The Lord pointing, as with the finger, to that sin, The
profanation of the Lords Day, as to the Source, whence all their Evils have
issued.

I will take leave now, for I must not pass over this lightly, to note two
things, 1. The Priests Villainy; 2. Your Piety; That they may remember, and be
confounded, because of their shame: And that you may go on, and do exploits.

1. The Priests Villainy, Is not that too heavy a word? No; It is the word of
the Lord. The Priests heart has wrought iniquity, to practice Hypocrysie, and
to utter error against the Lord; to make empty the soul of the hungry, and to
cause the drink of the thirsty to fail Esa. 3^. 6.
. This is villainy, and they have spoken it before the Lord in His house, where
He has said, He will be sanctified; and they have compelled others to speak
it too, even to utter error against the Lord, there in His House, where they
stand charged to deal faithfully, To utter Truth; To speak as the oracles of
God. They have committed villainy in Israel, a greater villainy than they
committed, whom the King of Babel roasted in the fire Ier. 29. 2^.
; They have not only committed Adultery with stocks and stones k: but they
have spoken lying words in Gods Name. I KNOW, AND AM A WITNESS, says the Lord
l Ier. 29. 23:


Many villainies have been committed in Israel, but none like this, which the
Priests have committed, The giving liberty to profane the Lords Day, BY A LAW;
Nay, a forcing thereunto. Every Word of God, shall meet with some, who will
turn head against it: look how many kinds of Precepts there are, so many
adversaries there are Omnis sermo divinus habit am^los suos, quo^ genera
praeceptorum sunt, ^^t adversarior^^. Salv. ad Ecc. Cath. l. 4. p 486.
But let the superstitious Papists turn head against the second WORD: Let the
Licentiously Profane oppose the fourth WORD: Let the Athyst, the Pagan who
knows not God, blot out the first and the third WORD, Take away all, but let
not the Priests do it; let not them oppose so holy, so just, so reasonable a
command. They know the Lord, They minister before him. But they did it, even
the Priests. And for a Priest to turn this good Word out of Gods house, and
the Ministers after it, if they would not speak error against the Lord; for
him to blot out the Hard writing there; this was villainy sure, never the like
committed in Israel; it exceeded the boldness of that Pagan King Dan. 5.
.

The Time must be enquired into; When did the Priests commit this wickedness?
Then; At that time, when the Lord called to mourning, they called to Dancing
Nigra est incendio civitas, and in vult^^ fest^vit^^^ usurpa^. Lugent cu^cta,
tu latus et. Sal. de gub. l. 5. p. p. 22^.
. To allude to that place; Then the Priests proclaimed a liberty for sports on
the Lords Day, when the Lord proclaimed a Liberty in the Neighbors Church, to
the Sword, to the Pestilence, to the Famine Ier. ^4. 17.
Salvian would express this a great deal better; Then they consulted all this
against the LORDS DAY, when they saw Cities wasted, and two Kings slain; if
not in battle, yet they were slain. The Priest did just like Ahaz; they saw
(as he) a miserable destruction before their eyes, yet they brought a pattern
of that abomination, which caused that desolation, and (as Vriah did) set it up
here by a Law 2 King. 16.
. The time must be noted, and (that our spirits may be raised high in praise)
the exceeding 2 Chro. 28.
patience of a God must be noted also, we did pattern after them; we were
like them; nay, we exceeded in that profanation, yet the Lord did not pattern
us, He did not make us like them in desolations. O exceeding patience that, The
patience of a God.

Truly, when the Church heard this, she was persuaded in her heart, That the
Lord would strip her people naked; set them as in the day they were borne; make
them as a Wilderness, like a dry Land, and slay them with thirst Hos. 2, 3.
. Nay, her sad thoughts rose higher; she verily thought, that the Lord would
put a Cup of deadly wine into her peoples hand; a Cup of pure wrath; That is,
she thought her Lord would not have mercy upon her children. And that is a Cup
of deadly Wine ^ndeed, of pure wrath wherein there is no mixture of Mercy. A
people may be stripped naked, etc. and yet there may be mercy in all that. Truly,
the Church thought thus now, the Lord will not have mercy: He will turn His
back upon her people now, for He beheld abominations in His House, which His
soul hates; and His Day was profaned by a Law. But see now, That we may set
our hope, and our hearts upon the Lord, and set-up a pillar, an everlasting
Monument to His Name; there is mercy to her people; they are yet the Lords
people, and the judgment is upon the Priests and they shall KNOW IT: Surely
some strange judgment, the first borne of Death Job 18. 19.
, shall devour their strength. Now the Lord make them know it for their good,
That whatsoever strange punishment they feel here, they may not feel the
wrath to come. So the Church prays, and every man will say. Amen.

2. The Church remembers your Piety now. Blessed be You of the Lord, you have
rescued this day from out of the hands of Spoylers; Ye have recovered Your
Lords Right; Ye have vindicated His Name: So Ye have provided for Your own
peace, and prepared a way for a blessing upon all You shall do, and for Mercy
upon the Nation. Peace be both to You, and Peace be to Your house, and Peace be
unto all that You have. The Church wishes unto You a blessing, which contains
all blessings, because You have restored unto her, her Lords Day, which next to
her Lord Christ, is the fullest and most comprehensive mercy.

Go on and do yet more, and be more zealous: Give all diligence, and let Your
z^ale boil yet higher (it cannot boil over, Th^s shall Ye do in the fear
of the Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart 2 Chro. 19. 9.
) for it is for the Lord, His Day, His House, His Worship, Seek Ye that
first, burn in Your zeal that way, and other things will come on as they do,
as east in upon You by an Almighty hand, for the Lord will be with the Good,
and He will remember You for good, for You remembered His Day and His worship on
His Day; He will remember You for good, Amen.

SECT. III.
That You have advanced Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel, how efficacious
that is. To promote the chief end, the Glory of God; and Your end, Man's
Salvation.

6.
2. THe Church blesses God that has instructed You to discretion, so as You
have shown Your zeal, and given all Diligence, to promote the Gospel: The
readiest and most compendious way to Your aim and end, to bring all the
designs about, which we hope are all level to the glory of Christ, and Your
own glory with Him at the end. And now great is the company of Preachers;
their mouth opened now, who, of late, were used worse than the Ox, which
treads out the Corn. They speak boldly now, as the Messengers of the
Churches, and the Glory of Christ. That, which let shall let no longer.

The Scepter of the Lord Christ is advanced, and the people flow in unto it.
The Church thinks her Sons and Daughters never had a more glorious year,
since the day her Beloved, and Crown of rejoicing, ascended to His Glory.
Never since that Day, when He was lifted up from the Earth, was He so openly
shown to the world, as this last year. Though there had been no other very
worthy deeds done unto this Nation by Your providence; yet this she accepts
always and in all places which all thankfulness, accounting it an exceeding
great mercy, That by Your means she was respited and spared one year longer
to lay in her provision, and more fully to stock her self against hard and
de^re years. This the Church accepts, as aforesaid, for this is the way to
do, and effect the greatest things. Therefore this the Church accounts an
exceeding mercy. The blessing of blessings; and she prays, that the blessing
of Him, Who dwelt in the Bush, may go along with You in this Design, in
making known the Arm of the Lord: In advancing this Glory, through the whole
Land, that they, who walk in darkness may see a great Light: They that dwell
in the Land of the shadow of Death, upon them this light may shine. This is the
only way to do good to the whole Land; to make it a Land of visions, wherein
the Lord may delight, and to make his people a willing people.

The Church will remember You here, what Luther, her valiant Gideon spoke to
the business now in hand; I will not, said he, trouble my self any more with
the Cloisters, the Monks and Scholars there, those Armies of Adversaries;
they mind their belly, that is their god, and the belly has no ears. Nor will
I contest with the Pope any longer: (he had done it, and was too hard for him
and all his Cardinals) let the Philistines alone with their Dagon: They will
find ways enough to break themselves and their god; he would not beat and
buffet the darkness (so he said also) as the fool did his shadow; he would
set up a light, then the darkness slinkes away. I know not where it is, for it
is a privative thing: but it flies away as the cloud before the Sun, or as
the beasts of prey will do when the Sun arises, there is a riddance, it is
gone, and those beasts go to their dark Dens.

You know his meaning, and know it for the good of the Land. He would advance
Christ; He would set up that Standard (that was his meaning and his work) To
use his own word; he would promote the Arc; then Dagon falls, breaks himself
to pieces, head and hands both cut off, the Head for council, hands for
action, ^ll gone. That Is the way indeed: So You have done, and so You have
succeeded already. You will to that work again, and join shoulder to
shoulder for the advancing thereof; That the Lord Christ may be showen openly;
His glorious excellencies made known, specially in those places, where
CATHEDRALS are, as barren in the Churches observation, to the souls of men, as
the Surface of that Earth, where the Mines of Gold and Silver are, there no
meat grows for man, nor grass for Cattle The Church entreats you to remember
those barren places, and those dark places all over the Land, where the dead
bury the dead, and the blind lead the blind every Day, Truly the Church is
persuaded, that the people for the most part, are as ignorant as the Monks are
of Christ; (to speak as Luther spoke) or as they were of the Holy Ghost, they
know not whither there be any Christ or no, unles a Christ of their own framing
in a Table. They have heard of the name Jesus, and the Monks have taught them
to bend the knee unto it, and that is all their Devotion according to their
knowledge. O, that the Name indeed, the glorious excellencies of that
wonderful name, were made known unto them, certainly their Hearts would bend
also. Blessed be Ye of the Lord, Ye have labored herein, and Ye will labor
yet more to advance this STANDARD; to set-up this Ensign (that the mountains
may melt before you, and the people may flow in unto it;)

To make known this Arm of the Lord, for this makes us a willing people. That
I may speak all in our Lord and Masters words; Ps. 110.
In so doing, you shall do as Christ did; you will give eyes to the blind;
feet to the lame; you shall cleanse the Lepers; make the deaf hear; nay, you
shall raise the dead. You will stick most at this last, though the other, as
this, are all the works of the Almighties Arm; and all is effected, when the
poor receive the Gospel. If then, you will order it so, that the poor people
may have the Gospel preached unto them, you shall do all the forementioned
works, which are so wonderful, for all these miracles are wrought by the
Ministry of Man, the Hand of the Lord going along with that ministry; so we
understand it; as the Lord dealt with His Servant Ezekiell, so He must deal
with every man, upon whom these works are wrought, eyes opened, ears boared,
dead heart raised; The word of the Lord came expressly to Ezekiel, and the
hand of the Lord was there upon him: when the hand of the Lord comes along
Chap. 1. 3.
with the word (for the word comes but to the ear. The hand of the Lord
carries it to the heart) then the eyes of them, that are borne blind are
opened; feet, bound-up as with fetters of iron and brass, are enlarged; the
dead are raised, etc. The blessing of the poor and thirsty souls be upon you,
and upon your house, and all that you have: for you have and will pity these
poor people; ye will thrust out the dumb and the ignorant; the light Priest
and treacherous Prophet; the lame and the blind that are hated of David's 2 Samuel
5. 8.
soul. And you will send forth Ministers unto those places, such as are indeed
the Messengers of the Churches and the glory of Christ. Mat. 11, 5.
Then behold these mavelous works wrought, The blind receive their sight;
and the lame walk; and the Lepers are cleansed; and the deaf hear; the dead
are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached to them. Amen.

SECT. IV.
The PROTESTATION, how wonderfully the Lord brought it about. Though Ye shall
do exploits, yet nothing to be wondered at now; The reason. But one head or
charge is handled here, and that is RELIGION, a great Binder. The Method in
giving-out this abstract.

7.
THe Church blesses Gods wonderful work in you, and by you and for you; That
you have protested to take the Lord for your God; So you have provided for the
Churches security, what ever times may come: for you have brought her into
COVENANT with her God. I know that is a thing the Church does mind every Month,
I may say, every Day, and can do it without you; but not in such a way, as you
have done it, in a National way, which you, and none but you, can do. You
could make a Covenant between GOD and between all the People, that they
should be the LORDS PEOPLE 2 Chro. 23. ^^
.

The Church will put a Question to you now, not to pose you, for you are wise,
and she knows the Answer before hand, and would have you know it, yet better.
She would know, How you brought this work about. Your answer is, Not by your
strength, nor by your wisdom, but by the good hand of God upon you, so you
brought it about; and so you showed mercy to your souls, and to the whole
Nation. And thereby the Lord would make you know, That He intended, by you, to
do the Nation good assuredly, with His whole heart, and with His whole soul.
The Church has heard and understands well all the exploits you have done ever
since; such as seem mavelous works and wonders in the eyes and ears of the
multitude; yet to her, they seem (great mercies indeed) but no strange matters,
no wonders at all No? no;

1. The Church knows you had a liberty granted to continue your Session, as
long as you will, that is, till you have done Gods will, for He procured that
grant unto you; this Grant, though she counts it an exceeding mercy: Yet she
does not count it a wonder.

2. The Church knows that you marched valiantly, and trod down strength: You
rent a Lion without hands, as easy as a man, with both his hands, can rent a
kid; and yet this the Church accounts no strange thing neither.

3. The Adversary and enemy had made a breach great like the Sea Lam 2. 23.
; We asked, Who can make it up? Who can heal it? You could, and you did it,
and y^u shall be called the Repayrers of the breaches: You stood in that Gappe,
and you made it up; the greatest work that ever was done by M^n, since that
Breach was made up betwixt God and Man; since that PACIFICATION made by the MAN
CHRIST JESUS; And yet this work does not seem strange to the Church Nay,
should any one of you tell the Church, That since the Day you entered into the
Protestation, the Adversary made great breaches upon your soul, and the Lord
made them all up: Temptations came-in upon you like a flood; The Spirit of the
Lord set-up a Standard against them Esa. 54 19
, they could do you no hurt, but good a great deal: should you tell the
Church so, she would not think it strange Should your thoughts stray a little
from out this year, where we suppose we are, unto the next, when some say
(but they are much mistaken, or see and will not see) that God did nothing for
you, but against you, and then should you tell the Church, what she knows well;

That your Soul was amongst Lions, and yet not devoured; That you did lie
amongst those that were set on fire, and yet not consumed; none of all this
could the Church call wonderful, or think strange. Nay, to express it as
fully as I am able; Were all the wildfire in England (the Church hears the
Land is well st^red with it now, and ^he expects it shall be hurled in her
face, and thrown into her bosom, she is the But and White, against which the
Malignants level all this, this she knows, but she is fearelesse) were all
this, I say, gathered up and rolled together into one Ball, and then with 500.
hands, nay with the whole Arm of flesh, hurled into your Court, and the Church
should be told, that the fire took not, not one spark kindled there; not one
hair of any head there was touched; the Church could not count this
vvonderfull neither, no such strange matter. Why? Because you have protested to
take God for your God. You are a people in Covenant with Him; you are sworn
Servants to Him; He must protect His sworn Servants; when you are brought to
the brinke of destruction, to a precipice (so we must understand it, some
ex^gence, some knotty business, that all the fingers in the world cannot
undo) such a strait as this: when at one shocke, three kingdoms must be cast
down, if God helps not Nodus vindice dignus. When the Gibbet is up and
Mordecai designed to it the next day, then it is Gods t^me to work^: it is ^or
His Glory t^ defer ^o long; and for the ^lory of His faithfulness to de^er
no longer (...). Chrysostom Tom. 4. Epist. 1.
: I say, in such an exigence, God must help. He stands bound to it; You have
protested to take Him for your God: He has protested to take you for his
people. You have sworn, and by the good hand of God upon you, you will stand
to the Oath; and He has sworn: by what? By Himself (by all that is in
Himself, and He is all;) You will stand to your Oath, that is supposed; He
will stand to His Oath, that must not be doubted. You rejoiced at the Oath; He
will rejoice over you to do you good: It must be so, ye have struck hands
together. Ye may say, The Lord must remember me. How? with the favor He
hears unto His people Ps. 106. 4.
. He must visit me now with His Salvations, that is with a great Salvation.
When I am at the pits brinke, one shocke throws me down, then, with
reverence be it spoken, He must deliver me. He must come-in at the
fourth-watch: when there is no help from Earth, then the Arm of the Lord must
be revealed from Heaven. I am His and He my God, a God in Covenant. The OATH of
GOD is betwixt us; by His good hand upon me, I will stand to it, and then He
must stand by me. I am thine ^ save Ps 7. 1.
me. It vv^s David's argument, and prevailed still, SAVE me, for I TRUST in
THEE. The Church says, it had been a vvonder if God had not done for you even
so, for you are His sworn Servants.

The Church commands me now to proceed on in declaring this wonderful work,
which the Lord so strangely, and as graciously (by your means) brought about,
To bring your selves and the Nation into Covenant with Himself. I shall not
meddle with the several heads or charges in the same, which would take up
more roomth, then her^ can be allowed. Religion is the chief head (there are
the spirits) and a great binder it is, it binds a people to their God; and God
to the people. I proceed herein in this order, first;

1. What this PROTESTATION is to you, and all that stand to it. 2. What a
discovering note it is to your Adversaries. 3. The Church will put-up a short
prayer to her God. 4. Then a Supplication to you.
In all this, you shall have but an Abstract, out of a large Volume or Theme,
rather nothing taken thence, but an addition thereunto.

1.
A Rock of DEFENSE to the Righteous.

THis PROTESTATION is to you, and all that have taken it, and will stand to it
2 Chronicles. 34. 32.
, a SELA-HAMMAHLEKOTH 1 Samuel 23. 28.
, a Rock of Separation betwixt you and your Adversaries; nothing shall be able
to reach you, to do you hurt. Should the Lord fill all the Inhabitants of the
Land, even the Kings and the Priests and the Prophets with drunkenness (so He
has done for the sins of a Nation, as He threatens Ier. 13. 13.
) Should He dash them one against another, even the Fathers and the sons
together ver. 14.
, for so He threatens also in the same place; Why yet, you should be safe, none
of all these shall come near you to hurt you. Why so? Because you are a people
in covenant with your God, and He with you. Look you to it, how ye stand to
it, for this follows; TROVBLED ye may be on every side 2 Cor, 4 8.
, (no doubt of that) and so you may say; you shall say withal, yet not
DISTRESSED: PERPLEXED ye may be (not knowing what way to take, or what to do)
but not in DESPAIR: PERSECVTED ye shall be, but not FORSAKEN: CAST-DOWN ye
may be, but not DESTROYED: ye may be set as on fire round about, ye shall not
be consumed* Why so? The same answer, and it answers all Arguments, even the
Jesuits their fire and sword, the hardest words and most violent deeds, ye are
in covenant with your God, nothing shall come unto you to do you HVRT. No
Plague shall come to your dwelling, as a plague. Though great Letters are
written upon your door, yet the Plague is not there for all that. God is with
you, even YOUR GOD, He will save you even from that Destroyer; it shall but
reach your body at the furthest.

The time will come, when you will say, your head aches, and your heart too;
nay, it faints; and yet hear what the Lord says, The Inhabitant shall not
say, I am SICK Esa 33 24:
. Why so? The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity I
bear any thing now my sins are pardoned. M^^ ad in vita Lutheri, p. 168. ^. ^
Ps 73. 2^.
: Look ye there, My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion forever ^. That stils and quiets all, God at peace with
me and all is peace: God in Covenant with me; in Christ reconciled to me; if
so, I am not SICK, my sins are forgiven, all is well with me, for God is
with me, and HE is ALL, health, strength, riches, All. See how efficacious this
Covenant is (if we STAND to it) nothing shall stand against us, nothing shall
come unto us to do us HVRT; that is first.

2.
As Sibboleth to the Wicked; It discoveres the Priests and their People; It
hampers the Malignant, though, like possessed Men; No Cords will hold the
Papists; Their obstinacy in Gods house: how to judge of the Legality of an Oath.

THis PROTESTATION or sacred covenant is a Destinguishing character; Thereby
you shall know, who is a true Englishman; Who, a Treacherous Priest Papist, or
Malignant person. Give it to a right Englishman, a True Israelite in whom is
no guile, He goes clear and smooth away with it; He takes it with all his
heart, and stands to it, rejoices at the Oath 2 Chro. 15. 15.
, that is, he pronounces it right. Give it to the Priests, they will refuse
it, or fumble at it, they cannot frame to pronounce it right ^: Present it to
the Papist, you shall see what he will do anon. This is to the Priests (the
two Armies of them) to the Papists also, as SIBBOLETH to the Ephraimites Iud.
12. ^.
: Now you shall know whose eyes are evil against you, because your eye is
good, and you are resolved to do the thing that good is. Now ye shall see,
who they are, that puff at you, deride you (blow their nose at you Luk 16. 14.
(...).
) Because you would have them protest to take God for their God; (and not
their bellies;) to bind themselves in covenant with Him, as the very word
(Religion) imports. But see how their mind and affection stands! They protest
to take God for their God! no not they, Their belly, ease, profits, pleasures
are their gods; these and other Lords have ruled over them, and they shall rule
by their means. So now you know them; their madness is manifest; this very
Protestation has discovered them; it is a SIBBOLETH unto them; bid them take
it; They will refuse; or, if they do take it, they fumble at it, they cannot
frame to pronounce it right;

Nor the Papists neither; Yes but they can you will say, for they can frame
their mouths to pronounce any thing, to swear and lie both: What care they
what covenant they enter into, what Oath they take, when they are resolved to
break it, and are resolved upon the Question, that they may break it, for it
is their Doctrine Dogmatiza^ mendaciae.
. They are as the man possessed with the Devil, no coards, no bands can hold
them, they break all, Words, Oaths and all, as you can flax, that is burnt
with fire Iud. 15. 14.
. An Oath is a great binder, (it cannot bind them) the strongest cord, the
greatest security, the only chain on earth (as one says Dan. Hen. 3. ^. 167.
) besides love, to tie the conscience of a man and humane Society together, yet
the Papists can turn it over as a Gypsies knot, fast or loose at their
pleasure. We hear and see that they take the Oath of Supremacy now, etc. What
then? Then they are good Subjects. No, the most treacherous and mischievous men
in the world, and the truest enemies to the Lords anointed, none like them.
Now beware of these men, for now they will act villainy, they will kill, stabbe,
poison, murder, massacre, they will act any thing, which the Devil can
suggest. Why so? Because they do not awe, they do not reverence the Oath of
God: they count it a Gypsies knot fast, or loose as the Malignant Church will.
No Oath will serve them but the Bishops Oath, with their etc. which fits the
mouth very well, though it be an open Sepulcher. But for all their slight in
turning over Oaths, we may see them hampered anon, after we have laid open
their cunning a little more, first,

Oaths will not hold them, the Church shall for an hour: Thither some of them
go, never more frequently then now. There is some hope then, you will say,
They will prove honest men and good Subjects. Yes, or the contrary, and the
latter most likely. The Church (as it is commonly called) is as the poole of
Bethesda; if I go rejoicing thither, and have the same desire the poor man
had to be made whole, it is the likeliest place in the world to find cure
there. But if I go thither to cloak my wickedness, etc. then I do aggravate
my sin, I make it as the sin of witchcraft: The Papists go to Church,
that has been the manner, but observe still, they commonly go thither, where
a Dog, that cannot bark, keeps the House That adds something to their
sin; but this makes it above measure sinful: There they sit, and there they
meet with their Adversary every hour, that is certain: And this is as
certain, they ^re fully resolved bef^r^ hand not to AGREE with him. The WORD
says This is my Lords will: They ^ay, they will d^e their own will The word
is flat against them, and they as contrary to it, Thou shall not make, says
the WORD: They will make Images and bow before them; so they say and do. They
go to Church and have concluded, are settled and resolved upon it, not to
conclude their souls under the power of Gods Word: Here they prevaricate
fe^refully, and, as with Oaths, so they play fast and loose in Gods House too:
Let them alone traversing their way in their Month Ier. 2^
, they shall be found crying out like a traveling woman, for that is the time
when they must cast forth their sorrows. In the m^an time, ye must look to
th^se men now more narrowly, and with a more vvakefull eye, now that they stand
before the Lord in His house out-facing Him there Now surely they will be more
abominable then ever, They will murder and commit Adultery, and swear falsely
and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods. All this they will do
the more boldly now, now that the House of the Lord is a DEN of ROBBERS in
their eyes. But see how the Ier. 7.
LORD takes all this, and how His Servants should lay it unto heart; BEHOLD I
HAVE SEEN IT, says the Lord. And we must behold also how ye have hampered
them as a Bull in a Net. Blessed be ye of the Lord, Who has instructed you to
discretion, and has made you to be quick o^ understanding. Never was there
any engine invented like this Protestation, to batter their strong holds, and
to confound them in their cursed craft

Ai, but you will say, the Papists will not come within a mile of it; no
matter, that will come to them, and pluck off their vizard, we shall know
them, now their madness will be made manifest. But it is ILLEG^LL you say;
say so still, and say the Bishops Oath i^ LEGAL but let my soul go out with
that, which the Devil and his Kingdom are most against Gaudeo sic Satana^
indignari and blasphemare quo^^es ^ m^ tangitur. Luther ^ Epist. ad Am
. That which pinch^th and galleth there, my soul upon it, that is Truth Q^od
signum maioris ^^^riae est omnes haeretici de^estantur. Hier.
, that which ought to be, and we stand bound unto. Mark it ever-more, That
which cuts the wicked to the heart, which makes them gnash on you with their
Teeth* that is GOOD, very GOOD, good Law and good Reason, and good Conscience
for it too, there is no doubt of it; every wise m^^ will give as much credit to
that sign, as to the word of the greatest Gamaliel ^n the world.

Lastly, It may be said, Have not the Papists a slight to turn this ov^r the
Thumbs too, as the other two O^thes?

Truly I think not, This will hamper them sure; for it seems to me, this
PROTESTATION has bound up Satan. No you will say, he rages, never more. A
good sign that he is in chains, never closer pent up then now, and his
servants with him; and that they have but a short time, because they have so
much wrath. They are met with now, and held-in short, and pinched very sore,
for though they dare do much, even to the putting out of the Light of Nature,
and the casting the conscience into a deep sleep, yet I must suppose that
this little remaining light is so prevailing with them, as that, though they
could dispense with the taking of it, yet that light would so flash in their
face, that their tongues would but fumble at it, they could not frame to
pronounce it right. Now the Church puts up a prayer to her God.

3.
The Churches Prayer; An Object^on against her Prayer, answered. Her weapons
^^^yer and Tears; In what cases the Sword is her Weapon.

THe Lord shake out every man from His House, and from His labor, that has
not a will and a heart to perform according to the PROTESTATION, even the Lord
shake him out and empty him Neh. 5. 1^*
. The Lord grant these Malignants, th^se sons or B^liall, these troublers of
Israel, who will be bound by no other cord, but by the cords of their own
sins, may be cut off, even all cut off that trouble the Church, those that
love peace and pursue it. These sons of Beliall cannot frame to pronounce an
holy, just and good Commandment; o that they were dealt with now, as those
persons were we read of in the Text; Then they took him and sl^w him at the
passages of Jordan Iud. 12. 6.
The Church knows, that there would be a greater slaughter then was that we
read of, and there fell at that time of the Ephramites forty and two
thousand. Here comes in a doubt, and it will be easily resolved. The
Obj^ction ^s.

Ob. The Church is a peaceable Mother in Israel; her Father is the God of
peace, her Lord, the Prince of peace; her servants, the children of peace; then
sure the Church does not know what spirit she is of, that prays for Fire and
Sword to come down from Heaven.

Answ. Yes, the Church knows she has the Spirit of God dwelling in her, and by
that Spirit she can and does pray as aforesaid (and will fight anon) and be a
peaceable woman for all this, and a true Mother in Israel, and follow the
Lamb here also; for in some cases (and none rises higher then this) He, even
the Lamb has wrath, and that must be executed by her Sword. Nay more, as she
prays for this thing, so she can rejoice to see this vengeance, and to wash
her feet Ps. ^8. 10.
in the blood of the wicked, and the whole City with her, yea and to shout for
joy Prove. 11. 10.
. These are wicked persons, professed enemies to God and His Christ; Without
natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, inconti^c^t, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, not having so much as a form of Godliness
2 Timothy 3. 3, 4, 5.
. Pity these wicked Malignant persons, and you destroy the Good; show mercy
here, you are cruel to the Church; spare such, and they will make havocke of
Gods Servants, as you see they do, and have done in all ages. Wicked persons
they, and desperately bold and daring; They would turn the Songs of the Temple
into howlings Amos 8. 3.
. She can rejoice to see the vengeance, yea and to wash her feet in the blood
of these slain. And till this be done, she never looks to have peace on the
Earth, for these are they who have taken peace from her. Therefore she is
resolved upon it now, she will not only pray, but use her WEAPONS too. Yes,
you will say. PRAYERS and TEARS. True, for these are the Churches weapons, and
very prevailing, nay, commanding they are. (Prayers command God, He is pleased
to say so much, and to yield Esa. 45. 11.
so far:) but the Church said, she will fight too in a case, wherein her
Prince, His State, Crown and Dignity is concerned, for in all this the Church
is concerned, her Laws, Liberties, Religion, Life. In such cases, He will
fight. Let it go; it is good construction to apply a Masculine word to so
Heroicke a spirit: as I read Queen Elizabeth did not well digest that
Grammatical nicety, to be prayed for by the Title of DEFENDRESSE of the Faith,
DEFENDER was better concord in her Ears: And indeed never any man Answered
the Title better. I was saying the Church has another weapon, which we call
the Sword, and she will make it drunk in the blood of these Adversaries, and
yet do no more then what she has done in all Ages, from the Primitive time
downe-ward. For though Prayers and Tears and these only are her Sons and
Daughters weapons, as they are private persons: Yet, as they are public
persons (That alters the case) and exalted in the Earth, the Sword belongs unto
them as their proper right; and they stand bound to use it, though then also
They STVDIE TO BE QVIET 1 These. 4. 11.
, and know themselves CALLED UNTO PEACE, so they may have TRVTH too 1 Cor. 7.
15.
. The Church has her Ioshaah's; and, they must not lie upon the face Josh. 7.
10.
, wishing those even cut off that trouble us. Gal. 5. 12.
. He must rise and cut off those TROVBLERS; it is his office so to do. The
Church has her Nehemiah's, they may build with one hand and hold the Sword in
another. She has her David's, the truest Subjects in the world (as then he
was) and yet their H^ast may be as his was, as the HOST OF GOD l, and all for
their own safety, and to maintain (as ^ Chr^. 12. ^2.
David did) their Masters peace The Church has her Princes and her Nobles, and
her Worthies (blessed be God for them all) to whom the Sword belongs, and they
are charged to use it, for the cutting off those, that trouble her; and are
enemies to her Lords Crown and Dignity: They are charged to be of good
courage, and to play the men for their King and His people, and the Cities of
their God, and the Lord do that which seems Him good 2 Samuel 10. 12.
: Then in the last place;

4.
Private Persons must make Supplications.

THe Church makes her Supplication to you; That you would rise up and be doing;
that you would avenge her of these Adversaries, who have done what they can to
take peace from the Earth. All is contained in your Covenant, every whit.
Remember that and you remember all; and the Lord remember His Covenant with
you, for the dark places of the Earth are full of cruelty Ps. 74.
. Doubtless the Lord, Who keeps Covenant and mercy for ever, will not break
with you now. Remember Deuteronomy. 7. 18.
WELL, what the Lord your God has done for you; That will give you assured
confidence for the time to come. Only deal courageously 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
; stand to what you have said, and what in you lies, cause the Covenant to
pass through the Land, and do as the good King did; what you can to make the
people stand to it 2 Chronicles. 34. 32.
, and the Lord shall be with the good 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
. (Amen) for they will make their prayer to Him, which cannot be in vain Esa.
45. 19.
, being one of the most prevailing things in Heaven or Earth: but it is
reserved for the time, when ye as Esther Est. 4 16.
commanded Prayer, then it will appear how prayer commanded for you.

SECT. IV.
The engaging the heart to God, engages God to our Business; then they
slide-on; the loftiness of Man shall be bowed down, and the ^aughtinesse of
Men shall be made low; Idols and Idol-men, and Idoll-garments, and bloody
Courts shall be destroyed; Counsels hid in the dark, discovered; and a Breach
made-up, great as the Sea; so as the Lord alone shall be exalted in that Day.

THe people that do know (that is) do fear and rely upon their God, shall be
strong and do exploits: So it was in days of old, Dan. 11. 32.
So it will be to the end of the World. Please you we will remember a sacred
Story, and consider it with our whole he^rt and with our whole soul Time was
when our Grandfathers dwelt in seiled houses, while they let the house of God
lie waste. Every man ran after (that is) was very earnest in his own
affairs, but the affairs of the Church, no man regarded* much work was
done, but no Temple-worke. The Lord by His Prophet Haggai admonishes and
reproves for this, corrects and punishes too: bids them consider the order
and method they took, whether things were done decently and in order; all for
themselves, their private wealth; nothing for God, and the Common g^od; and how
they prospered in their contrary way: vvhither God vvalk'd not contrary to them
also? Shame devoured their labors Ier 3. 24.
, there was a SWORD and a DROVGHT ^er ^^ 38.
upon all they had and upon all they did; They were in a deep consumption;
They eat and they drank, and yet pined away Hag. 1. 1^. ^er. 6.
; They labored, but in the fire; Wages they earned, but they put it into a
bagg with holes; much they did, but nothing prospered. After many ^ore and
sharp strokes (for man will not be made wise, but by blows) they began to
look up and consider their way, which was not right, yet they thought to
prosper in it, but it was not possible. At last they considered and thought
thus, if God does all, and gives all richly to enjoy; if He be the best and
highest Master, and pays the best wages; The greatest reason in the world,
His work should be done first; and so like wise and considering Men* they
fell to Gods work, ran as fast to His House, as before to their own. This
the Lord took very kindly, as His manner is, and ordered it so (that is His
manner too, for His wrath is quickly appeased, when He sees Men but look
STEADFASTLY to Him and His House) that their own house should not fare the
worse; they should sensibly see now a strange alteration in things, as a SWORD
and a DROVGHT before upon every thing: so now a BLESSING; a shewer of
BLESSINGS. Yes, but they must wait for it; No, no waiting now Behold presently
a shewer of blessings, that Gods people may for after times, lift up their feet
in Gods way, observe good order and method there, still to begin with God and
Temple-work, call it what you will, Religion if you please; From this Day
that the Foundation of the Lords Temple was laid CONSIDER IT Hag. 2, 18.
. What must they consider? It follows, FROM THIS DAY WILL I BLESS YOU; from
that moment of time when they minded Gods work to do it, I WILL BLESS YOU
says the LORD.

If ever GOD made good this Scripture to His people in after ages, then now He
has fulfilled it even in our days: Every man can make application, for from
this Day the Lord has blessed you; you must prosper now and do exploits, for
you go on now in the strength of a COVENANT, and in the strength of the
prayers of all those that are in Covenant with you, and that ^s an ALMIGHTY
strength.

Y^u have given forth your MALE, the first Borne of your strerg^h to manage the
great things of HEAVEN: assuredly from this Day the Lord has blessed you

You have found wherein the strength and spirits of the business lies now;
these are contained in Religion, very ^ffic^ci^us in vvorking; and a mighty
binder, as was said; ye have bound your selves to G^d, and God to you; now ye
shall g^e on as valiant men in the strength of God, and with His increase and
^l^ssing. Though you should hear, in after time, the multitude of many people
Esa. 17. 12, 13.
, which make a noise like the Seas, and a reshing like the rushing of mighty
waters. Then shall ye see also, that God will rebuke them, and they shall flee
fair off, and shall be chased as the chafe of the Moun^^ins before the
vvinde, and like a rolling thing before the whirle-winde, etc. For it follows,
but I forbear for I must keep my self within the bounds of this WONDERFUL
YEAR. This is but to show, that you have chosen a way to walk-in, and a rule
to walk by called the WAY of HOLINESS (the Lord keep you in it, and to it;)
it is a clear, an holy, a s^^e, an une^ring way, The way faring men, though
FOOLS, shall not err therein. Esa 35.
Ye may fall into the straits there (as was said) ye may be troubled on every
side, yet not distressed; perplexed ye may be, but not in despair 2 Cor 4 8.
, as you read; ye may meet with a Lion in that way; persecuted ye may be, but
ye shall not be forsaken: The Lord whose ye are, and whom ye serve, and have
engaged your hearts so to do, (the greatest security that Earth or Heaven can
give, is yours now) will carry you through all (His NAME, His GLORY is engaged
too) and make ye more than Conquerours at the last But for the present, we are
to Record yet farther, what GOD has wrought by you, or what you have wrought
with GOD this Day, where you will see and take good notice what an easy pass
or slide you had unto business, as they have, whom God will lead and prosper
(from this very Day the Lord did bless you) Take a short view of the works in
the same order they were done, so the Church will render you an account, and an
acknowledgement together, very short in these particulars.

8.
Then, from that Day, ye marched valiantly, ye trod down strength, ye had
Dominion over the Mighty Iud. 5.
; ye troubled the Troublers, and the Destroyer was destroyed. Then no power of
the adversary could with-stand you from that Day.

9.
Then, from that Day, ye found out the treacherous Priests and their Babylonish
garments; then you were to the poor Ministers, as your good God before you;
you took off the yoke on their jaws, and to the people, you laid meat unto
them Hos. 11. 4.
. Then you pursued your Adversaries to their strongholds, and you beat them
there with their own weapons: Indeed their own weapons, weapons of
unrighteousness, were as Goliahs Sword to the Giants of the Earth, as M.
Dearing called them long ago, who searched the Scripture whether things were
so, and would take poison from no man's hand. Ye found these men overcome to
your hand, bound fast with the cords of their own sin, as a wild Bull in a
Net (the Lord give them to feel it for their good) full of the fury of the
LORD, the Rebuke of Thy GOD Esa 51. 10.
.

Then, from that Day, ye proceeded against them and their Courts, so that the
Church may read her Deliverance, now in that which the Lord wrought for her
people in days of old, So the terrible one is brought to naught Esa. 29.
, and the Scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity, and they that
made a man an offender for a word, and laid a snare for him that reproves in
the Gate, and turned aside the just for a thing of naught, all these are
cut off; for where is the fury of the oppressors? and the jurisdiction of
their Courts, Where is it? She remembers this with all thankfulness and she
remembers you in all earnestness before the high Throne, as was said before,
for she can read on; Now Esa. 29. 19.
the meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall
rejoice in the Holy One of Israel: for how you eased the Churches shoulders,
and cheared her heart, when you took off those yoakes, the two insnaring Oaths
and bloody Courts, she and you know very well: and she accepts with all
thankfulness, but she gives glory to her God.

10.
Then, from that Day, you could trace the footings in the dark; the turnings
and windings of the crooked Serpent in his crooked paths; Then the Lord made
darkness light before you, and crooked things strait. Then you had discoveries
upon discoveries, for what a discovering God have you! How easily did He
defeat His enemies! Their turning of things upside down, He esteems as the
Potters clay, for He turned them and their work upside down, as easily as
the Maid does the Dish, which she vvipes, or the Potter the clay vessel he
frames Esa ^9. 16. Vid. Call. in loc.
.

11.
Then you quenched the SONS of the COAL; and though they sparkled in your
face, yet they could not kindle: notwithstanding the wrestling of the
Adversary, you held and maintained the staff of BEAVTY and of BANDS Zach. 11.
, and so made firm the Brotherhood between Jacob and Israel. And it was like
the making of twain one, so making peace Ephesians. 2. 15.
; as the causing the envy of EPHRAIM to cease, and the cutting-off the
Adversaries of IVDAH Esa. 11.
: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim, but they shall
be as one stick in the hand Ezekiel. 37. 19.
, that so with united force, they may fly upon the shoulders of the
Philistines. I will say no more of it here (for it fills a volume) But
according to this time it shall he said of Jacob and of Israel, WHAT HAS GOD
WROVGHT? Number. 23. ^3.


In all this last mentioned, the Church turns to her God, renders praise and
glory to Him, for he only works wonders. She will ascribe all to her God, so
the Church may do, and yet make all due acknowledgement to man, whom the Lord
is pleased to honor as an instrument. Man stood in the GAP, and he shall be
called, The REPAIRER OF THE BREACH, but God made it up, even Esa. ^8. 12.
by His own Right Hand, for it was great as the Sea. He did it who has taken
the wicked in their own Snare; consumed them with their own breath; swallowed
them up with their own lips; fallen upon them with their own tongues; bound
them fast with their own cords, HIGGAION SELAH Ps. 9. 16. Rem meditandam sum.
, a matter HIGHLY to be considered on. Therefore with your good leave, the
Church ascribes all to her good God, Blessing, Honor, Power, Wisdom, Thanks,
all the glory unto Him, that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever. And the Church makes account that so ye will do also; ye do
call this year and your Court BAAL-PERAZIM, for at this time, the Lord smote
His enemies there, and has broken forth upon them before you as the BREACH of
WATERS; Therefore ye call this year and that place BAAL-PERAZIM 2 Samuel 5. 20.
, giving glory to the Lord, for HE IS WORTHY.

A Transition to the next Section.
THus I have made as short a collection, and given-in as brief a Catalogue, as
I could, of Gods dealings, His wonderful Administrations; His strange
dispensations of Wisdom and Providence toward His Church this year so full
of Grace and Power; all these contracted here into as narrow a room as
possibly might be, considering how comprehensive some of the Heads were; else
where I have given them more enlargement; but I look and heartily expect, that
my pains will be prevented by some others pen, that has more leisure, and a
larger portion of gifts and abilities for the completing such a History, which
so much advances the Name of God, and the hope of Israel in the time of His
distractions: The Remembrance of what God has wrought this former year, will
be to the Church in after times, and in all her fainting fits, as we read
Deuteronomy. 7. 18.
, for the consolation is the same, and the gr^und thereof the same; Thou shall
not be afraid of them. T^ou shall WELL rem^mber what the LORD thy GOD did unto
PHARAOH, the Pope and unto all his helpers. The, etc

Another great Work you have wrought in the close of the year, concerning
Gods immediate worship and service, which must be recorded in order, with
reverence to the time, when these works were done (I say, work^^, for it is
plural, a comprehensive work, and contains much:) Thou^h it may suffice very
well, that the Lord has registered them, and will reward them. A Cup of cold
water Mat. 10, 4^.
given to His Church, He will think upon and reward, for that is His manner;
He will not be in arere with any man, much less with His faithful Servants;
if He seems to delay the time, or to forget, it is for your advantage, and
that he may remember you in the fittest time, as in the case of Mordecai. A Cup
of Water shall be remembered; how much more your labor of love, patience of
hope, your works of Faith, such works which you have done, and are written
in the records of Heaven and Earth both, for they concern His pleasant
Sacrifices, which He has commanded, such as were in the days of old, and as
in former years Mal. 3. 4.
.

But before the Church can record all this, she must record with all
thankfullness^, what you have done for her Land, her people there, breaking our
bands and taking-off our yoaks also, and rescuing us from cruel Taske-masters.

This the Church accepts always in all thankfulness. But we account this
rescuing us and the Law from out of the hand of cruel Lords, the chiefest
among your many worthy deeds: being most taken with outward privileges, and so
we may prosper in the world, we care not how our souls prosper: such our
teaching is, and so blind our guides are (for the most part) which will be
considered as we passe-on. For after we have rendered our heartiest thanks to
you, for rescuing us from under those hands; The Church will reason out the
case with the Judges, will point to the root of our evils, then she will show
^s a more excellent way.

SECT. V.
No oppression to the oppression of a Ruler or Judge offering violence to the
Law; we howled under that oppression; The Lord remembered us in our bondage, and
sent us Saviors, who disburthened our Shoulder of our grievous pressures and
oppressors.

THen (from that Day) you rescued a poor peeled people, from those that are as
EVENING WOLVES Zeph. 3. 3.
, Who are they? The Prophet means by an ordinary figure, IVDGES, and we mean
not the like but the same: for they ravened the prey, they gnawed the very
bones; they devoured and consumed the COMMONWEALTH; but to heighten their
vvickednes^e, they first KISSED her LIPS, pretending the PVBLIQVE GOOD. These
men of the Earth denied to free Subjects their Catholico^, that (...). 1 Pet.
1. 19.
which is every free-mans birthright; (...), that which the child receives
from his Father, though be ^^ ^he youngest, and his Father the poorest The
Judges denied us this our proper inheritance; they imprisoned the freest thing,
that is in all the world, and that which is most innocent. As the Bishops
Lorded it over the King of the Church, offering violence to His Laws: So these
Lorded it over the Catholic Rule of the Common wealth; I had almost said, the
most Catholic King in the world; but we ^ubmit here, for we are not learned;
we think that the sacred Scripture says as much, That the Law is the highest
power on earth And we remember well that Romans 13.
a mighty Emperor tells us, that the LAW was his MASTER; The LAW IS EVERY MAN'S
MASTER Mar Aurel An. l 10. Medi^. 25. Page 71.
, said he, then he could not exempt himself from out of that universality; it
was his MASTER too. This Catholic Master was trod under foot by it is Servants
Servientes ad legem fortiscue.
, so we think Judges are called. And then all falls to the ground and is trod
under foot, when the Master is under Nihil sequens stat cum principale non
steverit. Salv.
, when the Servant is on Horseback and rides his Master, then he oppresses
very sore, as we read, He oppresses the poor like a sweepi^g rain that
leaves no food Pro 28. 3. 1 Samuel 14 1^.
. Then we lay like the Hebrews oppressed by the Philistines, in our holes,
brought very low, down to the ground, and our speech scarce whispered out of
the dust. Complaints were vain and to no purpose, or made our burden heavier;
for the Servant was the Master, and what pleased him was the Law: So they
turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of Righteousness into Hemlock Amo.
6. 1^.
, Then we were afflicted indeed, fleeced and peeled; the flesh was torn from
the bone; and then we howled. Nay, the oppression was so heavy, that some of us
were madd (oppression makes wise men so Eccles. 7. 7.
;) and we spoke as madd men, so unadvisedly with our lips, accounting the proud
happy, for they that work wickedness were set-up, and they that tempted Go^
were even delivered Mal. 3. 15.
, and we were made as the little fishes, as the creeping things that have no
RVLER over them Hab. 1. 14.
. But notwithstanding we provoked Him so, the Lord looked down from Heaven,
saw our burdens, and that they were very sore, sent Saviors unto us, blessed
be His Name, and blessed be ye in the Name of the Lord. We might complain now
and be heard, and complain we did as an oppressed people before us. Neh. 5. 5.
Our flesh is as the flesh of our Judges and Rulers just the same; theirs no
better, ours no worse: Our children as their children, not so gay, but as good,
and as free borne as theirs: And we are brought into bondage, our sons and
our daughters, to be servants to them, who profess themselves to be Servants
to the Law. But these Servants overruled their MASTER, and so enthralled us:
And when you heard this cry and these words, you were very angry (for the whole
body was pinched where there was quick flesh) Then you consulted with your
selves, and rebuked the Judges and the Rulers who dealt so treacherously, so
like evening Wolves ravening the prey; And you disburdened the Commonwealth of
her pressures (too many to reckon, and) grievous oppressors (as the Squire of
the Body, still attending such Judges) a company of sharks, proging fellows,
pests, vipers, grievous vermin, worse then the Egyptian froggs, which
devoured every green thing. You eased the Land of those Adversaries;
abominable filth is cast into their faces; their names ^ot and their arm is
withered. And this is all which ye have done, terrible things which we looked
not for. We do not diminish one grain, we think it very much which you have
done, though we out-runne you in our expectation. But we must give great
bodies leave to move slowly, (they meet with many rubbs in the way) to
deliberate long upon the case, where it reaches to the precious life of a man;
when that thread is cut, life runs out from a bottom that has no end. We
are pretty well satisfied in this, that we are rescued and taken as a prey
out of their teeth. We would have the Iaw-bone broken too; we vvish
sometimes, and not in our haste, that they who so troubled us, offered such
violence to the Laws of God and man, were cutoff. Indeed we cannot think
our selves secure, while they are, and are not made examples, though one is
fled, and another is fast by the heels, and all are put to shame, being
pointed at with the finger, These are they, more unrighteous then was the
unjust Judge. For though he feared not God, nor regarded man, yet he was gained
with importunity, to do right. These not so, The HOWLING of the widow and
TEARS of her Orphans, These they regard not, no not these: the Lord grant
they may know all this for their good, and be confounded and turn unto the
Lord before the first borne of Death Job 18. 1^.
, some strange judgment consumes their strength, and the curse that is written
fall upon them d.

1.
The Church argues the case with the Judges, bids them mark the old way which
wicked men have trodden; advises them to an humble confession of their fault,
and to leave proud Apologies, for there the Law leaves them, and is clear
against them.

ZOphar spoke well, though he applied it ill, Know thou not this of old,
since man was placed upon Earth, that THE TRIVMPHING OF THE WICKED IS SHORT Job
20. 4, 5.
. So Elephas a little after 22. 15, 16.
, Have thou marked the old way, which wicked men have trodden? WHOSE FOUNDATION
WAS OVERFLOWNE WITH A FLOOD.

The Church applies all this right, even to the Judges, and would have them
apply it so too, for they are able. Surely they can look back and enquire of
the days of old, which will tell them, that their Fathers in whose steps they
trod, consulted shame to their house: Because of Men's blood and for the
violence of the Land Exodus 22, 22, 23, 24.
, shame devoured the labors of their Fathers Hab. 2.
. The stone cried out of the Wall and the Beam out of the Timber answered it;
woe to him that builds a House with blood and establishes it with iniquity;
And so it was and is, for these houses are consumed away by the heat of Gods
displeasure, as if they had been made, as we read Ier. 2.
some houses are in Gothland, of SNOW O lau^ d^ rit: Gent. Septen. lib. 1, Ch^.
23.
.

The Lord grant they may consider this, and trust to their Repentance, and free
acknowledgement of their crimes; to that BLOOD above all which yet speaks,
rather then to their Apologies, which some think, and all say, are smooth and
plausible. A SAGE of their own is clear against them. Thus the Lord Cook
speaks, where he speaks as we may understand him, Latin and English both, and
full to this purpose, for I may not hit of his words, being long since I read
them. The Law is clear for free Subjects in point of Privilege and property,
if the Client through ignorance, and the Lawyer through wilfulness, do not
darken it. The Law shows a way very discernable to a cleared sight, betwixt
Mine and Thine. If the Lawyer be at a fault here, surely there is dust cast
into his eyes, and he deals treacherously, because he will do so, not because
he wants wit or knowledge, but because he is subtle and wicked: for he goes by
the clearest Lights (not single but plural) that any Science in the world
has, the light of Nature and of Reason and of conscience, all three; Therefore
the Sage concludes, A knowing Lawyer (whom we commonly call good) must
necessarily be a good man, or etc. the Contrary, as the Country man calls him
who calls a Spade, a Spade. And the best excuse he can make, why he dealt
contrary must be his fear; that made him clash against the Law, fear of
present drowning, if he did not swim with the stream; and not ignorance of the
Law. But here also our Chronicles gives us a famous example of a good Judge,
and a good man, Sir John Markham by name, (late times yield us one or two more)
King Edward the 4. outed him his place. But the valiant Knight, valiant for the
Truth, no Judge thereof now) gloried in this (as well he might) that Though the
King could make him NO IVDGE, he could not make him a DISHONEST MAN, He could
do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth 2 Cor. 13 8.
, notwithstanding all provocations and forcei^g to the contrary. Our Judges
(the worst part of them) clean contrary, nothing for the Truth, but against
the Truth, nor were they so much forced, as they used forcing. Then Judgment
was turned away backward, and Justice stood afar off: for Esa. 59. 14.
Truth sell in the street, and equity could not enter, etc. For it followed
just so. Therefore Gods Arm brought Salvations, He put on the garment of
vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as ver. 16, 17. 18.
a cloak. According to their deeds, He did repay fury to His Adversaries,
recompen^e to His enemies.

Thus the Lord did for a peeled people, that we might set OUR HOPE in Him, and
not forget His works But behold we are turned back, we are not steadfast. This
is the Truth which appears thus.

2
We mind our Covenant no further then as it may be a Covenant of Salt, to
assure us our outward Privileges for ever. That Is our great error: the Church
confutes it, and instructs us to Discretion.

WE are not steadfast in the Covenant farther then it concerns our private
wealth: so far we will hold-fast to it, as it does maintain our outward Rights.

We are resolved upon the Question, and let us now be begged for fools or madd
men, if we do not by all lawful means, maintain the peace of our King, His
Crown and Dignity; and the Privileges of Parliament: for herein (we must have
a principle of profit to carry us) the Rights and Liberties of the Subject are
maintained. Vows are upon Him and Them; the Oath of God is betwixt us; the
strongest engagement that can be to maintain the LAW, and then the Law will
maintain us, and all the forementioned. And that is all we look after. We
consider not how spirituals strengthen Politickes; that both King and Kingdom
are established by Righteousness. Therefore the Church minds us of a great
principle of State government which is this; That true Religion and Godliness
is the root of all true virtue, and the stay of all well ordered Commonweals:
And to keep the true Religion pure and unstained, ought to be the highest of
all cares appertaining to public Regiments, and the peace thereof. Did not thy
Father Josiah do judgment and justice, and it was well with him Ier. 22 ^^.
. While he was yet young, he begun to seek after the God of his father, and to
pur^e Judah and Jerusalem 2 Chro. 34. 3.
. And there was never any King before him or since, that live^ so desired, or
dyed so lamented, No not one. But his son Iehoiakim not so; His Eyes and his
Heart were for oppression, and for violence to do it Ier. 22.
; therefore he was buried with the burial of an Ass; they lamented not for
him, saying, AH LORD, or AH IS GLORY: But what is this to the people? much
every way, as what concerned the HEAD then, concerns the BODY now, because of
that sympathy, and nearest Relation betwixt them: and what concerns the BE
concerns the BEEHIVE, and what does good or hurt to the one, does the very
same to both. Therefore this is added; They then and They only do seele the
weight of Duty toward their Prince and Country; they know the just bounds of
observation toward both, who can, in a gracious freedom of Spirit, arising
from Their innocence and independancy (except on the living God) stand out,
notwithstanding all shockes, against all corruptions in Doctrine and manners,
having a tender sense of both, that there be no corruption in either: And so
do wish from an entire and ingenious heart, O KING LIVE FOR EVER. It is not
the strength of all united hands, that can set the Crown fast upon a Kings
head: not the policy of as many heads can make it flourish there: nor can all
the Arm of flesh put out to it is utmost strength confirm to us our Liberties,
and establish the Right of Subjects: No, but it is RELIGION kept in it is
purity; Justice, maintained in it is integrity; obedience (more beautifying then
a Crown) performed to Gods command in sincerity; This will do it, even all
the forementioned. And we are convinced hereof by a common light, and natural
principles; and can conclude therefrom, when we are our selves, that we should
give out our strength and be most active for the first and last thing in the
PROTESTATION; To maintain RELIGION in it is purity, and the BROTHERHOOD in
Sincerity; for therein are contained the very strength and spirits of the
Covenant, as has been said, and cannot be to often thought upon.

But now what blunts the edge of our endeavors and affections this way, comes
now seriously to be considered on.

3.
Our Priests, who pretend to lead us, mislead us destroying all* that the
Church does for our building up, to the subverting of our souls, and the
putting out of a common light, by their common and unclean conversation. The
Church points us to a more excellent way.

WE are naturally blind, and cannot see far off 2 Pet. ^. 9.
. We are not instructed to discretion; not so discerning, as to approove the
things that are excellent, much less to contend for them. And a great cause
hereof is, (we are naturally stupid and blind, a spirit of infirmity naturally
boweth down; but I say a chief cause is) without us, in our guides and
leaders, for the most part blind, and yet they lead us. Many of them preach
once in a Year, perhaps some of them once a Month, and not a sound word of
Doctrine then, comes from them, but their TEXT. Their practice is as bad, it
corrupts like a canker: We observe that, and nothing else, we see they oversee
nothing amongst us with any care or diligence, but their Easter-booke, and
their Tithes all the year after. That has been the complaint against Bishops
from Days of old to this present Day See Hist. of the Council of Trent. 2. p.
252. and p. 216. Non magis de pa^scen^o grege cogi tant quam suitor de arando.
Pastors now a days, the werst part of the, think no more of feeding the flock,
then a Cobbler does of the plough. Call Ins. 4. cap. 5. Sect. 1^, 13.
. And if our SEERS do so, we think and are persuaded we may do so too, mind
Earth and do well enough for Heaven, for they do so, and yet they know better
and see farther then we can see, for they are called Seers, The Lord unscale
their eyes, and unvaile their hearts, and deliver His people from these
murderers, because of whom the Churches soul is wearied Ier 4. 31.
. The Lord stir up your hearts to pity the Countries round about yet more.
For we are in a sad condition if we saw it. Our Teachers are as you hear, and
the People content to have it so. Truly had not the Oppressor touched us in
that we make our god, outward profits and Privileges, we should never have
complained: what violence the Priests had done to the Law of God, to the House
of God, to His worship there, we regarded not: but what violence the Judges
did to the Laws of Man, that we regarded, and then we could howl.

Truly we mind not what bands you have broke; nor what yoakes c Facile est
quicquid in praesenti seculo nocet: illud grave, illud perniciosum quod in
aeternitate iugulabit. Salv d^ Eccl. Cath. l 2. 410.
you have taken off the necks of Ministers; Nor that you have advanced the
Scepter of the Lord Christ; and that worship which is according to the Rule and
mind of God; these things we mind not; No nor that you have troubled the
troublers, the Achans, That you have searched their Tents, and found out the
Babilonish garments; We regard these things no more then Gallio did the beating
of Sosthenes: for so we are instructed; Our Prophets, for the most part,
prophecy to us of wine and strong drink, which pleases the sense well, and
our walking is thereafter, we regard only our Oil and Wine.

And yet upon sadder thoughts, when we think as men, we are half convinced;
That this our walking is not right; That rivers of Oil and wine (i. e) the
marrow, and fatness, and fulness of the world is but emptiness, and will
^ot satisfy: All this reaches but to the body, no farther; and will leave
us, or we them on this side the grave. We can consider sometimes that we have
a Spirit within us (which is called the soul) a vast, large and capacious
thing: It can measure and graspe all the forementioned, all the things in the
world; and, when all is done, find but an emptiness in all. We are able to
consider, That the world cannot satisfy this soul, no more then can the
East Wind the stomach. It is Heaven and the great things there, which can
satisfy this great capacity, which can vviden and stretch forth it self like
the Heavens. The soul may go from creature to creature, as the Be from
flower to flower, and be as restless still, and as unquiet in its motion, as
is the needle, (not pointed right) and so must be till it be pointed steadfast
to Heaven

All this we can consider, and, upon due consideration, approove the things
that are excellent. But then we behold our Priests, and are quite off again,
seeing them walk like men, nay many of them more like be^sts I would rather
my tongue were silent in darkness, then it should cast a note of contempt upon
outward civility. These have not so much, but, as beasts, could they fancy
happiness, would place it in fat pastures, and sweet waters so do these droves
and herds of men This is a mighty snare unto us, lead not so much by rule as
by example Persuade^ lingua iubet vitae, Athan. ad Monachos. The Tongue
persuades, the life commands.
: We consider not what ought to be done, but what is done by our betters, and
thereafter we practice as our leaders do, as if what they did were well done;
and, as if outvvard things could inwardly satisfy. This digression is
necessary, declaring how our minds stand: Now I must show, That the Church is
of another mind, and so make way to the scope.

. 4.
The Church desires to prosper as her soul may prosper; Contends for the
advancing of Christ's Kingdom; prefers inward enlargements before outward
privileges.

ESaues ENOVGH Genesis 33. 9. Genesis 6.
will not content the Church, though that be much or a great deal. Jacobs
ENOVGH Genesis 33. 9, 1^*
only contents her, which inwardly satisfies and fills up the vast capacity of
the soul, This God alone does, Who is Jacobs ENOVGH, for HE is ALL.

The Churches Sons and D^ughters look after those things, which may further
them in their way Heavenward: such things as will make their souls to prosper
are to their mind and heart. They look after spiritu^ll enlargements, they
would have their Lord Christ to be highly ^d^anced in the world; It would
rejoice them at the heart to see His Sanctuaries kept clean; all filthiness
remooved thence, and those that attend His services there to be purified and
Holy ones, That their Lord might see no unclean thing there which might cause
Him to turn away from them, and turn His back upon His Sanctuaries, The sum
of their desires is; That they may offer to the Lord an offering in
Righteous^esse. Then shall their offerings be pleasant unto the Mal. 3. 3. v. 4.
Lord, as in the Days of old, and as in former Years. The Church Remembers
vvh^t you have done to promote these services so pleasant to the Lord, and she
must refer it to a special head of Praise and Thanksgiving.

CHAP. X.
It is ordered that neither the Table of the Lord, nor His Name be Idolized;
nor His Day profaned; nor Prayers restrained; All this the Church Records with
all Thankfulness; The Time also when this was done: and She sets her hope in
God for after Time, therefore She gives her self to Prayer.

SECT. I.
The Name restored; Idols and Idol Priests Cast-out; The bold Chancellor
rebuked; the Lords Day rescued from those that offered violence thereunto.

BLessed be ye of the Lord; you will have things called by their Name; Cringing
and bowing, flat Idolatry; The Table of the LORD, a Table: And His Name ye will
not suffer to be made an Idol neither; nor His Day profaned; nor would you
restrain prayer; for, next to her Lord Christ, it is the life of her soul,
and more precious then the breath in her Nostrills. She will speak of these in
order, and to your everlasting praise.

1.
The Church accounts of but one feast during her wea^y Pilgrimage here, and it
is, That her Lord Christ is pleased to invite her unto, and make her partaker
of at His own Table; where She beholds admirable things, an unspekeable gift,
which She cannot express, but there She sees her Jesus, Him, Whom her soul
loves, in Him and through Him exceeding riches of grace, abundant mercy, great
love.

The Church is abundantly thankful to you now; That you have restored to her
the Name, and the use of That, whereat She does communicate, and feast with her
Lord: She may call it a Table, for so it is, and not an Altar, for that is a
lie, an abomination, not to be once named in the Church of God, who has but
one Altar, as She has but one Priest.

2.
The Church has more thanks to give you before She can leave the Table; That
you have rebuked the bold Chancellor, his turning of things upside down, which
you esteemed as the Potters clay: Let him order things at his own Table, he had
no more to do in Church-vvork, then Vzziah had to meddle with the Priests
office: Therefore the Lord going along with you, has set a note of disgrace
upon him (so notoriously transgressing the bounds of his office, the pattent
whereof he has quite lost, or willingly laid aside) as manifest, as was the
Leprosy rising in the forehead. Blessed be ye of the Lord, that ye have so
rebuked him, and the vile Priest also, who would make an Idol of his Lords
Name; That WONDERFVLL NAME, making one letter in that Name, more excellent and
honorable then another, whereas every letter there is WONDERFVLL, and
infinitely glorious: but so he did Idolize that Name there, and every where,
bowing the knee at the hearing of it, and, in the mean Time, mocking Him to
His face. The Church thanks you for this, and that you remembered also that
which was an offense, and grief of heart.

3.
The INCLOSVRE, the Railes there, for why should the Priests, now the veil
of the Temple is rent, make the Chancell, as the HOLY of HOLYES, so making a
difference in places, where God makes none; or why should he stand alone
there, so like a sacrificing Priest, as if the gift he were to distribute
there, were not common to all believers? Now the Lord Christ is as a fountain
opened to the house of Judah, the Church. She is indeed a garden enclosed, a
spring shut up, a fountain sealed Cant. 4. 12.
, Because the Church is separated Optima fide casta^ conservas ^^ and tuos
fructus intogros. Iun.
for her Lords use: and all her fruit, as from Him, so all reserved for Him:
What her Lord Christ is, what He has, all is for His beloved; Therefore she is
peculiarly His, all she is, and all she does. But her beloved is a common good
to the whole Church, to every part and member of the same: The poorest, weakest
person, has the same right and interest in Him, the same access to Him, as
the strongest Christian has; even as a beggar pleades the same interest to the
Sunshine, and a common fountain, as a King does; for God has made these
things common. Blessed be ye that you have broken down the Railes there, and
thrown-down those Mock-gods, which did serve the Heathen, in those dark times,
to keep their gardens, and drive away the Crovves; and may yet serve some to
make sport with, who in the Sunshine (their tender years w^ll excuse them)
do ride upon a long reed and play with R^ttles. These dunghill goods
ascending out of the earth, you have ordered to be cast out to their place; And
some of the Priests you have whipped-out too, more polluting the Temple then
ever did the buyers and sellers there. The Church accepts all this with all
thankfulness, and waits the time when you must do more, even avenge her of
such Adversaries as these; who have not only done as abovesaid, but forced the
profanation of her Lords Day after an unheard of and heathenish manner, Surely
this bold and daring sin has filled up their measures brimme full, so as wrath
is running over now, and bearing them down as a mighty stream. And this the
Church remembers often, the more to enlarge and heighten her spirit in
thanksgiving and praise.

4.
That seeing she has but one Day in seven, her Lords Day therefore most
honorable; her souls Day, therein she has svveete communion with her Lord,
and finds rest to her soul; Her Market Day, then she lays in her provision,
expecting to live comfortably upon her gatherings all the week following:
Seeing, I say, she has but one day, she is dainty and curious thereof: zealous
according to knowledge, and religiously covetous, she would not have a minute
of that sacred time wasted. And now that you have rebuked the vile Priests and
their brutish people, for their horrible profanation of this Day, she accepts
this with all thankfulness. Surely the Day when you did this, and the place
where you did it, shall be called GILG ALL, for then and there you rouled away
the reproach of Egypt. This she accepts always with all thankfulness, but
more abundantly, if more I^s^. 5. ^.
can be, would she be enlarged for that which follows.

SECT. II.
The Churches Prayers, precious and prevailing; She entreates she may speak
for her self, or choose her spoakes-man.

THat you have regarded the breath of her nostrills, and the life of her soul,
She does profess unto you in the presence of her God, that she has but one
means, in her absence from Him, whereby to seek His face; To know His mind
concerning her, and her conversation here below: But one means to carry up all
her wants, and to bring down all her blessings: for she accounts nothing a
blessing which is not gained by Prayer; and she writes upon every thing she
receives, ASKED OF GOD: But one means to hide her self in the clifts of the
rock, till the indignation be over: For, when the Lord shall shut the Heaven,
and open His Armory against the earth Ier. 50 25.
, bringing forth all the weapons of His indignation: Then has she but one
means, one shift (but as one said, its (...) a great one, and a sure one) HE
ARE THOU IN HEAVEN THY DWELLING PLACE, AND FORGIVE AND DO. This is all her
refuge, SVPPLICATIONS TO HER GOD.

The Church has much to say at this point; But she humbly thanks you; that
you did not think it fit to bind her strictly, in her Public Assemblies, to
forms of others making: Alas they cannot reach her wants, nor the boosome of
her God. The heart knows its own bitterness, and can best indite her own
sorrows, and make them known unto her God. But yet the Church will not
prescribe here, only she hopes you will consider, how she has been dealt
with very lately, when a stout Prelate was so daring as to prescribe her a
prayer, and then cheat the world with her Name, The Churches Prayer, when
indeed it was Lincolns Prayer, so the prayers have been all this Time, some
private men's devotions, and then called the Prayers of the Church. But had this
been all, she had held her peace. Behold how her Adversary like an imperious
WHO RISH WOMAN has dealt with her these l^st years, which surely her Lord
will take as a FORCING His QVEENE before His Face; It is notoriously known,
that the Adversary has, by his prescribed forms, comp^^led her to blaspheme
the Name of her God, and her own Name; to curse her best friends, and to bl^sse
her worst enemies. In consideration of the premises, she conceives great hope,
that, if you allow not her children to choose their speakers, yet to allow of
your choice; such an one, who is sincerely honest, understands their case, the
weight of his office, and is sufficient to be their mouth to their LORD, and to
make known His meaning to them.

The Church is confident, that if you shall well consider her Negotiations, you
will find them weigh more upon the balance, then those concerning the greatest
Prince in the world; and yet she will take the grant of this her request, as a
special favor and grace from you, though not only a Prince, but inferior
persons will challenge so much as their proper Right.

But she referres her suites to the Closet, she is now giving in the tribute of
thanks and praise: and she blesses God and thanks you with all her heart,
for all the labor of Love, work of Faith, Patience of Hope toward her Sons
and Daughters, that you have brought them so far, even HITHERTO; she sets a
mark upon it, for it requires special observation.

SECT. III.
The ninth of September, a notable Day, to be written and to be named both;
written, because; on that Day, an unrighteous Decree, To establish a Service
odious to God (one of their own being Judge) was made Null and of none effect:
Named, as in Days of old forth same Reason.

HEre I have concluded the year almost in the midst of a Month; I could not
else have given up the full tale of wonders. It was necessary I should go to
the ninth of that Month, so far, that it might the more fully appear, how
far the Lord has brought His Church working wonderfully for His people. That
Day the Worthies adjourned their Court for five weeks, that so they might look
over their private interests, and then return again well refreshed for the
Commonweal, and Gods work, which that Day, late at evening, had a notable
close.

The Church seems to hear a voice now, as one of her sons once did, coming
to her ears with a double charge, Son of man write the name of the Day, even
of THIS SAME DAY Ezekiel. 24. ^.
. And the spirit suggests unto her the same Reason in effect, which He did to
the Prophet for so doing. She remembers well, some there were, who that same
Day, would have established the Liturgi^ (as now it is) with all it is faults,
which all indifferent men do find there not a few: and acknowledge it to b^ a
Service, which God never commanded, neither ever ca^e it into His Heart. He
that pleads so hard for the Liturgy (as now it is, for that must be remembered
still) the continuance and est^blishment of it in the Church; even the same man
t^ls us, it is a S^RVICE ODIOVS TO HEAVEN. Does he so? Truly, I th^nke so, but
j^dge you. No that you w^ll not, you will say, for you are not a judge; let the
learned give judgment in these matters, and let my spirit be subject
thereunto. I confess this is a point of w^sdome and of modesty both But I take
judgment here in a vulgar construction, and so we may judge; for the ear can
try words, as the Mouth can taste Meat Job 12. 11.
. I will then give you out his wor^s by tale, for we find a pretty parcel of
them together. Thus he says first,

GOD WILL HAVE NO WORSHIP OF OUR D. Hals Com. l. 2 p. 138.
DEVISING, Then God will not allow of all our Liturgy, for sure, there is
something of man's devising therein, as no man will deny that is not all
forehead, and dares deny that Snow is white or fire will burn.

2. WE MAY ONLY DO, WHAT HE BIDS US, Then we must worship the Father in SPIRIT
and in TRVTH, for the FATHER SEEKS such to worship HIM.

3. NOT BID WHAT HE COMMANDS NOT. Ioh 4. 23.
Then the Curate must not bid Saints days to be kept holy; for God commands
them not. He commands His Day to be kept holy (which the bold Priest has
count^rmanded) and such days, which are to the Church now, as days of PVRIM
were to the Church of old, Days turned unto them from sorrow to joy and from
mourning into a good Day Est. 9. ^^.
. So also days of Atonement, Fasting Days, called also Sabbath Days.

2. The Bishop must not bid his Curate read all the Liturgy, for then he will
read Archangels, which he ought not to do, for God commands him not to read
a lie, we never heard or read of that word plural, but in the Liturgy,

4 NEVER DID ANY TRUE PIETY ARISE OUT OF THE CORRUPT PUDDLE OF MAN'S BRAIN. We
believe it; and withal, that all is not true Piety, that is contained in the
Liturgy; for the worst part of it (I hear the most part of it, nay, some say,
all that is properly called the Liturgy) arises out of the corruptest sink
that is in the world, the Popes Masse-book, and that had it is original spring
out of man's brain.

5. THAT SERVICE, WHICH FLOWS NOT FROM HEAVEN IS ODIOUS TO HEAVEN. Be it so,
then ODIOVS this Service must be for the Reason aforesaid; for the worst part
of it flows from the Priests mouth now, and he derives it, as was said from
the most corrupt person and book, the ^ope and his Masse-book.

The Church now makes no conclusions from the premises against some set forms
of CONFESSION, THANKS, REQV^ST etc. It being the judgment of the gravest and
most learned Divines, that such set-formes may be and must be. Indeed the
Doctors words seem at the first view, and more then seem, if they be
narrowly looked into, clean against them, set Forms I mean. But the Church
concludes nothing; No, she leaves all determinations and conclusions at the
foot of her Lord, and of His Word; and under that authority, she concludes her
soul: and she expects, That all her Sons will in their consultations,
touching this great business, stand like the stalk of a Balance, leaning to
no side, neither to the right nor left, but just as the Churches Standard, the
MIND and WILL OF GOD expressed in the sacred Scripture, shall sway them just so.

But for this Liturgy so distracted, so mangled, so like torn flesh, so
complying with the Masse-booke all along, and so filling up the hour, so as
when the Minister has ended his Liturgy, he thinks he has done service
enough to the Church, that part of the Day: For this Liturgy the Church
thinks there can no sufficient reason be given for the continuance of it; and
therefore her Sons and Daughters will write this Day, when the weak
overcame the strong, and the fewest in number prevailed over the spiritual
Lords; even that Day, the NINTH OF SEPTEMBER And that we may set a fuller mark
yet upon that Day, the Church would have us note two ACTS of the spiritual
Lords, very notable both, and the consequence therefrom: The one bearing date
from the 16. of January, 1640 and issued forth by bill the ninth of September
following, for the feoffi^g this Liturgy by their last will and testament upon
the Church, her sons and daughters for ever; wherein their spirits were so
servent that they were consumed in their own fire. The other Act, bearing date
the ^9. of December, 1641. whereby they would have made void ^ll that the Lords
and Commons, (more spiritual then they) had done for the Church and
Commonwealth. Presently after their former Act, so full of that, we sometimes
call Spirit; This word SPIRITVALL was cast out of the bill; we might read it
there this once, and then no more for ever. By the^r l^st Act ^f Subscription,
full of the same spirit also, their LORDSHIPS were c^st out of the house and
with their own hands. H^^ein the Re^aliation of the Lord was wonderful, how
He meeted forth unto them the portion of their measures, because they forgot
Him and trusted in false hood I^^. 13. 25.
. But this belongs to the year following; we are to write this day, even this
same Day the ninth of SEPTEMBER for then the Church put-in a Caveat, That the
spiritual Lords last Will and Testament might prove null and of none effect.
The Church must name that Day also; so she can and give it a very proper name,
as once it was, when the Lord wrought wonderfully for His people. Thus we
read, That the Lords of the Philistines came up against Israel, presently
after Israel had powered out themselves before the Lord: Then Israel cried unto
the Lord and to their Seer, that he would cry for them in the ears of the
Lord: So he did, for he knew his duty, and he cried so long till he got a great
Thunder out of Heaven upon the Philistines and discomfited them; So they were
smitten before Israel. 1 Samuel 7.
Where we note in passage, that Samuel is the man of war, and his Lord the
God of Hosts, all creatures serve Him, great and small, high and low, Fire and
Hail, Snow and Vapors, stormy wind, which execute His Word Ps. 148. 8,
. It was so here; The Seer he prays, offers Sacrifice, and then the Lord
thundered.

And now that the Lord had made a Breach upon the enemy, Israel pursues them,
and smote them until they came unto Bethcar: Now the Prophet has his mouth as
wide opened in praise, as before in prayer; and not only so, but he sets up a
Monument to keep in mind this admirable Deliverance; he took a stone setting
it up, and called the name thereof, EBEN-EZAR, saying, HITHERTO the Lord has
helped us; His glory has been a REREWARD Isa. 58. 8.
hitherto.

This must be the Name of the Day, a good Day, and a good name HITHERTO. The
Church commands her Sons and Daughters to set-up quickly this Monument to His
praise, while the Mercy is fresh; for, as the Eele out of the hand, so Mercies
slip out the mind; We have still need of Remembrancers and none like this: To
remember this Day, and that HITHERTO the Lord has helped us. But because this
HITHERTO is counted by some a small Mercy, the Church will reason out the case
with a brutish people at this Standard, turning her self unto her Lord.

1.
A wonderful mercy and must have everlasting praise; That the Lord has
brought his Church HITHERTO.

IS this the manner of Man, Lord God? I must answer, no; Kings of the Earth
will not do so: If they be crossed, yea but a little, they will rage 2 Samuel 7.
19.
very much, show much wrath, they will be avenged, if they can, sevenfold, yea
seventy-and sevenfold: Nay, we poor men, low creatures, worms of the
Earth, cannot bear injury and wrong, our patience is tired-out presently, and
we will be avenged; we will not stick to say in our haste, vengeance is ours,
we will repay. Can two [Men] walk together, except they be agreed Amos 3. 3^
? No, for they will fly one in the others face presently. There was a great
disagreement betwixt God and His people, even now at this time, yet, behold! He
and they walk together HITHERTO. We vv^lked most contrary; He not so; but most
comfortably with us HITHERTO. We maintained w^rre against God; yet HITHERTO,
God has helped us. We thought He would have st^rred up all His wrath, and
have consumed us utterly; He stirred up all His bowels, and so brought us
HITHERTO; for, as we read, He is God and not Man Hos. 11 9.
. But to put this mercy home, and to make it sink down into our hearts, The
Church tells us more:

That, as this is not the Manner of Man, so, nor of God neither. The Lord has
wrought a new thing upon Earth, amongst us in our Land. It is not His Manner to
use such patience toward such sinners as we are. He has sworn in His wrath
against those, that have not provoked Him as we have done, and they are an
astonishing example of Gods smoking wrath at this Day, and written for our
example, who come the nearest to that Mother Church in our receipts and
returns, I mean in mercies and sins But this example, though an astonishing
one, is far off, and we are, if not blind, yet very dimme-sighted; We cannot
clearly see into a judgment so farre-off, though it is at this Day, as that
was Numb. ^6 10. Exemplum omniu^ oculis expositum, ut est erectum signum. Trem.
, for a sign conspicuous to every eye, as a banner displayed, or as ensigns
lifted up Esa 57. 17, 18.
.

Consider we Gods dealing, His Manner toward His people nearer hand; but
first, His dealing toward us. We went on very frowardly, traversing our way.
What did the Lord do? Did He deal frowardly too? No, to the Admiration of
Angels and men, He did as he said even then, He HEALED us; He sent us Saviors,
He did terrible things against the Adversary, which we looked not for; He
brought us HITHERTO: How far? I cannot tell that: Let it suffice to test,
far beyond our Prayers and above our Hopes: so far He brought us, as we can
conclude it, but possible to an Allmighty hand, to bring us so far, HITHERTO.
Is this His manner to deal so graciously with such presumptuous sinners as we
are? No, He did not deal so with Ireland, that Land lies under the
displeasure of an angry God, full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy
God. It Is not His manner neither to deal so with our Sister-Churches. O no!
The Lord has brought them to an HITHERTO of judgments. I pray you, nay I
charge you before the Lord observe their HITHERTO, and our HITHERTO, compare
them together, and then consider on it. I was saying, the Lord has given the
dearly Beloved of His soul (see how angry the Lord may be with His Beloved)
into the hand of her enemies Ier. 12 7.
. He has brought His people in Germany to a HITHERTO of judgments, and how
far beyond this, we cannot tell. He began with them twenty four years ago
(thereabouts) He has not ended with them HITHERTO, no not to this Day. The
Sword is yet bathed in blood. HITHERTO the Enemy has prevailed, and keeps the
Sanctuary of the Lord in his possession. O set we up a Monument here for
establishing the Memory of this Mercy, that God has brought us HITHERTO. We
profess o Lord God, we feel our selves overcharged with this mercy, that
Thou have brought us HITHERTO. Truth Lord, if Thou will bring us no further, no
not one step, we do indeed fear the reproach of Men, that Thy great Name
may suffer; Their Manner is to open against Thee and to say as of old, THOU ART
NOT ABLE. But we recover our selves again, and upon second thoughts we are
pretty well persuaded; That thou can work out Thine own glory in Thine
own vvayes by us unsearchable and past finding out; And therefore o Lord God,
we do profe^^e before the World, Angels and Men, That if Thou should set up
Thy Pillar here, and write upon it, Beyond this HITHERTO, this PILLAR, there
remains no Mercy, not a jot which you or your children shall live to see, for
you are a brutish sullen people, a crooked Generation, ye will not know, That
I have sent you SAVIORS; You fly from them as from Spoylers; You account
REFORMATION a killing Ex. 2.
; and so you speak of it in my ears. Therefore he that is filthy, let him be
filthy still Rev. 22. 11.
. And for these Saviors I will take them away, or put a cloud over them, or an
evil spirit into them; so as they shall carry you back again to the Egypt
you mind so much and like so well (yet the utmost of all evil, Deuteronomy. 28. 68.
Iratum habemus Christum quod ^ iusta Reformatione absumus; sin red^er^mu^ ^^
vo^^tum, quo furore, in nos exardesces, Bright. i^ stev. c ^. 11. v. 15. Quid
reliquum est prater ultimum supplicium, ubi conclamata est omnis emendatio,
Bright. in Rev. 16. 10.
) even to your pollutions, your MIRE and VOMIT where They sound you.

If Thou should say to us even so, and do as Thou have said, yet thy
Servants can find in their hearts to give Thee everlasting praise for bringing
us SO FAR, and helping us HITHERTO: for to the Confusion of our face, and to
the praise of Thy abundant Mercy be it spoken, that Thou have much the same
indictment against us, as of old against Thy Israel; We have dealt so and so,
YET THOU DESTROYEDST THE AMORITE BEFORE US. Thou broughtest US also up from the
Land of Egypt, BUT, etc. The same YET and the same BUT, thou have against us,
so as Thou art pressed under us as a Cart is pressed that is full of Sheafes
Amos 2. ^, 12.
. Therefore what though Thou will not do this in our days, no nor in our
childrens days; our eyes must not see such Salvations: What though, we a
foolish and gain saying people, must by Thy appointment, go to the place of
silence, and our childrens faces also must be wrapped up within their mould, ye^
notwithstanding we can bless Thee, we can praise. Thee with open Mouth and
enlarged Hearts, for that Thou have done before our eyes this last year; and
for those glorious promises, Thou have made to Thy Church for a great while to
come: Which we see (as in a Glass clearly by that thou have done this year)
are now fullfilling. We can bless Thee for all this, for helping us thus
far, for bringing us HITHERTO: How many of our Brethren, better then we,
would have rejoiced to have seen such a day as this, and EBEN-EZAR that Name
put upon it; That they might have seen the good of Thy chosen, have rejoiced in
the gladness of Thy Nation, and glory with Thine Inheritance. But Thy
pleasure was not so. Thou have provided better things for them, where their
sight is more cleared, their joy more refined, their glory more abundant,
blessed be Thy Name. We bless Thy great Name also, and we can almost say, We
have enough, that Thou have spared us to this Day, and brought us HITHERTO, so
wonderfully vvorking for us; and while we have any BEING it is the full
purpose of our Hearts to praise Thy Name, and the Lord keep it in the purpose
of our hearts for ever Amen: For what are we, what are our persons or our
Fathers House, That Thou have brought us HITHERTO. ^ Sam. 7. 18.


2
The Church has strong Consolations, because the LORD has spoken good words
and comfortable touching her house for a great while to come. She gives her
self to Prayer.

BUt yet, o Lord God, as thou have commanded us to Record, to Praise, to Thank
Thee for Thy Mercies HITHERTO: So do Thou take pleasure in those that hope in
THY MERCY Ps. 1^7. 11.
for after times. Good Lord, what a good word is that! Thou take pleasure in
those that HOPE in Thy Mercies: This word is to Thy people sweeter then the
Hony-combe; They keep it as a sweet Morsel under the tongue. Since it pleases
Thee so well, They will hope in thy Mercy, that they will. It is the manner
of the Church, I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
Salvation, my God will hear me Mic. 7. 7.
. It is the Churches confidence, Thou will hear; But if thou seem to
slumber, she will waken Thee with Importunity; she will give Thee no rest, her
Sons and Daughters will be Thy Remembrancers, for they remember all that
Thou have done HITHERTO is That they might set their hope in Thee for after
times Ps. 78. 7.
. They do, Lord, they do, and they will give Thee no rest touching this
thing, even that Thou would go with thy Church yet farther, even till the
enemy be subdued, and come no more into the coast of Israel to destroy there.
And they will trouble with their importunity, those thou have sent to heal us
when we thought 2 Chro. 10.
there was no remedy, they shall have no rest neither (Thou love an humble
violence) till they bring this people yet farther; if but to that place, where,
though there will be weeds many, yet they shall not keep down the good Corn;
though Briars there be, yet they shall not choke it; nay, though Scorpions be
there, yet they shall not sting in Thy holy Mountain. Why, Lord God, as if
this, which Thou have done, were but a small thing, Thou have promised to go
with Thy people yet a great way farther, for thou have spoken good and
comfortable words touching Thy Servants for a great while to come. Thou art
beginning, we hope, and Thou will not go back with us till thou have
finished; we dare not make haste, for some faith we have concerning this, That
Thou will hold the sanne in Thy Servants hand, till the floor be thoroughly
purged, as becomes a floor on Earth; that Thou will root out them, whom Thy
right Hand never planted; set Thy face against them, who turned Their backs
upon Thee, walking so contrary; That Thou will thrust out that, which thou
never commandedst, nor ever came it into Thy heart; o Thy Servants think they
have very strong arguments; when they can plead the case before thee with Thy
own. Thou have said, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted
shall be rooted Mat. 15. 13.
up; we know they have taken root, but not by Thee; and h^ld possession, but
not in right from Heaven: Wilt not Thou judge them O Lord God, and remove them
from being Overseers unto Thee? Thou have broken down what Thou did build;
and plucked up what thou did plant k; how much more those, who Ier. 45.
have built themselves up with their own hands; and planted themselves upon
their own bottom? Thou have said, Thou will be served in spirit, for that
service only reaches unto Thy bosom, and that has been the manner of all
Thy Servants, true worshippers; Whom I serve in spirit, says Thy Servant Romans
1. 9.
. What have thou to do with a fear taught by the precepts of men? Thou have
rejected them, who did reject the commands of God, that they might keep their
own traditions Mark 7. 9.
. Thou art the same jealous God st^ll; Thou do look into Thy Temple still
with the same eye, and beholdest the abominations there, both persons and
services, and we hope Thou will arise now and avenge Thy-selfe of Thy
Adversaries, who have made void Thy Law, and the offering vile, who have given
Thy children stones for bread, and for a fish, a Serpent. Surely Thou will be
avenged of such murderers. Thou have given Thy Servants a sure and gracious
word of Promise, Ask what you will and i^ shall be done l: Thy s^^vants (...)
ask nothing, but according to Thy m will, and it is th^^ confidence, that
Thou hear them: It is Thy will that we (...) pray for the peace of
Jerusalem; Thy will, that they should prosper that love it; Thy will, that the
zeal of Thy House should consume Thy Servants; and that the abominations there
should vex their righteous souls, for such are as smoke in Thy nose, and a
fire which burns all the Day: It is Thy w^ll, Lord, Thy Servants should pray,
Ease Thy self of Thine A^versaries. Thy Servants are assured they do not ask
amiss: they ask according to Thy own will: Thy own command; for Thine own
glory, that Thou may have a pure and clean Sacrifice offered unto Thee;
that Thou may be the King in Thy Church, and rule by Thine own Laws there;
they ask nothing in, or for behalf of their lusts, but against them
altogether; that Thou would be King in their hearts, as well as in their
Churches: That Thou would take all Thine and our enemies, which would not
have Thee for their King, and sl^y them before their eyes. We do not ask
(wickedly) therefore we will never leave asking, we will trouble Thee day and
night with importunity and give Thee no rest, (...). Iam. 4. 3.
till Thou shall hearken, and hear us, and grant our request; till Thou shall
perfect what Thou have begun; perform the word to Thy Servants wherein Thou
have caused them to trust; till Thou shall bring Thy Church THITHERTO, to a
safe place, where Jacobs face shall wax pale no more; shall be troubled, and
tossed, and vexed no more; shall hear Thy Name blasphemed no more; see Thy
worship defiled no more; Thy Day profaned no more; Anti christian Rights, base
beggarly Rudiments, prevailing no more; Thy Ministers villanously used no more;
Thy Servants thrust into corners no more: and because of Egyptian burdens and
illegal pressures, Thy people howling no more; nor any breach betwixt Judah
and Israel any more; where Jerusalem shall be a QVIET HABITATION, where she
shall look from the top of AMANA, from the top of SHINAR Isa. 29. 2^. ^o 33.
20.
and HERMON, from the LIONS DEN, from the MOVNTAINS of the LEOPARDS; then we
shall ^^ng the high praises Cant 4. 8.
of our God: Then Jacob shall rejoice and Israel shall be right glad, saying
HALLELV-IAH, Salvation, and Glory and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God
Amen, HALLELV-IAH.

FINIS.

