ARCANA DOGMATUM Anti-Remonstrantium. Or the CALVINISTS Cabinet unlocked. IN An
Apology for TILENUS, against a pretended Vindication of the Synod of Dort. At
the provocation of Master R. Baxter, held forth in the Preface to his Grotian
Religion. Together, With a few soft Drops let fall upon the Papers of Master
HICKMAN.

LUKE 22.32. And when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy lane. M.DC.LIX.

ARGANA DOGMATUM Anti-Remonstrantium. Or the CALVINISTS Cabinet unlocked.

A PRAEFATORY EPISTLE. To my old Friend M. B.
Sir,
I Have finished the task, to which, whether your haesitation or curiosity did
more earnestly solicit me, I shall not determine. A task, I confess, so much
the more unpleasing, as I had reason to conceive it the less needful. For (to
tell you the truth,) it is the observation of Judicious men, that your great
Champion comes off, in this encounter, with as little reputation, (though he
falls on with as much scorn and passion) as the Proud Philistine in his Combat
with little David. Indeed he makes out very fierce and frequent Sallies upon
the face of our Tilenus, and defies him utterly in the bitterest asperity of
foul Language: But withal he does him the honor to leave him Master of the
Field, and exposes his own Cause to the danger of being destroyed by his own
weapons. I do not impute this to any want of skill or mettle in him; for his
abilities have approved themselves sufficient to advance him above the pitch of
contemptible, would he be careful to manage them with that Prudence and
Christian temper, that becomes a faithful Soldier of Jesus Christ, minding
nothing more than the interest of his Church. But forgetting his duty herein,
like a Soldier of fortune, who lives by wars, or some young Gallant flesht by
the weakness of an Aggressor, whom he has worsted upon advantage, he is apt
to have a hand in every quarrel; and though he be not satisfied in the grounds
of the difference, yet rather than take up the dispute, and make men friends,
he will take a side and make a Party. That he has done thus in this
Controversy is evident to every impartial Reader, that is conversant in his
writings. Nay, he has much ado to keep his vizor close about him, he is ready
to unmask himself upon occasion, as the attentive eye may easily perceive, even
whilst he is in conflict with Tilenus.

For his six days hard march in pursuit after the Grotian Religion, as I am
not concerned, so neither do I think it tant-amount to observe the motions of
it. But I pray God (besides design in order to the carrying on of that old
dispute Luke 22. verse. 24
amongst the Disciples) there be not as much uncharitableness, (and that of as
ill an influence and abode) in Levying this war, as well against the honor and
integrity, as against the most Christian (if equally managed) enterprise of
that Learned man, as Master He himself concludes to be in Master P. his book
Preface, Sect. 20.
, for which he strongly insinuates, that for the Pres^^t m^^^ account, he is
more then unc^^a^^^ ^f salvation.

He has snatc^^ ^^^^e fair flowers from off the Hearse of the immortal
Grotius; but his expectation will deceive him, if he flatters himself with an
opinion, that they will serve to dress up his own reputation. For they begin
to welk and fade in his hands already; and besides, my information does assure
me, Master P. is Mustering his forces, to go out, with Letters of Reprisall, to
recover all such spoils of him; of the success of which accomplishment, no
doubt, we shall have full Intelligence in due season.

In the interim I have addressed my self, for pity sake, to the rescue of a
poor Fatherless Tilenus, whom Master Baxter falls so foul upon, in his
forlorn hope His Praeface to the Grotian Religion.
, in this Expedition against Grotius.

You may be confident Tilenus expected fairer Quarter at his hands, having some
temptation to think he was as inclinable to a state of neutrality, as to an
engagement (...) Quinquarticular Contestation. W^^^e i^, if I be not much
mistaken, he has made the greatest misadventure that ere befell him, whether
you consider the Party or the Tenants, whose Vindication he has so roundly
undertaken.

Yet I must profess ingenuously, that from my first perusal of his Aphorisms,
and my taking notice of his purpose to reduce them to a better Method, and
annex what, he says, Postscript to his plain Script. proof of Infants, etc.
he had prepared [Of universal Redemption], I have expected with some degree
of Longing and impatience this performance from him. And my desires have been
much inflamed by some Colors which he has since hung out and displayed in a
Preface to [Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments,] whereby he invites
and tolls in his Reader, as with the sound of Drum and Trumpet, to admire his
Invention and Acuteness in these words, [To the praise of God I speak it, tha^
in those ancient common disturbing Controversies between the Arminian and
Anti-Arminian, Lutheran and Calvinist, Jesuit and Dominican, I have discerned
those Principles which quiet my own mind, and which, I am confident, were they
received according to their Evidence, would quiet the now contending world:
But, says he, I am past doubt, to be derided as arrogant for this Confidence;
And should the Principles in a Method with Evidence be propounded, though
purposely to heal the divisions of the Church, many of the several Parties,
would but rage at the Reconciler, and pour out their impotent accusations and
reproaches against him, because he would attempt the healing of their
divisions, and would feign him to be Author of some new Sect, for seeking to
put an end to Sects. But let any man make good my just demand, that the
Principles propounded shall have an impartial reception according to their
Evidence, and I will give you security to make good my Confidence, that they
shall quiet the Christian world hereabouts. Thus far M. Baxter.

Now if it were but a piece of curiosity in me, to desire to see what prize
Master B. would play, if he were brought upon the stage, after this goodly
flourish, yet it were very innocent and pardonable. But to a Person that
profess to bear a cordial affection to Gods Truth and the Peace of his
Church, finding himself much unsatisfied too in the common way of stating these
Controversies, it is very allowable, if his heart entertained some passion, and
were transported with some longings to taste the fruit of this so deep rooted
and full blown a Confidence.

When the Jews met with any difficulty, for which they could find no
competent solution, they were wont to say, that Elias would come; and when he
came, he would untie all such knots, and unravell such intricacies, scatter the
cloud, and administer a clear light of satisfaction. It was the desire of my
soul that God would vouchsafe to send some such Elias, as might be able to
disintangle the intricacies of these Controversies; and why, thought I, may not
this Master Baxter be the man? though I must add withal, that too many
Reasons thronged in on a sudden, and offered themselves to oppose that thought,
and did actually check and silence it.

At last forth comes the Examination of Tilenus; and by that means, I thought,
a fair Price was now put into Master Baxters hand, or rather a handsome
invitation and an opportunity offered to him, to show his wisdom. But what was
the Result of it? He took the bait, but one would think, by his mere nibbling
at it, that he was afraid, there was a hook too sharp for him, either to
swallow or dally with.

In earnest, (because you are so very urgent to gain my opinion of it) I tell
you, though I find little abatement of the confidence he professed, yet I can
observe nothing of the success he boasted himself able to accomplish; for
indeed his Arrogance flew so high a pitch, that it flew to Lessening; he could
not see the game he had undertaken; if he had, he would never have offered his
security to perform that, whereof in his very next line, he says [But I know
this is to be expected from none but God. In the said Praeface.
]

What shall we say then, that he was so nice and chary of his healing
Principles that he would not affoard the Church of God their Benefit? I dare
not think him so uncharitable. He tells us, I remember, (in his forementioned
Postscript) I am not only distracted between men's contrary Judgments and
desires: but far more, between a fear of wronging the Church by mistakes, and
of wronging it by my silence, and Christ by hiding my Talent and his precious
Truths, which after hard study and earnest supplication, he revealed to me on
these terms, that I should reveal them to others.

I hope men's contrary Judgments did not still hold M. Baxter in distraction,
(from November 12. 1650. till April 14. 1658.) when he wrote against Tilenus;
and sure we may conclude [his fear of wronging the Church by mistakes] was
blown over, when he made this proclamation to the world. 1657. viz. [And to the
Praise of God I speak it, Vbi supra.
that in those -- Controversies -- I have discerned those Principles, which
quiet my own mind, and which I am confident, were they received according to
their Evidence, would quiet the now -- contending Christian world. And now his
fear of wronging the Church by mistakes was so well blown over, that he could
see nothing but fair weather, and so clear a light of evidence round about him,
might we not very well expect that his other fear should work upon him, His
fear of wronging the Church by his silence, and Christ by hiding his Talent and
his precious Truths, which (he says) after hard study and earnest
supplication, he (Christ) revealed to me on these terms, that I should reveal
them to others? May we not very well conclude from hence, that Master Baxter
has unfolded his napkin, and disburst his Talents, and held forth his
Revelations?

What then, have we all, or the Quintessence of all, that Master Baxter has to
reveal for the worlds satisfaction in these Controversies? Some of his
Principles, no doubt, he has communicated in these papers: but unless those
Principles be propounded to us in a Method with Evidence, happily they will not
conveigh their healing virtue to us; and that Method, that charming Method, I
suspect he has yet concealed from us. But whose fault is this? Why, he was now
in pursuit after Tilenus, and so engaged to leave his own Method, that he might
trace his Adversary by his steps. But grant this to be true, in respect of
that Part of his Preface, (from Sect. 6. to 17.) wherein he had concerned
himself against Tilenus; yet when he came to review the several heads of
Controversy (from Section 28. to the end,) he was then at Liberty to propound
his Principles as himself pleased; why did he not then give us his own Method
with Evidence, but put Master P. off by playing his old Notes over again with a
little new descant?

If you object, that I have not made good Master Baxters just demand, in giving
his Principles an Impartial Reception according to their Evidence; if you
please you shall have my Protestation, that I am verily persuaded, I have done
it; and whether I have or no, is referred to the Reader to judge by this Reply.
I shall but add as a further evidence hereof, that the Effect of this Receipt
of his Principles, has brought much comfort to me; for observing that his
promise amounts to so great Confidence, and his performance brings so little
satisfaction, he has healed much of my haesitation, and quieted my mind, with
a stronger persuasion than ever, that the certain Truth abides on the
Remonstrants side, in these Controversies.

For the matter of Fact charged by Tilenus upon the Synod, and their Adherents;
that M. Baxters VINDICATION with all his Artifice and ill language, will not
serve to make a sufficient plaster to cover, much less to heal that soar, is
abundantly evinced in the insueing Papers, but, for the Synods part, especially
in the Reflections upon Master Baxter's discourse, relating to each Article. To
which I can now add a further proof from some Intelligence which came very
lately to my hands from a Forreigner Arnold. Poelenburg. Confut. Disput.
Inaugur. Spanhem. p. 115.
who tells us of a most bitter contention betwixt Voetius and Maresius about
the sense of that Synod. One of them maintains that the Synod determined the
Decree of Predestination and Reprobation to antecede the consideration of the
fall of Adam; to which assertion the other has opposed an Apology for the
Synod. So that, though Assembled on purpose to decide these Controversies, and
appease the broiles that emerged, and were inflamed upon them, yet (that they
might seem to agree together in something) have they wrapped up their Decrees and
Canons in so many clouds, and Confounded them with so many intricacies (if a
man has recourse to their Suffrages for an interpretation) that they are like
to fall into a New Schism, before they come to a settled Resolution, what the
meaning of that Synod is; whereof notwithstanding M. Baxter makes himself so
great an Advocate.

By which his Advocation, I grow a little jealous, he has given Scandal, and
led his Brother into temptation. For was it not upon the account of his
Accusations, and the persuasion he had of the truth thereof, that Master
Hickman, (whose Pamphlet you mention, as a smart piece) takes the boldness to
inveigh and rail so uncivilly Page 21.
(without any provocation from him) upon Tilenus; calling him by the Names of
Ethiopian, Scribler, this poor Fellow? I know it is the Apostles Lesson, Romans
12.17. Recompense to no man evil for evil. And this is to follow that Copy that
our Blessed Master has set us, Who being reviled, reviled not again. 1 Pet.
2.21, with 23.
Nay Michael the Archangel, though he had the Devil for his Antagonist in that
dispute, yet he durst not bring against him a railing accusation. Jude epist.
verse. 9.
Master Hickman may pass muster for a precious Saint, as the present Accounts
are made below, but I am sure he can gather none of those flowers of Rhetoric
from the Discourses of the Holy Angels that converse above. He charge that
Author with impudence in abusing the Triers: but I must tell him (on his
behalf) when such Schemes of Rhetoric are used, (as they may be with
wonderful advantage, being not only isntrumental to illustrate and adorn a
Truth, but also to make it the more pungent, and take impression,) the abuse
imagined to result from them, is ever, amongst wise men, ascribed to him that
takes the impudence to make the Application. And whereas he says further, that
the Synod of Dort, which Tilenus writes against, is a man made up of his own
ugly clouts, (or to that purpose; for I have no list to look upon his
Scurrilous language) I must tell you, he shall find before he has read these
Papers half way through, that those clouts, as ugly as they seem to him, are
genuine parts of that Home-spun-stuffe; which was warpt and woven and milled
too, by that very Synod of the town of Dort. Neither has Tilenus set this web
upon the tenter-hocks, nor torn any part, to make ugly clouts of it: but only
used that Liberty, which is allowed to all Artists of this kind, fairly to
cut out of the whole piece, such Proportions, as might best serve, to cloathe
his discourse, in that fashion it is now Represented in. This is all I am
willing to return to Master Hickman.

But because I perceive his Pamphlet has raised a double scruple in you, I
shall adventure to apply something in order for your satisfaction. First, you
say, that his Evidence, to prove the Anti-Arminian principles, to be according
to the Faith of the Church of England, is so pregnant, that it must needs beget
a great prejudice in the minds of men against such as attempt the dissemination
of another Doctrine. To which I answer, (1.) Seeing these men have razed the
very Foundations of the Church of England, upon which it was established at the
Reformation; and made it their design to erect a new Fabric upon, the
Platform of a new Confession, a new Catechism, a new Directory, a new
Government; why should such a Seal of Secrecy be stamped upon these
Controversies alone; why may not these be examined by some new Triers in order
to a further Approbation, before they be admitted to take place of Authority in
this Church?

2. If these Principles, which you call Anti-Arminian, were embraced as part of
the Faith of the Church of England, I might puzle you perhaps, by asking you,
which of them, the Supralapsarian, or the Sublapsarian Principles? But I intend
to be brief and clear with you; I say therefore, though those opinions were
Can^ased as Problems of the School, yet they were not entertained as Doctrines
of the Church, much less determined to be Articles of the Faith. O^e
irrefragable Argument to this purpose, is as good as ten thousand, and it shall
be this.

Doctor Whitaker, having obtained the Bishops approbation to the Lambeth
Articles, (and not discerning that the Alteration) of certain words and Phrases
in them, had made them capable of a different sense and interpretation to what
he intended in their first contrivance) big with joy, as he was, at the
apprehension of this conceited victory, he addresseth himself to the
Chancellor of their University, the Lord Burleigh; shows him the Theses, and
acquaints him with all that had been done, (in favor of his opinions, as he
thought, and the rather because these Theses were drawn up in the absence of
some that opposed him) in that Convention. But contrary to Whitakers
expectation, Artic. Lambethae exhibit. Historia P. 4, 5, 6, 7.
that Great man, and wise Counselor, was extremely distasted at this
transaction; and threatened that he would make the Authors repent them of it. In
pursuance whereof, having declared to the Queen how her Majesty's Authority,
and the Laws of England were hereby violated, he added as the very burden of
his Complaint, That it was no hard matter to discern what they aimed at, who
stickled in this attempt; For, says he, this is their Opinion and Doctrine;
That every humane action be it good or evil, it is all restrained and bound up
by the Law of an immutable Decree; That upon the very wills of men also this
necessity is imposed, ut aliter quam vellent homines velle non possent, that
men could not will otherwise then they did will. Which assertions Madam, says
Burleigh, if they be true, frustra ego aliique fideles Majestatis tuae
Ministri, quid in re quaque opus sit facto, quid ex usu futurum sit and Regni
and tuo, suspensa diu consilia versamus, cum de his quae eveniunt necessario,
stulta sit plane omnis consultatio; I and the rest of your Majesty's faithful
Ministers do sit in Counsel to no purpose, it is in vain to deliberate and
advise about the affairs of your Realm, since in those things that come to
pass of necessity* all Consultation is foolish and ridiculous. At this
narration of the Lord Burleigh the Queen was much moved, and sent for Whitgift,
and the Council in her Majesty's presence, fell sharply upon him. At last they
came to the Question de Facto, (meaning the Absolute Decree) and Dogma (u^
ipsis videbatur) bonis moribus, Reique publicae, adversum graviter exagitant,
and did vehemently charge that opinion, as opposite to good manners and the
Weal Public. The Result of this debate, or rather Increpation was this; The
Archbishop begged pardon for his temerity, and promised he would write to
Cambridge, that those Lambeth Articles might be suppressed, and never come to
Public notice.

If the Fundamental point of all these Controversies, and that upon which the
rest do inseparably depend, had had so ill an influence upon good manners, in
the judgment of this Sage Council, and tended so manifestly, (as they
thought) to the frustration of Law, Counsel, Government; certainly such as now
sit at the stern, are so Prudent, they will not be induced to believe that
those opinions were ever Adopted into the Articles or Doctrine of This Church,
though there were alleged many more instances of single persons that did
Pretend to have it so. And yet how invalid these Instances are otherwise, might
easily be demonstrated, if I were, not only loath to exceed the limits of an
Epistle, but also confident that this work will be undertaken by a more
accurate hand, to the Readers abundant satisfaction.

As for you, my worthy Friend, if your scruple, about this branch of Master
Hickmans Book, be not yet removed; Let me offer one thing more to your
consideration. If in any part of the Christian world these opinions be
established, as their Doctrine, you will easily grant, it is likelyest to be in
the Belgic Churches, for the settling of whose distractions (about these
points,) that Synod of Dort was Assembled. But do you think these are
propounded, as Articles of their Creed there, or accounted current
Pulpit-Doctrine among them? You must not believe it. For now adays how many
are there that dare tell them out of that Place, [God will not have All men to
be saved; and the greater part of mankind are Reprobated by Gods absolute
Decree; or that Christ did not die for all men; or that God calls those, whom
he would not in any wise should come to him; or that the Elect (as they are
called) cannot by any, no not the most grievous sins, be removed from their
Election? Insanire credas eum, qui jam haec dogmata pro concione ausit
defendere, says a Learned person Arnold. Poelenb. ubi supra in Ep. dedicat.
employed amongst them, you may very well conclude the man is not sound in his
brain, not well in his wits, that takes the boldness to maintain these Points
in his Sermon. And if any person less discreet and provident, has exposed the
Arcana, or Secrets of that his Doctrine, naked to the understanding of the
people, illico magna animorum perturbatio existit, there follows presently such
a great Commotion and disturbance in their minds, as looks like the Praeface to
a new Schism: which thing, says that Reverend Person, Ibid.
we remember to have fallen out in this very town, (of Horn) where we now
exercise our Sacred Ministerial Function.

This, Sir, I hope, will be sufficient Antidote to allay and cure the
Palpitation of your heart, though it had beaten a great deal thicker upon M.
Hickmans suggestion, that his Quinquarticular opinions were the Doctrine of the
Church of England. And for the other branch of his discourse you may acquiesce
in a confidence, that Master P. never intended to assert a positivity of every
sin, not of sins of omission to be sure. But he is of age to answer for
himself. Yet since you press me for my sense of Master H. Metaphysicall
Divinity, you shall have something toward it.

I am not satisfied, that his distinctions to avoid the Possibility of sin, are
sufficient to avoid the making God the Author of it. For thus he says Edit.
the first.
, page 91. Because it belongs to the Universality of the first cause to produce
not only every real being, but also the real positive Modifications of
beings; therefore we say, that in good works, both the works themselves, and
their rectitude are positive, and are from God; in evil works there are also
two things considerable, the works themselves, and their pravitie; the works
themselves we doubt not, are positive, and from God, as all other positive
things (are); but their pravities add no new entities to them, but consist in
a mere privation. Thus Master Hickman. In reference to sinful Actions, others
deliver the distinction in these terms, (telling us,) [The sinful Act is to
be considered, either Materialiter, as to the matter of it, and so it is from
God, and of his production; or else Formaliter, as to the Form of it, and so it
is from man. But we should remember, that many times, the Material Act (as we
may say) cannot be disjoined from the formal, and in that case, why he that is
the Cause of the one, should not be adjudged the Cause of the other, is a
Question that requires a solid determination. If God produced the Act of eating
the forbidden fruit materially, why not formally too, seeing that sin consisted
wholly in the eating of that fruit? for Adam could not eat thereof without sin.
And if God by an Omnipotent concurse determined David's lying with Bathsheba,
will that distinction mend the matter? Will the matter of that foul Act tend to
the praise of Gods efficiency, when he tells us, See 2 Samuel 12.12. with Number.
15.30.
the Form of it, conduced so signally to his dishonor? If the Act which is
evil ex genere and objecto, be materially of Gods production, why should we
invest man with the formality of it, which is the sin? Is it because the Act is
repugnant to the Law of God, to which man stands obliged, 1 John 3.4.
and the transgression of this law is sin? This seems to be Master Hickmans
sense, (page 91.) In those things which are to be done according to a Rule,
good consists in a conformity to, and convenience with the Rule, but evil in a
difformitie or discrepance from the Rule. But I say, that Act of Adultery
cannot be materially committed, but it must unavoidably be discrepant to the
Law of God; so that if God produces this Act materially, it is impossible man
should give it any formality, but what is sinful; especially seeing this
formality or sinfulness does of necessity result from the material Act.
Indeed were there no Law in force about it, it were possible to conceive, how
he that produces (that which we now call) the Act of sin materially, should
not, for all that, be the formal cause of it. But the law being now made, and
that by God himself too, what Subterfuge can be invented to avoid it, but that
God, who is affirmed to produce the Act, should be accounted the Author of the
sin? But God made the Law, you will say, not to bind himself, but to regulate
his Creature; Though this be true, yet it does not take away the objection; for
how can it stand with the justice of God, first to make a Law to regulate his
creature, and then to impell and Act that creature contrary to that Law, and at
last to punish the same Creature, for being so Acted and impeld? Shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.26. God will be justified when he
judges Psalm. 51.4.
; and therefore when he comes to execute judgment upon all Epist. Jud. verse.
15.
, he will convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds,
which they have ungodly committed; not which himself has Acted them unto, or
Acted in them.

But Master Hickman perhaps, will stick still to his Metaphysicall formality,
and say, here is (in the supposed Act) a discrepance or opposition to the Rule
which is the Law of God. To this the answer is very easy, that man seldom, or
never entertains sin, or consent to it, with a design or mind to oppose
himself to the divine Law; but for the most part to enjoy his pleasure and
satisfy his Appetites; (Besides if he should consent to sin, with such a set
purpose to oppose Gods Law; yet we must grant, according to Master Hickmans
Doctrine, that that Consent, and that purpose (being real positive Entities,
Acts of the Humane Soul) are from God and of his production;) whence it follows
still, either that man does not sin when he commits such an Act, or, if he does
sin, that the fault is to be transferred upon God, who is the first Cause of
that Act.

By the way, (before we proceed further) Let me ask you one Question; Can a man
Viz. under the same influx and assistance.
do any more good than he does; or omit any more evil than he That is, whether
he can be guilty either of omission or commission? and upon what account?
omitteth? I know you are clearly for the Affirmative: But that will hardly
stand with M. Hickmans Metaphysics; for I argue thus; and first for good
works; He that can do more good than he does, can do some good that God does
not produce in him; the consequence is apparent; because he is supposed to do
already all that God produces in him. But man cannot do some good, that God
does not produce in him; for every good is a real being, and every real
being, or real positive modification of beings is from God, and produced by
him, says M. H^ckman. Thus for good; Then for evil; That man cannot omit more
evil than he omitteth, according to M. Hickmans Metaphysics, I prove thus; He
that can neither omit the Act to which the evil (of sin) adhereth, nor avoid
the obliquity of that Act, which is the sinfulness of it; He can omit no more
evil than he omitteth; the consequence is evident: But a man can neither omit
the Act; nor avoid the obliquity. Therefore etc. He cannot omit the Act, for
that is of Gods production; nor avoid the obliquity, for that is either to be
done by some other Act, or without it. If by some other Act, that is not in his
power, for every Act is from God; and it is absurd to say it may be done without
it.

If Master Hickman holds the negative of that Question; the British Divines of
the Synod are against him; and a world of absurdities do follow that opinion,
viz. That a man cannot bury his Talent, nor receive the grace of God in vain,
nor be idle and neglect the great Salvation; nor watch, nor fast, nor pray, nor
do any one good duty more then he does, nay, that he can do no duty properly so
called, nor sin at all, if he be thus chaind by a Fatal necessity to every
Action and omission. And then what will become of the word of exhortation and
the power of Godliness?

But let us follow Master Hickman a little in that instance of Hating God Page
90.
; This, says he, is Complexum quid, and must not be spoken of, as if it were
one; the vital action or hatred, is a thing positive, and consequently, (he
grants) that is from God; but the undue referring or terminating of that Act to
such an object, (to God,) which is altogether lovely: that, says he, is the
sinfulness of the Action. But whence is this derived? He says (page 75.)
only from man's corruption, and the Devils temptation. But what is man's
corruption? is it not his vitiosity? yet he says, (page 97.) where the cause
it self is vicious, its vitiosity is not the cause of the vitiosity of the
effect; for vitiosity of it self, neither can effect, nor be effected. And for
the temptation of the Devil, is not that an Act? if it be, then it is from God,
for every Act is from him, says M. Hickman. If he says the malice of the
temptation is from the Devil; I demand, what is that malice of the Devil? Is it
not his vitiosity? and then (as before) where the cause is vicious, its
vitiosity is not the cause of the vitiosity of the effect; for vitiosity it
self, neither can effect, nor be effected; what then? the vicious cause (says
he) taking together the being, and the supervenient privation, is the cause of
the vicious effect, taking it in like manner for the being, and the super added
privation. But I say again, the being, whether man's or the Devils, does not act
(according to Master Hickmans Metaphysics) for every Act is from God and
produced by him, and consequently it is the Act of God that gives the corruption
of man, and the malice of the Devil their life and vigor; and how then can God
be freed from being the Cause or Author of the sin? Besides, in the hating of
God there is, not only, the Act of hatred, which he confesses to be positive,
and so from God; but there is also the turning of the will in this Act, and the
undue determination of it upon God, the object altogether lovely, wherein
consists the sinfulness of the Action, as he confesses. I demand then, is not
this determination of the will an Act? If it be (which I presume cannot, with
any show of reason, be denied) then, whose Act is it, and from whom? If he
says, from man himself, his best course is to whisper this assertion as softly
as he can, else, I must tell him in his own language (p. 96, 97.) he and I both
were best not to make too much noise, lest we should awaken the youngsters to
fall aboard us with such an Argument as this. If man be the efficient Cause
either of a good action or a bad action, then he does effect it by another
action, and so we may proceed in infinitum. Well, for fear of these dangerous
Bugbears, we will, for once, ascribe it unto God. So that God is made the cause
of that hatred, and of determining the will upon this lovely Object, which is
God. Now if we should impannell a Jury of honest men, to inquire who is the
Cause or Author of this sin of hating God (in this case;) who would they find
guilty, think ye? Doctor Molin says, In Anat. c. 13. parag. 10.
Quod si Deus insontem creaturam destinavit ad perditionem, necesse est eandem
destinaverit ad peccatum, sine quo non potest esse justa perditio, and sic Deus
erit causa impulsiva peccati. Nec homo poterit just puniri ob peccatum, ad
quod est aut praecise destinatus, aut Dei voluntate compulsus. If his
destinating men to sin makes him the impulsive cause of sin, how can he
produce in them the Act that is sinful, and determine their wills unto it, and
yet not be the Cause of the sin? Let us put a Case for illustration. Suppose
a Prince should make a Law, injoyning his subjects to write none but perfect
Italian Characters, and then should take the hand of a child to write with, and
the Characters prove Bastard Roman, or Secretary: or suppose one should take a
dead man's hand and forge a Deed with it Such a case has been and a Trial upon
it too: and the dead hand acquitted by the Jury.
. Though the Subtilty of Master Hickmans Metaphysics should find the child
guilty, and distinguish the Forgery upon the dead body, yet without all
peradventure an honest Jury would bring in a better verdict. If it be objected,
that these are no competent instances, because there is no vital Ptinciple in
the one, nor power to resist in the other (and what else is to be alleged I
cannot imagine), it is to be remembered that, according to this Doctrine, the
will of man in sinning, is full as much acted by Allmighty God, as the hand of
the child and dead man, in those instances, are by those who make use of them
respectively. That is, the will is merely passive; and how can it be otherwise?
For every Act is from God; and if God uses the will to this Act of sinning,
how can the will avoid it? Should the will resist Gods motion, when he does Act
it? That is impossible, 1. Because that Motion, according to the Doctrine of
the Calvinists, is omnipotent and insuperable, 2. Because to resist is to act,
and every Act is from God, and produced by him. And now we see how little
reason Master Hickman had to slight and reject the Answer, which Gregory de
Valent. and Bradwardine give to that Objection, from the hating of God, as he
does (page 89, 90.) I recite not their words, says he, because I need not
their help, and because they seem to make impossible hypotheses, as if the
hatred of God were produced by God in a stone, whereas it cannot be that there
should be the hatred of God in a stone, which neither has, nor can have any
knowledge. The stone is like to be the less miserable for wanting this
capacity. But how much does Master Hickman make man better? He allows him a
will and understanding, I suppose, but no more use of these faculties, is
ascribed to man, by his Metaphysics, than to a stone; For to use them is to
Act them, and Act them a man cannot, because he can produce no action without
another action, and so in infinitum, and then the youngsters will fall aboard
us again.

If Master Hickman will not see these absurdities, and what reproach falls upon
the Holiness of Almighty God, by this Doctrine, yet Master Baxter does
consider, and sufficiently censure it; for he says (in his Call to the
Unconverted page 229.) Some are so loath to think that God can make a
self-determining creature, that they dare not deny him that which they take to
be his prerogative, to be the determiner of the will in every sin, as the first
efficient immediate Physical cause. And many could be content to acquit God
from so much causing Mark that word.
of evil, if they could but reconcile it with his being the chief cause of
good; as if truths must be no longer truths, then we are able to see them in
their perfect order and coherence: because our ravelled wits cannot set them
right together, nor assign each truth its proper place, we presume to conclude
that some truth must be cast away. This is the fruit, says he, of proud
self-conceitedness, when men receive not Gods truth as a child his lesson, in
a holy submission to the omniscience of our Teacher, but as Censurers that are
too wise to learn.

I hope Master Hickman will become at least M. Baxters Proselyte; especially,
if he considers how impossible it is, that his Doctrine should hold good, in
reference to the first sin of the first Angel, that fell from God; For I argue
thus, The Materiality of that first sinful Act, granted to be from God, from
whence will he derive the formality, or irregularity, which is the sinfulness
of it? Was it from the Angels own Corruption, or the Malice of his Tempter?
this could not possibly be, for he had neither; Therefore it must either be
from God, and then God is the Cause and Author of that sin; or else from the
self-determination of his own will, and then, if that determination be an Act,
we have at last found an Act, whereof God is not the first immediate Physical
cause. What can Master Hickman say to this? Truly he seems very fairly to
grant it, if I be able to understand him; whether this be out of inadvertency,
or conviction, I determine not: But in contradiction to what he had said
before, he says (Page 97.) Suppose the first sin of Angels to have been a
proud desire to be equal unto God; the cause of this proud desire was the will
of the Angel; but it was the Cause of the action (in such a sense as a
causality may be said to have a Cause) Per se, of the vitiosity of the action,
it was only the Cause Per accidens, and per concomitantiam. Thus far M.
Hickman.

And now, as Poelenburg says of Doctor Twisse, In confut. Disp. inaugur. Fred.
Span.
that being affrighted partly by his insolent asperity, and partly by the
tedious prolixity of his Volumes, he would not undertake him wholely, but
satisfy himself with a Confutation of that one Argument, whereof his
Confidence boasted, that the Devil, and his Angels were not able to Answer it;
and by his performance in that, the Judicious Reader might judge, what returns
might be made to the rest, if any man would give himself the Leisure and
trouble to attempt it. So shall I resolve concerning M. Hickman, though neither
the strength of his Arguments, nor the length of his Discourse be very
formidable; yet there is so much asperity in his style, (which brings no
advantage at all to the Cause he undertakes to manage) as deterrs me from a
further procedure in the examination of his Pretensions. What is already done
is sufficient to evince, that his Armor is not enchanted or impenetrable, nor
his weapons mortal. But such is his provocation, he must expect a sharper
assault, when it shall be seasonable, from a hand that will strike home and
lose no advantage to defeat him, being guided by an eye so piercing, that it
discovers every posture that lays his weakness open, and exposes him
unguarded to the mercy of his Adversary.

Sir, If you would be kept upright, you must not suffer your self to be led by
them who could never keep their own judgments steady in these Controversies.
After your recourse to God and the Holy Scriptures, you will find Primitive
Antiquity your best Directory; and the nearer you approach the fountain head,
the purer, you may be confident, to find the stream you drink at. But if you
come down to S. Austin, so many Adversaries had padled, and troubled and spil'd
the waters of his Cistern, that he could scarce see his own face in it. For
instance in that one Question; Whether the truly Regenerate may totally fall
away and perish, Master Baxter is very confident, he was for the Affirmative
Account of Persever. p. 5. etc.
, and calls them immodest, that deny it; yet M. Calamy His Sermon. at the E. of
Warwicks Funeral. p. 19. etc.
tells us, this learned Brothers evidence is all slur'd and made invalid by
Bishop Abbot, and that there is in S. Austins writings sufficient proof to the
contrary.

It may conduce something to ones settlement, to consider seriously, how many
of the most Learned and judicious Heads, these last Ages have produced, even
when they lanched forth on purpose to oppose these Truths, have st^ook sail
and paid homage, and some absolutely yielded up themselves to the Empire of
them. Arminius undertakes the defense of Beza, but finding himself in pursuit
after an utter impossibility, he retreats upon Conviction unto those opinions
which have worn his Name ever since. Tilenus while he sets himself in opposion
to Arminius, is awakened with so clear a light of Truth, that he becomes a
Proselyte. The force of Arminius's Arguments pressed so hard upon Junius, that
he thought fit to give ground, and Piscator flincht a little more upon the
impression made by his Adversaries. Gomarus was brought to his Retractations
about these Articles; and Walaeus, as well as he were glad to take Sanctuary in
Scientia Media, when they could find no other way to disintangle themselves,
and free God from the fault of sin. And what an admirable Providence, as
Poelenburg Vbi supra in Ep. Ded.
observes, appears in that late conflict between Amyraldus (the M. I presume of
M. Baxters New Method) and Spanhemius! Amyraldus maintains, that God will have
all men to be saved, if all men will believe; and from hence Spanhemius infers
a necessity of yielding not only Objective, but also Subjective grace, (
internal and effectual, as well as external and insufficient,) quia nisi
haec admittatur, sententia illa Amyraldi ridicula fuerit and insulsa, Deique
tum sapientia, tum potentia indigna, for unless this be admitted, that opinion
of Amyraldus, says he, is ridiculous and foolish, and unbeseeming both the
wisdom and power of God. So that, in the judgment of Spanhemius, if he will
opine and speak what is Consonant to himself, Amyraldus must shake hands with
the Remonstrants: And indeed those objections these men make one against
another (which no doubt they respectively conclude to be strong and valid) are
clear confirmations of all those Arguments, which the Remonstrants manage
against them both. And thus, as sparks of fire fall from the Collision of two
flints; so from the mutual Conflict of these Adversaries the glorious Light of
Divine truth breaks forth and falling between them, it serves the Remonstrants
to light their Candle.

To conclude; The Absurdities, which do unavoidably follow from these
Doctrines, if men would admit the light of Reason to discover them, are very
many and very reproachful to the Majesty of Heaven; They deflower the beauty
of his Attributes, evacuate the merits of Christ's Death, frustrate the use of
the Holy Ordinances, and enervate the power of Godliness, as is evinced in the
ensuing Papers. For while they advance his Sovereignty, they impeach his
Goodness; while they magnify his Liberty, they obscure his Wisdom; while
they sweeten his Mercy, they imbitter his justice; while they boast his Grace,
they confound his truth and sincerity.

This Doctrine attributes to Almighty God, a power, not only above the Laws he
prescribes, and the Promises he makes unto his servants, but Paramount to his
own Essential Equity; For it says, he may ordain, yea that he has ordained
the greater part of Mankind to destruction, merely for his own pleasure,
without intuition of any sin, or respect had to any demerit in them. It makes
God like an unwise Potter, who makes some vessels on purpose, that he may dash
them all to pieces. It teaches, that of men amongst whom he found no Disparity
of condition, he has elected some, and Rejected others; and that he introduced
a necessity of sinning for the illustration of his glory. How shall we
reconcile these things to Gods wisdom, or his justice?

It teaches, that God elected men to glory without Christ: but that he decreed
through the intervention of Christ's death, to bring them into possession of
that glory, that it might be done without any detriment to his Justice. But
this is either against the wisdom and justice of God, if he decreed what he
ought not to execute, or against his Omnipotence, if he could not bring the
same to execution.

It teaches, that God sent Christ to reconcile men to himself, whom he loved
with a most deer and unchangeable love, and that before he decreed to give
Christ to die for them; That he Courts others to be reconciled, whom he hates
immutably; That he calls them to repentance, inlightens them, gives them a
taste of the heavenly gift, and zeal to do good works; and all this to serve
but for a golden chariot to conduct them with the more formality to a sadder
execution; That he binds some men to believe in Christ, for whom he never
died; That he invites them to a Covenant of Grace, and ties them to impossible
conditions under it, that he may inflict the greater torments upon them; That
some men's sins, (of what nature soever,) are but paternall castigations,
Privileges of their Adoption, Emergences of providence for their benefit,
Confirmations of their grace, and that they do pave their way to glory, being
part of that Medium conducing to the execution of the Decree of Election in
them.

This Doctrine implies moreover, that God is more severe to the greatest part
of mankind than to Devils; That they cannot pray but for their own damnation,
or that the divine Decrees may be rescinded; That others living in the
filthyest sins, may notwithstanding be certain of their salvation, and need not
fear hell torments; for their sins shall not be able to separate betwixt God
and them; contrary to the express word of God by his Prophet Isaiah Cap. 52.2.
. This Master Baxter doubtless had a full view of, as may be collected out of
his Assize-Sermon On 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
, where he says, I had rather say to scandalous sinners [you are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God] than (to say) you are absolutely elected,
therefore glorify God; Yet, if I mistake not, the Synod of Dort Deputati Syn.
Geldric. call it, Fundamentum Christianismi. In Act. Synod. Dord. p. 30. a. m.
par. 3.
makes this Doctrine of Absolute Election, the great prop of godliness.

Besides, this Doctrine empties Hell of a considerable part of its torments;
which consist in the anguish and remordency of conscience, proceeding from her
reflection upon lost advantages. Now this must needs be taken away by that
Doctrine For who ever suffered anguish of mind, for that he could not fly, or
become an Angel, or any such thing, as is made impossible, by Gods own order?
, (if true) which implies, that Gods Decree has from all eternity, set heaven
and sufficient means to lead to it, out of the reach of the Reprobate, and made
their state of sin and damnation so unavoidable, that they never had the
real offer or tendry of such advantages.

It renders Gods Commands and Elogies irrational; for though he commands the
work to others, yet (according to the tenor of this Doctrine) he must do it
himself; and his Euge's, [Well done good and faithful servants,] are for such
actions only as himself has irresistibly produced, and the men could not do
otherwise. In a word; it makes a double Gospel, and a double Savior; as is
sufficiently proved in the following Papers.

That these absurd inferences, (and many more which might be deduced) are
evident to me, though they should not be so to others, is enough to bind up my
Judgment. But if M. Baxter can salve them by his New Method, I am so far from
being obstinate, that I shall not only acquiesce in his Performance (when I
see it accomplished;) but rejoice in it also, as one that finds great spoils.

Sir, I commend you heartily to the Lord, and to the word of his Grace.
The Contents.
MAster Baxters uncharitable Censures of Tilenus page 2, 3 and ill language ib.
How causeless and undeserved p 4, 5 Whence his mistake, and its original p 5,
6 All M. B. pretended falsifications not charged upon the Synod it self: but
many upon the Divines thereof, and their Adherents and Predecessors p 6, 7 The
Five Articles spoken against by M. B. were drawn up by Tilenus and written in
French, though translated afterward into English p 7, 8 Calvinists divided
about the Doctrine of Predestination p 10, 11 Four heads of Supralapsarian
Doctrine p 11, 12 Sublapsarians how differing from the Supralapsarians, p 13
The 5 Articles, as they were drawn up at the Conference at the Hague, p 15 16,
17 As they were drawn up after the Synod at Dort, p 18, 19 How abridged by
Tilenus p. 22, etc. The first Article made good out of the writings of
Calvinists p 23, etc. That the Elect are a small number p 23 That they are
elected without regard to Faith and Obedience p 24 That the Reprobates are
appointed to destruction, without any regard to Infidelity or impenitency p 25
The Animosities betwixt Supralapsarians and Sublapsarians, and God charged with
injustice and foolishness by them p 28, 29 Tilenus his second Article made
good against M. Baxter p 29 That Christ died only for the Elect p 29, 30 That
Christ had no intent nor commandment from his Father to make satisfaction for
the sins of the whole world p 31 Tilenus third Article made good p 33 Calvin
denies Freewill in Adam, p. 34. and Maccovius says h^s Fall was of an
unvoidable necessity, p 33 That the Elect do good out of an unavoidable
Necessity p 35 They hold the like Necessity for doing evil p 36, 37 This
necessity of doing or not doing good or evil, from Gods Decree p 38 That man
can do no more good, and omit no more evil p 39 That all endeavor after
Salvation before the gift of Faith, (which is infused irresistibly,) is of no
effect p 41 The 4. Article of Tilenus made good p 41 That the Elect cannot
reject Grace p 42 That Reprobates cannot accept it p 45 Tilenus his Fifth
Article made good p 47 The Elect cannot fall from Grace p 47 No,
notwithstanding the most grievous sins they can commit p 49 The Synod of Dort
not a sufficient test to assure us, which are the opinions of the Calvinists p
52 The Synodists do not ag^ee amongst themselves in the points in controversy
p 52, 53 1. They differ about the object of Election p 53 2. And about the
foundation of Election p 55 They agree not in this, [whether the Elect be
beloved out of Christ] p 56 3. They agree not in in this, [whether Reprobation
has respect to the Fall] p 57 4. Nor in this [whether there be an Affirmative,
as well as a Negative Act, in Reprobation] p 58 5. They agree not in this
[whether Christ died for all, or only for the Elect] p 59, 60 6. Nor in this
[whether the Impetration of Reconciliation is to be separated from the
Application of it] p 64, 65 7. They are not agreed [whether all that hear the
Gospel are commanded to believe in Christ] p 67, 68 8. They are not agreed
[whether the unregenerate have a power to understand the Scripture] p 68 9.
Nor, whether they may do any thing conducing to the assuring their Election p
70, 71 10. Whether a man can do more good then he does, or omit more evil than
he omitteth, they cannot agree about it p 72 11. They differ in this Question
[whether the Covenant and promises of the Gospel be generall] p 73 12. They
agree not in this [whether God wills seriously that all should be saved, 75. Or
whether reprobates be called seriously] p 76 13. They differ about dispositions
previous unto Faith and Conversion p 78 14. They are not agreed, Whether
perseverance be a condition of the Covenant p 81 15. Nor in this, Whether
Salvation be the reward of Faith, or only the end of it p 82 16. They differ
in this, Whether Temporary Faith be a true Faith p 83 17 Whether Faith may be
lost; some say the Act may, but not the Habit; others say Neither p 84 18. They
make the most horrid wasting sins of the Elect but sins of infirmity p 85 86
19. They say, the faithful falling into heinous sins, may bring themselves
into a damnable estate and lose their aptitude to enter into the kingdom of
heaven; insomuch, that if they die without an actual renewall of Repentance,
it is impossible but they should perish, p. 87. and yet their state of
Justification and Adoption, and their Right to the Kingdom of heaven remain
inviolable p 87, 88 All opinions (how opposite soever to one another) if
opposite to the Remonstrants, are current by M. Baxters Test p 88 The
pretentions of the Synod not according to their actions p 90 Grevinchovius his
character of the riged Calvinists in the Low Countries p 91 Eight detestable
errors commonly held by Calvinists, yet the Synod were never troubled at them
p 92 93 Bogermans passion favoring so much of partiality, never checked by the
Synod p 93, 94 Maccovius his blasphemies not censured, but he dismissed as an
Orthodox Divine p 94 The Supralapsarians maintained their Doctrine in the Synod
p 95 And the whole Synod guilty of those opinions, and why p 96, 97 The Synod
would not declare against the most horrid expressions of Piscator p 97 A
Minister of Sedan ejected for preaching too earnestly, that God was not the
Author of sin p 98 The Articles and Rejections of the Synod contrived so, that
Supralapsarians might subscribe them without impeachment of their own Tenants p
99 Not one of the several Sects of Calvinists censured by that Synod, but they
all think themselves countenanced thereby p 99 The
Supralapsarian-creabilitarian Doctrine on foot still p 100 In what sense the
waryest Calvinists, hold the decree irrespective p 101 M. Baxters Universal
redemption condemned by his Brother- Call. 103. by D. Tho. Hill, and the whole
Assembly, 104. (to which we may now add, The Declaration of the Congregationall
Churches.) A necessity of all humane Actions, in regard of Gods Decree, the
Doctrine of the present Calvinists, p 105, and 109 Hence liberty is defined to
be but a rational Spontaneitie, 107. and some distinctions made use of to free
God from being the Author of sin p 108 The Reprobates cannot repent, according
to the Calvinists Doctrine p 110 The Decree ties the end and the means
together, hence it is concluded, either that the elect cannot sin, 111. or that
their sins are privileges and advantages p 112 The false dealings of Festus
Hom. and D. Damman the Scribes of the Synod of Dort p 118 A character of
Bogerman the President of it ibid. The unjust practices of the Syn. of Arnham
and of Dort against the Remonstrants p 119, 120, etc. The Remonst. Doctrines
misreported to make them odious p 122 How the Remonst. hold a just man may be
certain of future perseverance, 127 and how in this they are falsified by the
Synod, p 128 M. Baxters acknowledgment of the first Article of Tilenus charged
upon the Synod, 129. though retracted again p 130 M. B. Sophistry and
impertinency in justifying the Synods saying, [That God had no regard to Faith
and Obedience in the Decree of Election,] p 131, 132, etc. M. B. maintains a
piece of Popery, or the Grotian Religion p 132 That sin is as much a means to
our salvation as Faith and Obedience p 133 Their distinction betwixt
predestinating and creating to destruction, and predestinating and creating to
Damnation; and of what use it is p 138, 139 The Decree of Reprobation makes
provision for the introduction of sin, that Damnation may be just, p 135,
137, 140, 141 And their good works lead the Reprobate to hell, as well as their
sins p 135 The distinction betwixt preterition and predamnation, used for
fashion sake, and does not mend the matter, but rather makes it worse p 141,
142, 143 Preterition does rather bring men into a state of Infidelity then find
them in it p 14^ Original sin unfi^ly called a state of Infidelity p 146 M. B.
illogicall inference, that God leaves men to the malice and hardness of their
hearts, in his Decree of Non-election p 146, 147 Original sin comes only by
Gods imputation p 147 Reprobates learn to go alone betimes by the Synods
Doctrine p 148 Men's personal sin not a previous qualification in the object,
but an unavoidable consequent of Reprobation p 149 The Syn. does not make
foreseen infidelity to be the qualification of the object of Reprobation p 150
God decrees sin, or else he could not foresee it, by M. Baxters Doctrine p 151
Preterition is not an Act of Justice by the Doctrine of many Calv. p 151, 152 A
dawbing betwixt the Supralapsarians and Sublapsarians in this point p 152 The
qualification or object, unto which the Decree of election is terminated p 154
How Gods Decree is built upon his Foreknowledge, and yet men's Faith and
obedience not only nor principally of themselves, but of God, p 156, 157 The
opinions of the greatest Clerks to be rejected, if they be not consonant to the
Catholic Truth p 158 The Doctrine of the Remonst. most consonant to Rational
Prayers p 159 But the Calvinists Doctrine not so, ib. for according to that,
some men can never use the [Lords Prayer] but they pray for their own
damnation, or else that Gods Decree may be rescinded p 159 Unregenerate men
discouraged from prayer: and all good duties by the Doctrine of Calvinists p
161 Gods giving [To believe and suffer] understood, of the opportunity and
Grace; p 162 The C^lv. confess the spirits way of internal operation beyond
their reach; yet they would tie us to their definitions about it, p 162, 163
The Prayers of the Primitive Church doubtless as Rational as those offered up
by the Calv. p 163, 164 Gods Title of a Helper implies man's cooperation p 167
The ill consequences of that Doctrine that teaches, God determines every good
motion p 167, 168 God upon occasion, in great temptations may determine the
will of his devout servants to what is good: but then their adhering to it is
not properly a duty in them p 169 Gods options and prayers addressed to us do
evince that his Grace does not irresistibly determine our will p 170, 171 Gods
praising of his servants must be considered as well as their Thanksgivings p
172, 173, 174 Those praises were irrational, if God did irresistibly determine
their wills to perform the work p 175 A difference betwixt duty and operations
merely voluntary. No Duty (which is an Act of Probation) unless a man has
liberty to do otherwise p 175, 176 Preterition without foresight of demerit
offensive, p 177 Yet this contested for in the Synod of Dort, and not rejected
p 178 What regard the Synod had to sin and demerit, in Preterition: viz. to
introduce it, as a just cause of ensuing Damnation p 179 M. Baxters
uncharitable insinuation p 180 What is offensive and scandalous in the
Calvinists Doctrine p 180, 181 M. Baxter has a singular way by himself p 182
Sufficient Grace not granted to others as well as to the Elect, by Call. p 182,
183 That sufficient Grace is not given to the Non elect, according to the
Doctrine of the Synod p 183 to 188 It Is serviceable only to carry on the
Decree of Reprobation p 188, etc, M. Baxter undertakes to deliver the sense of
All the Calvinists, though there be but few of his mind p 192 M. B. sufficient
Grace, like an Emperick's Medicament, confessed to be uneffectuall p 193, 194
What Fee is due to such Physicians? 194. and what expositions of Scripture by
such glosses? p 195 Gods spirit does not leave soliciting us till we shamefully
repulse him, 196. But he will not dwell with us unless we choose to embrace him
p 196 M. B. has one Doctrine for the Pulpit, another for the School p 197 God
dispenses Grace to promote duty: but the Calv. would have it administered in
such a way, as does cancel duty, p 197, 198 How God works to will and to do p
198 The Doctrine of the Synod is, that according to the will and intention of
the Father, Christ died for the elect only p 201, 202 M. B. School divinity at
odd^ again with his Pulpit doctrine p 203 Redemption in his pulpit is much more
universal, than in his disputations, ib. and p 204, 205 His Zeal transports
him to a forgetfulness of the decree of Reprobation, 204, 205. One of the
wonders of the world that Gods Immutable decree (as they calculate it) should
be executed. ibid. M. B. seems to make his Auditors believe that God intends
all their salvations: yet he denies it against Tilenus p 206, 207 D. Twisse his
doctrine, That the Non-elect shall be justified and saved, if they will
believe. Riddle me, Riddle me p 207 As much might with as good reason be said
of Devils p 208, 209 For it is a Grace, that consists only in the logical
connection of an Antecedent and Consequent p 207 That Christ exercises his
Priestly office only for the elect, is the doctrine of the Synodists p 210
Deliverance from sin by sanctification the work of Christ p 211, 212 And the
first part of our Redemption, yet D. Twisse and M. B. affirm most absurdly,
that Christ has procured remission and life, for those, for whom he has not
purchased sanctifying Grace p 213 M. B. own universalists are too strict for
his pretensions p 214, 215 A bountiful promise upon an impossible condition
216. unworthy the most merciful God p 217 How God purposed to cause the
condition of the new Cov. in us, p 217, 218 Something to be done by us in a way
of order to the introduction of Faith and the work of conversion 219 to 222.
And this is M. Baxters own doctrine p 223 He makes salvation possible in his
Sermons, even to such men, as he makes it impossible unto in his disputations p
224, 225, 226 According to M. B. doctrine against Tilenus [His directions to
prevent miscarrying in Conversion] should have been dedicated not to men, but
to God p 226 The sufficiency of Christ's death is no proof of the universal
extent of the benefit, in respect of Gods intention p 227 The Synodists cannot
affirm (if they speak consonantly to their doctrine) that the sins of the
non-elect were laid on Christ, p 228, 229 M. B. as well as others do untie the
end and means, 229. and divide them. The Syn. grants an Evangelicall command,
without Evangelicall power to perform it p 230 To promise and offer life upon
conditions; which are made impossible by the propounder, is absurd and a
mockery, 231. But to torment such wretches as do not, because they cannot
perform those conditions, and receive those promises, horrible p 232 Whether
Saving Faith, Regeneration etc be under promise, or under Revelation only. The
Calvinists differ, and M. B. dissents from himself in this point p 232 to 235
He had reason to alter his opinion, for they that hold them promises do make a
double Gospel, to avoid which, he makes use of this new Light, and yet he
avoids not the absurdity of making a double Savior p 236, 237 Infidelity
cannot properly be the Reprobates own fault, according to the Synods doctrine p
239, 240 M. B. universal Redemption is not sufficient to free the Non-elect
neither from sin, nor punishment 241. Why it ought rather to be called
universal perdition p 242 How God calls the Non-elect to Faith and Repentance
according to the doctrine of the Synod p 243 M.B. in extremes, p 246 M. B.
sufficient Grace deficient, and not such as that the Remonst. mean by
sufficient p 247, etc. Gods special grace restrained by the Calv. to the
elect: and his common Grace of no advantage to the salvation of the rest, 248,
etc. But administered only to render them inexcusable p 249 M. B. (if the
Synods doctrine were true) might with as much reason inveigh against the
Devils, as against the non-elect, for making light of Christ p 250 For the non
elect are more hardly dealt withal (by that doctrine) than the devils are p
251 M. B. sufficient Grace is ineffectuall of its own nature and kind, 253. But
that asserted by the Remonstrants becomes uneffectuall, through man's voluntary
and vincible fault, p 254, etc. The Remonst. grant that men may be and are
sanctified by that Grace, which they affirm to be bestowed on the non-elect:
which Calv. will not allow of, p 255 An exact Account of the power and
operations of Grace, according to the Remonstrants p 256, 257 They grant that
Grace works irresistibly upon the understanding and affections, yea and upon
the will too, as to a collation of power ibid. etc. Whether he that does not
oppose Grace, and is converted, has more grace than he that does oppose it,
and is not converted, p 258, 259 Though a supernatural power to believe be
conferred irresistibly: yet the actual consent is not so wrought: and why, p
259 If Faith be irrisistibly infused, the word cannot possibly be the
instrument, or means of it, p 260 Illumination performs the whole work of
Grace, according to Camero, p 261 The Calv. do not bring faith and salvation to
man's choice, by their doctrine, as the Rem. do, p 261, etc. The glory of
Conversion to be ascribed to God: but the miscarriage in that work only to man,
p 263, 255 The Remonst. preserve to the will her liberty, in the work of Grace,
p 261 How the soul comes to miscarry under these helps of Grace and to be
seduced, and led away by sensuality, 264. And rebel against the light p 265
Conversion, not wrought irresistibly: but a matter of choice, according to the
doctrine of the Primitive Church p 266 Preaching and Hearing the means to make
men willing p 269 Less Grace would convert some, than what is ineffectual to
others, p 270, 271 Conversion is from Gods Grace with the cooperation of man's
will p 272 M. B. denies Gods praedetermination and asserts the wills
self-determination, and yet maintains insuperable determining Grace p 273, 274,
275 Grace irresistibly determining the will not necessary, 276. not convenient;
for it overthrows that Dominion, which the will is said to have of its own
Acts. It destroys the nature of duty p 277 It evacuates the use of the
Ministry, the use of exhortation p 279, etc. It furnishes the obstinate with
a just Apology against all exprobrations p 283, 284 It takes away all praise of
virtue p 284, 285 It makes God the first deficient cause in man's sinning p 285
It is an Inlet to Enthusiasme, 286. And disparages the sweetness of the
Insinuations and motions of Grace p 288 What move Authors to conceal their
Names p 291 After the Fall no liberty left in the will to do well, p 292 The
Devil has the natural faculty of Freewill, as well as Man p 292 Men under an
unavoidable necessity of good and evil, 292, 293. The Calv. deny only a
necessity of coaction in humane affairs, p 297, 298 Elect and Reprobates put
under an unavoidable necessity of being saved or damned respectively, according
to the Calv. p 296 Spontaneity no good salvage for the necessity of sinning; or
the justice of perdition that follows it, p 299 Men will take unworthy courses
to promote the cause they have once espoused p 303 The Syn. but a party in
those controversies; though they took a solemn oath to be impartial p 303 The
equity of the Helvetians p 304 Original sin yielded to M. Baxter, 305. Whether
Christ has not restored the power that was taken away by original sin? M. B.
seems to be for the affirmative p 306, 307 D. Tailor unjustly censured by M. B.
for a Pelagian 308, 309. All the Fathers of the first 300 years spoke like
Pelagians, says M. B. 310. The Manichees as ill as the Pelagians, and the
Calv. to avoid one extreme, run into the other, p 311 M. B. will not subscribe
the Canons of the Syn. of Dort without his own interpretation, 312. and
consequently he had been served as the Remonstrants were, if he had been
amongst them ibid. The Syn. taught not the same Doctrine in these points with
S. Austin, p 313 S. Austin held that men effectually called, regenerated and
justified might fall away and perish 313 He held predestination upon
foreknowledge, if consonant to himself, p 313 314 If the Reprobates be under an
unavoidable necessity of wanting Faith, etc. That want is not their sin but
their Fate p 317 The work of conversion for mightiness, not inferior to the
creation p 318 The Synod excludes all others salvation, but the elect p 319 A
perverse insinuation of M. B. 320, and 322. His poor cavils, to no purpose p
320, 321 Though God be omnipotent, yet every egression of his power, is not
omnipotent, p 322, 323, 329, 330 Proved by M. B. assertion, That no sufficient
grace is given to the Non-elect; or else that they can conquer Omnipotency, p
324 M. Bax. five senses p 325 God acts to the uttermost of his power in the
conversion of sinners, according to the Synod p 326 M. Baxter slips from the
Question p 328 Sanctification, though not wrought without God, yet wrought by
means which is resistible p 329, 330 M. Baxters Fallacy, p 330 M. Baxter
decides the case, while he disclaimes the judicature p 331 M. B. calls that a
slander, which is an evident truth 332. And it is, That the Reprobates cannot
accept saving faith. p 332, 333 What power denied, and what granted to the
Reprobates p 334, 335 The Devils have a passive obedientiall, and a natural
Active power of willing, 335. God deals more hardly by the Reprobates, than by
the Devils, according to the Calvinists Doctrine p 335 M. Bax. pitiful
Put-off, touching a sufficiency of power in the Reprobate, illustrated by
example 336 M. Bs Ignoratio Elenchi p 337 Betwixt the natural Active Faculty
and the moral Disposition, there is a supernatural influx, etc. 338, 339. But
M. B. forgetting his Doctrine of sufficient Frace, now utterly denies it p 339,
340, 341 The Reprobates, by M B. doctrine, required to bring in their tale of
Brick, but are allowed no straw p 340 For what use is sufficient Grace, if it
cannot enable men to act graciously? p 341 M.B. mistakes the Question, 342. The
Reprobate are not saved, not because they will not, but because God wills not p
343 M.B. [can not] is more than [will not] p 343, 344 The Reprobates can not
and will not do both flow by an inevitable Necessity from Gods Decree p 344
M.B. trifling to blind the Syn. doctrine, etc. p 345, 346 M.B. praevaricates,
346 347. That those to whom God gives Grace cannot reject it, 347. for it is
irresistible p 348 The Calvinists persecute their brethren for differing from
them in the explication of an Article, which themselves confess, they cannot
comprehend, p 349 The conversion of a sinner is like Gods raising up children
unto Abraham of stones; according to the Syn. Doctrine, p 349, to 353 Such a
conversion cannot be esteemed a duty, nor accounted laudable p 353 Nor is it a
fault in those which are not thus transformed ibid. The Calvinists deny the
exercise of natural Freewill in man's convers. p 354 Grace given to Reprobates
comes not from a resolution in God to renew them p 356 The word and spirit may
be said to be effectual in a twofold sense p 357 What M.B. his [As full a
purpose] signifies p 357, 358 No man bound to believe a benefit belongs to him,
unless it be seriously intended to him p 359 Yet M. Perkins says, that in
binding the Reprobates to believe God intends only to make them unexcusable
for not believing, 360. God has a fourefold end in calling the Reprobates,
though their obedience be none of them, says Maccovius p 361 And this is the
sum total of M.B. Passive obedientiall Power, and his natural active
Faculty and his Suffic. Grace p 361, 362 God foreknew the non-conversion of the
Reprobate to be a sin of ingratitude, obstinacy and rebellion; Therefore
sufficient Grace is seriously offered to them; without which their sin could not
be such p 362 The odious inferences are not drawn from Gods giving effectual
Grace to some: but from his denial of Grace Sufficient and Necessary, and yet
decreeing to torment men for want of it p 365 No such odious Inferences do
follow the concession of Gods foreknowledge, as follows the position of his
absolute Decree; and why p 366, etc. M. B. calls that a fiction and abusive
language, which is the clear doctrine of the Synod p 370, 371 The Impertinency
of the Synods distinction, of [Quoad ipsos] p 372, 373 An illative or
consequentiall Necessity of Perseverance we deny not: but an antecedent causall
necessity that takes away the duty p 374, 375 The Ancients, Jesuits, Lutherans
and Arminians do hold that the Elect shall never fall away: yet this does not
favor the Calvinists opinion of Absolute Perseverance p 376 That which the
Synod professes to be a perfect truth, and M. B. too: is accounted a perverse
insinuation in Tilenus, by Master Baxter's equity p 377 The Calvinists hold the
Regenerate may fall into adultery, perjury, idolatry, etc. and yet not fall
into such gross sins as the unregenerate, 378. M. Baxters Ignoratio Elenchi
ibid. The habitually Gracious may be incapable of salvation, by the Calvinists
Doctrine p 379, etc. The Calvinists superabundant favor toward the Elect,
380. 1. They say, it is a contradiction, that they should sin, 380. 2. They say,
if they do sin, it is only out of infirmity, 380. 3. Or that their sins differ
from sins of the same kind in the Reprobate, 381 4. Or that their sins come to
pass through Gods destitution of them, 382 5. That their sins are but Fatherly
castigations, 384 6. That (they are sure) they cannot die in their sins
without Repentance, 386 7. That, if they should die in them without an Actual
Repentance, this would be profitable to them, p 386. etc. The Synod profess to
disown, what they clearly maintain, 388. viz. 1. That the most heinous sins do
not hinder the salvation of the Elect, 389. 2. That the Reprobates cannot be
saved, though they perform all the works of the Saints, and how these Riddles
are to be unfolded, 390, 391. Which doctrine is not for edification, 392 393.
3. That God by his mere will, without any respect to sin, did predestinate and
create the greatest part of mankind to destruction, 394, to 400. 4. That
Reprobation is the cause of Infidelity and Impiety, and how? 400, etc. 5. That
Infants of Believers, are cast into hell, p 405 The Synod, when they deny God
to be the cause of sin, do understand it only of a culpable cause, which God
is not they say, because he is under no law, p 407, 408 The Synod and M. B. can
advise better then practice p 409 An ocular demonstration of the doctrine of
Calvin. in M. Perkins Table etc. p 410, 411. Supralapsarians, are
Creabilitarians and Existentialists p 412 The Syn. Canonical Description of
Election, p 413 The Apostles Doctrine inverted by M. Perkins order of Causes p
414 The Elect beloved most flagrantly and unchangeably out of Christ; which
evacuates his satisfaction and merits, p 415 That Christ died to procure
salvation for them to whom it was as sure before, as Gods Love and Decree could
make it ib. That no sin can hinder the effectual calling of the Elect: not put
them out of the road to Glory p 416 That the sins of the Elect are of a better
rank then those of the Reprob. p 417 The Creabilitarians hold that the greatest
part of mankind are Reprobates before Creatures, in Gods purpose, 418. That
they have no interest at all in Christ, ibid. Being under Gods implacable
hatred, (at least, as the most modest Calvinists hold) upon the Fall of Adam,
ibid Though they improve their calling to the uttermost, yet by the sway of the
Fatal Decree, they shall be brought into a Relapse and finally perish, p 419
The Glory, which God aims to reap from his creature, according to the
Calvinists; consists chiefly in the execution of his decrees of Election and
Reprobation, contrary to the Scriptures p 420, 421 M.B. will have a parting
blow at his dissenting Brother p 427 That the Justified cannot fall from their
justification, no fundamental point with M.B. p 428 Good Christians, are not
made per saltum, ordinarily 428. The elect have such a Magazine provided, they
need consult, and take care for nothing, p 429, 430 But the Scripture teaches
another Doctrine, 431 And many that warp to the other opinions are convinced of
it, ibid. and p 432 Christianity a matter of choice p 433 Confirmation, of such
as are eminently faithful, in a state of indefectibility, very probable p 434,
435 Every single act of every gross sin does not cancel the state of
Justification; probable, 436 What will cancel it, p 437. The danger of
backsliding, 438. That the Regenerate may fall totally and finally, 439, 440.
and that David did so, p 440, etc. 444 445 Hardening goes along with
presumptuous sins, p 442 David a servant of sin, 443, 444. though he had not
served out a Apprentiship to the trade of sinning ibid. Adoption not absolutely
granted but upon condition of Persever. p 446, 447 Regeneration, and
Sanctification may be repeated, 448, 449. so may conversion the new creation,
repentance, (words of the same importance) 451, 452, 453 454. proved from the
Discipline of Penance, 455, 456, 457, 458. Heb. 6.10. cleared, p 459, 460 The
good ground. Objection from thence answered 461, 462, 463. Objection from
David's prayer, Psalm. 50. answered, p 464 Every degree of love will not secure
the state of justification. p 465, etc. Not safe to rely upon Gods mercy,
beyond the measures revealed to us, p 467 No depending upon an habitual
estimation of God, in our Actual disobedience, p 468 A saving Faith no more
separable from chastity, etc. than from charity p 470 Men may perish for want
of consideration p 471 How the hearts of the regenerate relapsing are turned
into as graceless a frame as theirs, who were never sanctified p 472 Some
single Acts of sin may exclude a man out of heaven p 473 The sin of David and
Peter were not single Acts only p 473, 474, 479 Habits infused may be lost p
475, 476, 477, 478 Some single Acts of sin do surmount some Habits p 479 Peter's
sin mounted up by very many and great Aggravations, p 479, 480 Men may lie in a
state of sin and yet pursue a course of Religion p 481, etc. Christ's prayer did
not secure Peter from a total falling away, but from a final only p 484
Peter did not constantly build upon the Rock p 487 M.B. expounds the sacred
text by Satan's Comment, 488. M.B. ensnared in a Fallacy, p 489 The House built
upon a rock, may be blown up though it be not blown down, 489. a caution to
prevent it p 490 The Doctrine of the Synnod touching Election and Perseverance
not acording to Godliness, 491. By it the vilest sinners may be certain of
their Salvation, without the renewing of Repentance, 492, to 500. They hold
every man ought to be certain of his Election, 492, 493. He that is once
certain of his Election may fall into gross sins, 495. yet they cannot fall
quite away, 496, 497. Therefore once certain and for ever certain, 449 This
Doctrine takes away from some gross sinners the fear of Gods displeasure, of
hell fire, and of judgment to come, which are the preservatives against sin,
501 And is the foundation of the Antinomians Doctrine, which M. B. accounts so
gross and absurd, p 500, 501 M. B. holds that no man has such a certainty of
his own sincerity, etc. as to exclude all doubting, p 503 514 The Doctrine of
Perseverance in M. Baxters judgment, gives advantage to security p 504 M. B.
interfering, ib. and 505 And incongruity of expression p 506 The word Grace,
one of the three that makes so many controversies, etc. p 506 The opinion of
the Remonstrants and Lutherans, touching falling from Grace, not against Grace,
506, 507. Nor against Gods Fidelity, 507. Ibid. Not. Marg 3. r. add 1 Pet. p
4.19. Gods Fidelity is not impeached by man's Apostasy, p 507, etc. The Holy
Ghosts Custody does not secure the Faithful without their own vigilance p 508,
509 The falling away of the Regen. not against Gods wisdom or power, p 509,
510 M. B. opinion against the Grace and wisdom of God 511. God by M.B.
doctrines invites the Reprobate to engage themselves in covenant with him: yet
he keeps himself disingaged to them p 511, 512 M.B. contradi^ts himself in
saying the opinions of the Arminians are against the peace of the Saints, p 513
The certainty of perseverance serves only the interest of the flesh, p 514 No
Cordials are to be provided for men in their wickednesses p 515 The opinion of
the Remonst. a better foundation of comfort for the lapsed, than that of Calv.
p 115, 516 M. B. provides as ill for the peace of the Saints as do the
Remonstrants p 516 That Men are to be judged godly according to the Predominant
estimation and operation of their soul, understood with restrictions p 517 A
continued Sedition and Rebellion must not go for single Acts: No more must the
sins of David and Peter p 517 A relapse in the last stage of life very
dangerous p 518 One Act of sin sets a man more backward, than one Act of virtue
can set him forward p 518 That the Habituated cannot change, how to be
understood p 518, 519 M B. a supercilious Censor rather then a charitable
Monitor of M. P. and why? p 519, 520. M. B. chooses to die in the state of an
Adulterer, and Murderer, and of one that has denied his Savior with
execrations, (whom he confesses in an incapacity of salvation) than in the
state of a person, by whom he knows no ill, but some passages (in a learned
Book) which he thinks uncharitable p 520 M. B. does not judge the person by the
works, but the works by the person, 521. Men of M. B. persuasion account that
damnable in others, which they think not culpable in their own Party p 522 The
Turks measure good and evil by the event, p 523 All events not irresistibly
decreed p 524 The Calvinists and M.B. have espoused the Turks opinion in this p
524 That the same sins for kind differ in respect of persons p 524, 525 What
Saints are brought forth out of M.B. furnace, after his Spiritual refining
526. Grace confined to a Party p 527 Many of the present leaders of the people
guilty of thus seducing them p 528 This gives advantage and scandal to
Socinians p 528 Scandal given to the Socinians and advantage by men's
pretending to more piety and godliness then their principles do exact p 529,
530 The Remonstrants do advance Gods Grace more than the Calv. p 532, 533 A
double acception of the word [Grace] p 534 How taken in the right stating of
the question p 535 Which side makes man most sinful p 536, 537 In what sense
Calvinists do make men the greatest sinners p 539 Whether sins of Regenerate
persons be not as great as others 540, 541 Whether the Elect have not the same
ends in sinning which the Reprobates have p 543 A Paradox of Calvinists p 543,
544
Take notice that in these Papers, I have made use of
Act. Syn. Not. edit. in folio.

Lugd. Bat. Typis Isaaci Elzeviri. Soc. Dord. Sumptibus. 1620.

And of the Canons of that Synod Translated into English.

Of M. Baxters writings, are cited His Saints Rest. His Scripture Proof for
Infants Baptism. His Treatise of Conversion. Directions to Prevent Miscarrying
in Conversion. Directions for Peace of Conscience. His Call to the Unconverted:
His Papers Of Saving Faith, against M. Barlow. His Sermons, at the Assizes, of
Judgment. Of Making Light of Christ. Disputations of Justification. Disput. of
Right to Sacraments.

For the distinction of Supralapsarians, [viz. Creabilitarians and
Existentialists] see page 412.

FOR Master Richard Baxter.
Sir,
IT is hoped, upon the account of your candor and ingenuity, that you will
hold the Ghost of Tilenus excused, if he takes a progress into the visible
world, to haunt you a while; especially seeing it is not out of malice, but
charity, not to torment or affright you, but (that is all the revenge he
desires) to inform you how unadvisedly you have attempted to deface the luster
and take away the life of his fairest reputation. Here by the way I cannot but
take notice of the truth of your own complaint and observation, in An Apology,
affixt to your Directions for peace of Conscience; Edit. 2.
Where you say, I have learned at last by some experience, that we must suffer
from the Learned and Godly, and not only from the Ignorant and the Wicked; and
being conscious of that humane frailty, whereby I am likely to be injurious to
others, I must needs know that it is many such injuries that we must mutually
overlook, who are by our pattern of Meekness so indispensably obliged to
extraordinary Unity, Love and Peace. A good provision made to entertain
unwarrantable proceedings; and whether Tilenus Ghost has received a fair
invitation from you, to it, or no, he resolves it to be his duty to take his
share of it. And good reason; for you charge him with falsifying and Calumny,
Praefat. Sect. 6.
unworthy a Divine, a Christian or a Man, and Sect, 7. you say, He unworthily
feigneth them to say. Sect. 8. you ask, Where now is the odious error that
this second Tilenus puts such a face upon? Sect. 9. you add, A most shameless
falsehood, made as they say of his fingers ends, and a little after you call him
This Accuser. Sect. 11. you say, Unworthy falsification still! Well might this
Author conceal his name for shame of the world: and a little after; All this
is such a selfe-devised tale, that no honest man should have been guilty of
against the poorest neighbor or enemy, much less against a party, and a Synod
of so many truly Learned and Worthy men. Sect. 12. The fourth Article forged by
this Ghost of Tilenus. Sect. 13. The accusation proceeds, you slanderously say
that the Synod -- and you wrong them also in feigning them simply to say. Sect.
14. and Sect 16. you call that, the fifth feigned Article of Tilenus, adding
presently upon the recital of it, This also is in his own abusive language,
and not in theirs. Lastly, you conclude Sect. 17. your addition is a perverse
insinuation. Thus you are pleased to cloathe your rebukes that they may make
the deeper impression. If you were ever content to take such coin for good
payment, it is more then probable Tilenus would be content to receive it at your
hands; but I think it should never have passed through his, but have been
nailed to a post, as we use to deal by that counterfeit money, whose metal
will not bear the Test, though it carries never so fair an image and
superscription. However Sir, Tilenus has a Second, that must take leave to
tell you, this Coin is not current in the balance of the Sanctuary. And thus I
find that many times even love of Moderation, and zeal for Truth do transport
some men to no small distance beyond them both. But if it were the weight of
the cause, Section 6.
and the greatness of his sin (as you pretend) which commanded you to be
thus plain; Tilenus when he finds his guilt, upon a further examination, will
be bound to acknowledge it, and to give you thanks for your Christian charity
toward him. In the mean while I must assure you, it was not for shame of the
world that this Author concealed his name: but, (if you will not allow it to be
imputed to his modesty) perhaps because he thought there was too much truth in
that of the Remonstrants, Antidotum in praefat. prope fin.
Non patitur tangi aut detegi ulcera sua malesana Calvini secta. Nimis enim
foeda ac tetra sunt, adeo ut propius intuenti horrorem pariant. Medicinam omnem
respuit, and medicum nullum far potest. Nemo impune hactenus ei medicam manum
porrexit, nisi cum ei potestas opprimendi defuit. I wish the practices of those
of that Party may not translate this complaint into English, and my pen shall
not. But I hasten to receive your charge made against Tilenus. You ask, Where
did the Synod say this? Sect. 12. 11. 9.
Not a word to any such sense in the Synod; and, There Is not a word of the
Decrees of the Synod, that has any such importance. So that here we have the
ground, upon which you take all your Confidence to accuse Tilenus of (your
pretended) falsification and Calumny. But good Sir, give me leave now to ask
the question: Where did Tilenus undertake to confine himself to the Decrees and
Canons of that Synod? D. Dammans question to Tilenus is this; page 27. Are these
your tenants consonant to the Articles of the Synod of Dort? what opinion have
you of that, and the doctrine held forth by the Divines in that Assembly? So
page 31. He is charged (personating an Infidel) to allege no other reasons to
justify his averseness to the Christian faith, then what he can clearly
deduce from the doctrine of the Synod and the Divines thereof; (whether in
conjunction or severally, is left to his liberty) and so he instanceth
accordingly p. 34. in these very words, [As some of your Synod do maintain]
page 50. the Synod of Alez is joined with it, and page 69. Tilenus takes in the
doctrine of the Synod and its adherents. And as these expressions must be
allowed to reach far downward, so there are others, that will ascend as high
upwards. Page 31. mention is made of the Calvinian as well as the Synodicall
Principle, and pages 36, and 58. M. Calvin and Piscator, their Authorities are
alleged and owned, as being men of the same judgment (generally speaking)
with those Divines of the Synod. So that Tilenus has left himself a greater
latitude then you did imagine, even a liberty to expatiate into all the
opinions of all the Writers of that whole age [not only the Divines of that
Synod and their Adherents, but such also whose unwholesome and rash opinions
gave occasion of it,] to make good his Articles as they are drawn up; and what
words and Phrases some of those Authors have made choice of to represent their
conceptions of these points of Doctrine in, we shall see anon.

In the mean time, I must acquaint you further, that these very five Articles
(word for word, as near as they could be translated) were drawn up by Daniel
Tilenus himself (and not his Ghost) who was as like to know, and as able to
state the difference and controversies betwixt the Remonstrants and their
Adversaries as any other. The truth is, he wrote a small Tract in French, which
was translated about 30. years since into English by one of his own
countrymen, (a Parson of a Church in London) Master John L'oiseau, alias
Tourvail: This, being put into a very mean dress (the Translators skill in the
English tongue not able to furnish better) was printed some years since, as I
am informed, (for a printed copy I have not seen, though I have had the
perusal of one in Manuscript) under another Title; viz. [Presbyterian
Doctrine.] Whereas the Title prefixed by the said M. J. L. was this [The
Doctrine of the Synods of Dort, and Alez brought to the Proof of Practice,
etc.] And at this Torch it was that Tilenus Junior lighted his Candle.
Therefore, if in the compiling or drawing up of those five Articles, there be
any forgery, or shameless falsehood, or unworthy falsification, as you boldly
charge them, it is the integrity of the old, and but the credulity of the new
Tilenus, that is to be questioned for it. Praefat. Sect. 6.
And truly (you say, yet how truly, is the matter of our present inquiry, but
you say) Truly this is an exceeding shame to the Arminian and Jesuit cause. I
cannot but take notice, by the by, of your great ambition to make a match
betwixt the Arminians and the Jesuits; you join them together at every turn,
though you know the parties are not agreed: but if you will read Lysimachus
Nicanor, or Herod and Pilate made friends, you may find a fitter match by far
for the Jesuits). But what is that, Ibid.
that is so great a shame to the Arminian and Jesuit cause? why, to find the
Learned Patrons of it to deal so unconscionably, that a Reader cannot believe
them; and that where it is so easy to any to see their falsehoods. He that
should read these severe expressions, falling from the pen of a man so serious,
as Master Baxter would seem to be, would be tempted to question whether there
were ever any such Doctrines entertained or broached in the world, especially
in these last ages, amongst the Reformed Churches, as Tilenus writes of. That
the Calvinists should be so far divided about the Object of Predestination,
and fly so fiercely in one another faces; one party accusing the other, that
by their doctrine they charge God with injustice, and the other to repay them
with a Recrimination, accusing them, to charge him with folly; who would
believe Tilenus (after Master Baxters attempt to invalidate his Testimony) if
he should acquaint the world that there are such high and bitter Animosities
amongst them? Therefore that we may the more readily gain belief in this
matter, Disputatio Theologica de 4. controvers. Remonstr. Artic. these. 10.
let Antonius Walaeus state the different opinions. There must be some common
state pitched upon, out of which God made a Segregation of Mankind, by his
eternal predestination, and distributed them into two Classes, viz. of such as
are to be saved, and such as are to be damned. In eo statu eruendo, says he,
mirum in modum humanum ludit ingenium, and varii vary se torquent: summa tamen
huc redit, inductione facta; ut homines segregandi judicio divino, considerandi
sint a Deo omniscio, 1. aut ut creandi: 2. aut ut creati et integri: 3. aut ut
creati and lapsi in primo Adamo: 4. aut ut restituti in secundo Adamo, id est,
Christo. Here are three several opinions acknowledged to be amongst the
Calvinists; viz. Supralapsarians of two sorts, and Sublapsarians. The whole
process of the doctrine of the first sort of Supra-lapsarians Jacobus Arminius
has reduced to four special heads; which are these. Declarat. Sententiae.
translated into English, page 40, 41.


First, That God has Absolutely and precisely decreed the salvation of some
particular men by his mercy or grace, and the condemnation of others by his
justice, without any sight or intuition in this decree, of righteousness, or
sin; obedience, or disobedience; that might proceed from either of them.

Secondly, That God, for the bringing to pass this his preceding decree,
determined the creation of Adam and all men in him, in the right state of
Original righteousness, and further ordained, that they should sin, and so be
deprived of original righteousness, and become guilty of eternal
condemnation.

Thirdly, That God has decreed those (whom he would precisely save) as to
salvation, so to the means appertaining thereunto, to bring them to faith in
Jesus Christ, and perseverance in it; and this indeed by his irresistible
grace, and power, so as they cannot but believe, persevere, and be saved.

Fourthly, That God has decreed to deny unto them whom, in his absolute will,
he has preordained to destruction, and accordingly does not confer that
grace which is sufficient and necessary to salvation; so as they are neither
able to believe, neither can they be saved.

Thus Jacobus Arminius drew up the Articles; who as he was a man of too great
integrity to impose upon his Adversary or his Reader, so is he known to be of
too great learning and judgment to encounter with shadows and Chimaera's of
his own imagination.

How this Doctrine of Predestination is held forth by the other sort of
Supralapsarians and the Sublapsarians, he that desires to be fully satisfied,
may procure his satisfaction at an easy expense both of time and money, if he
will consult that small Treatise, translated and lately set forth by Master
Tobias Conyers, Page 91. 92. 94. 95. 96.
under the Title of [The Just Man's Defence]. But amongst other Reasons inducing
these men to deliver the Doctrine of Predestination, in a different manner and
method from the former, Arminius observes, Ibid. page 97.
this was not the meanest; their willingness to prevent, lest God with the
same probability should be concluded, the Author of sin, from this their
Doctrine, as some of them have judged it concludable from the first. But really
(says He) if with diligent inspection we well examine these Opinions of a
later Edition, compared with the Judgment of the same Authors in other points
of Religion, we shall find the fall of Adam not possibly otherways
considerable, Page 98.
(according to the Tenants of these men) then as a necessary executive means of
the preceding Decree of Predestination; Page 100.
and a little after, The third Opinion scapes this Rock better then the other,
had not the Patrons thereof delivered something for the Declaration of
Predestination and Providence, from whence the necessity of the Pall may be
inferred, which cannot have any other rise then Predestinatory Ordination. Thus
Jac. Arminius.

Our next inquiry (that we may come to the certain knowledge of the truth of
this Matter of Fact; for which you have, with no little confidence to disgrace
him, questioned the integrity of our Tilenus) shall be, how the Articles
charged upon the Calvinists, were drawn up by the Remonstrants in the
Conference at the Hague.

Pet. Bert. Coll. Hag. p. 7. 8.
The first head of Doctrine, (which They charge the Contra-Remonstrants, or
Calvinists, whom they style their Brethren, to account ORTHODOX) is thus
expressed word for word.
I.
THat God (as some speak) by an eternal and unchangeable Decree, from among
men, Supra-lapsarians.
whom he considered as not-created, much less as fallen, ordained certain to
eternal life, certain to eternal death, without any regard had to their
righteousness or sin, to their obedience or disobedience: only because so
was his pleasure, (or so it seemed good to him) to the praise of his Justice
and Mercy, or (as others like better) to declare his saving Grace, Wisdom, and
free Authority (or Jurisdiction); Means being also foreordained by his
eternal and unchangeable Decree, fit for the execution of the same, by the
power or force whereof, it is necessary that they be saved after a necessary
and unavoidable manner, who are ordained to salvation, so that it is not
possible that they should perish: but they who are destined to destruction (who
are the far greater number) must be damned necessarily and inevitably, so
that it is not possible for them to be saved.

II.
Sub-lapsarians.
That God (as others would rather) willing from eternity, with himself, to make
a Decree concerning the Election of some certain men, but the rejection of
others; considered mankind not only as created, but also as fallen, and
corrupted in Adam and Eve, our first Parents, and thereby deserving the curse:
And that he decreed out of that fall and damnation to deliver and save some
certain ones of his Grace, to declare his mercy: But to leave others (both
young and old, yea truly even certain Infants of men in Covenant, and those
Infants baptized, and dying in their Infancy) by his just judgment, in the
curse, to declare his Justice: and that without all consideration of repentance
and faith in the former; or of impenitence or unbelief in the later. For the
execution of which Decree, God uses also such means, whereby the Elect are
necessarily, and unavoidably saved, but reprobates necessarily and unavoidably
perish.

III.
And therefore that Jesus Christ the Savior of the World died not for all men,
but for those only, who are Elected either after the former or this later
manner, he being the mean, and ordained Mediator to save those only, and not a
man besides.

IV.
Consequently, That the Spirit of God and of Christ does work in those who are
Elected that way or this, with such a force of Grace that they cannot resist
it: and so, that it cannot be, but that they must turn, believe, and thereupon
necessarily be saved. But that this irresistible Grace and force belongs only
to those so Elected, but not to Reprobates, to whom not only that irresistible
Grace is denied, but also Grace necessary and sufficient for Conversion, for
faith, and for salvation, is not afforded: To which Conversion and faith
indeed, they are called, invited, and fairly solicited outwardly by the
revealed will of God: though notwithstanding the inward force necessary to
faith and conversion is not bestowed on them, according to the secret will of
God.

V.
But that so many as have once obtained a true and justifying faith by such a
kind of irresistible force, can never totally nor finally lose it, no not
although they fall into the very-most-enormous sins: but are so led and kept by
that same irresistible force, that it is not possible for them (or they cannot)
either totally or finally, fail and perish.

Every branch of these five Articles, you may see sufficiently proved, in
Appendice Pressioris Declarationis, and by the several Syllabi Testimoniorum
inter Scripta Synodalia Remonstrantium.

After the Synod at Dort had declared their judgment, upon those five Heads of
Doctrine, the Remonstrants abridged the same into these Compendious Articles.

I.
Almighty God, out of all mankind considered in the same state or condition,
chose a few certain men to eternal salvation, without any respect of their
faith, repentance, conversion, or of any good quality; but, that he might bring
those elect ones, to the appointed salvation, he decreed that his Son should
suffer death for only them, (yea, even when they as well as others were fallen
into Original sin, and eternal perdition, by Adam's transgression) that he
might reconcile unto God them only, that he might, in them only, work faith,
by a most powerful working and force no less then that put forth in the
Creation of the World, or raising the dead; that he might preserve, in that
saving faith, unto their lives end, those very men although fallen into the
foulest and filthiest wickednesses, and sticking some while therein, and at
last might bring them into the possession of eternal life, for no other cause,
but because so was his good pleasure.

But on the Contrary,

I.
Almighty God (would pass by) the far greatest part of mankind, without any
consideration of their own proper and avoidable fault, that is to say, of their
own unbelief and impenitence, (and) would not elect (them) to salvation, or
have his Son die for them, or give them power sufficient for their conversion,
even then, when he invites, entreats, beseeches, and beggs of them to answer
his Calling them to salvation, under the promise of the said salvation, and the
penalty of eternal damnation: but will have them all born into the world to
eternal and never-to-be-ended torments and pains of hellfire, and at length
throw them headlong thereinto, for no other cause, but because it was his
pleasure so to do.

II.
That God would that Jesus Christ should suffer the most bitter and the most
shameful death, not for all men, but only for the elect, that for them alone,
by the shedding of his own precious blood, he might purchase faith, and all
other saving gifts of the Holy Ghost, that by his blood he might cleanse them
from all their sins both Original and Actual, committed as well after as
before their faith, might keep them to their last breath, and at last bestow on
them eternal life.

But on the Contrary,

That God would not that Christ should die for other Mortals, that he should or
might obtain for them any saving gifts of the Holy Ghost, but would that they
should be left in Original sin, and should, by consequent, fall or rush
headlong into other sins, which necessarily flow therefrom, (that they) should
continue destitute, or devoid not only of power whereby they might turn and
repent, but also of all hope of grace and salvation, till, at length, being
inwrapped in an unavoidable necessity of sinning, they should be thrust down
with the damned Devils to eternal and infinite torments both of soul and body.

III, and IV.
That God does communicate, inspire and infuse into his Elect children, not
only a power to believe, but also the will to believe, yea the very act of
believing, or faith, by such a supernatural, most powerful, and, at once,
most sweet, wonderful, secret, and unspeakable operation, or working, as, in
its power, is no less or inferior then that, whereby the world was made, or
the dead are raised; so that it remains not in man's power to will to believe or
be converted, but will they, nill they, they cannot but be converted and
believe.

On the other side,

That God does earnestly indeed call and invite to faith and repentance
infinite Myriads, (or ten thousands) of men, with threatenings of eternal death
and damnation, yet so still, as he wills not to communicate to them either
faith or the power to believe and repent; so that, though they be called of God
to faith, yet they cannot but remain unbelievers. And that yet notwithstanding
all this, he will punish and does punish eternally with the most grievous and
horrible torments of hell, those very persons for that unbelief of theirs, that
was unavoidable.

V.
God will preserve in the faith, all those, who are absolutely elected from
eternity, and are, in time, brought to faith by an Almighty and irresistible
operation or working, so that, although they fall into foul and detestable
wickednesses and villainies, and continue in them some space of time, against
their Conscience, yet the said wicked villainies do not hinder so much as a
straw amounts to, their Election or Salvation, neither do they or can they, by
means of, or because of these, fall from the Grace of Adoption, and from the
state of Justification, or lose their faith, but all their sins how great
soever they be, both which heretofore they have committed, and those which
hereafter they will or shall commit, are surer than assuredly forgiven them,
yea, and moreover, they themselves, at last, though it be at their last gasp,
shall be recalled to repentance, and brought over into possession of salvation.

That this is the perfect sense of the Synods Doctrine, the Remonstrants have
notably evinced in their ANTIDOTUM (Continens Pressiorem Declarationem Propria
and Genuinae Sententiae, Quae in Synodo Nationali Dordracena asserta est et
stabilita.)

For Daniel Tilenus, it seems, he took the like course; for whereas the Synod
delivered their Judgment about the First Head, (Divine Predestination) in the
18 Articles and 9. Rejections, He abridged the sense thereof into seven short
lines; and the Second Head (about Christ's Death) comprised in nine Articles,
and seven Rejections into four or five lines; and the three and four Heads
(concerning Man's corruption and conversion) containing seventeen Articles and
nine Rejections, into fourteen lines; and the fifth Head (of Perseverance)
dilated in the fifteen Articles with nine Rejections, into less than four
lines. And besides, in Compiling his Articles Tilenus had respect to the
Doctrine, as it is asserted, or held forth, by the Synod of Alez, (which is not
now in my power, to give any account of)

But my Present task is to make it good, that these Articles of Tilenus are
consonant to the sense of the Calvinists Doctrine, whether delivered in or out
of the Synod. The first whereof is drawn up and presented in these words,

That God by an Absolute Decree has Elected to salvation a very little number
of men, without any regard to their faith or obedience whatsoever, and secluded
from saving Grace all the rest of Mankind and appointed them by the same Decree
to eternal damnation, without any regard to their Infidelity or impenitencie.

Here Master Baxter takes exceptions:

1. Where talk they of a very little number? For your satisfaction hear
Martinius, (one of the most moderate of the Synod of Dort) who says that

In praefat. excussioris placidae -- Citante Smoutio Eendrachts. fol. 109.
God according to his good pleasure has reprobated the greatest part of men;
was it for sin? Christ does not teach so, Mat. 11. nor the Apostle, Romans 9.
Here we have the greatest part of Mankind under the Decree of Reprobation, and
that not for sin neither. The less part therefore is Elected. But we have
another Synodist speaks more fully to the Article. Antonius Thysius ad Summam
Baronis. p. 10. 20 literis (gg) collatis.
God has by his absolute and irresistible will, reprobated the greatest part
of Mankind by far, and created them to destruction; says Ant. Thysius. And
what is the number of the elect then? If it be not small enough, yet Master
Calvin expresses it to a tittle; The Election is of a very small Number of the
Godly. Electionem exigui piorum numeri. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 21.. 7. mihi page
592.

2. Master Baxter excepts: It Is not true that they say he does it (without any
regard to their faith or obedience whatever). Witness to the contrary

1. Donteclock. How can it be true that God did from all eternity consider us
in Christ as faithful? On the contrary he chose from all eternity some certain
persons, without respect to faith or any other quality, only for his will and
good pleasure. Respons. ad Anonym. Quatern. E.

2. Bucan. What manner of persons are Elected? Such as are unclean and wicked
in the sight of God. Loc. com. de Praedest. q. 20.

8. The Contra-Remonstrants. We do profess that God in his Election, had no
respect to faith foreseen, perseverance, or any other good quality. Collat.
Hag. page 126.

4. Damman, Scribe to the Synod. The Election was made without any
consideration of faith foreseen. In suo consens. To whom I may add Lubbertus,
a Synodist too; who says, It Is a humane invention, that God decreed Salvation
to us upon this condition [if we would repent.] In Declar. Respons. page 50.

3. Master Baxter excepts; He unworthily feigneth them to say that God
[appointeth them to eternal damnation without any regard to their impenitency
or infidelity] The truth of this shall be tried by the Suffrages of

1. Calvin. Predestination is Gods eternal decree, whereby he appointed what
he would have done concerning every man. All are created in a like condition.
But eternal life is preordained for some, eternal damnation for others. And
therefore as every man is created for either end, so we say he is predestined
either to eternal life, or eternal death. Instit. l. 3. c. 21.. 5. Therefore
that frivilous shift of the Schoolmen concerning prescience, is overthrown.
For Paul does not say, the ruin of the wicked is foreseen of the Lord, but
ordained by his counsel and will. Idem ad Romans 9.18.

2. P. Martyr. That any should be created of God, that they might perish, seems
absurd at first sight. But the Scripture speaks it. In app. loc. com. in loc.
de Praedest.

3. Polanus. Whom God predestined to eternal destruction, those he created
to eternal destruction. In Hoseam 13.9.

4. Beza. God destined to destruction, not for corruption, or the fruits of it:
but because, so it seemed good to him. de Praedest. contra Castol. page 416.
and in Notia min. N. T. ad Romans 9.21. Seeing therefore that the shame of death
eternal is signified by the name of dishonor, they speak like Paul, who say
some are created of God to just destruction, and they that are offended with
this form of speech, do betray their ignorance.

5. Perkins. Every man is to God, as a mass of clay in the hand of the Potter,
a^ Paul affirms; and therefore God by his absolute sovereignty, does make
vessels of wrath, and not find them. But he should not make them, but find
them made of themselves if we should say, that in his eternal counsil, he
passed them by, only as sinners, and not as men. De Praedest. and Gratia Dei.
page 16.

6. Ant. Thysius, a Synodist. Reprobation is decreed without any regard had to
sin. Ad Sum. Baronis ex Piscat.

Let not Master Baxter except against this, and say, that Reprobation is not
the same with Damnation; for it does inevitably draw damnation after it, as is
acknowledged by Festus Hommius (Scribe to the Synod) in these words;

The fruits that follow Rejection, are, 1. The creation of the Reprobate. 2.
Desertion, or withdrawing of Gods grace and means. 3. Blinding and hardening.
4. Perseverance in sin. Thesaur. Catech. fol. 216.

Lastly all the Supra-lapsarians must give their votes for this opinion, who
make the object of Predestination, Man considered, either as created and not
fallen, or as yet not created, but possible to be created. Thus Amesius. It Is
neither necessary, nor consonant to Scripture, to assign any pre-required
quality in man as the formal object of Predestination, or any certain state of
man, so as to exclude the rest: for it is sufficient to understand that man is
the object of this Decree, so that the difference, which is found in men, may
follow from the Decree. In Medull. Theol. l. 1. c. 25. th. 10.

And Gomarus, a Synodist. Predestination is twofold. One to Supernatural ends
(which though at once in the accounts of eternity, yet in order of nature goes
before; because the end for which a thing is, is first in the intention of the
wise.) The other unto Creation in Original righteousness and other means.
These. de Praedest. disput. 1604. These. 12. and These. 13.

The object of Predestination are Rational Creatures, not as really to be
saved or damned, created, about to fall, or about to stand, about to be
repaired: but as in a remote and indefinite power, are saveable, damnable,
creable, fallable, repairable, etc. And upon these very grounds of Gomarus
Maccovius disputes the point stiffly for the Affirmative. Theol. Disput. 17.
mihi page 59.

From hence arises that bitter dissension, betwixt the Supralapsarians and the
Sublapsarians, wherewith Grevinchovius so worthily upbraideth Smoutius in these
words; Gomarus Festus and other Supralapsarians, and thy self also, if I be not
deceived, do contend bitterly against Donteclock, Acronius, etc. That nothing
more foolish, ot more sottish can be fastened upon God, then that He should
have created Man, not having first appointed his end, that is to say, the
salvation or damnation of every one, or rather the showing forth of his wrath
and power, in the perdition of the Reprobates.

On the other side Acronius and the rest of the Sublapsarians, exclaim as much
against the Supralapsarians, That nothing can be conceived more unjust, than
that Man should be reprobated and created to destruction, whilst considered
as, not yet corrupted by sin. Absters. Calum. Smout. p. 51.

And this, I hope, is sufficient for the proof of the first Article, as to the
matter of Fact.

The II. Article runs thus. That Christ Jesus has not suffered death for any
other, but for those Elect only; having neither had any intent, nor
commandment of his Father to make satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.
What says M. Baxter to this Article? Why, A most shameless falsehood, made,
as they say, of his fingers ends. We must Impannell an honest Jury to try this
too, and, 1. That Christ, is said, to have suffered only for the Elect. Call
in the Witnesses under written

1. Geselius, what say you to the matter in question? They do greatly err,
that teach, Christ died for all and every man. Specim. c. 9. fol. 36.

2. M. Perkins, it is expected you should give in a full testimony for the
Plaintiff, what say you? The Ransom was designed by the Decree of the Father,
and by the intercession and oblation of the Son, for the Elect only. De
Praedest. p. 20.

3. Piscator, a knowing man; he will speak the truth, and the whole truth and
nothing but the truth; That Christ died sufficiently for every one, is a false
Proposition. For he died only for the Elect, paying a most sufficient price of
redemption (for them) namely his own precious blood, the blood of the Son of
God, the blood of God himself. But for the Reprobate he dyed in no wise,
whether sufficiently, or effectually. Contr. Schaff. Th. 209.

4. Beza, what can you say to this point, for the acquitting of Tilenus? (I
say,) Whether you consider the counsil of God, or the effect of the Passion, or
both, Christ died no way for the wicked. In These. cum D. Fayo in Schol. Genev.
disp. de dig. and effect. Sacrif. J. C.

5. Maccovius, can you say any thing to clear the Plaintiff from the charge
that Master Baxter brings against him? For that distinction of Christ's dying
for All sufficiently, but not effectually, (I say) it is most vain and foolish.
For, if you say Christ died sufficiently, because his death would have sufficed
to redeem all, if God had so pleased; then by a like reason, it might be said,
that Christ has justified All, and glorified All sufficiently, but none
effectually. Mac. distinct. c. 11. disp. 18. p. 110. and Colleg. Disp. 12.

6. Vogelius, what say you to the second Article of the Remonstrants,
Concerning the Universality of the merit of Christ's Death? They that subscribe
to it are to be suspected of Pelagianisme, Socinianisme, and other filthy
Heresies. Contra Ministros Campens. page 125.

This evidence already given in, might suffice for the whole Article: But
because there is another branch, perhaps M. Baxter will expect some pregnant
proof for that too; viz. That Christ neither had any intent, nor Commandment of
his Father, to make satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.

To evince this, take here the depositions of

1. Triglandius, a Synodist, (who says) The passion of Christ in it self is
sufficient to redeem all men, yea many more -- but according to the Counsil of
the Father, He died only for the Elect, and truly faithful, with that intent,
that through faith he might make all them, and only them, partakers of the
efficacy of his passion to their salvation. Christian Moderation page 25.

2. Zanchy, who says, Christ according to the purpose of the Father, was born,
prayed, suffered, dyed, rose again, and sits at the right hand of the Father
interceding only for the Elect, h. e. for those, who were to believe,
according to the eternal Election. Miscel. page 345. in quarto.

3. Beza. I say again and profess before the whole Church of God, that it is
false, blasphemous, and wicked, to say Christ suffered, was crucified, died and
satisfied, no less for the sins of the Damned, then for the sins of Peter,
Paul and all the Saints, whether in respect of Gods Counsil, or in regard of
the effect. Resp. ad Coll. Mempelg. p. 221.

4. Rippertus. To say, Christ died for them that perish, is false, and accuses
God of injustice. Contra Domin. Sapma. p. 764.

5. Vogelius. If Christ tasted death for unbelievers, He drank that bitter cup
in vain, or else unbelievers must taste eternal death twice, contrary to Gods
justice, to the dignity of Christ's death, and to possibility. ubi supra. p. 133.

6. Maccovius. If Christ died for all, then he was a surety and ransom for
all, even for those that perish everlastingly. And this will brand God with
injustice, for taking a twofold punishment for the same offenses, when the
first satisfaction might have sufficed. Ubi supra page 35.

7. D. Damman, Scribe to the Synod, speaks to the same purpose. It is repugnant
to Gods justice, that he should constitute Christ to bear the sins of all men,
and make full satisfaction for them, and yet ordain some men to bear their own
sins, in their own persons, and so make satisfaction for them themselves; then
he should punish one sin twice, that is to say, both in his Son, and in them
that perish, Consens. p. 63.

Piscator shall shut up this Scene; The Reprobate are plainly excluded from the
merit of Christ's death, and yet they are bound to believe in him. In Resp. ad
Duplic. Vorstii. c. 7. page 66.

The third Article of Tilenus. That by Adams fall his Posterity lost their
freewill, being put to an unavoidable Necessity to do, or not to do, whatsoever
they do, or do not, whether it be good, or evil; being thereunto Predestinate
by the eternal and effectual secret Decree of God.
What says M. Baxter to this Article? Unworthy falsification still! I see it
will be a hard matter for Tilenus to gain M. Baxter's favor, when he cannot
escape his censure; but the best on it is, rather then his reputation shall
stand branded, with those marks of Infamy, which M. Baxters blackest ink has
endeavored to imprint upon it, many of M. Baxter's Reverend and (in his
opinion) Orthodox friends, are ready to be his compurgators. I was about to
summon M. Calvin, in the head of these, but I find him stumbling at the
threshold; and taking exceptions at the very Preface of the Article, which
charge his Adherents and followers, to hold, That by Adams fall his Posterity
lost their freewill; For he will not acknowledge such a Freewill in Adam
himself, whereby he might have stood; witness these words of his to Castellio;

Thou say, Adam fell by his free will: I except against it; That he might not
fall, he stood in need of that strength and constancy, wherewith God armeth the
Elect, while he will keep them blameless. Whom God has elected, he props up
with an invincible power, unto perseverance. Why did he not afford this to
Adam, if he would have had him stood in his integrity? Ad Calum. Nebul. Ad
Artic. 2. And

Maccovius. However Adam fell Necessarily, in regard of the immutability of the
Divine Decree; yet he fell not by compulsion, but of his own accord. (Non
coacte, sed sponte.) Coll. Disp. disp. 16. page 54.

If the Calvinist's put Adam himself under such an unavoidable Necessity, to
do, or not to do, as an immutable Decree had determined him; It Is strange any
of them should give Tilenus the Lie, for affirming it, to be their opinion
concerning all men else. And yet Tilenus stands accused by M. Baxter, of an
Unworthy falsification; for affirming, that they hold, That the Posterity of
Adam (having lost their free will in his fall) are put under an avoidable
Necessity to do good, or evil; And therefore to clear Tilenus, that He may
still carry the Reputation of a True man, I Will offer the Certificates of his
Compurgators; and First they shall certify to the unavoidable Necessity of
doing good; as,

1. Sturmius, whose Certificate on the behalf of Tilenus runs thus; The Elect
are not only Predestined to the end, but also to the means that lead to that
end; and therefore as they are necessarily saved at last, in regard of the
immutability of Election; So in regard of the stability thereof, they do
necessarily also embrace the means, by which they are conducted to that end. De
Praedest. Th. 10.

2. Zanchy. Whosoever are predestined to the end, they are also predestined
to those means, without which that end is not to be attained. And therefore as
the Elect do necessarily arrive at the end at last, in regard of the
steadfastness of Election; so in regard of the same steadfastness, it is
necessary they should be led and walk by the means ordained to that end. De
Not. Dei lib. De Praedest.-Sanct. quaest. 5. and lib. 5. c. 2. q. 4. So it
comes to pass, that our Will cannot but will good, because it is so inclined of
God.

3. Cornel. Dungan. Such as the operation of grace is in the beginning, such is
it also in the progress. If it be resistible or irresistible, when it begins
(the conversion or regeneration of man; and they hold that work irresistible)
such it is also, when it goes forward. In pacific. page 172.

4. Donteclock. As many as were predestined by God unto salvation before the
creation of the world, (that the purpose of Election may remain sure) they are
by the power of God led to it, so certainly and infallibly, that it is
impossible that they should finally perish. Instit. de Praedest. page 93.

But can Tilenus bring any competent number of Orthodox Calvinists to Certify
touching the Unavoidable Necessity of doing evil? For the other branch seems so
plausible that few of them will stick to subscribe to it: But for this branch,
who appears to make Tilenus his charge good?

1. Zanchy. We grant that by this ordination of God, the Reprobate are
constrained by a necessity of sinning, and thereby of perishing also, and so
constrained that they cannot choose but sin and perish. De Not. Dei. lib. 5, c.
2. de Reprob. q. 2. and soon after, We doubt not therefore to acknowledge, that
there is incumbent upon the Reprobate by their immutable Reprobation, a
necessity of sinning, and that unto death, without repentance, and for that of
suffering eternal pains.

2. Piscator, when Vorstius urges him, how unworthy the Majesty of God it is,
to make an absolute Decree, whereby a man should be destinated to a necessity
of sinning: To this he answers; Indeed humane Reason judges so: but the word
of God says otherwise. And again; These sayings are not therefore false and
blasphemous, because humane reason is offended with them. Ad Amic. Coll.
Vorstii. Not. 6. and 8. mihi page 157. and Resp. ad Duplic. Vorstii par. 1.
page 223. When God does necessitate man to sin, that he may punish him for sin,
he does justly, because he has power to govern man as he will. and Resp. ad
Apologet. Bertii. page 144. All things are done by the Decree of God, therefore
all things are done of necessity. For whatsoever God has decreed, that comes
to pass necessarily, because it cannot not come to pass. And therefore Judas
betrayed Christ necessarily, nor could his will to betray be changed in him;
because he betrayed Christ by the determinate counsel and fore-decree of God.
Also that willing of Judas was the work of God, in as much as it was moved of
God; for by him we live, move, and have our being.

3. Fred. Bronkerns, (says) All things come to pass by an infallible, and an
inevitable necessity. Antidot. fol. 50.

4. Sturmius. Upon the privation of Grace there follows a twofold necessity,
one of sinning, another of perishing. For the Reprobate being destitute of Gods
grace, and left to their own nature, as they cannot but sin, so they cannot but
perish: unto which double necessity the reprobates are predestined. De
Praedest. These. 22.

That this unavoidable necessity to do, or not to do good or evil, is
(according to the Doctrine of the Calvinists) from Gods eternal
praedestination, and effectual secret decree, appears sufficiently by the
Testimonies already alleged, to which I will add but two or three.

1. Nicasius Vander Shure. The end for which God does elect and reprobate, in
respect of man, is, that the elect might be saved, the reprobate damned: but
every one according to the means which God has likewise predestined, that
they might walk in them, the elect in faith and good works, and the reprobate
in unbelief and evil works. page 20.

2. Sturmius. Hence it therefore follows, that the elect are diligent in all
good works: because they are no less predestined unto the means then unto
the end. But the reprobate omit all care of doing good, because they are
rejected from this grace of the means, no less then from the end it self. De
Praedest. in explic. These. 1.

From this unavoidable Necessity etc. some of the Calvinists have drawn these
Corollaries (which they maintain to follow by undeniable Consequence from that
Doctrine; viz.)

I. That man can do no more good then he does; Omit no more evil then he
omitteth.

Piscator. Although God simply and precisely wills not that man should do any
more good then he does, or that he should omit any more evil then he omitteth,
yet he cannot therefore be reproved of envy, or iniquity, or of any other vice.
Ad amicam Duplicationem Vorstii. page 177.

And because this is a very great temptation and encouragement to carelessness;
therefore he could not for shame but insert this much by way of caution. ( page
176.) Although it be manifest to us, in the general and indefinitely, or at
least it may be manifest to us by Gods word, that we can neither do more good
then we do, nor omit more evil then we do omit; because God has precisely
decreed from all eternity, that both shall so come to pass; yet because it is
not manifest to us in specie, definitely and in special manner, how much God
has decreed, that we should do or omit, we cannot be justly accounted foolish
if we do perpetually endeavor, to do more good then we do, and likewise to
omit more evil then we omit. And Page 228. Although it be Fatally appointed,
when, and how, and how much every one of us ought to practice piety, or not to
practice it, yet the daily meditation of Gods precepts is not undertaken in
vain.

And to second Piscator in this opinion, Maccovius does most fiercely maintain
it in a Disputation of nine or ten pages long. Colleg. Disput. Miscel. Quaest.
Disp. 2. (mihi) a page 410, usque ad 419. And whether the contagion of this
opinion had not laid hold upon some of the Synod, we shall examine hereafter.

A Second Corollary, drawn by others from that Unavoidable Necessity
forementioned, is this:

That all zeal and endeavor after Salvation, before the Gift of faith, and
Spirit of Renovation conferred upon us, is of no effect.

So faith

Donteclock. We conclude therefore, that all the care, study and diligence,
which men can use to promote their salvation is vain and to no purpose, rather
hurtful then profitable, before faith and the spirit of renovation. But after
faith and conversion they are clearly necessary and profitable. Adversus
Castle. p. 171. Note here by the way, that his opinion is, That Faith and the
Spirit of Renovation are never given to the Non-Elect. The Reprobates are not
called effectually; whence it comes to pass, that they can neither convert
themselves nor believe. In Dialogo super Translatis These. Gomari and Arminii:
quatern. C.

The IV. Article of Tilenus. That God to save his Elect from the corrupt Mass,
does beget faith in them by a power equal to that, whereby he created the
world, and raised up the dead, insomuch that such unto whom he gives that
Grace, cannot reject it; and the rest being Reprobate cannot accept of it, etc.
How does this Article come off with M. Baxter? He tells Tilenus [you wrong
them in feigning them simply to say, that those to whom God gives grace cannot
reject it.] Because M. Baxter is grown so Gentle, I shall (for his
satisfaction) acquaint him out of what Poets Tilenus borrowed this Fiction.

1. Calvin. God moves the will, not after that manner, as has been believed
and delivered for many ages, that it should be at our choice to obey or resist
the motion. But efficaciously effecting it. Therefore that so often repeated by
Chrysostom is to be rejected. Whom he draws, he draws being Willing: whereby
he insinuates, that God reaching forth his hand, does expect whether we will
make use of his assistance. Instit. lib. 2. c. 3, Sect. 10.

Geselius. Man is regenerated, and renewed by the omnipotent power of God,
creating him anew. In Specim. cap. 4. fol. 17. and fol. 73.

They who are called unto salvation, outwardly, and inwardly, according to Gods
purpose, they cannot but believe in Christ, and convert themselves; that is,
this calling works irresistibly and invincibly, not only upon their
understanding and affections, but also upon their will.

3. Smoutius. We will never say, that God determined to save believers only by
a gentle suasion, and traction, agreeable to their wills: much less will we
deny, that he draws them by an omnipotent operation, which they neither will,
nor can, nor can will to resist. Concord. p. 9. Praefat.

4. Contra-Remonstrantes. As no man is able to hinder his own birth, or his
resurrection from the dead: So no man is able to hinder the working of Gods
Grace, when he will regenerate, and raise him up from the spiritual death.
Collat. Hag. page 207.

5. Donteclock. We determine the Grace of the Holy Spirit to be such an
efficacious operation, that men, in whom God is pleased to work it, cannot
resist it. For it is as a spiritual regeneration, it is the renovation of the
understanding, will, and all humane powers, it is as a spiritual raising from
the dead, by which is taken away whatsoever, in man, is able to resist the Holy
Spirit, or hinder it, that it should not, in its time, work conversion and
faith in the Elect: So that it depend's not at all on the will of man, but
only on the will and power of God. Ad scriptum cujusdam Anonymi. lit. B. 1.
versa.

6. D. Damman. God works effectually in none but in the Elect, and therefore
Grace is rightly said to be irresistible. Consensus. page 82.

7. Triglandius. They that are converted cannot hinder the taking away of their
resistance. Apolog. 274.

8. Gomarus, a Creabilitarian Synodist: Whether is this Grace conferred by an
irresistible and efficacious operation of God, so that the will of him who is
regenerated has no ability to resist it, as it is said 2 Chronicles. 20.6. In thy
hand is strength and power, and there is none that can resist thee? I do
believe it, and profess that it is so. Insua Declaratione. page 20.

For the honor of the Synod Johannes Bogermmannus, their President, shall have
the casting voice in this particular. Grotius citing S. Chrysostom, (...). If
it be grace, may some say, why are we not all saved? Because ye will not. For
Grace though it be Grace, saves none but the willing, not such as do daily
strive against it. And upon that of S. John. None can come to me except the
Father draw him. In the word (...), draws, is denoted Help, says He,
((...)), nay (...), says Bogerman, and quidem (...), that exceeding power,
whereby he causes light to shine out of darkness. Ad Script. H. Grotii, part.
2. Annot. Not. 87. (mihi) page 147.

And thus I hope, the Reader will be satisfied touching the matter of Fiction,
imputed to Tilenus by M. Baxter. But the severer part of M. Baxters censure is
yet behind, touching the other branch of this Article; For here he tells
Tilenus roundly, You slanderously say, that the Synod says, the Reprobates
cannot accept it. I am glad to find M. Baxter let fall this expression; because
I hope, I may conclude from hence, that, in his opinion, this Doctrine is
erroneous, and of evil consequence. But if any of the Adherents of the Synod
profess themselves to be of this judgment, Tilenus is like to overthrow M.
Baxter upon the Action of Slander, what ever loss and damages he recovers of
him. Let us put it to a Verdict of a Jury of good men and true, whose Foreman
shall be

Peter Martyr. The (divine) calling is extended unto some, that cannot be moved
to a capacity to receive it, who are therefore said to be called, but not
chosen. In Append. loc. com. page 980.

2. Musculus. As the Elect being called in their time, do believe, repent, are
justified and saved, neither can they fall from salvation: so the reprobate can
neither obey Gods call, nor repent, nor believe, nor be justified, nor be
saved. Loc. com. de Reprob. 472.

3. Zanchy. There follows Reprobation the denial of grace, this is attended
with sin, and sin with punishment, unto all which God has preordained the
Reprobates from all eternity. Lib. de Not. Dei. c. 2. de Praedest. Wherefore it
is rightly said, that the Reprobates are preordained and predestined to a
perpetual destitution of grace. ibid. page 721. in quarto.

4. Gomarus. The Reprobates cannot believe; for faith is proper to the Elect.
Disput. (1604) de Prad. these. 32.

5. Triglandius. Unbelief flows from Reprobation. For the Reprobates cannot
attain to faith by Nature; and God has not decreed to give them faith. Defens.
page 140.

6. Lastly, D. Damman. We grant that the Non-Elect, neither do, nor can
believe, nor persevere in the faith. De persever. page 86. Item in Concord.
Remonstr. page 44. Unbelief flows from Reprobation; for the Reprobates cannot
attain unto faith by nature, and God has not decreed to give them faith.

The fifth Article of Tilenus. That such as have once received that Grace by
Faith, can never fall from it finally, or totally, notwithstanding the most
enormous sins they can commit. How does M. Baxter resent this Article? Why,
it is feigned, and (Tilenus) his own abusive language. One would think by these
expressions, that the man did disclaim the Doctrine. But alas! it is only a
copy of his countenance (as shall appear afterward;) for the Calvinists do
constantly maintain, Such as have once received that Grace, can never fall from
it, finally or totally; Witness,
1. Calvin. As the Spirit is never extinguished, so likewise it is impossible
that faith, which he has once imprinted upon the hearts of the Godly, should
be lost and perish. In Comment. in Mat. 13 20. and in Comment. ad Hebr. 6.5.
The Elect are out of danger of deadly sin.

2. Donteclock. The Elect cannot finally fall from faith. Instit. de Praedest.
page 101.

3. Mehnius. Justifying faith can never be lost, because it is peremptorily
given to the faithful, in perpetuum. In Anchor: Animarum page, 107,

4. Whitaker. This is that justifying faith with its necessary fruits which we
maintain, that we can never wholly lose. In cygn. Cant. 20.

5. Piscator. It is impossible true believers should fall from the faith, the
Decree and federall promise of God withstanding it. In Resp. ad Duplic.
Vorstii. page 246. and page 326. The natural infirmity of the flesh, whereby
they may lose faith, is so restrained and hindered by the absolute and
effectual decree of God, that it cannot break forth into act. Et page 238.
There is a fatal necessity of the perseverance of the faithful, because it
depends upon Gods absolute Decree.

6. Contra-Remonstrantes. They who have once believed, have no need to fear
perdition. In Collat. Hagi. p. 32.

7. Gomarus. They who have received the gifts of faith and charity, -- though
in respect of their humane frailty it is possible they may totally lose them,
yet in respect of the will of God, and his gracious Conservation by his Spirit,
it is impossible. In Declar. sententia suae. page 33.

8. D. Damman. The Elect can never fall totally nor finally. De Persever. page
169. and page 27. We know though the Spirit may be grieved in the faithful,
yet can he not be totally excussed or quenched.

9, Thysius. But what is this to the Elect, who though they do fall, yet they
cannot but be renewed? Ad Sum. Baron. page 73.

And because M. Baxter calls that addition [notwithstanding the most enormous
sins they can commit] a perverse insinuation; Behold: the Authors of it are

1 Contra-Remonstrants. It is not true, that they who may fall into grievous
sins, and commit the works of the flesh, may fall wholly from the faith. In
Coll. Hag. in 5. Artic.

2. Zanchy. Though by their grievous sins they may trouble the spirit, and
weaken faith: yet the Spirit does not wholly depart from them, nor is faith
wholly extinguished. L. Miscel. in depuls. Calum. page 305.

3. Rennercherus. Those whom God has once received into favor, their sin and
guilt being abolished, them he preserves in his grace as just persons, so that
they cannot fall from grace and perish through any sins, because they are and
remain pardoned in them. In Catena. cap. 27.

4. Piscator. The tenth head of Doctrine objected to our Divine is, That the
Regenerate cannot lose their faith through any heinous sins. But this is the
Doctrine that John teaches. Contra Schaff. page 12.

5. Mehnius. The sons of God though they fall into all the sins that Solomon
committed, they are always converted before the day of death. In Anchor. Anim.
p. 125.

6. Perkins. The foundation of our salvation is laid in the eternal Election
of God, so that a thousand sins, yea, the sins of the whole world, and all the
Devils that are in hell, can never make void God's election. It may come to
pass, that sins may harden our hearts, and weaken our faith, and grieve the
Spirit of God in us, but they cannot take away faith, nor quite excusse the
Holy Spirit. God does not condemn any man for sin, whom he has adopted into
the number of his children in Christ Jesus. In dialogo de statu homin. page 44.

7. D. Damman. The Regenerate heaping up many sins cannot proceed so far, as to
excusse the Spirit of grace utterly through an universal Apostasy. Et mox;
Because this seed of God cannot be ejected but only by sin, therefore the
Regenerate cannot eject it. De perseverant. page 33. and page 20. If none can
pluck them out of Christ or his fathers hands; therefore not the Devil nor
sin. And page 128. The Regenerate when he sins against conscience, he retains
so much grace, and has so much of Gods favor, that he cannot but rise again.
Item page 193. To the objection of Bertius: It follows, that if the Elect
cannot die in mortal sins, then if they always go on in mortal sin, they
shall never die. To this Doctor Damman answers, I grant it. But the question is
whether the Elect can always go on in sin: and page 144. The decree of
Election does imprint upon man and his affections an inevitable necessity both
of believing, and persevering: and therefore we think the righteous do always
persevere, and cannot but persevere. page 146. and therefore he concludes, they
need not consult about their perseverance; nor fear falling from grace, page
123.

Thus we see the matter of fact is made evident throughout every one of the
Five Articles, and I hope this is more then abundantly sufficient to clear
Tilenus from the guilt of the forgery, unworthy falsification, and perverse
insinuations, In Praefat. Sect. 5.
which M. Baxter has laid to his charge. But Master Baxter will be ready to
object; you know that the Synod of Dort owneth none of these: and it is that
Synod that is the Test of the Calvinists Anti-Arminianisme. How far the Synod
owns these Doctrines we shall examine anon. In the interim M. Baxter must not
think to escape by telling us, That Synod is the Test of the Calvinists
Anti-Arminianism; For that is not in question. Every one may observe, that the
Project which that Synod did drive at and carried on was, to cry down the
Arminian Cause and Party; and in this the Synodists agreed together. Adeo
facile cocunt, qui in fatalitatem absolutam tantu^ consentiunt. An Deus ex
part una statuatur insipiens, ex altera injustus, fusque deque habent: Salvo
tantum fato, Syncretismus Orthodoxus constat. Hoc qui non admittit, etiamsi non
nisi verissima dicat, in spongiam incumbat, and ex albo Orthodoxorum deleatur,
necesse est: Absolutum Decretum, id est, fatum, tessera est, ex qua
dignoscitur, an quis sit Orthodoxus, etiamsi id dicat, unde necessario
consequitur, Deum esse insipientem stulium. injustum, Tyranno quovis
crudeliorum, peccati Authorem and si quae alia ejus generis blasphema sunt.
Exam. Cens. p. 63. b. sive Apol. pro Confess. Remonstrant.
Supralapsarians of all sorts, as well as Sublapsarians, conspired in this. But
it is the Test of their Calvinisme that we are to bring them to; And where
shall we find such a Test, as will secure us of the sincerity of these men's
judgments? Calvin himself is not such a Test; He sometimes personates the
Sublapsarian, as the Synod of Dort Act. Synod. ed. in fol. 1. part. p. 203. m.
has dressed him up; Otherwhiles he Acts the part of a Supralapsarian, as he is
brought upon the stage by the Remonstrants: Apolog. pro Confess. Remonstr. p.
64, 65.
And Beza treads in the very footsteps of his Master in this Art of double
dealing, as will plainly appear to any that shall for his satisfaction)
consult the Remonstrants Apology cited in the Margin. Shall we take the Synod
of Dort, upon M. Baxter's bare word, for such a Test? he that would not be
deceived must learn to distrust. Indeed it appears that there was a great deal
of wash and Fucus Deus bone! Vidimus atque experiundo didicimus, quanta illi
art, quanto studio sententiam suam incrustare, tegere ac caelare semper conati
fuerint, bodieque adhuc conentur. Vix credo humanam industriam comminisci plura
posse, quam commenti sunt isti mortales, ut sententiae ipsorum, a sententiae
Supralapsariorum differ non videretur. ibid.
, of daubing and paintry used, at the drawing up the Canons touching the
several Articles, to make them look of the same complexion: but if we examine
the Doctors, as Daniel did his Elders apart, we shall find their opinions to
stand at push o'pike one against another. For instance. If you would inquire,
Whether the Election be necessarily made out of the Corrupt Mass, some of
those Divines will tell you it is, and some, as positively; affirm it is not.

That the Decree of Election is of certain men, out of mankind fallen into sin
and lost, is collected out of Romans 9.15, 16. I will have mercy upon whom I will
have mercy, and verse 23. The vessels of mercy prepared unto glory, and verse
22. the Reprobates are called vessels of wrath. But the wrath of God toward
men does presuppose their sin. Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven, against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Also Ephesians. 1. we
are said to be elected in Christ, that we might be holy. Also, we are said to
be predestined unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ; which cannot be
said but with respect to sin. The Belgic Professors. Act. Synod. Dort. Part.
3. Page 4.

And the Divines of Zeeland, ibid. page 43. That Election is made out of
mankind fallen, is proved out of Romans 9.15, 16. where the purpose of Election
is called, Having mercy, and verse. 23. the Elect are called vessels of Mercy.
Now mercy supposes misery. Romans 11.32. God has shut up all in unbelief, that
he might have mercy upon all: and 2 Timothy 1.9. He has called us according to
his purpose and grace etc. That mercy given to us in Christ does presuppose
sin, and show us the remedy of it.

But the Deputies of the Synod of South-Holland are of another judgment, ibid.
page 34. f. Whether in his election God considered man as fallen, or not fallen,
they think it not necessary to determine, so that it be concluded, that God
considered all men in a like state in his election; that the Elect were no
better then the Non-elect, whether in themselves, or in Gods gracious
estimation. And

Gomarus is most positive in this opinion; and therefore he professed in the open
Synod, that he could not approve of the judgment of the four Belgic
Professors, concerning the object of Predestination; because he thought God did
consider man as not fallen, in his predestination of him. Vt supra in Sess. 107.
part. 1. Whereupon he set down his own judgment apart by it self; wherein he
makes mankind simply considered the object of the Decree. part. 3. page 21.

II. If you inquire whether Christ be the foundation of Election; you will
find them divided in their judgment here too. The Drent Divines say, that
Christ is the foundation of Election, not as he is God, nor as he is man, but
as he is God-man, our head and eternal Redeemer, by whom we are saved: because
he, by his merit, has procured the grace of God for us, and by his spirit he
effects faith in us. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. Art. Syn. Dord. part. 3. page 80. f.
These. 8. And the Hassien Divines to the same purpose, ibid. part. 2. page 25.

But Pet. Molin. says otherwise, ibid. part. 1. page 290. m.

Christ as he is man and the mediator, he is head of the elect, but not the
cause of election; seeing he himself as he is man is elect. He is the
meritorious cause of our salvation, and our Ransom. But of two alike sinful,
he is not the cause why the one is preferred before the other. The Cause is to
be sought in Gods beneplaciture and free love, which in order goes before the
intercession of the Son. For the Father sent the Son and gave him to be the
Redeemer. This is his Answer to that Question, [whether Christ be the
Foundation of Election?] which is negative.

III. If you inquire, whether the elect be beloved out of Christ; they are at
odds here too, for some of them say,

When we affirm that the love of the Father whereby he chose us, goes in order
before the intercession of the Son, our meaning is not, that the elect are
beloved of God, out of Christ; For though the love of the Father went before
the sending of his Son, yet he never loved us but in consideration of his Son,
neither would he ever confer any benefit upon the elect, but in and through his
Son. Pet. Molin. ubi supra.

Yet the Synod rejects it as an error in them, who teach, that Christ neither
could nor ought to die for those, whom God dearly loved, and chose unto
eternal life, seeing such stood in no need of Christ's death. Cap. 2. Reject.
7. page 253. part. 1. Act. Syn. Dord.

IV. If you inquire, whether Reprobation has respect, only, or not at all, to
the fall of Mankind; They run division likewise upon this Article; for some of
them say, it has, and others as confidently aver that it has not.

Sibrandus Lubbertus says, We do not teach that God by his absolute will and
decree, without any respect to sin, has ordained any to damnation. But we say,
God would declare his justice in the damnation of the Reprobate; and therefore
he would not appoint any to damnation but for sin. Act. Syn. Dord. part. 3.
page 14.

And the Divines of Great Britain say, Reprobation or Non-election is Gods
eternal decree, whereby, for his own most free good pleasure, he determined
not to have mercy upon some persons fallen in Adam, so far forth, as to deliver
them effectually, from the state of misery, by Christ, and bring them
infallibly unto blessedness. De Reprob. These. 1 page 11 part. 2.

But Gomarus says, God had no respect at all to sin, as going before it, in
the Decree of Reprobation. For, says He, Peremptory Reprobation is the Decree
of God, whereby, for his own most free pleasure, to the declaration of his
avenging justice, he determined to give neither grace nor glory to certain men,
out of universal mankind, but to suffer them freely to fall into sin, and to
leave them in their sins, and at last justly to condemn them for their sins.
ibid. part. 3. page 24. These. 2. And their Deputies of the Synod of
South-Holland to the same sense, making mankind in general, not considered as
fallen, and in the corrupt mass, the object of the Decree of Election and
Reprobation. ibid. page 35. p.

V. If you inquire concerning the Act of Reprobation; whether it be Negative
only, or Negative and Affirmative also; The Synodists are not all of one mind
in this point neither.

For the Hassien Divines say, The Divines of the Reformed Churches do think, we
must accurately distinguish betwixt the two Acts of Reprobation, whereof one is
negative, viz. The purpose of God not to have mercy, or preterition: The other
affirmative, viz. his purpose to damn, or ordination to destruction as a just
punishment. Act. Syn. Dor. page 33. part. 2.

And the Churches of Wedderav. There are two acts of Reprobation; Preterition,
or Non-election, and Damnation, or preparation of punishment. ibid. page 40.
These. 2. item page 45. th. 2.

But the Divines of Great Britain were of another opinion. For they say, The
proper acts of reprobation as it is opposed to election, we think to be no
other, then the denial of the same glory and the same grace, which are
prepared for the children of God in election. And in the Decree of election,
are prepared, for them, Glory and effectual Grace, and with that intention,
that it should be effectual: that is, that by such grace, they may be brought,
infallibly, to the said Glory. That such Grace and Glory is prepared for the
Reprobates, we deny. ibid. page 11. a. m.

These differences we observe amongst them in matters that relate to Tilenus
his first Article. So in reference to the Second Article; If you inquire,

I. Whether Christ has dyed for All, or only for the Elect; you will find
them (whatever they seem to say in the full Synod) according to their Chamber
Practice, to contradict one another; For the Divines of Great Britain do
determine, That,

God, pitying mankind, fallen, sent his Son, who gave himself a price of
Redemption (or a Ransom) for the sins of the whole world. Acta Syn. Dor. page
78. These. 3. part. 2.

Martinius giving in his Suffrage, upon this Article, does resolve thus. There
is a certain Philanthropy of God, whereby he loves all mankind fallen, and
seriously would have them all to be saved, ibid. page 103. These. 1. and Th. 8.
If this Redemption be not supposed as a common benefit bestowed upon all: that
indifferent and promiscuous preaching of the Gospel, committed to the
Apostles, to be performed amongst All nations, will have no true foundation. (
Et these. 9.) And seeing we abhor to say this; it is to be considered, how
much they speak against most clear and known principles, who, at their
pleasure, do plainly deny, that Christ died for all men. These. 10. Neither will
it satisfy to propose such a sufficiency, as might be enough; but such as is
altogether enough in God's and Christ's account. For otherwise the command and
promise of the Gospel will be overthrown.

For ( These. 11.) from a benefit, that is sufficient indeed, but not designed
for me by a true intention, how can there be deduced a necessity of my
believing it, to belong unto me? And These. 26. he gives the chief Reasons which
induced him to be of this opinion, which are three.

1. That the Scriptures might be reconciled without wresting.

2. That the Glory of Gods truth, mercy and justice, in the commands, promises
and threatenings of the Gospel, might be preserved; lest by these God should be
thought to will and do something otherwise then the words signify.

3. That it may be manifest, that the blame of the destruction of the wicked
may be in themselves, not in the defect of a remedy, by which they might be
saved. Thus Martinius sent to the Synod from Breme, Act. Syn. Dord. part. 2.
page 104. etc.

And Ludovicus Crocius another of the Bremish Divines, sets down his opinion
somewhat to the same purpose, though not so well, or so fully (as M. Baxter
does intimate) See ibid. page 117. These. 2.3.

But the Divines of the Palatinate were of another judgment; for they say;
That the general love of God to sinners is remarkable. But that Love is more
excellent, which moved God to give his Son to save us from our sins. This is
not general but special, not common to all and every man, but proper to the
elect. ibid. page 83.

And the Divines of Geneva, to the same purpose; Christ, out of the Fathers
good pleasure merely, was destined and given to be Mediator and Head to a
certain number of men, constituting his body Mystical, by Gods election. These.
1. page 100. and These. 2.

For these, Christ, who best understood his own office, would and decreed to
die, and to add the infinite price of his death, a singular and most
effectual intention of his will.

And Iselburg says, Christ died, or laid down his life, for all and every one
of his elect sheep or Faithful, and in their stead, and for their good only.
Ibid. page 111. These. 3.

And the Ministers of Emden say, Christ according to the intention, counsil and
decree of his Father, died only for the Elect. Ibid. page 119. q. 4.

The Belgic Professors say, If you consider the proper end, and the singular
and saving efficacy of Christ's death, we affirm that, according to his
Fathers and his own counsil, Jesus Christ died, not for the Reprobates and
those that perish, but only for the Elect, and those that do believe. Act.
Syn. Dor. part. 3. page 88. f.

The Brethren of North-Holland say, The Scripture says Christ died for All,
that is, for All the Elect out of all sorts of men. Ibid. p. 107. and p. 108.
They say, That of the Remonstrants is false, that the intention of the Father,
delivering his Son to death, and of the Son in undergoing death, was, that by
the same he might save all and every one, though through the fault of many of
them the matter happens otherwise.

The Brethren of Zeeland offer these Arguments (such as they are) against
Christ's death for all, ibid. page 112. These. 2. and 3. If Christ paid a price
of Redemption for all and every man, then All and every one ought to be saved,
and none to perish.

But this is false etc.

If reconciliation with God, and remission of sins be impetrated for all and
every man, then the word of reconciliation is also to be preached to all and
every one. But the Consequent is false. Ergo.

The Deputies of the Synod of Groningen say, we do believe, that according to
the Father's intention, delivering his Son to death, and the Son's, in
suffering it, reconciliation with God and remission of sins is obtained only
for the elect. Ibid. p. 138.

The Deputies of the Synod of Gallo-Belgia say, That according to the
Scripture, Christ really died for none, but believers. And the will of the
Father in sending his Son, and of the Son in dying was no other. Page 151.
These. 2.

The Deputies of the Synod of Gelderland, shall conclude this part of the
contradiction; and the Reader shall have their very Syllogismes, that he may
learn Logic with his Divinity.

Whosoever God calls to salvation, purchased by the death of Christ, for them
Christ died. But God calls not every man to salvation, purchased by the death
of Christ. Therefore Christ dyed not for all.

Whomsoever God commands to believe in Christ crucified, for them Christ dyed.
God does not command every man to believe in Christ crucified. Ergo. ibid. page
93.

II. If we inquire who then the Impetration of Reconciliation be to be
separated from the Application of it, we find them at Boy's play, at Heads and
Hollies, here too; for some are for the Affirmative; as

Martinius. That external Calling does necessarily require, as going before
it, these things; the promise and sending of the Son, and the paying of a
Ransom to take away sin, and God so appeased, that he requires no other
sacrifice of any man for sin, being content with that most full one (of
Christ's,) and that there be no need of any other merit or satisfaction, for
man's reconciliation, so that (which ought to be done in all remedies) there be
an application of the medicine Act. Syn. Dord. part. 2. p. 104. These. 7. and
these. 23. Christ has merited for all God's favor, to be really obtained, if
they do believe, and so by Gods favor righteousness and life. (and These. 24.)
This his favor God commonly declares by his Gospel: which notwithstanding
(because he keeps the merits of his Son in his own power, as being given and
propounded, not by us, but by himself) he takes order it shall be published,
to whom he pleases, and especially by that means it is effectual, in whom,
when, and how far he pleases: and These. 25. Hence it is manifest, that the
merit or impetration, and the application, are and are not, of an equal
latitude, in a diverse respect.

Ludovicus Crocius is of the same judgment too. Vid. ibid. page 117. These. 2,
3, 4.

But these two great lights of the Church of Breme (as far as I can observe,
for the present) are eclipsed by the Negative Suffrages of all the rest of that
Synod. But first let us hear the judgment of Peter Moulin, inserted amongst
the Acts of the Synod, Part. 1. page 292.

The Sectaries, says He, pretend, that Christ by his death, has impetrated
reconciliation and remission of sins for all and every man: which is pressed with
so many Inconveniences, says He, and draws so many wicked absurdities after
it, that it is a wonder, they can strive against it. Et paulo post,

God is manifestly illuded by this Doctrine: and after, Thus God is not only
illuded, but He himself is feigned to illude mankind. And, in short, he
concludes, that this impetration (as distinguished from the Application) is
vain and ridiculous.

The Divines of the Palatinate say, That, it is an evident error in the
Remonstrants, that they do divide and sever the impetration, and application of
the benefits of Christ, according to several objects: and not judge them to be
applied to all those for whom they are impetrated. Act. Syn. Dord. part. 2.
page 87. To the same purpose, the Helvetians, page 94. these. 3. and they in the
Name of the Churches of Wedderav. page 97. these. 2. So the Divines of Geneva,
page 103. these. 7, 8. And Iselburg contradicts his brethren before mentioned;
for he says, Whomsoever Christ has reconciled to his Father by his death, to
all them and to them only, he does apply, truly, certainly and absolutely,
that impetrated reconciliation with God, and the remission of all their sins,
ibid. page 113. these. 5. See also These. 4, 6, 7, 8. So the Ministers of Embden.
page 119. quast. 5. And amongst the Provincial Divines, see to this sense page
105. p. 109. m. 113. m. etc. 134, 135, 137. f. 140. These. 3, 4. 145. p. p. 151.
These. 3. ( Part. 3.) in folio.

III. If you inquire of those Divines whether all that hear the Holy Gospel
be commanded to believe in Christ, or no; they are not agreed in this, (which
is one of the chief) fundamental Articles; They are yea and nay here too.

For the Synod says, ( Cap. 2. Art. 5.) It is the promise of the Gospel, That
whosoever believes in Christ Crucified, should not perish, but have life
everlasting: which promise together with the injunction of repentance and
faith, ought promiscuously and without distinction, to be declared and
published to all men and people, to whom God in his good pleasure sends the
Gospel. Act. Syn. Dord. part. 1. page 252.

But P. Moulin was of another judgment ( ibid. 294.) The Sectaries, says he,
are always up with this Argument; What all are bound to believe, is true. But
that Christ dyed for them, all are bound to believe. Therefore, it is true.
The Minor of the Syllogism is false; says D. Moulin.

And some of those, who subscribed the Former Article, have declared themselves
of another judgment in their single Suffrages. As the Deputies of the Synod of
Gelderland, who argue thus, Whomsoever God commands to believe in Christ
crucified, for them Christ dyed.

God does not command every man to believe in Christ Crucified. Therefore
Christ dyed not for every man. They have somewhat a better Syllogism
following, but the same doctrine still, in these words; They only whom Christ
calls unto him, they only are commanded to come unto him, that is, to believe
in him. Act. Synod. Dort. part. 3. page 95. f. and page 100. a. m. and after.
Christ calls unto him only the thirsty, the laboring, burdened, such as
acknowledge their own blindness, want and nakedness. Therefore -- Hereupon we
do not command all promiscuously to believe in Christ: though we press this
also, that they cannot enter into life eternal, nor be delivered from sin, the
wrath of God and damnation, but through Christ only.


Again, in Questions relating to the third and fourth Articles, you will be as
far to seek, if you have recourse to their judgment for a Resolution. For
herein they cannot agree upon a verdict, how ever they made a shift to shuffle
up their Canons and Rejections. For inquire of them, whether the unregenerate
have power to understand the sense of Holy Scripture? The Divines of Great
Britain do affirm it; To certain of the Non-Elect there is granted a kind of
supernatural illumination, Act. S. V. part. 2. page 188.
by virtue whereof they may understand the contents of Gods word to be true,
and yield an unfeigned assent unto them. De 5. Artic. These. 1. And the Divines
of Drent say, That man fallen, by nature though corrupt, can hear the word of
God, understand, believe it to be true, and in some measure be affected with
it. To which purpose Paul treats in the first and second Chapters to the
Romans. And this also appears from hence, in that the Devils themselves who are
fallen, more foully then man, and wholly destitute of Gods grace, yet can do
these things. Luk 14.13. Act. 16.17. Jam. 2.19. We therefore grant, Act. Synod.
Dord. part. 3. page 211. f.
in a sound sense, what the Remonstrants say, that by the strength of freewill
men may attentively hear and read the Gospel revealed.

But the judgment of the Brethren of North-Holland is otherwise; for they say,
That the blindness of man's mind in spiritual matters is so great, that
although the Gospel be preached to him, yet without the internal illumination
of the Holy Spirit, he cannot understand the sense of Scripture, Ibid. page
175. and p. 170. m.
necessary to be known, believed, hoped in, and practiced. And the Deputies of
Over-Issel say, The understanding being blind, by its natural power, without
some other, and that a supernatural or spiritual light, Ibid. page 195. V.
169.
it can by no means comprehend the good that is revealed by the Gospel. And
the Deputies of the Synod of Groaning do affirm, That an unregenerate man, that
is, considered in the fall, has nothing in him, whereby he is able to dispose
himself unto supernatural good. The Holy Ghost does expressly deny, that man,
by the light and gifts of nature remaining in him, Ibid. p. 206,
may be raised to the true knowledge of God. Ibid. p. 219.
To the same purpose do the Deputies of the Synod of Gallo-Belgia express
themselves; In the state of sin, say they, the natural man is blind; and
perceives not the things of the Spirit of God; and that not only because he
is unable to find them out before their Revelation; but also because after they
are revealed to him, he cannot savingly understand, or yield assent unto them,
without the internal illumination of the Holy Spirit and special grace.

Again if you inquire, whether the unregenerate be able to do any thing, that
may conduce to their comfort in gaining assurance of their election and
regeneration; The Synod does at least imply it, in the Chapter of
Predestination Artic. 16. where they say, That those, who do not as yet
effectually perceive in themselves a lively faith, or a sure confidence of
heart in Christ etc. such as these ought not to be cast down at the mention of
Reprobation, nor reckon themselves among the reprobate; but must diligently go
forward in the use of those means, by which, God has promised, that he will
work these things in us, and ardently desire and humbly and reverently expect
the good hour of more plentiful grace. If this does not imply a power in them
to do so, as is here directed, they do but trifle to no purpose but to blind
the Reader.

That they speak here of the unregenerate appears, 1. Because they propound the
case of the Regenerate, in the infancy of their Regeneration, in the words
following, and sure they would not be guilty of so gross a Tautology, as to
repeat the same thing twice in one Article. 2. Because if this does not
concern the unregenerate, there is no light of hope in the Article, no not so
much as for the Elect, that are yet in an unregenerate state; and surely they
would not be so negligent as to omit provision for their encouragement unto
duty, which therefore must needs be this, they must use the means, etc. And yet
to assert that the unregenerate has any such power, this is rejected as an
error, that had troubled the Churches, etc. For that an unregenerate man is
not properly, nor totally dead in sins, nor destitute of all strength tending
to spiritual good, but that he is able to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, or everlasting life, etc. This they reject. Chap. 3. and. 4.
Reject. 4.

Again, if you inquire, whether a man can do more good then he does, or omit
more evil then he omitteth; The British Divines affirm he can, whether you
understand it of the unregenerate, Act. Synod. Dor. part. 2. page 135.
or of the regenerate. But the Deputies of the Synod of Gelderland, ib. part.
3. page 164.
do deny it; for they Answer thus. Per Gratiam Dei potest. He may do it by the
grace of God: for he can do all things through Christ that strengthens him. But
without the grace of God he can do no such thing; and he that says the
contrary, He is injurious to the grace of God on one side, and on the other
side he falls into plain Pelagianisme, as they say. Here observe, the question
is propounded by them concerning the Regenerate, one in a state of Grace, and
supposed to be under the influences of the divine assistance according to that
state, whether such an one can do more good then he does, or omit more evil
then he omitteth. Now they do not answer directly and positively, that he can,
but with this addition, By the Grace of God, he can do it; which is an
insinuation of the negative, that he cannot without a further measure of Grace
superadded, to that; wherein, being regenerated, He is upposed to stand, as was
said before.

Again, if we have recourse to this Oracle at Dort, to be informed; whether the
New Covenant be made with all and every man, and consequently, whether the
Promises of the Gospel be General; Their Decisions are off and on here too;
videtur quod sic, and probatur quod non; For example

The Divines of Great Britain do affirm, That there is an Universal
promiscuous Promise Evangelical founded in the merit of Christ's death. De Art.
Part. 2. page 79.
2. These. 4. and These. 5. They say, That according to this promise salvation is
offered unto all.

And Martinius says, That there is a common (or general) love of God toward
all mankind fallen, and that God seriously would have all men to be saved. De
Art. 2. These. 1. And accordingly, He says, there is a promiscuous calling
allotted to the Elect and Reprobate, These. 2. And a common execution (or
exhibition) of Grace. These. 6. See the rest, cited out of him above, to the
same purpose.

The Belgic Professors do affirm; That it is not denied by the Orthodox, but
to whomsoever the Gospel is preached, the Ransom of Christ, as such, is to be
declared indifferently, and offered in Christ's name, and that seriously, and
according to the counsil of the Father, etc. Act. Syn. Dord. par. 3. page 88 m.

But all are not of this mind. For the Brethren of Vtrecht say, The promises of
the Gospel are universal, but not simply, as belonging to every one of all
kinds, but to all and every believer and elect person. Ibid. page 118. and 123.

As concerning the new Covenant's being established with every man; we answer,
that whether God could do it or no, we will not dispute: but that he would so
establish it, we deny.

Of the same judgment are the Deputies of the Churches of Friesland. Ibid.
130. And the whole Synod rejects it as an error in them that teach, That all
men are received into the state of reconciliation and grace of the Covenant, so
that no body shall be condemned for Original sin, nor, in respect of it, be
liable to death or damnation, but that all are acquitted and freed from the
guilt of that sin. Cap. 2. Rej. 5. page 253.

Let us ask them another Question, viz. Whether God wills seriously, that All
men be saved? Some say, yes; As

Martinius, who says, There is a common Love of God toward all mankind being
fallen, whereby he would seriously have all men to be saved. De Art. 2. These. 1.

And the Divines of Wedderau; God in calling the Reprobate, wills their
conversion and salvation seriously, with a will approving it, though not
effecting it. Ibid. page 152.

Lubbertus says, We do not teach, that God simply would not have all men to be
converted and saved; neither do we teach that God feigneth, or would not
seriously the conversion of all, or that he has contradictory wills. But we
teach that he seriously wills all men's conversion and salvation in respect of
approbation and his rejoicing (in it.) Act. Syn. Dor. par. 3. page 13. m.

But the Divines of Embden, on the contrary, say, Hence arises another
question, Whether God according to his good pleasure, seriously wills that all
men should be saved. The Remonstrants affirm it, every where. But we deny it.
Part. 2. page 74. Quaest. 13.

The Deputies of the Synod of Groaning, say, That general will (of God)
desiring and intending the conversion and salvation of all, is the fiction of
man's brain, and transformes God into an impotent man, who desires that all men
should be saved, but is not able to effect it. Ibid page 7^. p. m.

Shall we try these Divines with another question; Whether the Reprobates be
called unto salvation seriously, or no?

Sibrand Lubbertus, is for the Affirmative; as was now alleged; and so are
the Synod in their Decrees, where they say, That, as many as are called by the
Gospel, are called seriously. For God by his word does seriously and most truly
declare, what is acceptable to him, namely that those that are called, come
unto him: and moreover does seriously promise to all such, as come to him, and
believe in him, rest for their souls, and life eternal. Cap. 3. and 4. Art. 8.

The British Divines say, Those whom God does thus affect by his Spirit, using
the means of his Word, those he does truly and seriously call and invite to
faith and conversion. De. 3. and 4. Art. Th. 3. p. 128. and in explicat. We
must judge, by the nature of the benefit offered, and the clear word of God,
of those helps of grace, which are administered unto men, and not by the abuse
and event. Seeing therefore, that the Gospel, according to its own nature, calls
men to repentance and salvation, seeing the excitations of Divine grace tend
the same way, we must conclude, that God does nothing here feignedly. This is
proved by those serious and patheticall Beseechings. 2 Cor. 5.2. (19.) We
beseech you in Christ's stead, that ye would be reconciled unto God.
Exhortations, 2 Cor. 6.1. We exhort you not to receive the grace of God in
vain. Expostulations. Gal. 1 6. I wonder you are so soon removed from him that
has called you unto the grace of Christ. Promises. Apoc 3.20. Behold, I stand
at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will
come in unto him, etc.

But this Doctrine will not down with the Deputies of the Synod of Gelderland:
we had their invincible Syllogismes before, whereof the Minors are these. 1.
God calls not all men to salvation. 2. God does not command every man to
believe in Christ: 3. Christ calls unto him the thirsty etc. only. But they
deliver their mind more roundly, upon the third Article; For whereas the
Remonstrants do argue, that these two things are very repugnant, That God would
have a man to be saved, and yet should not give him what is necessary to enable
him to convert and believe, (without which salvation is not to be had.) To this
they Reply, That it seems no less repugnant to them, that God should call one
to salvation, and yet not communicate salvation to him. Whence we conclude (say
they) Seeing God does not give to all that are called that which is necessary,
that they might convert and believe (and he could give it if he would),
therefore he would not communicate salvation unto all men, and therefore
neither would he call unto salvation All, that are outwardly called: nay seeing
God calls All to salvation, whom he calls; therefore as many as are not called
unto salvation, are not called of God; that is to say, those, to whom he will
not give, what is necessary for them, that they may convert and believe. Et
mox. And by this means we shall preserve the Dignity of the (Divine) Calling.
Act. Syn. Dord. part. 3. page 163.

To this agrees the Declaration of the Judgment of the Deputies of Groningen;
The sound of Preaching does promiscuously reach the ears of all men: but in
effect it calls them only whom God has elected to eternal life. For Vocation
does properly belong to them by God's Ordination. Ibid. page 208. p.

May we take the confidence to examine their sweet accord in one thing more;
Are any dispositions required unto Faith and Conversion, or not? What say those
Divines to this Problem?

There are some external works ordinarily required of men, before they be
brought to the state of Regeneration or Conversion, which are wont sometimes to
be freely done, sometimes freely to be omitted of them; as, to go to Church, to
hear the Word, and such like. This is the judgment of the British Divines.
Part. 2. page 128. These. 1. and These. 2. They say, There are some internal
effects, praevious to Conversion or Regeneration, which are stirred up by the
power of the Word and Spirit, in the hearts of such as are not yet justified;
such are the knowledge of the Divine will, sense of Sin, sear of Pain, thinking
of Deliverance, some hope of Pardon. And page 131. This Spiritual birth does
presuppose the soul to be stirred up by the Spirit, using the organ or
instrument of the Word.

To the like purpose, do the Divines of the Palatinate deliver their Judgment,
in this Point. It Is certain, they say, that some Acts of Sorrow, Contrition,
Acknowledgement of sin, etc. do precede Faith and Conversion in a man that is
to be regenerated; whiles by the Ministry of the Law and Gospel he is prepared
to receive Grace. Ibid. page 137. p. And so the Divines of Geneva; The salutary
sense and feeling of sin, joined with a thirst after the remedy, a good hope,
softness of heart, hatred of sin, and flying unto God, these are latent
effects of the holy Spirit, preparing and drawing a man by little and little to
the grace of Justification, and unto Regeneration. Ibid. p. 155. These. 2.

But with the Hassian Divines this is pure Remonstrant or Arminian Doctrine;
and therefore they reject this as Heterodox; That a man in the state of sin,
before Faith and the Spirit of Renovation, has, or may have any zeal, care or
study, to obtain Salvation; and that he may hear God's word, be grieved for
sin, desire saving grace, and the Spirit of Renovation; and that this is most
profitable and most necessary to the obtaining of Faith and the Spirit of
Renovation, as the Remonstrants do expressly teach. Also, That a man in the
state of sin, before his Regeneration and Vivification, has the knowledge of
his (spiritual) death, grief and sorrow for it, desire of deliverance, hunger
and thirst after life, likewise confession of sins, contrition, initiall fear,
etc. as our Brethren the Remonstrants, speak at the Conference at the Hague.
All this they reject. Ibid. p. 144. Reject. 6.

The Divines of Embden are of the same judgment. Vid. ibid. page 178. Quaest.
13.

Those of Vtrecht say, The heart and affections of an unregenerate man are
quite corrupt; so that till he be regenerate, he cannot hunger after the
salutary grace of God, and newness of life, nor desire deliverance from sin,
nor beg the Spirit of Regeneration. Part. 3. page 184. These. 6.

The Deputies of the Synod of Groningen, deliver themselves to the same sense
too. Ib. page 73. p.

But it is high time to explore the judgment of these Divines in some few
points relating to the Fifth and last Article. Touching which, the first thing
I shall propound for the Reader's satisfaction, shall be, Perseverance be a
Condition of the yea or no? The Divines of the Palatinate Judic. de Artic.
quinto inter Jud. Th. exter. p. 206. a. m.
say, That Perseverance is God's gift. But the Remonstrants are deceived and do
deceive, in that they think Perseverance, being reckoned an effect of Election
and a gift of God, cannot be a Condition of the Covenant, commanded by God, and
to be performed freely by us: As if these were inconsistent and repugnant,
being rather subordinate and very Consentaneous. For God, who in the New
Covenant prescribes the condition of Perseverance, to all the adult, that are
in Covenant, and by that prescript requires it, does not leave it suspended
upon the strength of their free will, but does effectually work and produce it
in them.

That it is a condition and under command, though it be the gift of God, is the
acknowledgement of the Judic. de 5. Art. inter Jud. Th. pro p. 221. a.m.
Belgic Professors, and of the Brethren of Vtrecht Ibid. page 252. Th. 2.
, and the Divines of Drent Ibid. 273. Th. 4.
. But this Doctrine is rejected by the whole Synod in their First Rejection
Act. Syn. 1. part. page 268. Th. 1.
, upon the fifth head of Doctrine. And the Divines of Embden Ib. 2. part. page
246. q. 3.
do determine thus, Perseverantia non est Conditio N. P. id est, Perseverance
is not a Condition of the New Covenant, prae-required to be performed by men,
that the promise of the New Covenant may he sure: but it is the very gift of
the New Covenant, which God has promised to bestow freely upon his Elect. See
to the like sense the Judgments of the Divines of Great Britain Ib. p. 201.
Th. 2.
, and Geneva Ib. p. 226. Th. 2.
.

2. Suppose we should propound this easy Question, Whether Salvation or
eternal life, be the reward of Faith, or only the end of it? This Question,
one would think so clearly and peremptorily resolved in Scripture, that wise
men could not disagree in the Solution of it; yet behold! here we have pro, and
con, too. Salus in Credentibus and Proemium est fidei 2 Timothy 4.8. and Finis. 1
Pet. 1.8. So says Gomarus, the great Supralapsarian Act. Sy. 3. part. page 21.
f.
. That is, Salvation in the Believers, is as well the reward of faith as the
end of it. Yet the Deputies of the Synod of Gelderland Ibid. page 30. p.
will not admit of this, Uti gratis filii fimus, etc. That is, As we are made
sons and obtain the right of the inheritance freely, so are we freely also
put into the possession of that inheritance. Therefore it is ill said, that
eternal life, as a reward, is decreed and given by God to those that fulfill
the conditions which he has prescribed. For to give life as a reward, upon the
performance of a condition, upon which, that life was decreed, as a reward,
(this) is to give life not altogether freely and of good pleasure, but of debt.

3. Let us inquire of them, Whether a Temporary faith be a true faith, or only
hypocritical? What do they resolve of this? The British Divines say Sententia
De Artic. 5. explic These. 1. A^^. Syn. part. 2. page 189. p.
, The Non-Elect may give an unfeigned assent to the Gospel. The seed which fell
upon stony ground, Luke 8.13. does denote those hearers which believe for a
time, that is, which assent to the Divine Revelations, especially to the
Evangelicall Covenant: And that this Assent was unfeigned is evident, in that
the Word was received with joy. Simon Magus, Act. 8.12. believed Philip
evangelizing the things that appertained unto the Kingdom of God, and gave a
Testimony of his Faith by receiving the Sacrament of Baptism. Hymenaeus and
Alexander made shipwreck of the faith, not that which is counterfeit or
feigned, but a true one. For he is not to be blamed, that falls off from an
hypocritical faith: neither is shipwreck made of a feigned faith, but a
detection and discovery: neither can a man be shipwrackt, unless he were truly
in the ship, etc. Thus our Learned Divines, and some others with them. But
others of them, and by name the Deputies of Over-Issel Act. Syn. 3. part. page
277. p. p.
, are of another judgment, for they say, Quale discrimen est inter hypocritam,
and verum Christianum, tale quoque est inter fidem temporariam and salvificam.
Look what difference there is betwixt a true Christian and an Hypocrite, the
same difference there is betwixt a temporary and a saving Faith.

4. If you inquire of them, Whether Faith may be lost or no; here they divide
themselves and their opinions. Some say the Act may be lost, but not the Habit.
Others do maintain that not the Habit nor the Act neither. That the Habit, the
seed, the root, the Spirit of Faith may be lost, we deny. That the Act, the
trust, the comfort may be cut off, and that totally, though not finally, that
we grant, say the Divines of Gelderland De 5. Artic. Act. Syn. Dor. 3. part.
page 228. f.
. And so the Deputies of Friesland Ibid. page 261. These. 3.
; As to the Act of Faith, we easily grant, that through the frauds of Satan,
the allurements of the world, and the malignant power of the flesh, it may be
represt, interrupted, and as it were suffocated for a time. But as to the Habit
of Faith, which is not a transient but an immanent Act, infused into us of the
Holy Ghost, whereby our hearts are purified, and we united as members to Christ
our head, and quickened by his Spirit, we deny it. But the Divines of Drent
Ibid. page 275. p. Quid vetat, quo minus Sancti, dvm ipsa actualia peccata, and
quidem crassio ra, comittunt, simuactum fidel sentiant? etc.
are of opinion, that whether you speak of the Act or of the Habit of Faith,
neither of them can be lost amongst such rubbish as the works of the flesh. The
Saints may commit sins and gross ones, prey upon the Carcass of corruption,
and yet keep their faith, the mean while, upon wing, and in action.

5. If you inquire into the nature of those sins, which it is possible for the
Faithful to fall into; They will tell you, They have no such Amulet, or
charm, as can keep them absolutely secure and free from the shot, darts or
impressions of their Ghostly enemies: They are liable not only to be
assaulted, but foiled also as well as others; and to fall into such horrid sins
as do most grievously wound, and directly wast the conscience See Act, Syn.
Dor. 2. part. page (ed in fol.) 192. th. 3.202. f. 208. a. m. 216. p. p. 219.
f. 222. th. 3.233. these. 9, 10, 11. and part. 3. page 253. p. 275. p. See also
Part. 1. p. 266. De Persever. Sanct. Art. 5.
. In atrocia, in gravia, in gravissima peccata, as the British Divines have
it. In graviora and atrociora contra conscientiam, as they of the Palatinate;
in gravissima and atrocissima, as those of Hassia; in gravia and enormia
peccata -- ita ut conscientiam gravissime laedant, as those of Helvetia; in
atrocia peccata, adeoque Conscientiam sibi vastant, as those from the
correspondence of Wedderau. Possunt quidem in atrocia and conscientiam direct
vastantia scelera, incidere, as the Divines of Drent; and as the effects
hereof, angores and pavores Conscientiae patiantur; they may feel and suffer
the anguish and horror of Conscience, as the Divines of Breme conclude; yet a
many of them do account these but slips, and sins of infirmity only. As
Sibrandus Lubbertus Act. Syn. Dor. part. 3. p. 227. p.
implies in these words; Etsi regeniti aliquando ex infirmitate labuntur, and
fides illorum deliquium patitur, etc. And this Suffrage of his was subscribed
by Polyander, Gomarus, Thysius, and Walaeus. So the Brethren of North-Holland
Ib. p. 237. f.
, Statuunt ex Dei Verbo, vere fideles, etsi ex imbecillitate carnis nonnunquam
labantur and in peccata conscientiam graviter laedentia incidunt, non tamen
posse ad Mortem peccare etc. So the Divines of Drent Ibid. page 275. p.
do hold, that the Saints may act gross sins, and their Christian saving faith
together, Quia ex infirmitate tantum, sine desperatione peccant. Ubi supra.

Lastly, if you demand of them, what condition a faithful man brings himself
into, by committing such horrid wasting sins; They will tell you, See for this
Act. Syn. Dor. 2. part p. 9. p. m. 192, 193. 194, th. 3, 4, 5, 6. cum,
explicat. and p. 202. th. 5. exp. 244. th. 54, 56,
He contracts a damnable guilt, whereby (1.) he loses his present aptitude to
enter into the kingdom of Heaven, (2.) he has reason to fear, and that
deservedly, the Divine wrath and revenging justice, (3.) that he stands as a
person, by his own demerit, to be damned; so that should he now die, before he
has obtained his pardon, through his renewed Acts of Faith and Repentance, and
be actually absolved, it were impossible but he should perish: Notwithstanding
(so great a Paradox is in this Divinity) they tell you, That, at the same
instant, the seed of Regeneration with all fundamental gifts, without which
the state of Regeneration cannot possibly consist, are preserved safe and sound
in him, so that he has a saving faith, and the Holy Spirit, and God's special
favor; insomuch that his universal justification, state of Adoption, and
right to the kingdom of Heaven, do yet remain uncancel'd, unviolated, and
immovable.

By what has been discovered, in this our scrutiny into their different
judgments and opinions, the Reader may conclude what an excellent Test, Master
Baxter commend's unto us for Trial of the right strain or Tincture of the
Calvinists Doctrines. A Test that allows all for current, that is any way
opposite to the Doctrine of the Remonstrants, especially that which stands at
the greatest distance to it. And though as contrary as black and white, 'twill
set off the work the better, in that it is chequered with such a variegation of
opinions. A Test whereby Master Barlee will be approved for an ORTHODORT Divine
as well, as Master Baxter.

But I foresee this will not satisfy M. Baxter. In his Preface, Section 5.
He will yet expostulate; Why should you charge a Party with the opinions of a
very few, which upon greatest deliberation in a Synod, the Party will not own?
To this it may truly be replied, that there were and are more then a very few,
of those opinions, and they owned by that Party you speak of, and both joined
together in a confederation, to root out another Party, that complained of the
enormitie of those opinions, which were so far from being redressed, that they
were not touched upon at least, if not countenanced by that Synod; which we
shall examine further in the sequel. In the mean while, we may consider, how
happy it had been, if M. Baxter for the prevention of the mischief that has
ensued, had been amongst them, with his power of Sequestration, to have removed
as many as would not have been of one (that is of his, if that be one) mind;
though thereupon he had left a very thin unanimous Assembly. But that same
[Suffragium] breathing hot and cold, according to the temper of the several
Climates (and sometimes the Fantasies of single persons) from whence it came,
raised so many cross winds, that they made the Sea of Dort tumultuous and
troublesome, and occasioned a Naufragium of that whole design; which the
Decrees singly by themselves might have passed over with less disturbance or
observation.

In good earnest, after much inquiry, I find, it is a very hard matter to
understand what metal Master Baxter's Test is made of. I confess they seem to
allow the Sublapsarian Doctrine as the most Current and Passable amongst the
Vulgar: but I do not find them cry down the Supralapsarian, no, nor the
Supra-Creatarian neither, as dross or counterfeit. That these are no less
pure and Orthodox then the other by that account, we have many presumptions to
induce us to believe. For, first we know, Kissing goes by favor; and we find
men wedded to the most rigid of those Opinions were embraced, and placed upon
the Bench, while the Remonstrants, who detected their enormitie, were brought
unto the Bar; not permitted duly and sully to implead them; or justify
themselves. 2. What was, at least the Pretended, business of their Convention?
That those opinions of Arminius, Act. Syn. Not. Dor. Sess. 140. page 285. part.
1.
and his followers might be accurately examined, and determined of by the Rule
of Gods Word only, the true Doctrine established, and the false rejected, and
concord, peace and tranquillity (by Gods blessing) restored to the Churches of
the Low Countries. This was the end of their Convention. But what opinions were
they, that gave the Scandal to Arminius and his followers? Were they not those
of the rigid Calvinists? and who were the Authors of that disturbance, but
those petulant Parsons, that would not endure the Prescription of the wise
Physician, nor suffer their Soars and Ulcers to be lanced? It Is true, The
weakest must to the wall, and when it is put to the Question. Who they are that
trouble Israel? to be s^^ the Oppressor will have the casting voice. But if the
Character (inserted in the Margin) be true, Illi scilicet Religionis ergo, alii
ministeriis suis aincti, alii prescripti, relegati, extorres, etc. Nempe
Hillenius Alcmaria etc. Tu quoque aliique tui similes, aut libellis infames,
aut concionibus tribunitiis, Conventiculis, schismate, seditione ac rebellione
adversus Illust. Ordd. Decreta, ac Magistratuum Edicta, insignes: Hos tu
totidem quasi religionis ac professionis vestrae Martyrs habe, and in Canonem
refer; non invideo; nec vehementer nego, si quidem ista est religio, Populum
mendaciis splendidis decipere, ac dementatum in Pastores ac Superiores suos
concitare: in alienas Ecclesias ac Ministeria involare (quod tu de Samuele and
Antipa, Borriis vesiris agnoscis). Loca publica per vim occupare, Clausira
publico sigillo munita effringere, Senatui vim infer, Ordd. Edicta atque
Interdicta palam violare, omnia turbare: Haec dum vobis impune licent,
Superiorum sive indulgentia, sive metu, jam istos videre est precarium in vos
imperium trahere: At si hac non succedit via, si eorundem authoritate, toties
laesa, ista maledicendi ac malefaciendi libido vestra coercetur, ferocitas
comprimitur, tuique unius vel alterius exemplo alii deterrentur, sisiuntur, and
ut verbo dicam, cuneus cuneo pellitur; tum vero vos audire est, vim ac
persecutionem, quam aliis intentastis, quiritantes, Martyria vestra praedicare.
Grevinch. Absiersio. Caelumn. Adr. Smoutii. page 42.
which Grevinchovius has given of them, I shall refer it to the judgment of
the Reader, whether it does not more then a little resemble a Disturber both of
Church and State.

But the impartial Synod is Assembled, and upon the invocation of Gods holy
name bound by Oath, that they would hold the Sacred Scripture as the only rule
of their verdict, and demean themselves in the hearing and determining of this
cause with a good and upright Conscience. Act. Syn. ubi supra.
And in the Frontispice of every Chapter of the Decrees or Canons, they insert
this Title, A Rejection of the Errors wherewith the Churches of the Low
Countries have now a long time been troubled. Would not any man expect (upon so
solemn an undertaking) especially having made it their method, as well to
reject such Errors, as to assert their own Doctrine, that those should be
rejected, amongst the rest, that teach,

Reprobation to be decreed, in order of nature, before Creation:

The greatest part of mankind to be created to destruction:

That by the force of Gods irresistible Decree, it is impossible but Man should
sin:

That whatsoever comes to pass, whether good or evil, does come to pass by
the force of Gods irresistible Decree:

That Man's wickedness is not the cause of God's will of abandoning man to
hell, but on the contrary, that God's will is the cause of that wickedness:

That it is not absurd to say, that it may be a capital sin to do the true
and primary will of God:

That seeing Adam is the cause of sin, and God the cause of Adam, how it can
be, that God should not be the cause of sin:

That God does incite, lead, draw, command, impell, harden, deceive men unto
wicked actions, and effect sins that are most enormous? Such horrid and
blasphemous opinions as these, are frequent in the Writings of Calvin, Beza.
Piscator, Martyr, and many others; and yet herein we have altum Silentium,
these Doctrines never troubled those Churches, nor the tender Consciences of
this Synod. They are so good friends with these Opinions, they never disturb
their peace at all.

3. This is not all; when Bogerman, the President of the Synod, had entertained
but a suspicion, that the Remonstrants would detect the enormitie of these
opinions, and the shameful errors that had been broached by those so admired
Names, (forgetting his solemn Oath to lay all prejudice and affection aside,
and examine all matters to be debated, according to the only rule of God's
word) he fell into so great an agony of Passion, that it was discernible in his
very eyes and countenance, as if they had touched the very apple of his eye.
Yet the Synod obliged by the conscience of the same oath, never gave him the
least rebuke or check for this palpable indication of Partiality; as the
perspicacious Author of that Judicious Antidotum Bone De. us! quam vehementer
afficiebat ipsum levissima talis suspicio! qui viri oculi! quis vultus! quis
ardor animi! quartae (...)! etc. Antidotum p. 31
has observed and put upon record for us.

Ibid. p. 32.
4. When Maccovius Professor of Franequer in Freisland, had not only asserted
and disseminated by his Writings, the most horrid opinion, of all that ever had
been written about Predestination by Zuinglius and Piscator; and moreover in
the very Synod undertook, against his Colleague Sibrandus Lubbertus, to
maintain, that God wills sin; that he ordains men to sin, as it is sin;
that God in no wise would have all men to be saved, and many things of the like
import, declaring openly, that if these things were not maintained, they must
forsake their chief Doctors, who had taught those things and fall in to the
opinion of the Remonstrants. What said the Synod to this bold Supra-Creatarian?
Did they sequester or displace him? No, but accounted him for a pure Orthodox
Divine, guilty neither of heresy nor erroneous doctrine, as it was declared by
the public testimony of the Synod; and so they dismissed him with a wholesome
and friendly Caution, to forbear such forms of speech as might give offense to
tender ears, and could not be digested by persons ignorant and incapable of so
great mysteries: and that he would not set light by those distinctions of
Divines, who had deserved well of the Church of Christ.

5. That which is beyond all exception; we find in the very Acts of the Synod
[Sess. 107. Act. Syn. Not. Dord. 233. part. 1.
] That Gomarus declared publicly, that he could not approve of the Judgment
of those Belgic Professors, concerning the object of Predestination; that he
thought, they must determine, Man to be considered of God in his
Predestination, not only as fallen, but also before the fall. Hereupon he drew
up his opinion by himself; and therein Predestination is said to be made out of
Mankind simply considered, Ibid. part. 3. p 21. m. and 24. pr.
and not as yet fallen into sin. and the Synod of South Holland were of the same
judgment too, Ib. p. 33. m.
whose chief members, Pestus Hommius, Henricus Arnoldi, Baltazar Lydius,
Gisbertus Voetius, were chief enemies of the Remonstrants.

6. If Master Baxter will not yet allow that the Synod may justly be taxed with
these opinions, Section 5.
because (as he pretends in his Preface) the Calvinists do not Commonly hold
them; they are but the opinions of some few; I desire him to examine his own
Muster-roll, how many he has inlisted therein, for the defense of the Synod?
Of all the Synod he could find but the British Divines, which were but five;
and the Bremish, which were but three; to pass the Muster upon the Article of
Universal Redemption, and but one single foreign Auxiliary Paraeus, to bear
Arms for it. And yet these seven or eight men, in Master Baxter's account,
shall justify all the rest from the guilt of such opinions as they do
peremptorily maintain, though himself as well as the Remonstrants judge them
most absurd. If so small a number will serve Master Baxters turn to justify;
in all reason a far greater should serve Tilenus's interest to condemn them.

7. But what ever enormity Master Baxter will allow to be in those opinions,
the Synod has drawn the guilt of it upon their own heads, and deservedly ought
to bear the blame; For Persons Commissioned and empowered to suppress errors,
if they do not forbid and check them, the fairest interpretation we can give of
their remissness herein is to say, they afford them a toleration. Non
impedientes ad Genus causarum Moralium pertinent, says Scheibler. And, Metaph.
l. 1. c. 22. n. 140.
Qui tacet consentire videtur, says the Civil Law. And, Agentes and
consentientes pari poena plectuntur, says the Moralist. Indeed I find there
were some who had a mind to condemn the opinions of Piscator in the Synod;
Antidotum pa. 63. f.
and some would have added to their Rejections, a rejection of certain hard and
incommodious expressions (they might have called them blasphemous and
horrible), which are found in the writings of some of the Reformed Doctors:
Act. Syn. Not. Dord. sess. 132. p. 239. part. 1. ed. in fol.
To this end reasons were alleged on both sides, by the British, Hassien and
Bremish Divines, with some others. But when the matter was put to the vote, the
major part of Suffrages were for the Negative; (forsooth) lest by the rejection
of such expressions and Phrases, the Adversary should take advantage to allege
that the Orthodox Doctrine, professed by those men, who imprudently made use of
such phrases to explain it, were rejected also. Especially seeing some of those
modes of speech were the language of the holy Ghost, others, in a sound sense,
admitted by the Remonstrants themselves, and far the greatest part might
admit of a charitable interpretation. By this we may perceive what temper
Master Baxter's Test That more then a very few, even the major part of the
Synod favored these opinions.
was of; especially, if to this we add what was observed to be the general
practice, after the Synod was dissolved, in those Low Country Churches; The
least suspicion a man could lie under, for favoring the Remonstrants Doctrine,
was ground enough to remove him from his Ministry. (The imitation of which
practice was forthwith taken up at Sedan; Franciscus Auratus, a most faithful
Minister of that Church, being dismissed from the execution of his Function,
because, upon occasion of that text, Jam. 1.13. God tempts no man, etc. he
largely declared, that God was not the Author of sin. This they thought a
sufficient indication that he did not sufficiently abhor that Doctrine which
the Synod of Dort had condemned). But on the other side the most violent
abettors and urgers of the most rigid Supralapsarian Predestination,
Clamosissimos tenebriones and spurcissimae vitae mortales. Antidotum page 33.
were so far from the stroke of censure or rebuke, that though of never so lewd
a conversation, one might see them adorned with the happiest conditions, and
promoted to the chiefest chaires and Churches, tanquam (...) and (...)
fortissimos.

Lastly, if we consider that the present Galvinists of all sorts,
Creabilitarians, Supralapsarians, Sublapsarians, do all center in this Synod,
as the Test of their Anti-Arminianisme (as Master Baxter calls it) we must
conclude that the design of that Synod was not to reduce all those several
Sects to one opinion, (that being impossible, their differences are so high and
irreconcilable) but their elaborate Artifice, in contriving and dawbing,
varnishing and trimming up the Decrees and Canons thereof, was used on purpose,
to calculate them for the Meridian of every their judgments, and make them
serve indifferently the interest of their several opinions. So that this Synod
is to men of that persuasion what Manna was to the Israelites (as some
affirm). It affords them that relish, to which every man's palate is most
affected. One man discovers enough therein to encourage him to be a
Supralapsarian; another man finds the contrary. To this man's sense they
maintain universal Redemption, to another apprehension they deny it.

Hereupon we see our late and present Divines are no less divided in their
judgments about these Questions, then those which were before the Synod, as we
may observe in reference to each of Tilenus his five Articles.

The Orthodox Evangelist, pa. 52. m. pa. 56. m.
For 1: Master Norton of New England, as a pure Creabilitarian, says, The
creature in its condition of possibility is the object of the Decree. And a
little after, Not man considered as actually being; whether in his pure, or
corrupt estate; but as yet to be, and in the Divine Essence: namely, as capable
in respect of the sufficiency of God, to be what he pleased, is the object of
the Decree. And a little after; The creation of man mutable, the permission of
sin, the punishing him justly for sin, make up one full and perfect medium
conducing to this end, (God's glory) as concerning the Reprobate. The creation
of man mutable, the permission of sin, the effectual Application of Free
grace and Glory, notwithstanding sin, for the merit sake of Jesus Christ, make
up one full and perfect medium, conducing to this end (viz. Gods glory) as
concerning the Elect. And afterward he concludes, Page 66. f.
That Reprobation is not an Act of justice; and a little after; Though
condemnation of man for sin be an Act of justice, yet God's will not to have
mercy, his will to permit sin, his will to leave a man in sin, his will to
punish man for sin, are Acts of his Lordship, not of his justice. If the
Assembly of Divines came any lower, yet not so low as the Sublapsarian way; For
they say; Confess. of Faith. chapter 3. th. 3.
By the Decree of God, for the manifestation of his Glory; some men and Angels
are Predestined unto everlasting life, and others foreordained to
everlasting death. By ranking Men and Angels in the same Decree, it is evident,
they conclude men to be Elected and Reprobate antecedently to the fall of Adam;
which appears more fully by comparing the 6. and 7. Theses of that Chapter,
with this third. The Calvinists that speak most warily, do yet maintain an
Absolute and irrespective Decree, not as to the end but as to the means, Dr,
Kendal De Doct. Neopel. oration habita in Commit. Oxonii. p. 36.
Asserimus Decretum Absolutum, quod nullum Motivum, (ut loquuntur) admittat ex
part Dei. We assert an absolute Decree, because it admits of no Motive on Gods
part. Non negamus fidem conditionem esse salutis; Asserimus vero fidem dari
absque omni condition. Similiter and de damnatione philosophari solemus. Non
negamus impoenitentiam finalem esse conditionem damnationis; Asserimus vero
Deum absolute decrevisse; reprobos omnes, impoenitentiae suae permittendos,
fidem vero in Electis omnipotenti Gratia suo tempore creandam. We do not deny
faith to be the condition of salvation; But we affirm that faith is given
without any condition. In like manner also we are wont to speak concerning
damnation; we do not deny final impenitency to be the condition of damnation;
But we affirm God absolutely decreed to permit all Reprobates to their own
impenitency; but to create faith, in his own time, in the Elect by his
omnipotent Grace. And a little after, Decretum illud irrespectivum, non est de
salute, sed side; nec de instigendis poenis, sed non concedenda Poenitentia.
That irrespective Decree (...) not (such) as to salvation, but as to faith; nor
as to the infliction of punishment, but as to the non-concession of repentance.
As well Sublapsarians as Supralapsarians of both forts, though they frame a
Decree that suspends the benefit of salvation upon a condition, yet it makes
that condition absolutely irrepudiable and irresistible as to some persons, and
absolutely impossible unto others, and so takes away the proper nature of sin
and duty, and by consequence saves and damns respectively without them.

2. If we consider the Article of Redemption by Christ; however M. Baxter finds
an Universality of it, in the decisions of that Synod, yet Doctor Thomas Hill
(Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and able sure to understand a piece
of Latin, as well as Master Baxter) could find no such matter; For to signify
his esteem of that Assembly he calls it a happy remedy against Arminianisme;
(in his Epistle to the Christian Reader; before Master Fenners Wilful
Impenitency. a. 3.
) yet two pages after he breaks out into this Lamentation; But alas, Arminius
now appears amongst us, not so much in the Schools and Pulpits, as in popular
meetings.

For as Zanchius complained with much regret of the Sulteran ( I suppose it
should be Lutheran) Ubiquitaries, that he found them ubique, every where to vex
and molest him, so may we grieve, (O that we could with brokennesse of heart
bewail it!) that our Universalists, are almost universally spread amongst us;
It is gotten into our Netherlands, much into the Fennish and Moorish parts of
this Kingdom, yea amongst many people that love Jesus Christ, and therefore
entertain it, as conceiving it most for his Honor, (the more are they to be
pitied, etc.) Thus Doctor Hill; who certainly did not think his happy Remedy to
be infected with that (he accounts) disease, and so much bewailes, as if it
were as mortal, as he conceived it Epidemicall. Good God! That man's eye should
be so evil, because God is so good and gracious! That he should think it a
matter of humiliation, and that with brokennesse of heart, that the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and the Merits of his Death, and the emanations of his Grace,
should be so much magnified!

And yet we find the whole Assembly of Divines (if we may collect their
Judgment out of their Public Confession, rather then take it from what a
single member (it seems) has whispered into M. Baxter's ear) had so narrow a
Faith they could not admit this Point to be an Article of their Belief; For
they speak restrictively of Christ's Sacrifice. ( Chap. 8. th. 5.) that it has
fully satisfied the justice of his Father, and purchased not only
reconciliation, but an everlasting inheritance in the kingdom of Heaven, for
all those, whom the Father has given unto him. And more fully ( these. 8.) To
all those for whom Christ has purchased Redemption, He does certainly and
effectually apply, and communicate the same, making intercession for them etc.
And this is very probably collected out of the third Chapter too, comparing the
6. and 7. Theses together. They who are Elected, being fallen in Adam, are
redeemed by Christ -- The rest of mankind God was pleased, according to the
unsearchable counsil of his own will, whereby he extends or withholds
mercy, as he pleases, for the glory of his (not Justice, but NB.) Sovereign
Power over his creatures, to pass by, and to ordain them to dishonor and
wrath for their sin, to the praise of his glorious justice... Besides, Master
Baxter has had some contest (as I remember) with Adversaries, who make the
remission of sins the immediate effect of Christ's death, and maintain that it
is granted unto the elect, before they do Actually believe. I suppose Master
Baxter will not say these men are for universal Redemption (though perhaps as
great Admirers of the Synod as himself:) and I doubt, these are not a very few.

3. As touching the unavoidable necessity of all humane Actions, in regard of
the effectual Decree; that the Calvinists do commonly maintain it is evident;
That I may not tire the Reader with a multitude of testimonies, I shall
satisfy my self with one or two. The first cause so concurreth, as it
determines the second cause in its operation, says M. Norton. This is readily
granted in natural Agents, in free-rationall Agents it is proved thus. If the
futurition of the operation of the second Cause is determined by the Decree of
God, then the operation is self is determined by the efficiency of God. The
Orthodox Evangelist p. 110. m. And a little after; If as often as the will does
not will; it therefore does not will, because God has not determined that it
should will, then as often as it wills any thing, it therefore wills,
because God has determined that it should will. But as often as the Will does
not will, it therefore does not will, because God has not determined that it
should will. Therefore -- p. 126. f. Notwithstanding sin is wholly of man, and
subordinate efficiency in sinful actions, belongs formally unto the second
Cause: yet the infallible futurition and execution of all effects; the
infallible futurition, and ordering the execution of all events; is as fully
ascribed unto God, as if man had no hand therein. I know Master Baxter has
declared himself against this Philosophy, (in his Treatise of Judgment, Answer
to 23. excuse). But whether the Assembly of Divines have not, at least
insinuated, this to be their judgment, I leave the Reader to consider, by a
view of some of their expressions. Chap. 3. th. 1. (of their Confess.) They
say, God from all Eternity did by the most wise and holy Counsil, of his own
will, freely and unchangeably ORDAIN whatsoever comes to pass; and Chap. 5.
these. 4. The Almighty power, unsearchable wisdom, and infinite Goodness of
God, so far manifest themselves in his providence, that it extends even to
the first fall, and all other sins of Angels and men; and that not by a BARE
PERMISSION, but such as has joined with it a most wise and powerful bounding,
and NB. OTHERWISE ordering and governing of them in a manifold dispensation to
his own holy end; and these. 2. In relation to the foreknowledge and DECREE of
God the first Cause, All things come to pass IMMUTABLY and infallibly. Indeed
all they, who ground God's certain Foreknowledge of all things future, upon
his infrustrable and ineluctable Decree for their futurition, must grant that
all humane Actions whatsoever are immutably necessary, otherwise God should not
foreknow them. And what is it that has begotten a new definition of Liberty,
and many distinctions to free Almighty God, and convince man of the guilt of
sin, but the common opinion of the Necessity of all humane Actions by reason of
the secret effectual decree of God? The liberty of the second cause (says
Master Norton) does not consist in a power of indifferency, Vbi supra p. 74.
to act or not to act: (as it was wont to be defined) Liberty consists in a
spontaneitie, quam ratio praecedit, says Maccovius Colle^. dis. 16. page 53.
, A spontaneitie (such as Beasts are carried by) ushered in by Reason.
Therefore whatsoever a man does, reason going before, that he does freely,
though he cannot but do it. This is the Liberty of the Leviathan; and by this
Philosophy, man is yoaked in the same name with brute Animals, his reason
having the honor to be the fore-horse in every expedition.

Again, upon this opinion, that men's evil Actions are of an unavoidable
necessity, by God's immutable Decree, and irresistible determination, that God
may not be concluded the Author of sin, and that man may be properly accounted
guilty, certain distinctions are invented, Vbi supra page 63. p. 8. f.
as, First, We must distinguish (says Master Norton) betwixt the Action and
the evil of the Action. Notwithstanding God is no way the Author of the evil of
the Action, yet God ascribes unto himself the doing of these Actions that are
sinful; 1. Because he is the Author of the Act wholly: 2. Because he is the
Fore-determiner, Orderer and Governor of the sinfulness of the action to his
own glorious and blessed end. The action is ascribed to him absolutely; the sin
cleaving to the action not absolutely, but only in such sort and respects. 2.
That man may be accounted properly guilty, notwithstanding this inevitable
necessity that lies upon him (according to this Doctrine,) they use distinctions
to reconcile Liberty with Necessity. To which purpose they say, 1. It Is but a
necessity of immutability, not of compulsion; and 2. though the sinful Action
be inevitable in senfu composite, that is, in respect of God's Decree and
divine determination; yet in sensu diviso, suppose man left to his own liberty,
and divided from this conduct of Gods providence, (which is impossible) then
it is avoidable. These distinctions will serve to play withal in a Sophisters
Problem: But in a matter of so high concernment as life and death eternal,
they will serve as little to magnify Gods justice, as to abate the pains of
hell fire in such as shall be damned upon this Account.

4. For the fourth Article, touching the Grace of conversion; that those who
are Elected cannot reject, those who were Reprobates cannot accept it: you may
find the Judgment of the Calvinists (and I think of most, if not all, that are
of that denomination at this day) bound up in those expressions of Master
Norton; Vbi supra page 126.
Notwithstanding the creature in regard of his formal Free-efficiency, is
somewhat distinguished from a mere Instrument: yet even those effects wherein*
God uses the second Cause, as a subordinate Free-Agent, depend upon and are
determined by the first Cause; as much as where the second Cause is a mere
passive Instrument; because the Free-efficiency of the second Cause, is the
effect of the first Cause. Can the Axe not cut, when the Carpenter will have it
cut? or can it cut, when he will not have it cut? (I speak not here of Gods
direction of Free-Agents to others ends and objects: but with reference to sin
and the work of their Conversion respectively.) This Doctrine distinguishes
men from stocks and stones, in the work of Gods Regenerating Grace upon them,
as little as the Synod 3 and 4. chapter of Convers. Artic. 16. p. 259. part. 1.
can possibly admit of; and here is very little room for the Free-Agents Can
and cannot.

For the Elect's cannot reject it; if Master Baxter does not think it an absurd
opinion, why does he allege any thing to color over the matter? but if he
thinks it absurd and a distinction needful to clear the Doctrine; I shall
show anon, that he does little less then reproach them with it, even by what
he cites from them to excuse it.

That the Reprobate cannot, accept that Grace (or be converted) is the distinct
affirmation of Master Fonner more then once or twice, Page 8. and 16. etc.
in his Treatise before mentioned; where he says; The Reason why the wicked do
not repent, nor come out of their sins, is not because they cannot, (though
they cannot) but because they will not.

For the last Article of Tilenus, That the Regenera^e cannot fall away; how
ever Master Baxter makes an offer to except against the Indietment, which
Tilenus prefer's against them for it, I suppose, no Calvinist will deny it. But
what? shall the Elect be saved then however they live? By no means. That
Diabolical Sarcasme (says Master Norton Vbi supra page 83.
), and bitter scoff invented to the abuse and derision of the Doctrine of the
Decree; is not only an untruth, but implies a Contradiction; viz. If I be
elected, howsoever I live, I shall be saved. Satan in this Sophisme, divides
the end and the means asunder, which God has joined together. The Decree
consists not of the end without the means, nor of the means without the end,
but of both together: Both end and means are contained in one Decree. Yea, so
far is the Decree from admitting such an inference, as that the contrary
infallibly follows thereupon: and in point of Election, is not only
necessarily concluded, but irresistibly caused. Faith, Repentance,
New-Obedience and Perseverance, being the effect of Election. Thus far Master
Norton; and what can ye wish more? But stay, the Divines of the Synod told us
the Elect might fall into most gross, foul, heinous, wasting sins. Do these
move upon another Center, without the Decree, or has the Decree of Election
made Provision for them? This looks like a very hard Chapter: M. Norton udi
supra p. 5^.
but Master Norton and Master Perkins will help us to spell it out. The
Creation of Man mutable, (you had the words before, but being so comfortable,
Decies repetita etc.) the permission of sin (and not only that of Adam's Fall,
but, toties quoties, by parity of Reason, to advance God's grace and glory,
else it will not serve our turn here; and then the renewed) effectual
Application of Free Grace, and Glory, notwithstanding sin; for the merit sake
of Jesus Christ, make up one full medium, conducing to this end, (Gods Glory)
as concerning the Elect. To this purpose Master Perkins reckons the sins of the
Predestinate, amongst the number of their Privileges, upon their Adoption;
First, says He, They are Heirs of God; then Coheirs with Christ, and Kings. 3.
All their afflictions, as also their defects and slips (or falls) are only
paternall castigations for their good. In his Armilla Aurea. cap. 37. Q. 4. Now
can any Calvinist but M. Baxter call it abusive language, and a perverse
insinuation, to say, That such as have received that Special Regenerating
Grace (which is the fruit of Election) can never fall from it, notwithstanding
the most enormous sins they can commit? Why, man, they have an Absolute Decree
passed in heaven, for their Indempuity. And what is that Decree? Vbi supra page
51.
The Decree (says M. Norton) is God by one eternall-free-constant Act,
absolutely determining the futurition, i. e. the infallible future being of
whatsoever is besides himself, unto the praise of his own Glory. If Election,
which is God himself (according to this Doctrine) be absolutely theirs, there
can be no more danger of miscarriage in their salvation, than there is that God
Almighty should lose his very being; and therefore the Assembly of Divines,
consonantly to these principles have peremptorily defined, that, They whom God
has accepted in his beloved, effectually called, and sanctified by his Spirit,
neither totally nor finally, can fall away from the state of Grace; but shall
certainly persevere therein unto the end, and be eternally saved. In their
Confess. Chap. 17. Th. 1.

Thus, if Master Baxter will not, other Readers will be satisfied, that the
several Articles of Tilenus stand impregnable, as to the matter of Fact,
against the very Synod of Dort, their Predecessors and their late and Present
Adkerents. And now where shall Master Baxter erect a new Forge for Calumny and
Falsehoods, to justify his uncharitableness (to say no more) in casting out a
suspicion whether Tilenus were a Christian, in the 8 and 13. Sections of his
Preface?

I Have done with the reproachful part of Master Baxter's discourse, in
defense of the innocent Tilenus. There is a Rational part yet behind (such as
it is) and that Master Baxter may have no occasion to blame our neglect of that,
or triumph over it; we shall make Reflections upon the several remarkable
periods of it, beginning (where Tilenus is first engaged) at the Sixth Section
of his Preface.

Where Master Baxter breaks off from Master Pierce, and goes out of his way,
though he thinks it is a stepping into his duty, to Rebuke the unworthy dealing
of (Master Pierce his friend, whom he protests not to have sock or known to
this day) Tilenus. He pretends, says Master Baxter, to give us concisely but
truly, the sum of the Doctrine of the Synod of Dort in the five Articles. And
when he has made this promise, he presently falls to falsifying, and calumny,
unworthy a Divine, a Christian, or a Man: the weight of the case and greatness
of his sin, command me to be thus plain: yea were I of his Party, I must say
the same. What! Catholic M. Baxter, come already to espouse a Party!

Tilenus will one day thank you for the intended charity of your Rebukes. In
the mean time on his behalf, I desire the Indifferent Reader but to lay this
child at the own Fathers door; and so to his discretion I shall leave it.

But, What! (says M. Baxter,) shall so many Countries purposely Consult to
declare their thoughts, and their writings be common in the hands of all, and
the adversary purposely write against them, and pretend to be acquainted with
their Doctrine, and make it his design to bring it to be odious to the world,
and yet shall falsely tell the world, that they hold and assert the things that
they are not only silent in, but disown, detest, and are contrary to their
Doctrine.

Ans. 1. For the Convention of so many Countries to consult; that is no more
then may be alleged by the Fautors of the Trent Council. 2. Writings that are
commonly in men's hands are not commonly read, not always understood, never
sifted to a discovery of their absurdities by Persons that swear allegiance to
their admired Authors, upon others commendations, as too too many do of all
Sects whatsoever. 3. The Adversaries design was not, to bring that Doctrine to
be odious: but to evince it to be unpracticable (at least) and useless; which
I think is yet sufficiently done, for all your pretended Vindication. 4.
Whether he tells the World false tales, more then Master Baxter, is submitted
to the Judgment of the Reader. 5. If they be silent in these things, their
silence is consent; for they declare the end of their Convention to be, to
suppress errors etc. and therefore, 6. If they had detested these, certainly
they would have disowned them. However I am glad the Doctrines, which Tilenus
charges them with, are detestable in the judgment of Master Baxter. I pray God
keep him still in this mind! though he proceeds to rebuke Tilenus in these
words;

Truly this is an exceeding shame to the Arminian and Jesuit Cause, to find the
learned Patrons of it, to deal so unconscionably that a Reader cannot believe
them; and that where it is so easy to any to see their falsehoods.

Answ. 1. The Jesuit Cause is lest to their own vindication, or your Catholic
charity. But, 2. For the Patrons of that Cause (you call Arminian, being the
Catholic Doctrine of Christ's Church (as you acknowledge for some of its
Branches, in your Account of Perseverance) for one thousand four hundred years
together) what is the Reason you cannot believe them? Perhaps because you will
not read them. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? As to
your Controversy with Tilenus, read that Antidotum forementioned: after a
serious and impartial perusal whereof, if you do not sit down with
satisfaction herein, I shall conclude in your own words to Master Warner (of
Justification page 314.) It is not replying that will serve the turn: but
either prejudice will hold them to the side that they have taken, or else they
will think him in the right that has the last word; -- but usually they will
go with the Party that is in greatest credit, or has most interest in them, or
advantage on them.

But 3. you upbraid them with unconscionable dealings, unworthy falsification,
perverse insinuation; and upon this threefold Cord it is that you suspend your
belief toward them. But can you discover such moats in the Remonstrants eyes
(which how many soever your Multiplying Glass, or indisposed Medium presented
to you, are by this time washed out of Tilenus's) and can you not see the Beams
that are lodged in the eyes of your own Party? Do they stand at too near a
distance for you to behold them? If you will promise to suspend your faith here
too, upon the discovery of such beams, I will be so charitably officious as to
direct you to a Prospect whence you may take a full view of them.

If you have seen Festus Hommius, (who was one of the Scribes of the Synod) his
Specimen Controversiarum Belgicarum, you might have seen enough of such
dealings as you unjustly charge Tilenus with, as is sufficiently discovered in
two little Pamphlets, the one bearing this Title, Joan. Wtenbogardi Responsio
ad ea quae illi speciatim impegit Festus Hommius; the other this, Optima Fides
Festi Hommii, etc. Of this Man and his Brother Scribe Doctor Damman, the Author
of that Antidotum, Page 11.
writes thus, To whom is the falsehood of these men unknown? Festi sc. Hommii
in edendis and pro arbitrio suo truncandis atque interpretandis Trelcatiorum
Scriptis, non sine magnorum virorum gravissima indignatione? Similiter in
propolandis pessima fide Episcopii Disputationibus privatis, etc. And of
Bogerman President of the Synod, He says thus, An non ille est, cui (o justa
Nemesis ^) arts, frauds, and mendacia sua (quibus titulis ille innoxios and
insontes Remonstrantes in Synodo, Ib. page 10.
suopte arbitratu injussus and praeter omnem rationem oneratos ac gravatos
tanta cum acerbitate and amarulentia dimittebat, ut poenitentia tactus, veniam
sibi postea petendam indicaret) adeoque ambitio and (...) palam publiceque
exprobrata and in os objecta sunt, quod, vid. etc.

But alas! these are Peccadillo's not worthy Master Baxter's taking notice of;
we will therefore bring him to a Mount, (which will afford him a notable
Prospect indeed) whence he shall descry the Reputation of the Innocent
Remonstrants, bleeding under the strokes of such objected forgeries and
Calumnies. Hactenus Remonstrantibus, says the same Author, Page 23.
fere crimini datumtest, quod mala fide sententiam contra Remonstrantium
proponerent atque exprimerent: dici vix potest, quot convitia, dirae ac probra
propterea passim contra Remonstrantes in foris, pulpitis, circulis, conviviis,
scaphis, rhedis, curribus, triviisque hominum dicta ac projecta fuerint,
tanquam in falsi manifestos and fide omni indignos Mortales. Ipsa Synodus
Arnhemiensis (O rem foedam ac detestandam! quis credidisset?) ausa est
sententiam illam, quam Remonstrantes ipsissimam ac genuinam
Contra-Remonstrantium sententiam esse asserebant, tanquam foedam atque impiam
sub vocabulorum quorundam homonymia and aequivocatione communibus calculis
damnare, ea tantum de causa, ut falsum dixisse Remonstrantes crederetur, atque
ita publici odii victimae fierent.

But to bring the Prospect a little nearer to Master Baxters ken. Was there no
such Artifice used in the Synod of Dort? What say they in their fourth
Rejection, upon the First Chapter of Divine Predestination? They reject the
error of those who teach, that in the Election unto faith this Condition is
formerly required, viz. That a man use the light of Reason aright, that he be
honest, lowly, humble, and disposed unto life eternal, as though in some sort
Election depended on these things. Is not here an insinuation, as if the
Remonstrants held this Doctrine, (the design of the Synod being to declare
against them) yet say the Remonstrants, this is falsely and by way of Calumny
thrown upon them; for the Contrary appears as clear in their writings, as the
light at noon day Ibid. p. 72.
. In the sixth Rejection, they reject those who teach that not all election
unto salvation is unchangeable, but that some which are elected, the Decree of
God notwithstanding, may perish and for ever do perish. The Synod herein does
adulterate, pervert and traduce the Doctrine of the Remonstrants by odious
expressions. Ibid. p. 76.
That last branch, that the elect may perish eternally, the Decree of God
notwithstanding, is without cause thrown upon them, and against their
judgments. For the first, they ever profess Election and the will of God to
be immutable. Indeed when they say so, they make the subject, about which
Election is exercised, to be the faithful man, as such. Hence it comes to
pass, when that man who believes to day turns Infidel to morrow, there is no
change in Gods Election, but in the man only. The Reason is, because God will
not choose the unfaithful, but the faithful. And therefore when the faithful
man becomes unfaithful, the will of God concerning the Election of faithful
men remains uniform and the same: But the truth is, if the will of God, or the
Divine Election concerning that man, (now) become unfaithful, should
persevere, then the will of God should properly be changed; because he should
will to elect unto salvation not only the faithful men, but the unfaithful
also.

In the Seventh Rejection; the Remonstrants complain, that they (of the Synod)
have clothed a most certain truth with some rough invented Phrases, to make it
odious, and look ugly. Ibid. p. 77.
The Error rejected is, That in this life there is no fruit, no sense, no
certainty of immutable election unto glory, but upon condition, contingent, and
mutable. But the Remonstrants profess they have not these words in all their
writings. They know no fruit more sweet to a pious man, then what grows upon
the consideration of Gods unchangeable love; whereby he will most assuredly
confer eternal life upon believers. As for that opinion (which some place so
much of their comfort in) that he who does once truly believe, may be always
certain of his being in the faith and Grace of God, however he pollutes, or
behaves himself, this is a fruit, which indeed they cannot relish, growing
only upon that tree of Election, which (by whomsoever it was planted) has no
sound root in Scripture.

In their Ninth Rejection the Synod does covertly insinuate (to make them
odious) that the Remonstrants teach, That the cause why God sends the Gospel
rather unto this Nation than unto another, is not the mere and only good
pleasure of God, but because this Nation is better and more worthy of it than
that, to which he has not communicated the Gospel. But the Remonstrants know
none that do say or think so. Upon all occasions they have professed and taught
the contrary, says the Author of that Antidotum, page 79. v. sqq.

This last imputation Perfrictae frontis and mentis odio tantum non excaecatae
indicium est. Ib. p. 80.

Touching the Second Chapter (of Redemption) in their Second Rejection, (That
this was not the end of Christ's death, that he might establish a new Covenant
of grace by his blood; but only that he might procure unto his Father the bare
right of making again with men any covenant whatsoever, whether of Grace, or of
works) here in the first member (of this Article) they impute to the
Remonstrants what is manifestly false, and contrary to their public Doctrine.
And the Second Member is a fiction and interpolation to render them odious.
Vid. ib. p. 88.

In the Fourth Rejection, the first branch is of the same complexion; and the
opposition made therein very unapt and ridiculous. Ibid. p. 89.

The first Rejection, the Remonstrants observe to be equivocal, and to admit of
a double sense. Whereof they account one to be false, but the other they do
most steadfastly embrace. ib. p. 90.

Touching the Third and Fourth Chapters, (of Conversion) they say, they may
justly challenge three things of the Synod. 1. Bonam fidem. 2. Charitatem sive
aequitatem. 3. Prudentiam and attentionem, page 104. The first we are now
concerned to inquire into. And whereas, in their First Rejection, they condemn
the Remonstrants, as teaching (that it cannot well be avouched that original
sin of it self it sufficient for the condemning of all mankind, etc.) If they
understand this of Adam's first sin, there is none of them but acknowledge,
that the guilt of it has overspread his whole posterity, and made them
obnoxious to condemnation: But whether that which is appendant to it, by way of
punishment, makes a new guilt and begets a new punishment, no act of man's will
passing unto the espousing of it; this they think too vain and trivial a
subtilty to contend about.

In their Fourth Rejection, They insinuate, that the Remonstrants teach, That
an Unregenerate man is not properly, nor totally dead in sins, nor destitute of
all strength tending to spiritual good, etc. whereas there is not one of them
that did ever write or affirm so: but in their third Article they confess,
That in the state of Apostasy and sin, man of himself and by himself can
neither think, will, or do any good, that is truly good.

In the Seventh Rejection, They impute to them, that they teach, that, The
Grace whereby we are converted is nothing else, but a gentle suasion, etc.
whereas there is not one of them have such an affirmation, That nothing else is
required to the power of believing but a gentle suasion. Quid enim ineptius
quam Potentiam in homine effici per suasionem? For what can be more foolish
than to affirm that a power may be wrought in man by persuasion?

In the Eighth Rejection they charge them to affirm, That it lies in man's
power to be, or not to be regenerated. When their meaning is no more but this,
that it may come to pass, that man may oppose a new contumacie, or resistance
to God's Call, etc. Ibid. page 105.

In the Fifth Chapter (of Perseverance) (as in the rest) the 1, 2, 3, and 4
Rejections, Ibid. p. 119.
are observed to be of the same argument and importance, that by the Fiction of
a multiplicity of errors the Remonstrants might be rendered the more odious;
and this is none of the most conscionable, much less worthy dealing. Besides,
there is (to use Master Baxter's own words) a perverse insinuation in the first
Rejection; where they affirm, there are some (meaning the Remonstrants) who
teach, That Perseverance is a condition of the New Covenant, which is to be
performed on man's part, by his own free will, before his peremptory election
and justification. In that this condition is said to be performed by man's
free will, Ibib. p. 126.
the Remonstrants are brought under a suspicion, as if they did not think the
grace of God and the continual assistance of his Holy Spirit necessary unto
perseverance in that which is good; whereas the Synod knew they were of a
contrary persuasion: Besides, by implying, that they should assert any
free will to be in man, which was not made so by grace, to do that which is
pleasing unto God, they procured the Remonstrants envy, which was a manifest
injury to them.

Likewise in the Second Rejection, the Remonstrants are (Master Baxter would
say) feigned to teach, That when as all abilities necessary unto perseverance,
and all things, which God is pleased to use for the preservation of faith, are
granted and set in readiness, that it still remains in the choice, and
pleasure of man's will to persevere, or not. Which words do darkly insinuate, as
if the Remonstrants did believe and teach, Ibid.
that God, for his part, does first perform all those things, that are
behoofull, toward men, and then leave them to themselves, affording them no
further grace or help to assist, and exstimulate them to do their duty: But
this is far from the Remonstrants Doctrine, who did always undoubtedly hold,
that God does always, both in the beginning, progress and end, more
especially in temptations, assist and help man by his grace to persevere in
that which is good, unless he confronts those divine aides and succors by the
unworthiness of a shameful neglect, or the opposition of a contumacious
rebellion. The liberty whereof, under the most gracious and potent
dispensations, is ordinarily, according to His most just and wise providence,
reserved unto man by Almighty God, that so his perseverance may be, under such
a sweet conduct, a work of his own choice and duty, and consequently capable of
the Divine approbation and reward.

Once more; That Author complains, that such Doctrines are imputed to them, as
the Remonstrants, never so much as dreamt of, especially, as they stand
reported by the Synod. For example; such as are in their Fifth Rejection, viz.
That no certainty of future perseverance can be had in this life, Ibid. p. 127.
without special revelation. Indeed they own no such certainty of a future
absolute perseverance, as flows from an inconditionate Election, and serves to
furnish Cordials for the secure and sinful, in the midst of their
perversities, drowning their cares and sorrows, and extinguishing their fears
of hell fire and Gods displeasure. But they do most willingly acknowledge that
an upright man, one that fears God, eschews evil and works righteousness,
may be certain of his future perseverance; so that no force, fraud, or fallacy
shall be able to rob him of (that treasure) his hope of eternal life, if so be
he be not wanting to Gods grace, but walks circumspectly in that road which God
has appointed to lead him in, and beset it with Guards of Angels to secure his
passage against the incursions of the enemy. And he that walks according to
this Rule, Peace be upon him and mercy! But in the Sixth Rejection, there is
another unworthy imputation cast upon the Remonstrants, viz. That it is a very
commendable thing to be doubtful of future Perseverance. They say, That as the
Regenerate are begotten to a lively hope, so they go on (if they do their duty)
to a Persuasion, and grow up to a full Assurance, and they exhort Heb. 6.11.
hort every one (with the Apostle) to show the same diligence to the full
assurance of hope even unto the end. And this is Gospel truth, Christian
consolation, and a practice laudable. But for the certainty of such a
perseverance, as was mentioned above; they do not only doubt of it, but
absolutely deny it, as having no just Title to the ground it is built upon, and
having a Genius that comports too much with the interests of the flesh and
carnal security, and apt to make abatements in our accounts of solid
devotions, and the practice of Holy duties. He that seeks for such a certainty
of his perseverance in God's favor, as may be made serviceable to caresse him
in the height of his lust and vanity, is sure never to find it otherwise, then
by special revelation. For the Holy Scriptures will not afford it. And the
Revelation that brings it being contrary to that Rule, how extraordinary
soever, cannot come from heaven, and therefore ought to be suspected (if ever
it comes) for a strong delusion. And now having discharged my undertaking, and
brought Master Baxter to so full and clear a view, of that unconscionable
dealing, unworthy falsification, and perverse insinuation, in the Practices of
his own Party, I hope they shall receive equal measure from him with Tilenus
and his Adherents. I hope he will not yet Jurare in verba: but suspend his
belief of their sayings also, till a further examination.

Reflections upon the VII. Section.
WHere we cannot but take notice of M. Baxter's ingenuity in acknowledging the
full sense and importance of the first Article, as it is charged upon the Synod
and its Adherents; For he confesses that in the Decree of Election, God had no
regard to faith or obedience, in the persons whom he did elect, as a means or
Antecedent to his Decree; and this he knows well enough to be the point in
question. 2. That he appoints the Reprobates to damnation, without any regard
to their Impenitency or Infidelity; This Master Baxter acknowledges too; for
he says, they (of the Synod) profess, that it is for their infidelity and
other sins, that God decrees to damn them, as the Causes of damnation, though
not of the eternal decree. Therefore the appointment of them to eternal
damnation, (which is the Decree, and that which Tilenus spoke of) though not
the execution of that appointment, was without any regard to their infidelity
or impenitency. One would think now that Tilenus had a fair Title to Master.
Baxter's right hand of fellowship: but to show the pregnancy of his wit in
taking up exceptions, in the writings of such as differ from him, and the
acuteness of his Judgment in finding out distinctions to blind, or set a
fair gloss upon the absurdities of those to whose opinions he is wedded, he
proceeds in his discourse, and first by way of Interrogatory, he demands (as if
this circumstance were the main hinge of the whole Controversy) Where talk
they of a very little number?

Answ. With your patience, Sir, I conceive Tilenus had the phrase (as you
heard) from Master Calvin, whose expressions the Synod did too much reverence
to disown, much less detest them. And therefore though they have not the very
words, they come not short of the sense. For they say, that out of the common
maltitude of sinners, he culled out to himself, for his own peculiar, some
certain. Cap. 1. Art. 10. and Art. 7. A set number of certain men, and so
Rejection 1. And Cap. 3. and 4. Art. 7. They say, Under the Old Testament God
disclosed unto but a Few this secret of his will, (viz. concerning salvation)
and yet I hope it was disclosed to all the Elect (at that time in a capacity to
receive the Revelation.) So that by luck, we have found, a Few, even in their
Canons, and some certain, culled, out persons, for his own peculiar. And now I
hope Master Baxter will be satisfied in this particular, if I had in Tilenus
his behalf said, that the number whether more or less shall not increase the
quarrel But the next word would have done it, if Master Baxter had not been
prudent in the choice of it; For he does not rudely say, It is a lie, but more
modestly, It Is not true? But what is the untruth? That they say, he does it
(elect unto salvation) (Without any regard to their faith or obedience
whatsoever.) But does Master Baxter say this is an untruth? yes and proves it
too, and that substantially, by a handsome way of sliding from the question;
For they profess, says He, that he (God) has regard to it, (and a double
regard too), 1. as the benefit which he decrees to give them, 2. As the
condition of the Glory, which he decrees them. But what is this to the matter
in question? The question is about the Prevision of it, as a qualification,
wrought by Gods Grace, in the person to be Elected, and you tell us of a
Provision made for it, that it may be wrought, ex Post facto, after they are
elected. I Will discover the impertinency in a familiar instance. Suppose Master
Baxter has a sequestered Parsonage at his disposal, and power to give
Ordination, Institution and Induction: one reports of him that he has made
choice of an Incumbent without any regard to his Learning or Godliness
whatsoever, he being acknowledged to be a very ignorant and vicious person to
all the neighborhood. Upon this report Master Baxter's Confident undertakes
the vindication, and to salve the matter, He cries out, It Is not true, that he
made him Incumbent to that Parsonage; without any regard to his learning or
Godliness whatsoever; For he had regard to it, 1. as a benefit, or quality
which he designed to work in him. 2. As the condition of that greater
preferment which he intended to confer upon him. This is Master Baxters way of
Answering Tilenus.

He decrees to save none (says M. Baxter) but for their Obedience as the
fruit of faith, which is not a means or Antecedent to Gods decree, but to our
salvation, as the most rigid Anti-Arminians teach.

(For obedience as the fruit of faith?) Is the fruit better then the tree? why
not for Faith, as well as for obedience, or rather for both together? But if ye
should set it so (Faith being much dearer to some of them then Obedience) yet I
doubt many of your rigid Anti-Arminians would not teach so. Why not thus? By
Grace Ephesians. 2.8. and Chap. 4.32.
, through Faith, for Christ his sake? Or if you will, Secundum opera, but not
Propter opera, by no means; works are via ad Regnum, but not Causa regnandi.
The way unto the kingdom of Heaven, but not the Cause of reigning there; and
therefore let it be according to their works, and not for their works. For, if
your [For] be Causalis respectu Consequentis, and not only Rationalis respectu
Consequentiae; it has Popery in the belly, or at least a piece of the Grotian
Religion, and though Bellarmine makes it a point of his Belief, yet Amesius
cannot digest it. Bellarm. Enervat. Tom. 4. page 208.

This obedience, as the fruit of Faith, you say, is not a Means or Antacedent
to God's Decree, but to our Salvation. This is ORTHO-DORT indeed. But you might
have said the same of the sins of the Elect, as well as of their Faith and
Obedience. For they are all alike Ingredients to make up that One full Medium,
as concerning the Elect. They are part of the Means or Antecedent in order to
the Execution of that Decree, as you have heard before out of Master Perkins,
and Master Norton; And would not this be very wholesome Doctrine to teach your
people, that God had a regard to the Permission of sin in them, and their
several falls, though into most heinous, wasting crimes, to serve for Fatherly
chastisements, as well as to their Faith and Obedience, to make up the full and
entire Means or Antecedent in order to the execution of the Decree of their
Election.

Master Baxter goes on with his exceptions, He calls that Secluding, all the
rest from saving grace, which the Synod calls but Praeterition, and
Non-Election, and Reliction. What a trabiliary and hypocondriac Passion
suggested this exception to him? Is saving grace attainable or within the reach
of these Non-Elect, Relict, (Gomarus has Abject) Past-Byes? If not, why do you
carp at the word Secluded? you have a mind to find a knot in a bull rush, if
you could tell how. But to let you see it was not a word invented or made use
of by Tilenus, to the Prejudice of your Party, you may find it used by some of
them before him. Et si Deus ab aeterno certos quosdam ad communionem salutis in
Christo Elegit, alios vero ab ta EXCLUSIT pro suo beneplacito: Zanch. in Misel.
tract. de Pradest. Sanct. c. 1. in Thesib. de Instit. Dei These. 8. And Calvin.
Instit. lib. 3. c. 23. Sect. 1. in pr. Quos ergo Deus praeterit reprobat; neque
alia de causa (observe that) nisi quod ab haereditate quam filiis suis
praedestinat, illos vult excludere. I hope you will allow Exclusit and
excludere, to be very near of kin to Secluded; and so I leave it.

But Master Baxter has a severer censure for Tilenus in his following words,
(He unworthily feigneth them to say) that God (appoints them to eternal
damnation without any regard to their impenitency or Infidelity,) when they
profess, that it is propter infidelitatem and caetera Peccata, that he decrees
to damn them, as the Causes of damnation, though not of the eternal decree.)
Why then, Tilenus said true, They were appointed, without any regard to their
Infidelity etc. Ay, but he regarded their Infidelity and other sins as the
Causes of damnation. Your meaning is, that those sins are the means or
Antecedent (as your expression was a little before) in order to the execution
of this Decree. And so are their very best works by the Doctrine of your Party,
who speak consonantly to their principles. Statuere possumus bona opera
Praedestinationi quandoque, quandoque etiam reprobationi inservire.
Praedestinatio per illa gloriam Dei illustrat, and quoad reprobationem, sunt
nonnunquam rations, quare gravior reddatur Lapsus. Qui enim a Deo deficiunt,
cum ab illo fuerint ornati bonis operibus, ut gravius peccant, ita etiam
acerbius puniuntur. We may resolve that good works do serve to the furtherance
sometimes of Predestination, and sometimes of Reprobation. Predestination does
set forth the glory of God by them; and in respect of Reprobation, they are
many times the means to aggravate Relapses into sin. For they who do fall from
God, when he has adorned them with Good works, as they do more grievously sin,
so are they also more severely punished, Loc. Com. De Reprob. Pob. 1. p. 122. f.
says Steph. Szegedin. 2. But does not your Decree of Reprobation (in good
earnest) make provision for those sins, in order to the illustration of: Gods
justice, when he shall condemn them? An attentive Reader may remember something
alleged (above) to this purpose? But not to leave it unto conjecture in a
matter of so great moment, I shall give you Master Nortons words, ( out of his
Orthodox Evangelist. page 56. f. 11.) The and of God in the Decree, says he,
is himself, for the manifestation of his glory, in a way of Justice upon the
Reprobate. The creation of man mutable, the permission of sin, the punishing of
him justly for sin, make up one full and perfect medium, (that is, means)
conducing to this end, as concerning the Reprobate. (Remember it is the constant
and unanimous Doctrine of the Calvinists, that the Decree includes the means as
well as the end.) And this is the very Doctrine of Gomarus held forth in the
Synod, not detested, nor rejected, nor disowned, nor silenced; for it is
inserted amongst their Acts. Part. 3. page 24. These. 2. you had it fully in the
former passages. Hereupon the Divines from the Correspondence of Widderau, do
conclude in the Name of those Churches to this purpose. Act. Syn. Dor. part. 2.
page 154. f. Quid ergo? an peccata fiunt necessario? ita est sane; si nempe
intelligas necessitatem illam, quae pendet a gemina hypothesi, decreti scilicet
permittentis, and finis boni. What then? are sins committed necessarily? yes,
so it is, if you consider that necessity which depends upon a double
hypothesis, that is to say, the Decree (not ineffectually, for so they hold of
permission) Permitting, and the Good end intended. The case then in short may
be thus illustrated. A Noble man commits Treason for which his Prince seizes
upon all his estate to the utter undoing of his posterity. These, being
disabled to purchase Arms and other accommodations for the wars, according
to that equipage that becomes their Noble extraction, the Prince makes a
Decree, of two branches, 1. Negative, That none should assist or supply their
needs, 2. Positive, That they shall lose their heads: but this shall be for
neglect of duty, or disobedience; which that they may be found guilty of, they
are summoned to appear in person, as becomes their Noble birth, and his
Eminence, to fight his battails. These unhappy persons appear with such
strength and Accoutrements as are left them, according to the notice they have
of the Prince his pleasure. But being unable, naked wretches as they are, to
subdue their Princes enemies, He is informed, that now he has a just cause to
fall upon them, and take away their lives, and accordingly Sentence is given,
and the fatal Block and Axe employed for a present execution. If any should
complain, that this were great severity, toward poor wretches made miserable
by their Fathers miscarriage, which they could no way hinder or consent unto
(being no way privy to it); Master Baxter is an able Advocate to justify these
proceedings. He will tell us, (if one should say these men were appointed to
death without any regard to their disobedience) it was for their disobedience
and neglect of duty that the Prince decreed to behead them, as the Causes of
their beheading, though not of the Decree it self.

Here it will be seasonable to take notice of a subtle Distinction, which some
of this Party makes use of to maintain that (Horrible Decree) as Master Calvin
calls it, Antid. p 38.
and yet to free Gods justice, Supralapsarians.
as they suppose, from the imputation of Severity. It Is one thing, say they, to
Predestinate and Create unto damnation, another thing to Predestinate and
Create unto Destruction. God, say they, has Reprobated and Created to
destruction the far greatest part of mankind without any respect at all to
sin in them: But he has not preordained, or doomed any one man to eternal
damnation (and the Synod makes a great use of this word Damnation) without
respect to sin coming between. What is the ground of this opinion or
Distinction? When God condemns the world, He performs the Office of a Judge,
who pronounces sentence upon the guilty, and therefore he has (in that
Capacity) a respect to foregoing sin, as the meritorious cause of that his
sentence. But when he does reprobate to eternal Destruction, he uses his
Right of Dominion, Vid. Act. Syn. Dort. part. 3. page 67. af.
as an absolute Independent and supreme Lord, who being bound to none, deals
thus by his creatures without any intuition or sight of sin and transgression
in them, as himself pleases. Hence it is that so many men make the glory of
Gods Power and Sovereignty See the Assemblies Confess. of Faith. Chap. 3. These.
7.
rather then that of his Justice, the end of Reprobation. Finis Reprobationis
est gloria Dei. Nam sic Deus demonstrat Liberam suam potentiam, and jus Summum
faciendi de suis creaturis quod vult, say the Divines of Embden in their
Suffrage, De Artic. 1. These. 2. Hypothes. 4. Page 76. And that (now mentioned)
Distinction does enable the Supralapsarians, to hold their own opinions, and
yet to subscribe to the Decrees and Articles that define Damnation to be in
consideration of sin only. And this was a great help to accomplish that
harmony and consent (not so much of minds and meanings, as of modes of Speech
and Phrases) which we find in that Synod.

And now is not this Decree notably Calculated to set forth the Glory of the
Divine Attributes? First God Reprobates and Creates the greatest number of men
to destruction, to set forth the Glory of his Sovereign Power: so say the
Supralapsarians. And then, that the Divine Justice may have her share in Glory,
order is taken by the same Decree, which comprehends the means as well as the
end See Gomar. Th. de Praedest. disput. (1604.) Th. 23. and M. Norton ubi
supra. page 56, 57.
, that sin shall fall in, to make those persons guilty, that they may be an
object fit for Justice to triumph over, under a sentence of condemnation. And
though this was a very common Doctrine amongst the Greater Lights (as they were
reputed) of those Churches, yet they were not troubled at them, but at those
that detected their enormity, and consequently, not those errors, but these
Persons, that attempted their Reformation, are ejected.

But does this respect of infidelity and impenitency, or other sins, as the
Causes of damnation, though not of the Eternal Decree, mend the matter or make
it worse? It seems to make it more plausible to inconsiderate Readers, that
look but superficially upon it. But weigh it exactly, and it renders the
Doctrine much more absurd and repudiable. For, (as has been intimated) it
makes sin by Gods design to truckle Quamvis enim peccatum, in decreto
reprobationis, non spectavit Deus, ut causam illius objectam, habuit tamen
permissionis illius rationem, ut medii quod fini, reprobationis subjecit ac
subordinavit. Gomarus in disput. de Praed. (disp. 1609.) These. 91
under this Decree of Reprobation, as a necessary consequent, and as a means
subordinate to the execution of it; so that according to this opinion, the
Reprobates are at first (in our manner of apprehension) inevitably destinated
to destruction, and then to sin, that that destruction may be ushered in with
the Formalities of a Judicial Process, and a sentence of condemnation.

And yet after all the service this Distinction of Reprobation has been pressed
to do them, it proves to be but a Distinction without a difference, upon the
matter, by their own confession. It is but Docendi causa, to help Learners,
that they consider a double Act, one Negative, (the denial of undue Grace)
which is praeterition, the other Affirmative, Compend. Chr. Theol. page 26.
(the destination of due punishment) which is Praedamnation, says Wollebius,
and so say the four Professors of Leyden, in their Synopsis Purioris Theol.
Disput. 24. These. 52. (mihi) page 308.

In Anatome. cap. 13. parag. 3.
Whereupon Molinaeus deals ingenuously, and tells us plainly they come both to
one reckoning, as we say; Reprobare ac velle damnare idem esse, quemadmodum
eligere idem est, ac velle salvare. To Reprobate, and to will damnation are the
same thing, even as to elect is the same as to will salvation. And though he
styles the Synod Reverend, and commends it for the celebrity and sanctity of
it; and again they give him thanks, for his accurate judgment and consent in
Doctrine; yet in this he goes against the whole stream of them; and (in the 9.
Parag. of that his Anatome,) he takes up an objection: Non effugeret, qui
diceret. Reprobatione non destinari homines ad damnationem, sed tantum
praeteriri, ant non eligi. If any one says, men are not destinated to
damnation by Reprobation, but are only passed by or not Elected, he shall not
escape so, says Molin. Nempe sic quaeruntur verba molliora, quibus eadem res
dicatur. This is but a dressing up of an ugly Matter in finer and softer words.
Perinde enim est, sive Deus destinet hominem ad damnationem, sive id faciat, ex
quo damnatio necessario sequitur. For it is all one, whether God does destinate
a man to damnation, or does that from which damnation necessarily follows.
Molin knew well enough, that to Reprobate is, as it were, a putting the fatal
rope about the man's neck, and tying his hands behind him: and whatever follows,
whether exhortations or prayers, is but in order to a preparation for turning
the Ladder. Hereupon he concluded, that no man is Reprobated but for sin.
(ibid. parag. 3.) But M. Baxter would make us believe, in his next words, that
the Synod and himself too are of this opinion; for he goes on, and says,

They do not only respect Infidelity and other sins as the cause of damnation,
but as the state, in which God finds many, when he denies them the grace of
Faith;] You speak not a word of Impenitency, it is clearly granted by you all,
that that was not looked upon in the Act of Preterition. But for its companion,
(as Tilenus had linked them together) though you divorce them, for your
advantage, remembering the old Rule (Divide and Impera) I mean Infidelity, God
had respect to that, as the state wherein he found many, etc. I pray how many
are they? and which? Infants or Adult only? 2. Is there not a Fallacy in those
words, (When he denies them the grace of Faith?) He denies it to the
Reprobates for ever; and therefore if you understand it of his denial of This
grace in the last stage of their lives, He must needs find them then in a state
of Infidelity. Or 3. do you mean the Heathens, by these Many? What state can
they possibly be found in else, when God denies them the Grace of Faith? But
if this be your meaning, you have placed that Infidelity amongst very unfit
Associates; For this can be but a Negative, not a Positive Infidelity; and so
whether it can be reckoned amongst their other sins (as being a sin it self)
is another question. That men cannot see or believe, without a certain Medium
or object, this is no more their fault, then it is that they see not
non-existents, etc. M. Baxter of saving faith page 53. f.
But 4. did God find any, really, in the state of Infidelity, when he denied
them the Grace of Faith, according to the Doctrine of the Synod? Do not they
and you conclude, that Preterition is the denial of this Grace? It Is proved
sufficiently already that they do so. And you know, some of them are of
opinion, (and that opinion not rejected by the rest) that in his Preterition
God considered mankind, only as having a possibility of being, in regard of
the sufficiency of his divine power; Did God find any then in a state of
Infidelity? They that bring the Decree of Reprobation down lowest (amongst the
Synodists) do affirm, that it was passed in consideration of the Fall of Adam.
To this purpose I might produce a cloud of witnesses, Act. Synod. Dord. 2.
part. page 77. q. 5. 3. part. page 24. these. 7. and p. 123. f.
were it not needless, seeing we find so much in confirmation of it amongst
the very Decrees and Articles of the Synod, to which all those Divines
subscribed. That God out of his mere just will has not decreed to leave any
man in the fall of Adam, and common state of sin and damnation, or to pass
over any in the communication of grace necessary unto faith and conversion.
This they reject as one of the troublesome errors. Cap. 1. Reject. 8. and cap.
2. Re ect. 5. That all men are received into the state of reconciliation and
grace of the Covenant, so that no body shall be condemned for original sin,
nor, in respect of it, be liable unto death or damnation, but that all are
acquitted, and freed from the guilt of that sin. This they reject as the same
error too. To the like purpose is the first Rejection of the 3. and 4.
Chapters. Where we have not only rejection or denial of grace; but damnation
also intailed upon Original sin. And if the grace of faith was denied to them
upon that account, how could God find them before it in the state of
Infidelity? Sure you will not make it Adams state before his fall, for he had
no need, and therefore it was no part of his duty to believe; in the Gospel
sense of believing; and consequently Original sin, whether as committed by
him, or derived unto us, cannot be Infidelity; Therefore that was not the state
he left men in, and yet the Decree of Reprobation had no other lower Prospect
of man, as a condition to pass him by upon, but that wherein Adam left him, as
the Synod has defined. And therefore your [other sins] must disband together
with your state of Infidelity, unless Original sin be a Noun of Multitude;
For that is that, which the Synod calls the common state of sin and damnation,
wherein they say, God left the Reprobate, when he denied them the grace of
Faith. But M. Baxter proceeds, and tells us of the Synod further, that

Of all the Non-elect they determine that God leaves them but in that misery,
into which, by their own fault they precipitate themselves: and that he leaves
them by his just Judgment to the Malice and Hardness of their own hearts.
It Is most certain, when ever God leaves men, he does it by his most just
judgment: but that He should leave them, to the Malice and Hardness of their
own hearts, before this Malice and Hardness be found in them, were very
strange. And unless Adams sin, or Original sin, upon which the Decree of
Reprobation passed against them, be Malice and Hardness of heart, I see no
truth in that assertion, that God leaves them (then) to the Malice and
Hardness of their own hearts. This is indeed a misery, into which men by their
own personal faults, do precipitate themselves: such is not that which you and
the Synod speak of; neither by omission, nor by commission, nor by consent. How
then? It is the fault of their Nature, which they are made guilty of only by
imputation, says Master Calvin, as you may find him cited in the Preface to
Tilenus his Examination. To which I will add that of Lubbertus A Synodist. In
Declaratione Respons. page 105.
, Our Carnal generation from Adam, fallen and guilty, neither is, neither can
it be, the cause of that original guilt which we derive from him; but the
imputation of sin committed by him, etc. And if it be thus, then you cannot
say, they are but left in that misery, into which by their own (if you mean
proper personal) fault, they ptecipitate themselves. Neither is it true, that
they are but left in this misery; for according to the nature of the means,
designed by this very Decree, and subordinated to the execution of it, they are
subjected inevitably to a far greater misery, 1. of sin, and 2. of condemnation
and punishment. To proceed.

You say, Though they deny Election to proceed upon foreseen says (because God
decrees to give that faith, before we can be foreseen to have it) yet they
purposely pass by the question, Whether foreseen Infidelity be in any the
qualification of the object of Reprobation or Preterition: But plainly they
took foreseen [Malice, Hardheartednesse, men's own sin, and their own ways and
common misery] to be the qualification of that object.

Answer 1. For the Common misery we grant it; In drawing up their Canons
against the Remonstrants, touching the divine Decrees, they thought it would be
most for their advantage to plant them upon that ground. But what? men's own
sin, and their own ways too, did they take these to be the qualification of
the object? It seems the Reprobates learn to go alone betimes. But I suppose
they had not gone very far in those ways, what ever speed they made; For the
Synod do determine that this Act of Reprobation, or preterition, passed against
them upon the fall of Adam, (as was observed before, and the places where they
hold it forth pointed out to you) and how many Leagues had Cain traveld upon
his own legs, at that time? and yet he was the first of such travelers that
were left in that fall, if yet we may conclude him to have been left in it. But
I see, if you have not mistaken them, the Synod have misled you, in these,
[their own wayes]; Cap. 1. Art. 15.
For whereas they say, the Non-elect are those, whom God has decreed to leave
in the common misery, and not to bestow saving faith, and the grace of
conversion upon them, but leaving them in their own ways, etc. Here Is a
description of Reprobation, with the fruits or effects of it. It Is a reliction
of men in the common state of misery, accompanied with the denial of saving
faith and the grace of conversion; and here is their first setting forth, in
their progress into actual sins, till, having accomplished that unhappy
voyage, at last they arrive at condemnation and just punishment, as the Synod
(in other words) reports it. Here then, if you consider the Decree of
Reprobation passed upon the Account of Adam's fall, men's own (if you take it
for) actual sin, and their own ways are not a previous qualification for it:
but a necessary and unavoidable consequent of it.

2. Unless [Malice and Hardheartednesse] be common Titles for Original sin,
(and if they be, they are very absurd ones) you are as much out of the story as
before, as has been made evident already. And so for Infidelity; For
Infidelity of this kind, as a sin, there can be none, (according to your own
doctrine) till Christ, the object of saving faith be propounded. He could not
be propounded (for a Savior, till there was need of him) till after Adam's
fall; but before that Proposal, the Act of Reprobation stepped in, and prevented
all the Non-elect of his saving benefits, as the Doctors of the Synod have
concluded. And yet

3. If God found many of these Non-elect, in a State of Infidelity (as you
affirmed a little above), why that should not be acknowledged, as fit a
qualification, to be looked upon, in an object of Reprobation, as Adam's fall,
or any other, if not much more, then any other of their own sins, I cannot yet
understand. But the truth is, though Master Baxter says, they purposely pass
by the question, yet having fixed their Decree of Reprobation upon the fall, to
speak consonantly to that Doctrine, they could make no question of it;
especially having denied election to proceed upon foreseen faith; De Reprob.
Judic. de propos. 1. Act. Synod. Dor. part. 2. page 19.
For the Divines of the Palatinate do conclude from that Rule, Contrariorum
eadem ratio, eadem scientia est, That from the account given of Election it is
easy to take the measures of its opposite, Reprobation. Dicere, Deum quofdam
reprobasse propter praevisam incredulitatem, blasphemum est in Deum, cui hac
ratione jus suum detrabitur, gloria eripitur. Paraeus in Romans 9.13.


One thing more, I must take notice of, though it be shut up in a Parenthesis;
you say, God decrees to give faith before we can be foreseen to have it. I
would fain know, whether God's foresight has no other Perspective glass or way
of discovery but His Decree? For, if he does, in your opinion, decree to give
or effect every thing in us, before we can be foreseen to have them; then it
inevitably follows, that in your Judgment, that [ foreseen Infidelity, Malice,
Hardheartednesse, men's own sins, and their own ways and common misery.] are
to be put upon the account of Gods Decree, and laid at the door of his
efficiency. And then, whether to punish men for these, (if they be the effects
of his own Decree, and so unavoidable) be justice in him or no, you go on and
tell us of the Synod,

That, they make Preterition an Act of Justice in God. Answ. But Sir, I have
showed you before, that not only a single Person, M. Norton, Quum Deus
Decretum electionis fecit, tum justitia ejus nondum erat laesa. Piscat. contr.
Schaff. Th. 104.
but a whole Assembly, (that late one at Westminster) make it not an Act of
Justice, but of Sovereignty. And may not this be the very sense of the Synod,
by an equivocall use of the word Justice?

For Gomarus These. de Praed. disp. 1604. These. 27. Nicasius a Schure says, Non
accidere ex justitia judicii divini, quod plures s^nt condemnandi, quam
salvandi, sed ex justitia do^minii, etc. So Appen. pres^or. Declar. in Praefat.
Reprobation being fixed at original sin, and that ascribed to Gods imputation
only, the whole account of that Decree is finally, by them resolved into Gods
mere will; hence they make a^ rather an Act of Power than Justice.
(a Creabilitarian, as was noted above) says, though God does destinate and
create men to destruction, he cannot be accused of injustice, in regard of a
double right in him; 1. that of absolute dominion; 2. that of judgment,
subordinate and relative to sin, (when it is committed.) So, says he, here
appears a double justice. One is the Justice of an absolute Sovereign, who is
supposed to do no injustice, whatsoever he does, being under no Law, and having
all at his dispose; In this sense the Supralapsarians call Preterition an Act
of Justice. (Jure Dominii:) Or 2. the Justice of a Governor or Judge, who
passes no sentence of condemnation, but upon intuition of sin, or evidence of
guiltiness; and in this sense the Supralapsarians will not, but the
Sublapsarians do acknowledge Preterition to be an Act of Justice. Now, how many
of the Synod were for Gomarus his sense, and how many for the other; I shall
leave to M. Baxter to Examine. In the mean while I shall hasten to make my

Reflections upon the VIII. Section.
HAving gotten footing upon such firm ground, as he supposed he had laid, He
proceeds to expostulate very Magisterially in these words.

And where now is the odious error that this second Tilenus put such a face
upon? Sir, It has a more ugly face of its Own, then any Tilenus can put upon
it; and neither the Synods mask; nor your paintry can hide it, much less make
it beautiful. But where is it to be seen? you ask, Is it in the Number? If he
think a greater number are saved or absolutely decreed to salvation, then they
do, he should speak out.

I Promised you already not to quarrel further with you about the number. But
what if Tilenus should speak his mind out, in this particular? I hope there is
no Felony, nor Treason can be made of it. I will therefore tell you plainly for
him, (if you do not know his mind already), that he is so far from thinking
that a greater number are absolutely decreed to salvation, then they do, that
he does not think so of any single person whatsoever. But what! do they think,
that any number are absolutely decreed unto salvation? Absolutely? That is,
without any regard to their Faith or Obedience whatsoever; and are they come to
this already? But perhaps by the word Absolutely, you intend, Absolutely in
respect of Motives on Gods Part, not in respect of Means on our Part, and yet I
cannot tell how you should do that neither, since the means are absolutely
decreed too, as to be wrought in the Elect, according to the judgment of the
Synod, and most expressly declared by the British Divines. Act. Syn. Dor. part.
2. page 200.
But what if we grant you an Absolute Decree, in respect of such Motives? If we
acknowledge, that there is in man no Cause, Motive, or Moral Title unto his
Election: but ascribe it wholly to God's good pleasure and Grace: will you then
condescend to it, that there is any qualification at all in him, unto which, as
the Term or Object, the wisdom of God thought fit, the Decree of election
should be Terminated? Grant this and we shall soon agree. But what should this
Term or Object be, to qualify Persons for their Election? It can be no other,
than what may make us capable, in the accounts of the Divine wisdom and Grace
(of which the holy Gospel is the best Repository) to receive the Highest Act of
Gods Dearest Love toward us in Christ Jesus; and such is our Election unto
Glory, Our Saviors [Come ye blessed children of my Father] at the General
Judgment, being nothing else, but the Solemn Judicial Publication of it. But
if Tilenus be of this opinion, What manner of Persons ought we to be in all
holy Conversation and Godliness? 2 Pet. 3.11.
For it should seem by this Doctrine, that a holy faith and a blameless life,
are made the previous dispositions to our immutable election unto Glory. But
this will usher in a new objection of Master Baxters against Tilenus.

For if he think, (says Master Baxter) that God foresaw that they would
believe and obey, before he decreed to give them faith or the grace of
obedience, and consequently that these are only or principally of themselves,
and not of God, be must condemn Austin etc. as well as the Synod of Dort.

Here we have a very Perverse insinuation, if I may make so bold, with Master
Baxter's leave, to use his own expression. Believe and obey (you mean the
Gospel) before a Revelation of it, or a call to it? Was Adam obliged to do so,
or could he do so in his state of Innocence? And will poor collapsed Tilenus
pretend to it? No, he has studied the Mysteries of Grace, and learnt himself,
and the incapacities of Mankind better. God has, not only a Foresight, which
is, as I may say, bounded within the compass of things future, In their due
time, existent; which cannot be without his Decree: but also a Foreknowledge,
which extends to all things Possible, though no Decree ever did, or ever shall
pass for the futurition or existence of them. Thus He foreknew that the men of
Keilah would have delivered up David into the hands of Saul, 1 Samuel 23.12.
if he had stayed amongst them; and thus he foreknew that Tire and Sidon would
have repented, Mat. 11.21.
if they had been placed under the same dispensations, as Chorazin and
Bethsaida were. Now suppose, Almighty God to consider men under such a state
and order of means; though he has not, as yet (to speak after the manner of
men) decreed to establish either such an order, or such men under it, yet by
his Omnipotency, he infallibly foreknowes what creatures of such capacities,
would do, being put into such a Posture. But for Faith and Obedience, these
duties relating to some Authority and Revelation, and requiring power far above
what remains in us since the fall of Adam, it implies a Contradiction to say,
Man can believe and obey the Gospel, before he receives as well a competent
strength as a proper Object for it. But Almighty God having put such and such
capacities into us, and placed us under such and such means and dispensations,
in his eternal wisdom, He Foreknowes what use and what improvement every one
will (in that order) make of those capacities and dispensations; And then
making a Decree according to this his Foreknowledge, He Foresees who will
believe and obey, not before he decrees to give them Faith or the grace of
Obedience, as M. Baxter perversely insinuates: but after it, (though
considering them under such an order of means, he foreknew it, before his
Decree) and consequently this both faith and obedience are neither only, nor
principally of themselves, but of God; And this is consonant to the Doctrine of
the Primitive Church, for all the purest Ages of it. As Mr. Baxter
acknowledges in his Saints Rest. part. 1. page 154. in the margin. f.
And if the Passion, or prejudice or interest of fierce Disputers have raised
new Articles, and maintained them at the charge, or upon the reputation of
their Over-credulous Admirers, yet having imposed so palpably upon the Faith of
the Church, they are in these particulars, to be forsaken, by what Names, or
Titles soever they be dignified or distinguished. And for this we have S.
Austin's own warrant and direction. Disputationes quaslibet etiam Catholicorum
and probatissimorum virorum, Epist. 111.
non esse tanti faciendas, etc. He says, The Disputations of the most approved
Catholics are not so highly to be esteemed, but that it may be always lawful
for us, with respect to the honor that is due to them, to reprove those things
in their writings, which we think to be recessions from the truth. And he
adds, that himself did so by the writings of others, and he would have others
do so by his own.

Nevertheless Master Baxter may receive competent satisfaction to his
scruples, if he will but keep his word; For he makes a very reasonable demand
in these words;

For my part, says he, I wish no more in this, then may consist with Rational
Prayers and Thanksgivings; and if this be all, who will not add a great AMEN
to it?

Do you wish no more then what may consist with Rational Prayers for the Grace
of God? For my yart, I am so far from denying you this Option, that I wish,
with all my heart, that you would really grant but so much for your self and
all your Party. But the truth is, men of your Ortho-DORT Persuasion, if they
speak consonantly to Right Reason, they must conclude the prayers of the Major
part of mankind, to be grossly irrational and absurd. For according to your
principles, some, even of those, who are truly sanctified, (for such S.
Austine, by your own acknowledgement, allows to be amongst the Non-Elect) can
never address themselves to their Devotions, but they must, either pray for
their own damnation; which is irrational; or that the Divine Decree about it
(as it is calculated by your Doctrine) may be repealed; which is no less
irrational then the former. And in (that which is of general Prescription)
the Use of the Lords Prayer (A Form, which I hope M. Baxter's modesty will
yield to be as Rational, as any his zeal, Fantasy or Godliness can make,
at least Ex tempore,) All the Non-Elect are, by unavoidable Consequence,
involved in offering up (as it were in one breath) cross Petitions to a like
Purpose. For, according to your Doctrine, All these Non-Elect, are left, at
least, in the Lapse of Adam, under (as many call it) an efficacious Permission
to fall into Actual sin; in intuition and respect whereof, they are Predamned
to everlasting fire; and the End of this, you say, is the Advancement of Gods
Glory, and the Final execution of it, at the Great day, which will be the
consummation of his Kingdom. Hence it follows undeniably, that in offering up
those Petitions [Hallowed by thy Name; Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done;]
They pray for their own damnation. And again, seeing this Damnation, (to which,
Yours say, they are Preordained upon this account) is the greatest evil of
Punishment, (or a combination of them All,) To which, though they may be
Decreed (according to the Doctrine of many Calvinists) by Gods Right of
Dominion, or his absolute Sovereign power of Jurisdiction, yet adjudged and
sentenced to it justly they cannot be, without the guilt of sin; and therefore
the said efficacious Permission of sin, and the peremptory Denial of Grace
Sufficient and necessary unto Faith and Repentance (without which there is no
Remission) are Decreed likewise, as the unavoidable Means of bringing that
Horrible Decree to its Final, Infallible execution; Hence it follows by
unavoidable Consequence, That in offering up those other Petitions, [Forgive us
our trespasses; and lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil,]
These Non-Elect do implicitly Pray, that the said Decree may be Repealed.

But his Question following, [Would you not have men pray for faith that want
it?] May put a man to a stand, if not to silence. The Synod it self was not
resolved about it. For though it be a piece of their advice in their 16. Decree
upon the 1. Chapter: Yet upon second thoughts, ( Chap. 3. and 4. Reject. 4.)
and a fuller view of it, they descry it to be an enemy, not only in Arms, but
upon the March too, (as the English Translator gives Intelligence) against
direct Testimonies of Scripture: And Donteclock says, All study and care a man
can use to promote his salvation, before faith and the spirit of renovation, is
not only vain, but rather hurtful then profitable, as you heard above. If
this be true, to what end should a man pray for faith that wants it? But I
thank God, I am not of M. Donteclocks opinion; and therefore you shall have my
advice without a fee in this case; Let him pray. And he that has it, let him
Pray for more continually with thanksgiving. But M. Baxter has not done his
Expostulations yet; for he goes on in the same strain still. Was it not a
Rational Prayer [Lord increase our Faith] and [Lord I believe, help thou my
unbelief?] Who doubts it? And was it not a Rational Thanksgiving of Paul for
his Converts, that [God had given them both to believe and suffer for him?
Phil. 2.29.
] That God had given the Philippians to believe and suffer (not to fight) for
him, I find, by way of assertion, not thanksgiving, which yet had been very
commendable, if he had thought fit to take the occasion. But you observe God
gives both to Believe and suffer; I suppose you mean the opportunity and
patience to glorify his Name and Gospel by their sufferings; for sure you
cannot think that God did actually inflict the reproaches, which they suffered,
or their stripes upon them; and if you understand it of the grace and power to
yield submission to their Persecutions with meekness, we must remember the
concession till we meet with a fit occasion to make use of it.

In the interim we will hare the patience to read out your long objection;
which proceeds still in these words, [ Sure you do not mean when you pray for
[Increase of Faith] that God would give you natural free will, which you had
before, or that he would send the Gospel to you; but some way that he will
effectually procure you to believe. (And doubtless the way of his internal
operation is beyond our reach, and therefore beyond our dispute.) 1. If this be
beyond our reach and our dispute; why have your Party stretched themselves so
much, and multiplied so many fierce disputes about it? Chapter 3. and 4. Reject. 8.
and Art. 12.
Nay, why have they defined so positively, that God employ's his omnipotent
strength in it, working (our regeneration) in us, but not with us (as the
English Translator has it) but, without us; why do you say this operation is
performed, insuperably, irresistibly? Nay, if the work be beyond our reach, why
have so many Worthy learned men been, not only reviled but ruined by them;
because they chose rather to follow the expressions of the holy Scriptures and
Ancient Fathers, then subscribe to their new and unsavory, and contradictory
Phrases, and positions?

2. You may be sure, when he prays for Increase of Faith, no man in his right
wits, intends his natural free will, nor the sending of the Gospel, when he
has it lying by him. But now, I pray, let me take my turn to put Questions.
Had the Primitive Church for 3. or 400. years together no Rational Prayers?
Have the Lutheran Churches at this day, no Rational Prayers? Did not they, and
do not those, in their devotions, beg earnestly of Almighty God, that some way
he would be pleased effectually to procure them to believe? Could this doctrine
make so great a Harmony in their Liturgies, and can it not consist with your
Prayers? I am sure the fault is not in the Doctrine. That is innocent and
charitable and good friends with all the world, and therefore very well
disposed both for Prayers and other holy Duties.

3. What think you of these Prayers, amongst the rest, in the English Liturgy?

ALmighty God, which show to all men that be in error, the light of thy
Truth, to the intent that they may return into the way of righteousness; Grant
unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of Christ's Religion, that
they may eschew those things that be contrary to their profession, and follow
all such things as be agreeable to the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Or of this,

LOrd from whom all good things do come, grant us thy humble servants, that by
thy holy inspiration, we may think those things that be good, and by thy
merciful guiding, may perform the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Or of this,

O God, forasmuch as without thee, we are not able to please thee, grant that
the working of thy mercy may in all things direct and rule our hearts, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Or of this,

KEep, we beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church with thy continual mercy, and
because the frailty of man without thee cannot but fall, keep us ever by thy
help, and lead us to all things profitable to our salvation, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Or of this,

LOrd, we beseech thee, to grant thy people grace to avoid the infections of
the Devil, and with pure heart and mind to follow thee, the only God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Lastly, what think you of this Prayer,

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued,
and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally, by thy mercy,
obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.

Is not this a Rational Prayer? Doctor Jackson says, That, In the first part
of this Godly Prayer, B. 10. chap. 37. page 3131.
we have the state of the Question concerning the concurrence of Grace and
Freewill, more pithily and more plainly set down, than in any
Controversie-writers, whether in the Romish or reformed Churches. The Sum is,
That without Gods Preventing Grace, or peculiar disposition of his Favorable
Providence, we cannot do any good works at all, though but Civilly or Morally
Good, nor any works Spiritually Good without Gods assistant Grace, or gifts of
the Spirit inherent in us.

To be a Helper, is a Title, which the Almighty frequently takes upon himself;
and the Church is wont to appeal to him under that Title, when she addresseth
her self to him, to gain his succors in her distresses. And, as S. Austine
has observed, that Title is as well a prescription of our duty, as a support
of our expectation. Ipsum nomen Adjutoris praescribit tibi, quia and tu ipse
aliquid agis. Agnosce, quid poscas, Agnosce, quid confitearis, quando dicis,
Adjutor meus es, ne derelinquas me. Adjutorem utique invocas Deum. Nemo
adjuvatur, si ab illo nihil agatur. If we style God our Helper, we suppose our
selves to be in action, and our Prayers designed to solicit his assistance, not
to cut out work for him. If we think those divine dispensations, under whose
influence, we desire, in our prayers, to be conducted, should determine all our
good motions, we might soon be tempted to throw off all care and leave all
other duties to be wrought in us, by God alone, and betake our selves wholly
unto prayer. And having entertained this vain imagination, how many are there
in the world, that, when they suffer infirmity, or fall into fouler sins, are
ready to ascribe it, not so much to their own neglect of duty (for alas! humble
and modest wretches, they can do nothing!) as to the suspension of that divine
Omnipotent determination, that should have accomplished the same in them. And
then they comfort themselves with such thoughts as these; [God did not
determine me, not bow my Will to do otherwise. I cannot of my self change my
disposition, and this is that I received from God, who suffered me to be led
into this temptation, though I have not failed to pray daily not to be led into
it. What shall I do? I hope God will one day give me so to be determined that I
shall not fall.] Thus they hope, and pray, and expect the return of their
prayers, but their sin remains, because they will not be convinced, that it is
their own duty, at least, not that it is in their own Power and choice, to
determine against it.

Our torpor and lukewarmnesse is a disease that wants so great a remedy as our
own prayers and God's quickening assistance. But if the sword of Josua does not
second the elevation of Moses hands, if our endeavors do not attend upon our
Prayers, those Amalekites that infest us will never be discomfited. Hence Saint
Peter is careful, that when we rise from off our knees, we should take heed to
our walk also, 1 Pet. 1.17. If ye call on the Father, who without respect of
persons judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your so
journing here in fear.

In a time of violent temptation, I doubt not, God may and many times, does
vouchsafe, so to fortify and determine the will of his faithful and devout
servants, at the importunity of their ardent prayers, (or when he sends them
out upon some signal employment, Rev. 3.10. Mar. 13.11.
for the service of his Name and Church) that they shall not be vanquished or
transported by it. But when their will is thus necessarily determined by
Almighty God, their liberty cease, and they cannot properly be said, at that
very time, to obey God (as obedience presupposes liberty, and denotes duty)
in overcoming that temptation; because that Special Help (which gains the
Conquest) is given as a kind of reward of their former piety, or as a present
benefit returned unto their prayers. But we are to consider, not what God's
superabundant Goodness is pleased to confer upon such as are excellent in
virtue, (whether by way of reward for their former piety, or of benefit upon
the earnestness of present devotions) to help them in their saddest
exigencies: But what his ordniary way of dispensation is in the Commencement
and carrying on the work of Grace in men's hearts. The best measures we can take
for this, are his own Revelations; and these are discovered not only by
Commands, established with promises and threatenings: but by obtestations and
complaints: As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies; Ezekiel. 18.23.
Turn ye, Turn ye; why will ye die, O house of Israel? Psalm. 81.13.
By Options and wishes; O that my people had hearkened unto me: and Israel had
walked in my ways! Deuteronomy. 32. v. 29. Chap. 5.29.
O that they were wise, that they understood this! O that there were such a
heart in them! By Prayers and beseechings; This is signified by the extension
of hands, Isa. 65.2.
(which is often set forth as a posture of Prayer) All the day long have I
stretched out my hands to a gainsaying people: (and) Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God. The Sincerity of God's earnest desire
of man's Conversion and Salvation, attested by these (and other like)
Patheticall obtestations, Options, and Prayers, is enervated and overthrown,
viz. as well by the necessity of an irresistible conversion, as by the
insufficiency, or internal inefficacy of Grace, and impossibility of
obedience. It Is inconsistent with the Divine wisdom to desire impossibilities,
as life from a dead creature, or motion from a carcass; for that were, to
desire a sufficient effect from an unsufficient Cause. So to desire an
irresistible conversion; for that were to desire obedience, wherein there must
be liberty, in necessity; and to be earnest that that may be done by others,
which he absolutely intends to do irresistibly by himself.

But whereas M. Baxter is so tender and jealous of the reputation of his own
Reason; and that must not be debased so much, as to be prostituted to an
irrational devotion; it were well, if he were no less tender and jealous of
the honor of the Divine wisdom. For such is God's gracious Condescension, in
his intercourse with poor Sinners, that he makes Prayers to them too, that
they would be converted, and be reconciled, and be at peace with him. Are these
His Prayers Rational or serious, think you? If your prayers to him, cannot
Rationally consist, without his irresistible determination of your will; how
can his to you, consist with it? Is it not agreeable to your Reason, to pray
for God's preventing and following Grace, For Grace to excite and enable, and
assist you, unless he does invincibly apply your will to the singularity, and
every circumstance of every good act you do; And is it agreeable to his
wisdom, to pray and beseech you, to do that, as your duty, which he must
insuperably work in you himself, or else it shall not be done at all?

So that, in short, your objection from Rational Prayers, is unavoidably
returned upon your self; For what, you think, you may rationally expect from
him, upon the account of your Prayers; the same he may as Rationally expect
from you, upon the account of his. And thus much for Rational Prayers.

And by Parity of Reason, your objection from Rational Thanksgivings will
admit of a like Solution.

It Is certain we can never give Almighty God sufficient thanks for the Riches
of his abundant grace and favor toward us. But there are a sort of sturdy
Beggars, that will cross the proverb and be choosers too; and if they may not
have what they list, they remain churlish and unthankful for all other
instances of our bounty. But the law has made a good provision, in appointing
not an alms to cherish, but a whip to chastise such dispositions. A [God I
thank thee] may be expressed with no little vehemence of Spirit, when men have
little thanks for their labor; For it is ordinary, as well to ascribe unto God
what his Justice will not own, Jer. 7.10.
as to expect what his wisdom will not grant. Isa. 58.3.
You should consider that as we are obliged to give thanks: so God has thought
fit to give commands, and does vouchsafe commendations and praise to our well
performed duties. Whatever the Ignorant vulgar do, a wise man will not cast
away his commendations upon the actions and combatings of those little Puppets
that play in fight, but reserves them for the honor of that invisible hand
behind the Curtain, by whose sole strength and activity they are put into their
several postures. If our Regeneration or conversion be wrought in us solely by
Gods Omnipotent strength, without us (as the Synod has designed) it were very
absurd that we should have any praise for it: yet the Apostle says, that, that
circumcision of the heart, in the Spirit, (which can be nothing else but
regeneration, or conversion) though it gains no praise from man, as not subject
to his observation, yet it has praise of God. Romans 2. ult. God allows his
servants to seek for glory and honor, as well as immortality, by a patient
continuance in well doing. Romans 2.7. Phil. 3.8.
and he assures us, for our encouragement, we shall not lose this part of our
reward. For he will give praise, and an Euge 1 Cor. 4.5. Mat. 25 21.
serve bone and fidelis, well done thou good and faithful servant!

God understands the extent of his own work and his creatures duty, better then
you or I; and he is so jealous of his own glory, he will not prostitute any
part of it to an unworthy flattery of his Vassals. The Approbation and Applause
he gives them, at the end of the day, when their work is done, is an earnest
admonition unto us, who are still upon duty in the Vineyard, that he expects to
be honored by an ingenuous and free obedience. To lay all the burden of our
duty upon his operation, that the more thanks may accrue to him upon that
account, is to grow lazy that Grace may abound; And he will never accept of
such thanks, as are set up to commute for duties that are attended with more
cost and difficulty, or are made a pretense for sloth, or an encouragement to
tepidity.

2. I would ask, from whence these Thanksgivings, you set so much by, come?
Sure, if the rest of your good Motions carry this stamp of Divine and
irresistible Determination upon them, your Thankesgivings do so too, and then
whether they be Rational or no, you cannot but perform them, and in that case,
whether it be Rational to expect praise and glory for them, I have some Reason
to be doubtful. The sum of all is this; The Praise which God gives his
servants for the performance of their duty, it is a Rational Praise, or it is
not. I hope, you will not say the last, for shame; for admit there be a great
Grace in it, yet you must allow that there is some truth too, Joh. 1.17
and then it must be Rational; for God is a God of wisdom. If this praise be
Rational, then it is for something done that might have been omitted, or done
otherwise; else how can a man have praise in himself alone and not in another,
Ecclus. 31.10.
as the Apostle says he has, if his works be Judgement-proof and current?
Galat. 6.7.

In short, this puts the difference, betwixt that Good, that consists in duty,
and that which consists in operations merely voluntary; and that whether they
proceed from the Excellency of Essential Perfection, as in God, or from the
benefit of exalted Nature, as in Saints, and Angels. They, who are subject to a
law in the quality of Probationers, in order to their trial for preferment,
they can give no proof of themselves; Acts of Subjection they may do, but
rewardable obedience they cannot perform, unless they have liberty of
Contradiction (as the Schools call it) a freedom to do, or not to do their
duty. It is otherwise with Angels and holy Spirits at their journeys end, when
they Rest from their duties, Rev. 14.13.
and reign as kings in the possession of eternal bliss. The excellency of
their goodness consists in a perfect voluntary Conformity to the chief Good,
with a full satisfaction and acquiescence in the fruition of it, with out that
imperfection of a liberty to do otherwise. Upon our arrival in heaven, and our
immediate approximation unto God, when we shall be like him, and see him, as he
is in Glory, we shall then Will Good as the blessed Saints and Angels do, most
voluntarily, yet not of freedom but necessity: But to do this, is the
Prerogative of our Nature, in highest state of Exaltation, by way of reward
upon the consummation of her duty, which is free obedience, and never properly
performed (unless by special dispensation, if any such be granted) but when
we have it in our own power and choice to do otherwise. But this contemplation
has transported me beyond my bounds. All that is desired of Master Baxter is
this, that he will allow, that praise, which the most wise God gives unto men
for their good duties, may be as Rational, as Man's Thanksgiving for the
benefit of the Divine Grace; and then his objection will amount to nothing. But
as long as he continues so eager in a palpation and flattery of his own Reason,
He must expect to meet with some Adversary, that will be no less zealous in a
just vindication of Gods wisdom. But let us attend to the case he puts for
Tilenus to answer, which is ushered in with a [If,] and an interrogatory, after
this manner.

3. [ If his offense be at Gods preterition of men without a foresight of their
demerit) as taught by the Synod. To interrupt your Period, I suppose this is a
matter to take offense at, and to carry a just indignation against too. For
Donteclock and Molinaeus say, it charge God with unjustice; Molin. Anatom.
Armin. cap. 13 page 84.
For it cannot consist with Gods Justice, Si homo innocens and nullam ob culpam
destinaretur ad desertionem, ex qua aeterna perditio necessario consequeretur;
If a man innocent, and for no fault should be destined to desertion, from
whence of necessity his eternal perdition follows.

He adds another Reason ( Parag. 10.) If God has destined his creature to
perdition, it is necessary that he should have destinated it to sin too,
without which that perdition cannot be just, and so God shall be the impulsive
cause of sin. Nor can man be justly punished for that sin, unto which he is
either precisely destined, or compelled by the will of God. And ( Parag. 6.) He
flies higher, and says, By this kind of Reprobation the Innocent creature is
not only made most miserable, but also most wicked. For if God does first hate
man, the work of his own hands, it cannot be but that man must needs hate him
again; and so God, by this opinion, is made the Author of sin, and man's hatred
of God. This Opinion therefore, even in the Judgment of Molinaeus, (to whom
the Synod gives so great commendations, amongst their Acts Part. 1. p. 300.
.) does justly give offense to all Readers, that are tender of the honor of
Divine Justice. But (says M. Baxter) it is not their Doctrine (true or false)
but his (Tilenus) forgery, yea it seems contrary to their Doctrine. You say
right M. Baxter, it seems contrary to their Doctrine: and they and you, are
much beholding to your seemings: But Multa videntur, quae non sunt; and so does
this. Was it rejected as a troublesome Doctrine to those Churches, wherein it
was so fiercely maintained? Let the Reader remember (if Master Baxter will not)
what the Contest was, betwixt Maccovius and Lubbertus, mentioned above; Let him
also reflect upon the Public Profession of Gomarus in the open Synod, let him
read again his Definition of Reprobation, forecited. There were many
Creabilitarians, as well as Gomarus, who made the creature in its condition of
Possibility, to be the object of the Decree. And these Spirits were too
Mercuriall to have been fixed, to a subscription, of those Canons or Decrees of
the Synod; if any Syllable had been found in them, which they could not easily,
by the benefit of some few distinctions, have reconciled to their
Supralapsarian Doctrine. These are none of Tilenus's forgeries, Master Baxter;
by which, what ever their Doctrine seems to you, (for Perit judicium cum res
transit in affectum) it will be evident to the impartial Reader, that the
Major Part, to which the rest subscribed, thought it a thing indifferent, Act.
Synod. Dor. part. 2. page 34. f. Sir Judic. Gomari de Reprob. part. 3. p. 24.
Th. 2, 6, 7.
(and so the Deputies of the Synod of South Holland, express themselves, as
was alleadgcd above) Whether Gods Preterition of men were in foresight of their
demerit, or without it. If, (as you say of Gods regard to faith and obedience
in reference to election; so) you affirm he had regard in his Preterition to
men's demerit, 1. as the necessary fruit or effect of that Preterition or
Reprobation; ^ as the condition upon which he decreed to damn them; I grant in
this sense, it is their unanimous Doctrine, that in his Preterition, God had a
regard to it, and a foresight of it. But indeed, says M. Baxter, they (well)
(how well, is referred to the Readers judgment) affirm that there was the
same sin and demerit, (therefore no regard to faith and obedience in Tilenus's
sense) in many, whom yet, God Decreed to convert and save. They say so; but
there is so much equivocation and Artifice in their sayings, that we see the
Supralapsarians concluded they might Subscribe to it, without Prejudice to
their own opinions. Master Baxter proceeds thus,

4. If his offense be, that they think, that [God does not effectually convert
and save all the rest of the world] if he be a Christian, he believes the same
himself: or if he be not, one Part of it may be seen. If you had Practically
learned, what that of our Savior means, Mat. 7.3.
(...), you would have weeded this last clause out of your discourse, before
you had charged Tilenus with Perverse Insinuations. But Tilenus will take no
offense at this; neither is he offended, that God does not effectually convert
and save all the rest of the world; no nor yet, that he does not give to all
Grace that is immediately sufficient to faith in Christ and to salvation. But
his offense is, that you teach, God has rejected far the greater part of
mankind, not-willing to save them, nor to give Christ to die for them, nor to
confer any saving benefit upon them, by the help whereof they might convert
themselves, no not when he does seriously and with open arms invite,
solicit, and even with prayers and supplications exhort them to be converted
and save themselves from perdition; but to have decreed, that infinite Myriads
of men, fallen, by divine punishment inflicted for Adams sin; into an utter
inability to rise again and convert themselves, should without any mercy be
born under a designation to the eternal and most exquisite pains and torments
of hell fire; and which is more, that when the Promises of the Gospel are held
forth to allure them to an expectation of a better condition, See Act. Synod.
Dord. part. 2. page 24. Th. 2, and 6. and p. 84. These. 21. p. 35. These. 2. and
part. 3. page 76. p. p.
that they should be decoyed into a state of infidelity, and a new contumacy,
whereby they may be involved in a more heinous guilt, and so obnoxious to a far
more intolerable condemnation, for the rejection of that Grace which was never
intended to be of advantage to them; and all this to no other end in the world,
but that by this means, the most Gracious and Merciful God, might procure (as
is pretended) the Glory of his Liberty and absolute Dominion, in saving and
damning his poor Creatures at his Pleasure.

But here Master Baxter, falls upon us again; for he says, 5. If he be
offended, that they teach, that God does not give sufficient Grace to the rest;
I answer, That which he calls sufficient Grace (but you cannot tell where) or
those of his way) they confess that God gives to other men as well as to the
elect. Answ. 1. Those of his way? why may not he have a way by himself as well
as you? But the truth is, he is no great friend to Singularity. He loves to
keep the good old way, where a man may be sure to find him, and where he is
sure to have good company, that love to keep the beaten road with him. But of
your Party, Isa. 56.11. Of Right to Sacram. in the Praeface.
every one follows his own way, as the Prophet complains; insomuch as you take
liberty to tell them, it is not in my power to be of all men's minds, when they
are of so many and inconsistent.

But 2. do the Divines of the Synod say, that God gives sufficient Grace to
other men as well as to the Elect? I pray point us to the place, I am sure,
your so much admired Martinius says otherwise, and yet he was the most likely
to use the fullest expressions to this purpose; But when he had cut some fair
Trenches, as if he would bring the water of life into the dwellings of the
Reprobate, on a sudden he opens a Sluice that carries all from them again to
refresh the Freehold of the Elect.

Et quia his (Electis), says he, Fides, applicandi organum, donatur, Martin.
de morte Christi pro solis electis. These. 5. part 2. p. 107.
reliqua communia beneficia, quae ex font communis dilectionis oriri dixi,
incredulos praeterfluunt, apud eos non manentia, in solos electos influunt; ut
quibus solis fiunt utilia.

All common benefits which do spring from the fountain of God's common Love,
they do slide by, and make no stay in unbelievers: But they flow into the
Elect, and become beneficial to them alone, to whom Faith is effectually
communicated, to that purpose. By this it is evident, that Martinius did not
give sufficient Grace to others, as well, as to the Elect.

3. I wish M. Baxter had dealt ingenuously and freely with us. He might have
told us positively, that the Synod confess, God gives sufficient Grace to the
Non-elect: But he knew very well, this is inconsistent with their Doctrine,
which I shall make evident by several arguments; as

1. They who are left in the fall of Adam, and common state of sin and
damnation, they have not Grace sufficient to salvation. The Non-elect are left
in the fall of Adam, and the common state of sin and damnation. Therefore they
have not Grace sufficient, etc. The Major is evident of it self, The Minor is
the express Doctrine of the Synod. In the 1. Chap. of Predest. Art. 15. and
Reject. 8. and Chapter 2. Reject. 5.

2. Arg. That which comes to the Non-elect by accident, and not out of an
intention in God to do them Good, is not sufficient to salvation.

That Common Grace comes to the Non-elect but by Accident, and not out of an
intention in God to do them good. Therefore --

The Major needs no proof. The Minor is the Doctrine of Triglandius, a
Synodist, In Declar. page 202.
who says, That the external calling of the Gospel is properly directed to
the Elect only; and the Reprobate are not called but improperly and by
accident. And Master Baxter has let fall something to this purpose, in his
Treatise of Right to Sacraments. page 418. m. and little less is employed in
the 15. Sect. of his Preface, in these words, Is it a Rational conceit, --
that God has as full a purpose etc. To this sense the Deputies of Gelderland
above.

3. Arg. That which comes short of what is necessary to salvation, is not
sufficient to salvation.

The Grace conferred upon the Non-elect comes short of what is necessary to
salvation. Therefore etc.

The Major is evident; because the least measure of sufficiency that can be,
takes away necessity.

The Minor is the Doctrine of the Divines of Embden, (in terminis) As God for
his good pleasure Decreed to leave some in that misery, Act. Synod. Dord. par.
2. p. 76. Hyp. 5.
into which they were precipitated by their own fault; ita Media ad salutem
necessaria iis non confer, decrevit; So he decreed not to confer upon them
means necessary unto salvation. So the Deputies of the Synod of South Holland,
amongst the Acts of the Synod at Dort. Part. 3. page 35. De Reprob. Reject. 1.
and the whole Synod in the 8. Reject. upon the First head of Doctrine, where
they threw it off as an Error, that God did not decree to leave any in the
fall of Adam, and pass any over in the communication of Grace necessary to
Faith and Conversion.

4. Arg. Common Grace only is not sufficient to salvation. The Grace conferred
upon the Non-elect is common Grace only. Therefore.

For the proof of the Major, I will refer the Reader to M. Baxters
additionall Sheet, (at the end of his Papers, Of saving Faith Page 94.
) especially Prop. 13. where he may see the nature and effects of common Grace,
and how far it can carry a man. The Minor I presume M. Baxter will not deny.

5. Arg. That Grace which does Specifically differ from saving Grace, and can
by no improvement of the Non-elect, become saving Grace, is not sufficient to
salvation. The Grace conferred upon the Non-elect, does specifically differ
from saving Grace, and can by no improvement of theirs become saving Grace.
Therefore.

The Major, I think will not be denied. Vbi supra.
The Minor as to the first branch of it is Master Baxter's Doctrine; Synod.
Dord. 3. part. page 213.
and as to the second branch of it, it is the judgment of the Divines of Drent,
who affirm, that Finis horum generalium donorum non est, ut eorum recto usu
majora and plura mereamur aut assequamur, and tandem Reprobi fiant Electi: Sed
ut Societas humana and politia conserventur, Electisque variis modis
inserviatur, utque ad vocationem internam praeparentur. That is, Those general
gifts are not bestowed upon us, to the end that by the right use of them we
might obtain more and greater gifts, and so at last the Reprobate become Elect:
But that humane Society, and Policy might be preserved, and that they might be
inservient to the Elect, and prepare them for their inward call. As much as
this, upon the matter, is employed by the Synod amongst their Decrees. Chap. 3,
and 4. Reject. 5.

6. Arg. That Grace which does not slow from the fountain of saving good, is
not sufficient to salvation. The Grace conferred upon the Non-elect does not
flow from the fountain of saving good. Therefore,

The Major is clear enough. The Minor is proved out of the Decrees of the
Synod. Chap. 1. Art. 9. Where they say, Election is the fountain of all saving
good; from whence faith, holiness, and the residue of saving gifts, lastly,
everlasting life it self, do flow, as the fruits, and effects thereof.

7. Arg. That Grace which is not conducible to the salvation of the Non-elect,
is not sufficient for their salvation. The Grace conferred upon the Non-elect
is not conducible to their salvation. Therefore.

The Major is evident. The Minor is proved thus, That Grace, which in the very
intention of God works to the hurt of the Non-elect, that Grace is not
conducible to their salvation. The Grace conferred upon the Non-elect, in the
very intention of God, works to the hurt of the Non-elect. Therefore.

In Hoseam 13.9.
The Major needs no proof. The Minor is proved out of Polanus; Those, says he,
whom God has Predestined to eternal destruction, those he also creates to
eternal destruction, to them all things which are for the salvation of the
elect, are unto their eternal destruction. Which shall further appear by this

8. Arg. That which is intended and designed, as a mean to carry on the Decree
of Reprobation, to its final execution in the Non-elect, that is not conducible
to the salvation of the Non-elect. The Grace conferred upon the Non-elect is
intended and designed to carry on the Decree of Reprobation to its final
execution in the Non-elect. Therefore.

The Major is not to be denied. The Minor is proved out of M. Perkins, who
speaking of the execution of the Decree of Reprobation, (in the Adult, Armilla
Aurea. Cap. 53.
who are called) makes three Degrees in it; and in the first, he places their
Illumination, Repentance, temporary faith, the taste of the heavenly gifts, and
the sanctity of their outward life. These are several steps in carrying on the
execution of the Decree of Reprobation, and to this end is that common Grace
conferred upon them, as the more ingenuous and clear, of that side, do
acknowledge.

For they tell by sufficient Grace (when the equivocation of the Phrase is laid
aside) they mean sufficient (not unto salvation, that is far from their
thoughts, but) to these Four ends.

To Convince them of their contempt, or at least, neglect of that great benefit
(which elsewhere they say, Synod. Dord. par. 279.
was never intended for them) thus the British Divines. De Art. 2.

2. To render them inexcusabi^. So Gomarus, in his Theses de Praedest. (disp.
1604.) These. 31. and the Belgic Professors in their Synopsis Pur. Theol. Disp.
24. These. 55. and the Orthodox Churches of Wedderau, in their Judgment given
in at the Synod, and Master Perkins speaks very home to the point. Ib. par. 3.
p. 152.
( de Praedest. page 85.) All that are within the Pale of the Church are bound
to believe the Gospel; that he is redeemed by Christ every one, as well
Reprobate as Elect, but for different reasons. The Elect is bound to believe
that by believing, he may be pertaker (of the fruits) of Election: The
Reprobate, that by not believing, he may be made inexcusable, etiam ex
intention Dei.

3. To improve their induration, and blindness. So Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c.
24. n. 12. Those whom he has created to dishonor and destruction, that they
might become instruments of his wrath and examples of his severity; that he may
bring them to their end, one while he deprives them of power to hear the word,
another while he does more blind and harden them by the preaching of it. ( and
n. 13.) Behold, He directs his Word to them, but it is to make them the more
deaf: He sets up his light amongst them, but to make them more blind: He
affords them his Doctrine; but to the end they may be more hardened by it: he
applies the remedy, but that they may not be healed.

4. To augment their condemnation and torments. So Beza. Most miserable
wretches, In brevi explic. tot. Chris. Aph. 6, 7.
altius conscendunt, ut gravius ruant. They are advanced higher by these gifts
of Grace, that their fall may be the greater. Resp. ad Scrip. cujusd. Anon.
And Donteclock says, Christ is preached to the Reprobate: but to what other
purpose, then that, Resp. pro Daventr. ad Apol. Mathisti. p. 36.
by this means their condemnation may be the greater: and Jacob. Rivius says,
the Reprobate may frequent the Church, hear Gods word, receive the Sacraments,
etc. but yet they cannot be illuminated by these things; but all this means
tends to aggravate their condemnation, because God will declare his glory by
their destruction.

These are the only ends for which Master Baxters Common Grace is acknowledged
by those Divines to be sufficient. But if the Reader be so weak, as to be
imposed upon, and think Master Baxter meant (Sufficient) to salvation, the
Synod do utterly disclaim it. So the Divines of Geneva De Reprob. These. 1. (2.
part. page 51.) and those of Embden, page 73. Quaest. 12. and page 175. f. they
say, Distinctio illa Gratiae in sufficientem and efficacem, si non de externis
mediis, sed de vero and interno Spiritus tractu loquamur, minime nobis
probatur. They will not allow of the distinction of Grace, into sufficient and
efficacious, if by sufficient you understand any thing besides outward means.
So Gomarus, (part. 3. p. 24. th. 2.) The Divines of South Holland, (page 35. a.
m.) and they of Gelderland, cast a reproach upon the Doctrine of sufficient
Grace in these words; Quod de sufficienti gratia and suasione Spiritus S.
dicitur, qua potest velle, credere, converti, cui adhibetur, nugae sunt. Mere
trifles, say they. Part. 3. page 162. f.
The Deputies of Over-Isel do earnestly deny it too, page 195. p. and P. Molin.
Part. 1. page 290. f. In a word, what ever Master Baxter says, the whole Synod
denies sufficient Grace. Chapter 1. Art. 15. and Reject. 8. and Chapter 3, and 4.
Reject. 5. and elsewhere; Nay, (to use his own words) though Master Baxter puts
such a face upon it, he denies sufficient Grace plainly himself, in his very
next words; for he says,

To give them (the Non-elect) the natural power of free will, and a Christ to
be believed in, and an offer of Christ and life, and an earnest persuasion of
them to accept him, and to leave the matter to their own choice, yea and to
add common exciting moving help of the Spirit, which yet is uneffectuall, this
is it that the Jesuits call sufficient Grace. Who quarrels with them for the
name? The Dominicans yield it them; and though the Jansenians deny it them, the
Protestants have no mind to quarrel about a word, the thing is yielded them by
all: Nay Master Baxter, abate me an ace, quoth Bolton. All the Divines of the
Synod did not grant it. But I wonder, you should so confidently undertake for
all Protestants, as if you were their Great Dictator, or Proloquutor, and had
all their Senses in your head, and their votes at your girdle; when alas! we
see by too many of your complaints and volumes, that there is not so good an
accord amongst you; where upon you say, in your Preface (To your Disp. of Right
to the Sacrament) If I agree with some Reverend Brethren, it must displease the
rest by disagreeing from them. And in the point we are about, you disagree from
a many of them; who deny sufficient Grace, unless taken in those four senses
above mentioned, as well as the Jaensenians, whose ingenuity I must commend,
that denying the Thing, they abhor the practices of others, who study to
deceive by equivocating with the Name. But I see Master Baxter will be Catholic
indeed; He is grown as charitable as the very Jesuits, and allows the Non-elect
as much sufficient Grace as they do; The natural power of Free Will, an offer
of Christ, and a persuasion to accept him, yea and exciting help of the Spirit
too, but uneffectuall. (...)!

But let us examine how much it weighs, that the Non-elect may see how much
they are beholding to him for his courtesy. A thing may be said to be
effectual or uneffectuall in a twofold sense; as for example, a medicine may
be effectual of its own nature, against such a disease, and yet, prove
uneffectuall through his fault to whom it is administered; and that either
because he will not endure the Application of it; or because he will do
something or take something, that prevents or disturbs and interrupts the
operation of it. But when Master Baxter tells us of his sufficient uneffectuall
Grace, he does not take uneffectuall in this sense. It Is uneffectuall in its
kind, and of its own nature (as to the production of faith and conversion,
(according to their Doctrine) and not only through the fault of him to whom it
is administered.

So that we may set forth the sufficiency of Master Baxters Administrations,
for cure of the sin-sick soul, by a comparison of the like made to the body.
To a man desperately sick, suppose Master Baxter should thus address himself
in the company of an eminent Physician; Sir, you are in a very sad condition,
and nothing is to be expected but sudden death, unless you will submit to our
directions and Prescriptions to prevent it. I see, God be thanked, you have all
your natural faculties, your mouth and your stomach, and here I offer you an
excellent Physician, and I entreat you heartily to be advised by him; he will
give you Physic shall be wholesome and work very gently, it may stir the
humor a little, but there is no danger of working too much, for indeed it is
uneffectuall.

Let the Reader judge whether M. Baxter should not deserve a fee of such a sick
person, for affording him such a sufficient means of Cure. Would not this
Doctrine make an excellent exposition upon that of Jer. 51.9. Curavimus
Babylonem, We would have healed Babylon [we applied very wholesome medicines,
yet uneffectuall] but she is not healed: forsake her? And would not this
doctrine make a very Patheticall Gloss upon that Commination (of Ezekiel. 24.13.)
In thy filthiness is lewdness; because I have purged thee (administering very
sufficient remedies, yet uneffectuall) and thou wast not purged, therefore
shall thou not be purged any more from thy filthiness, till I have caused my
fury to rest upon thee? Yet this is Master Baxters Doctrine, and his concession
of sufficient Grace to the Non-elect; and if they will not take his word for
the making of it good, he will put in Sureties, the Jesuits and the Dominicans,
for the performance of it. But that we may not doubt he is in earnest, he
renews his Grant in these words; This General and Common Grace which such call
sufficient, leaving the matter to the sinners choice, we yield that God gives
to the worst that perish. Which such call sufficient? Who are those [such]?
Such as your self, the Dominicans and Jesuits. But the Remonstrants are
Non-such. If you go to the Jesuits Schools to learn the doctrine of the
Remonstrants, no marvel you are deceived. But that the Reader may not follow
you in your error, I must tell him the Remonstrants have not so learned Christ,
having been taught as the truth is in Jesus.

But I must not take leave of this passage, till I have taken notice of a
[perverse insinuation] in it, in these words, [Leaving the matter to the
sinners choice]. What, as if a man should bring food, or Physic, or Cordials,
to the door of a sick Bedridden person (under a pretense to releeve him) and
leave it there (for him to take in, who is not able to stir out of his bed)
and depart, taking no further care for the importation of it? This is none of
the Remonstrants Doctrine. God does not leave the matter to man's choice in this
sense. He continues his solicitations, till he has been very frequently and
very shamefully repulsed ( for his Spirit shall not always strive with man,
Genesis 6.) He stands at the door (which is within our sick-mans reach, Rev. 3.20.
and is by God's knocking made in his power to open; there God stands) and
knocks still, for admission and intertainment; but it being man's duty, and
therefore a matter of choice, not of necessity, (wherein, as the common saying
is, He can neither will nor choose) it must be his own free Act to open the
door, else Christ will not enter in and sup with him. And this is notably
evinced, 1. from Gods command, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Therefore choose life. 2. from
Christ's commendation, Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen the good part. 3. from that
commination, Prove. 1.29. For that they did not choose the fear of the Lord. And
this is good wholesome Doctrine with Master Baxter, when he gets into the
Pulpit; For there he tells his Congregation, in good sober sadness, that the
reason that most men perish, for all the mercy that is in God, and for all that
Christ has done and suffered, Treatise of Convers. page 2.
and for all the Grace that is offered them in the Gospel, is, What? Even
because they will not receive this Grace, nor entertain Christ and the mercy of
God, as it is offered to them. And what does this signify, but this, because
they would not choose it? And upon this account they are condemned, and very
justly. Yet when he is come from his pulpit, and undertakes to dispute with
Tilenus, it is not sufficient that Gods Mercy and Christ's Merits, and the Divine
Grace be at his choice, to receive it; this may serve the Non-Elect: But be not
angry, says he, if we thank God for more, even for giving us both to Will and
Do. If you may be allowed to be your own Carvers, no doubt, you will be very
liberal in the choice of your own portions; and if God ratifies it, it is well
for you. But we find that Gods design, in his way of dispensing Grace, is to
promote and advance duty: but your way does evacuate and cancel it. For if he
works the very Act (which we call duty) by an irresistible operation, in nobis
sine nobis, as the Synod says of Conversion, in us but without us, then duty
is no more duty, but necessity: and Grace is no more Grace, but force.

That God works to Will and to Do, others acknowledge with no less
thankfullness then your selves, if you mean a power and ability in us to Will
and to Do (as you employed your meaning to be, a little before, when you said,
He gives both to believe and to suffer) that is, a power to do it; yet so as
the will is left, more free rather then determined under an irresistible
necessitation, and consequently man may abuse his liberty, Heb. 12.15. 2 Cor.
6.1.
and be wanting to the Grace of God, and make default in his cooperation, and
so his will may remain undetermined, and the work to which he was enabled, be
left undone.

But if you think, when God works to will and to do, it is not in Man's power to
bury his talent, and contradict Gods motion, I must reject that Comment as a
corruption of the Text, and a subversion of the Apostles argument to enforce
his exhortation; With all humility, solicitude, fear and diligence, Ephesians. 6.13.
lest God be offended, and you miscarry, (...), Perficite, conficite,
interficite, superate (for the word has all these significations) all
difficulties and opposition being subdued, work out, and make your salvation
dead sure; for it is God that grants and works ability, not of necessity and
indesinently, but of his mere grace and good pleasure, which he may be provoked
to suspend and withdraw. This sense gives a huge inforcement to the
exhortation. But according to your interpretation, the Apostle should argue
thus, My beloved, it is God that works in you to Will and to Do, determining
your wills to the very Act of duty, insuperably and irresistibly, so that it is
not in your choice to do otherwise; and this he does because it is his Good
pleasure: therefore work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Would
such exhortations tend to the quickening of your Audience, or rather make them
careless? Or can it consist with the Holy Spirit of Discipline and wisdom to
use such a vehement exhortation, and then back it with such a Reason, as (if
granted) would render that exhortation insignificant and to no purpose? for
what diligence is to be used out of a fear of miscarriage, if the effect be
irresistibly determined? In the Appendix to your Aphorism, you say, Page 52.
Believing is properly a condition required of the Party if he will enjoy the
thing promised. And in your Treatise of Conversion, page 296. you say,
Salvation is not given barely from the will of God, but from the faith and
obedience of men, for it is an act of rewarding Justice, as well as of
Paternall love and mercy: What is that rewarding Justice terminated upon? Man's
free duty, or God's omnipotent irresistible work in him? Resolve this, and
Tilenus will not be angry, that you give God thanks for working in us to Will
and to Do.

Reflections upon M. Baxters IX. Section, and the II. Article.
WHerein Master Baxter sets up (to be baited and worried, as his Fantasy
pleases) the Second Article, in these words, [ Says this new Tilenus, They
hold, that Christ Jesus has not suffered death for any other but for those
Elect only: having never had any intent nor commandment of his Father to make
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.] Here M. Baxter flies out into
passion and foul language, and the first Case of his indignation he gives us
in these modest expressions [A most shameless falsehood, made, as they say, of
his fingers ends.] By the way, I cannot sufficiently wonder, why a man, that
has wrote so many Directions for Peace of Conscience; should throw such Birds
of prey off his own fist, to devour a strangers. Reputation: but the best on it
is, they are so well acquainted with the place of their breeding, he may safely
venture to fly them without his varvells, they will find the way home of
themselves; and therefore I shall not need to trouble my self to take them up
for him. But whether Master Baxters fingers ends be not more dexterous at such
work then are Tilenus's, let the Reader judge by what follows. There is not a
word of the Decrees of the Synod that has any such importance; says Master
Baxter. But you have taught us to distinguish betwixt Name and Thing; suppose
the word should not be there, I hope it will satisfy the Indifferent Reader,
and save Tilenus his Reputation, if the sense be there; and if (at least) this
be not there, I shall despair of ever understanding the Riddles of this Sphinx,
without the help of such an Oedipus, as Master Baxter. The Synod (in their 2.
Chapter, Art. 8.) decrees and declares their Doctrine in these words, For this
was the most free counsil, gracious will, and intention of God the Father, that
the lively and saving efficacy of the most precious death of his Son should
manifest it self in ALL the ELECT, for the bestowing upon them ONLY,
Justifying faith, and bringing THEM infallibly by it unto eternal life; that
is, God willed, that Christ by the blood of his Cross (whereby he was to
establish a new Covenant) should effectually redeem out of every people, tribe,
nation, and language, All THEM and ONLY THEM, who from eternity were elected
to salvation, and given to him of the Father, that he should bestow says on
THEM (which as also the other saving Gifts of the holy Spirit, he purchased for
THEM by his death) that by his blood he should cleanse THEM from all sins both
Original and Actual, as well committed after, as before they believed, and
finally should present THEM before him in glory without all spot, or blemish.
Here we see the saving efficacy of Christ's Death for their Redemption,
restrained to the Elect Only, and that according to the counsil, will and
intention of the Father; and this Master Baxter had under his view, when he
expressed so much wrath against Tilenus; and therefore he confutes himself with
this Confession, They do indeed assert, Art, 2. Sect. 8. That it was only the
Elect that God the Father intended by the death of Christ effectually to bring
to faith, justification and salvation: which is the same Doctrine with that of
Election before mentioned. Who ought Master Baxter this shame, to betray him to
this incogitancy? The same Doctrine with that of Election before mentioned?
Why, was not that Election of some, certain, culled out Persons; as the Synod
declares? So we see what Master Baxters Universal Redemption comes to: His
Redeemed All, are no more then his Elected All: it is an All in respect of
kinds, not of Persons. But Christ is theirs to be suit, according to the most
Free Counsil, gracious will, and intention of God the Father. So says the
Synod, and this Master Baxter will subscribe to, when he is Disputing against
Tilenus, though when he gets into the Pulpit he declares, this to be a Doctrine
of an ill influence; for he says, Christ and salvation are made light of,
because of this disjunctive Presumption, either that he is sure enough theirs
already, Making light of Christ. page 21.
and God that is so merciful, and Christ that has suffered so much, for them,
is surely resolved to save them, or else it may easily be obtained at any time,
if it be not yet so. Is it not the express Doctrine of the Synod and Master
Baxter, that Christ is sure enough the Elects, and that God and Christ are
resolved to save them, and that this will most infallibly be obtained at God's
time, if it be not so yet? This disjunctive presumption which he preaches down
in his Church, he disputes up in his Closet. And though, when he is conversing
with his papers (inter Adversaria) and drawing Diagrams concerning the Divine
Decrees, his good wits jump with the Synod, and tells us, The Father intended
by the death of Christ effectually to bring to Faith, justification and
salvation, none but the Elect, yet when he has his Crown, which is his crowd
of Auditors about him, he forgets himself, and if not his love to truth, his
zeal to souls transports him into other language, much more patheticall then
this Doctrine will allow of; For thus he addresseth his exhortation to them;
Ibid. page 29.30.
Beloved hearers; the office that God has called us to, is by declaring the
glory of his Grace, to help under Christ, to the saving of men's souls. I hope
you think not that I come hither to day of any other Errand. The Lord knows I
had not set a foot out of doors, but in hope to succeed in this work for your
souls. I have considered and often considered, what is the matter that so many
thousand should perish. [Now the man is in a rapture and has quite forgotten
his Decree of Reprobation] when God has done so much for their salvation; and
I find this that is mentioned in my Text; [Mat. 22.5. But they made light of
it.] is the cause. It is one of the wonders of the world, that when God has so
loved the world, as to send his Son; and Christ has made a satisfaction by his
death sufficient for them all, and offers the benefits thereof so freely to
them, even without money or price, that yet the most of the world should
perish; yea the most of those that are thus called by his word! [Is it one of
the wonders of the world, that Gods eternal and immutable Decrees concerning
them, should be executed?] Why, here is the reason, (says Master Baxter,) when
Christ has done all this, men make light of it; God has showed that he is not
unwilling; (but your Synod has showed otherwise;) and Christ has showed that
he is not unwilling, that men should be restored to Gods favor and be saved;
but men are actually unwilling themselves. God takes no pleasure in the death
of sinners, but rather that they return and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. (How came he
then to reject them upon Adam's sin, and deny them Grace sufficient unto
salvation, as you teach?) But men take such pleasure in sin, that they will
die before they will return. The Lord Jesus was content to be their Physician,
and has provided them a sufficient plaster of his own blood: (but such as his
Father intended should not be effectual, by your doctrine:) but if men make
light of it, and will not apply it (which your Party confess they are not
enabled to do) what wonder if they perish after all? This Scripture gives us
the reason of their perdition. It is a most lamentable thing, to see how most
men do spend their care, their time, their pains for known vanities; while God
and Glory are cast aside: (and a little after) Oh how should we marvel at
their madness, and lament their self-delusion! (who preach such
contradictions) Oh poor distracted world ^ what is it that you run after? and
what is it that you neglect? If God had never told them what they were sent
into the world to do, or whither they were going, or what was before them in
another world, (or what Decrees had past to shut them up under sin, and deny
them the Grace of Faith and Repentance, according to your Disputations) then
they had been excufable; but he has told them over and over till they were
weary of it. This is Master Baxters preaching vein; by which his vulgar flock
would be ready to flatter themselves, that they had their Teachers warrant to
be confident, that God does earnestly intend the salvation of them all. But
when this pang of soul-saving zeal is over, that he gets into his Polemicall
strain, then he disputes them out of all their hopes again; for thus he
proceeds; If this Tilenus think that God intended the justification and
Salvation of all by Christ, it is absolutely, or conditionally. Here I wish
Master Baxter had positively spoke out, what it is that God intends them, whom
he calls the Reprobate or Non-elect; if not their Justification, and salvation;
then, I know nothing else it can be, but their greater condemnation, and then
sure he is unwilling they should be restored to his favor; which is opposite,
point blank against Master Baxters popular exhortations. But if God intended
their justification and salvation absolutely, they shall be saved, says Master
Baxter, which no Christian that I know believes; Tilenus, as little Christian
as you make him, is of This Faith too; and therefore he says, God intended
this but Conditionally. But then Master Baxter tells us, The rigidest
Anti-Arminians, even Doctor Twisse does over and over grant it you (and I thank
him for nothing) of Justification, and salvation, that Christ died to procure
this Common Grace, that men shall be justified and saved, if they will believe.
The Reader perhaps may be amused at this Doctrine, That Christ should die to
procure Salvation, upon Condition of belief, for such as are absolutely
reprobated. But here lies the pretty knack; In Logic, there is a certain truth
of the Connection of the Antecedent and Consequent, when yet both the Antecedent
and Consequent taken apart are false. For though it be true, says Master
Norton, If Judas believe he shall be saved; Vbi supra p. 79.
yet is it not true, either that Judas shall believe, or that Judas shall be
saved. Now by the help of this Logic, Master Baxter, and his Party, may be
able to preach a very Common Grace indeed, though they utterly deny Saint
Jude's Common Salvation. Epist. ver. 3.
For the Scripture telling us indefinitely that Christ came to seek and to save
that which was lost, Mark 16.15, 16.
and Christ giving his Apostles Commission to preach the Gospel to every
Creature; sticking to the letter of the Text, a man might infer, that Christ
died to procure this Common Grace, for the horse and mule that have no
understanding, yea even for the Devils; that they shall be justified and
saved, if they will believe. For there is a truth of the Connection of the
Antecedent, and Consequent, [Whosoever believes shall be saved], though taking
them apart there is no truth in them: It is not true, either that horse, mule
or Devil shall believe, or that they shall be saved. But as Master Baxter
says a little after, Christ did not die to purchase empty Names, as a benefit;
So I may say, he did not die to purchase empty Connexions of Antecedents and
Consequents. This would be an excellent Motive to conversion, if made use of
amongst the unregenerate, or a sweet Cordial for the Desolate spirit, to tell
them there is a certain truth of the Connection of the Antecedent and the
Consequent, if they believe they shall be saved, though taking them apart there
is no truth at all in them; For really they shall neither believe, nor be
saved. Is not this strong consolation and passing encouragement to tell them,
they have just as much possibility of grace and salvation as the beast that
perish, or the veriest Devil? I know Iselburgh, In Artic. 2. Th. 1. p. 110.
par. 2.
one of your Bremish Divines, does say, that no mortal man's sins are so great,
but the sacrifice of Christ is sufficient for the expiation of them; nullus
etiam ex genere humano ab eo ita aut pariter alienus sit, atque Satanas and
Angeli mali: That no man is estranged to such a distance from Christ, as the
Devil and his Angels are; and he cites for it, Heb. 2.16. He in no wise took
upon him the nature of Angels: but the seed of Abraham. But Zanchy says, he
was born, prayed, died, rose again, ascended into heaven, and there makes
intercession for the elect only; and then as good he had not been born at all
in respect of the Non-elect, nay, it had been good for them, if he had never
been born; as we shall show anon. In the mean while the Reader is to be
informed that the Divines of the Synod, at least, a many of them are of
Zanchy's Judgment; and so we have not only the sense that Tilenus charges upon
the Synod, but the very words too. For the Divines of Vtrecht De Artic. 2.
These. 4. par. 3. p. 117.
say positively, Christus pro omnibus and singulis hominibus non est mortuus;
etc. Christ did not die, nor procure reconciliation with God and remission of
sins, nor satisfy Gods justice for the sins of Every one. Of the same
judgment are the Divines of Over-Isel. Ibid. page 134.135.
The Hassien Par. 2. p. 92.
Divines deliver the same Doctrine too. And those of Wedderau Page 100.
, are of the same opinion; Christ performed all the parts of his Priestly
office, fulfilled the law, paid the ransom, makes intercession; And of these
three, all and only the Elect are the adequate object. Qua tria pro objecto
adaequato habent omnes and solos electos. And the whole Synod in their Decrees
Rejects C. 2. de Morte Chr. Reject. 5.
it as an error in those, who teach that all men are received into the state
of reconciliation, and grace of the Covenant. If Christ died for the Non-elect
and purchased neither Reconciliation, nor remission of sins, nor
sanctification, nor eternal life for them, as the Synodists do generally
conclude; to what end then did he die for them? to procure, says Master
Baxter, This Common Grace, which amounts to no more then the truth of the
connection of an Antecedent and the Consequent, [If they believe, they shall be
saved] though there be a Decree past against them from all eternity, that they
shall neither Believe, nor be saved. Is not this a worthy achievement for the
eternal Son of God to shed his blood, and lay down his life for, and a rare
subtilty worthy the profound judgment of Doctor Twisse, and a whole Synod of
Anti-Remonstrants?

But the office of Christ's Mediatorship must be a little more evacuated, and
stoop somewhat lower yet, to serve the interest of this Doctrine, as we shall
now demonstrate. For, why was the Title of a Savior imposed upon the Son of
God? The Angel told Joseph, the reason was, because he should save his people
from their sins. Mat. 1.21. What, from the guilt of them only? no sure, from
the power of them also, the dominion and pollution. For he came to destroy the
works of the Devil, 1 John- 3-5, 8. To turn away ungodliness from Jacob, See 2
Cor. 5.19, 20, 21.
Romans 11.26. To Redeem us from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1 18. To redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify us unto himself, a peculiar people zealous of
good works, Tit. 2.13.14. His Commission to this effect did not expire at his
death, it was continued and ratified after his Resurrection; For God having
raised him from the dead, sent him (which implies his Commission) to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities. Act. 3. last. And
this was according to the Covenant, sealed with his blood, which contained on
Gods part a gracious Grant of power, That we being delivered out of the hands
of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our lives, Luke 1.74, 75. To this agrees the Grand
Commission for the establishment of the Ministry; whose great employment is,
to preach repentance, (and that is conversion, says Master Baxter) and
remission of sins in Christ's name among all nations. Luke 24.47. To open their
eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of their sins, and an inheritance
amongst them that are sanctified. Act. 26.18. (From which, I remember Master
Baxter, in some of his Papers, proves Sanctification to go before
Justification, as Justification goes before Glory; and to this purpose, he
tells his Reader flatly, that without a grain of his own salt, he cannot relish
that saying of Saint Austin, Bona opera non praecedunt justificandum, sed
sequuntur justificatum. Good works do not go before justification, but follow
after it.) The Hassien Divines likewise do most expressly declare, Act. Synod.
Dor. 2. par. p. 92. pr.
that holiness and righteousness And they do allege for it, Hebr. 9.10.
Hebr. 13, 12. Ephesians. 5.25.26, 27.
were as true parts of Christ's purchase, by the sacrifice of himself, and
intercession of his blood, as were either Pardon, reconciliation, or eternal
life.

Now if our delivery from sin, by sanctification, be the very first Part of
that Redemption which Christ has wrought for the world; is it not a very
gross and palpable absurdity, to overlook or overleap these first fruits of
our Redemption (as I may call them) and to affirm, That Christ has purchased
the latter for some men, for whom he has in no wise procured the former, i. e.
Remission of sins and eternal salvation, for those to whom he has not so much
as procured reconciliation or sanctifying Grace? Yet this is generally the
Doctrine of those Calvinists who seem most to advance the Merit and efficacy of
Christ's death by their proclaiming an Universal Redemption.

Christ, say the Hassien Divines, appears before his Father, as the only
Mediator, Ibid. p. 100.
that by the Presentation of his merits and accomplished satisfaction, he may
procure remission of sins, and restitution of righteousness for us. Then he
undertakes with his Father for our obedience and gratitude; the seal and
earnest of which sponsion or undertaking, (which is) his holy Spirit, he
conferres upon us, by whom he stirs up in us a care and study both to avoid
sin, and to perform righteousness. Lastly, he makes intercession for us. Quae
tria intercessionis Christi momenta nullo modo ad hoedos, sed tantum ad oves
Christi pertinent. These parts of Christ's Mediation do belong to none but the
Elect. But perhaps these are none of those Vniversalists of the Synod, that
Master Baxter will be tried by. Well then, to do him a kindness, he shall have
his own choice. First he named Paraem; and having examined him, he
acknowledges the sufficiency of the merit: but the efficacy, as to the
procurement of power, Ibid. par. 1. p. 213. etc.
for the Non-elect to perform that Condition, of Faith and Repentance, (upon
which pardon of sin, and eternal life are suspended) he flatly denies it.
Ibid. par. 2. page 79. Th. 3. in explic.
Here is but cold comfort from that stranger; let us therefore come to those,
who sat warm in the Synod; what say the British Divines? It seems good to
Almighty God (they say) even after his acceptance of Christ's Sacrifice, not to
confer remission of sins and eternal life, actually upon any, but by and
through Faith in the Redeemer. And here that eternal and secret decree of
Election discovers it self; when that Ransom which was paid for all, and shall
most certainly be beneficial unto all the faithful, to life eternal; yet
notwithstanding it does not profit all, because it is not given to all, to
perform the condition of that gracious Covenant. Christ therefore so died for
all, that by means of faith, all and every one, by virtue of this ransom, may
obtain remission of sins and life eternal. He so died for the Elect, that by
the merits of his death, especially destined for them, according to Gods
eternal Beneplaciture, they might infallibly obtain both Faith, and eternal
life. Here is very slender confirmation of Master Baxters Universal Redemption
hitherto; and now he has but one reserve to trust to, the Bremish Divines; and
alas! they say so little to make his assertion good, that I wonder as much, why
he should offer to entitle them to it, as why he should so foully asperse
Tilenus for declaring the Divines of the Synod etc. to be of another judgment.
Ibid. p. 110. These. 2.
For Isel-Burg affirms roundly, that the Decree of Reprobation has shut out
all the Non-elect from all the saving benefits of Christ's death. And Lud.
Crocius, tells us of no other universal Redemption, Ibid. p. 117. These. 3.
but Reconciliation, upon Condition, if they will repent and believe: Ibid. p.
106. Th. 21. with Page 107. These. 2, 3, 4, 5.
but not a word of procuring Grace to enable all men to perform this Condition.
And Martinius, whom it seems M. Baxter reposed most of his confidence in,
though he tells us of a like Conditional Remission and Salvation, if they will
be regenerated, repent, and believe, yet, really and effectually Christ has
promerited, purchased, obtained, and communicates Faith, Regeneration, or
effectual Calling, Justification and Glorification, to none, but the Elect,
according to Gods special Decree. This is his judgment. And now are not these
Divines wonderful Magnifiers of the merit of Christ, in affirming that it has
procured this Common grace, even for the worst that perish, as Master Baxter
Phraseth it, that he shall be saved, if he will believe? This is just according
to the Proverb, If the sky fall, we shall catch Larks. You had as good (and
may do it as reasonably) tell men of a certain inheritance designed for them in
the world in the Moon, provided they will make a Ladder to Climb up to take
possession of it. Happiness propounded upon Condition, but that Condition made
impossible, and that by a punishment, inflicted by the Propounder; and yet he
to be the Father of Mercies, who sent his own Son to seal a Covenant of Grace
with his own blood, wherein he has undertaken to give both Grace and Glory,
this as the end, and that as the way. How inconsistent!

But, says Master Baxter, did God purpose to cause in men this condition or
not? Sure he did. Otherwise, it would follow, 1. That God invites poor sinners
to confederate with him in a covenant of Grace, and yet is deficient, in
affording what is necessary, to enable them to perform it. And then, 2. it
would follow that God were the First Desertor in respect of this new Covenant,
which is against all sober Divinity. 3. It will make the Covenant of Grace to
be no less intolerable than that of works; for by this Doctrine, it does
exact impossible commands, and afford no strength at all to perform them. It
supposes God to make new Laws, and lay new Impositions, upon those bruised
shoulders of Adams Posterity, whiles he pretends to heal them.

It is a Rule in the Civil Law, Quando quis aliquid concedit, id etiam
concedere videtur, sine que res concessae esse non potest. If God makes a grant
of eternal life to any, or a serious Promise, sure he promises and grants
therewith, whatever is necessary for the enjoyment of that life. And in our
case, (you heard,) provision is made for it by the very Article of the
Covenant, Luke 1.74, 75. Ephesians. 5.25. Heb. 13.12.
and it is a main Part of our Mediators Office to take care for the performance
of it, (in a way suitable to his wisdom, justice and mercy) according to that
of the Apostle, Act. 5.30, 31. The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye
flow and hanged on a tree; him has God exalted with his right hand to be a
Prince and a Savior, to Give Repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.
See Act. 3. last.
But because he gives this, not to evacuate but assist our duty, not to
discharge us from it, but to enable and so oblige us the more to be diligent in
applying our selves to it; Hence it comes to be our duty, as well as his
donation, To have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and
Godly fear, Heb. 12.28. and upon this account the Apostle exhorts so
earnestly, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling; for
it is God that works in you to will and to do, of his good pleasure.

And this makes a fair way for our Answer to Master Baxters next demand, in
these words; If God did (purpose to cause this condition) then it was
Absolutely or Conditionally: if absolutely, it it will be done. If
conditionally, what is the Condition? and so in infinitum.

That you may not tire out your patience, or run your self quite out of breath
in such a long course, I shall endeavor to stop your passage, by telling you,
that there is ordinarily, some condition to be performed, not by way of
Causation, Merit, or Congruity, but by way of Order, to the introduction of
faith, or the work of Conversion. This is confessed by Master Norton, who says,
Vbi supra chap. 6. page 129.
That Christ in his ordinary dispensation of the Gospel calls not sinners as
sinners, but such sinners; that is, qualified sinners, immediately to believe.
But because, he may run with the Hare and hold with the Hound, like your
self, in this course; therefore, I shall send an Ahimaaz after you, to give you
a turn; I mean Doctor Jackson, 2 Samuel 18.27.
no Novice, M. Baxter, in School, or Practical Divinity; Book 1 and. 3109. c.
His words are these, And because Man by the assistance of Gods special
Providence (without the concourse of sanctifying inherent Grace) is enabled to
do somewhat, which being done his Conversation or Mortification shall
undoubtedly be accomplished; therefore are we said to mortify the body; and
not so only, but to make our Election sure; yea to work out our own salvation.
For so the Apostle speaks, Phil. 2.12. But how are we said to work out our own
salvation? Non Formaliter sed Consecutive: Salvation is the Necessary
Consequent of our working, or does necessarily follow upon our work, Not by any
Merit, or Causality, force or efficacy of our work, or by any natural
Connection, but merely by Gods grace, by the Counsil of his holy and
irresistible Will, by the Determination of his eternal Decree, by which it
has pleased him to appoint, Page 3110, and 3111. See p. 3114.
The one as a Necessary Consequent of the other; to wit, Spiritual
Mortification or life it self, as the Issue of our endeavors to Mortify the
flesh. Thus that profound Doctor. To whom I may add the invincible Argument of
that Learned, P. 3143. f.
and Judicious Editor of his Works; His words are these, Let us take a Polemo,
(a most shamelesly debauched Ruffian), upon this man we desire the work of the
Lord by our Ministry may be prosperous. We must either tell him that there is
something required of him in this present state, unconverted as he is, and so
set him a Task; or that nothing at all is expected from him. These two be
Points Contradictory Diametrally, there is no mean betwixt them. I say, that of
this man, something is required. The first Minimum quod sic, is Reflecting upon
his own actions, and the Law writ in his Conscience. Next I would apply some of
Gods words spoke by the Prophets to some sinful people or Person; Or I would
read to him, Ezekiel. 18.
as Isa. 1.16. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings,
cease to do evil, learn to do well. Or that of Saint James 4.8. Draw nigh to
God. -- Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double
minded. And would Affirm that these words signify something, were (not empty
noises, but) Precepts; and if Precepts, have some Duty correspondent to be
performed by him to whom I laid them; which is, quod quaerimus; that I would
have done. My Adversary must say, Nothing is to be done; It Is to no purpose for
me to Exhort, or him to Try, nothing can be done to purpose. Now what will the
poor Patient say? Men are naturally inclined to believe them, that most ease
and please their natures best. The least Consequent of this Doctrine that he
will or can make, and that if he were a good natured man too, will be this; Why
then I will betake my self to a negative idleness, wrap my body in my arms,
sit still, and wait the Good hour when Grace shall breathe upon me. A Second
will say, Go to then, I will eat my meat with joy, and take my portion of the
things of this life, till tastes of a better drop into my mouth from heaven. A
Third may perhaps do worse; wend to a Tavern, or worse place, and make work for
Grace, with a graceless Desperate hope, that the more he sins, the more Grace,
when it comes, may abound; that quo sceleratior eo Gratia vicinior: If my
Adversary says nay; He must abstain from lewd Courses; we are half agreed: is
not that part, the same with Esay's, Cease to do evil? If he maintain his
Conclusion; I have no more to say, but to enter an Appeal to God, and this
Protestation to man; That I disclaim all such dispositions, preparations,
endeavors, as, cooperating to the Production of Grace, after the manner that
temperate behavior concurreth to produce the Habit of Temperance; or that
natural qualities do, to produce Forms merely Physical: And this will quit me
from Pelagianisme or Popery; But he shall never be able to free himself from
the Errors of the Stoic or Manichees that holds it indifferent, what works a
man does before he be regenerate. Ibid.

This is Master Baxters own Doctrine. Sure I am, says he, that some means is
appointed to be used for the Acquisition of Special Grace. Of Saving Faith.
(page 27, and page 46.) And that a very command to use such means as means, is
a strongly encouraging intimation, that God will not deny men the end and
blessing, that use the means as well as they can. For it is certain that he
appoints no means in vain. But whereas you say, immediately before this, That
[you are satisfied, that God has not entered into Covenant or Promise with any
unregenerate man to give him saving Grace upon any Condition to be performed
without it] Give me leave to ask you, Has not God made a General invitation
to all the unregenerate (within the pale of the Church) to come unto him, with
a gracious promise to receive them? and does not this promise imply a
readiness, to grant what ever may fit them for his communion, without which,
that promise cannot be made good to them? Dare you affirm, that God will deny
saving Grace to some, who make the best use they can, of the Gifts of nature
and his common Grace, to stir up themselves to lay hold upon him? If you dare
do this, you dare contradict the Apostle S. Peter, Act. 10.34, 35.
and say (though not, as he does, Of a truth) [I perceive that God is a
respecter of Persons: for in every nation, there be some that fear God and
work righteousness, which are not accepted with him]. You complain Vbi supra,
page 40.
, you have people in your Parish that are harping on this string, (and yet this
is Ipsissima Fides DORDRACENA, Chap. 3. and 4. R^ject. 485.
a string of that very Instrument, which you have provoked Tilenus to play
upon) [We cannot give Grace to our selves, nor be saved without it; nor can we
have it till God give it us: which if he will do, we shall be saved: if he
will not, all that we can do will not help it.] I pray do not you twist
another string for them to harp upon, by telling them, Do what they can to
dispose themselves for it, God has made no promise to bestow saving Grace upon
them. For this will make as foul a jarring in their minds, and as unpleasant
Music in Gods Church, as the Denial of works Preparatory and Dispositive to
saving Grace. But to give you your due, you Govern your discourse sometimes
with more moderation and Caution when you address your self unto your
Congregation. For though in heat of Disputation, you determine, That God has
Culled out some certain persons for himself by his Decree of Election; wherein
he had no praevision of, or respect unto, either faith or obedience or any
other good quality, as wrought in them by his Gospel accompanied with his
Spirit; But he therein made provision for it, that in due time it might be
irresistibly wrought in them, not with, but without them, by His own Omnipotent
strength; And for the rest, not comprehended within that Decree, there is
another Decree past against them, withholding from them all internal Grace
sufficient and necessary for their salvation; which though offered them in the
Gospel, yet it is suspended upon the Condition of Faith and Repentance, which
Condition is impossible, because God did not Purpose to Cause it in them. This
is your Disputation-wise Doctrine, when you are combating with an Adversary:
But when you are consulting the advantage of Souls, then you are zealous (as
best becomes you) in another strain. In your Sermon (on Mat. 22.5.) you say, It
is true that Grace is free, Making light of Christ. p. 21, 22.
and the offer is universal, according to the extent of the Preaching of the
Gospel; and it is true that men may have Christ when they will; that is, when
they are willing to have him on his terms; but he that has promised thee
Christ, if thou be willing, has not promised to make thee willing: and if thou
art not willing now, how can thou think thou shall be willing hereafter? But
soon after; Oh Sinners! you might do much, though you are not able to your
selves to come in, if you would now subject your selves to the working of the
Spirit, and set in while the gales of grace continue. And in your Directions
for Peace of Conscience, Direct. 9. p. 65. Edit. 2.
you affirm, If wicked unbelievers would but do what they can, in daily,
serious, deep considering of these things, (viz. the vanity of the world, and
certainty of damnation, the excellency of Holiness, with the certainty of
everlasting Happiness) and the like, they would have no cause to despair of
obtaining Faith and Sanctification. This is your Sermon wise Doctrine. And you
have written [Directions to prevent Miscarrying in Conversion]. Sure, you do
not fear a miscarriage of the work on God's part, the danger is not from his
falling, but our own. Therefore something is required on our Part, and possible
to be performed by us, which being performed, our Conversion is ascertained,
but being neglected, it miscarries, and we our selves only are guilty of it.
If this be not true (Master Baxter) the Title of that Book is improper, and
your whole Discourse impertinent. And now you have so many blocks in your way,
and some of your own sawing out, I hope your course will be stopped, and your
Dispute not run out in infinitum.

I return to your Vindication of the Synod: you say, 2. [But contrary to this
Accuser] This is another Cast of your displeasure: A Civil Title; To be an
Accuser, is a piece of the Devils character: but such bolts are soon shot, when
Faction has bent her Bow, and Pride has a mind to make a quarrel. But if
Tilenus be the Accuser, the Synod or Master Baxter is the Adversary; For he
says, Contrary to this Accuser the Synod declares. (Art. 2. Sect. 3.) [This
death of the Son of God is the only and most perfect Sacrifice and
satisfaction for sins, of infinite value and price, abundantly sufficient to
expiate the sins of the whole world] and that it is, [therefore sufficient --
because this death was joined with the sense of Gods wrath and curse, which we
by our sins had merited.] that is, that the sins of all the world were etc.
But how is this contrary to this Accuser? Indeed it is besides him, if you
will, and as much besides the purpose. There is in the Chamber of London as
much Treasure, perhaps, as will pay the Debts of all the Prisoners about the
City; and it is so much the more current, because it is of excellent old Gold:
But what is this to the poor Prisoners redemption, as long as the Major and
Aldermen, (in whose sole power it is to dispose of that Treasure) will not
disburse it to that purpose? The superabundant sufficiency that is proclaimed
to be in the Exchequer, does not relieve the distressed, for whose benefit it is
not employed, but rather upbraid the want of Liberality in him who is Master of
it, and has the Power but wants the Will, to lay it out in such charitable and
pious uses.

But, you say, [ the sins of all the world were charged on Christ, and he
bore their penalty, as Paraeus in his writings to the Synod (and there
contained) expresses it.] Answ. Laid on Christ? To what end? to Load him, or
ease them? But you join with Paraus, Page 14.
in your first Assize, Sermon, where you say, Doubtless Christ died not for
all alike, nor with equal intentions of saving them; and yet he has born the
sins of all men on the Cross, and was a Sacrifice, Propitiation, and Ransom
for all. To what end, I say, all this, according to your Doctrine? Was it to
purchase saving Grace, Faith and Repentance for them? you say, No. Was it to
make satisfaction and procure Pardon? you cannot with any modesty affirm it, if
you speak consonantly to the Principles of the Synod; For, as you confess
(Sect. 7.) they determine concerning all the Non-elect, that God left them in
that misery, into which they were precipitated by the fall of Adam, and decreed
to damn them for this and all other sins (which would inevitably follow upon
their dereliction in this condition) as the Causes of their damnation* So that
this Decree has from all eternity, laid the sins of the Non-elect, upon their
own shoulders, and they are immutably designed to sink under them; why then
should they be charged on Christ? why should he bear the Penalty of them? Is
not Christ a principal link in that Golden chain of means, composed by the
Eternal Predestination to draw the Elect to glory? From hence some of the
Divines of the Synod do conclude, That the death, and all salutary benefits of
Christ do belong only to the Elect. Ad credentes quidem, propter indivulsam
illam salutis catenam. Romans 8. To them alone, Jud. Eccles. Wetter. Confir.
These. 3. par. 2. page 98.
in regard of that inviolable chain, Romans 8. And you tell your Reader, in the
Preface of your [Call to the Non-converted; [For Gods Decrees, you must know
that they separate not the end and means, but tie them together;] If it be so,
why do you untie them here, and ascribe the Death of Christ, which is a prime
means of salvation, in any measure to the Reprobates, who are immutably
appointed to another end, unless you affirm withal, (which i^ the Doctrine
delivered by many of your Party See M. Perkins Synopsis above, and Testimonies
cited for this.
), that Christ's death belongs no further to them than it may cooperate to their
End, that is, be a means of their destruction?

But, you say, They add also (Sect. 5.) [That the promise of Salvation to all
that will believe must be preached to all without difference, with the command
of Faith and Repentance.] This Command is either Legal or Evangelicall; Legal
Quia solum Evangelium novit remedium contra maledictionem legis, solum etiam
pr^dicat poenitenti^^ in nomine Christi. Hemingius Syntag. Inst. Christ. Loc.
16. These. 21.
I know you will not say; If Evangelical, then there is a promise of strength
annexed to those commands, to enable us to perform them (for this makes the
difference Wendolin. Theol. Chri. lib. 1. c. 19. These. 6. in explic. Discrim.
4^. Evang. and Legis.
betwixt precepts purely Legal, and Evangelicall; the Gospel does afford
strength, the Law none.) And Redemption from our vain Conversation, being (as
was said) the first part of our Salvation, our Salvation must needs commence in
an oblation of strength, the tendry of a Gracious Subsidy toward Faith and
Repentance; which yet you deny the unregenerate to have any promise of, and how
then can the Promise of Salvation be preached unto them*

2. If by salvation, they and you, understand only eternal life, (which is
the consummation of it,) then to preach this, unto men, who are punished with an
utter inability to repent and believe, for the Fall, or upon the Fall of Adam,
I say to proclaim such a promise of Salvation, to persons of that quality,
under condition of Faith and Repentance, is no less absurd, than to run in
amidst a multitude of blind men, and promise them ten thousand pounds apiece,
if they would but view such colors and distinguish the green from the black
and white. And if you take remission of sins in to this promise of Salvation;
and tell us, that is to be granted too, even to the Non elect, if they will
Repent and Believe; This is as if a Physician should come into an Hospital
full of sick and diseased persons, and profess seriously to them, Alas! poor
wretches! what a number of sad Objects are here! But I have compassion in store
for you, and my bowels yern over you, (and yet he administers nothing
effectually to work their cure; but exhorts them vehemently after this manner)
Come, be ye ruled by me, do you but purge your humors, and allay the
inflammation of your blood and spirits, and reduce your bodies to a good
temper, and I will save your lives, and preserve you from death and torments.
Were not this a comfortable proclamation? But suppose a Command As the
Non-elect are tied, to Repent and Believe by a command, but excluded and denied
ability by the Decree.
were added to this Promise, and a Commination appendant to that Command, that
if those blind men do not distinguish those colors, and those sick men do not
of themselves recover their health, they shall be tormented in flames of fire,
and kept alive in those flames to the uttermost; what would you think of such a
tendry of salvation to these poor Mortals? But the Synodists were very willing
to pass over this black and more horrid part of the story, whereof the event
is undeclinable, and to take occasion to tickle the conceit of the Reader, with
the Imagery of glorious promises, whose fruition, to such Non-elect, is utterly
impossible.

Yet even about these promises of the Gospel, I find a considerable difference
amongst them* They are not agreed whether saving Faith, Conversion, or
Regeneration (which come all to the same reckoning in this point) be promises
or no. Upon that passage in Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4
Whereby there are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by
them we might be partakers of the Divine nature. In Notis Minor. ad lo^^^
Beza says, He does not understand the Divine Essence, but a Participation of
Divine qualities, whereby the image of God is restored in us. And sure, this is
nothing else but Regeneration. If this be the matter of those great and
precious Promises, and not the effect of them only, then here is a promise of
Regeneration (conditionally) made to the Unregenerate (for the Regenerate being
already possessed of them, the Promises cannot properly be said to be made to
them as such) and truly seeing an Unbeliever has a Conditional promise of
Salvation made to him, Amesius Bellar. Enervat. Tom. 3. cap. 2. number. 10.
as an Unbeliever, which becomes absolute upon his believing, as Amesius says,
I can see no reason, why we may not as well say, that an Unbeliever, or
unregenerate Person has a conditional Promise of Faith and Regeneration. The
British Divines, if I be not much deceived, De 5. Artic. Act. Synod. Dor. p.
200. part. 2.
were of this Judgment; For to prove that Faith and Perseverance are Absolute
Promises, they say thus, There are some Promises of God which concern the End,
others which concern the Means unto that end; The Promises which concern the
end, v. g. concerning Salvation, are conditional. Believe, and thou shall be
saved. Be faithful (or persevere) unto the death, and I will give thee a crown
of life. And seeing no man is able to perform these Conditions, God has also
made most free and absolute promises to give these very Conditions; which he
himself works in us, that by these, as the means, we may attain unto the end.
To prove this they allege, Deuteronomy. 36.6. God shall circumcise thy heart, that
thou may love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, etc. The end here
promised is life; which the Israelites could never attain unto, unless the
condition were performed, that is to say, the love of God. But God does here
Absolutely promise, say they, that he would give them this Condition.

Here then we have a promise of Faith and Regeneration or Conversion, (for so
the Belgic Synops^ Pur. Theol. Disput. 32. These. 2. page 420.
Professors understand [the circumcision of the heart] and to whom is this
promise made, but to such as were yet unregenerate? And Master Baxter himself
was once of this Judgment; For in his Appendix Page 47.
to his Aphorisms, in his Answer to the eighth Objection of his Adversary, he
says thus, If the Covenant were only Absolute, then it can be made to none
but wicked men: and indeed the absolute Covenant is made to none other. Sure
those that God does promise to bestow new hearts upon, and soft hearts, have
yet their old and hard hearts: (except it were meant of a further degree, and
not of the first saving Grace.) 2. And as the Absolute, so the great
Conditional promise [Believe and be saved] is also made to ungodly men. Is not
this spoken to Unbelievers? will you speak it to none but those who believe
already? were none of those Jews ungodly, to whom Peter says Act. 2.39. The
promise is made to you, and to your children? etc.

But it seems he has since met with a new light; For, in his Directions to
prevent Miscarrying in Conversion, Page 265.
dividing the Benefits, or Mercies derived to us, from Christ, into Common and
Proper, The Proper or Special Mercies, he makes to be of two sorts. Some
Physical inherent qualities, or Performed acts, 2. And some are adherent
Rights, or Relations. Of the inherent sort, he makes three Degrees: whereof the
first is, the first Special work of Vocation, Conversion, or Regeneration,
causing the Sinner to Repent and Believe, and giving him the Principle of
Spiritual life; and of this, he says, God has not promised it Conditionally
or Absolutely to any individual Person that has it not. He has bound all to
Repent, and Believe, but has not promised to make them do it: (only he has
revealed, that there are certain Persons, so given to Christ, as that they
shall be infallibly drawn to believe.) But he has appointed certain means for
the ungodly, which they are bound to use, in order to their conversion; and if
they will not use them, they are without excuse.

What should move Master Baxter to change his opinion in this Article? I will
give you my conjecture. The promises of the Gospel are observed to be General,
and must be preached promiscuously, to Elect, and Reprobate (as they call them)
without distinction. And if the Redemption, wrought by Christ, be not supposed
as a common benefit, bestowed on all men: that indifferent and promiscuous
preaching of the Gospel committed to the Apostles, to be performed among all
Nations, should have no true foundation, as Martinius has observed. What
should these men do in this case, De Artic. 2. These. 8.
or what should they say? To say, the Promises of the Gospel are not to be
Preached to all, the more Sober and Learned, dare not. To say, Faith and
Regeneration are Promises of the Gospel, is to confess them to belong
indifferently and promiscuously to the Reprobate, as well as to the Elect; and
then maintaining that these are Promised most freely and absolutely, to be
wrought in us, without us, by God himself; this would by an undeniable
consequence entitle the Non-elect to as good an interest in the Benefit of an
irresistible conversion, as the very elect. What course then must be taken so
to state the Article, that they might avoid this Inference? The Synodists, they
divide the Promises, (as you heard) into some concerning the End, which are
conditional; If you repent and believe, you shall have pardon and salvation;
and these may be safely preached unto the very Reprobate; it really intitles
them to nothing; For, By this Proposition, If you believe, you shall be saved,
it is not signified that God wills either Faith or Salvation unto him to whom
it is so declared, more then unbelief and death, seeing he adds together
therewith, If you do not believe you shall die; says Amos. Rescript. ad
Grevin. cap. 5.


The other Promises (in their division) are concerning the Means, Faith,
Regeneration and Perseverance, which are absolute, undertaken to be wrought of
Almighty God without us, by the strength of his Omnipotency, and these are the
Propriety, and Freehold of the Elect; not to be indifferently and
promiscuously preached. But by this Doctrine they set up a double Gospel; one
for the Elect, which offers salvation upon such conditions as God has
absolutely promised and undertaken to perform himself, by an irresistible
efficiency; another for the Reprobate, which offers salvation upon other terms,
though under the same Name and Title) that is, upon such Conditions, as they
are bound to perform themselves, though there be no competent strength of
Grace, either promised or administered to enable them hereunto. Perhaps (to give
him the Title, he bestows on Amyraldus) our Oculatissimus Baxterus, upon his
second thoughts, discovered this foul Absurdity; and to prevent it, chose
rather to call them Revelations concerning the infallible effecting of Faith
and Regeneration, than Promises. But there is another foul Absurdity sticks
even to his Doctrine, and he cannot possibly shake it off, that is, He makes
Christ to be set up as a Double Savior; For unto some, he has procured
sanctifying Grace, which he does effectually and irresistibly communicate, to
redeem them from sin and their vain conversation, and this in order to their
Glory; And thus he is the Savior of the Elect. But for others he allows no
more, but external Ministeries, with Common Grace, which is uneffectuall, and
these in order to their condemnation too; such a Savior he is to the
Reprobate; Indeed in respect to these, he is made a Pure Socinian-Saviour; from
whom (according to this Doctrine) they receive little or no influences, but
those of his Holy Laws, and A Grand Exemplar.

And yet, right or wrong, Master Baxter now he is engaged will pursue his
vindication, as he imagines, to a perfect Triumph; and therefore he pleads
moreover for the Synod, that they add, That [the Reason why many that are
called by the Gospel do not repent or believe, but perish in Infidelity, is
not through any defect of the Sacrifice of Christ offered on the Cross, or
insufficiency of it, but by their own fault.]

By their own fault? Says the Synod so? Alas! how could that be? It was a
punishment indeed inflicted on them, when as yet they had but a mere
Possibility of Being in regard of the sufficiency of the Divine Power to effect
it. So the Creabilitarians, or Gomarists have determined. But to come as low,
as the lowest Calvinists; Admit it were upon the Fall of Adam; yet he could not
by that Fall, forfeit an interest in Christ, which he never had before that
Fall (for then, that being a means and power to rise again after falling, he
could not have lost it, by falling) whether for himself, or his Posterity.

2. Did Adam's Posterity become their Fathers Surety, that he should perform
the conditions of that First Covenant, and so became liable to the Forfeiture
of that Obligation, which he did violate? Or, 3. did They voluntarily, and of
their own choice, set up Christ, to be their Prince and Savior, and were the
Laws of Repentance and Faith (the breach whereof becomes so exceeding sinful
to them) of their Own Election, or were these both Laws and Prince imposed upon
them, and they invited to embrace, submit and subscribe to them, as Special
Acts of Grace, and the only Instruments to make them happy? Or, 4. Was it ever
in their power to Prevent, or is it yet in their power to rescind that eternal
Decree of Reprobation, whereby God immutably determined to leave them in the
Lapse: iisque, media ad fidem and Conversionem, vel simpliciter non dare, vel
non efficaciter applicare, idque ex mero Placito and liberrima voluntate,
faciente de suo quod vult; (as the Zealanders have defined, and it is inserted
amongst the Acts of the Synod; Par. 3. p. 45.
) And either simply to deny them Means necessary to Faith and Conversion, or
else not to apply it effectually to them, and this out of his mere will and
pleasure, Disposing of his own, according to his own mind? By which Doctrine
we learn, that it is their Misery to be ruined for Adams sin, but not their
Fault to perish in Infidelity. Neither proceeds it from any insufficiency or
defect of the sacrifice of Christ, but merely from the sole Pleasure and
incontrollable will of God.

And yet, for all this, Master Baxter runs on, and to make a fuller
Vindication, he tells us, The British Divines, and the Bremish especially, and
most clearly Martinius, (and Crocius well) did give in their suffrages for
Universal Redemption, which are Recorded in the Acts of the Synod, and these
Decrees are plainly agreeable.

How well Crocius and the rest have stated the Point, we have seen already; and
indeed one may thrip cross or pile, whether he squares his judgment by their
suffrages, or the Decrees of the Synod. What the sense of those Decrees is, you
find in their eight Article upon the second Chapter or Head of Doctrine, cited
above, at the beginning of our Reflections upon this ninth Section; and he that
would see more, may examine their 5. and 6. Rejections.

What is this Universal Redemption you or they speak of? Does it consist in
the Ablation of the Curse or Pain, the Impetration of Grace and Righteousness,
and the collation of Life and Glory? Man's Misery consists but of two parts, sin
and punishment. Does your Universal Redemption make sufficient provision to
free the Non-elect from both, or from either of these? From the wrath to come,
the Damnation of hell, or from iniquity and their vain conversation? Indeed in
your Assize Sermons, you did very seasonably Preach up Christ, to be a Lord
Chief Justice, to Judge the Reprobate; but I cannot find that ever you Declare
him to be their Lord Keeper, or their Lord Treasurer, to communicate his saving
Grace, for their Conversion, or to secure them against the assaults and rage of
their Ghostly enemy. These last Offices you suppose him to bear, in favor of
the Elect only. So that your Universal Redemption hold a very fair
Correspondence with your Sufficient Grace (as to the Non-elect); there is not
one single person sanctified by this, or saved by that. Nay further, seeing all
the influence, Reprobis Deus Mediatorem patefacit. ut neglecta condition
poenitentia and fidei inexcusabiles reddantur. Wendel. ubi supra explic. These.
8.
that Christ's death has upon them, according to your Doctrine, is of a killing
nature and tends clearly to no other end, then to carry on the Decree of their
Reprobation, and they being the far greater part, it had been a much more
proper Title, if you had said, Those Divines did give in their Suffrages for
Universal Perdition.

Martinus, (who deals so clearly, as you suppose, in this Question,) says,
That the Redemption by Christ must be proclaimed, De Artic. 2. These. 8.11.
not only as a Common sufficient Benefit, but as really and intentionally
designed for me, else no necessity can be deduced from it, to engage me to
believe, that it belongs to me, (which, by the way, does somewhat take off the
edge of the unregenerate, from endeavoring after Regeneration, if there be no
promise concerning it, as Master Baxter's New Light, has discovered.) But what
is this common Benefit, and what does that Redemption amount unto, which is to
be thus universally preached? why, (not saving Grace; for that is peculiar Ib.
Th. 14.
to Believers, but) remission of sins, and eternal life, Ib. These. 21.
if they Repent and Believe.

It will be worth our while, to observe, after what manner, God is supposed, by
this Doctrine, to address his Visitations and Calls of Mercy, to these
Non-elect, who are dead in sins, and sick of an impotency to Believe and turn
themselves, that he may woo them unto Repentance. He must (consonantly to these
opinions) bespeak their Repentance after this manner: O ye children of
Reprobation, once, in your first Parent Adam dearly beloved of me, but now
rejected and cast away by me, out of an eternal and implacable hatred; how
long will ye abuse my Patience? how long will ye spin out the war of your
Rebellion against me? Know ye not, how acceptable a sacrifice Repentance and a
broken heart are to me? Go to, therefore, recollect your selves and believe me;
I entreat and pray, request and supplicate, beg and beseech, turn your selves,
and seek after Righteousness; I swear by my self, (that ye may have no
temptation to be doubtful of it) Obedience is better to me then Sacrifice, and
I will be the Author of eternal Salvation to All them that obey me: And if
these things cannot move you, behold! the tears of your God, your Creator, a
Father of Mercies to you, and will ye be deaf also to his sighs and moans,
complaints and lamentations? O that ye would be wise, O that ye would consider,
Oh miserable wretches, why will ye die and perish in your sins? What pleasure
is it to you, to provoke your God to anger, who loves Righteousness and
hates iniquity? It Is very true, and I know it right well, that you cannot but
Rebel against me, because I have deprived you of the power to will and to do
rightly, and from all eternity rejected you from all communion in my saving
Grace: but yet I do seriously affirm it, and protest and swear by my Holiness,
that your Repentance will be very acceptable to me And do you but Repent
thoroughly, and I will unfeignedly give you Pardon and Salvation. Behold what a
Patheticall Scheme of Persuasion God should use! Behold, what affections and
bowels his Invitation of the Non-elect should be clothed with, according to
this Doctrine!

And yet for all this in the next (10.) Sect. Master Baxter puts it home to
Master Pierce, with sufficient confidence, in these words, Can Tilenus, or you,
or any that is most passionate in these points, tell us of one jot more that
you ascribe to the death of Christ for all, then the Synod of Dort does? I must
say, if you can, it is yet beyond my reach or my remembrance. Then I must say,
you have a shallow reach, or a Treacherous memory, or a Partial judgment; The
first, if you could not apprehend; the second, if you have forgotten; the
third, (which lies most under my suspicion Because I find you referring your
Reader to Books that are confuted, and yet you take no notice of it. E. G.
Saints Rest. par. 1. page 154. in the Margin. Bogerman, Vedelius, etc. I pray
see Corvinus against Bogerman, and Vedelius Rhapsodus.
) if you will so rashly condemn, whom you will not vouchsafe to hear, pleading
Gods cause, as well as their own, so earnestly and so convincingly in their
many Writings.

But it is time to take up here, that we may reserve our strength and patience,
to follow you, in your next stage, where you run on in Tautologies of a tedious
length. You set forth after this manner; They give more to Christ's death for
the Elect then you, but no less that I know of, (the more shame for you then,
to condemn opinions and persons unheard and unexamined) to his death for all
then you. For you say, that he dyed to bring it to men's choice, whether they
will have Christ, and life or not? and so say they, (you should add
EQUIVOCALLY, and perhaps you may say true;) and Calvinists, commonly, (as
Dallaeus has told you, in the very words of abundance of them.) If you say,
that according to you Christ has purchased Grace for all, or for more then the
Elect, to Cause them to believe. I answer, I. That the highest Grace with you
does but bring it to their choice; and help, but not determine their wills; and
this (but not verily this) they grant to others, as well as you do. 2. Is it
the Name of sufficient Grace, or the Thing? The thing that you call so, as I
said (too often already, unless it had been to more purpose), they grant to be
as common as you can Reasonably expect them to imagine, (you say right,
considering the rest of their Principles,) and Christ did not die to purchase
empty Names, as a benefit. (I pray, what is that Remisson of sins, and eternal
life, which you say he purchased for Reprobates? Is there Name and Thing too?
They hear the sound of it, but never any of them tasted how sweet it is.) The
difference (you conclude) is plainly but in this: The Synod thought that Christ
purchased more for some, then you do; but no less for others.

Here we have Master Baxter in extremes; he is excessive in his bounty toward
the Elect, but defective in his Charity toward the Reprobates; and therefore
no wonder he is out in the mean, which is that Grace that brings Salvation to
Man's choice, as stated (not by him but) by the Remonstrants.

For the First, he is deficient even in his Pretended Sufficiency, and the
Accounts being truly and exactly cast up, we shall find the Reprobates are very
little obliged to him, or to the Synod, for their Alms of sufficient Grace.

For when they speak of Grace, they understand either Gods Love and favor; or
the effects of it. Gods Grace in the first sense is, either General, extended
to all mankind considered, as Rational Creatures, but out of Christ, and this,
though the Reprobates have an interest in it, will not serve the turn; or
Special, which passes into a Decree of Election, and thereby provides Christ
and all other means necessary to the working of Conversion and bringing
Salvation (as they affirm) insuperably. And this is a peculiar Enclosure to the
Elect. If we take Grace in the Second sense, for the effects of Gods free Love
and favor; this Grace is divided (as the former) into General and Special;
The Special Grace which is saving, is Proper to the Heirs of Salvation, says
M. Baxter, and the Synod too, that is to the Elect. The General, is that
Common Grace, consisting of such effects as flow from Gods General Love, and
this is vouchsafed to the Reprobate. Which Grace, though adorned with the Title
of Sufficient, to tickle the fancy of the unwary vulgar, and flatter him into
an apprehension, that it contains all that is needful unto his salvation, yet
really it signifies only (in the very acknowledgement of the more ingenuous
sort of Calvinists) so much as is sufficient to Convince men of their sin and
misery, of their infirmity and want of a Redeemer; and because it informs them
likewise, that Christ is such an one, sent to give life and pardon upon
condition of Faith and Repentance (though intentionally designed for the
benefit only of the Elect) and that life and pardon is tendered to them upon
those conditions, which are irresistibly effected in those Elect, but made
impossible to the Reprobate; therefore by the administration of this Common
Grace, they become guilty of impenitency and unbelief, and so this Grace is
inservient to the execution of the Decree of Reprobation; And this is all the
Sufficiency I can find in it, whether I examine it by Perkins his Table, or the
Doctrine of the Synod.

We see how little the Reprobates are beholding to you for your bounty. For
this your sufficient Grace, both Name and Thing, is of no more value then a New
Nothing, which many times is promised unto children to please them; but with an
intent really to cosen them; and therefore discovering the fallacy, we account
it a piece of ingenuity in them to slight the offer.

If the Non-elect neither have, nor can have interest in that Grace of God (by
what name soever you will call it) which is of force to procure Conversion and
a saving faith, what do you telling them of the rest, by which never man was,
nor ever shall be, nor ever can be saved? And is it possible for any man to
arrive at Salvation, who lies under the Decree of Preterition, and is thereby,
ipso facto* put in the order of men certainly to be damned, Damnation being the
unavoidable execution of that Decree, whereof Preterition and Predamnation are
but several Synopsis Purioris Theologiae. Disp. 24. th. 49, and 52.
Respects? I must therefore prefer, to such collusion, the ingenuity of those
men, who speak their opinion fully out, and tell us that all the Dispensations
of Grace administered to these Non-elect, are designed but to make them the more
inexcusable.

You alleged above, in the words of the Synod, that it is not through any
insufficiency or defect of the sacrifice of Christ, that men Perish in their
Infidelity; and may not as much be said in respect of the Devils, that it is
not through any defect, or insufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice, that they are
damned eternally? The Reason is the same for both according to the Principles
you go upon, namely because God wills to have it so. And I wonder with what
confidence you can tell the Non-Elect (and them you must be supposed to speak
to, the Elect not being concerned in it) as you do in your popular Sermon of
Making light of Christ, Page 52.
That, It were better for him he had been a Turk or Indian, that never had
heard the name of a Savior, and that never had salvation offered to him: For
such men have no cloak for their sin. Joh. 15.22. Besides all the rest of their
sins, they have this killing sin to answer for, which will undo them. And this
will aggravate their misery: That Christ whom they set light by must be their
Judge, and for this sin will he judge them. Oh that such would now consider how
they will answer that Question that Christ puts to their Predecessors, Mat.
23.33. How will ye escape the damnation of Hell? or Heb. 2.3. How shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation? Can you escape without a Christ? or
will a despised Christ save you then? If he be accursed that set light by
Father or Mother, Deuteronomy. 27.16. What then is he that sets light by Christ? etc.
How I say, can you say this, unless you lay better grounds to glorify Gods
Justice in punishing the Non-elect for their Infidelity? For by that Doctrine,
the most part of the Christian world are so far from being designed a benefit
by the exhibition and tendries of Christ to them, that they receive far more
hurt by it, and so their condition is rendered a great deal worse than that of
Devils, to whom Christ was never offered; For the most they could say of
Christ, was to expostulate or cry out, Art thou come to torment us before the
time: but these may complain, that, though there was as little benefit intended
them, by the offer of Christ, as the Devils to whom he was never tendered; yet
it did serve to aggravate their sin, and made them guilty of infidelity and
liable to a greater condemnation. Be not startled at thy news, (if it seems so
to you,) for it is the very Doctrine of Gomarus; This is the difference, These.
31. de praed. Disput. 1604.
says he, betwixt the Reprobation of men and Angels, that the Angels never
have Christ tendered unto them, but unto men he is tendered often, (outwardly in
the word, and inwardly by the Spirit,) that being convinced of Infidelity and a
stubborn heart, they may by that means, be rendered the more inexcusable.

Now I Conjure every Christian Reader, as he tenders the Glory of our ever
Blessed God, and the Honor of his most Holy Ordinances, and the eternal
Salvation of men's precious souls, sadly to weigh and consider, the pernicious
influences of such a Doctrine; that his understanding may be awakened to
apprehend, and his will inclined to entertain, more solid practical principles
of Divinity; that every mouth that utters such wickedness, may be stopped. For
certainly this cannot be the purpose or purport of Gods General love toward
mankind, in sending his Son to die for them and be preached unto them See and
consider, Joh. 3.16.17
.

And now Master Baxter, perhaps will rub up his memory a little better. What!
Does neither Tilenus nor Master Pierce, nor the Remonstrants ascribe one jot
more, to the death of Christ for all, than this amounts to? Does that Grace (of
Christ's purchasing) which they account sufficient rise to no higher a pitch,
no, not so high, as to put them into a possibility of being restored by Christ's
mediation, into at least as good a condition as that of Devils? This is a very
strange story. But, God be thanked, there is no truth in it. The difference is
so wide, betwixt the two Parties in this Point, that nothing can well be wider.
For 1. Sufficient Grace in your sense, is, that which never did, and never
will, and never can, bring salvation unto any man; for let him use his utmost
diligence to cooperate with it, it will not, it cannot sanctify him, being
(not through the Receivers default, but) of its own kind and nature
uneffectuall^ For thus the Professors of Leiden speak of it; Concedimus omnes
illos, etc. Censura in Confess. cap. 17. par. 3. Page 235, 236.
We grant, that all who are called by the Gospel are sufficiently called, that
is, God is not obliged in justice to call them otherwise, then he does call
them, and by that Calling they are sufficiently deprived of all pretense of
excuse, before Gods Tribunal, if they be not converted; because the fault of
their non-conversion rests in themselves only. This is their definition of
sufficient Grace, and the Compiler of this work was the Synod. I shall refer
the Reader to the Remonstrants Descant upon this Definition* (in their Examen
Censurae. cap. 17. parag. 3.)

But sufficient Grace in the Remonstrants sense, (which is like to be Master
Pierce's, and Tilenus his sense too;) is, Gods Grace which brings salvation
unto All men, to whom it has appeared, Tit. 2.11. For, they say, To the end
man may not only be able, but also freely and heartily willing to perform the
Divine commands; God wills to do all things, on his part, necessary to the
effecting of both in him: that is, he has determined to confer such Grace
upon sinful man, whereby he may be rendered fit and able, to perform all that
is required of him in the Gospel, (and in their next Thesis) God therefore when
he calls sinners by his Holy Gospel, Confess. Remon. c. 17. These. 1.
he bestows upon them Grace not only necessary but also sufficient, to
perform faith and obedience (the Requiries of the Gospel.)

2. They do not deny, but God may, and many times does confer, Imparia
Paribus, Paria Imparibus, and Potiora Pejoribus. They acknowledge God has not
past any Decree, whereby he has debarred, either Himself of Liberty to bestow,
or men of a Possibility to receive such several Dispensations. And although
they confess, there is a sufficient calling, Ibid. These. 3.
which yet is uneffectuall, yet they say, the reason is, because it wants the
Saving effect, on man's part: Perque solam hominis voluntariam, ac vincibilem
culpam, infructuosa est sive eventum optatum ac debitum non sortitur, and that
it obtains not the due and desired event but becomes unfruitful, is through
the sole voluntary and avoidable fault of man.

3. This Grace does not only Prevent the will, and confer a power of
willing, upon them that are Called, (for I think it unprofitable to speak of
the rest,) but (if they oppose not a new contumacie to check it,) it does also
accompany and help the Will of man, so, that the will, when it actually
wills, that is, believes and obeys God, ought to ascribe this, to that very
Grace, as the Principal Moving Cause, by the prevention and concomitant
assistance whereof, men, duly cooperating with it, are many times, really
converted and sanctified, to such a degree, that there is nothing wanting, but
Perseverance, to obtain the crown; To which purpose our Savior Christ says,
He that continues unto the end shall be saved; which saying of His, does not
only imply a Possiblity of defection and consequently of destruction, for want
of continuance; but an assurance also, of the happiness of such, if God should
please to put a present period to their life, in that condition. 4. Do not the
Remonstrants hold, that it is possible for a man to fall Totally and Finally
from a true justifying Faith, or saving Grace, and that this does sometimes
eventually come to pass? and yet Master Baxter, will not allow this to be
special Grace, flowing from that Fountain of Election; (which Grace, according
to his opinion can never be lost,) this therefore at least in his sense, is but
Sufficient Grace, and yet it is far more, then that common sufficient Grace,
which the Synod speaks of; and how could this be either out of Master Baxters
reach, or memory, having so lately, before this, put forth his Account of
Perseverance?

More distinctly, for the satisfaction of the Reader touching the Remonstrants
opinion of the operations of Divine Grace; 1. They hold, that it works upon the
understanding inlightening and induing it with the knowledge of Divine truth.
Act. Synod. Remonst. de Great. p. 14.
And, that God by the sole illumination of the understanding, without any
formal immediate, or direct impression or action upon the will, makes all the
Elect, of children of wrath and servants of sin, to become children of light,
and servants of Righteousness; This is all that Camero requires unto their
Regeneration; as appears in his Theses, and his Conference with Tilenus, where
he says, Fidem proficisci ab illuminatione Spiritus Sancti, That Faith
proceeds, from the illumination of the holy Spirit; and also, Thesi 3.
animo percipi non posse quo pacto liberum arbitrium, quod principium Ethicum
est, aliter quam Ethice moveri posse; It is not to be understood how Free will,
being a Moral Principle, can be moved otherwise then Morally. But the
Remonstrants say, 2. That the Divine Grace works upon the affections also,
and that irresistibly, (as likewise it does upon the understanding;) to which
purpose, we may consider those Passages, There came a fear on all, Luke 7.16.
and, Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us? Luke 24.32.

3. That it works directly and immediately upon the Will too, and that
irresistibly, as to the collation of power to believe; Praeterea minime quoque
diffitemur Spiritum Sanctum immediate agere in voluntatem, in illam vires
infundendo ac potentiam supernaturalem ad credendum, That the Holy Ghost
works immediately upon the will, Act. Synod. Remonst. de Gratia. p. 14
infusing strength into it, and a supernatural power to believe, we do not
deny; and in the next Page, Si per gratiam habitualem intelligere libeat
potentiam quandam supernaturalem, concessam voluntati ad hoc ut credere and
been agere possit, eam libenter admittimus; If by habitual Grace, be
understood a supernatural power conferred upon the will, to this end, that it
may be able to believe, and act well, we admit of it willingly. And after, If
any one demand of us, Ibid. page 20
whether, the action of God converting (a sinner) be only moral, consisting
of proposals, invitations, suasions; we answer, say They, that it is more then
Moral, and in respect of exciting Grace, we say there is also a supernatural
power, infused into the will, distinct from the illumination of the
understanding; and if we respect cooperating Grace, we say, that may be called
Physical, and has a real and proper efficiency. If it be demanded whether
there be any immediate action of the Spirit upon the will, (they say) we do not
deny it. If it be demanded, whether, besides the illumination of the mind, and
excitation of the affections, and invitation of the will, Grace does nothing
after the manner of a principle, or antecedently unto Conversion; Page 21.
we say, it does. And after, (page 62.) Potentiam credendi ante omnia conferri
dicimus per irresistibilem Gratiam. We say the power of believing is conferd by
an irresistible Grace. And, If it be demanded, whether he, who does not oppose
a new contumacy (or rebellion) but yields to the motions and operations of
Grace) and consequently is converted, has more grace, then he, that does
oppose (and check them,) and consequently is not converted; we answer, the
antecedent and preventing Grace may be equal, Page 21.
but the first has cooperating Grace, which the later has not.

Indeed after a man is instructed with this Supernatural power to believe, they
acknowledge no other Grace necessary toward the Eliciting or educing the act
of faith but what is Moral, or that which uses the word, as the instrument,
not excluding sundry secret inspirations, impressions and motions of Gods
Gracious dispensing, which yet do not produce consent otherwise, then in a
moral way of working. For if the Actual consent, to what is offered in the
word, be instilled or inspired into the will, as it is a Principle of Election;
Then, 1. there is a Consent in the Will, before it be elected or drawn out by
the will; which is absurd. 2. Then it is not the Wills consent unto the motions
of Grace: but Grace that imprints that Actual consent, does consent unto it
self; which is no less absurd then the Former. 3. Then a power of believing in
the Will were unnecessary; and it would be in vain to confer it; because the
Consent or Act of Believing should not be drawn, out of that power, but be
imprinted upon the will by another internal force or mition. 4. Then the word
should conduce nothing to the begetting or effecting of faith, or consent in
the will of man: For the word cannot concur but as a moral Instrument, nor
act but objective and morally, and such actions are resistible, and may be
uneffectuall, which such an Actual consent instilled into, or imprinted upon
the will (by an Omnipotent Grace, as Contra. remonstrants.
they say it is) cannot be. So that by this Doctrine, if it should be granted,
(say the Remonstrants); the Ministry of the Word would be made void and
altogether unprofitable. This inconvenience Master Baxter could discover well
enough as to the Infusion of Habits; Of saving Faith. page 21.
And therefore he follows the stream of those Divines, who take Vocation, which
(taken Passively) contains the Acts of Faith and Repentance, to be Antecedent
unto Sanctification, which comprehends the Habit of them. Placing the Act
before the Habit, he says, This makes the Word the Instrument of that work,
whereas (which moves me very much, says he) according to the contrary opinion,
the Word cannot possibly be the Instrument, or means, of our Regeneration, as
to the Habit, (nor as to the Act neither, if that Act be irresistibly infused
or imprinted) but only a subsequent means to elicite Whose Act? not Gods; that
were too gross: then it must be man's; and then by this means, Man works the
will and the Deed.
or educe the Act, which seems against the stream of Scripture, and Divines of
All Ages. A fair Confession.

The Remonstrants then, do, not only grant an Illumination of the mind,
which, upon the matter, is made the All-sufficient Grace by Camero, but also a
Collation of Supernatural power; which yet they cannot allow to commit such a
Rape upon the Will, as to force it, in its manner of working, or deprive it of
its natural Liberty to Will or Nill. They reserve to her, as her undoubted
Prerogative, that freedom still, as entire as ever, to Act or suspend her
action, without which power man is able to do no more Duty properly so called,
then the Brute Beast, which has a Spontaneity as well as Man, but no Rational
Election.

But Master Baxter will here step in, with his objection, and tell us, This is
but to bring the matter to man's choice, and so they do. But I must acquaint the
Reader with a vast difference in the Portage, whether you consider the matter
or the manner of it. For, 1. Your Doctrine does not bring the same Thing, to
man's choice. It brings Christ as you say, and remission of sins, and eternal
life, to his choice* upon condition, [If he will Repent and Believe] But does
your Sufficient Grace, by an irresistible Collation of power upon the will,
bring Faith it self, and Repentance it self, to the choice of them that perish?
It does not, it cannot. For by the conduct of an Immutable Antecedent Decree,
Grace sufficient to bring it to their choice in this sense is denied them, and
their choice otherwise determined and that Infallibly; unless you equivocate
in the use of the word choice, and put it for Spontaneitie, whereby the
wretched Reprobate, for all the influences of that sufficient Grace, is
unavoidably led, as an Ox to the slaughter.

2. And as your Doctrine brings not the same Thing to their choice; so neither
does it bring the same assistance. You bring Remission and eternal life, but
as a covered dish with a Noli me tangere, upon it. They must not touch it with
unwasht hands, and shutting up the Living fountain, and sealing it by an
immutable Decree, you afford them neither towell nor water that is sufficient
or of force to cleanse them. What you bring to their choice and lay at their
door, you leave as a burden too heavy for their strength to take up, and their
feeble shoulders to carry in to their quiet possession and comfort.

But with us, Faith and Repentance, are as well brought to choice, as Christ,
Pardon, or eternal Life; but not laid down and left there. God continues to
illuminate the mind; and inspire the will; and thus he knocks at the door of
the heart; till man freely opens to him, Revel. 3.20.
or gives him such rude and shameless Repulses, as provoke him to withdraw
himself in a sore displeasure. Genesis 6.3.


Here then being such a free, preventing, irresistible efficiency of a
supernatural power, and a no less Gracious concomitant Assistance both of
outward means, and inward motions, toward the carrying on, and accomplishment
of our Faith and Repentance, our Conversion and Salvation; The Glory of this
Work ought in all Reason to be ascribed to the Divine Grace, as the principal
Cause or Author of it. Itaque nec illi debent sibi tribuere qui venerant, quia
vocati veneru^t; nec illi qui noluerunt venire, debent alteri tribuere, sed
tantum sibi, quoniam ut venirent vocati, erat in eorum libera voluntate.
August. lib. 83. qq. q. 68. Agen^ de invitatis ad coenam.
But, if under the conduct of such, no less sweet, then powerful
Dispensations, there proves to be a miscarriage, to what can we, in justice,
impute this unhappy event, or what can we charge the fault upon, but man's own
wilful and execrable Rebellion?

For we must consider, though the understanding be enlightened with the
knowledge of Supernatural excellencies, yet it apprehends still, the whole
variety of sensual or carnal Goods, the will, Add hereunto, that which the
British Divines do aver [de Art. 3, and 4. pa. 133. pr.] Per versitatem sive
resistendi potentiam remo^am and in acta primo positam, in sua amara radice,
etiam in Renotorum coluntate deli^escere, unde pronitas ad resistendum motibus
spiritus S. v. locum.
(though empowered to do better,) has a liberty to embrace them; and both the
understanding and the will have a natural Inclination (tending also to their
own ease and Preservation) to gratify the Infirmities of their neighboring
Appetites, whose objects being at hand to affect and tickle the senses, with
the soft insinuations and relishes of their immediate presence, have a great
advantage over spiritual objects, which are remote at a huge distance, and out
of sight to flesh and blood; yea and over the chief Good upon a like Account
(whom being enjoyed would transcendently fill, satisfy and swallow up all our
most insatiable Appetites;) Hence it comes to pass, that many times Sense
finds too great an indulgence with the more noble Faculties, and being preferrd
above it is rank the Objects thereof are entertained with too inordinate a
complacency; So that, we observe, how men, though irresistibly convinced of the
truth and excellency of things Spiritual, yet once bewitched with the charms
and pleasures of these (for want of Mortification and a Main Guard, they pursue
the enjoyments of them so eagerly, that they can brook no check. Video meliora,
proboque, Deteriora sequor.

When men are not able to resist the Spirit speaking to their understanding by
way of Conviction, Act. 6.10.
they will Rebel against the light thereof, Job. 24.13.
and abuse the Liberty of their will, to resist the Holy Ghost; Act. 7.51.
And having grieved this Good Spirit so long, till they have made him, even
weary of striving with them, no marvel he complains so bitterly of such
perversities; Mat. 13.15.
This peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and
their eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should
be converted, and I should heal them.

That this was most unquestionably the Catholic Doctrine of the Church for the
First three hundred years after Christ, Par. 1. page 154. in Mar.
we have M. Baxters own acknowledgement, in his Saints Rest. Thus Lib. 2. de
vocat. Gent. c. 9.
Saint Ambrose brought it to men's choice: Igitur sicut qui crediderunt,
juvantur, ut in fide maneant: sic and qui nondum crediderunt, juvantur, ut
credant. Et quemadmodum illi in sua habent potestate, ut exeant, and isti in
sua habent potestate, ne veniant. As they which have believed, are assisted,
that they may continue tn the faith: so they also, who have not yet believed,
are assisted, that they may believe. And as they have it in their power to
depart (from the faith), so these also have it in their power, not to come, (or
accept of it). Saint Austine, the Great Champion of Divine Grace, he brings it
(in our sense) to man's choice too; even in that book [De Litera and Spiritu,]
which was opposed to the Pelagians: Cap. 34.
Nemo habet in potestate quid veniat in mentem, says he, sed consentire vel
dissentire propriae voluntatis est. What shall (be represented, or) come into
his mind is not in man's power, but it is in his power, to consent to it, or
dissent from it. And in his Book de Dogmat. Ecclesiast. Cap. 21.
Initium salutis nostrae a Deo miserante habemus; ut acquiescamus salutiferae
inspirationi, Nostrae est Potestatis. We have the beginning of Salvation from
Gods mercy; to assent unto his saving inspiration, and acquiesce in it, is in
our own power. And in L. 1. Retract. he has these words; Cap 22.
Alio loco dixi, etc. I have said in some other place, that except a man change
his will, he cannot work that which is Good, which, the Lord teaches, us, to
be placed in our own power, where he says, Either make the tree good, and his
fruit good, or the tree evil, and his fruit evil: which, says he, is not
against the grace if God which we preach; for it is in man's power to change his
will for the better; but that power is none, unless it be given of God, of
whom it is said, He gave power to them, to be the sons of God. By which words
it is evident, his judgment was, that the same man, under the same helps, has
it in his power and liberty to bring forth good or bad fruit. And Hierome
writing against the Pelagians, says, Etiam his, L. 3. Advers. Pelag.
qui mali sunt futuri, dari potestatem Conversionis and Poenitentiae; There is
a power of Conversion and Repentance, given even to such as will be wicked. It
is in our power, says S. Bernhard, not to be overcome, Sermon. 5. de quedrages.
and in this Spiritual warfare, none of us can be conquered against his will.
Thy Appetite O Man, is put under thee, and thou shall rule over it. Thy enemies
may make a commotion, and levy some forces of Temptations, but it is in thy
power, if thou will, (to make peace with them, or give battle to them) to give
them thy Consent, or to deny it. It is in thy power, if thou will, to make thy
enemy thy servant, that all things may cooperate to thy advantage. If these
testimonies be not sufficient to give the Reader satisfaction, he may find
abundance more, if he consults Grotius his Disquisitio, An Pelagiana sint ea
Dogmata, etc.

Nay, does not Master Baxter himself preach this Doctrine unto his people, in
his popular Sermons? What means that part of his Application, Page 54.
in his [Making Light of Christ,] where he tells his Hearers; I come now to
know your Resolution for the time to come. What say you? Do you mean to set as
light by Christ and salvation as hitherto you have done? and to be the same men
after all this? I hope not. Oh let not your Ministers that would fain save you,
be brought in as Witnesses against you to condemn you. At least, I beseech you
put not this upon me. Why Sirs, if the Lord shall say to us at Judgment, Did
you never tell these men, what Christ did for their souls, and what need they
had of him, and how nearly it did concern them to look to their salvation, that
they made light of it? We must needs say the Truth: Yea Lord, we told them of
it as plainly as we could; we would have gone on our knees to them, if we had
thought it would have prevailed; we did entreat them as earnestly as we could,
to consider these things: They heard of these things every day; but alas, we
could never get them to their hearts: they gave us the hearing, but they made
light of all that we could say to them. And in the Preface of your Call to the
UNCONVERTED, you tell them, Our Preaching and Persuasion, and your Hearing and
Considering, are the appointed means to get this Moral Power or freedom, that
is, to make you truly willing. You know these have no other way of operation,
but, what is Moral, which may be rejected or embraced; and therefore if there
be not a Supernatural power sufficient (in actu primo) conferred upon men, with
a liberty to reduce it into act, which they may freely use or suspend, to what
end are all these exprobrations of their neglect? And yet we must account them
Rational, (and that cannot be but upon supposition of such power and Liberty)
because we find them used by our Savior Christ, with a denunciation of woe
against such contemners; Mat. 11.20. to 24.
Then began he to upbraid the Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were
done, because they repented not. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee
Bethsaida: for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in
Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, in Sackcloth and ashes. But
I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of
Judgment than for you. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven, shall
be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works which have been done in thee,
had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto
you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of
Judgment, than for thee. By which severe intermination and asseveration of our
Savior, it appears, that if God had afforded the men of Tire and Sidon, or
those of Sodom, that Grace which he granted to the Cities of Chorazin and
Bethsaida, they would have repented. But this Grace was not any quality or
motion determining the will by a Physical, or irresistible operation: for if
it had been such, they whom Christ so bitterly reproved and threatened, for
Non-conversion, had been infallibly converted. This Grace therefore did but
empower, and (bringing the matter to their choice,) assist and solicit them,
morally to embrace it; which solicitation and assistance, they obstinately
rejected, when they had it in their power and at their liberty, freely to
cooperate with it, to their effectual conversion. Our Savior gives us another
Emphaticall Instance in the men of Nineve, Mat. 12.41. where he tells the
Scribes and Pharisees, The men of Nineve shall rise in Judgment, with this
generation, and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of
Jonas, and behold, a greater than Jonas is here. How was our Savior greater
than Jonas? in respect of his person, or office only, and not also in respect
of the efficacy of his Ministry? He was full of Grace, Psalm. 45.
had the words of eternal life, taught with Authority, John 1.
Grace came by him. Was Jonas a better Preacher than our Savior? Did a more
efficacious Grace of the Spirit accompany his Ministry, than did that of the
Son of God, who came from heaven to seek and to save that which was Lost, by
calling them to repentance? The horror that follows the conception of such a
blasphemy, will not suffer any sober Christian bosom to entertain it. Yet the
men of Nineve repented at the preaching of Jonas: But that generation did not
repent at the Sermons of the Son of God. Was this through any defect in Christ's
Dispensations? No; The administration of Grace here by him was more abundant
than that of Jonas. The fault therefore lay in their abuse of their power and
liberty, in opposing new contumacy and obstacles to these more Gracious
Dispensations. To this purpose Prosper, writes expressly, (lib. 2. De vocat.
Gent. c. 26.) The Grace of God, says he, is principally preeminent in all our
Righteousnesses, persuading us by exhortations, moving us by examples,
terrifying us with dangers, inciting us by miracles, giving understanding,
inspiring Counsil, and inlightening the heart it self, and imbruring it with
affections of faith: but the will of man is also subjoyned and conjoined to it,
which is excited by the foresaid helps to this end, that it may cooperate to
the Divine work in it self, that it may begin to exercise toward the attainment
of rewards, (ad meritum), what through the (power of the) supernall seed it
conceived, toward an endeavor [ad studium], having it from its own
mutability, if it fails, from the help of grace if it proceeds. Which help is
applied to All, by innumerable ways whether hidden or manifest, and that it is
rejected of many, is their own wicked fault: but that it is received of many,
is both of the divine grace, and man's will. I shall shut up this with an
Instance out of Fulgentius, In libr. de Praedest. and Great. c. 15.
framing a comparison betwixt Nebuchadonosor and Pharao, he says; In respect
of their nature, they were both men; in respect of their Dignity, they were
both Kings; in respect of the Cause, they both kept the people of God in
Captivity; in respect of their punishment, they were both chastised and
admonished by the rod of Clemency. What was it therefore that made their ends
to be so different but this, that one sensible of Gods hand, bewailed the
memory of his own iniquity: the other fought against the most merciful truth
of God by his own freewill.

But all this will not serve Master Baxters turn; though he contradicts the
faith of Primitive Antiquity, and overthrows, not only man's natural liberty,
and way of working; but likewise all the commands and exhortations,
comminations and promises of Holy Scripture, he will not be satisfied without
Gods irresistible attingencie of the will to apply and determine it to the very
Consent or Act of willing; which is that we are now to take into examination.

But to attain Master Baxters meaning may be a matter of some difficulty, he
does say and unsay so often; (which makes many not to regard at all what he
says;) For Physical Predetermination he denies it in this Preface; and in his
Sermon of Judgment, he says, Section 5.
That God does determine all Actions; Answer to the 23, and 24. excuses, (mihi.
page 242, 243.)
Natural and Free, as the first Efficient Physical immediate Cause: or else
nothing could Act; This Principle, he says, is most likely to be false. And,
that the will is necessarily and infallibly determined by the Practical
Understanding, which is unresistibly necessitated by objects: and therefore
whatever Act is done by my understanding or will is necessitated, and I cannot
help it. And, that Liberty is but the Acting of the Faculty agreeably to its
nature: And it was God as Creator, that gave Adam his Faculties: and God by
providentiall dispose, that Presented all Objects to him, by which his
understanding, and so his will, were unavoidably necessitated; This, says M.
Baxter, is of the same nature with the former: Ibid.
uncertain, if not certainly false. Were this true, for ought we can see, it
would lay all the sin and misery of this world on God, as the unresistible
necessary Cause; which because we know infallibly to be false, we have no
reason to take such principles to be true which infer it. I wish Master
Baxter had kept himself always of this mind, and then he had saved me all
this labor. But a little after, he tells his Reader, There are other ways of
Determining the Will; which yet he mentions not; But in his first Assize Sermon
he says* Page: 9.
Christ has undertaken himself to be a Physician to the world, (who are now
Morally dead in sin, though naturally alive,) to cure all that will come to
him, and take him so to be, and trust him, and obey him in the Application of
his medicines. He has erected an Hospital, his Church, to this end; and
commanded all to come into this Ark. Those that are far distant, he first
Commands to come nearer; and those that are near, he inviteth to come in. Too
many do refuse and perish in their refusal. (And your doctrine declare they
cannot do otherwise.) He will not suffer all to do so, but mercifully boweth
the wills of his Elect, and by an insuperable powerful drawing, Compells them
to come in. So that we have an insuperable compulsory determination. And yet in
his foresaid Sermon of Judgment, He tells us, Vbi supra.
The will of man in its very Dominion does bear Gods Image. It is a self
Determining Power, though it be biased by Habits and needs a Guide. If a Guide
would serve Master Baxters turn, we are content to allow him out; not an Ignis
fatuus, but a Lantern that does direct the understanding infallibly, and
besides this, a real influx, that after the manner of a Physical Cause,
inclines the will to Act: But he must have such a one as does controull and
Determine the will to Act and Operate, (notwithstanding the Dominion over its
own Acts, which he seems to ascribe to it) which we think not only
unnecessary, but, in the ordinary course of Gods providence, very absurd,
inconvenient, and of dangerous Consequence to be affirmed.

1. That it is unnecessary is evident by Gods complaint, Isa. 5.4. Judge I pray
you between me and my vinyard. what could I have done more to my vinyard, that
I have not done to it? Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? That God administered all things
necessary and sufficient (not in Master Baxters sense, of sufficiency which is
unsufficient) to this effect, appears, by his expectation of grapes (of good
works;) for the All-wise God does not, he cannot, expect to gather grapes of
thorns or figgs of thistles; and to expect conversion and good works from them,
who have not grace necessary and sufficient to their production, is as
unreasonable as to expect a Bird should fly without wings, or a man go without
legs. But here was no determining Grace administered; for then they would have
been infallibly converted, and have brought forth good works. Therefore such
Determining Grace is not necessary.

2. As it is unnecessary, so it is inconvenient; For (1.) it overthrowes that
Dominion which (by Master Baxters own confession) the will has over its own
Acts, and destroys its Connatural manner of working; For it puts a necessity,
in order of Nature and Causality, Antecedent to the Act of the will, so that
all Praerequisites put in order, the will has not a simultaneous power (that
may be reduced into Act) to Act otherwise, or a power to want that operation,
to which it is so determined; which takes away the liberty of the will quoad
exercitium, in regard of the exercise of it.

2. It destroys the proper nature of duty, for a Duty is a work performed
conformably to a command, for his Authority sake, who does command it; that
giving proof of our free obedience, we may avoid the Penalty, and gain a Right
to the Reward, upon which the Command is established. This cannot be agreeable
to the nature of that work to which God does irresistbly determine the will;
for 1. though the work be conformable to his command; yet it cannot be properly
said to be done because of his Authority, but because he does insuperably
determine it. 2. The doer (or rather the sufferer) gives no proof of his free
obedience, because he cannot do otherwise. 3. This can procure him no right to
the reward, because it is not thank-worthy, (as the Phrase is, 1 Pet. 2.19.20.
) being no part of a free obedience. And 4. upon what Title can it free a man
from punishment? For we see God does overruled such as become the Rod of his
anger, Isa. 10.5, 6, 12.
and directs them to do his work, (according to his Secret, which the
Calvinists account his only proper will) and yet when that work is done, he
casts the Rod into the Fire.

But M. Baxters Determining Grace has the Doctrine of the Synod to justify
it, in making Faith and Conversion, Repentance or Regeneration (for the terms
are promiscuously used here) no part of man's work or duty. For the Synod says,
That Regeneration etc. is a work, for the mightiness thereof, not inferior to
the Creation of the world, or raising up the dead, quam Deus sine nobis, (...)
and 4. de Convers. Art. 12.
in nobis operatur, which God without us, works in us, and (they say) that
Faith, whereby we are first converted, Ibid. Art. 14 and Reject. 6.
and from which we are styled Faithful, is really inspired and infused into
the will; Ibid. Reject. 8.
and that God, in regenerating a man, does employ the strength of his
Omnipotency, powerfully and infallibly to bow and bend his will to Faith and
Conversion. And in this work says M. Baxter Of Saving Faith. page 20.
, the Spirit is as the Hand, the Object and Word as the Seal, the Act of
impression on the Intellect is first in Order of nature, and so upon the Will
the impressed Act and Habit immediately are effected by it. Is this Faith and
Conversion (thus wrought) Gods or man's? It may be called Man's in regard of the
Possession of it after it be wrought: but in regard of the efficiency, the
production is so merely a piece of New Creation, that it can in no sense be
accounted a part of Man's Moral duty. For this is not performed by man because
Gods will commands it; but wrought in him, because Gods power imprints it. And
then

3. This will evacuate the force of the Ministry, the use of Commands, and
exhortations, expostulations and reproofs. For how can you in Gods Name
seriously command a man, under pain of death and promise of life, to do that
(as his duty,) which you teach him to believe, that God will insuperably effect
himself? If he believes that God must and will do it, by his irresistible
determining Grace, he cannot reasonably believe that he does seriously require
it as his duty; because it implies a contradiction, that God should at once
will an effect to be done by another, and yet will to do it himself alone. What
do your Ministry then amount unto? It Is but the Revelation of what God will do
in men's souls, like the Angels Message to the Blessed Virgin (Luke 1.30. with
35.) Fear, not for thou have found favor with God; for the Holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee. Therefore
that Holy thing* that Faith and Repentance, that shall be borne of thee, shall
be called the work of God. Thus you may signify to your Beloved Disciples what
God will do for and in their souls; But if you should attempt the use of
exhortations, etc. to move them to undertake that work as their duty; your
exhortations would lose all their force and propriety; for that work, you say,
is actually and really of Gods Impression; Now when Gods Omnipotent hand of
Grace sets the Determining Press on work (which is not moved at all by your
exhortations, they being directed only to souls that are merely Passive under
it) that work (of Faith and Repentance) is stamped upon them irresistibly. And
can it consist with Gods wisdom to attaque a Sinner thus; If you will be
wrought upon, and converted and believe, as the force of my insuperable Grace
shall irresistibly determine you, you shall be saved? And can you find in your
heart, to exhort your Auditors, and to fall down upon your knees to them (as
you say, many times you would do) to entreat and beseech them, not to wrestle
with Omnipotency, but to suffer themselves to be moved and determined by it?
And can you threaten woe and eternal death to others, if they be not thus
determined, telling them withal, (which is a part of your Gospel Truth,) that
there is no other internal Grace designed for them, but what is specifically
different from that, administered to determine the will of the Elect? Is this a
Doctrine according to Godliness? or were this a good way of Preaching? Yet
this is exactly according to the sense of your School Divinity, if you would
deal ingenuously and speak without aequivocation.

But if you come to expostulate with your Hearers in good earnest, what
rational evasions and subterfuges does this Doctrine afford them to repel the
force of all such Expostulations? For whereas you apply your self (in your
Sermon Of Making light of Christ, Page 59, 60. etc.
) to try them, whether they will not make light of him hereafter; and demand of
them, 1. Will you for the time to come, make Christ and salvation the chiefest
matter of your care and study? 2. Will you for the time to come, set more by
the word of God, which conteins the discovery of these excellent things, and is
your charter for salvation, and your guide thereunto? 3. Will you for the time
to come esteem more of the Officers of Christ, whom he has purposely appointed
to guide you to salvation? 4. Will you for the time to come make conscience of
daily and earnest prayer to God, that you may have a part in Christ and
salvation? 5. Will you for the time to come resolvedly cast away your known
sins, at the command of Christ? What say you? Are you resolved to let them go?
To all these Quaeries you have furnished them with a ready Answer; They will
tell you, (and with great Reason, according to your Doctrine,) yes; if God
shall, not only bring it to their choice: but also insuperably determine their
will thereunto. Ibid. p. 63, etc.
The like Answer will they return to your demands that follow; 6. Will you for
the time to come serve God in the dearest as well as in cheapest part of his
service? not only with your tongues, but with your purses and your deeds? 7.
Will you for the time to come make much of all things that tend to your
salvation, and take every help that God offers you, and gladly make use of
all his Ordinances? 8. Will you do all this with delight, not as your toil,
but as your pleasure? They will tell you, Yes; if God shall vouchsafe, not
only to bring it to their choice, but insuperably determine their wills to it.
In like manner are all Gods most Patheticall and earnest invitations to
conversion put off by this Master Baxters Determination, and made frustrate;
For example, Zac. 1.3. Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of hosts, Mal. 3.7.
and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of hosts. And Revel. 3.20. Behold!
I stand at the door and knock, if any man will hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him and sup with him, etc. The sinner is taught by
Master Baxters Doctrine to Answer, Alas! Lord, how can I turn? how can I open!
Do not illude and mock at the impotencie of a poor sinner; for seeing
Conversion and the opening of the heart cannot be peracted, unless I do
determine my self to it: and seeing I am indifferent and undetermined to Act,
it cannot be that I should determine my self unto Conversion, unless thou
do first, in order Ordine causalitatis divinum opus praecedat, nostra
operatio sequutur, necesse est. Brit. Divin. Act. Syn. par. 2. p. 131. f.
of nature and causality, determine me to the same conversion, and that by some
such potent and insuperable motion, as I neither have, nor can obtain by any
Act of mine, if thou have not decreed to confer the same upon me.

And this Doctrine does furnish the most obstinate sinners with an Apology
against all Gods most vehement exprobrations and reproofs; For whereas, he
says, Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty
works, which are done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented, etc. The excuse is very ready and easy, out of this principle; Lord
thou know the men of Tire and Sidon could not have repented by this means,
unless thou had decreed to administer determining Grace to them herewith;
and if thou had communicated that Grace to us also, we should have repented,
nay we could not but have repented, as well as they. When you shall upbraid
them for rejecting the Counsil of God against themselves, and putting the word
of life from them, and despising Gods Goodness, and neglecting so great
salvation; what influence can these exprobrations and reproofs have upon them?
If they have once imbibed your Doctrine, they will return scorn to your
reprehensions, and tell you, this means was so tendered, that it might be
rejected and despised; for it was not accompanied with Determining Grace, but
administered only to render them the more inexcusable, and upon that account
fit for no other entertainment but neglect.

4. Whereas Faith is so the work of the Saints, that it is said to procure them
praise 1 Pet. 1.7. and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ; By
this Determining Grace, which makes them mere Passives in the reception of it,
working it irresistibly in them, but without them, (as the Synod says;) All
those Eulogies, which are given them, [as, Well done good and faithful
servant] are rendered absurd, (not to say ridiculous.) Should a man cause his
Servant, (that of himself, has no mind to go) to be nailed up in a soft
chariot, and brought to London, and then commend him for his care and
faithfulness in taking such a journey to come and serve him; when he is merely
passive in the business; would you think him in good earnest? I think not.

5. If this Determining Grace be necessary, there is another gross absurdity,
and of more dangerous consequence than the former; for from hence it follows,
That a man cannot sin, unless God be first deficient in what is necessary.
So Piscator (in terminis), Resp. ad Duplic. Vorst. p. 245.
Desertio Divina est causa desertionis humanae, obediendi Deo, non autem contra
haec causa est illius. Gods desertion of Man is the cause of Man's deserting his
obedience toward God, and not the contrary. And of all true Believers, he
says, Ibid. page 314.
They are no more able to omit or neglect the study of perseverance, then a
Blackamore is able to change his color, or Male and Female their sex. But
because this assertion is so palpably contradicted by the foul sins of such as
have been Regenerate, De Persev. page 6.
therefore Doctor Damman does mend the matter thus; Regenerati non possunt
omittere praestationem ejus quod ab illis postulatur, modo Deus illis praestet
quod promisit. The Regenerate cannot omit to perform what God requires, unless
God does omit to perform what he has promised. And, Quando Deus partibus suis
defungitur, Ibid. p. 37.
nos nostras omittere non possumus. When God does his part, we cannot omit
ours. How do you like this Doctrine, Master Baxter? This is the genuine fruit
of your opinion concerning Determining Grace. But it yields another fruit no
less unsavory and of a juice as pernicious in the diffusion of it, as the
former; For,

4. This Opinion is a great and ready Inlet to all Enthusiasms; And it is not
only easy but ordinary for men to entitle their Diabolical delusions to the
Determinations of Gods Spirit; and his broad Seal is frequently stamped upon
that Commission (to Authorize it), which is drawn up by a lying, and one happily
a great deal worse than their own private Spirit. When men of high ambition,
and hot Brains, and strong Fantasies, and Passionate Appetites, will not
acquiesce (as you know, many times they will not) in Gods clear and distinct
Revelations concerning their duty; but entertain new Designs, Pretended to a
Good end, though the only means visibly conducible to carry them on be
apparently unwarrantable; What Methods do they follow in this case? God is
earnestly fought and wrastled with, for obtaining a Dispensation, and success
in a course of disobedience, against his own express command. When God (who is
not so much called upon to counsel, as to countenance and assist in the affair
such men have resolved upon, and are praeengaged to transact) being provoked by
the perverse importunity of such Addresses, permits them, in displeasure, to
the sway of their own inordinate Passions, and to prosper in the irregular
pursuit of them, this is presently interpreted to be Gods gracious return unto
their prayers, and his casting voice (the intimation of his secret
Beneplaciture) for the Determination of their Will to this choice of their very
Rebellion against him, and consequently it has, as is pretended, his
unquestionable Approbation.

When Balaam upon Balaks invitation of him to curse Israel, consulted the Lord
first about that Message and Expedition, He gave him a clear and peremptory
signification of his will and pleasure. Number. 22.12. Thou shall not go with
them, thou shall not curse the people: for they are blessed. But Balaam, upon a
new and more urgent invitation, seeks God again, that he may yet obtain leave
to gratify his Avarice and Ambition; Almighty God provoked with the perversity
of this solicitation, permits him to his own lust, and upon this (which was but
an instance of Gods indignation against him, that he was not satisfied with his
express command at first) without doubt Balaam would have concluded, that God
had now infallibly determined and actually sent him, had he not been rebuked
for his iniquity by a miracle: but the dumb Ass speaking with Man's voice, 2
Pet. 2.16.
forbad the madness of the Prophet. What practices have been suggested and put
in execution at Munster, etc. upon a persuasion of such an irresistible
Determination? and what work that opinion may yet help to make in other parts
of Christendom, if not timely prevented, is easy to foresee without a Spirit
of Divination.

Lastly, you may be advised to consider, how much you fail in your intended
Commendations and praise of the Divine Grace; For you do wonderfully disparage
the excellency of its nature, and sweetness of its insinuations, while you
think to advance it, by setting it up to so high a pitch as an irresistible
Determination. For who performs the most ingenuous and commendable Cure upon a
Distracted Person, he that puts him into irons in Bedlam, or he that makes such
applications as keep all his limbs sound, and lets him go at liberty? Your
Determining Grace, does withhold the Will from the Contrary Object, and
restrains it from one part of the Contradiction, ere it does prevail with it to
choose and embrace the other: But Grace with us, the more to illustrate her own
Glory, and that she may truly appear to be, as she is styled, Grace, does win
the Will to act even then, when she preserves to it, its natural indifferency
and freedom to Act and not to Act. So that in short, the effect of your Grace,
is as an obligation which a man is drawn to enter into by Durance; that of
ours, as one which he enters into out of Act. 17.11 Generositie.
Generositie, ingenuitie, or justice, whereof though the first will not hold
good in Law, yet the last does remain in full power, force and virtue.

Reflections on Section XI. and the III. Article.
3. Says This Tilenus, they hold [That by Adams fall his Posterity lost their
freewill, being put to an unavoidable Necessity to do, or not to do, whatsoever
they do or do not, whether it be good or evil; being thereunto predestinate by
the eternal and effectual secret Decree of God.] Answ. Unworthy falsification
still! says Master Baxter. But I remember when Christ sent out his Disciples,
He gave them a Commission, and charge, when ever they came to a house, to say,
Peace be unto this house; telling them withal, that if the house were not
worthy, their Peace, (i. e. their Apprecation and Blessing) should return to
them again. What Commission Master Baxter has to asperse, slander, and
calumniate his neighbor, I know not; I am sure the Divine Grace did not,
whatever the Doctrine of the Synod might do, to determine his will to this
unhandsome language: but because he was not very well advised in the disposal
of it, having bestowed it upon a person altogether unworthy, it does infallibly
return to him again. But, [Not a word to any such sense in the Synod;] says
he; What, neither Name, nor Thing? Let the Reader judge by what is already
said, and still to be alleged; whereby it will appear how little reason Master
Baxter had to add that Sarcasticall expression [Well might this Author conceal
his Name for shame of the world.] What induced the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews to coneeal his Name, or your good friends Martin Mar Praelate, and
Junius Brutus to conceal theirs? Was it for shame of the world? Is there never
a Prophet left, think you, to lament the Desolations of Gods Church, and say as
Jeremiah did, If ye will not hear, Jer. 13.17.
my soul shall weep in secret places, for your Pride? I pray you therefore use
no Arts of conjuration to call the Ghost of Tilenus out of his Retirement,
where he loves privately to exonerate his passions. But you say, [As the words
be not in the Decrees of the Synod; so much is there in many suffrages against
the sense.] I wish you had produced, that much, that we might have examined how
much it will amount unto. But suppose the words be not in the Decrees of the
Synod, it is enough to justify Tilenus his assertion, if they be found in the
writings of such as Adhere to the Synod, or such as were before it, if the
Synod has not rejected them, as I am confident they have not.

But you go on and tell us, [It is but the Moral, or Dispositive, or Habitual
Freedom of the Will, that they or other Protestants commonly say that Man has
lost.] M. Parker whose Theses you do so much cry up, These. 13. p. 11.
upon all occasions, says, Licet logica superfuerit ratio, seu principium
quod, unde remota ac passiva materia potentia, periit tamen principium quo,
sive Forma facultas ad bonum. And the Deputies of Over-Isel say, In the will of
man after the fall, Act. Synod. Dord p. 197. par. 3.
non remansit libertas been agendi, there remain no liberty to do well. And in
their Decrees, C. 3. and 4. Art. 3.
the Synod says, All men are conceived in sin, and born the children of wrath,
untoward to all good tending to salvation, forward to evil, dead in sins,
slaves of sin; and neither will, nor can (without the Grace of the Holy Ghost
regenerating them) set free their own crooked nature, no nor so much as dispose
themselves to the amending of it. See also the 2, 3, and 4. Rejections; and
Tilenus charge them with no more. He needs not. See Embdanorum exam. circa 3,
and 4. Artic. Quaest. 26, and 29. pa. 185, 186. par. 2.

You go on; [They all profess that man has the natural Faculty of Freewill;]
And will you not acknowledge as much of the very Devil? But you bid us, [See my
forecited pages in my Treatise of Judgment of this.] If by that Reference to
those Pages, you intend to raise in us an expectation of something
extraordinary, you have deceived us; for we can find no such matter; if you
only directed us, where we might find an account of your Opinion more at large
in this point, we have maturely considered it, and must profess to you, that
it does not satisfy.

2. You say, [There is not a word in the Decrees of the Synod, that men are put
to unavoidable Necessity. 3. Much less to do or not do, whatever they do or do
not, good or evil.] You take sanctuary very often in the Decrees of the Synod,
which, you may know, were contrived with a great deal of Artifice to serve the
interest of two Parties (as was observed above) and wherein they inserted
nothing but what might seem most plausible to save their Reputation. But the
Reader may remember (or if he does not, he may look back and find) that every
branch of this Article was sufficiently made good out of the Writings of the
Doctors of the greatest note amongst the Calvinists, See Antidot. page 41, 42.
viz. That men are put to an unavoidable Necessity of doing or not doing good,
or evil; so that they can do no more good then they do, nor omit more evil
then they do omit; and that in regard of the Divine Decree; And these positions
are no where Rejected by the Synod; but rather confirmed by some of the Divines
thereof, as was alleged above.

That they are under a Necessity of Immubility (and that is an unavoidable
Necessity) in respect of the Decree, is to be evinced from the Judgment of the
Divines of Wedderau; P. 150. par. 2. page 154.
De Artic. 3. and 4. These. 1. and in Corol. they conclude concerning the
Necessity of evil thus, An peccata fiunt necessario? Do sins come to pass of
Necessity? They answer yes; by a necessity that depends upon a double
hypothesis, Decreti scilicet permittentis, and finis boni; That is, in respect
of the Divine Decree (operatively, for so they declare their sense a little
before) permitting it, and in respect of the good end, which God accomplisheth
by it.

And then for good; To begin with the first Act of it, Conversion or
Regeneration, the Divines of Wedderau do affirm, Vbi supra.
(and it is inserted amongst the Acts of the Synod) Sicut homo ad sui
generationem nihil prorsus confert; ita nec ad sui regenerationem; A man can
confer no more to his regeneration than he does to his natural generation. Is
not this work wrought by an unavoidable Necessity? and yet the whole Synod, in
their Decrees, speak the same sense, ( Cap. 3, and 4. Art. 12.) They say, It is
a work which God, without us, works in us, by an operation, for mightiness
not inferior to the creation of the world, or raising up the dead. Is not here
an unavoidable necessity? and ( Art. 17.) they compare it to that powerful
operation of God by which he gives being to this our natural life. And Re
ect. 6. They say, that faith by which we are first converted, and from which we
are styled faithful, (So that we have that denomination for a work wherein we
are merely Passive) is infused by God; and this is said to be done, by his
Omnipotent strength, and irresistibly; Reject. 8. All which expressions do
clearly evince an unavoidable necessity; for they affirm in the same place,
that it lies not in man's power to be or not to be regenerated. And for all
succeeding good, the Divines of South- Holland do conclude, Post finem Act.
Synod. (mihi.) page 292.
that the Spirit of God does promove, and apply and determine the mind, will
and affections, to act, and not only ad exercitium Actus, sed etiam ad sin
gularitatem, to the singularity of the Act, as well as to the exercise of it;
that is, (as they explain it) the Holy Spirit does not only determine us
simply to do, but also, to do or to Act in this place, at this time, after such
a manner, as pleases him. This Determination of the Will unto every good Act,
makes a Necessity in order of Nature and causality, antecedent to every such
Act.

Without doubt, the meaning of Daniel Tilenus (the compiler of these Articles)
was this; That, in respect of the Divine Decree, (according to the Doctrine of
the Synod) All men, whether Elect or Reprobate, are under an unavoidable
Necessity, of being saved or damned, and of performing such works See Synops.
pur. Theo. disp. 24 these. 18. and Act. Syn. Dord. c. 1. Artic. 7. and Reject. 6.
, as do inevitably conduce to the accomplishment of their several Ends
respectively. And this is evident, even to the eye of sense, in M. Perkins
Delineation of the Decree expressed hereafter; And for the Salvation of the
Elect, with the Means conducing infallibly thereunto, that is clear by the
Synods Definition of Election therewith inserted; Ibid.
and that the Damnation of the Reprobates is under a like unavoidable
Necessity, may be collected from hence, that many Calvinists do Resolve of
that, by the Rule Ibid. Art. 15. and Rej. 8. and Synop. pur. Theol. Disp. 24.
rh. 44. and Act. Sy. Dor par. 2. p. 19. a m. Jud. Th. pal.
of Contraries, as it stands in opposition to Election.

And though the Elect may fall into many sins, and the Reprobate perform many
good works, (at least, quoad substantiam actus,) yet these do not remove
either of them one inch from under that unavoidable Necessity; because those
sins are Ingredients, that help to make up one full and perfect Medium,
conducing infallibly to their End, as concerning the Elect: Act. Synod. Dord
par. 2. p. 118. m.
and those Good works are Ingredients likewise, that help to make up one full
and perfect Medium, conducing infallibly to their End, as to the Reprobates, as
is showed out of Perkins, Szegedine, and Norton, elsewhere.

When therefore these men deny, that Mankind is under such an unavoidable
Necessity, to good or evil, they do but impose upon the unwary Reader, and
abuse him with equivocations and Fallacies; and herein it lies. They make
Liberty to consist in a spontaneous motion or Lubency, and a freedom from the
Necessity of Coaction and violence; and when you charge them with this Opinion,
that Man is under an unavoidable Necessity, to do good or evil, in this sense,
they will as stiffly deny it, as Master Baxter does; They are under no such
Necessity, they will say, meaning they are not compelled by violence. But if
you press them with a Necessity of Immutability, (which is no less
unavoidable then the other) whether arising from Gods irresistible operation,
as in the conversion and perseverance of the Elect; or from his ineluctable
Decree, as in the Government of the Reprobate toward their Final doom; this
Necessity they will not, they cannot deny. For the truth of the first branch,
i. e. in respect of Gods irresistible operation, See P. Molinaeus, amongst the
Acts of the Synod. par. 1. page 295. m. The British Divines, par. 2. page 132.
These. 2. The Hassiens. page 145. These. 3. Those of Wedderau. page 150. p. m.
Those of Embden, page 169. these. 59, 60. and page 185. Quest. 26. and Sibrandus
Lubbertus par. 3. page 157. m.

For the other branch, i. e. an unavoidable Necessity arising from the
Immutable Decree, you had it even now, from the Divines of Wedderau (ubi supra)
where they add, Multa fiunt necessario etc. (as above) Many things come to
pass of Necessity, upon supposition of the Divine Decree, which are done
freely in respect of man's will. Thus, they say, the Jews crucified Christ
necessarily, and yet freely. Necessarily; because being delivered by the
determinate counsil of God, they took him, and with wicked hands fastened him
to the cross and slew him. Act. 2.23. Yet freely; because with a full Lubency,
and a deliberate or interpretative will, they sought to slay him, as the
Evangelicall Story wttnesseth. And this Multa must be extended to Omnia, to All
sins as well as that, or some others, else the rest shall be exempted from Gods
Decree; which is absurd.

Will a spontaneitie alleviate the Necessity of sinning, or the Perdition that
follows it? Let me put a case to M. Baxter. Suppose a Prince intending the
ruin of such a Noblemans Posterity, makes a Law, that whosoever associate
themselves with Strumpets, and are not reclaimed by one or two Admonitions,
shall be Rack^ alive, and have their bones broken, and their bowels and heart
torn out of their bodies and burnt before their faces; And yet underhand takes
order to Caresse such persons, and give them opportunity and entertainment
amongst Harlots, with plenty of wine, and ravishing aires of Music to take
them off their Guard, and applies charms and Philters to work upon their
Fantasy, blood or spirits, till those persons are no less drunk with lust
and passion than with wine: M. Baxter is sent once and again to admonish them,
and he says unto them, Sirs, I desire you to consider, what a severe yet a
very just law, is made against this Luxury wherein you live. You have a most
gracious Prince that tenders your welfare, and takes care by my Ministry to
reduce you from that exorbitancy, which otherwise will bring you to utter
ruin; I earnestly beseech you to recollect your selves, and reform your lives
and manners, that you may be restored to your Princes favor, whom these crimes
have so highly exasperated. I pray, as you tender your lives reflect upon the
horror of the punishment awarded to such vices, etc. But the men inthral'd by
the witchcraft of the foresaid Artifice; (which is still applied to them) do
hugg their unlawful pleasures, and defy the threatened torments, till the
hour comes that summons them to the dreadful execution, which all men, that
understands the whole process of the business, bewails with bitter
lamentations. But then in steps M. Baxter to justify the equity of the
sentence that is past against them, and he aggravates their guilt, and taking
no notice of those underhand practices, by which these forlorn wretches were
captivated to this misery, he tells the sad Multitude of Complainers, that the
proceedings are very just; for they knew the Law, and he had taken pains to
inform, exhort and admonish them, in the bowels of his tenderest compassion,
and he is sure they had the natural faculty of Freewill, and they lay under no
Necessity that compelled them to those lewd courses, for they pursued them with
a kind of Lubency and alacrity; and therefore the infliction of their
sufferings was very just and warrantable. I am very loath to make the
application: For to fancy that the Decrees of the most wise, just and holy God
have any such influence or any Aspect that looks that way, were horrid
blasphemy. And if there were any such Decrees made in heaven, Almighty God
should for his honor sake, rather give Master Baxter a Fee to hold his peace,
than to divulge them. And yet they have been divulged by men of no small
account amongst the Calvinists, As God denies the Reprobates his Grace that
they cannot but sin, so also has he destined them to this condition, that of
their own nature they cannot but commit diverse wickednesses. Zanch. de Not.
Dei. page 554. And, we doubt not to confess, that by the immutable
Reprobation, a necessity of sinning is incumbent upon the Reprobate, and of
sinning even unto death without Repentance, and of suffering eternal
punishment for it. page 571. (alia edit. 743, 744.) Piscator to the same
purpose. in Notis ad Duplic. Vorst. page 2l7. Although the rebellion of the
Reprobates depends upon the antecedent, absolute and irresistibly efficacious
will of God, yet by this they cannot nor ought to be excused from the fault of
Rebellion; Also page 223. When God necessitates man unto sin, that he may
punish him for sin, he does justly, because he has power to govern man as he
list.

By this it appears how little reason Master Baxter had to say (as he does in
his following Invective) [All this is such a self-devised tale, that no honest
man should have been guilty of against the poorest neighbor or enemy, much
less against a Party, and a Synod of so many truly learned and worthy men.]

Answ. 1. What Self do you mean? Self-Will? or Self-Richard? Mutato Nomine, I
am sure it is justified by Zanchy-Self, and Piscator-Self, and why I may not
add Synod-Self too, I see no reason but your Selfs-denyall, which in this case
ought not to be accounted of so great validity as D. Tilenus's affirmation, who
(as we have been informed) was privy to the transactions of their very
close-Committees.

2. The Calvinists do impute far worse matters to Almighty God himself, as
appears by sundry of their Testimonies cited above; to which one thousand more
might be added out of their writings, if it were needful; and what think you
of that modest expression (lately mentioned) of D. Damman a Synodist, That if
God performs his part, we cannot omit ours?

3. I make a very great difference betwixt the Foreign Divines and the
Provincial, and betwixt the single Doctors and the Where not the best
arguments, but the most votes do carry it; as Luke 23.23.
Synod, And M. Baxter is a man of so much observation, (if affection has not
darkened his sight) that he cannot but see, when men have espoused a Cause,
what unworthy See Antidotum in Praefat. and p. 130, 131.
courses (to say no worse) they will take to provide a Dowry for it, and make
it fruitful. These Divines took a solemn Oath at their entrance into the Synod
(as was said above) to examine these controversies impartially, without
affection or prejudice, according to the word of God, yet so unmindfull were
they hereof, that they condemned the Remonstrants unheard, shut them out of the
Synod, See, ibid. p. 7. etc.
not permitting them the liberty promised in their Letters of Citation, to
explain and defend their opinions. By which it appears clearly that they were a
Party indeed (in another sense, than M. Baxter takes the word) and therefore as
unfit to be Judge in these Controversies, as the Council of Trent was to be
Judge of those, betwixt the Church of Rome, and the Protestants. That they were
such a Party And it is the more scandalous that a Synod should be such a Party
is further evident, by the Diligence used in exploring the Judgment of
Divines before they were invited to this Assembly. To which purpose they
solicited the Prince of Anhalt by Letters, that he would transmit the
Confession of his Divines, that they might examine whether it were calculated,
to serve the interest of that Doctrine, See ibid. p. 7. etc.
which they were resolved to establish, before they would admit them to their
Convention; which motion that Prince resented so ill, that he rejected it, not
without disdain and indignation.

The only Divines that carried themselves worthily, that is, with prudence and
equity toward the Remonstrants, were the Helvetians, who darkly taxed the
crafty practices and prejudice of the rest, and professed a desire to suspend
their judgment concerning either Party, till the whole cause were fully known;
For they say, Caeterum ut criminatio acerba est venerandam hanc Synodum
appellare Schismaticam, Act. Synod. Dord. p. 102 f. par. 1. edit. in fol.
ita intempestivum nobis videri non diffitemur, Remonstrantes criminis ejusdem,
hoc quidem tempore, agere reos and condemnare. Est enim veneranda and sancta
haec Synodus congregata eum in finem, ut Doctrinam Remonstrantium propositam,
explicatam defensamque audiat, ad Dei verbum probe examinet, de ejus vel
veritate vel falsitate pronunciet. Eo usque igitur sententiam de schismate,
ejusque Authoribus suspendendam esse sentimus, quandoquidem pars ea, quae post
examen convicta fuerit doctrinae erroneae, hoc ipso Schismatica quoque
intelligetur, nisi cum corpore, a quo se sentit avulsam, rursus coalescat* But
their judgment was not followed by the rest, who were so much the less worthy
for dealing so unworthily, See the Antidotum, etc.
both in word and deed, with their Reverend Brethren.

You go on; The Question is, Whether men have Original sin or not? Those of
you that are of Doctor Jeremy Taylor's mind in this, speak out, and disown the
Pelagians no more, but speak as bitterly of Austin as of the Synod of Dort. To
which I answer, 1. That men have original sin; the remote Cause whereof is
Gods imputation of it: but the next Cause is their Carnal Generation. For the
sin of Adam is therefore of right imputed to us, because we are carnally
propagated from him, now become guilty: and so according to the flesh we were
as a certain part of him sinning: because we then existed in his loins, when
he sinned. The like, in a manner, is said of Levi paying tithes in the loins
of Abraham, Heb. 7.9, 10. The Question then, is not whether men have original
sin derived to them from Adam, for that is yielded: but whether being called,
they have a new power given them by Christ to become Evangelically Righteous?
and this question M. Baxter stated with some show of moderation in his first
Assize Sermon, Page 12, 13.
and resolved it seemingly according to the sense and meaning of Tilenus. His
words are these; [The last Question is, Who they be that are and may be urged
to glorify God on this ground, that he has bought them? Doubtless, only
those whom he has bought: but who are those? It discourageth me to tell you,
because among the godly it is a controversy; but if they will controvert
points of such great moment, they cannot disoblige or excuse us from preaching
them. Among the variety of men's opinions, it is safe to speak in the language
of the holy Ghost, and accordingly to believe, viz. that, As by the offense of
one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation even so by the righteousness
of one, the free gift came upon all men to justification of life. Romans 5.18.
And that he gave himself a ransom for all, and is the only Mediator between
God and man. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. That he is the propitiation for our sins, and not
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2.2. That God
is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe. 1 Timothy 4.10. That
he is the Savior of the world. Joh. 4.42. 1 John 4.14, 15 That he tasted death
for every man. From which clear evidence Master Baxter is so fully convinced,
that he does acknowledge a General Grace in words, though indeed, in the
result, as he defines it, it is not so much Grace as Severity, having no power
to save, and being designed only to render the persons, upon whom it is
conferred, inexcusable, and their damnation the more intolerable. But Tilenus,
far more to the advancement of Gods Grace and Christ's merits, does conclude
from those Texts, by him alleged, That God for Christ's sake does confer upon
all those, who are called by the Gospel, a new power, whereby they are enabled,
if they use their diligent endeavor, and be not wanting to themselves and that
divine Grace, to expedite and free themselves from the servitude of sin. But by
what consequence this should be drawn to prove a denial of Original sin, I am
not able to imagine, seeing this Sufficient power all men will not make use of,
no not so much as to exempt and free themselves from that servitude of sin,
which is superadded to sin Original.

As for Doctor Jeremy Tailor, you should do well to stop his mouth first (not
by impotent and unworthy insinuations, but by solid and convincing Arguments)
before you invite or provoke others of his mind to open theirs.

But why disown the Pelagians no more? would you not persuade your Reader that
Doctor Tailor is a perfect Pelagian? and is not this suggestion as odious and
uncharitable, as the self-devised tale, with which you charged Tilenus even
now? how then comes it to pass that so honest a man as Master Baxter is found
guilty of it, not against the poorest neighbor, but against a very learned and
worthy person, though happily his enemy for telling him some truths that go
against the grain of his interest, Popularity or Ambition? M. Baxter may
remember a little Pamphlet entitled [A Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ,
etc.] subscribed by 52. Ministers (his Brethren) within the Province of London;
Page 4. with the 9.
wherein amongst other abominable errors, damnable heresies, and horrid
blasphemies, they reckon this for one [That Christ was given to undergo a
shameful death voluntarily upon the cross, to satisfy for the sin of Adam,
and for all the sins of all Mankind.] Now seeing the Pelagians are charged by
the Ancients with this Doctrine [ that Christ did not die for all, as appears
by Saint Austin, contra 2. Epist. Pelag. l. 2. c. 2. Pelagiani dicunt Deum non
esse omnium aetatum in hominibus mundatorem, salvatorem, liberatorem, etc.
Suppose a man should return Master Baxters language upon his Party, [ Those of
you that are of the 52. Ministers mind in this, speak out, and disown the
Pelagians no more; How would they take it? or how would Master Baxter interpret
it? This would be called a shameless calumny, at least a perverse insinuation
in Tilenus, though it must pass current for a piece of ingenuity and candor in
himself. But does not Doctor Tailor, in stating the Question, that there may be
no clamours against the person interested in either persuasion, nor any offense
taken by error or misprision; tell you; It is not intended, nor affirmed; that
there is no such thing as Original sin; for it is certain, Further, explicat.
p. 452
and affirmed by all Antiquity upon many grounds of Scripture, That Adam
sinned, and his sin was Personally his, but Derivatively ours; that is, it did
great hurt to us, to our bodies directly, to our souls indirectly and
accidentally. So great hurt, that the Doctor says, Page 431.
(in his Vnum necessarium) That our Spirit, when it is at the best, it is but
willing, but can do nothing without the miracle of Grace. He does not stick (in
his Answer to the L. Bishops second Letter) Page 101.
to call it the Pelagian Heresy, and says, it did serve it self by saying too
little in this Article. And in his Vindication to the Countess of Devonshire,
Page 101.
he says, I desire to be observed in opposition to the Pelagian Heresy, who
did suppose Nature to be so perfect, that the Grace of God was not necessary,
and that by Nature alone, they could go to heaven; which because I affirm to be
impossible, and that Baptism is therefore necessary, because Nature is
insufficient, and Baptism is the great channel of grace; there ought to be no
envious and ignorant l^^d laid upon my Doctrine, as if it complied with the
Pelagian, against which it is so essentially and so mainly opposed in the main
difference of his Doctrine. I do not insert this, as if I had a mind to
vindicate the Doctors opinion, or espouse his quarrel; (he is of age to answer
for himself,) but to give the Reader notice of the disingenuous practices used
by this great pretender unto truth and Godliness, in his unworthy defamation
of some, no less than in his undue vindication of others. But for the Doctors
honor and comfort, M. Baxter puts him amongst very good company, Saints Rest.
par. 1. page 154. m.
(under this accusation,) viz. All the Fathers of the first two hundred or
three hundred years; and the plain truth is, says he, till Pelagius days, all
spoke like Pelagians. And yet how this opinion can be true I understand not,
seeing S. Austin maintains his Doctrine against the Pelagians, by the Authority
of all the Fathers that wrote before him, and condemns that of Pelagius, as a
recent error or novel Presumption. However M. Baxter should do well to
consider, that the Manichees are, at least as ill as the Pelagians, and
therefore he should take heed, he run not into the extremes of very many
Calvinists, who think they are never safe from the danger of this Charybdis,
till they fall into that Scylla. And if I should say the Synod of Dort did so,
he would not spare to tell me, as he does Tilenus here, that he speaks bitterly
of them. Why bitterly? Some men are so tender of their very errors, that they
are ready to complain, Truth bites them, when she does but employ her tongue to
lick their soars, in order to their healing. All other men's Gall and Copperas,
it seems, does corrode and fret: but Master Baxters is purely Balsamical.

But is it all Gospel that was said by Saint Austin, or the Synod of Dort?
Harae. says, Augustinum, tam varium fuisse in fervore disputationis hujus, ut
passim nec secum, nec cum Scriptura conciliari possit. De great. and lib. arb.
lib. 2. cap. 14.
You dissent from the first as much as Tilenus, and the Canons of the later are
no Authentic Text with you, unless you may be allowed to make your own
exposition. So you profess in your Confession of Faith, concerning Artic. 1.
Sect. 12 Art. 3. Sect. 12. and 15. Art. 5. Sect. 9, Page 25.
10, 11, 13. And having cleared your self of the imputation of Arminianism^,
you proceed in these words, [ So I shall think that those who go as much on the
other hand, and differ from the Synod one way, as much as the Arminians did the
other way, remain censurable as well as they; and soon after. Yet let me add
this, Page 27.
lest my seeking to satisfy the offended, may draw me into guilt; Though I
have voluntarily my self professed my consent to those several Canons and
Confessions of Faith, (but this is upon liberty taken to explain what Phrases
you dislike in them, and putting your own sense upon them; and therefore you
might very well subjoyne what follows) Yet for the Synod of Dort, the
Confession of the Assembly; yea or the Larger Catechism, without some
correction, I do hereby protest my dissent against the so imposing them to a
word upon all Ministers, that no man that cannot subscribe to them, shall be
permitted in the Church: whether our confession were intended for such a
necessary Test, I know not well; But that the Synod of Dort was, is expressed
in the end; says M. Baxter. Whence we may collect, had Master Baxter been
amongst them, his pretended moderation would have been intolerable, and if not
banished, at least he would have been silenced as well as the Remonstrants.

I must not forget to give the Reader warning of Master Baxters Artifice, to
insinuate into his credulity, that the Synod of Dort maintains no other
Doctrine then what was taught by S. Augustine; which suggestion, had it any
truth in it, might gain some reputation to the Synod. But M. Baxter
acknowledges (in his Account of Perseverance) Page 5.
that Austin's opinion was that some who are effectually Called, Regenerated,
Justified, and Sanctified, do fall away and perish; which neither the Synod nor
He will allow of for sound Doctrine. And that he never intended to teach such
an irrespective Decree, (I say Irrespective in the same sense) as the Synod
holds forth, is evident by that one Argument even now mentioned; Antiquitus
fundatam Catholicam fidem adversus recentem Pelagianorum haereticorum
praesumptionem perniciemque defendimus. Aug. lib. 4. adversus Pelag. Epistol.
and cap. 12. Quibus demonstratur quomodo sit haec quam tenemus fides vera,
vereque Christiana atque Catholica, sicut per Scripturas sanctas Antiquitus
tradita, sic a patribus nostris and usque ad hoc tempus, quo isti eam
convellere tentaverunt, retenta atque servata, and deinceps propitio Deo
retinenda atque servanda.
That he defended his Doctrine by the Authority of all the Fathers that had
written before him, and accused the Pelagians of Novelty. What the Ancients
opinion was Prosper has expressly delivered in these words; Paene omnium parem
inveniri and unam sententiam, qua propositum and praedestinationem Dei secundum
praescientiam receperunt, ut ob hoc Deus alios vasa honoris, alios vasa
contumeliae fecerit, quia finem uniuscujusque praeviderit, and, sub ipso
gratiae adjutorio, in qua futurus esset voluntate and action Praescierit. They
all held that Predestination was according to Gods praescience; that God made
some vessels of honor, others vessels of dishonor, because he foresaw the end
of every one, and foreknew what he would be, by his own will and choice, under
the assistance of Divine Grace. S. Austin does profess that S. Ambrose by name
maintained this cause with him. But Saint Ambrose (lib. 5. de Fide. c. 3.)
says expressly; Non enim ante Praedestinavit, quam prasciret: etc. Gods
Praedestination was not before his foreknowledge; etc. And in those Commentaries
that go under the name of Ambrose, and thought to be of the same Age, Ad Romans 8.
we read thus; Istos, quos praesciit futuros sibi devotos, ipsos elegit ad
premissa praemia capessenda. He chose them to receive the promised reward, whom
he foreknew would be devoted to his service. Et misericordiam dabo ei, quem
praescii, post errorem, recto cord reversurum ad me. I will give mercy to him,
whom I foreknow, would after his error, return to me with a right heart. To
him we may add Hierome, the sharpest Adversary of Pelagius, who is of the same
judgment; for he says, Ex Dei praescientia evenit, ut, Ad Gal. 1.
quem scit justum futurum, prius diligat, quam ^riatur ex utero. It is from his
foreknowledge, that whom God knows will be righteous, he loves before ever he
comes forth of his mothers womb. And upon the first Chapter of Malac. Dilectio
and odium Dei vel ex praescientia nascitur futurorum, vel ex operibus. The love
and hatred of God arises either from his foreknowledge of future things, or
else from works. And upon the eighth to the Romans. Proposuit sola fide
servare, quos praesciverat credituros. He determined to save them by faith,
whom he foreknew would believe. Which is more considerable, in his heat of
Conflict against the Pelagians (lib. 3.) He says, Eligit (Deus) quem bonum
cernit. God chooses him, whom he sees to be good. I may add to these Saint
Austin himself, who in his last writings (being Bishop) ad Simplicianum L. 1.
Qu. 2.
, has these words, Nemo eligitur, nisi jam distans ab illo qui rejicitur: unde
quod dictum est, Quia elegit nos Deus ante Mundi Constitutionem, non video
quomodo sit dictum, nisi de praescientia fidei and operum pietaetis. No man is
chosen, but he who is distant, or differs from him who is rejected: hereupon I
cannot see how that saying [that God has chosen us before the foundation of
the world] is to be understood, but of Gods foreknowledge of Faith and good
Works. And a little after of Jacob, he says, Non electus est ut fieret bonus,
sed bonus factus eligi potuit. He is not elected that he might be made good,
but being made good he might be elected. From which clear passages I argue;
either Saint Austin taught the same Doctrine which the Ancients had taught
before him, or he did not; If he did, then he taught Election upon Gods
foreknowledge of faith and piety, which is against the Doctrine of the Synod at
Dort; If he did not teach the same Doctrine, then he falsely pretended their
Authority and contested against all Antiquity, as well as against the
Pelagians; which is very absurd to affirm of him. So that maugre M. Baxters
pretension, a man may disown the Pelagians and the Synod of Dort too, and yet
speak Reverently of S. Austin.

Master Baxter shuts up this Scene with a notable Question, in these words; Do
you believe that all ungodly men, or any man Naturally, has the Habit of
Faith, or Love, or Holiness? This is the very Question, if you will rightly
understand it.] To which I answer, That, I do not believe that all ungodly men,
or any man Naturally has the Habit of Faith, or Love, or Holiness: But this
is not the very Question, if I rightly understand it; but rather this, [Whether
to continue in the want of these, by reason of an Antecedent Decree, that
denies Grace Sufficient and Necessary to perform them, be a matter of
unavoidable Necessity, and yet a sin properly so called, in the Natural and
unregenerate.] The Synod holds the Affirmative of both branches, as touching
all the Reprobate: But I deny such a Decree, and consequently that unavoidable
Necessity, supposed to follow it; and if there were such a Decree and such a
Necessity of wanting Faith and Repentance, that want could not be the sin, but
the Fate of such Reprobates.

Reflections upon the XII. Section and IV. Article.
[ THe fourth Article, you say, forged by this Ghost of Tilenus.] You have been
truly informed, that the Article was drawn up by Daniel Tilenus himself; but
you are a very bold man in venturing to combat with a Ghost; upon whom, your
own Reason might have told you, (if your passions had not transported you to
fall on without consulting it) that you were like to make no impression with
such blunt weapons, as you manage against him. You must therefore be content,
till you can come better armed, to leave the Field and the victory behind you,
which your Confidence, no doubt, at your Marching forth, promised you the Glory
of in this attempt. But this Ghost must follow you into the next Field, (where
he is to try your strength and skill, a little further,) which is, [That God to
save his elect from the corrupt Mass, does beget faith in them by a power
equal to that whereby he created the world, and raised up the dead, insomuch
that such unto whom he gives that Grace, cannot reject it; and the rest being
Reprobate cannot accept of it, though it be offered unto both by the same
Preaching and Ministry.] That the work of Regeneration or Conversion, for
mightiness, is not inferior to the creation of the world, or raising up of
the dead Cap. 3. and 4. Arb. 12. and suffrag. Gamvens. de 2, (...) 4 cap. Th.
10, et. 13.
; is the express Affirmation of the Synod, in terminis; What is it then that
Master Baxter has to object against the Article? 1. Where did the Synod say
that this was to save his Elect from the corrupt Mass, excluding all others
salvation? Tilenus has not the words [excluding all others salvation;] but the
Synod has the Thing, sure enough; for they conclude that the Election of some
implye: Electio (quam de Jacobo intelligit) absque reprobatione (quam vi
oppositionis intelligit de Esavo) ne cogitari quidem potest. Piscat. Respon. ad
Syllog.

1. Taufreri. Contra absol. Reprob. Decret.


the Rejection of others, and that is exclusion, in Zanchy's sense, as was
showed above, and in any man's sense, I think, but M. Baxters. Do they not say,
many of them, and it is the judgment of them all, that the number of the Elect
can neither be diminished nor increased? and are not the rest excluded then by
that Doctrine? And although you say, God invites them to salvation upon Faith
and Repentance, yet this Condition is impossible, and made so by his own
Antecedent Decree, which first ordained their fall Oportuit ergo Deum quoque
hanc unicam viam sibi aperire, id est, Adami Lapsum ordinare, sed ad eum quem
dixi finem. Beza. in resp. ad S. Castle. de Praedest. in refutat. secundae
Calum. p. 361.
(as many Calvinists do teach) and then the denial of Sufficient and Necessary
Grace unto Faith and Repentance, as the whole Synod has declared; and thereby
they exclude all others Salvation.

Master Baxter goes on; [And if you quarrel not with a supposed exclusion but
an inclusion, then he that denies a necessity of salvation from the corrupted
Mass, may tell God he will not be beholding for such a mercy, and stand to the
venture] Here you are really guilty of a perverse insinuation, to render
Tilenus and his Doctrine odious to the world, whereof you falsely charge him in
other parts of your Preface. Sect. 6. and 16.
Why else should you hold forth such a supposition, if it were not to impose
upon your Reader, that Tilenus or the Remonstrants deny a necessity of
salvation from the corrupt Mass? Where do they say this? or what temptation
have you to suspect they think so? if you had no such intent, your [Inclusion]
might have been excluded, and so might the other branch of your distinction,
which follows in these words; [But if you mean it Exclusively, they profess
that Faith is the means of our Salvation, not only from the corrupted Mass,
but from Infidelity, and the Curse of the Law, and from damnation, and all the
sin that would procure it.] Before Master Baxter spoke of an Exclusion of
Persons; but now he comes to resume this Exclusion as the second branch of his
distinction, he speaks of an Exclusion of Things, which is not very
Artificial, in the way of discourse. But why do you profess Faith is the
means of our salvation, not only from the corrupt Mass, but etc.] Who said
only from the corrupt Mass? And surely the corrupt Mass is the Terminus a
quo, and if you be a Sublapsarian, you must conclude that as Man's Misery, so
Gods Mercy and Salvation must begin there; otherwise, if men be lest in the
corrupt Mass, till they arrive at final damnation, Faith will come too late
then to save them. 2. Here you separate Infidelity from the corrupt Mass, and
hereby you implyedly acknowledge, that we are not made guilty of Infidelity by
Adams sin, and consequently that men being Reprobated upon the account of this
sin, were Reprobated without any respect to their Infidelity, as Tilenus
charge the Synod, to hold, in his first Article. But why do you separate the
curse of the Law, and Damnation, from the corrupt Mass, as if this alone were
not sufficient to procure both, as your words insinuate; though I presume as
much contrary to your own sense as it is, most certainly, Cap. 1. Reject. 8.
to the doctrine of the Synod?

Master Baxter runs on in perverse Insinuations still, saying; 2. [If you think
that God does not cause Faith in us, you will not then pray for it, nor be
beholden for it.] I am so well assured that it is God that causes Faith in us,
(in the sense of Holy Scripture) that I account my self obliged, not only to
pray for the working and increase of it, but most humbly and heartily to thank
and bless him also for the Possession and benefit.

But, then says Master Baxter, If you yield that he causes it, but not by
such a power as you mention, you either think that God causes it without power
(which is an opinion that needs no censure) or that he has many Powers, and
causes one thing by one power, and another thing by another: which is as
unbeseeming a Divine or Christian to assert. Answ. It Is acknowledged that God
causes Faith, and that by his Power, which Power of his is one and the same
Omnipotency, essentially; but exerted and put forth to the production of
several effects, not like the Powers of Natural Agents, which Act Ad Ultimum
sui Posse, to their utmost strength, but in such a Proportion and Measure, as
seems meet to his All-wise Good pleasure, to allow every Agent in order to its
operation. For it is a certain Rule; Licet non possimus Deo tribuere virtutem
agendi Lmitatam, nil tamen vetat, quod influxus extrinsecus ab eo ortus, non
contineat omnem perfectionem possibilem in ratione influxus. Though God be
omnipotent, yet every influx of God is not omnipotent, for what is Omnipotent
is Infinite, and what is Infinite can neither be increased nor diminished. If
therefore every influx of God unto Second Causes were Omnipotent or Infinite,
no one Influx of the Divine Power could be more strong or forcible than
another. But let us hear Master Baxters Problem upon the point in these next
words; [Is not all the world of sober Christians agreed, that Omnis Potentia
Dei est Omnipotentia? Either God Causes faith by the same Omnipotency by which
he created the world, or else he causes it not at all: For he has no power
but one, and that is Omnipotency.] Here Master Baxter strains his wits to
palliate the Synods absurd Doctrine. To which end he confounds Gods essential
Power, which is Omnipotency, with the Egressions of the same Power to diverse
effects and purposes, which, as was proved even now, are more or less
powerful, as the wisdom of God is pleased to send them forth. But let us try
what use we can make of this captious way of arguing; and I shall infer from
this Position of M. Baxter, one of these two Conclusions* either, 1. That there
is no Sufficient Grace given to the Non-Elect, which is against M. Baxters
Doctrine; or 2. that those Non-elect can conquer Gods Omnipotency; which (to
use his words) is as unbeseeming a Divine or Christian to assert. Thus I argue;

Some power of God is exerted toward the Conversion of the Non-elect. All
power of God is Omnipotency. Therefore some Omnipotency is exerted toward
the conversion of the etc.
But that M. Baxter may not Cavil at the Form of the Argument, being in the
third figure, we will reduce it according to the Rules of Art; and 1. Ostensive.

All the Power of God is Omnipotency. Toward the conversion of the Non-Elect
is exerted some power of God. Therefore, to the Conversion of the Non-elect is
exerted some Omnipotency.
2. We will reduce it [Per Impossible.]

No omnipotency is exerted toward the conversion of the Non-elect. All power
of God is Omnipotency. Therefore, No power of God is exerted toward the
Conversion of the Non-elect.
Now Master Baxter may take his choice of these two Conclusions. If he says
there is no power of God exerted toward the conversion of the Non-elect; then
his sufficient Grace is vanished; for I presume he will not say that is
sufficient to an effect, which has nothing of Gods power in it. But if he
says the Omnipotency of God is exerted toward their Conversion; then seeing
they are not [de Facto] actually Converted, it will follow, that they can
insuperably resist, and prevail against Omnipotency; which (to take no
advantage) of the blasphemy of that assertion) if they can do, though they
shall be the greatest Rebels in the world, they will deserve to wear the crown
for their exceeding prowess.

This will awaken Master Baxter to the use of some of his Five senses, which,
to make a show and fill up the Muster, rather than for any great service in
this Controversy, are displayed in these words; [In these several senses it
may be said, that a thing is the effect of Omnipotency. 1. Properly and
strictly as denominating the cause. And so all that God does is the effect of
Omnipotency, even the life of a Fly; and therefore you cannot deny it of
Grace:] This I shall not Question. But 2. Improperly, as meaning that the Agent
does Act to the utmost of his Power, and could do no more: and thus never did
any Divine that was well in his wits say, that Grace is the effect of Gods
Omnipotency. 3. Improperly also as meaning that so much power as was put forth
in causing Faith, would have created a world; had it been that way employed.
And this cannot be their meaning, because sober Divines do not use to ascribe
several degreees of Power (unless [which is a good Reserve for you]
denominatively ab effectis) to God: and if they did, yet would they not pretend
to judge of the Scantling, and say, This work has more power, and this less:
especially in such Mysterious works:] Answ. 1. Whether the Divines of the Synod
were well in their wits, I shall not examine. It Is too evident that many of
their Followers are not, which is the fairest excuse that can be made for many
of their Doctrines and Practices. And whether they thought, that God did Act to
the utmost of his Power, and could do no more, in the conversion of a Sinner, I
shall not dispute neither. Nor shall I put any of their words upon the Rack to
force them to speak their meaning to be this, [That so much Power as was put
forth in causing faith, would have created a world, had it been that way
employed.] But whether their sobriety contained them from ascribing several
degrees of power to God, at least from implying them, and judging of the
Scantling, I shall leave to the interpretation of the Judicious and Impartial
Reader, having first set down their very words, which are these; Cap. 3. et. 4.
Reject. 8.
In the Regeneration of man, they say, God does, suae Omnipotentiae vires
adhibere, exert or employ the strength of his Omnipotency. They do not speak
here of Gods Essential power, which we doubt not to be Infinite, or
Omnipotent; but of the influx or emanations of it, applied to, or employed in
this work, and these, they say are [vires Omnipotentiae suae] the strength of
his Omnipotency. And he that denies this, they add, that he does [Actionem
Dei Omnipotentis subjicere voluntati hominis] subject the Action of the
Allmighty God to the will of man. Ibid. Art. 12.
Which Action or Operation, Virtute sua, nec creatione, nec mortuorum
resuscitatione minor, aut inferior, for the mightiness thereof (as the English
Translator has it) is not less, or inferior to the creation of the world, or
the resuscitation of the dead. If this be not a passing of Judgment upon the
scantling of Gods Power, I profess, I know not what Master Baxter means by it.
And I would fain be informed, whether, of the work of Special Grace in Gods
Elect, and the work of Common Grace in the Reprobate, we may not truly say,
That work has more power, and This less; which yet, says Master Baxter,
Sober Divines do not Pretend to judge of, especially in such Mysterious works.
But he sums up all in these word: [Gods will is sufficient to cause the thing
Willed: And the willing of Grace, will not cause a world, nor the willing of a
world, will not cause Grace.] Here 1. Master Baxter slips away from the
Question, which is not about the Object of Gods Will, but about the Influx of
his Power; For it is not the will of God Reduplicative, or quatenus Will, that
causes the Thing willed, but quatenus Potentia, as it is Power, as well as
Will. And we must not forget to take notice, that Things willed of Almighty
God, are either willed Absolutely, as his own works, or disjunctively and
conditionally, as Man's duty; Gods will alone is sufficient to cause the things
willed in the first sense, but not in the latter; And this, not because the
Will of God alone cannot, (at least if it does not imply a contradiction, to
say, God can do that which is Formally our Duty) but because alone, it will not.

But it is time to feel the pulse of Master Baxters fourth sense, which beats
thus, [4. Improperly, as only describing the degree of excellency in the
effects, as related to the Cause. As if they said, there is so much excellency
in this effect of Grace, that no Cause below Omnipotency, that is, below God
himself, could procure it. And he that denies this, let him prove if he can,
that any Creature without God, can Sanctify.] A very Profound Argument! I will
requite you with such another; Let Master Baxter prove, if he can, that any
creature can breathe or move one step without God: Ergo, therefore Omnipotency
is required to cause every Creature to fetch every haust of breath, and move
every step. But let us reduce M. Baxters Argument into form, and see what will
follow from it,

Whatsoever cannot be wrought without God, is wrought by omnipotency, or a
power not inferior to that by which God created the world, or raises up the
dead.

But Grace or Sanctification is not wrought without God.

Therefore, Grace or Sanctification is wrought by Omnipotency, or a power not
inferior to that whereby God created the world, or raises up the dead.

I deny the Major, That whatsoever cannot be wrought without God is wrought by
Omnipotency, etc. For i will assume upon that proposition; thus, Man cannot
breathe, nor set one step, nor perform any one natural action without God;
Does it follow therefore, that besides Gods General concourse, there is
required a Special omnipotent influx not inferior to that power whereby he
created the world or raises up the dead, to cause us to breathe and walk? Then
every breath we fetch, and every step we set, is irresistible, and cannot be
suspended or forborne. The Fallacy in these Arguings is A Dicto Simpliciter. God
is Omnipotent, does it follow therefore that the power which he exerteth, or
puts forth to cause Grace in us, is Omnipotent? If it be so, then God Acts
in this work, to the utmost of his power, and can do no more; and no Divine,
Our preaching and persuasion, and your hearing and considering, are the
appointed means, etc. Call to the Non-Converted, Preface. Joh. 17.17. Ephesians. 5.26.
that is well in his wits, will say so; as Master Baxter has acknowledged.
It Is true no creature, without God, can Sanctify: but God uses the creature
as his instrument and means to work Sanctification; Now are ye clean through
the word: and Sanctify them through thy truth; and Christ does sanctify and
cleanse his Church by the washing of water through the word: yet the word is
neither Omnipotent nor irresistible. And it is man's duty 2 Timothy 2.21. 1 Pet.
1.16.22. 1 John 3.3.
to sanctify himself, and as it is possible for him to perform, so it is
possible for him also to neglect it.

Master Baxters fifth sense is given us in these words; [And if only the
several effects are compared, as if the meaning were [the work of Grace does
more clearly demonstrate Omnipotency in the cause, then the creation of the
world] I have met with none that dares pretend to be a Judge in the comparison
or competition.] Then I have been more happy in this than you; for I have met
with a man that does more than pretend to it, one that has played the part of a
Judge in the comparison or competition; and I am sorry, you are no better
acquainted with him: but you may read his decision in the next words, which
tell us [In some respect the work of Grace demonstrateth Omnipotency more, as
being against more actual resistance: In other respects the creation
demonstrateth it much more.] Now how can we reckon this Judge amongst the
number of those Sober Divines, who you say, did never intend to make themselves
Hi sunt qui se ultro apud temerarios convenas sine divina dispositione
praestciunt, qui se Praepositos sine ulla Ordinationis Lege constituunt, qui
nomine Episcopatum dante Episcopi sibi nomen assumunt, sedentes in pestilentiae
Cathedra, etc. S. Cyprian. de unit. Eccles. page 23.
Judges (I wonder who else made you so) of these things, or trouble the Church
with disputes about them. This Assertion will argue want of Sobriety in some
body; let the Reader judge in whom.

In the mean while I shall proceed to Master Baxters 13. Section. Where I find
his Discourse ushered in again with a new Reproach cast upon Tilenus, whom he
upbraideth in this language; [ You slanderously say, etc.] Now at a venture, I
submit it to the Impartial Reader, to stamp the brand of Infamy, in an
indelible Character, upon the Forehead of him who is the greater slanderer of
the too, Tilenus or Master Baxter. But what is the slander? [ That the Synod
says, The Reprobates cannot accept it, viz. saving Faith;] How dares Master
Baxter call this a slander He does acknowledge it of them, in Sect. 36. of this
Preface.
which is so easily proved to be their Doctrine? That which is neither given to
them, nor designed for them, by Almighty God, Reprobi credere non possunt.
Gomarus, in Thesibus de Praedest. disp. 1604. these 32. Reprobos nec obedire
vocenti Deo, nec credere, nec resipiscere, nec justificari, nec salvari posse,
inquit Musculus, in locis Com. Loc. de Reprob.
that the Reprobates cannot receive, or accept: Faith and Repentance are
neither given to them, nor designed for them, by Almighty God: Therefore they
cannot receive or accept it.

The Major is proved by the words of the Baptist; Joh. 3.27. A man can receive
nothing except it be given him from above. The Minor is the Doctrine of the
Synodists; For if you examine their Suffrages, most of their Definitions or
Descriptions of Reprobation, do include the Denial of Grace Sufficient and
Necessary unto Faith and Repentance. But we need not be at that trouble to
find proof; for we have it amongst the very Decrees of the Synod. Cap. 1.
Artic. 15. They say, God Decreed to leave the Non-elect in the common Misery,
and not to bestow saving Faith and the Grace of Conversion upon them. And
Reject. 2. They reject it as an Error that troubled the Belgic Churches, That
an Election unto justifying Faith may be without peremptory Election unto
Salvation. And Cap. 2. Reject. 6. Whereas some, rather than others, are made
partakers of forgiveness of sins, and life eternal, They reject it as an
Error, [That this diversity depends upon their own free will, applying it
self to Grace indifferently offered: and not upon the singular gift of Mercy,
effectually working in them rather than others, that they may apply this Grace
unto themselves. By which Doctrine it is evident that this Faith is denied unto
the Reprobate, and consequently, that they cannot receive it, which is all I
intended to evince from it. By all which, and much more that might be alleged
to prove it, it appears that the Synod has the perfect sense, (and it is that
and not so much the numericall words) that Tilenus charge them with.

But says Master Baxter [They deny them no power but Moral, which is the
willingness Habitual it self;] Yes by your favor, they deny them
Supernatural Assistance Sufficient and Necessary for the Introduction of that
Supernatural Habit, from whence should flow (if it be at all) that Habitual
willingness, which you call Moral Power.

[But they knew that all had a Passive and obedientiall Power, and also a
Natural Active Power or Faculty of willing, and so far can Accept.] Answ. 1.
For your Obedientiall power, it is no more than what was in the first Chaos
toward the Production of the world; and you may with as much reason affirm it
possible for all Creatures sublunary, to have been educed or drawn out of that
Chaos without Gods Fiat, or Omnipotent word, as for Faith to be drawn out of
man's Obedientiall Power, unless God bestows a new supernatural power toward
the production of it. And for your Natural power, what proportion has that to
a Supernatural Act or Object? So little, or none at all, that Saint Austin
acknowledges, that the want of such Acts in reference to such objects, is not
culpable, but where a new sufficient power is conferred toward them. His words
are these, Lib. 3. de lib. Arbitrio c. 16.
Ex eo quod non accepit, nullus reus est; ex eo vero quod non facit, quod
debet, just reus est. Debet autem si accepit, and voluntatem liberam, and
sufficientissimam facultatem; No man is guilty for that which he has not
received; but upon this account, that he does not what he ought to do, he is
justly guilty. And he ought to do, if he has received a free will and
sufficient ability.

We may say of the Devils, as much as you do here say of the Reprobates; we
know they have a Passive Obediential, and also a Natural Active Power or
Faculty of willing, and so far can Accept (Grace). And the Divine Decree
makes no difference betwixt them, (as the Synod states it); for that is
irreversibly past against them both. But does God allow these Reprobates, (whom
he calls by his Gospel,) no more Grace and Power toward Faith and Repentance,
than he allows the Devils? you do not, you dare not affirm it; and yet you
affirm what is tantamount, if not worse; For what he does afford them, you
would say surely, if you had occasion, as well you insinuate (Sect. 15.) that
it is not with a purpose to Convert them. To what end is it administered then? I
am sure many, if not all the Synodists, do tell us, that it is to make them
inexcusable; by which Doctrine, God should deal more hardly by these men then
by the very Devils (as was said above) to whom as the benefit is in no sense
tendered, so the unavoidable refusal of it, does in no sort procure them, (as it
does those) the aggravation of their sin and torments.

But I must return to take notice what a pitiful Put-off Master Baxter is fain
to make use of, to save the Reputation of his own, and the Synods Doctrine. We
will illustrate it by this Similitude. Suppose a School to which are sent many
children; There is an Usher appointed to read a part of a Latin or Greek
Author to all these Children every day: and the head-Master culls out a small
number, to whom he privately communicates the Construction and way of Parsing,
and inculcates it with so much earnestness and affiduity that the meanest
capacity amongst them cannot but understand it; the rest, which are much the
major Part, are past-by and neglected, no care at all taken for their solid
institution. When notice is taken, and complaint made of this incongruous and
partial way of Instruction, according to the method whereof, those few
peculiar Favorites cannot refuse, the rest not receive the benefit, and
therefore had as good absent themselves from the School: An Impertinent person
undertakes the vindication of this School and the Master of it, telling the
Complainant, [You slanderously say, those children cannot receive benefit by
this way of teaching; for to my knowledge they have all their senses and
Natural faculties, for Discipline, as perfect as the other children.] When the
Question is about the helps and means administered on the Masters part, to
enable them to gain the Construction and way of Parsing the Authors read to
them; This Impertinent waves that which is the only thing in Question, and
falls a commending the Boys Natural Abilities, crying up their nimble eyes,
and quick ears, and faithful memories, and ready apprehensions. Just thus
does Master Baxter here; The Question is (not about the Habit of faith or
Moral disposition to believe, as Master Baxter suggesteth a little after, but)
about Necessary and Sufficient Grace for the begetting or acquiring that
supernatural Habit, or Spiritual Disposition. The Synod says, God does so
dispense this Grace, that the Elect cannot reject it, but the Reprobates cannot
accept it. No says Master Baxter, there is no reason to object this against
them; for they knew well enough the Reprobates [have a Passive and Obedientiall
Power, and also a Natural Active Power or Faculty of willing, and so far can
Accept.] What a piece of Sophistry is here! a mere Ignoratio Elenchi. M.
Baxter sets himself quite besides the cushion; And it would make one wonder to
observe, that men, who handling other points of Divinity make some show of
Learning and skill in the Arts and Sciences, when they come to dispute these
Controversies, should be driven to such evasions and fallacies, and are content
to serve themselves of these mean shifts, rather than abandon their beloved
errors.

But, says M. Baxter, [The Question is only of the Moral Disposition: And I
pray you, if you are a Christian (which is more sure, than that you are
charitable) or a man of Observation, tell us, Whether you think that an
Infidel has a Habit of Faith, or a Disposition of believing; or whether a
drunkard has a Habit or Disposition of Sobriety, or a whoremonger of Chastity,
or a worldling of heavenlinesse]. I think not. But give us leave to ask you
another Question; Whether an Elect Infidel, drunkard, whoremonger, worldling,
have the Habits or Disposition of Faith, Sobriety, Chastity, Heavenlinesse? Yet
these can and do accept (rather cannot refuse) Grace, the rest cannot accept
it. Is the Passive and Obedientiall power, and the Natural Active Faculty
alone sufficient hereunto in those Elect? No certainly there is something else
required. Therefore the Question is not only of the Moral Disposition, as you
say; for betwixt the Natural Active Faculty, and the Moral power which you
call Habitual willingness, there is a sufficient supernatural or spiritual
influx in order to the Acquisition For, Habitus Infusi se habent ad modum
Acquisitorum. And you say, Our new birth is a new creation ordinarily in
materia disposita. Of Saving Faith. page 40.
of that Habit or Dispositition. And I conceive the very Question is about this
influx and the degree of its Activity, in helping the Unregenerate to repent
and believe. In your Treatise Page 294.
of Conversion, you say, That Habitual willingness none has, but he that
has proportionably received that Grace that does effect it. There is then some
help to supply the defects of that Moral Disposition, or rather to work it,
through want whereof the Reprobate cannot have it. Excus. 22.
And in your Sermon of Judgment, you say, [ If we take Power Ethically, (and
who takes it otherwise in this Question, but such as love to lurk in
Ambiguities?) none but the effectually called have a power to believe.] The
Elect Drunkard, Whoremonger, Worldling, etc. cannot levy forces enough of his
own to subdue those Rebel lusts that fight against the soul. You confess God
is pleased to send them foreign insuperable aid, out of his Omnipotent and
irresistible Armies of Auxiliaries; And though the Principes and Triarii be
kept for a Grand Reserve to fall in to their succor when they are routed and
discomfited, (and we do not envy them that Assistance, but bless God for such
Gracious Supplies, understanding their great need, many times, as well as Gods
free liberty to show mercy) yet some of the Velites you might allow the
Reprobate, at least to balance the force of the enemy; And then being upon
such equal terms, (as the first Adam stood upon in Paradise, which I do not
understand in respect of Innocence, or, a present and immediate freedom from
the servitude of sin, and guilt of death; but in respect of a measure of Grace
proportionable to those temptations and infirmities they are to contest
against, which is that condition to which the second Adam is said to have
restored us) if they will not fight it out then, Romans 5.17.
and quit themselves like men, let them be led into captivity to the Law of
sin, till they perish in it. But it seems it is but a folly for them to expect
such Relief. They are required to bring in their tale of Brick, but no straw
will be allowed them: they must make a shift with such stubble as they can rake
up upon the Fallows of their own Nature; for so M. Baxter intimates in his next
words, which are these,

[The Synod never doubted but that men have the Natural Power of willing; and
what then can be moreover imagined to be in the will, besides the Moral
Inclination to will?] It Is true, if by [being in the will] you mean, as being
there by the Right, or improvement of Nature: but you have told us formerly of
a Sufficient Grace, Praef. Sect. 8.
bringing Christ and Salvation to the choice even of the worst that perish.
What is become of this Grace now? without this man has a Natural Active
Faculty of willing, and if that Grace superadded to it, cannot enable him to
will above Nature, that is, Graciously, or to Believe, what is the real
effect, purpose, and intent of it? I pray speak out, without any equivocation
or Mental Reservation. But your Sufficient Grace, as far as I can perceive,
is like those men, which deceitful Officers use to take up against a General
Muster, that the cheat of their dead Pays may not be discovered; they will
serve to make a show, and skirmish a little in a way of Pastime, but are never
engaged to fight. Thus you furnish out your Common Grace, (which you are
pleased to allow the Non-Elect) and if it be handsomely harnessed carrying a
bow, yet wanting string and arrow, like Ephraim it turns back in the day of
battle. Never was the body of sin vanquished, nor the soul of any one single
Christian crowned under the conduct of it. And therefore perhaps you thought,
you were as good to leave the Reprobate to their Natural Active Faculty
without that Assistance; which though they may Accept of, yet they cannot
improve to their salvation: It is of another sort, and designed to another end,
a means (not to save, but) to harden and render inexcusable, for accomplishing
the Decree of Reprobation.

But let us hear Master Baxters appeal, which he enters in these following
words; [ Now I dare appeal, says he, to any Reasonable man, whether these
vicious persons have holy inclinations to the contrary virtue? that is, whether
a wicked man be Habitually or dispositively a Godly man? This is the very
Question when you have driven it to the Head, about the power of unsanctified
men to Repent, Believe, Love God, etc.] To which what has been returned
already is sufficient to make it appear, that Master Baxter has not yet hit
the nail of the head in this Question.

But there are two things which I have observed to fall frequently from him in
his writings, to which I must apply an Answer.

1. That even the Reprobates may have Christ and life, Section 8.
or salvation, if they will.] But Antonius Thysius Ad Sum. Baron p. 38.
speaks more ingenuously, according to the Doctrine of the Synod, (whereof he
was a member); Multi salvi non fiunt, says he, non quia ipsi nolunt, sed quia
Deus non vult. Many are not saved, not because they are unwilling, but because
God wills not. And Contra Castle. page 102
Donteclock says, Duo ergo sunt qui nolunt, Deus and homo; There are two that
are unwilling, God and man. And Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. 24. n. 14.
, Quod igitur sibi patefacto Dei verbo non obtemperant reprobi, probe id in
malitiam pravitatemque cordis eorum rejicietur, modo simul adjiciatur, ideo in
hanc pravitatem addictos, quia justo, sed inscrutabili Dei judicio suscitati
sunt ad gloriam ejus sua damnatione illustrandam; That the Reprobates obey not
the Gospel of God, may very well be imputed to the malice and pravitie of their
own heart, so this be also added to it, that they are therefore addicted to
that pravitie (or naughtiness) because by the just, but unsearchable judgment
of God, they are raised up to set forth his glory by their Damnation. And
little less then this is employed, though very modestly, in Sect. 15. of M.
Baxters Preface.

The second Thing I must take notice of in Master Baxters Doctrine about this
Article is, That the Reprobates cannot, is no more then they will not, for thus
he says (Sect. 36. of this Preface) When the Synod says they cannot, (which
he told Tilenus even now, he slanderously charged upon them; yet now himself
finds it in them and expounds it thus) When the Synod says they cannot, they
speak but of a Moral Impotency, which is nothing else but Habitual
unwillingnesse, and so the cannot and the will not is the same thing] But Beza
In brevi explic. tot. Christian. c. 5 Aph. 4.
does distinguish them, and says, Nec volunt, nec etiam possunt; So does
Master Fenner; The Reprobates are not damned because they cannot (though they
cannot) says he, Cap. 3. and 4. Artic. 3.
but because they will not; And this is the very Doctrine of the Synod, They
say, [All men are conceived in sin, and born the children of wrath, untoward to
all good tending to salvation, forward to evil, dead in sins, slaves of sin;
and neither Will, nor Can, (without the grace of the holy Ghost regenerating
them) [which is denied to every Reprobate by this Synod] set straight their own
crooked nature, no nor so much as dispose themselves to the amending of it. And
both this Cannot and this Will not, when you have driven the Question to the
very Head, do flow by an inevitable Necessity, from the Divine Decree,
according to the Doctrine of the Calvinists, speaking even by the Synod; as was
showed above, in the Testimonies alleged in proof of the last branch of the
third Article; and as appears by the Decrees of the Synod it self; compare
Chapter 3, and 4. Artic. 3. with Chap. 1. Artic. 15.

In his next (which is the 14.) Section, Master Baxter runs on in his wonted
strain of accusation; for he tell Tilenus, [You wrong them also (and it is just
so, and no otherwise then formerly) in feigning them simply to say, that those
to whom God gives grace cannot reject it.] It were a strange Fiction I confess
to affirm, that they say simply, when it is so evident they speak so doubly and
equivocally upon all occasions. But does Master Baxter think that every Reader
will bring the Colliers faith, and follow him with a blind obedience in
whatsoever he please to impose upon him, if he be ushered in with a valiant
Calumny? If he understands Latin he will find the charge Tilenus brings
against them, acknowledged in the next words, which tells us, [ They say indeed
that, Post Dei operationem, (quoad ipsum) non manet in hominis potestate
regenerari vel non regenerari, etc.] What alters the case? is it Master Baxters
(for it is none of Tilenus's) Dictum simpliciter, or the Synod's, Secundum quid,
or, quoad ipsum, the first of which is a mere blind, and the other such an
insignificant Parenthesis that the English Translator thought fit to leave it
quite out in his Translation of those Decrees. It is a notable sign men are
ashamed of their opinions when they use such figg-leaf distinctions to cover
their nakedness. But it seems [quoad ipsum] would not do it; and therefore
Master Baxter makes it quoad ipsam, in his Descant upon the words, or the
Reason he renders to excuse them; which is this that follows, [ For, says
he, when effectual Grace has done its work, the man is regenerate already, or
else grace were not effectual: (do you give it that denomination ab eventu
then?) Besides, (says he) by [Power] here, they mean nothing but the
proportion of man's corruption and resisting disposition, (would any man
interpret it of man's virtue and cooperation?) compared with that Grace that
shall infallibly prevail against it.] What need these trifling
circumlocutions; you might have told us in one word, if you would have used
your Christian simplicity, that, the Masculine Omnipotency, and the Feminine
Irresistibility of the Synod, are so infallibly praevalent in this work, that
the Elect cannot reject it; which is that we contend to be the Synods meaning.
But, by the way, let the Reader take notice of the sincerity of this
Praevaricator. This Article of Tilenus is taken out of that very Decree of the
Synod (Cap. 3, and 4. Artic. 12.) which he professes, (in his Confession of
Faith, Vbi supra.
he cannot subscribe unto; yet here, he quarrels Tilenus about it, and
undertakes the vindication of it, by his slight Comments, and takes the
confidence by unworthy suggestions, to wrong him, under an unjust pretense that
he has wronged them. For evidence whereof, it will not be amiss to give the
Reader a more full view of their sense and meaning. The Belgic Professors say,
that Faith, De Art. 3, and 4. These. 6. p. 155. p. 3
by which we are first converted, and from which we are styled Faithful, is
not an Act, but a Habit infused of God: and that so Potent, that the will of
man cannot resist or hinder it. Ibid. p. 157. and those 4. Professors
subscribed these Rejections.
This is subscribed by Polyander, Gomarus, Thysius and Waleus; and approved by
Lubbertus; which Lubbertus rejects, amongst others, these two propositions, as
unsound opinions; 1. In hominis irregeniti Potestate esse, primam gratiam
accipere vel rejicere; That it is in the Power of the unregenerate to accept or
reject the first grace. 2. In hominis irregeniti Potestate esse, prima gratia
been vel male uti. It is in the power of an unregenerate man to use the first
grace well or ill. And the Divines of Part. 2. p. 153. m.
Wedderau say, that the Grace of the Holy Ghost, which effects faith (whether
it be done ordinarily or extraordinarily) is irresistible: That man neither
will nor can resist it, his vitiosity being conquered by the insuperable power
of God. Ita Britanni: ad hoc opus regenerationis habet se homo passive, neque
est in potestate voluntatis humanae impedire Deum sic immediate regenerantem.
That the will of man is merely Passive in this work. So that God is the
solitary Cause of the first Conversion. And does not the whole Synod subscribe
to this doctrine? They resemble this work to that Powerful operation of God,
by which he gives being to this our natural life. (Cap. 3, and 4. Art. 17.) A
work to the production whereof he imployeth his omnipotent strength. (Reject.
8.) A work for the mightiness thereof not inferior to the creation of the
world or raising up the dead, which God works in us, but (not with us, but,)
without us; an operation so carried on, that when God has done his part, it
remains not in man's choice, to be, or not to be regenerate; to be, or not to
be, converted; Art. 12. and Reject. 8.) From whence I argue thus; That work
wherein man is merely passive, which is wrought in him, but without him, like
his first birth, creation or resurrection from the dead, by Gods Omnipotent
strength; That work, or that Grace that works after this manner, he cannot
reject. But such is the operation, or Grace that effects his Regeneration, or
Conversion, according to the Doctrine of the Synod (as was alleged out of
their very words.) Therefore the Synod are not wronged, nor is Tilenus guilty
of a Fiction: But M. Baxter accountable for them both.

But, says M. Baxter, [For the manner of Gods operation, they confess it
such, as man cannot here comprehend, ibid. Sect. 13.] They were then very bold
men, so positively to define it to be insuperable, infrustrable, omnipotent,
irresistible; And was it done like Worthy Learned Divines to exauctorate,
persecute and banish, For it is well known, they were instigators in this work.
their Learned and Godly Brethren, for dissenting from them in the explication
of an Article, which they confess themselves unable to comprehend? These
things sound ill to impartial ears. Let us hear if the rest will sound any
better.

And Sect. 16. they tell you, says M. Baxter that [Sicuti post lapsum homo non
definit esse homo, in ellectu and voluntate praeditus, nec peccatum, quod
universum genus humanum pervasit, naturam generis humani sustulit, sed
depravavit and spiritualiter occidit: ita etiam haec divina regenerationis
gratia, non agit in hominibus tanquam truncis and stipitibus, nec voluntatem
ejusque proprietates tollit, aut invitam violenter cogit; sed spiritualiter
vivificat, sanat, corrigit, suaviter simul ac potenter flectit.] To this I
shall answer in the words of the Remonstrants, In respons. ad Epist.
Ministrorum Walachrian. p. 71.
printed a year before the Synod of Dort began. [At nullum hic discrimen datur
operationis divinae in homine and trunco, desumptum ex modo and efficacia
operandi, sed solum ex part subjectorum, hominis and trunci, inter quae
infinitum intercedere discrimen nemo inficiabitur, nisi qui truncus sit aut
stipes, ideoque quid mirum, si non possit truncus and stipes secundum modum
creaturae rationalis simul agere, sicut nec homo secundum modum creaturae
irrationalis (aut non rationalis?) Quod si ea quam Contra-Remonstrantes urgent
ratione Deus hominem convertat, nullum nos discrimen videre ingenue fatemur
inter hominis and trunci vivificationem. Cum enim in homine quamvis voluntate
praedito ita operetur ex ipsorum placitis Deus, ut non possit non voluntas
agere id quod agit, and sola Conversionis Causa sit Spiritus gratia, non
cooperante voluntate, and haec ex innato principio reluctans Spiritui ad
obedientiam tamen potentia cui resisti nequit flectatur, ita quidem, ut causa
istius actus dici non possit; certe non alium hunc esse agendi modum censemus,
quam si ex Lapidibus filios Abrahae esset facturus Deus, aut ex limo terrae
Adamum, aut si contra naturalem inclinationem molem aliquam saxeam sursum
attolleret. Breviter, non magis spontanee, nedum indifferenter, quod essentiale
est libertati, ad conversionem sui concurret homo, quam cum truncus aut lapis
motu non naturali a Motore impellitur. Thus far in answer to the Epistle of
the Walachrians; And in their Antidotum they say, Verum quidem est hominem non
esse truncum aut stipitem, Page 97.
manet enim homo intellectu and voluntate praeditus, sed tamen certum etiam est
cum non plus confer ad illam sui mutationem and conversionem, quam stipes aut
truncus ad sui tractionem, id est, esse tantum subjectum merum impressionem
recipiens, etc. And this is very roundly acknowledged by Amesius in his Medulla
Theol. (l. 1. c. 26. Th. 25. p. 135.) where he says, Voluntas respectu hujus
primae receptionis (Christi sc.), neque libere agentis, neque naturaliter
patientis rationem habet, sed obedientialis tantum subjectionis. (For the
Scripture (2 Cor. 4.6.) alleged to prove this assertion, it speaks of the
extraordinary Gifts of knowledge inspired into the Apostles, or the Revelation
of the mind of Jesus Christ to them by the Holy Ghost to fit them for the
service of the Church then a planting; and so makes nothing to that purpose for
which he does so frequently produce it. This by way of caution; to return;) And
Maccovius In Colleg. Misc. quaest. disp. 1. in Corollar. mihi. 410.
is no less Positive in the point than Amesius; Hoc non est crude asserere, ut
lapis se habet ad carnem, sic irregenitus ad regenitum. The sum of all is
this; The Synod alleages, that (however, they state the Question) they teach
that Regenerating Grace does not work upon men, as if they were stocks and
stones. The Remonstrants on the other side acknowledge a vast difference in
respect of the Subjects; a man is not a stock or a stone, nor a stock or a
stone a man; one has sense and reason which the other has not; and therefore
no wonder if they do not Act alike: But withal, they say, if the Conversion or
Regeneration of man be wrought after such a manner as is taught by the Synod,
they can see no difference in the Manner and efficacy of the operation, from
that, Si homo minime liberi arbitrii filius est, atque ideo non potest, diversa
eligere, sed necessario semper manet quod est, quasi lignum vel lapis in seipso
subsistet naturae vinculis non arbitrii liberate unitus. Cyr. Alex. Thesaur.
lib. 3. c. 2.
whereby God should of stones raise up children unto Abraham; For what higher
expressions could stocks and stones thus transformed into childrens use, than
to say, God employed his omnipotent strength in our transformation; and it was
effected in us, but without us, and that by an operation for mightiness not
inferior to that whereby God created the world and raises up the dead, and it
was so carried on that when God had done his part, it remained not in our power
to be, or not to be, thus transformed into children of Abraham? The case is
plain enough. But then there is a Quaere, whether this work can properly be
called a Duty, and a wise God account it Laudable and rewardable in these sons
of Transformation; and whether upon any score of Justice he can impute it for a
fault to those other stones, that lie still in the high ways, untransformed,
and adjudge them to an intolerable curse, and subject them to an implacable
vengeance (could they be sensible of it) because they are not obedient to such
an Almighty operation, though never put forth toward their change. This is the
very Question, whether Master Baxter will, or will not understand it. But I
shall tell him Saint Austines judgment, who says thus, Lib. de duab. Anim.
contra Man. c. 10. Cap. 12. ib.
De quo nesciente, vel resistere non valente quispiam quidpiam mali fecerit,
just damnari nullo modo potest. And again, Peccati reum teneri quenquam quia
non fecit quae facere non potuit, summae iniquitatis est and insaniae. It is a
part of the highest iniquity and madness to hold one guilty, because he has
not done that which he had no power to do.

By what is said already we may give judgment of the truth of Master Baxters
Inferences which follow in these words; [So that you see they deny not Natural
Freewill, which is a Power of Choosing or Refusing, but Moral Freewill, which
is a Spiritual Inclination:] This is fairly spoken: But for my part, I am not
so quick sighted; I cannot see, but they deny the exercise at least of Natural
Freewill in the work of Man's Conversion, unless [Non manet in hominis
Potestate regenerari vel non regenerari] must signify, that man has a Power
of Choosing or Refusing; and if he has so, then it lies in his power to be or
not to be, Regenerated; which is rejected by the Synod as an error Cap. 3, and
4. Reject. 8. And how can they refuse an omnipotent operation?
. That they have a Natural Freewill, which is a Power of Choosing or Refusing
in Natural or Civil matters, is very truly granted: but it is nothing to the
purpose.

But let us follow him, to hear the end of his discourse, which proceeds thus,
[ And so they deny not in the Regenerate the Natural Power of sinning and
resisting grace, (much less in the elect unregenerate.] I thank you for
nothing. This is what they dare not deny for shame of the world. Common
experience is such a Confutation of that Doctrine, (should they or you deliver
it,) as would admit of no Reply. But why do you kindle such an Ignis Fatuus
before your Reader; unless it be to blind or dazzle his eyes, while you lead
him from the Quaestion, that he may take no notice of the pitiful Subterfuges
The Question is only this; Whether God does infuse Faith and Repentance, into
man's will by a strength and operation irresistible?
you are driven to?

You say, They deny not in the Regenerate the Natural Power of sinning and
resisting grace, (much less in the elect unregenerate) (so you told us: what
then?) but only that this Power, or any ill disposition of theirs, shall
eventually frustrate the Grace that comes from a Resolution to renew them.]
This is comfortable news for all such Elect, if true; but Master Baxter and
the Synod may be mistaken in their Intelligence, and therefore every man that
tenders his everlasting safety, had best not depend upon it. The Reasons of
this advice are given before. But here the Reader may take notice, that the
common sufficient Grace, which Master Baxter puts such a face upon, (to speak
to him in his own language) saying it brings Christ and life to man's choice,
and they deny it not to the worst that perish, This Grace, I say, is like to do
them but a little good; it must needs perish with the Receivers; for it comes
not from a Resolution to renew them; And therefore as good never a whit, as
never the better for the coming of it. And yet to assure us this fell not from
Master Baxters pen unadvisedly, we have as much employed in the next, which is
the fifteenth Section, which shuts up the fourth of Tilenus's Articles.

This Section advances upon the Reader after this manner; [ I would at this
time only ask you, whether every Jesuit will not confess that God did from
Eternity Foreknow who would Believe and Repent, and who not?] When you come to
be Ghostly Father to men of that Society, you may vouchsafe to put the Question
to them your self, and it is very probable, without the seal of secrecy, they
will confess thus much to you. But what then? [If so, then whether it be a
rational Conceit, that God in sending Christ to die, and the Word and Spirit
to convert men, has as full a purpose that these shall be effectual to
convert and save them, that he foreknew from Eternity would never be converted
or saved, as them that he foreknew would certainly be converted and saved?] To
which Question I Answer, 1. That it is more modestly propounded than Maccovius
his Stultus foret (Christus) si finis esset unus pulsandi, In Col. de Prad.
disp. 15 p. 49.
ut intraret. It were a foolish thing in Christ, to call them unto Conversion,
whom he foreknew would never be converted, if one end of his calling were, that
they might be converted. Master Baxter says not so. He will not speak so
broadly: but he asks, whether it be a rational conceit, etc. 2. The word
[effectuall] is equivocall; It may signify de facto and eventually prevailing
and irresistible; or it may signify so powerful an administration as will
take effect, if man does not oppose a new contumacie to check and hinder it.
Here we may not admit it in the former, but in the latter sense only. 3.
Master Baxter seems in these words to establish Gods Purpose, as to Conversion
and Non-conversion, to Salvation and Non-salvation with the effectual means
thereof upon Gods Foreknowledge; if he does so, as to his Decrees of Election
and Reprobation we should soon agree. But this he does not. 4. Those words
[hath as full a purpose] are ambiguous. Do you mean as steadfast a purpose? I
suppose you will not so interpret it; for God does not use lightness in his
purposes, which the Apostle did not like to be thought guilty of. 2 Cor. 1.17.
Do you mean that this Purpose is Absolute as to some, but Conditional to
others? or if Conditional to All, yet that that Condition is intended to be
wrought irresistibly in some, but made impossible to the rest? If this be not
your meaning, I am not able to divine what it is. It is as far from my
apprehension, as Nebuchadnezzars dream was from the notice of the Astrologers.
But I will have recourse to some Daniel or other, to whose spirit Master Baxter
may be Familiar, and by that means perhaps we may find out the Interpretation.
Calvin (in Ezekiel. 18.23.) says, Sed notandum, Deum duplicem personam induere;
That God, in calling sinners, puts on a double person. And Donteclock says,
Quantum abest a Dei proposito ac sincera intention servare eos, quos per totam
vitam ipsorum nunquam vocat, tantum ab ejusdem proposito ac intention abest,
Reprobos, qui vocantur, salvos facere. Ad Script. Anon. lit. k. 3. And Piscator
says, Interim ex Dei verbo constat, Deum etiam Reprobos aliquos ad salutem
vocare, and interim tamen non velle, ut ullus Reproborum salvus fiat, quippe
quos omnes immutabili Decreto ad exitium destinavit. Contra Schafm. praf. page
7. God calls some of the Reprobates to Salvation, but he wills not that any one
of them be saved; because he has, by an immutable Decree, destined them to
destruction. And ( These. 120:) Nempe hoc vis dicere, Deum quod lingua
profitetur, idem and velle, At id non semper, nec in omnibus verum est. God
does many times profess one thing with his mouth and intend another. And These.
83. Et si Deus non semper vult, quod se velle significat, nequaquam tamen (...)
vitio contaminatur. Though he speaks one thing and wills another, yet is he not
defiled with hypocrisy. But according to this Doctrine, God, though he calls
them, he cannot seriously intend or will their Salvation, having Antecedently
and immutably willed and decreed their Reprobation. Neither can he seriously
will or intend their faith and repentance. For their Reprobation from Faith and
Repentance follows unavoidably their Reprobation from Salvation; so that whose
salvation God seriously wills not, their faith and repentance he cannot will
seriously, lest he should seriously will things contrary and disagreeing. But
says Martinius, with much reason, Vbi supra.
Quomodo ex beneficio, sufficient quidem, at mihi non destinato per veram
intentionem, deducetur necessitas credendi quod illud ad me pertineat? If the
benefit though never so sufficient, be not really intended and designed for me,
how can a necessity be imposed upon me to believe that it belongs unto me?
Master Perkins distinction offers its service to this cause, De Praedest.
and it is most exactly consonant to their Doctrine Though it no way satisfies
Martinius his argument.
; [Every man within the Pale of the Church, says he, is bound by the tenor of
the Gospel, to believe himself redeemed by Christ, whether he be Elect or
Reprobate; but upon a different account. The Elect is bound to believe it, ut
credendo electionis particeps fiat; that by believing he may be made partaker
of the benefit of Election: The Reprobate; ut non credendo, fiat inexcusabilis,
etiam ex intention Dei; that by not believing he may become inexcusable; and
this according to Gods intention. And in his book [ De libera Gratia and libero
hominis Arbitrio, page 48.] he says, The commandment of Faith and Repentance,
is, to such as are ordained to eternal life, a Precept of Obedience, because
God does enable and confirm them to perform it: To the rest, it is a Commandment
only for their trial and conviction; that their sin may be detected, and all
occasion of pretense taken away. Thus therefore, when faith is commanded, and
yet the gift of Faith, [or power of Believing] not conferred, Deus minime
ludificatur, sed homines incredulitatis, idque in justitia sua, redarguit
convincitque; God does not mock, but in his righteousness, he does reprove and
convince men of unbelief. And Maccovius delivers his mind as fully, Colleg.
disp. 2. page 7. and disp. 15. page 49.
That God in Commanding men to come unto him (which is to believe in him, and
to be converted) though he wills not that they should come, yet he Acts
herein very seriously, because he has a fourfold end, hereby to be
accomplished upon them, (though he does not propound their obedience for any of
them) 1. ut explorentur; 2. ut convincantur; 3. ut exprobret illis impotentiam;
4. ut condemnationem in illis augeat. 1. To try them; 2. To convince them; 3.
To upbraid them with their impenitency; and 4. To augment their condemnation.
By these Lights I presume we may see to read Master Baxters meaning, and gain
the perfect sense of his [Rationall conceit] and his [as full a Purpose, etc.]
namely that God has other designs and ends to serve upon them; and therefore
in sending Christ to die, and the word and Spirit to be administered, he has no
purpose at all that these shall be effectual to convert and save them, they
come not from a resolution to renew them. And this is the sum total that
Master Baxters Passive obedientiall Power, and his Natural Active Faculty, and
his Sufficient Grace, that brings Christ and life (as he says) to every man's
choice, do amount unto.

5. God certainly foreknew the Non-conversion of these men, you speak of, to be
a sin of ingratitude and perverseness, of Contumacie and Rebellion, and
decreed therefore to damn them for it. And if he did foreknow their sin to be
such, then he did also consider them under such a dispensation of means, as
might possibly render them ungrateful, perverse, contumacious and Rebellious.
But if in se^ding Christ to die, and the word and Spirit to convert them, he
has no purpose that these shall be effectual to convert and save them, then
these Non-converted cannot be ungrateful, perverse, contumacious, or
rebellious. Do you think God in his foreknowledge can look upon men as
obstinate and ungrateful toward the tendries of his Grace, unless he sees
also that such Grace has been seriously intended and offered to them for their
Conversion? If he sends not his Preachers with a serious and gracious intention
and purpose to save them, and, in order thereunto, to hinder or recall them
from a course of Rebellion and obstinacy, how is it possible his Goodness
should find a will to convince them of Rebellion and ingratitude; and not
being convicted, what Right can so pure a Justice find, to proceed against
them, in judgment, as persons obstinate and ungrateful, when he never had a
serious intention to save them, or to free them from such Rebellion and
obstinacy? For what ingratitude can there be against a Person, that has no
will to do a benefit, but only a will to seem to do it? What obstinacy can
have place against him, that calls not out of a purpose to save, or with an
intention to benefit? No man can be ungrateful toward a Cruel Hypocrite. No
man can be obstinate against an unmercifull Deluder. And is it not a Cruel
Hypocrisy and an unmercifull Delusion, to carry a will of seeming to convince
those persons of Ingratitude and Obstinacy, for their rejection of Grace and
favor, whom we have Antecedently, for some fault of their Ancestors imputed to
them, secluded from all the salutary effects and benefits thereof, with a
design and purpose, to take advantage of the next plausible pretense to ruin
them? Can the odious crimes of ingratitude and obstinacy have place in such a
case? The Jews might with as good reason have condemned our Savior of
Ingratitude and Obstinacy against that invitation to accept their faith and his
own deliverance, when, having first nailed him to it, they, in mockery, cried
out to him, Come down from the Cross, and we will believe on thee. What is
offered in a lusory way, or only tendered to render us inexcusable, nothing in
the whole world can be more excusable, then to reject it Neque enim ea fingi
potest homines reddere inexcusabiles per verbum and Spiritum vocatio, quae eo
tantum fine exhibetur, ut reddat inexcusabiles. Suffrag. Brit. de 3, and 4.
Art. these. 3. page 129. par. 2.
. We are not wont to beat our children but to commend their ingenuitie, when in
such cases they turn Recusants. I hope we will allow Almighty God to be full as
equal, if not an infinitely more indulgent Father than man is.

Master Baxter shuts up his discourse upon this Article with these words, [And
will not most of your most odious inferences fall upon your own Doctrines, if
you confess Gods Foreknowledge, as well as upon theirs that maintain his
Decree of giving effectual Grace to some.] I pray what are those odious
inferences you mean, that are drawn from Gods Decree of giving effectual grace
to some? and who are they that have drawn them? name the Persons, and produce
the Inferences. Who denies God a liberty to dispense what undeserved favors he
pleases, and to whom he pleases, and in what measure or proportion he
pleases? I know no man repines at it, or disputes against it. Hereby, had he
pleased so to Reveal and communicate himself, he had done great benefit to
them, and no injury to others.

The odious inferences are drawn, or rather of themselves do follow, from that
which Master Calvin called an Horrible Decree, from your Doctrine of
Reprobation; wherein you teach, That God, for the Sin of Adam, denies All Grace
that is Sufficient and Necessary to salvation, to the far greatest part of
mankind; and yet decrees in the very self same Act to torment them for want of
it; and that notwithstanding, he invites them with the greatest shows of
seriousness and earnestness, and the highest expressions of Love and
indeerement, to embrace it. These Master Baxter are some of the Inferences that
strike so deep into the face of Gods justice and sincerity, and that makes them
so odious and distasteful; and this is the ground of that practice so
frequently taken up by your Party, in their writings, as well as by your self
in this place; you throw out, before your Readers eyes, the Lure of Effectual
(meaning irresistible) Grace, and infrustrable Perseverance, and infallible
Assurance, (the greatest certainty whereof lies in the strength, not of your
Arguments, but your Confidence) to draw him off from the deep Resentment of
those other Inferences which are really abominable, if not blasphemous.

But, hark you, Master Baxter, one word more before we leave this point. Are
you sure that such odious inferences will fall upon our Doctrine, upon the
Concession of Gods Foreknowledge, as falls upon yours, upon the Position of
such Decrees? Why, according to your Doctrine of Decrees, things are therefore
future, because they are decreed: but according to ours of Foreknowledge,
things are therefore foreknown, because they are future. Zanchy says (as was
showed above) that by the immutable Reprobation there is incumbent upon the
Reprobate, a necessity of sinning, and that even unto death, without
repentance, and of suffering eternal punishment for it. And Piscator says,
the Rebellion of the Reprobate depends upon the Antecedent, Absolute, and
irresistibly Efficacious will of God; This Immutable Decree with that
irresistible means Which are inseparably tied together. Hence the Divines of
Wodderan, say, that sin comes to pass of necessity, in respect of the Decree,
and the good end intended. De cap. 38. and 4. page 154. par. 2.
appointed in order to its executions, does make an Antecedent Causall
Necessity; But the Foreknowledge of God does not so, and therefore the Liberty
of man's will does very well consist with this Foreknowledge, though it cannot
with that Decree. Nequaquam recte intelligenti haec repugnare videntur,
Praescientia quam sequitur necessitas, and libertas arbitrii a qua removetur
necessitas: quoniam and necesse est quod Deus Praescit, futurum esse, and Deus
Praescit aliud aliquid esse, sine omni necessitate, says Anselmus. That is, In
Concordia:
Foreknowledge which inferrs necessity, and Freewill which rejects necessity,
are no way repugnant: because both what God foreknows, is necessary to be
future, and God foreknows the futurition of many things to be without any
necessity. But you will say, whether God foreknows me to sin or not to sin,
it is necessary that I do, according to Gods Foreknowledge, else his
foreknowledge should not be infallible, which were absurd to affirm. To this
Anselm answers; You ought not to say, [God foreknowes that I will sin, or not
sin, but God foreknows that I will sin or not sin without any necessity]: and
so it fellows, that whether thou sinnest or sinnest not, it will be without
necessity: because God foreknows it to be future, without necessity, and so it
must be. Gods foreknowledge therefore does not oppose or take away contingency
or liberty from second Causes, but establish them. It does not press upon the
will a necessity of future Acting: but only extends its notice to all her
future motions, which are free, and it supposes them to be such. And therefore
although the futurition of things be necessary upon Gods Foreknowledge; yet
that Necessity is not effective, but only illative. The things foreknown are
supposed to have a being before, and not to derive their being from that
foreknowledge. Ideo enim quia ponuntur res esse, Ibid. Anselm.
dicuntur ex necessitate esse, aut quia ponuntur non esse, affirmantur non esse
ex necessitate: non quia necessitas cogat, aut prohibeat rem esse, aut non
esse. Nam cum dico: si erit, ex necessitate erit, hic sequitur necessitas quae
rei positionem non praecedit. Idem valet si sic pronuncietur. Quod erit, ex
necessitate erit. Non enim aliud significat hic nisi quia quod erit, non
poterit simul non esse; thus Anselm. Whereby it appears that Gods Foreknowledge
does suppose the operation of the will, as future, and therefore the necessity
arising from thence is but a Consequent Necessity. He says the same of
Predestination upon Foreknowledge, Ibid.
[Quaedam Praescita and Praedestinata non eveniunt ea necessitate, quae
praecedit rem and facit, sed ea quae rem sequitur. Some things Foreknown and
Predestined, do not come to pass by that Necessity, which Praecedes the
thing and is the cause of it, but by that which does follow it. I refer the
Reader for his satisfaction in this Particular, to Doctor Hammond [Of
Fundamentals; page, 160, 161.] but for M. Baxter i will commend him to writings,
that are of more Authority with him. In his Treatise of Conversion, he says,
[What if I could foretell, from the obstinate wickedness of such a thief, or
such a drunkard, that he will never be cured: Is it long of me because I
foreknew it? What if the Prophet foretells Hazael what cruelty he shall commit
on the children of Israel, is the Prophet therefore the cause of it?] And in
his Sermon of Judgment, he says, [Must God either be ignorant of what you
will do, Excuse 26.
or else be the cause of it? If you foreknow that the Sun will rise to
morrow, that does not cause it to rise. If you foreknow that one man will
murder another, you are not the cause of it by foreknowing it. So is it here.]
The short is, Gods foreknowledge has no such influence in drawing men on,
either to Presumption or desperation; because it makes no such Provision of
insuperable or irresistible means, to carry on the work of salvation or
damnation respectively, as that Decree is supposed to do. And thus much in
vindication of Tilenus his fourth Article.

Reflections upon Section XVI. and Article V.
THe fifth feigned Article of Tilenus is, (says Master Baxter) [That such as
have once received that Grace by Faith, can never fall from it, finally or
totally, notwithstanding the most enormous sins they can commit] This also
says, he, is in his own abusive language, and not in theirs, whose words
concerning falling away are [Quod quoad ipsos, etc. that is, In regard of
themselves (it,) not only full easily might, but doubtless would come to
pass: yet in respect of God it cannot so fall out; since neither his Counsel
can be changed, nor his promise fail, etc.] 1. I desire the Reader to take
notice, that this Pretending Vindicator of the Synods Doctrine professes [in
his confession of Faith] That he cannot subscribe to four of their Canons upon
this Head of Perseverance. 2. The Synod acknowledges that the Faithful
sometimes by Gods just Permission are carried away into grievous and heinous
sins: which the lamentable falls of David, Peter, and others of the Saints,
described unto us in the Scripture, evidently show. Art. 4. and Art. 5. They
say, Now, by such enormous sin, they greatly offend God, incur the guilt of
death, grieve the Holy Spirit, break off the exercise of faith, most grievously
wound the conscience, now and then, for a time lose the sense of Grace; Yet
Art. 6. they say, That God who is rich in mercy, according to the unchangeable
purpose of election, does not wholly take away his holy Spirit from (them), no
not in their grievous slips, nor suffer them to wander so far, as to fall away
from the grace of Adoption, and state of justification. And Art. 8. By Gods
free mercy they obtain thus much, that they neither totally fall from Faith and
Grace, nor continue to the end in their falls, and perish. Is not this the same
Doctrine that Tilenus charge them with, to a very tittle? Where then is the
Fiction or abusive language. Did it fall from Tilenus, or Master Baxter? He
could not choose but see these clear assertions; for those cited out of the
eighth Article, usher in his, [Quoad ipsos,] and there was something in it,
that he slipped over them, and would not direct us to the place quoted by
himself. But it is usual with these men wilfully to mistake or wave the true
state of the Question; The Question is, An vere Fidelis, ad quem in fide
conservandum Deus a part sua facit, quantum salva aequitate facere potest, a
vera fide excidere possit.
and we have reason to suspect, that it is upon design, when men use such
Artifice, to lead honest Passengers out of the right way. And so it is here;
For what is the meaning of [Quoad ipsos indubie fieret?] What I That in regard
of themselves they would undoubtedly fall away? It Is impossible. If his
Apostasy cannot happen in respect of God, much less in respect of man; for if
God will so invincibly preserve him in the faith, man cannot hinder him.
For [quoad ipsos] take them in themselves, and they are not up; they are low
enough, if you consider them without God:

Qui jacet in terram, non habet unde cadat. But to make the impertinency of
that distinction [Quoad ipsos] more evident, I shall give you an illustration
of it in this example. Suppose a man being to play a prize for his life, upon a
Stage erected to that purpose; his friend should come to one, who pretends to
understand exactly the strength and structure of the work, and demand of him,
whether his Friend, who is to venture his life upon that Stage, might not
possibly fall through it; should he return this answer, That in regard of the
ponderosity or weight of his own body (which has a natural tendency to the
Center) he might fall through: but in regard of the strength and stability of
the Stage, made on purpose to support him, it was impossible. Would you not
think this a very impertinent and ridiculous distinction, in answer to a
serious Question touching a man's (especially if it were eternal) safety? Yet
such is the distinction Which turns sensum compositumin sensum divisum.
here used by the Synod and repeated, as an excellent Save-All, by M. Baxter.
Why I divide a man from communion with Almighty God, and take him off the stage
and supports of his Grace, designed to buttresse and prop him up, and the man
is not so much as upon his legs, he is at least as low as Adam laid him; and
then in that capacity, it is ridiculous to ask, Whither he cannot fall? The
Question here is, whether a man, as he is (set actually upon the stage) in the
state of Grace, can fall away finally or totally. A clear Categorical Answer
might be given in one single syllable, Affirmatively or Negatively; Ay, or No.
Let us therefore have the truth uttered roundly and clearly, and away with all
equivocations and trifling distinctions, that serve for nothing but to palliate
a bad Cause, and amuse the Reader, casting a mist before his eyes, that he may
take no notice of the absurdity that follows the opinion we have espoused.

But (as Master Baxter goes on) because Gods purpose is unchangeable, etc.
therefore necessitate consequentiae at least you must confess your selves that
it follows that the Elect must necessarily persevere; and so there is a
Logical or Moral impossibility of their Apostasy.] A consequent Necessity of
Perseverance, which is inferred from Gods Foreknowledge of it, we shall not
deny you. We know of no inconvenience, much less absurdity, that will follow
it; because that Necessity does no way infringe, but suppose the vital
operation of the will freely determining it self, by the assistance of Grace,
ab intrinseco, and so makes Perseverance a duty considered as future, in Gods
Foreknowledge: but such a Necessity as follows from an Absolute Decree, and
that determining Grace, which flows from it, we deny; because that Necessity,
in order of Nature and Causality, is Antecedent to the operation of the will,
and does, according to your Doctrine, irresistibly effect it; and so turns
Perseverance into an Absolute free Gift of God in stead of being a free duty of
man. And it is this you contend for, and not the other only; for in your
[Account of Perseverance] you say, Page 36. 37.
1. We must distinguish between an Impossibility in re and extra rem, or a
causis intrinsecis, or a causis extrinsecis or else accidental. It is
possible, you say, that true grace be lost, if you speak of a possibility a
causis intrinsecis and de natura rei; that is, the Habit and subject together.
But it is impossible that it should be totally and finally lost, if you also
respect the extrinsick causes: And this both per impossibilitatem
Consequentiae; because it is not possible that these propositions should be
both at once true. [God wills absolutely or foreknoweth that Peter will
persevere,] and [Peter will not persevere] (And yet this following is
reconcilable with the first [it is possible in natura rei for Peter to fall
away.] And also 2. Per impossibilitatem Causae, First, because God has not
only Decreed the Perseverance of the Sanctified, but also the Holy Ghost has
undertaken it as his special charge. Secondly, And the Faithfulness of God
(as far as I can yet understand) is by his promise engaged for the Perseverance
of all the truly Justified and Sanctified Believers. It is not therefore such
a Logical Impossibility of Apostasy, that the Synod and you contend for. But
of this Question we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. In the mean
time, let us consider your Interrogatory in the next words; wherein you demand,
[ Will not any Jesuit confess this, that All that (suppose on foreknowledge)
God electeth to salvation, must necessitate consequentiae infallibly be saved?
No doubt, they will: and some of them much more,] We have told you already,
which you know well enough, that that Necessity Consequentiall upon Gods
foreknowledge, does suppose the operation of man's will as determined freely of
it self, not as begotten or effected of another; And this as it implies no
inconvenience, so it breeds no controversy: But you love not to be tied to the
true state of the Question, lest you should lose your license of Sophistry and
dawbing, which is here very palpable. In your [Account of Perseverance] now
mentioned, Page 14.
you deliver it as the opinion of the Ancients, Jesuits, Arminians and
Lutherans, that they deny an absolute personal Election of men to Faith and
Perseverance, and so maintain indefinitely a total and final falling from a
state of Justification, without excepting such Elect themselves. But a little
after, you add [ Yet note, that the Jesuits themselves may confess that the
Elect shall none of them finally fall away, but shall all persevere. But that
is, because they hold that Election is upon foresight of Perseverance; and so
that these Propositions [This man is Elected] and [This man shall not
Persevere] are inconsistent as to their truth. But they do not make Election,
or differencing grace, the cause of Faith and Perseverance. This being most
undoubtedly true, the Reader must needs conclude, that their Authority is very
impertinently alleged for the justification of yours and the Synods Doctrine.

In your XVII. Section, you tell Tilenus, [Your addition is a perverse
insinuation [notwithstanding the most enormous sins they can commit.] How
readily ill language flows from this supercilious froward man! [A perverse
insinuation!] Why? The Synod does profess it; as was evidenced above, out of
their very Canons; and your self acknowledge as much, as soon, as ever you had
evaporated your Bilious passion. Is it a perfect truth in your mouths, and [a
perverse insinuation] when it falls from the pen of Tilenus? Does his quill
stain it more then yours? Why a perverse insinuation? [It seems, you say, to
intimate.] If it does but seem to intimate, happily it may not really intimate.
But what? [That they may commit as enormous sins as others, (this were a very
perverse insinuation indeed, especially if we take in what follows) and yet not
fall away: But why have you changed Tilenus his bare assertive [notwithstanding
the most enormous sins they can commit] into a comparative expression [that
they may commit as enormous sins as others?] Comparisons you know are odious,
especially such as are made betwixt your selves, and such others, as some of
your Party are too apt to account Reprobates, for no other Reason, than that
they cannot digest your rigid doctrine of Reprobation. But cannot the (once)
Faithful commit as enormous sins as others? What think you of Adultery and
Murder? or if they be not enormous enough, Of Idolatry, etc.
then what think you of * execrations of a man's self and Perjury, and these
repeated over and over to gain belief in the denial of the Son of God? Such
sins the Regenerate may fall into. But yet the Synod says, they cannot fall
into so enormous sins as others; Cup. 5. Art. 6.
for they cannot commit the sin unto death, or against the Holy Ghost; so as to
be altogether forsaken of (God), and throw themselves headlong into everlasting
destruction; and therefore they cannot fall away. But is not M. Baxter himself
guilty of a perverse insinuation here? Do not his words intimate, that, at
least, if they commit as enormous sins as others, they do fall away? This must
be the meaning of his words, if there be good sense in them. But then his next
words contain such a poor ordinary piece of Sophistry, as every Freshman that
has but looked upon Burgerdicius's Logic, would discover. It Is the Fallacy
called Ignoratio Elenchi; a mistaking of the Question. Observe how his
discourse runs, [ It seems, says he, to intimate, that they may commit as
enormous sins as others, and yet not fall away: when the Synod holds that in
committing gross sins, they fall into a present incapacity of Salvation.]
Tilenus Asserts, [the denial of a final and total falling away,] to be the
doctrine of the Synod; Master Baxter seems to conclude against it, but omits
the Condition that should make his conclusion a Contradiction to the Assertion;
for he tells us, upon their commission of gross sins, they fall into a
present incapacity of Salvation; but this does not contradict the thing in
Question, [their final and total falling] which the Synod peremptorily
denies, just as Tilenus has charged them in this Article; and so Master Baxter
professes in the very next words, which tells us, though the Synod holds,
[that in committing gross sins, they fall into a present incapacity of
Salvation]; yet (there follows a [But] which yields the Question (as to matter
of Fact, and the proof of this is all that the Ghost of Tilenus pretends here
to aim at;) [That God will keep them from such sins as are inconsistent with
Habitual Grace.] For the truth of which Doctrine, we may take a convenient
time to examine it. It shall suffice here, to take notice of the opinion of the
Synod, [That such as are Habitually Gracious may be incapable of salvation.]
And yet, such is the superabundant favor extended to them more than others,
They are, 1. Elected Irrespectively, 2. Converted Irresistibly, and 3.
Conducted insuperably and infallibly to their eternal Salvation. Hereupon,
They do affirm concerning these Elect; 1. That it implies a Contradiction, that
they should live after the flesh; M. Norton's Orthodox Evangelist. p. 79, 80.
and 83. and so M. Baxter in his Call, etc. in the Pref. Gods Decrees separate
not the end and means, but tie them together. Lit. c. 3.
Because the Decree consists not of the end without the means, nor of the means
without the end, but of both together: Both end and means are contained in one
Decree. Yea so far is the Decree from admitting such an inference, as that the
contrary infallibly follows thereupon: and in point of Election, is not only
necessarily concluded, but irresistibly caused. Faith, Repentance,
New-obedience, and Perseverance, being the effects of Election. Thus Master
Norton. But because common experience is too clear a confutation of their
impeccability, therefore 2. They say, It is only out of Ignorance and
Infirmity that they do sin: Act. Synod. Dor. par. 3. p. 227.
Etsi regeniti aliquando ex infirmitate labuntur. So Lubbertus de 5. Art. And
the Deputies of the Synod of Groningen to the same purpose; Pii autem cum
peccant, Ibid. page 283. m.
sit non tantum, idque saepe, ex ignorantia. Psalm. 19.13. 1 Timothy 1.13. Sed
etiam, idque imprimis, ex infirmitate aut interna, aut ext^rna; When the Godly
sin, it is not only, and that often, out of ignorance; but also, and that
especially, out of infirmity, either inward or outward. And so the Deputies of
the Synod of Gallo. Belgia. De quinto Art. These. 3. page 290.

And because it is evident they may, Cap. 5. Art. 4, and 5.
and many times do fall into grievous and heinous and enormous sins; Therefore,
to alleviate the matter, they say, 3. (as Master Baxter here Sect. 18.) That
these sins of theirs are exceedingly in regard of manner, ends, concomitants,
etc. different from the like Facts in a graceless man. This Master Baxter
happily learned from the Divines of Embden; who tell us (in their Theses upon the
fifth Article, Th. 15.16.) However an Elect man falls, he does not sin, with
all his soul But the more light and renitency of conscience a man sins against,
the greater is his sin.
, all his mind, and a full will. Ergo si peccata quae ab Electis admit^untur,
respicimus, sunt quod ad speciem attinet, peccatis reproborum paria: in modo
vero, quo ad peccandum inducuntur, plane imparia. Though the sins of the Elect
and Reprobate be alike for kind; yet are they very unlike for the manner of
perpetration. If this be not a sufficient extenuation, to reconcile them to the
state of Grace, then they say, 4. That their sins come to pass through Gods
destitution of the Elect, from the withdrawing of his Grace and leaving them to
themselves and their own weaknesses. To this purpose D. Damman (one of the
Scribes of the Synod) says (as was showed above) Regenerati non possunt
omittere praestationem ejus quod ab illis postulatur, De Persev. page 6.
modo Deus illis praestet quod promisit. And afterward, Quando Deus partibus
suis defungitur, nos nostras omittere non possumus; That is, The Regenerate
cannot omit the performance of what is required of them, if so be God performs
what he has promised to them. And, When God does his part, we cannot omit
ours. And the Synod implies as much in the four first Articles, upon the Head
[Of Perseverance]; For, Art. 1. They say, Though God frees them, even in this
life, from the Dominion and slavery of sin, yet not altogether from the flesh
and body of sin. And Artic. 2. They say, From hence (viz. because God frees
them not from the body of sin) arise in holy men, daily sins of infirmity,
and even their best works have their blemishes. And Art. 3. They say, By reason
of these relics of sins dwelling in them, and besides this, the temptations
of the world and Satan, they, which are converted, could not continue in the
state of Grace, if they were left to their own strength: And Art. 4. They say,
They are not always so led and moved by God, as to be preserved from the
seducements of Concupiscence, but by his just permission are carried away into
grievous and heinous sins. So that, according to this Doctrine, their failings
are not so much their sin, as Gods deficiencie in affording Grace sufficient
and necessary to preserve them from it. If it be alleged, that they say in the
Article last mentioned, that it is through their own fault that they are
seduced by the concupiscence of the flesh, Ibid. Art. 4.
and give way unto the same; It must be remembered, that they make it sin
whatsoever a man commits or omits against the Law of God, though such omission
or commission be of unavoidable necessity, through want of Divine grace to
enable them to perform or omit it; because they received a power in Adam to do
otherwise. And it is in this sense only that such omissions or commissions of
the Regenerate are called sins. For I argue thus; Either God has a will, by
his Grace, to hinder their sin, or he has not. If he has a will to hinder
sin in them, and administers his grace to that purpose, and sin be not
eventually hindered, then they do insuperably resist his Grace; which is
contrary to their Doctrine, in the Eighth Rejection of the third and fourth
Chapters, and sundry others of their Writings V. Reliquae judicia Zuyt-Holland;
ad finem, Act. Syn. Dord. viz. p. 292. par. 3.
. But if God has not a will to hinder their sin, then, the reins being let
loose to the flesh in them, through Gods permission, how can they choose but
sin? and how can they be said to grieve the Spirit of God, who will not
preserve them from sinning? But, (to go on,) because though in the Actions that
are sinful, God be the Author of the Act wholly, (as Master Norton has it,
Vbi supra p. 63.
) and the Fore-determiner, Orderer and Governor of the sinfulness of the
Action to his own glorious and blessed End, yet the Regenerate, that commit
such Actions, are guilty of the defect and enormitie that is in them; Therefore
in the fifth place, to extenuate, or extinguish rather, the heinousness
hereof, they say, these sins of theirs have the nature of fatherly
Castigations, and are designed to work for their good. Act. Synod. Dor par. 3.
page 2, 5.
So the Divines of D en^ in their Examen, upon the fifth Article, where to
prove that the sins of the Regenerate are for their advantage, they produce
that of the Apostle, Romans 8.28. All things work together for good to them that
love God. Whence they infer thus; If all the evils wherewith they are
chastised; then their very sins also; Quae peccata, quemadmodum in impiis,
interdum habent rationem poenae: sic etiam ipsissima peccata, etiam in
fidelibus, habent rationem paternae castigationis; Which sins, as in the
wicked, they have sometimes the nature of punishment: so the very self same
sins also, in the faithful, have the nature of Fatherly correction. Yea and
these sins of theirs are illustrations and confirmations of their Grace. So the
British Divines (De quinto Articulo.) Tantum abest, Act. Synod. Dor. par. 2.
page 202. f.
say they, ut etiam gravia illa carnis peccata fidelem a statu justificationis
adoptionisque semper deturbent, ut contra a Theologis, praesertim practicis
statuatur, Deum eadem saepe in justificatis and adoptatis permittere, ut
confirmatior postea sit ipsis cum ^ustificatio tum adoptio; Their most grievous
sins are so far from disturbing the justification and adoption of the
faithful, that practical Divines especially, do resolve, that God does often
permit such sins in them, that their justification and adoption may be the more
confirmed to them. If, notwithstanding the good service their soul sins is
designed to do them, any of the faithful should be so tender hearted as to be
afraid of them; They assure them, 6. That there is no such reason; For they
cannot die in their sins; so the Deputies of the Synod of Groningen, Vbi supra.
Non tamen manent in peccatis, sed aut externe per castigationes Dei and
admonitiones, aut interne per Spiritus Sanctus gratiam excitati and moti
resipiscunt and resurgunt. They do not remain in their sins, but being stirred
up and moved, either outwardly by Gods admonitions and chastisements, or
inwardly by the grace of the Holy Spirit, they do repent and arise. And so the
whole Synod, (in the 7. Artic. of Cap. 5.) In these slips, God preserves in
them that his immortal seed (by which they were once borne again) that it die
not, nor be lost by them: afterward, by his word and Spirit, he effectually,
and certainly renews them again unto repentance. But suppose a tender
conscience should call for a solid proof of this Doctrine, out of Holy
Scripture; and because there is none to be produced, should be troubled with
doubtings, fears, and jealousies about it? Why, then in the last place Master
Baxter himself has resolved, Of Justif. Disp. 3. page 398.
(at the end of his Discussion of Master Tombs his Animadversions,) That, if
you can prove it profitable for such a man to be suddenly cut off before
Repentance, and that such a thing will be, I should incline (says he) to think
that he will be fully pardoned at the instant of Death, and so saved; because
the Lord knows that he repented Habitually and virtually, and would have done
it Actually, if he had had time for consideration. But Quo warranto is all this
spoken? For my part, I shall ever think it my duty, to admonish my Reader, to
remember the terror of the evil day, and to take heed strictly that he falls
not under the Arrest of it at unawares Luke 21.34, 35.
; for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the everliving God. And
thus much shall suffice in return to Master Baxters objections against the
Articles of Tilenus.

BUt we have another task behind; For though we have cleared the Field before
us, and seem to have given a total defeat to all Master Baxters Pretentions in
behalf of the Synod of Dort; yet he has a Reserve behind, which he leads up to
fall on the Rear of Master Pierce; and if he can, with the strength of that,
charge through His forces, he may take the confidence to proceed and to renew
his charge upon Tilenus also. Before we disband therefore, we will advance to
find out that Reserve, and fall upon it, that it may not be able to annoy us,
when we are retired to repose in our Winter Quarters.

This Reserve I find in his 37. Section. And with it, he makes his Charge and
Onset upon Master Pierce after this manner: [ And for them (whom he styles the
choicest of Gods servants) and the Synod of Dort, I may well challenge that
Justice from you, as to impute no such opinions to them which they purposely
disown, and publicly profess to detest.] Master Baxters demand seems very
Reasonable; if there be not some ambiguitie or equivocation in those words
[purposely disown and publicly profess to detest.] For what says the Apostle
of some in his time, Tit. 1. last: They profess they know God; but in works
they deny him. Men may profess publicly to detest what they heartily affect;
and purposely disown what they like and approve of well enough in it self: but
because they see it grows scandalous and unsavory to a multitude of Judicious
Godly men, and not well to be defended without further scandal; therefore for
shame of the world, they may publicly profess to detest and disown it for
this purpose. And whether it were not so with the Synod in what they disown,
and profess publicly to detest, we shall the better judge by examining each
particular here mentioned by M. Baxter; The first whereof is, [That the most
heinous sins do not hinder the salvation of the Elect, however they live;] Does
the Synod cordially detest and judiciously disown this Doctrine? You heard
above what was the opinion of Master Perkins and others, that mille-peccata, a
thousand sins, nay the sins of the whole world, nay all the Devils in hell,
were not able to make void Gods Election. Is it not the General Doctrine of
the whole Synod, as well as the Suffrage of the Divines of the Palatinate De
Artic. primo prop. 5.
, Electio ad Salutem immutabilis est: nec defectibus aut lapsibus electorum
etiam gravioribus interrumpitur, aut abrumpitur; That Election unto Salvation
is immutable: and that it is neither broken nor interrupted by their failings
or most grievous falls? Do not the Divines of Drent say, that the sins of the
Elect cooperate to their benefit; and the Divines of Great Britain affirm, Vbi
supra.
(as you heard even now) that their sins are so far from interrupting or
disturbing the justification and adoption of the Faithful, Vbi supra.
that they serve the more to confirm them. And the whole Synod in their Sixth
Rejection of the first Chapter, do Reject it as a gross Error in them, who
teach, That not all Election unto Salvation is unchangeable, but that some
which are Elected, notwithstanding Gods decree, may perish, and for ever do
perish. This is their avowed Canonical Doctrine, yet (as if some men of
another mind had drawn up this Conclusion of those Decrees and Canons) here
(for what purpose the Reader may gather by what has been already hinted to
him) they publicly profess to detest this opinion This Riddle may be, and is
to be read, by the explication of the next here following.
[that the most heinous sins do not hinder the salvation of the Elect, however
they live.]

And they do no less detest the next opiniopinion; [That the Reprobate cannot
be saved, though they truly perform all the works of the Saints;] But did
Marlorat detest this opinion, In Joh. 15.2
when he says, Stat igitur firma sententia, quemcunque Deus ante conditum
orbem elegerit, eum non posse perire: quem vero rejecerit, eum non posse
salvari, etiamsi omnia Sanctorum opera fecerit. Usque adeo irretractabilis est
sententia. Whom God has elected, he cannot perish: whom he has rejected, he
cannot be saved, though he should perform all the good works of the Saints, The
sentence past from all eternity is so irrevocable? And amongst the Acts of the
Synod, we find this of Doctor Molin; Par. 1. page 290. f.
Reprobos posse salvari, dogma est Arminianum, Christianis auribus insolens.
That (such as they define to be) Reprobates may be saved is an Arminian
Doctrine, unusual to Christian ears. Vid. ib. par. 3. p. 24 these. 4. and page
35. these. 3. cum Reject.
And do they not all conclude, that the Decree of Reprobation is eternal and
immutable, so that the Reprobate can never become Elect? And yet these men
profess publicly to detest this Doctrine, [That the Reprobate cannot be
saved, though they truly perform all the works of the Saints.] How shall we
read these Riddles? I Will give you Master Nortons explication of them, Vbi supra
p. 78, 79.
(as before). The Scripture, says he, holds forth the certain truth of the
Connection of the Antecedent and Consequent, when yet both the Antecedent and
Consequent taken apart are false. That is, it holds forth a truth in the
Connection of both the parts of such a proposition; in either of whose parts,
considered in themselves, there is no truth. For example, to our purpose; says
he; If Judas believes, he shall be saved; If John believes not, he shall be
damned. There is a truth in the Connection of the Antecedent, and Consequent of
both; though the Antecedent and Consequent of both, considered by themselves,
are false. For though it be true, if Judas believe, he shall be saved; and if
John believes not, he shall be damned: yet is it not true, (no nor possible,
for you say a little after, that it implies a contradiction) either that Judas
shall believe, or that Judas shall be saved; or that John shall not believe, or
that John shall be damned. God having Decreed the end, by the Conjunction of
the end and means together. Thus Master Norton has made the Doctrine of the
Synod as clear as the Sun in these particulars. We see then what it is that the
Synod does so purposely disown, and profess publicly to detest; The denial
of the truth of a Logical connection of the parts of a Proposition. Now I would
fain have M. Baxter, in the highest Paroxysme of his zeal, to preach this
Doctrine (if he be confident it is a truth) fully and wholly; Let him tell his
Auditors at Kederminster; that they are all most certainly and immutably
enrolled under a twofold Regiment; one is the black Regiment of Reprobates; the
other is the white Regiment of the Elect; and let him use all his Rhetoric to
persuade the one unto Faith and Repentance, and to d^ssuade the other from
presumption. He cannot make choice of more probable Arguments to prevail with
them, than by telling the first, Certainly there is a Truth in this Connection
of Antecedent and Consequent, If you Repent and Believe you shall be saved:
though indeed take the parts of the Proposition asunder, and they are both
false; for the plain truth is, you shall neither believe, nor yet be saved; for
you are under the Decree of Reprobation; and Impenitencie and Infidelity are
the means appointed for the execution of that Decree; and Almighty God has
decreed the accomplishment of the End, by the Conjunction of the end and means
together For Gods Decrees, you must know that they separate not the end and
means, but tie them together. So M. Baxter in his Call to the Non-converted, in
Pref. c. 3.
; so that the means can as little be declined, as the end avoided, and both are
no more possible, then it is for the immutable Decree of God to be rescinded;
yet seeing there is a Logical truth in the Connection of Antecedent and
Consequent, [If you repent, you shall be saved] (though it is decreed that you
shall neither do the one, nor be the other) I beseech you bring forth fruits
meet for Repentance, and cast away your transgressions, and so iniquity shall
not be your ruin. Is not here a fair encouragement of sinners to Repentance?
The like might be said, for dissuading men from Presumption, upon the account
of their Doctrine, touching the Decree of Election; but I am already weary of
these gross absurdities; and therefore I leave it to the Readers own judgment
to make the Inference.

A third opinion, which the Synod does purposely disown, and publicly profess
to detest, is, [That God by his own mere will, without any respect at all to
sin, or sight of it, did predestinate and create, the most of the world to
damnation;] But here the Remonstrants In Antid. pa. 37. etc.
have detected the egregious Artifice of the Synod, to palliate the enormity of
their Doctrine. For observe, they do not deny, much less reject it as an
Error, that troubled the Belgic Churches, [That God by his own mere will,
without any respect at all to sin, or sight of it, did Pass-by, or Predestinate
and create the most part of the world to destruction.] For this is the avowed
Doctrine of all the Supralapsarians, and it is inserted amongst the Acts of the
Synod, and earnestly contended for by Gomarus, as was declared above, and his
Suffrage is given in by himself (dissenting herein from the rest of his
Colleagues) accordingly in these words Act. Syn. Dord. par 3. page 24. these. 2.
, Vid. ib. p. 34.
Reprobatio peremptoria est decretum Dei, quo, pro voluntate sua liberrima, ad
declarationem justitiae suae vindicantis, certos ex humano genere (simpliciter,
non autem lapso) homines, nec gratia nec gloria donare, sed in peccatum libere
prolabi permittere and in peccatis relinquere, justeque tandem propter peccata
condemnare constituit. By the Decree of Reprobation God determined to give
neither Grace nor Glory to certain men, out of all mankind (not yet fallen):
but to suffer them freely to fall into sin, and to leave them in their sins,
and at last to condemn them for their sins, and this for his own most free
will, (and pleasure Vid. ibid. p. 21. a. m.
), to the declaration of his vindictive Justice. And Gomarus was not alone of
this Judgment: for we find the Deputies of the Synod of South-Holland speaking
the same sense with him, Ibid page 33. etc.
in their Suffrage upon the same Article; for they say, God did, Certas qu^sdam
singulares Personas -- ex toto genere humano seligere, select out of all
mankind (not fallen into sin, as others express themselves, but simply
considered) certain singular persons. And after, they say, Deum in eligendo
omnes homines considerasse in pari statu: Page 34.
That God in his Decree considered all men in a like condition; using the word
[Paritie] in an equivecall sense; for it may either be referred to the state of
man before the fall, or under it. The chief members of this Synod of
South-Holland, were Henricus Arnoldi President there, Festus Hommius Scribe of
the Synod at Dort, Baltasar Lydius, Gisbertus Voetius, etc. But these very
Supra-lapsarians, of what sort soever, will Subscribe to this, [That God did
not Predestinate men to damnation, without any respect to sin.] They blind
their opinion with a distinction betwixt Reprobation and Praedamnation, or
Predestination to damnation. For they say, it is one thing to Predestinate and
create to damnation, another thing to Praedestinate and create to destruction.
Damnation, being the sentence of a Judge, must be past in consideration of sin:
but Destruction may be the Act of a Sovereign, and so inflicted by Right of
Dominion, as was showed above. To this purpose, those Deputies, Ibid. page 35.
m.
De Causa Reprobationis, do conclude, Causam adaequatam cur Deus aliquos non
eligendo Praeterierit, esse solum divinae voluntatis beneplacitum: That the
Adaequate cause why God does passe-by some, is the sole beneplaciture of his
Divine will: Causam vero cur eosdem damnare decreverit, esse non tantum
actualem oblatae gratiae divinae rejectionem, sed etiam alia omnia peccata, tam
Originalia, quam actualia: But the cause, why he decreed to condemn them, is
not only the rejection of the divine grace, but also all other sins, as well
the Original, as Actual.

Besides, the Synod in those their Decrees, where they thought it most
plausible, to fix Predestination upon the fall of Adam, they confess God did
not reprobate the most part of the world without all respect of sin; because
they suppose all mankind infected with that corruption and stain of Original
sin, in and with Adam, and God cannot but behold it, because nothing is
concealed from his eye: but they never confess that God had respect to sin as
the impulsive or Meritorious cause, for which he did reprobate and ordain any
to the torments of hell. For they say, if God had been moved by sin, to pass
the Act of Reprobation, He had reprobated All without exception; because All
had sinned in Adam.

Again when they say, God did not do this, without respect of ANY sin, they
confess, it may be granted, that he had some respect, to some kind of sin, to
that of Adam, committed more then five thousand years ago, without the consent
or knowledge of those, who are reprobated, and to that Original sin, that does
follow from that first sin, by unavoidable necessity: but they do not say he
had respect to any Personal sin or sins, committed freely and with a
deliberate will, of those who are reprobated; I say, according to their
Doctrine, God had no respect to any such personal sins, (Infidelity and
Impenitency,) unless it were for the introduction of them, by an efficacious
permission, as means connected with the end, in the same Decree, for the
infrustrable execution of it. And therefore the Deputies, forementioned, Vbi
supra.
do reject it as an Error, in those, that hold, Causam cur Deus aliquos
rejecerit esse infidelitatem and impoenitentiam praevisam. That impenitencie
and unbelief are the cause, why God rejects men. And the very Decrees of the
Synod affirm as much; For ( Cap. 1. Reject. 8.) they Reject it as an Error in
those, who teach, that God out of his mere just will has not decreed to leave
any man in the fall of Adam, and common state of sin and damnation.

But suppose the Synod did grant (as their very nice and wary distinction,
[absque omni ullius Peccati respectu] makes it more than Probable, they did
not) that God in man's Reprobation had some respect to his Actual Personal
sin, yet if that sin be such as those Reprobates could not possibly avoid, the
whole matter will be reduced at last, to the respect of that only sin of
Adam. And thus the Synod has determined, Cap. 3, and 4. Art. 3.
That All men are conceived in sin, and born the children of wrath, untoward to
all good tending to salvation, forward to evil, dead in sins, slaves to sin;
and neither Will nor Can (without the Grace of the Holy Ghost regenerating
them) set straight their own crooked nature, no nor so much as dispose
themselves to the amending of it. So that if the Synod had granted a respect of
personal sins in the Reprobation of men, yet they had understood no other sins
than such as had been unavoidable to those Reprobates; For they say, those
Reprobates want the Grace of Gods regenerating Spirit, that they may avoid sin;
and they say also God has Decreed not to give it them; whence it follows, that
they cannot possibly avoid those sins; but, through the strength of that first
sin and corruption, which they lie under, when they are commanded, by the word
of the Gospel, to repent and believe, will they, nill they, they shall fall
into those foul sins, of Infidelity, disobedience, impenitency, and the like,
as necessarily, as a millstone falls downward by its own weight, for which
inevitable sins notwithstanding, they should be said, to be praeordained to the
eternal and horrible torments of hell. And then, if God ordained the sin of
Adam, and made that necessary and unavoidable too, as Danaeus Ada^um Dei
consilio and ordinatione necessario lapsum esse.
and Piscator and others do positively aver (and the Synod has no where
rejected it, that I can remember) the Reprobation of the most part of the world
will be reduced undeniably to the mere will of God, Deum Adamo legem dedisse ut
eam transgrederetur, etc. Sententia Perkinsii nostrorumque Theologorum haec
est, lapsum illum evenisse Dei voluntate transeunte in rem permissam, h. e.
Deum voluisse, ut Adamus Laberetur. D. Twiss. in vind. Great. L. 2. p. 1. Sect.
2. c. 12. vigr. 3. p. 142. col. 2.
what ever public Profession they have made to detest it.

A fourth Doctrine, which the Synod does purposely disown, and publicly
profess to detest, is, [That Reprobation is the cause of Infidelity and
Impiety, in the same manner, as Election is the fountain and cause of Faith and
Piety.] That sin follows the Decree of Reprobation by an unavoidable necessity,
is the express affirmation not only of Piscator, Zanchy, etc. But of many
Synodists also; Reprobationem tria consequuntur, privatio gratiae, peccata, and
poenae peccatorum; says Gomarus, Disp. de Praedest. Resp. Otten.
There are three things which follow Reprobation, the denial of Grace, Sin,
and the Punishment of Sin. And that they do follow it as the fruits of it, is
the affirmation of Festus Hommius Thesaur. Catech. page 216.
. Fructus Reprobationis sunt desertio vel privatio gratiae Dei and mediorum,
induratio, etc. The fruits of Reprobation are desertion or the deprivation of
Gods grace and means (sufficient and necessary) induration, etc. And the
Divines of Wedderau do confess, that a necessity of sin does follow from the
Decree of Reprobation. De 3, and 4. Art. in Corol. p. 134. par. 2
And this is the Doctrine of the whole Synod in their Canons: for they say man
cannot but sin, without Gods regenerating Grace, which he has Decreed to deny
or deprive them of; as was showed above. Even Master Baxter himself, does
acknowledge and profess that the Decree does tie the End and Means together;
and what is the Means of Damnation, but Infidelity and Impenitency etc. as he
tells us from the Synod, in the seventh Section of his Preface. There is a
necessity therefore of these sins in the Reprobate Loquimur de adultis vocatis.
else he should not perish, as such an infidel and impepenitent. Whence is this
necessity? not from the nature or will of the creature; therefore from some Act
of God; and what is this Act of God, but that Reprobation, whereby he denies
unto the Reprobate Grace sufficient and necessary unto Faith and Repentance;
and then his Law, whereby he requires the performance of those duties, which
without that Grace are not performable? But says the Synod, Reprobation is not
the cause of Infidelity and impiety, in the same manner, as Election is the
fountain and cause of Faith and piety. But whatever fallacy there be in those
words [in the same manner,] certainly, according to their Doctrine, Infidelity
and Impiety do flow by as inevitable a necessity from the one Decree, as Faith
and Piety does from the other; Vid. Antidotum p. 47, etc.
so that it is no less impossible Quod aliqui in tempore fide a Deo donentur,
aliqui non donantur, id ab aeterno ipsius decreto provenit. Syn. Dor. cap. 1.
Art. 6.
for those who are Reprobated to believe and repent, than it is for those who
are Elected to remain impenitent and unbelievers. Contrariorum eadem ratio,
eadem scientia est, say the Divines of the Palatinate De Repro. prepos. 1. p.
19. par. 2.
. Ex iis igitur, quae de Electione supra dicta sunt, de opposita Reprobatione,
ejusque descriptione, quid statuendum videatur, haud difficile est pronunciare.
Reprobation then is no less the fountain of Infidelity and Impiety, than
Election is the fountain of Faith and Piety. If we list to cavil about the
word [Cause;] (which is here made use of to impose upon the unwary Reader,) we
could tell them, that it is an improper and inept expression, to say Election is
the Cause of Faith; For Election in an immanent Act in the mind of God, not an
Egression out of him, that produces any effect in man, though Faith does
infallibly follow that Act, by the emanation of another power, which God,
according to the Decree of Election, will exercise, to the irresistible
production of Faith. And thus it is acknowledged by Piscator, that, although
the Decree of Reprobation be not effective, in respect of infidelity in the
Reprobate, because it does not properly effect or produce that infidelity; yet
it is efficax efficacious, Antidot. p. 48.
because that Decree being made, infidelity follows of necessity, For example.
Suppose a man blind by nature, or made blind by the infliction of punishment
upon him for some crime; He that commands such a man upon pain of death to read
a Proclamation, though to speak properly he cannot be said to be the cause,
that that man reads not the Proclamation; for his blindness is the next and
proper cause hereof; yet in sense of Law, and to speak Morally, he may be said
to be the Cause, that by not reading, that blind man becomes defective, as it
were, in a duty enjoined him and so guilty of death; not by way of efficiencie,
as producing the defect of reading in him, but by commanding that Reading to
whom it is impossible to read, in whom therefore after that command, the defect
of Reading cannot but follow. After the same manner, according to their
Doctrine, God deals by the Reprobates: first for the transgression of Adam they
are punished with blindness of mind in things spiritual; so that it is no
less impossible for them to believe, when God commands it, than for a blind
man to read a proclamation. And yet notwithstanding they are thus punished with
spiritual blindness, God commands them to believe under pain of eternal
death. Which when God does, he does not, indeed, by way of efficiency produce
infidelity and impenitency in them, but by his command God is the Cause, or
brings it to pass, that they become as it were unbelievers and impenitent;
because it is impossible, on the one part, that they should become unbelievers,
unless the command of Faith does intervene, and on the other part, the command
of Faith being given, they cannot, in regard of that innate pravitie and
blindness, but be and remain unbelievers. And this is the means, which (for
all their Professed detestation) is tied to the End, (by the Decree of
Reprobation) in order to the execution of the said Decree, by the Damnation of
the Reprobates.

Another Doctrine, which, says M. Baxter, the Synod does purposely disown, and
publicly profess to detest is, [That many harmless Infants of Believers are
snatched from the mothers breasts, and tyrannically cast into Hell, so that
neither Baptism, nor the Churches prayers in Baptism can profit them.] That
many Infants of Believers are cast into Hell, notwithstanding the Prayers of
the Church, and the Sacrament of Baptism administered, (according to Christ's
institution and command) for their Salvation, is the express Doctrine of
Calvin, Beza, Zuinglius, Martyr, Zanchy, Piscator, Paraeus, Perkins, etc. For
the Infants of unbelievers, it is the Doctrine of Gomarus and the Divines of
Drent, expressly, that they are Reprobates. Act. Synod. Dor. par. 3. page 24.
and page 83.
Gomar. de Reprob. th. 7. and Judic. Drent. circa. 1. Art. these. 18. For the
Infants of Believers dying in their Infancy, whether the Decree of Reprobation
lays hold on them and makes them liable to damnation, the Divines of
South-Hollands judgment is, Ibid. page 36 pr.
Non esse curiose inquirendum; we ought not to be curious in inquiring after
it; and the British Divines say, De primo Articulo. ubi supra par. 2. p. 10.
these. 7.
Ad rationem electionis divinae sive ponendam sive tollendam, circumstantia
atatis est quiddam impertinens, and nihil prorsus operatur, The circumstance of
age is a thing altogether impertinent, and works nothing touching the Decree of
Election or Reprobation. Their meaning is plain enough, and it is consonant, no
doubt, to the sense of the whole Synod. We may therefore observe a twofold
Fallacy in the Proposition, which they publicly profess to detest, 1. In the
word [Innoxios] harmless Infants; See the Antidonum cap. 4, and 5. page 52.
etc.
For the truth is, they acknowledge none such, every Infant of a span long,
from its first Conception being guilty of Adams sin; for which it is justly
liable to condemnation; and for that sin many are damned Act. Synod. Dor.
; as is delivered in Reject. 8. Cap. 1. Another Fallacy is in the word
[Tyrannice] tyrannically, cast into Hell: For when God does Reprobate such
Infants, and cast them into Hell, he does not do it, they say, after the manner
of a Tyrant, who is bound by some certain Law, the transgression whereof is
Tyranny: but he does it jure dominii, as an Absolute Lord, whose Sovereignty is
without Law or control, and therefore he may dispose of them at his pleasure.
That this is their sense (notwithstanding what they publicly profess to
detest) may easily be collected, from the 18. Art. of the 1. Chap. (Of
Predestination) where to stop the mouths (as they pretend) of such as murmur
at the grace of free Election, and severity of just Reprobation (as they call
it) they allege that of the Apostle, Romans 9.20. O man who art thou, that
replyest against God? And that of our Savior, Mat. 10.15. Is it not Lawful
for me to do what I will with my own? Texts of Scripture which the
Creabilitarian-Supralapsarians, as well as the Existentialists make use of for
proof of their Decrees; and they are just as much to their purpose, that is,
altogether impertinent to the use those several Parties do make of them.

Amongst those Doctrines which the Synod does purposely disown, and publicly
profess to detest, there is another, which I wonder Master Baxter has
omitted; which is this, [ That this Doctrine of the Calvinists makes God the
Author of sin] But perhaps he has smelt out the Fallacy expressed in the Fifth
Article of the first Chapter; where they say, Incrodulitatis istius, ut and
omnium aliorum peccatorum, causa seu culpa neutiquam est in Deo, sed in homine.
The cause or fault of unbelief, as of all other sins, is in no wise, in God,
but in man. Here are two words made use of, as of the same importance, [Causa
seu culpa] Cause or fault, by which, while many of their Doctors do affirm
that God does incite and irritate, urge and impell, necesitate and constrain
men to sin, nay, works sin in them; yet shall they be excused from
prevaricating the Doctrine of the Synod; for though to speak properly God be
the cause of sin, by such manner of working to the production of it, yet Culpa
the fault of sin can in no wise be ascribed to him. Zuinglius and Keckerman
have given the Reason of it, because there is no law made to bind Almighty God
to the contrary, but man only: For confirmation hereof they add: Sicut Taurus
cum nunc has, nanc illas vaceas promiscua and vaga Venere init, adulterii culpa
non tenetur, sed homo, si cum aliorum uxoribus rem habeat, eo quod huic, non
illi, prohibens lex lata fit; ita Deus peccato seu culpa non tenetur, cum
creaturam ad hos and illos actus movet, sed tantummodo creatura ipsa, quia ei
lex prohibens lata est, non Deo. I shall not so much as English it for shame.

I cannot leave Master Baxter till I have followed him to the very last stage
of his Preface, which he shuts up thus, [We should live in peace, if the advice
of the Synod (ibid.) were followed, [A Phrasibus denique iis omnibus
abstineant, quae praescriptos nobis genuini Sanctarum Scripturarum sensus
limits excedunt, and protervis sophistis justam ansam praebere possint,
doctrinam Ecclesiarum Reform^tarum sugillandi, aut calumniandi.] But the Synod
should have done well to have left us an example herein by their own practice.
But we find that when the British, Hassien, and Bremish Divines moved to have
the harsh and incommodious speeches of some of their Doctors declared against
and rejected; they were out-voted and cried down upon this account, Ne Phrasium
istarum rejectione Orthodoxa doctrina ab illis asserta and defensa pariter
damnari videretur. Session. 13^.
We may see by this it is a great deal easier to give good advise than to
follow it. And this appears further by that Admonition of Master Baxter in the
next words, [And if withal we were humbly Conscious of our own frailty and
fallibility, and could maintain that unfeigned charity to our Brethren, which
beseems all the Disciples of Christ, and which would cause us to say and do
by others (even in our Controversall writings and private Speeches of them) as
we would have them say and do by us. But alas! the Disciples of that Synod,
will neither be persuaded to be the first, nor do the last; they will follow
none of these Prescriptions; no not so much, as Singular M. Baxter Physician
heal thy self.
; witness his proceedings against

ocular demonstration of the causes of salvation and damnation A Table of
Decrees of Salvation and Damnnation
Ye shall live, therefore ye shall mortify the deeds of the Body.

Ye shall die, therefore ye shall live after the Flesh.

Delineated by Mr. W. Perkins In his Armilla Aurea.
Predestination

Creation.

Election

The Fall.

Reprobation

Supralapsarian Creabilitarians

Supral: Existentialists

Sublapsarians

Suprulap: Creabilitar

Sup: Existent:

Sublapsarians

God's Love in Christ toward the Elect

Effectual Calling.

Justification.

Sanctification.

Glorification.

Eternal Life.

The Word.

Softning.

Faith.

Remission

Imputation.

Mortification

Vivification.

Repentance

New Obedience.

CHRIST the Mediator.

His Holiness.

Obedience.

Death.

Burial.

Dominion of the grave

Resurrection

Ascension.

Session.

Intercession.

Illumination.

Repentance

Faith.

Taste.

Zeal.

Deception of Sin.

Obduration.

Malice.

Unbelief.

Apostasy.

Calling Vneffectual

Agnition of that Call

Relapse.

Gad's hatred toward the Reprobate.

No Calling

Ignorance.

Blindness.

Reprobate Sense.

Greediness in sinning

Pollution.

Damnation.

Death Eternal

Death

Judgment.

Declaration of Mercy.

Declaration of Justice.

GOD's GLORY.

Place this at Page 411



M. Perkins his Synopsis, or Table, In Armilla Aurea.
showing (according to his account) the Series of Causes, both of Salvation and
Damnation; or the Decrees of Election and Reprobation with the Means and Order
of their Execution.
BEcause this Table contains an Ocular demonstration of the matter of Fact,
charged upon the Calvinists and their Synod by Tilenus; I thought it convenient
to insert it, and to make some Reflections and Observations upon it for the
benefit of the Reader; who upon a view of this Diagram may take notice with me,

1. That there are three several Sects, contending as well against one
another, as against the Remonstrants. They are usually divided into two
Parties, Supralapsarians and Sublapsarians. But because Supralapsarians are of
two sorts: I shall distinguish them by several Names. The first sort, who make
the creature, Gomar. disp. de Praedest. (1604.) these. 13.
not in its Actual existence, but in its condition of Possibility, the Ob^ect
of the Decree, These I shall call Supralapsarian Creabilitarians. The second
sort, who make the creature in its Actual Existence, but yet Innocent, the
Object of that Decree, These I shall call Supralapsarian-Existentialists. The
third sort, who make mankind fallen in Adam, and by Divine imputation guilty of
Original sin, the Object of the said Decree, These are called Sublapsarians.
Piscator endeavors to reconcile all three opinions. Considerationes illa non
sunt opposi^ae, sed tantum diversae: ac proinde omnes locum habere possunt:
sicut and revera habent. -- Objectum praedestinationis esse hominem
consideratum and ut nondum conditum, and ut conditum, sed adhuc integrum, and
ut lapsum peccatoque corruptum. Idem Tract. de Gratia Dei. page 173. etc. Cap.
1. Artic. 7.
And although these several Parties differ hugely in fixing the Object of the
Decree, yet there is no considerable difference amongst them, touching the
means and manner of carrying it on, from the Fall of Adam to the Final
Execution of it. Of which, the Synods Canonical Declaration is this, That
Election is the unchangeable purpose of God, by which, before the foundation of
the world, according to the most free pleasure of his will, and of his mere
Grace, out of all mankind, fallen, through their own fault So they call Adams
sin.
, from their first integrity into sin and destruction, he has chosen in Christ
unto salvation a set number of certain men, neither better, nor more worthy
then others, but lying in the common misery with others: which Christ also from
all eternity he appointed the Mediator, and Head of all the Elect, and
foundation of salvation; and so he Decreed to give them to him to be saved, and
by his Word and Spirit, effectually to call, and draw them to a Communion with
Him: that is to give them a true faith in him, to justify, sanctify, and
finally glorify them, being mightily kept in the communion of his Son, to the
demonstration of his mercy, and praise of the riches of his glorious grace.
They say, Ibid. Art. 15.
Moreover, the holy Scripture herein chiefly manifests, and commends unto us
this eternal and free grace of our Election, in that it further witnesses,
that not all men are elected, but some Not-elected, or passed over in Gods
eternal Election, whom doubtless God in his most free, most just,
unreproveable, and unchangeable good-pleasure, has decreed to leave in the
common misery (whereinto by their own That is, Adam's fall.
default they precipitated themselves) and not to bestow saving faith, and the
grace of conversion upon them, but leaving them in their own ways, and under
just judgment, at last to condemn and everlastingly punish them, not only for
their unbelief, but also for their own Is their own fault even now mentioned
any of them?
sins, to the manifestation of his Justice. And this is the Decree of
Reprobation, which in no wise makes God the Author Artic. 5. They say, Cause or
Fault of sin, etc.
of sin (a thing blasphemous once to conceive) but a Fearful, unreproveable,
and Just Judge, and Revenger.

Thus far the Synod.

2. Observe, That according to this Order of Causes, the Apostles Doctrine is
inverted; for he says, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye
through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, Romans 8.13.
ye shall live. But on the contrary, here the Doctrine runs thus; Ye shall
live; therefore ye shall mortify; Or, Ye shall die, therefore ye shall live
after the flesh. For sin is acknowledged to be the fruit and effect, Norton,
ubi supra, page 52.
or as others who speak more nicely and warily, an infallible Consequent of the
Decree.

3. By this Table, Almighty God is supposed to have loved a certain number of
persons, with an unchangeable love, and so dearly, as freely to have elected
them to enjoy a communion with himself in joys and glories everlasting, and
that before Christ is given to be a Mediator for them; which does much Eclipse,
if not quite evacuate the merit and satisfaction of Christ. For to be chosen to
such salvation, is to be in Gods highest favor; and then what room is there
for the intervention of Christ's Merits and the price of his blood, to satisfy
Divine Justice, appease Gods wrath, to make an atonement and procure a
Reconciliation? This will help to establish, at least to countenance the
Socinian Doctrine, who take advantage of that opinion to argue against the
satisfaction of our Savior after this manner; They who are no longer under
wrath, but in Gods Grace and favor, they have no need, nay they cannot by the
death of Christ be delivered from wrath and restored to Gods favor. But those
whom God loves unto eternal salvation, are no longer under wrath, but in Gods
favor. Therefore there is no need, nay they cannot be delivered from wrath and
restored to Gods favor, by the Death of Christ.

4. That Christ is appointed a Mediator only for the benefit of these Elect,
to die for them, and procure salvation for them; whose salvation was as sure
before, as the Decree and love of God could make it.

5. That Faith, Sanctification and Obedience, are not considered in this
Decree, as qualifications in the person to be elected: but are provided to be
brought in by it, to dress him up for Glory.

6. That those Elect Persons, in their appointed time, shall be called so
infrustrably and irresistibly, that it is not in their power to make it void or
hinder it.

7. That no sin can put them out of that road, Series, or File of means drawn
by the Divine Decree, to lead them from Election to Glory: No not their foulest
or filthiest sins; Hereupon Master Perkins reckons it amongst the Privileges
which wait upon their Adoption. Armilla Aurea. cap. 37.
Hinc etiam multis Privilegiis donantur, says he, They are endowed with many
Privileges, 1. They are heirs of God. 2. Coheires with Christ, and Kings. 3.
All their afflictions, their failings also and falls, tantum sunt castigationes
paternae ad bonum illorum; they are nothing but fatherly chastisements,
designed for their Good. And such is the Judgment of the Divines of Drent,
Par. 3. page 275. f.
inserted amongst the Acts of the Synod; Whereas, say they, the Remonstrants do
maintain that the faithful may fall from Grace; there are a thousand
Testimonies of Scripture against it. (And presently after) We will add but one
Testimony more: It is said Romans 8.28. That all shall work together for good to
them that love God. If all the evils, wherewith they are chastized; then their
very sins also; Quae peccata, quemadmodum in impiis, interdum habent rationem
poenae: Sic etiam ipsissima peccata, etiam in fidelibus habent rationem
paternae castigationis, Which sins, as in the wicked, they have sometimes the
nature of punishment: so the very self same sins also, in the faithful have
the nature of Fatherly correction. And may not God be the Author of them then,
seeing all evil of punishment is from him? Amos 3.6.


8. From hence it undeniably follows, that the sins of these Elect, must be of
another rank, and of a far different nature, from the very same sins (for kind
and quality) of the Reprobate. For example, the Adultery, Sedition, Murder,
Oppression of the Reprobates do shut them out of Gods favor and kingdom: 1.
Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.19.
But the same sins (for nature and kind) in these Elect; their Adultery,
Sedition, Oppression, Murder, cannot shut them out, either of Gods Grace here,
or his Glory hereafter.

On the other side, Observe 1. That according to this Synopsis, containing
Master Perkins's and the Judgment of all the Creabilitarians, That the far
greatest part of mankind are Reprobates before they are Creatures; and
according to the most modest opinion amongst them, they are Reprobates (as to
the demerit of Preterition) only upon the account of Adams sin, which was no
more in their power to prevent or avoid, than to hinder Gods imputation of it,
or to forbid their Parents Banes of Matrimony; and for Actual sins, they do
commence upon the stock of this sin Original.

2. That Christ was not given, according to Gods intention, for their benefit;
They have no interest in him; there is no line of communication drawn betwixt
him and them.

For 3. at least, upon the Fall of Adam, Gods implacable and immutable hatred
was extended toward them. And hence

4. His calling of them is but uneffectuall; so that

5. Though they own and answer that Call, so far as to be enlightened by it,
repent at it, believe upon it, relish the heavenly Gift, and grow zealous of
Gods Glory, yet this does not remove them one step out of that road or line
drawn, by the Decree of Reprobation, to lead them to eternal death, according
to the Series and process whereof (which is immutably set, and insuperably
carried on) the Deceitfulness of sin must and shall inevitably and necessarily
prevail to bring them into a Relapse, which shall heighten their pollution and
guilt, by an accession of obduration and malice, unbelief and Apostasy, and so
cooperate to the aggravation of their condemnation and torments. And this is
the very Doctrine of the Synod of Dort, as it is delivered, Act. S. Dor. par.
2. p. 62. th. 24, 25.
in the Judgment of the Divines of Embden; For speaking of the means by which
the Decree is executed in the Reprobates, They say, Prima and summa eorum
exitii Causa, The first and chiefest cause of their destruction, is the
corruption of our first Parents, Spontanea Adami voluntate, of Adam's own
accord, first brought upon himself, and afterward by the just judgment of God
propagated unto his whole Posterity: in which if God had left all, he had done
injury to none, because he is debtor unto none.

The second (Cause) is, because, either God vouchsafes not to call these
Reprobates at all by his Gospel; or if he calls some of them outwardly by the
Gospel, yet it is not accompanied with any internal Spiritual efficacy: or
if in some of them he begets a certain assent, and some kind of faith; yet he
leaves them all at last, in their blindness and voluntary corruption, and does
not vouchsafe them his saving grace. And Szegedin, To the Question, In loc.
com. de Repr. tab. 1. p. 122. f.
Whether the Reprobate can do good works? he makes this answer, They may do
good works sometimes, but not persevere in them: as the Predestinate in like
manner do fall into most grievous sins. Therefore, says he, we may conclude,
that Good works are sometimes inservient unto Predestination, and sometimes
unto Reprobation. By good works Predestination does illustrate Gody glory; and
in respect of Reprobation they are many times reasons, why sin is aggravated.
For they that fall from God, when he has adorned them with good works, as they
do more grievously sin, so are they more severely-punished.

Lastly Observe, that, according to this Series, or Table of Causes, The only
Glory that God designs and aims at, primarily and by it self, as to be drawn
out of the Rational Creature for himself, consists in the Salvation of some
for the Declaration of his Justice and Mercy, and the Damnation of others, for
the Declaration of his Power and Justice. Whereas the Scripture informs us
otherwise, viz. That the Glory, which he intended to have, and therefore
requires and expects from us, does consist in the oblation or performance of a
free and dutiful obedience, or results from it. To this purpose we have our
Saviors own warrant, Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear
much fruit; and his example, Joh. 17.4. I have glorified thee on the earth: I
have finished the work that thou gave me to do; and his Command, Matthew.
5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven; and Gods own approbation, Psalm.
50.23. Who so offers praise, glorifieth me, and to him that orders his
conversation aright, etc. So that Gods Glory is intended all the way; Whether
ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. This is that
duty, we are all primarily designed for, and called unto, by the dispensations
of his Grace, (1 Pet. 2.9. Ephesians. 1.6.) And if men will not comply, by a
voluntary obedience, with this Gracious design, that the Goodness of God may
triumph in our exaltation: then, for their contempt, or neglect of his honor
and service, as he has threatened, so, he rejects them, and glorifies his
Justice in the infliction of their deserved punishment, Act. S Dor. par. 2.
page 104. th. 5.
Martinius therefore acknowledges, that the condemnation of the wicked is an
event of Gods Calling, which is not intended of God, by it self: but by
accident it is an attendant upon man's transgression. Hic autem eventus per se
non intenditur a Deo: sed per accidens hominis Culpa sequitur.

As for that Glory of God, which the Blessed Saints and Angels do eternally
celebrate in heaven, that is not designed by Almighty God, for a part of Man's
duty (the Scene whereof lies here on earth) but for his Reward upon the
performance of that duty: which duty the wicked having neglected, they are by
way of punishment, for ever debarred, Rev. 7.14, 15. Job. 17.24.
from having any communion in that blessed solemnity, which is the Masters joy,
into which none are admitted but such as have been faithful servants.

This (by the way) will afford a sufficient answer to that Maxim in Logic,
[What is first in the intention, is last in the execution], (Whence some
Admired Doctors would infer, that punishment was intended before sin, and
Glory before obedience.)

But the Maxim will not hold in the Distribution of Rewards and Punishments,
which do always (where Justice holds the Sword and balance) presuppose duty
and fault, respectively, as the Vshers to go before them. This is easily seen,
and many times complained of in Civil administrations Call to the Unconverted.
p. 84. A Rulers will us Lawgiver is first and principally that his laws be
obeyed, etc. See the rest.
, wherein, as the Magistrate that intends reward before obedience, is accounted
imprudent: so he that designs a personal punishment before there be a fault,
shall not escape the Reproach of being a Tyrant.

AN EXAMINATION OF Master BAXTERS XIX, and XX. Sections.

Wherein the state of DAVID AND PETER is Debated.

The State of DAVID and PETER Debated.
Answer to Section XIX.
THough I have not troubled my self much to examine how violent and rigid an
Adversary you are to Master Pierce, in the point of Perseverance; yet in that
superficial view, which I have taken of those and some other of your Papers, I
observe that after your pretended kindness, and an offer to shake hands, you
no sooner unclaspe, and begin to take leave, but (such is your temper,) you
must have a parting blow, that exasperates your Dissenting Brethren and sends
them away as little satisfied in your moderation as when they first met you.
This is no great temptation to invite a peaceable spirit, to interpose in any
of your Disputes. Yet finding that M. Pierce grows weary (upon such like
considerations) of drawing this Saw of contention (and I cannot blame him,
having had so much harsh and jarring noise about his ears, as is more than
enough to set any ingenuous persons teeth on edge) and resolving hereupon to
give himself a little truce and respite, till he meets with further
provocation; And finding you also (I hope unfaignedly) professing, that you are
truly and heartily willing of further information And you do not hold it
fundamental that the Justified cannot fall from their justification. Of Persev.
page 17.
, I shall in all Christian meekness, at least in order to mine own
satisfaction, if it may not prove so to yours, represent my present thoughts by
way of Reflection upon those arguments that you have laid before us in the
nineteen and twenty Sections of your Preface. But before I consider your
arguments I shall premise.

1. That according to the course of Gods ordinary dispensations, Christians are
not made Per saltum: (I speak of the Adult, and persons arrived to capacity) I
conceive, a man, notwithstanding those habites of grace pretended to be infused
at that instant, cannot be a sound Habitual Christian at his first Conversion.
My reason is, because Christianity is a profession and a matter of choice upon
a mature and sober deliberation, as our Savior Christ has taught us in that
twofold Parable. S. Luke 14.28. etc. For which of you intending to build a
tower, sits not down first, Deuteronomy. 26.17 Josua. 24.15, 22.
and counts the cost, whether he has sufficient to finish it? lest happily
after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that
behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man begun to build, and was not able
to finish. Or what King going to make war against another King, sits not
down first, and consulteth whether he be able, with ten thousand, to meet him
that comes against him with twenty thousand? Or else while the other is yet a
great way off, he sends an embassage, and desires conditions of peace. Thus
is the Discipleship of Christ to be entertained upon a deliberate, due and full
account taken of all the cost toil, and difficulties, which we must be at, and
encounter with in the profession of it. But, if in the constitution and framing
of every good Christian, Non sola intellectus illuminatio, and cordis
sanctificatio; sed ipsa quoque voluntatis immutatio, hec est, qualitatum, seu
facultatum, and virium supernaturalium in voluntatem infusio, ejusdemque ad
conversionem and fidem efficax flexio and inclinatio, fit irrisistibiliter; as
the Hassian Divines have declared at the Synod; and after this first
conversion, if God does by a Physical operation, in the will of man, work also
alium quemcunque actum verae pietatis, scilicet, ipsum voluntatis motum
efficienter attingendo, hoc est voluntatem ipsam applicando and determinando ad
volendum and eligendum; In 2. Sent. d. 28. Sect. 2.
as Estius and those of that way do constantly maintain; A man that is sure of
such a Magazine provided for him, and such invincible forces levied to his
hands, has no reason in the world to sit down to consult about the charge of
his ensuing warfare; and if he advances, upon any account besides this, he
does but reckon, (as they say) according to these men's opinion, without his
Host. Besides, as the seed of the word is a necessary ingredient to the
ordinary conception of this new man, so is the travel of the Ministry no
less requisite to the parturition of him: and for want of this Regular way of
new birth, Saint Paul calls himself an abortive. 1 Cor. 15.8
And to show the necessity of our own cooperation to this work in us, Heb.
12.15. 2 Cor. 6.1.
ne defimus gratiae Dei, that we receive not the grace of God in vain, nor be
wanting to it, we are enjoined to put off the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts, and (not only) to be renewed in the spirit
of our minds, (in a passive signification (but to put (on actively) that new
man, which after God is created, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.
in righteousness and true hol^^esse. And ^s we are enjoined, so are we
enabled to it too; For, where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty (and
this is the dispensation of the Gospel, and the privilege of those that live
under it) whence it follows, that we all, 2 Cor. 3.6. with 17, 18.
with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
Hereupon says Basil Mag. Habeo in creatione id quod secundum imaginem est.
Homil. 10. Hexam.
Fio autem proposito and voluntate etiam secundum similitudinem. Vbi tua est
gratia? Cur tu coronatus es? Si enim opifex totum N B. contribuit, quomodo
regnum coelorum tibi apertum est? To this purpose it is very considerable, what
the Assertors and Defenders of that Physical operation, are fain to yield. In
the division of Grace in operantem and cooperantem, there arises a difficulty;
for if Gratia operans be distinguished a cooperante, then that Gratia operans
must be said to be that, quae operatur ^n nobis [sine novis] and in voluntate
nostra nihil agente; For if our will does act any thing here, there is no
reason why this grace should be called operans and not cooperans. Saint Austin
is brought in, in favor of this interpretation, where he says, Ut velimus
Deus sine nobis operatur, cum autem volumus, and sic volumus ut faciamus,
nobiscum cooperatur. To this purpose he produces that place of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 15. Yet not I, but the Grace of God with me. For when he had said, neither
the Grace of God alone, nor Paul alone, he added: but the Grace of God wrought
with him; that he was called from heaven, and that he was converted by so great
and efficacious a call, this was the Grace of God alone. To the like purpose
Thomas is produced. Upon these authorities and the misunderstanding of this
doctrine some have been drawn into an opinion, that in effectu gratiae
operantis our will does nihil agere, nec seipsam omnino movere, but is Passive
and moved only. But says Estius, 2. Sent. d. 26. Sect. 8.
this sense is false and erroneous, and that he proves by three reasons. 1.
Because the inward Act which that working Grace produces in us; as for
example, to love God, to hate sin, it is an Act of the will; not only as of
the subject, but also and chiefly, as of the eff ctive Principle: therefore the
will in respect of that act, is moving, and not only moved. 2. Because that
act, by which the will begins to will good, is a free act; therefore in respect
of that act, the will is a moving principle, not of any sort, but a free one.
3. Because Acts of this kind are under precept. For man is commanded to
believe, to convert himself to God, to fly from sin; therefore they proceed
from the will freely moving it self hereunto. Wherefore rejecting that false
interpretation of those Doctors, he concludes, their meaning was only this;
That God works the first act or good motion of the will in us, by his grace,
without any other motion of the will, previous in us, whereby we endeavor, or
aspire to that first motion, or whereby the will commands it: because many
times a good affection of the will is inspired into a man, when he is very
repugnant to it, as it happened in Paul, Act. 9. By this we see, that even in
the opinion of those men, that maintain, that way of efficacious Grace, by
Physical operation (as they call it) our reception of Christianity, or which
is all one, our Conversion to the Faith, (even in the first act of it) must be
a matter of free choice at least. And as it is a matter of choice, to embrace
it at the first, so it is a matter of study and industry to maintain it
afterward in contesting to mortify and subdue all those corruptions,
infirmities and temptations, which make opposition to the power of that
profession, which is the power of Godliness. He that striveth for the masterie
is temperate in all things: Watch and pray that ye fall not into temptation:
Fight the good fight of faith: and be faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee a crown of life: and a multitude of such expressions. 2. Whether, after
long and faithful service, God may not vouchsafe, of his especial grace and
favor, to reward the devotions and pains of some pious persons, with a secure
establishment in a comfortable estate of indefectibility, this you know, the
Remonstrants had no mind to dispute. An vero non aliquando pro absoluto jure
suo extraordinaria quadam ratione Deus fideles quosdam, Scripta Remonst.
Dogmat. Artic. 5. page 190.
diu multumque in stadio pietatis exercitatos, and in variis adversitatibus
atque afflictionibus velut in igne probatos, dono perseverantiae indefectibiles
remuneretur ad hec, ut veluti luminaria quaedam pietatis, patientiae and
fortitudinis in domo Dei luceant, Deoque pro instrumentis serviant ad alios
exemplo suo ad eandem fidei constantiam animandos, in medio relinquimus. Me
thinks, it is very agreeable to the riches of the Divine Goodness and Grace, by
way of reward or benefit for their long and hard duty, to draw his old
soldiers into the securest quarters (allotted to any persons in the Church
Militant) after they have stood long upon the Guard, and strictly kept their
watch, and constantly maintained the fight with admirable courage, prudence and
success against all assaults of the enemy. That excellent man of so profound a
judgment and learning was of this mind. D. Th. Jack. Ap. to 10. B. of the
Creed page 3148.
There is a Degree or measure of Mortification (best known unto God) which may
be obtained before the hour of death, by some later, by others sooner, unto
which whosoever does attain, he is not only actually instated in this promise
of life, but confirmed in Grace, and endued with the Gift of Perseverance. I am
much pleased to find a Text of Scripture, that to my apprehension, sounds, so
like a promise to this purpose. Rev. 3.12. see verse. 5.
Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the
Name of the City of my God, which is the New Jerusalem, which comes down out
of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my New name. And such might be
those Elect And what if, in these, I should grant Master Baxter his twofold
cause of stability, 1. the nature or degree of their grace within; 2. the
Election and preservation of God without? Of Persever. page 37.
persons, whom God is said to have chosen, Mark. 13.20 for whose sake, he did
vouchsafe to shorten those days of tribulation, and did exempt them from the
danger of Seduction, Mat. 24.24.

3. I do not conceive that the single Act alone of every gross sin, does
utterly destroy the New birth, or excuss Charity and the Spirit of Grace, or
cancel his interest in Gods paternall favor, and title to salvation, 1 Cor.
6.9. Ephesians 5.5.
who is such a Delinquent. When the Apostle says, The unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God; I suppose he does not mean, every man that does
something that is unjust: but he, whose frequent practice, and contracted
Disposition, has procured that denomination. So when the Apostle, Gal. 5.21.
having reckoned up the works of the flesh, concludes with this intermination,
that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Joh. 8.44.
To do such things may import the custom (according to Scripture notion) and
the frequentation of them. In that conflict betwixt the flesh, and the Spirit,
in the Regenerate, though the flesh prevail in some single combat, we must
not presently blow the trumpet and proclaim it king. One may worst his enemy
in a slight skirmish, yet not presently get possession of the crown and
Throne. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether it be of sin unto death, Romans 6.16.
And he that is overcome of his lust, and brought into bondage, he is a servant
of corruption, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. I conclude then, That a single Act, though
intertaind with some complacencie, if retracted, before the pleasure has made
too deep an impression, by a long abode, does not put a man out of the state of
Salvation, nor rescind his gracious privileges and relations, nor cassate his
interest in that grace, wherein God has made him accepted in the Beloved; but
only then, when sin does reign and dwell in peace, or when after a hot alarm
of its approach, Ezekiel. 33.9.
and special warning given to arm and stand upon his guard, if a man then
turns coward, lets it in without resistance, and permits it to levy forces and
stand in competition with the spirit; and much more if he shall invite it in,
and assist it against his interest. Whether the sin of Peter or David were of
this nature, we shall examine in the sequel.

In the mean while, let us consider, what is granted concerning the danger or
sad estate that the regenerate men fall into by their perpetration of foul
sins. De Persev. Sanctorum.
Spiritum contristant, indignationem Dei paternam incurrunt, reatum damnabilem
contrahunt: sic ut demeritorie saltem licet non effective jus ad regnum
coelorum penitus admittunt fideles regeniti and justificati, says Doctor
Prideaux. Some resemble their estate to the condition of a man excommunicated
or outlawed, who loses his actual claim to whatsoever is due to him upon
never so good assurance, D. Field Ap. to 2. B. of the Chapter page 313. and 834.
so that albeit the right and title to it is yet invested in them, yet all
prosecution of that right is suspended during the time he continues in that
estate. Others represent their estate by the condition of the Leper amongst the
Jews, who for the time was debarted the use of his own habitation; yet he lost
not his right to it; for after he was healed, he might reenter and keep
possession. (But by the way, if he died before his actual cleansing, he could
not do so.) I suppose rather that their estate might be represented by the Law
made against the presumptuous sinner, Number. 15.30. The Soul that does ought
presumptuously (or with a high hand): whether he be born in the land, or a
stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord: and (there was no sacrifice to make
his atonement) that soul shall be cut off from among his people. His punishment
was not sequestration, or exclusion from his People, but excision. I do not
here take upon me to determine, what the final and eternal estate of such a
person was, (that must be according to the quality and degrees of his
repentance before his execution) but I observe that by the sentence of God,
declared in that law, presumptuous sins do ipso facto make an alteration of
estate (as great an alteration as is from life to death) in the person that
commits them: Now to give us to understand that David's sin was of such a
nature, there is the very character of a Presumptuous sin set upon it, which
is, that the Lord is reproached by it. ib. and so it is said of David's sin, 2 Samuel 12.14. By this de^^ thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme.

Before I proceed further, I could wish you would seriously consider the
importance of that caution given by the Apostle, Heb. 12.15, 16. Looking
diligently lest any man fail (or fall from) the grace of God, lest any root of
bitterness springing up trouble you and thereby many be defiled, lest there be
any fornicator or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright, for ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected. If you think such caveats and threatenings, being
applied as preservations against defection, do always become a means of
perseverance to the regenerate; and at most imply but a possibility of their
Apostasy, in regard of themselves, not the certain futurity of it, unless it
be, in the Non-elect, God having put in a bar against it for the rest; I desire
you to consider, that a Type being given, and an instance made, in a person who
certainly had once a just right to inherit, whether this must not needs imply a
real danger of the event, viz. of falling to those, who for the present have a
true right and title to the Evangelicall blessing and celestial inheritance. I
say, a real danger of falling, and in some case (which is here set down to
aggravate the danger, and consequently to excite their care to avoid it, to the
highest pitch) irrecoverably.

But to return to David; I think it very easy to conclude him in an
unjustified estate, out of your own principles. In your Account of
Perseverance, Page 40.
you lay these for grounds, ( n. 5.) The Dominion of any one sin is
inconsistent with saving grace and justification. n. 7. You say, He that has
not more hatred then love to any sin, and that had not rather be rid of it,
even in the use of Gods means, then keep it, in regard of the Habituated state
of his will, is under the dominion of sin, and in the state of damnation. n. 8.
He that is thus resolved, and affected against a gross sin, or any known
sin, that is under the power of h^s will, is not like to live in, or give up
himself to it: Nay he cannot commit it without renewed resolutions against it,
and a restless importunity of soul to to be delivered, which will prevail. If
this be true, (as I am ready to subscribe to it) David was in a much more sad
condition, then you are apt to believe him in. For that he was guilty of a
gross known sin, you cannot, you will not deny; but where were his renewed
resolutions against it? where was the use of Gods means, or the restless
importunity of his soul to be delivered from it? Did he not give up himself to
it, and industriously make provision for it, and live in it? Nay did he not
upon design and contrivance, against all the engagements of nobleness,
ingenuity, (and humanity) proceed from one wickedness to another? It cannot
with any color be denied. There is but one Salvo in all your three
propositions to help you; you will say, perhaps, that in regard of the
habituated state of his will, he had rather have been rid of it, then have kept
it. That does not appear, but very much against it. If it had been so, why did
he not consult his Prophet, or fast and mourn, as he did afterward for the
sickness of his child? His habituated estate, it seems, was a very secure
state, that the accustomed ministry of the Church would not serve the turn,
but God was fallen to discharge an especial piece of his Ordnance to awaken him
out of it. You add in your 10. Proposition; That sin does as naturally breed
troubles and fears, as the setting of the Sun causes darkness, or as a
gross substance in the Sunshine causes a shadow. And this from the nature of
the thing, and by the will of God. If it be so, what can we conclude, from the
want of such fears and troubles in him, but that it is probable, God left him
for the time under some degrees of obduration?

And indeed, not so much the palpitation and trembling of the heart, through
fears and troubles, as the hardening, of it, is the inseparable companion of
presumptuous sinning. The Devil carries himself with a kind of bashfulnesse
till he finds encouragement. And that man must be lustily steeld with
impudence, that will be presumptuous where he has little interest. It is
argument enough that the sin has gotten a great force in a man when it is
presumptuous. Upon this account it is, that our Criminal prays so earnestly
at another time, Psalm. 19.14. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins,
lest they get the dominion over me. Upon which words Amesius says, In Psalm. 19.
Talia flagitia non constunt cum timore Dei. Such crimes cannot consist with
the fear of God. Indeed he infers from thence, that the servants of God are not
inthral'd to such contumacies. And it is true in sensu composito, as they are,
and whilst they are Gods servants. But if they betake themselves to the
service of another Master, his lusts then they will do. Shall a man need to
serve an Apprentiship to the trade of sin, before he can merit the title of
being a servant to it? His servants ye are to whom ye obey, says the Apostle.
Suppose David had only been surprised at first, with the beauty of the woman
(though indeed, those sins, whose horrid enormity is so great, that the very
light of nature commands us always to be in arms, and stand upon our guard
against them, can never be excused or extenuated upon the account of a
surprizall.) But put case I say, he had been surprised at first, yet upon whose
command was it, 1. That (after sufficient time of recollection and advisement,
when he should have been at prayers) he sent Messengers, and sure some preface
of courtship was used to flatter and seduce her, and so took her and lay with
her. 2 Samuel 12.
2. That he afterward sent for her husband, from his duty in the Leaguer. 3.
That he advised him so earnestly to go home and wash his feet -- and sent a
mess of meat after him. 4. That he blamed him under a pretense of pity, that
he went not down to his house. 5. That he bad him tarry till the morrow, and
then invited him to an entertainment, where he made him drunken. 6. That he
laid so cunning a plot to murder him (whom he had so lately debauched, that he
was scarce awakened, or at least scarce recovered out of his distemper) and
then wrote a letter, with so much formality, to Joab, to acquaint him, how he
should manage and carry on this projected stratagem, and lastly, that he sent
it by Uriah's own loyal hand, making him carry the Warrant for his own
unworthy and treacherous execution; At whose command, I say, did David do all
this? Was it not at the command of Lust? and then, did he not obey her, as her
servant? What clearer evidence can there be in the world then this, to prove,
that sin has got the Dominion over a man?

I Will offer you but one argument more, from the doctrine of Saint John. 1 John
3.9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 17. verses. Take it in this form, No man that is not of
God, that has not eternal life, nor the love of God abiding in him, but is of
the Devil, and abides in death, no such man is in the state of justification:
But David, guilty of the matter of Vriah, is such a man, viz. not of God, not
having eternal life, not the love of God abiding in him, but is of the Devil,
and abides in death: Therefore, etc.

The Major is undeniable, being the express words of S. John.

The Minor is thus proved out of the same Apostle. He that commits sin, and
does not righteousness, that loves not his brother, that shuts up his
bowels of compassion from him, that not only hates, but actually murders him,
(like Cain for the satisfaction of his lust) he is not of God, has not
eternal life, nor the love of God abiding in him, but is of the Devil, and
abides in death: But David in the matter of Uriah commits sin, does not
righteousness, loves not his brother, shuts up his bowels of compassion
from him, and actually murders him. Ergo. The Major is again the express words
of S. John: and the Minor is proved evidently by the History which contains
the matter of Fact. 2 Samuel 11.


I am the more confirmed in the certain truth of this doctrine, by reflecting
upon the scope and method of the Apostles discourse upon it. Having represented
the great privilege of Adoption, he proceeds to declare that this privilege
is to be preserved by a purity of soul and life, suitable to that state; and
because, 1 John 3. v. 4. to 17.
(as he urges,) injustice and uncharitableness are altogether inconsistent
with it, therefore he earnestly dissuades from them, as a most certain means,
conducing to the forfeiture of the benefit thereof. Beloved, Ibid. v. 2.
now are we the sons of God (says he) by inchoation, adopted into that
state, of special grace, and favor, to give probation of our filial
ingenuity and obedience, in purifying our selves, that we may be advanced to a
due and fitting capacity, for the glorious presence and communion of the Holy
God. Thus we are now the sons of God: but it does not yet appear what we shall
be; for that glory is not yet revealed in us; neither have we yet performed the
condition, which is required to qualify and dispose us for it; Aug. does
distinguish betwixt sons by Regeneration, and sons by Praedestination: as in
your Ac. of Persev. page 16. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15.
for we must withdraw our selves from all pollutions, and be devoted by a
special separation to his service; As obedient children, not fashioning our
selves according to the former lusts in our ignorance: but as he which has
called us is holy, so must we be holy in all manner of conversation; Wherefore
come out from among them (Heathenish pollutions) and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. And will be a
father unto you, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. This
Privilege of Adoption, is not absolutely our own freehold, our tenure in it
is conditional, (no less than that of being his house, and his Disciples,
which imports the same benefit under diversified expressions) and this
condition is the sincere and constant performance of our faithful duty and
service, Heb. 3.6, 14. Joh. 8.31.
Romans 2.7.
which consists in a course of holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our life; Luke 1.75.
according to the covenant made with Abraham. All the Divines that I have met
with (at least to my best remembrance) do set Justification before Adoption (in
order of nature, if not of time) and yet, you your self confess, Aphor. of
Justif. distinct. 21. Those only are his practical conquering Disciples, who
actually persevere. Disp. of Sacram. page 94.
that that justification, of which the person has true possession, though it
be ours actually after faith, yet it is but conditionally, viz. upon condition
of perseverance in faith and sincere obedience. If that Justification, which we
are entitled to after faith, be held upon such terms, then much more, that
Adoption which follows it. Here then you and Tilenus are agreed, but I doubt it
will not hold long. For if the question be asked, whether every Regenerate man
will infallibly perform this condition, you answer in the affirmative; and
indeed according to your doctrine he cannot do otherwise, unless you take up
your distinction for fashion sake, and say that quoad se, he may fail in that
performance, but respectu Dei, it is impossible; because, to speak openly and
plainly, it is not he that does it (and how comes it then to be his duty, and
rewardable?) but God by an insuperable power, Preface, Section 9.
according to his absolute purpose to cause this condition in him.

Let us come at last to your reasons.

1. I do not find (you say) any mention of them (David and Peter) or any
others, that were twice Regenerated, or sanctified in Scripture Then there can
never be any other truly Prodigal son; but only Adam.
. Answ. 1. Then all those of whose pollutions and backslidings Almighty God so
bitterly complains in Scripture, were either not regenerated and sanctified at
all (and then it would be somewhat strange, Isa. 1.21. 2 Pet. 2.18.19. Ezekiel.
16.38, with 60. Jer. 18.11. with 13. Jer. 2.12, 13.
that a most wise God should complain that men had corrupted themselves and
polluted their ways, who never had been sanctified:) or else that they did all
perish in such their pollutions and backslidings; and this will seem no less
strange then the other, to any considering person (who attends to it without
prejudice). That after so many earnest invitations and wooings to return, Jer.
3.12. Isa. 1.18. Hose. 2.7, with 14. Jer. 3.1, 12, 14. Hos. 14.4.
and such a gracious reception given by Almighty God to such returners; that
notwithstanding all this, every Revolting and backsliding person should be
damned, is to me utterly incredible.

2. The Metaphor of Regeneration, may deceive us; For it signifies the
production of new Qualities and new Relations, as you say, Treatise of
Conversion, page 8.
I may add, new Capacities too. For consider the whole world as lying in
wickedness, dead in trespasses and sins, under the curse of the Law, and the
sentence of Gods wrath; Christ coming to take away this curse, and make
expiation for that sin, and to appease that wrath, may very well be said to
have begotten us again to a new hope, in respect of that capacity, which we
were put into by the benefit of his death and resurrection 2 Timothy 1, 9, 10. 1
Pet. 1.3.
, even before our embracing of the Gospel. The Resurrection is called a
Regeneration too, as Beza and Deodati interpret that Text, Mat. 19.28.
Regeneratio sumitur pro illa die, qua electi incipient novam vitam vivere. i.
e. Cum animo and corpore fruentur illa haereditate coelesti, says Beza, and
Deodati to the same purpose; so that you see the Scripture mentions a twofold
regeneration. But this last will not serve our turn, and therefore I shall
reflect upon what you grant, as the Doctrine of the Synod, in your 33. Sect.
They deny not, you say, but men may fall from a present capacity of salvation,
and under the necessity of a renewed Repentance, to put them again into a
present capacity. But, say I, after a lapse into gross and foul sins (which
are said to corrupt and defile and pollute the soul, especially upon any abode
in them) there is and must be a production of new qualities, as well as a new
capacity, (if that new capacity does not rather consist in such qualities,)
therefore, in that case, (this being a Regeneration) the man so lapsed is twice
Regenerated.

3. How can there be an actual iteration of the travel of the Ministry,
about the very same persons, without a possible iteration of the new birth? Yet
we see, the Apostle to the Galatians, Gal. 3.2. c, 5.4. c. 4.6.
who had received the Spirit, and were in a state of Grace, God having sent the
Spirit of his Son into their hearts, crying Abba, Father, (all which are
sufficient evidences of their Regeneration) yet to these he says, My little
children of whom I travel in birth again, Gal. 4.19. Deodati Annot. Eng.
until Christ be formed in you. That is, says Deodati, My little children,
for whom I endure great pains and anguishes, as a woman that is in travel,
until such time as Christ's pure doctrine is re-establisht amongst you, as I
had planted it, to frame in your souls a living image of Christ, in
righteousness and true holiness. And what can you make of this but
regeneration?

4. You do confess, All those five words, viz. Conversion, Repentance,
Regeneration, Sanctification, Vocation, Treatise of Conversion, page 6.
are used in Scripture to express the same work upon the soul; and there is
another word, Ibid. page 8.
you put in (a page or two after) the New Creation. But what more frequent in
holy Scripture, then at least the implyed-iteration of Conversion, Repentance,
Sanctification, and the new creation? For Conversion take that place Hosea
14.1. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God; for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity: Fallen! from what? from one wickedness to another? No, from the grace
and favor of God, verse. 4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them
freely: for mine anger is turned away from him. Let us also consider that of
the Prophet Jer. 3.1. If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and
become another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not the land be
greatly polluted? yes, according to that Law made and provided on that behalf,
Deuteronomy. 24.1, 2, 3. But thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return
again to me, says the Lord. Where we may take notice, 1. What their Relation
was to God; He was married unto them, verse. 14. (and to be a wife, sure is as
near a relation, and imports as great an indearement, as to be sons and
daughters). 2. What their transgression was; fornication, which, in a
spiritual sense, as relating to God, was Idolatry; and that does, ipso facto,
alter the state, and rescind the Covenant; whence it was, that Moses finding
the people playing the Harlot with the Calf, to intimate that the Covenant
betwixt them and their God was canceled and made void, he broke the Tables in
pieces. Yet 3. God invites them to a restitution; return again to me, says He;
and more fully, Verse. 12, 14. Turn, O backsliding children, says the Lord;
for I am married unto you; and though I might give you a final bill of divorce
for your backsliding and Idolatry; yet I will take you again (upon your
repentance.) So that here we have some, at least, that were converted a second
time from a state of aversion from God, and therefore they were twice
Regenerated. What exceptions you will make against these instances, as relating
to a national Church, I know not: but what ever they are, I am confid^nt I
shall be able to answer them out of your own doctrine, delivered in your
Disputations, of Right to Sacraments.

5. That the new Creation (another expression as you acknowledge, Treatise of
Conversion, page 8.
to describe Regeneration) may be repeated, sundry Scripture instances will
evince. As Ezekiel. 18.31. Make you a new heart and a new spirit, and that of
David, (who certainly had this new creature, or the new creation wrought in him
once before) Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right
spirit within me. And to whom does the Apostle direct his Epistle to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.1.
but to the Saints and faithful in Christ Jesus? Cap. 4.24.
Yet he exhorts them to be renewed in the spirit of their minds. To put on the
new man: as was said above.

6. Repentance, you say signifies the same work upon the soul, as Regeneration
does. What shall we turn Novatians? No iteration of Repentance neither? Why was
that title given to Repentance by Tertullian, Hierom and the rest that
followed? why did they call it, Secunda Tabula post Naufragium? Council.
provinc. Colon. mihi pa. 121. a. b.
Prima tabula, qua subnixi ex diluvio peccatorum tam in Adam veluti stirpe,
quam postea male vivendo, quacunque tandem ratione contractorum enatamus,
Baptismus est, post quem acceptum, si rursus naufragium fecerimus, nulla pro
peccatis nova hostia restat, sed tantum superest haec secunda tabula,
Poenitentia, quam si gnaviter (donec vita superstes est) apprehenderimus, ac
apprehensam persequuti fuerimus, non dubium, quem rursus ad salutis portum
pertingemus, quamlibet etiam pericalosi sint, in quos postea incidimus,
peccatorum scopuli. It is not only possible for the vessels of the Regenerate
to leak and let in a litttle salt water; but they may run against the rock of
Presumptuous sin, and make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience; 1 Tit.
1.19.
for that is the damage sustained by their miscarriage, who are embarked upon
the bottom of Christianity, as S Paul tells us; and this plank of Repentance
is thrown out by special indulgence and grace to such, to preserve them from
immersion and utter ruin, and transport them again to the desired haven of
eternal happiness.

The institution of the discip^^ne (...) R pentance (or as the Ancients call it
P^nnance) imports no less; And the Practice of the Ancient Church confirms it.
The Apostle delivers up the Incestuous Corinthian to Satan: to what end? for
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. That is, says Deodati, to macorate and pull down the
body extremely, even to death, i^ God would have it so; as oftentimes by means
of the aforesaid things ( viz. excommunication, Annot. in Engl.
with its attendants (in those first days of the Christian Church) horrors,
anguishes of spirit, and torments of body) death did follow, and at his last
passage, if the sinner did show a lively repentance, he was loosed from those
bonds of excommunication, and readmitted into the peace of the Church, and into
the Grace of God, and so died with comfort, eased and relieved with the public
and private prayers of the faithful. Finis excommunicationi propositus non est
excommunicati exitium sed salus, Beza. not. minor.
ut videlicet hoc remedio d^metur ipsius caro, ut d^s^a^ spiritui vivere.
Whence it clearly appears, that in the judgment of these Learned men, grovnded
upon the Scripture, such as lay under the sentence of excommunication were not
in a state of justification, and consequently that by the use and practice of
this wholesome Discipline they were to be regenerated, and brought forth as it
were anew unto it. And this was the end of the same Censures inflicted upon
Hymenaeus and Alexander; who had actually repelled a good conscience. 1 Timothy
1.19 and 20.
And this was no more, than was contained in the commission upon the donation
of the Power of the Keys; Mat. 18.18 Joh 20.23.
What ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whosesoever sins ye
remit, they are remitted; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.

I am not ignorant, that there is an extemporary Repentance 1 John 1.9. this
was signified, Lotione pedum. Joh. 13.10.
(as Meisner calls it) in order to the continual expiation of intercurrent
sins in the blood of Christ; sins of ignorance, and infirmity, of inadvertency
and sudden surreption, which the regenerate daily fall into, Luke 15.7.
who yet are said, (in respect of the change of state) to need no repentance.
But there is a Solemn repentance after enormous, wasting sins, (commonly called
Mortal sins). Why was this instituted and to be performed with so much
discipline of severity (as we find it practiced by the Apostle and the
Primitive Church (for 7, 9, 13, years together upon one and the same person,
before his restitution to the peace of the Church, and the grace of God, and
hopes of pardon) but to signify that such persons had extreme need of such a
Repentance as might import a change of state, whereby they might be recovered
again after a fall wherein they were given for lost? and this is called
repentance unto salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10.

That this Discipline should be instituted only for the use and benefit of
such as never were regenerate (and I cannot see what else is to be alleged to
avoid the force of the argument; for a second Regeneration) is so ridiculous to
imagine, that I presume no rational man will offer to affirm it.

To conclude this argument then. Whosoever may Repent and be converted, and be
renewed and sanctified and become a new creature, a second or third time, he
may be twice or thrice Regenerated: But a poor sinner may repent and be
converted, and renewed, and sanctified, and become a new creature, a second or
third time, Ergo. The Major Proposition is undeniable; because, Repentance,
Conversion, Renovation, Sanctification, and Regeneration, do all signify one
and the same work upon the soul, as is acknowledged not only by Bucan, and the
Professors of Leiden, Buc. loc. com. 30. p. 294. Synops. disp. 32. these. 2. p.
420. Treatise of Conversion, page 7.
but also by your self. The Minor is evident by the proofs alleged. I shall
but add, what is said by the Provincial Council before named, touching this
matter of Repentance after gross sins. Remedium sane in Ecclesia sum
necessarium, Vbi supra.
quo sublato, quantula quaeso, hominum pars fuerit, quae post baptismum,
nullius peccati, aut etiam criminis sibi conscia, vitae aeternae
participationem sperare queat? Vt nulli nobis immaeniores Haeritici unquam
fuisse videantur, quam Novatiani, qui tam necessarium animae medicamentum medio
tollere conati sunt. And yet which of the two is more pernicious to Religion,
viz. to deny a capacity, in some grossly sinful, to receive the peace of the
Church (which cannot keep them out of heaven, if they be truly penitent) or to
deny in others a possibility to loose the peace of God; this I say, I shall
refer to the judgment of the sober and learned to consider. In the interim I
proceed.

2. You say, Those Passages, Heb. 6. and 10. seem to import, that if men should
thus wholly excuss the spirit of God, there were no renewing them by Repentance.

Answ. If they do but seem to import so much, they may really import something
less. You know they have been understood of a renewing by the iteration of
baptism. Nam qui post baptismum (in quo cum Christo cruci configimur and
consepelimur) labitur, Council. provinc. Colon. p. 120.
ac putat aliam renovationem baptismatis superasse, is Christum denuo
Crucifigit. Semel crucifixus est Christus, semel peccato mortuus est, at modo
non moritur ergo and unicum oportet esse in ecclesia Baptismum, non plura. 2.
By the word impossible, which the Apostle there uses, may, (according to the
frequent use of Scripture) be meant, it is, exceeding difficult, to renew such
sinners, not that it is absolutely impossible, as the word is used by our
Savior touching those that were too much, for the present, wedded to the
world, Mar. 10.25, 26, 27. 3. You may lay an Emphasis upon that expression, If
men should thus wholly excuss the Spirit: how do you mean? Renouncing utterly
their Christianity and Baptism, and doing despite to the Spirit of Grace, by
persecuting all that are faithful Disciples to it; and this against the light
of conviction, and the sweetness of experience in Gods gracious dispensations;
This may amount to the sin against the Holy Ghost. But though some fall by such
sins irrecoverably; yet it does not follow, but others (who do excuse the
Spirit, so far forth, as that signifies the quenching of it, to the loss of
Gods favor and their justification) may fall and be renewed again by
Repentance; For there may be an Apostasy total and not final; And so much is
employed in the very text. If they, viz. who have tasted of the heavenly gift,
Heb. 6.4, 5.
and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come, Cap. 10.29.
If they shall fall away thus, viz. treading under foot the Son of God, and
counting the blood of the Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified an unholy
thing, and doing despite to the spirit of grace; It is impossible to renew them
again unto repentance. Yet others that fall away and excuse the spirit, but not
thus adding contempt and persecution to their Apostasy, they may be renewed
again unto Repentance. The Apostle puts in his exception, only against one
sort of Apostates, and it is a Rule in Law, Exceptio firmat Regulam in Casibus
non exceptis.

3. Your next Argument, is Metaphorical, and consequently, none of the most
Cogent, but it is taken from Christ's words, who says, that the Hearers like
the good ground that give deep rooting to the seed, do not fall away in trial:
But David and Peter, were such by Gods own testimony. Ergo.

Answ. 1. I might argue as well, a Remotione consequentis ad remotionem
antecedentis: But David and Peter did fall away in trial. Ergo. But they were
good ground you say, by Gods own testimony; and it is granted you for truth. 2.
Therefore, I deny your Major; where does Christ say, that the Hearers like the
good ground that give deep rooting to the seed, do not fall away in trial? I
can find no such assertion in all the three Evangelists which record this
Parable. Saint Luke says, Luke 8.15. Mar. 4.29. Mat. 13.23.
they bring forth fruit with patience, and S. Mark and S. Matthew add some an
hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty. But he does not so much as intimate that
this good ground is immutably fruitful. Are not thorns and briars the
natural off spring of our Red-earth? At least they are very apt to spring up
from it, for want of tillage and manuring; Jer. 4.3. Hos. 10.12.
Hereupon God calls to his own people, Break up your fallow ground, and sow
not among thorns.

3. Whence then did you draw that Predication of good Hearers? [they do not
fall away] Perhaps you collect it by way of opposition, to those on the rock,
which when they hear, receive the word with joy; and these have no root,
which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. So Saint Luke
has it. Cap. 8.13.
Now what do you infer from hence? That those Hearers, that are resembled to
the good ground, do not fall away, and by consequence you conclude, that David
when he was tempted to wantonness, did not fall under the power of that
temptation: nor Peter when he was questioned about his relation to Christ, did
not Praevaricate; and so the Adultery and murder of the one, and the denial of
Christ and perjury of the other, were not falling away. I pray what will you
call them? Bringing forth fruit with Patience? What? either an hundred, or
sixty, or thirty fold? Had you duly consulted the other two Evangelists, they
would have prevented that Fallacy wherein you were taken, I suppose, for want
of such advisement. They would have told you what the temptation is that our
Savior speaks of, viz. Tribulation, Mat. 13.21. Mar. 4 17.
affliction or persecution for the words sake; represented by the scorching
Sun, in the same parable. But what is this to David, who burnt himself in other
flames, of his own kindling? or to Peter, who wilfully run into the fire? The
Sophisme then, is a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. The honest and
good heart well manured and husbanded like good ground, that receives the seed
and lets it sink, and take deep root, and bring forth fruit with patience, does
not wither and dry away through the scorchings of hot and violent persecution.
Ergo. The man that has such a heart, when, grown remiss or presumptuous, he
is drawn away of his own lusts and enticed. Jam. 1.14, 15.
Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin when it is
finished, brings forth death. The man falls not away then neither by your
doctrine; which is not contained in the parable. Nay the Parable tells you, the
seed may be destroyed, though the sun of persecution never touch it, by those
thorns that grow out of the ground it self. But because you insist so much upon
Parables; (for you have another not far off) I would have you to consider;
where the point of discrimination lies, in reference to the fruitfulness and
unfruitfulnesse; not in the nature of the seed, or in the influences of the
Sun, or any other heavenly dispensation; but in the qualification of the soil
only. We may be instructed further from the Plough; that be the ground never
so good the seed does not take root, much less deep root in it presently upon
the first sowing; for then the earth is loose and mouldry, and many times a
storm does so beat and discompose it, that the seed is left naked, for a prey
to vermin; And though it has taken root, it is not firmly settled, till a
vicissitude of soft showers and warm beams, have stiffened and confirmed the
soil about it, and then it is lodged sure.

4. Your fourth Argument advances in these words; No Scripture tells us that
David or Peter were void of charity, etc.

Answ. Nor does it tell us so of Judas Where does it tells us of Noah's, or of
Lot's repentance.
. You know negative arguments from Authority are not concluding, especially for
matters of fact. What Scripture tells us, that Master Richard Baxter, is, or
should be, Teacher of the Church of Christ at Kederminster.

5. You argue; David prays Psalm. 50. that God would not for that sin, take his
holy Spirit from him: which implys that yet he had it.

Answ. 1. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within
me; implies the contrary; and this Petition was before the other.

2. Take not thy holy Spirit from me, may signify no more, then what is
repeated by way of further explication in the verse following; Restore to me the
joy of thy salvation, etc.

3. I say, this Psalm was composed after his restitution, when the Spirit of
God was returned to him, in renewed breathings, and visitations; whereof these
holy passions, and devotions were a strong effect.

6. You say, The thing in it self seems utterly improbable to me, that David or
Peter should have no love to God, after those particular sins.

Answ. 1. Every kind and degree of our Love toward God will no more serve
Gods turn, then every sort and degree of his will serve ours. There is a common
grace (as you declare many times in your writings) which is real, true and
good, yet not special saving Grace. See your Saints Rest. Second Edition. And
of Saving Faith, p. 2, and 93.
Wherefore you tell us, we must not only inquire into the truth of the Act or
Habit (in a Metaphysicall notion): but also and much more into the Moral truth
of it, as it is a grace or duty. The unregenerate, and wicked you confess may
love God; because they may apprehend it as good in it self, and good to their
persons. I shall add, (though it should seem a Paradox) that the very damned
in hell, do carry some affection toward God, as he is the chief Good; else I
cannot conceive, how the Loss of the beatificall vision (which consists ^n the
fruition of his glorious presence) can be so great a torment as to surmount the
pain of sense in them; as the Ancients affirm it does. I must press you
therefore with one of your own Conclusions; that the sincerity of love (without
which it will not be saving) is laid in the prevailing degree, not in the act
of it. Vbi supra.
This you confirm by the words of our Savior. Saints Rest. Second Edition.
Mat. 10.33, 37. He that loves father or mother etc. more then me, is not
worthy of me. And unless ye forsake all, ye cannot be my Disciples. God and
Christ being set in competition with the world, and the Spirit set in
opposition to the flesh, it is the comparative degree that carries it. To which
purpose you quote these passages of Scripture. To him that overcomes, Rev.
3.21.
will I give, etc. Psalm. 73.2.5
And, that of the Psalmist, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none
in earth, that I desire in comparison of thee. This is your doctrine, as near
as I can remember, (in your Saints Rest,) for I cannot now conveniently turn
to the place. Whether there were now in David or Peter this Prevalent degree of
love, as to prefer God before, not only the world and the flesh, but their
life also, I leave to every indifferent Reader to judge.

But you proceed, and say, The sins I know were odious, and deserved an utter
desertion of God: But God inflicts not all that we deserve.

Answ. This is somewhat like the thirty fourth Excuse of the wicked at the day
of Judgment, Sermon of Judgment.
(as you allege it in their names) and therefore I shall return your own words
to you; viz. God knows his own mercy better then you do; and he has told you
how far it shall extend. If those Scriptures of the Prophet and Apostles, [
When the righteous turn away from his righteousness -- If any man draw back --
Ezekiel. 18.24. Hebr. 10.38.] be no Gospel with you I cannot help it. If those
sins deserved an utter desertion of God; we are to govern as our lives, so our
judgments by his Covenant; for to depend upon any Extraordinary
supererogations of Mercy, more then his superabundant Grace has contracted
for, or promised, is high presumption.

But you go on, and tell us, 1. That although Actually in the time of sinning,
the power of sensuality prevailed against the Act of Charity; yet that
Habitually God was afterward set less by then the sensual pleasure, by these
Holy men, is utterly improbable.

Answ. 1. When our Savior Christ says, If any man comes to me, and hate not
(which signifies to love less) his father -- yea and his own life also, Luke
14.26.
he cannot be my Disciple. Does a habitual estimation of God, satisfy the
Precept, under the actual breach of it? or can that carry Gods acceptance? I
think not: (2.) Can the Habitual estimation of God consist with an indulgence
to the pleasure of sin, and sensuality? I would fain understand how far they
are reconciled? and how long you would keep them friends? I hope not till
doomes day. And if you can think fit they should be separated after some
considerable time of cohabitation; you must in all reason give them a bill of
divorce in David's Case; whose remorslesse Conscience, for so many months
together, does sufficiently evince his indulgence to the pleasure of his lust
or sensuality.

3. We may observe in some persons, that sins are many times recurrent,
especially sins of some sort, and are content to divide with Almighty God, not
only in point of time, but likewise in the affections and devotions of the
sinner. His zeal for God shall be all fire and tow, at such times, and upon
such occasions, and in such company; yet at the return of such and such
temptations, (which may be frequent too) he is periodically captivated to the
law of that lust. I hope you will not vote such a person into the state of
justification, while he is thus divided betwixt God and Mammon. And that David
had sinned himself into this, if not into a worse temper, what hinders us from
concluding? That he had espoused Bathsheba and so gotten the temptation into
his bosom; this was to make provision for his Lust, not for his Repentance;
and while we find him unrelenting at the crime, we ought to conclude, his
design was to perpetuate the pleasure, under a color of legitimating the use
of his Adultery; and therefore it is observable, 2 Samuel 2. last. cap. 12.9.10
God was angry at the after marriage, as well as at the former murder and
uncleanness. And this may in some sense be urged against Peter: but of him
more anon.

2. You say, You cannot imagine that the Faith of David and Peter were
Habitually extirpated, and they were turned unbelievers. And I cannot think
(what ever the Papists have yet said to the contrary) that a sound Christian
faith is separable from Charity, though a superficial opinionative belief may.

Answer. To the first branch of your imagination, I shall say but this for the
present; we are told by the divine Revelation^, that we must be judged by the
w^^k (...) own performing, and not by the (...) ^ods infusing. 2. Misbelievers
as well as Unbelievers may be in an unjustified state; and if Faith without
good works be dead, and cannot justify: then Faith with dead works is dead and
damning also. 3. As to your second branch, if by a sound Christian Faith, you
understand such a faith, as you have defined a saving faith to be, in some of
your writings, I think you will have no Papists much less Protestants, your
Adversaries: but then I hope, you cannot think such a Faith any more separable
from chastity, brotherly kindness, or loyalty to Christ, then from charity:
Aut yet we see these separated from the faith of David and Peter respectively;
Therefore the faith that they had now, was not that sound Christian saving
Faith.

3. You ask a question and then resolve it your self, thus; Do you think, that
if David or Peter had after this sin, been upon sober deliberation put to it,
they would not have chosen the love of God before the world or sinful
pleasure? I think they would.

Answer. 1. Doubtless Judas would have done so too. Esau did so concerning his
fathers blessing. But what matters it, what men would have done; when woulding
is too late, their will having undone them. 2. The neglect of sober
deliberation many times betrays men to destruction. The Ox knows his owner,
and the Ass his Masters Crib: Isa. 1.3.
but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. Jer. 8.6.
No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? Every one
turns to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. 3. Peter had an
hours respite after one temptation; Luke 22.59
and so long a time, is sufficient to make the killing of a man be adjudged a
prepensed and wilful murder by our common Law; and whose fault was it, that
he wanted such a sober deliberation as you speak of? Why did he not put himself
to it, to chose the love of God? He had a natural power, to do it; (to use
your own distinction) and why he had not, and did not exercise a moral Power,
you must fetch the reason from his own, or (to excuse that) from the will of
God. For David's part, he had a pretty considerable time to deliberate in. Sure
it was the love of pleasure, not the love of God that kept him from it.

4. You demand; Is it likely that this one Act should turn their hearts into as
Graceless a frame, as the ungodly themselves that never were sanctified? It is
not likely. Yet so it must be, if they excussed all the Love of God.

Answ. If they excussed all the love of God? Why all the love of God? I told
you not long since, out of your own writings, that every degree of the love of
God will not serve the turn: but only that which does preponderate and
prevail; And therefore (though all the love of God be not excussed, if that
prevailing degree be excussed, they remain unjustified, whether or no their
hearts be turned into as Graceless a frame, as the ungodly themselves that
were never sanctified. But this does follow, you say, and it is not likely that
it should be so. I answer, 2. That a Graceless frame of heart, may be so
denominated, either from the total absence and privation of grace only, or
else it may imply also a contracted vicious habit in opposition to Grace: In
the first sense, I grant their hearts may be said to be turned into as
Graceless a frame: but not in the later; because though their hearts may have
as little grace for the present, yet are they not, through custom of sinning,
reduced to such an indisposition to receive the impressions of Grace, as are
the hearts of the notorious ungodly, who were never sanctified. And yet I must
tell you. 3. That (as it is observed of water that has been heat, it will be
congealed and freez the sooner; so) such, as have felt the heat of that Divine
fire, and been enlightened and melted, and warmed and refreshed by the sweet and
efficacious beams and influences of that Grace; they are in danger, for their
great ingratitude, Hebr. 6. and 10.
to be permitted to fall into a state more miserable and hopeless, then such
as were never sanctified. But 4. you allege, Is it likely that this one Act?
Answ. 1. There are some single Acts of sin so heinous, that their enormitie
does equalize the Habites of many sins, and of some they do manifestly
preponderate and surpass them. And such Acts, though they proceed not from a
habit, but are only once committed, they do exclude a man from the kingdom
of heaven. One Act of unmercifull severity to his fellow servant, brought an
implacable wrath and endless torments upon him, who had not long before
received his Lords Acquittance, though he had not passed a very fair Account to
him. Mat. 18.34.
What more then a single Act deprived Esau of the blessing? Heb. 12.16.
and that sin unto death, mentioned by Saint John, 1 John 5.16.
seems to be no more. Mark 10.21
And what followed Christ's unum tibi deest, to the young man in the Gospel? yet
that was but an Omission neither. But 2. why do you call it (but) one Act? when
it was so accumulatively and exceeding sinful? There was a complication of
many sinful Acts, as well in the fall of Peter as of David. To that
Objection, Account of Persever. p. 13.
that Adam by one act did lose his habitual state of Grace, and Relation to
God, becoming unholy and unjustified: therefore so may we: you deny the
Antecedent; For, you say, it was not by one Act, but by many that Adam so far
fell. But sure here was no less, if not a much greater combination of sinful
Acts in the fall of David and Peter, then in that of Adam; therefore neither of
them ought to be contracted or extenuated into one single Act.

5. Your discourse runs on in these words; I think it was the Habit of Grace,
that the Gracious looks of Christ on Peter, and the words of Nathan to David,
did excite and bring again to Act; Peter was converted indeed by a particular
Conversion from that sin, when he Repented; but surely he was not converted a
second time from a state of unbelief, or of ungodliness, or uncharitableness,
or unholinesse.

Answ. 1. I suppose you mean an infused Habit; and if so; you know it is
questionable whether there be any such or no. In 4. did. 14. q. 2. Art. 5.
Dominicus Soto says that till the Council of Vienna [which was An. 1311.]
Nulla fuerit inter Doctores habita mentio de infusione qualitatis. There was no
mention made amongst the Doctors, touching the infusion of any [permanent]
quality [into the soul] And that Council did define and choose it but as a
more probable opinion? Carranz. Sum. p. 820.
And therefore till the Council of Trent it was not held (in the Church) as a
matter of Faith, Petr. as Jos. Id. th. sp. L. 4. c. 8, Resp. 1.
that there were any such Habits; and I doubt you will hardly adopt it into
your belief upon the account of that Authority?

2. If you mean an Habit acquired by frequent Acts and the industrious exercise
of (virtue) So I call it, supposing it, in fieri.
the motions of divine grace influencing hereunto; there is nothing more
reasonable then to conclude that this may be lost. Nihil est magis rationi
consentaneum, quam eodem modo, unumquodque dissolvere, quo conflatum est; is a
Rule in Law; and it will hold here, by Master Barlow's concession, Page 41.
(mentioned in your Account of Perseverance) Loose we may, what addition (He
speaks of Habitual Grace) by our cooperation with it, we have gained; and by
parity of Reason, if the Habit it self be a matter of our acquist, or gaining
(under the transient influences and motions of the divine assistance)
doubtless it is also in our power to make shipwreck of it.

3. Grant there be infused Habits, yet enormous sins may expel them, if not
efficienter physice, yet moraliter seu demeritorie; because the sinner so
grievously offending, and so highly dishonouring his gracious Lord and father,
Merito amittit jus quod habebat ad haereditatem coelestem, tanquam filius Dei
adoptivus, and consequenter spoliatur gratia sanctificante, in qua tale jus
fundatum See Rev. 22.14. Mat. 5.8.
erat. So the Romanist; and your self acknowledge, as much in part, in
opposition to M. Barlow, (in the place before mentioned) you say, A man may be
active in destroying grace, that was but passive in receiving it. We may merit
the diminution, and so may be active. And why may I not add, that by frequent
vicious acts, opposite to the habit of Grace, that habit may be extinguished,
or (if you like it better) expelled, and at length the contrary vicious habit
introduced? Vbi supra. page 28.
In your answer to that objection against the certainty of Perseverance, drawn
from the Apostasy of some persons rarely qualified, who have turned Quakers and
Licentious, if not Infidels; you yield an utter expulsion of such Habit. For,
you say, Some answer the foresaid Objection by telling them, that as in actual
sin (like David's and Solomon's) the habit of grace was alive under contrary
actings: So in the foresaid actual Errors, the habit of sound faith may
possibly be alive in many that seem to be fallen quite away. Though I do make
use of this answer, you say, in some cases where there is hope of such habits
Remaining, yet I am afraid of using it in most of the forementioned cases. I
dare not say that a man that long deliberately and industriously cries down
the Godhead of Christ and the holy Ghost, and that denies the Scripture and
the Immortality of the soul, etc. can be at that time in a state of Salvation.
Here we are agreed. And indeed, as S. John's exhortation does intimate, that,
upon our Apostasy or neglect of duty, 2. ep. verse. 8.
we may lose, what we our selves (cooperating with the Divine grace) have
gained: so that prayer of David, [Take not thy holy spirit from me] and that
intermination of our Savior [Take his Talent from him] do imply that, upon the
like account, God may, and many times does) take away what he has given. If
any man pretends to an interest in any promise of the Gospel to secure him
against this danger; that promise is either conditional or absolute. If he
says, conditional. I must say of such promises, as they usually say of laws,
Vigilantibus, non dormientibus jura subveniunt. The remiss and careless, much
more the highly guilty, do forfeit and lose the benefit of them. If he claims
by an Absolute promise, he does but beg the question, and gets nothing by it.

4. If the Habit of Grace remained in them, they might have recovered of
themselves, without any new influences of actual exciting or assisting grace
(Gods simultaneous proportionable concurse, If that be true, that every new
degree of grace is infused as the first was, as you seem to imply. [Of Pers.
page 41.] I can see neither any necessity, nor usefulness of your remanent
infused habits. For frustra fit per plura, etc.
which is never wanting, always supposed); which you will hardly allow of;
And yet the proof is clear from the nature and office or property of a habit,
which is, not only to furnish the faculty with strength simply sufficient, to
dispose, and incline it to Act, but also to do it with facility; As we see by
experience when a power is instructed with a habit in things natural. But this
you will hardly grant (as I said) in the restitution of David and Peter Yet you
say, The new nature or disposition of such a man will not suffer him to be long
without Actual Repentance; Disp. of Justif. p. 398.
.

5. Whereas you argue, that Peter's Conversion was but particular, not from a
state but a single sin: I must desire you to reflect upon what was said before
upon that head. Some single Acts of sin are not capable of such frequent
repetitions as should make them fruitful enough to beget a habit; Yet this
does not extenuate, but heighten their enormitie. Such was the crucifixion of
our Savior; and there may be some others, if not Parallel, yet in some measure
proportionable to it, whose execrable clamor will not only outcry the habits
of many other sins: but in a manner justify them. And that you may not think
the sin of Peter so inconsiderable; you must not look upon it as a sudden
surprisall; for he was forewarned, not only by the general application of a
prediction, [All ye shall be offended, because of me this night] but also by a
personal admonition. Mark 14.27
Luke 22.31. Simon, Simon: behold Satan has desired to have you, Mar. 14.30.
[Before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice.] He was forearmed too,
if he had followed his direction, [Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation] and retirement was suggested to him also, Mat. 26.41.
as his best posture of defense [If ye seek me, Joh. 18.8.
let these go their way.] That he was honored, to be the first in order, of
the College Apostolic, the mouth of all the rest, whose confession was made
the rock and foundation of the Christian Church, and in whose person, the power
of the Keys was conferred upon the whole body of the Priesthood; that such a
man as he, After so high a profession of fidelity too. Though I should die with
thee. Mat. 26.35.
should, (not fly the persecution, or faint under the pressures of it, but)
will fully expose himself to question, and notwithstanding all our Savior had
done to fortify him against it) then lie, and persist in it, and forswear and
curse himself, and all this, out of a base unworthy fear, to save his skin,
rather then own a person, who was his gracious Master, his God and his
Redeemer; who had formerly told him; Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my
words, Luke 9.26.
of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory,
Mat. 10.37. Luke 14.26.
and in his Fathers, and of the holy Angels. And again, [He that loves his own
life more then me, is not worthy of me]. So many and signal aggravations are
enough if not to mount his sin up to the highest pitch of a pardonable
guiltiness, at least to have his name enrolled in the Catalogue of such
sinners, as stand in need of a solemn repentance in order to their restitution
to grace and pardon.

6. Your sixth Conjecture, (for your arguments are no other) discovers it self
in these words. I verily think that after his sin, David went on in his
ordinary course of Religion and obedience in all things else (abating in the
degrees): otherwise his Apostasy would have been noted by those about him, and
so his very sin would scarce have been hid, which he desired to hide. And I do
not think that he went to God daily in public and private (was that to hide
his sin too?) without any love at all. These things to me are utterly
improbable.

Answ. I think, and I think, and I verily think; is this a good way of arguing?
Other men will be allowed their liberty to think as well as your self, and (if
they see cause) to think otherwise, and yet think as verily as you do; and make
no wonder or scruple at it at all that David should go on in his ordinary
course of Religion and obedience in all things else. It is so ordinary a thing
for Religion to be made a cloak or a vizor, or a stalking-horse to shelter the
design, when another game or mark is aimed at, that no man of observation can
think this part of your conjecture improbable. Saul in the very time of his
grand rebellion, will offer sacrifice. Absolon will go pay a vow at Hebron when
he intends an insurrection. Naboth shall not have a false Indictment drawn up
against him, and witnesses, sons of Belial suborned to make the charge good
upon oath; but a solemn Fast and Prayers shall be proclaimed to usher in the
Tragedy. Why, you know well enough that men will be very strict in observing
the new Moons and Sabbaths and solemn Feasts and appointed Meetings: they will
appear before the Lord, and that they may not appear empty, they will bring a
multitude of sacrifices and oblations, Isa. 1.
and make many prayers, and spread forth their hands; and yet their hands are
full of blood. Have you lived to these years, and are you become so great a
master of Israel, John 3.11.
and know not thou these things? Verily, verily I say unto thee, etc. The
very Heathens had taken up that for a rule, Can^e si non Cast. And the
adulterous woman, when she has eaten the bread of leudness, she wipes her
mouth very formally, and says, Prove. 30.20.
I have done no wickedness. But you say, you do not think, that he went to God
daily in public, and private, (Sir, you were not Clerk of his closet, and
therefore know little of his private devotions; the public, I grant it
probable, he did frequent, to the end you mention, which proceeded more out of
self-love, then love toward God: but) you do not think he did this without any
As great men's quick goods are presumed to be of a better kind or breed, than
the like goods of their poor Neighbors (for Noblemens geese, as the proverb
is, are swan^.) So there be some who will have all qualifications, whether of
life or practice, all acts of duty, or performances to be of a better kind or
rank in the Elect, than they are in others. And as Belief, so Mortification, in
them especially, how little soever it be, so it be true, will suffice unto
salvation. Dr. Tho. Jackson. B. 10. p. 3147.
love at all. It seems now, that in your opinion, any love will serve his turn,
who is once Regenerate. It comes out of a Silver-mine and is of the right stamp
and must pass for current, God cannot refuse it: But the love of a poor
unregenerate, when it is put into the scale against all the creatures of the
world, if it does not preponderate and turn the scale, it weighes nothing at
all with you. But to proceed, there is no doubt, men may have so much love to
God and so much zeal to his service (in some particular instances) as may lead
them into an expectation of receiving very great favors from him, and yet be
(that while) in a very unsafe and unjustified condition. I need no other
evidence to prove this than Gods own attestation. He arraigns the Jews upon
this very account, and gives order to his Prophet, to prosecute the Indictment
against them, in these words; Isaiah 58.1, 2.
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people
their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. Yet they seek me daily,
and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook
not the Ordinance of their God: they ask of me the Ordinances of justice: they
take delight in approaching to God. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and
thou see not? I hope, by this time, (whatever they be to Master Baxter) to
the indifferent Reader, These things will not be utterly improbable. So much
for your Conjectures and Imaginations. To your arguments,

7. You say, Christ prayed beforehand for Peter, that his faith should not
fail: therefore his charity was not totally Extinct.

Answ. The Church of Rome tells you, by the mouth of all her Doctors, that it
does not follow. Faith they say, may be separated from Charity. But admit it
cannot; yet where iniquity does so abound that Charity waxes cold, there Faith
will grow so weak and languide, yea so dead, that it will not justify. It is
not the Metaphysical but the Moral truth or goodness, that makes our Faith or
our Charity a grace, or duty, and it is the prevailing degree only that
qualifies it for acceptance unto justification; (which if I mistake not is your
own avowed doctrine) and whether the prayer of our Savior prevailed so far,
Vbi supra.
or was extended to that latitude, I leave you to consider. But I am persuaded
otherwise; that the prayer of our Savior (in that respect) was a preservative
only against a Final, not against a Total defection; and the admonition, which
our Savior gave him to improve his restitution for the benefit of others, does
confirm me. Et tu aliquando conversus confirma fratres tuos. Luke 22.32.
And when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. Here is a new
conversion, which in Scripture notion, (as has been showed out of Amesius and
others, and your own writings) signifies the same work upon the soul, that
Regeneration does.

8. To conclude this: you say, They that build on the Rock, persevere in trial,
(Matthew. 7.25.) because they build on the Rock; But David and Peter had built
upon a Rock: Therefore, I think they did not totally fall from habitual grace.

Answ. Here Is a hard argument indeed; hewn out of the very Rock: but the best
on it is, it is but Metaphorical, and Rocks may be removed or rent a pieces; and
so I doubt not, to do by this, by his assistance, whose kingdom was resembled
to a little stone cut out of the mountain without hands. Dan. 2.34, 45.


1. You say, they that build on the rock, persevere in trial: now I pray, give
me leave to assume: But David and Peter did not persevere in trial. Therefore
they did not build upon the Rock. But you say, they had built upon a Rock:
Therefore they did not fall totally. Answ.

2. An argument drawn from the time past to the time present, or time to come,
is of no validity, unless it be understood of things that are absolutely
immutable as God is, who is therefore styled, which was and is and is to come.
Judas had been faithful unto Christ, shall we conclude; therefore he continued
so? So David had been a man after Gods own heart, but in the matter of Vriah
the Scripture tells us he was not so. And Peter had owned and honored Christ:
but in the high Priests hall he did otherwise. 3. Therefore we must consider,
that the Hebrews (whom the Greek writers of the New Testament are supposed to
imitate as much as may be) having none but a Participle of the Present tense,
are wont to make use of the Preterperfect tense of their verbes in stead of it,
which signifies any part of time indefinitely, (as is to be observed, Psalm.
1.1. and 2.1. and 10.3, 6, 10, 17. and 11.1, 7. and frequently in other places)
and so it does denotare actum perpetuum; So that when our Savior says, He
that hears these sayings of mine and does them, Matthew. 7.24.
is like to a man that built his house on a Rock; His speech imports thus much;
He that has for the time past, and does for the time present, and shall for
the time to come, hear these sayings of mine and do them, He is like unto a man
that built his house on a Rock. Hereupon the Apostle exhorts us, Let us not
be weary in well doing for in due season, we shall reap if we faint not. Gal.
6.9.
4. Our Saviors words are, Whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does
them; But was David's gazing upon the beauty of Bathsheba, and then lusting
after it, and afterward sending messengers to her house to court her into his
embraces; was this like the keeping of Christ's sayings? Or after Christ had
forewarned Peter of his danger, [Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to
have you, that he might sift thee as wheat] and forearmed him with his counsel
[ Go into some place of retirement Joh. 18.8. Mat. 26.41.
; watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation,] for him to run into the
Court (which he had reason to suspect would be nothing but a bloody
Inquisition) to satisfy his Curiosity; and after one modest Interrogatory
which did not only put his Faith to a stand, but overthrew it by a flat lie,
to return again to seek out the temptation, etc. Was this keeping Christ's
sayings or doing them? This is just expounding the Holy Text by the Devils
Comment. For tempting our Savior to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the
Temple; Matthew. 4.6.
He uses this argument; If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: For it
is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands
they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.

It Is true God has promised the custody of Angels to secure his children it is
in omnibus viis suis, Psalm. 91.11.
in all their ways. That is in their vocation. Ibi viae pro vocatione,
Scripturae Phrasi ponuntur. Says, Aegid. Hunnius. But the Devil applies this
promise to that most desperate precipitation of himself, to which he tempted
our Savior; Whereupon he repells the assault with these words, Matthew. 4.7.
It is written again thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. In like manner,
Christ has said, Whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them, is
like unto a man that built his, house upon a rock, and the rain descended and
the floods came, for the winds blew upon that house and it fell not, because
it was built upon a rock. But (as the Devil left out [in all his ways,] there:
so you leave out, [whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them] here,
and apply the stability, or security (which in the words of our Savior
doubtless belongs only to the obedient (to David and Peter, in their highest
impiety and presumption; not remembering, that he builds upon a far different
foundation, who acts against his conscience. Quod fit Contra conscientiam
aedificat ad gehennam.

5. I find you ensnared in the same fallacy [A dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter] as before; for the security intimated by our Savior is against
temptation, from without. The rain descended, Mat. 7.25.
and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell
not; for it was founded upon a rock. Storms and tempests and floods of
adversity and persecution, though never so violent and impetuous, such obedient
Disciples of Christ are secured against, continuing their duty: But if there be
a Mine within that rock, or under-neath it, and some barrels of powder lodged
within it, and such a train laid, that if it be set on fire, the Mine will
spring; then the house may and will fall. Mat. 15.19.
And so it is here, For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications false witness, blasphemies, and these were they that
overthrew the house in David and in Peter. And therefore it is the duty of every
man to keep a special watch here; for his eternal weal or woe depends upon it.
Prove. 4.23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of death. To
this, let us add in our constant practice Saint Judes direction, and then (by
Gods assistance which, Ver. 20.21.
in so doing, we cannot fail of) we shall never fall. Beloved, building up your
selves on your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in
the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life.

Answer to the 20 Section.
TRuly Sir, (you say) I am willing to learn better that Doctrine that is
according to Godliness, and to disclaim all that is against it: But you must
hereafter learn to do us that justice, as not to take our expressions of the
worst that the mercy of God will cover in a man obedient in the main, to be our
descriptions of Godly men.

Answ. Since you ask no favor in this cause, and you tell us, we must learn to
do you that justice; justice you shall have; and it is this that when your
expressions of what God will cover, whether they amount to a full description
of your Godly man or no (but it seems he may be such in those rags as well as
when he is clothed in that fine and clean linen mentioned in the Revelation)
when they are apparently encouragements to continue men in their disobedience
and ungodliness, they ought to be reproved; And if you be as willing, as you
pretend, to learn that Doctrine better, which is according to Godliness, such
reproofs will be acceptable and welcome to you. In hope whereof, I shall
endeavor to make it evident, that those Doctrines, viz. of election and
perseverance, etc. In the vindication whereof, you have taken so much,
Unchristian liberty, to asperse and revile Tilenus, is not according to
Godliness; and I prove it thus;

That Doctrine whereby a gross sinner. v. g. an Adulterer or perjured person,
is taught to be certain of his salvation, not only certitudine objecti but
also certitudine subj^cti, before the renewing his repentance, that doctrine is
not according to Godliness:

But by the Synods doctrine and yours, touching election, perseverance, etc. a
gross sinner, v. g. an adulterer, or perjured person is taught to be certain of
his Salvation, not only Certitudine objecti, but also Certitudine subjecti,
before the renewing his repentance.

Therefore that doctrine is not according to Godliness.

The Major is evident, because such a doctrine, does infeeble at least and
weaken all exhortations to mortification and repentance; if it does not
evacuate the necessity of them.

The Minor shall be proved by these four steps, 1. They hold not only that
every man may: but also that it is his duty, and he ought to be Certain of his
election: De hac aeterna and immutabili sui ad salutem electione, electi suo
tempore, variis licet gradibus, and dispari mensura, certiores redduntur; says
the Synod: And in their seventh Rejection; Acta. Syn. de Divin. praedest. art.
12. p. 243. fol. p 247.
They reject those which teach, Electionis immutabilis ad gloriam nullum in hac
vita esse fructum, nullum sensum, nullam certitudinem, nisi ex condition
mutabili and contingente. The Divines of Geneva Judic. Theol. exter. p. 56.
these. 5. ed in fol.
say, Haec electio nobis patefit in tempore, -- ut spem aeternae gloriae certam
concipiamus. Those of North-Holland do affirm Jud Theol. Provinc. p. 39. m.
: Deum in hac vita suos Electos per Spiritum Sanctum, de hoc tanto and
incomprehensibili suo (Electionis) beneficio certos facere. Sibrandus Lubbertus
says Ib. p. 17. Ib. 11, 12.
, Aliquis de sui Electione in hac vita, citra peculiarem revelationem, certus
esse potest -- yea, sensum and gustum Electionis sui percipere. And to this
suffrage subscribed Johannes Polyander, Antonius Thysius and Antonius Walaeus.
The Divines of Hassia Jud. Theol. ext. p. 32. m.
do affirm, though no man can know himself to be of the number of the Elect, a
Priori, yet all and every believer may be certain of his election to eternal
life, a Posteriori, that is, by the revelation of the word, and the testimony
of the Spirit dwelling in them, and by the fruits or effects of their Election,
which believers find in themselves. And those of Geneva Ib. p. 49. f.
say, there is not one of the Elect, that is arrived to the capacity of reason,
that does not, before his death, receive a most certain persuasion of that
decree. To deny the sense and certainty of Election in this life, is to render
Election it self unprofitable to the elect in this life, yea to abolish it, tum
quoad gratiam, tum etiam quoad gloriam, say the Divines of the Palatinate. Ib.
p. 18 f.
And those of Wedderav say, not only Potest: Ib. p. 39. th. 7.
He may be certain of his Elect. But Oportet: Ib. p. 44. th. 7.
It behooves him to be so. Nay, Potest and debet: He may and he ought to be
certain of it; say the Divines of Embden: Ib. p, 72. pr.
and Vnusquisque too; every man ought to be so. And the Belgic Professors say
as much. Jud. Theol. provinc. p. 7. these. 5.
And this certainty is without any If's, or And's, says Gomarus; Ibid. p. 22.
f. these. 12.
Fideles in hac vita de Electione sui salvifica certi sunt, non solum hac
condition si perseveraverint: sed etiam absolute. Quia sese perseveratures
esse per Dei and Christi gratiam certi sunt. The faithful are certain of their
Election, in this life; not only upon this condition, if they shall persevere:
but absolutely. Because they are certain by the grace of God and Christ, they
shall persevere. And this is the Doctrine of the whole Synod; who therefore do
reject those who teach, There is in this life, no fruit, no sense, no
certainty, of immutable Election unto glory, but upon a mutable and contingent
condition, as was declared above. As they hold that every man may and ought to
be certain of his Election, So they hold of his persevarance also; Of this
preservation of the Elect unto Salvation, and perseverance of true believers in
the faith, the faithful themselves may be and are ascertained. Acta Syn. de
pers. Sanct. these. 9. p. 267.
. And in their fifth Rejection, they reject those that teach, that no certainty
of future perseverance can be had in this life, without special Revelation. I
might bring in the suffrages of the Divines; but seeing they all subscribed
these Articles and Rejections, it will be to no purpose to tire the Reader with
more quotations, especially seeing they maintain it to be the fruit and effect
of Election. Ib. Reject. 1. pa. 268.


2. The second step to the probation of that Minor proposition, [viz. That by
the doctrine of the Synod a gross sinner, is taught to be certain of his
salvation, before the renewing his repentance] shall be this; that he who has
once examined his state, and finds himself thus certain of his election, and
perseverance, may be able to remember it; if not, it is but taking his pen and
ink and setting down the time when he took this examination, with that
certainty which he found to be the result of it.

3. My third step, (or postulate) shall be this; that he who has taken this
pains to examine and shrive himself, and found this comfort, a certainty of his
election and perseverance; may notwithstanding fall into gross sins: Wherefore,
says the Synod Act. Syn. de persev. Sanct. these. 4. p. 266.
, they must continually watch, and pray, that they be not led into temptation,
which when they do not, it is not only possible, that they should be carried
away by the flesh, the world and the Devil, into grievous and heinous sins, but
sometimes also, by Gods just permission, they are carried away: which the
lamentable falls of David, Peter and other of the Saints, described unto us in
the Scripture, evidently show. Whereupon Zanchy says, Quod negem electos in
atrocissima scelera ruere posse, calumnia est, quasi nesciam, and non doceam
Davidis scelera, adulterium and homicidium, fuisse atrocissima and gravissima.
Lib. Misc. in depuls. Calum. page 307.


4. My fourth and last step toward a proof of that proposition shall be this;
that he who is fallen into such heinous sins, may be able to remember the
doctrine that has been taught him, concerning this point; or if he should
forget it, he may have recourse to his Authors, out of whom he has learned it:
And if he consults Beza, In libello Chr. Quest. and Resp. p. 688.
he says Interrumpi interdum fateor in gravibus tentationibus Spiritum --
nunquam tamen penitus eripi dico; Et Paulo post. Sic veram fidem and ejus
effecta in electis interrumpi dico, ut in iis qui lethargo laborant, and in
Ebriis in quibus impediuntur animae facultates, non tamen anima ipsa tollitur,
quum inter letha^gum, aut Ebrietatem, and mortem ipsam plurimum intersit,
aeternae vero vitae certum pignus habeant, qui adoptionis Spiritum habent. And
Ruardus Acronius says, In Enarra^. Catechet. q. 53. ss. 11. fol. 89.
although, in the souls (of the Elect) the flames of lusts, of revenge, of
hatred, and the burnings of diverse wickednesses do oftentimes arise: though
there be also manifold sins of ignorance and omission, doing what they should
leave undone, and neglecting what they should perform; yet because these
infirmities are covered with the merit of Christ, and for Christ's sake are not
imputed, they do not excusse the holy Spirit. Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them, etc. so that should they assent to an error, Quo
fundamentum salutis, vel in totum vel ex part, evertitur, whereby the
foundation of Salvation, is, either in whole or in part, overthrown, or violate
the command of God, against conscience (repugnante conscientia) and by that
means sin most grievously and foully, and through the most just judgment of
God, loose the greatest gifts of the holy Spirit: yet are they not deprived of
all, nor forsaken totally and finally. For God, who is rich in mercy, says the
Synod, Act. Syn. de persev. Sanc. Art. 6. f. 266
according to the unchangeable purpose of Election, does not wholly take away
his holy Spirit from his, no not in their grievous slips, nor suffers them to
wander so far, as to fall away from the grace of Adoption, and state of
justification, or to commit the sin unto death, or against the holy Ghost, or
to be altogether forsaken of him, and throw themselves headlong into eternal
destruction. Out of these four grounds, I shall now give you the proof of that
Minor proposition, viz. That a gross sinner may be certain, etc. before his
actual repentance of that sin.

Whosoever may be certain of his eternal election and final perseverance, may
be certain of his salvation.

A man guilty of gross sin, v. g. an adulterer or prejur'd person, without an
actual repentance of his sin, may be certain of his eternal election and final
perseverance. Therefore,

A man guilty of gross sin, v. g. an adulterer or perjured person, without
actual repentance may be certain of salvation.

The Major is evident of it self; because election and perseverance do contain
all things necessary to salvation.

The Minor is proved thus,

Whosoever after his unfeigned conversion, and some good progress in holiness,
may become guilty of gross sin, as adultery, etc. He, without an actual
repentance of that sin, may be certain of his eternal election and final
perseverance. A man after his unfeigned conversion and some good progress in
holiness may become guilty of gross sin, as adultery, etc.

Therefore, a man guilty of gross sin, as adultery, etc. without an actual
repentance of that sin, may be certain of his eternal election and final
perseverance.

The Minor is evident by the examples of David, Peter, and others of the lapsed
Saints.

The Major is proved thus,

Whosoever may have examined the sincerity of his conversion and holiness, and
may remember, the result of that examination to be a certainty of his eternal
election and final perseverance he, though he becomes guilty of gross sin, as
adultery, may without an actual repentance, be certain of his eternal election
and final perseverance. A man though he becomes guilty of gross sin, as
adultery, may have examined the sincerity of his conversion and holiness, and
may remember the result of that examination, to be a certainty of his eternal
election and final perseverance. Therefore without an actual repentance he may
be certain, etc.

The Major is manifest; because election, and perseverance (supposed to be the
fruit and effect of it,) are said to be absolute and immutable; therefore, he
that is once certain is for ever certain of them; not only certitudine objecti;
but certitudine subjecti. The Minor is undeniable; because this examination of
his state, and the certainty which follows it, being, said, to be possible, and
his duty; A man that is unfeignedly converted, and has made some good progress
in holiness, is presumed to have performed it. Let me illustrate this very
considerable truth by an example. Suppose a Prince makes a Decree that every
person, who is listed under his Command, and ingageth himself in fight, against
the common enemy; shall be a Pensioner to him during life: he that knows
himself to have been inlisted, and to have fought against the enemy, though he
be for the present a captive in the power of the enemies hands, yet, supposing
that Prince, to have an absolute, insuperable, and irresistible power, and will
to execute his said Decree, (as the Synod has determined in our case) he may
(if he were sure of life, as men are of immortality) assure himself, to be that
Prince his Pensioner, with as great a confidence, as if he had never been taken
captive. By this you may see upon what foundation the Antinomians build their
judgment, [mentioned by you, Pa. 12. p.
in the ninth opinion, of the Saints Perseverance] that though a believer fall
into adultery and murder with David, or into Incest and drunkenness with Lot,
he ought not to fear the loss of his justification, nor to be humbled with such
considerations, nor to rise from the sin with such a motive. Ibid. p. 39.
And though you think this opinion so gross, you need say no more of it then
disclaim it; yet, it had become a wise Master builder, much better, to have
razed the foundation, of such an edifice, as gives harbor to such monsters of
opinion, and to have plucked up the roots of such a pestiferous weed; which, I
have some reason to believe, you had so full and fair a view of in the
decyphering of those opinions. For the short is; A man may be certain of his
immutable election and final perseverance, or he may not. If he may not; then
(in the opinion of the Synodists Jud. Theol. ext. 216. aph. 9. and p. 223. th.
5. p. 249. q. 9. Jud. Theol. prove. p. 243. th. 2. and 276. these. 3.
) the foundation of firm and solid consolation is blown up. If he may; (as they
unanimously, and strictly maintain) then he may be so still, after he be fallen
(as he may be) into the most gross and horrid sins imaginable; as is proved
above. From hence I shall draw another argument to prove this Doctrine, to be a
Doctrine not according to Godliness; which is formed thus.

That Doctrine, which takes away (from some sort of men, under the guilt of
gross sins) all fear of Gods displeasure, of hell fire, and of judgment to
come, that is a Doctrine not according to Godliness. This Doctrine (which the
Synod maintains) that a man may be absolutely certain of his immutable election
and final perseverance, takes away, from some sort of men under the guilt of
gross sins, all fear of Gods displeasure, of hell fire, and of judgment to
come. Therefore this Doctrine is not according to Godliness.

The Major is proved; because the holy Scriptures do so frequently inculcate
this fear of God, hell and judgment, as a preservative against defection and a
spur to Godliness. Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw, back
my soul shall have no pleasure in him Hebr. 10.38.
. Fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into hell: yea, I say
unto you, fear him Luke 12.5.
. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ -- knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord, we persuade men 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.
.

The Minor is proved by what went before; and the undeniable consequence of the
Synods Doctrine. Qui sio Electi sunt, says Tossanus, penitus rejici and deseri
nunquam possunt, tum quia ex decreto Dei certo and immutabili eliguntur, tum
quia non possunt non semper diligi in Christo Didescal. de pratest. per quast.
propos. c. 4.
. Who are so Elected can never be altogether rejected or forsaken, both because
they are chosen by Gods certain and immutable Decree, and also because they
cannot but always be beloved in Christ. M. Baxter had notice of this argument
(though he does not apply it to one, that lies under the guilt of gross sin as
he might,) for he argues thus; Of the S. Persev. p. 28. f. etc.
That which is impossible (or certainly not future) need not, and ought not,
and if known to be such, cannot be the object of rational fear, and care to
escape it. But the damnation, and the Apostasy of any of the sanctified, is
impossible, or not future, and known so to be: (according to the Doctrine of
the Calvinists) therefore it need not and must not be the object of their fear,
and care to escape it. M. Baxter may please to take notice that the argument
may be made use of, as rationally, by any person, under the guilt of Adultery,
or any other wasting sin, if he has had any former sense, gift, or certainty
of his immutable election, according to the Doctrine of the Synod. But what
answer can M. Baxter give to this argument? For my own part, says he, Ib. p.
31.
the answer that satisfies me, is this: that it is true that a known
impossibility or non-futurity of evil does evacuate rational fear: But then he
that will be perfectly freed from that fear, must have a perfect knowledge of
the impossibility, or non-futurity. But Christ and his Apostles knew that
those, whom they wrote to, had no such perfect knowledge: (It seems all the
Divines of the Synod had, however they came by it, and herein M. Baxter
dissents from them; for he says farther,) Nay more, it is not (at least by any
ordinary means) to be expected in this life, that this knowledge of our
sincerity, Justification, and perseverance should be so perfect as to have no
degree of doubting, habitual or actual. An ingenuous confession! And, such is
the force of truth, Ibid. p. 28.
it has drawn a further acknowledgement from him in these words; Moreover, we
cannot deny but that carnal security, not only in hypocrites, but in the godly
themselves, may possibly, and too frequently take advantage for increase, from
the Doctrine of Perseverance. In consideration whereof he concludes afterward,
Page 39.
that, a very great cautelousness according to the weight of our work, would be
necessary, if our assurance of perseverance were perfect.

This, proceeding from so clear, and full a conviction of the danger that
inseparably attends those Doctrines, I cannot but wonder what should induce M.
Baxter, with the hazard of his judgment, to dispute so earnestly against the
opposite Tenants; and not without a manifest interfering in the procedure of
his discourse, Ibid. p. 14.
as will appear by the reflections now to be made upon another Passage in that
Treatise. The Opinion of those Ancients (says he; meaning the Greek and Latin
Fathers that were before the days of Augustine Page 3.
) and of the Jesuits, Arminians, and Lutherans, who deny an absolute personal
Election of men to faith and perseverance, and so maintain indefinitely a
total and final falling from a state of justification, without excepting such
elect themselves, is an error of dangerous consequence, against the grace and
fidelity of God, if not against his wisdom and his power, and against the
peace of the Saints: and therefore is to be carefully avoided and resisted, by
those that would not wound their faith: Answ. I confess it is of dangerous
Consequence indeed, if it be against Gods grace and fidelity, etc. but, who
says it is? Do the Maintainers of that opinion judge so? No. Then it is
possible the inference of an Adversary may be drawn out by passion and
prejudice, and so not naturally follow, but only as it is forced to serve an
interest. Whether this be of such an extraction, we shall examine presently,
as soon as I have demanded, How those several Parties forementioned, could
except such elect themselves, (as you speak) when (as you confess) they deny
there are any such elect? But let us look upon the dangerous Consequence of
this, which you call Error. 1. Against the Grace of God, you say; Then it
seems the whole Church of God, or next to the whole, (as you confess) has
held an error of dangerous consequence, against the Grace of God for thirteen
or fourteen hundred years at least (as you write, Account of Persev. page 18.
though somewhat incongruously; for it should have been, more properly,
fourteen or thirteen hundred at least: (but as you tell M. Barlaw, Of Sav.
Faith. page 24.
we all write incongruously sometimes; therefore that may pass). We cannot
extol the Grace of God sufficiently: But we do not advance, but undervalue it,
when we take upon us to bound it, or weigh it out at our own pleasure. Doctor
Sanderson has observed, the word [Grace] is one of the three words, that
occasions most of the greatest controversies in the Church, for want of a due
explication. But how were those Ancients, and how is that opinion, (which you
call an Error of dangerous consequence) against Gods Grace? Does it conclude a
man may be converted and saved without Gods Grace? you will not affirm it Does
it follow from that opinion, that a man may receive the Grace of God in vain,
or be wanting to it, or fall from it? If any of these, or all of them be the
Error and of such a dangerous Consequence; it is at least a Consequence of
Scripture. 2 Cor. 6.1. Hebr. 12. Gal. 5.
Receive not the grace of God in vain. Take heed lest any man be wanting to the
grace of God: ye are fallen from Grace. Lastly, is this opinion against the
Grace of God, because it implies, that man's Cooperation is indispensably
necessary with it, that it may avail unto his final salvation? This is not
only Bernard's Doctrine but Saint Austins also. Toll liberum Arbitrium, non
erit quod salvetur; toll gratiam, non erit unde salvetur; says Bernard Tract.
de great. and lib. Arb
: and Augustine Ep. 46. ad Valentinum.
, to the same purpose, Si non est Dei gratia, quomodo salvat mundum? Si non est
liberum arbitrium, quomodo judicat mundum. If there be not grace how shall he
save the world? If there be not Free Will, how shall he judge the world?

2. You say this error is of dangerous consequence against Gods Fidelity. Why
against his Fidelity? Fidelity relates to ones word or promises. Jacob. Laur.
in 1 Pet. 4.61.
Fidelis quia est verax in omni verbo, ac speciatim in omni promisso suo?
Faithful is he that has promised, says the Apostle. Heb. 10.23.
But has God passed his word or promise to any man for such an absolute
personal Election to Faith and Perseverance, as you there speak of? I trow
not. There are conditions annexed to his promises, upon which they are
suspended. Heb. 4.1. Let us therefore fear, least a promise being left, of
entering into his rest, any of you, should come short of it. Be thou faithful
unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Rev. 2.10.
If we fail not of our Fidelity to him, doubtless he will not fail of his to
us; He will make good his word and perform his part; Faithful is he that has
called you, who also will do it. 1 These. 5.25.
Nay though we be unfaithful, See 2 Timothy 2 11, 12, 13.
yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself; but, having past his word to
that purpose, Account of Persev. page, 37.
if we deny him, he will deny us. You say, indeed, It is impossible that true
Grace should be lost totally and finally. First, because God has not only
decreed the perseverance of the sanctified, but also the Holy Ghost has
undertaken it as his special charge. To which I answer, 1 Whether God has
decreed the perseverance of the Sanctified, is the question; and that you are
not certain of the truth of it, appears, in that you dare not venture your
salvation upon it, as you confess. Ibid. p. 17.
2. If the Holy Ghost has undertaken that charge absolutely; then every
miscarriage in such a person under his custody, is that undertakers failing,
and argues want of power, of care or fidelity. If he has undertaken that
charge but conditionally; then, notwithstanding his office and Incumbency,
those under his charge, as they may grieve him by abusing their liberty to
evil, so may they despite him, and drive him quite away, by their contumacy in
it. But, Secondly, you say, Ibid.
the faithfulness of God (as far as I can yet understand it) is by his
promise engaged for the perseverance of all the truly justified and sanctified
Believers. Answ. Show us such an (absolute) promise, and it suffices. If you
cannot produce any but conditional; we are where we were, and no further.

3. You say, If not against his wisdom and his power. Why, [If not?] was it
not a suggestion to render the opinion, you contest against odious? Sure you
know there can be no such matter; For 1. Who has been Gods Counselor? must he
forfeit his wisdom, if his Decrees be not calculated to every man's humor?
And 2. for his Power, how is that any way impeached by this opinion? Does it
suppose him to Act to the uttermost of his power, and yet to be defeated in his
enterprise. Thus never did any Divine that was well in his wits say, Preface to
Groo Relig. Sect. 12.
as you confess, that Grace is the effect of Gods Omnipotency. Well may a man
despise the riches of his goodness and forbearance and long-sufferering: Romans
2.4. Romans 9.19.
But (in this sense) Who has resisted his will? Saint Augustine, whom you look
upon, as your great Fautor and Patron in this cause, (though you dissent from
him too) shall shut up this.

To this question; Whence the good will (in men) should be; if by nature, why
is it not in all, In libr. de Spiritu and litera ad Marcellinum c. 33.
seeing it is the same God, that is the Creator of all? If it be by the gift of
God, why is not this in all likewise, seeing he would have all men to be saved?
To this question, his Answer is very remarkable to our purpose, Vult Deus omnes
homines salvos fieri, non sic tamen, ut eis adimat liberum arbitrium, quo vel
been vel male utentes justissime judicentur. Quod cum sit, Infideles quidem
contra voluntatem Dei faciunt, cum ejus Evangelio non credunt: nec ideo tamen
eam vincunt, verum seipsos fraudant magno and summo bono, malisque poenalibus
implicant, experturi in suppliciis potestatem ejus, cujus in donis
misericordiam contempserunt.

You see then that this opinion is of no dangerous consequence against the
grace, or fidelity, much less against the wisdom and power of God. But has
not your own Doctrine that very dangerous influence which you unjustly charge
upon the other? Is it not against the Grace of God, 1. In your preterition,
which denies Grace to the far greatest part of mankind. 2. In your Physical
irresistible operation, which turns Grace into necessity to all others? Is it
not against Gods wisdom to enjoin that, under promimises of life, and
threatenings of damnation, to persons, that cannot possibly refuse it, to whom
likewise he is supposed to have promised the irresistible effecting of it? And
is it not against his wisdom, to invite others, and assure them, by oaths and
obtestations, of a free and hearty well-come to the fruition of that, [both
end, and means,] which by an immutable Decree he has absolutely debarred them
of, from all eternity, according to your Doctrine?

Indeed I find you have made a good Provision to secure Gods Fidelity from
violation in reference to the unregenerate; For, you maintain, Disput. of Right
to Sacram. p. 420.
though they be in Covenant with him and oblige themselves, yet he is not
obliged, as a Covenanter to them; for he has no mere outside promises, Page
422.
when he means not as he speaks. And after you tell your Adversary,
Unregenerate men are really in covenant as to their external ingageing act;
and this they may break. But does it follow that they cannot violate their own
promise, unless God be actually obliged by promise to them?

This may very well secure Gods Fidelity: but whether his sincerity will be
salved by it, I make some question. Does he by his Ambassadors and by himself,
Mat. 23. Luke 19.
use so much holy courtship, with prayers and tears to allure poor sinners,
and draw them into covenant to serve him, and all the while keep himself
disingaged, make them no grant, not so much as pass his word, for any thing
really sufficient to enable them to do, what he with so much importunity and
the greatest expressions of love and tenderness imaginable, urges and ingages
them to do? This to my apprehension, does entrench so much upon the riches of
his mercy (whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the Divine nature) Divinae naturae
nomine, non essentiam sed participationem qualitatum intelligit, qua imago Dei
in nobis restituitur. Bez. not. min. ad 2. Pet. 1.4.
that I cannot readily, (without much greater evidence) subscribe to it.

But you have one assault more, to make upon this opinion, before you leave it.
You charge it therefore in the Rear, That it is against the peace of the
Saints. Answ. 1. I wonder that you of all the Calvinists in Europe should make
this objection, having written so much against it. Do you not confess in the
same papers, that the Lutherans, Arminians and others of that opinion have as
much peace, and with as little doubting as your selves? It is very clear, you
say, that the denial of the Doctrine of the Perseverance of all the
sanctified, Account of S. Persev. page 19.
does not necessarily destroy all Christian consolation. And a little after, It
were unreasonable and uncharitable to think that none of the Ancient Churches
(who were all of these Opinions as you confess for thirteen or fourteen
hundred years together) that differed from us in this, had Christian peace;
that none of the Lutheran Protestants, or Arminians now have peace; that such
holy men as Austin and Luther etc. were deprived of peace. A little after; If
we could not have joy and peace in believing, except we receive it from the
certainty of our own perseverance, then it would follow, that exceeding few
even of them that hold the Doctrine of the Perseverance of all the justified,
have joy and peace in believing. For that Doctrine of Perseverance can give
assurance of their own perseverance to none but those, Ibid. page 20.
that are certain of their sincerity and justification. -- But too sad
experience, you say, tells us that there be but few, exceeding few of the
godly, among us, that are certain of their sincerity, justification and
salvation. Insomuch that you conclude not long after; I never knew the man that
attained any more then such a strong persuasion, Page 31.
mixed with some doubtings and fears, yet so far overcoming them, Page 25.
as to live a peaceable joyful life. And four pages after, you say, We cannot
deny but that the Doctrine of the certain perseverance of all the sanctified,
may accidentally occasion much more trouble then consolation, to many doubting
souls that are sincere.

2. Whom would you gratify by your Doctrine? Those fierce Disputers for
Assurance, which you mention, that say they are sure of their salvation, with a
great confidence; for want of other Arguments; Or those Opinionists, Ib. p. 20.
21.
that no sooner run away from the communion of the Church, but find themselves
presently wrapped up with such a seeming certainty: or the passionate feelings of
Hypochondriacall women, who after such a sudden fit of pretended assurance,
fall into stronger pangs of doubting and trouble than any others? I profess I
cannot see, what interest that Doctrine will serve, but that of the flesh. But
care would be taken, lest this pretended peace of the Saints, should justle out
the real fear of God; and so the Preachers of it be worthily reckoned amongst
those, that are lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God.

3. It Is most certain, the work of righteousness shall be peace, Isa. 32, 17.
and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. But would
you have Cordials for them in their lapses, Adultery, Incest, perjury,
drunkenness, etc. Take heed you do not cry peace, when there is no peace; For
there is no peace to the wicked, says my God. It Is your assertion, sin does as
naturally breed troubles and fears, as the setting of the Sun causes
darkness, or as a gross substance in the Sunshine causes a shadow; Ibid. p.
40.
And this from the nature of the thing, and by the will of God. Therefore that
of the Psalmist is considerable: I will hearken what the Lord will say; for he
shall speak peace to his Saints; but let them not turn back to folly. Why?
Because then, he will speak to them in his wrath.

4. In this case, (toward the renewing of repentance, the opinion you condemn
does afford much more encouragement and comfort then that you maintain; because
the Defenders of it hold no man excluded by an Antecedent irrespective Decree
from that peace of God which passes all understanding; nor from the
intercession and other benefits of Christ's blood, which speaks better things
then that of Abel; as yours do; if not in word, yet certainly in effect.

Lastly, what provision have you made for the Saints Refuge, or to secure their
peace? Page 22. f.
you tell us ingenuously, in your forementioned Pa- There is no man of greatest
holiness certain that he shall not fall into some odious Scandalous sin; For
though there be promises of our perseverance in a state of grace (you should
put in Conditional) yet in the judgment of all, there is no promise to the
best of us all, that we shall not fall into any such heinous particular sin.
No man is certain but he may be Drunk as Noah was, or Incestuous as Lot was, or
commit Adultery and Murder as David did, or deny Christ as Peter did. Now what
shall become of such a man, if he so die, and there is no man that can be
certain, (without extraordinary divine Revelation) but he may so die before
Repentance? Disput. of Justif. page 398.
In this case after one or two conjectures, (which you have little grounds and
no proofs for) you resolve, in these words; If we should conclude that God has
purposely left men of such a middle condition (and no man is sure but he may be
left so) without any certainty how he will deal with them, that so no man may
be encouraged to sin, and in impudency, I think it no dangerous Doctrine, nor
injurious to the body of saving Truth. And thus you see, what your pretended
errour' [of such dangerous consequence, against the grace and fidelity of God,
if not against his wisdom and his power, and against the peace of the Saints]
is come to.

Your next thoughts, (which I shall reflect upon in this 20. Section of your
Preface) are, That men are to be judged Godly or Ungodly according to the
predominant Estimation, Election, Resolution, and Operation of their souls, and
the bent and course of their lives, and not by a particular Act: because no act
will prove us holy indeed, but what proves a Habit; and a predominant Habit.
To this I shall make no difficulty to subscribe with these restrictions. 1. If
when you speak of a particular Act, there be no equivocation in the word
[particular]; As when David is taxed for the matter of Uriah, and Peter for his
shameful denying of Christ; if you take these for Particular Acts (wherein
notwithstanding, there was such a complication of continued enormities) you may
as well take a Sedition or Rebellion carried on with violence and blood for
several years together for a particular Act. 2. If the last Scene of a man's
life, be so shut up that it begets no prejudice against such a predominant
estimation etc. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning. 2 Pet. 2.20. And if any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. Hebr. 10.38. In his trespass that he has trespassed, and in
his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die. Ezekiel. 18.24. And if the tree
falls toward the South or toward the North, in the place where the tree
falls, there it shall be. Eccles. 11.3.3. That one single Act of gross sin
does set a man further back, then a single Act of the contrary virtue can set
him forward; because though the good cannot deserve heaven, the bad do demerit
hell; and (2.) though one single Act be not the performing, yet one may be the
violating that Covenant, which does oblige us to serve God in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. Luke 1.

It follows in that 20. Section, That men thus Habituated, never live in a
course of wilful sin: -- and the ungodly have never one true act of saving
love to God. This is true Reduplicative [as thus Habituated, or ungodly] and in
sensu composito: but not insensu diviso; For the Righteous may turn from his
righteousness, and so may the ungodly from his ungodliness. Intervals and
vicissitudes they may have: but instead of judging one by the best, or the
other by his worst hour, it is our duty to call the sinner to repentance, and to
tell the dutiful; Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall
find so doing.

For your advise to Master Pierce, to try himself, I like it well, if it
proceeds from a charitable Monitor; not so well, if from a supercilious censor:
And truly the close of your Section carries some suspicion that it does so;
For you say (and in perfect sense of your own severity; which induced you to
usher in your saying, with this Preface; Be not angry with me if I tell you)
that if I must needs choose one of the two, I had rather die in the state of
David before Nathan spoke to him, or of Peter, after he had denied his Lord,
then of M. Pierce, that has committed no such sin, now after this Book, which
it is like you repent not of (with the rest of your failings, which are known to
God.) A strange Option, to fall from a considering Person! You say (Sect. 18.)
that the sin of Peter and David put them into that present incapacitie for
heaven, that Actual Repentance, and deep and serious Repentance too was
necessary to their recovery and forgiveness, You would tempt a man to think
that you do not believe your self, or at least, that you uttered those passages
very unadvisedly. What, had you rather die in the state of David or Peter,
(under the guilt of those wasting sins) that is, in such an incapacitie for
heaven, that Actual Repentance, and deep and serious Repentance too, were
necessary for your recovery and forgiveness; had you rather die in this state,
then in the state of Master Pierce? If you be advisedly of this mind, where is
your Faith for your self? Do you believe a third state after this life wherein
your soul may be purified and made fit for heaven? Where is your charity to M.
Pierce? Of evils we presume you would choose, that which you thought the least.
And do you think his soul in a worse condition then theirs, who are in a
present incapacity of salvation, and stand in need of an Actual Repentance,
and a deep and serious Repentance too, in order to their recovery and pardon?
Why, what evil has he done? He has written a book, a very learned book (as
M. Baxter worthily commends it) in vindication of himself from those slanders,
which an eager Antagonist, had cast upon him for a former vindication of his
God. Herein Master Baxter (as if he had taken his line and plumet, and sounded
the depth of Master Pierce's heart to the very bottom, and discovered clearly
from what fountain, they issued) finds (in his opinion) uncharitable passage;
and these induced him, to resolve, if he were put to it, to prefer that Option.

Be not angry, Sir, if I put S. James his question to you upon this occasion:
Are you not then partial in your self; and become a judge of evil thoughts?
Jam. 2.4.
For you are clean contrary to God in judgment. He judges the person by the
works: you judge the works by the person. The bitterest expressions that fall
from your Dissenting Brethren, you can have this excuse for; We are united in
Christ, Disput. of Right to Sacram. in the Preface.
and in hearty love to one another -- We are so far agreed, that we do without
scruple profess our selves of the same Faith and Church: -- And if any salt be
mingled in our writings (which is usual in Disputes which are not lifelesse)
it is intended rather to season then to free, or to bite that which each one
takes to be an error, rather then the man that holds it. -- And thus on both
sides, those that err, and those that have the truth, do show that error is
the thing which they detest, and would disclaim it, if they saw it; and that
Truth is it which they love, and are zealous for it, so far as they know it.
Sir, a little of this candor or charity would have made a better construction
of those passages in Master Pierce his book (at least to alleviate your
censure) than what you put upon it. But the judgments of some men are so
biased toward the Party they have espoused, that what they account but
venial or infirmity, if not laudable in them, shall be censured as damnable
in those against whom they set themselves in opposition. To this purpose I find
an observation so pertinent, in that profound Doctor, D. Thomas Jackson, B. 10.
of his Comment on the Creed. page 3181.
that I cannot forbear to transcribe it for the benefit of the Reader, The
Turks, says he, being ignorant, or not considering that there is an Immutable
goodness precedent to the Act or exercise of Gods will; A Goodness, whereof
his will, however considered, is no cause; For it is coeternall to his will, to
his wisdom and Essence: they fall into grossly absurd errors. And consequently
unto this their ignorance, or to the common error, that all things are good
only because God wills them, they sometimes highly commend, and sometimes
deeply discommend the self same practices for quality and circumstances, with
as great vehemence of zeal and spirit, and with as fair protestations of
obedience in all things to Gods will, as any other men do.

For Selimus to attempt the deposition of his Father, was in their Divinity a
good and godly Act. For Bajazet to take Arms against his Brother, was an
abominable impiety. What was the reason? Selimus his attempt sound good
success; for he prevailed against his Father, and this was an argument, that
it was Gods will that he should so do. But Bajazet miscarries in his attempt
against his Brother, and his disaster was a proof sufficient that God was
displeased with his attempt, it was not his will that he should prosper. And
seeing his will is the only Rule of Goodness, seeing he did predestinate
these two Princes, as he did Jacob and Esau, the one to a good end, the other
to an evil; the self same Fact or attempt was good in the one, but wicked in
the other. We all condemn it as an error in the Turk, for measuring the
difference between good and evil, by the event. But even this error has an
Original which is worse. They therefore measure all good and evil by the
event, because they ascribe all Events (without exception) to the irresistible
will of God, and think that nothing can fall out otherwise than it does;
because every thing is irresistibly appointed by Gods will, which in their
Divinity, is such a necessary Cause of Causes, and by Consequence of all
Effects, as the Author M. Burton
of the said Epistle would have it to be. Whosoever he be, whether Jew, Turk,
or Christian, which thinks that all events are so irresistibly decreed by God,
that none can fall out otherwise then they do, must of necessity grant, either
that there is no moral evil under the Sun, or that Gods will (which is the
Cause of Causes) is the only cause of such evil.

But is the like sin or error expressly to be found in Israel? Do any make
the same Fact for nature, quality and substance, to be no sin in one man, and
yet a sin in another? or to be a little sin in one men, and a grievous
out-crying sin in another? Though they do not avouch this of Rebellious
attempts against Prince and State or of other like public Facts, cognoscible
by humane Laws; yet the Principles of Predestination commonly held by them and
the Turk, draw them to the like inconveniences, in transforming the immutable
Rule of Goodness into the Similitude of their partial affections in other
cases.

The Adultery and Murder, which David committed, had been grievous sins in
another man, but in David being predestined, they were but sins of infirmity:
sins by which the outward man was defiled, not the inward man. Such a sin was
incest, in Lot; Such are all the sins committed by the Elect. Thus far Doctor
Jackson.

And this is as like Master Baxters doctrine as if that great Prophetic
spirit, had been in his very bosom at the writing of those passages. For,
says Master Baxter, The sin of Peter, David, etc. was exceedingly in regard
of manner, ends, concomitants, etc. different from the like Fact in a
graceless man, And two Sections after, In his Preface Sect. 18 (materially)
more heinous Sect. 20.
Men thus habituated (to Godliness) never live in a course of wilful sin
(though elsewhere Disput. Sacram. page 331.
, he says, How long Asa or Solomon sinned we know not: Nor can any man possibly
determine justly how long a man may live in the practice of such a sin, and yet
have true special Grace, and a state of Justification:) nor have any one sin
which for Ends, concomitants and all, is such as that of unsanctified men. What
I do the Godly man's Relations extenuate his Commissions? Is his sin less,
because his light, and Gods love toward him have been greater? The more
indeerements he has received, the more is his ingratitude heightened: and the
more encouragements have been conferred, to continue him in his allegiance, the
more execrable is his Apostasy and Rebellion; and all those sweet and gracious
experiences of Gods favor, which he has enjoyed, by his perversity, are
raised up to be Aggravations of his crime.

But Master Baxter having considered too, That, as it is a greater measure of
spiritual refining and purity, that is promised and justly expected under the
Gospel, so a greater measure must be looked after by every man in himself, and
by the Guides of the Church in its members; yet he resolves, that a man may be
often drunk, and often commit fornication, Ib. page 329.
he knows not justly how often, and yet have true grace. And a little after, We
know many that we see great signs of grace in, and that are well reputed of as
eminent for Godliness, that do frequently commit as great sins, as some kind
of rash swearing seems to be: For example, It is too rare to meet with a person
so conscionable, that will not frequently back bite, and with some malice or
envy speak evil of those that differ from them in judgment, or that they take
to be against them, or that they are fallen out with: They will ordinarily
censure them unjustly, and secretly endeavor to disgrace them, and take away
their good names, and love those that join with them in it: So how many
Professors will rashly rail and ly in their passions? Page 330.
(yea, and out of their passions too.) How few will take well a reproof, but
rather defend their sin? How many in these times, that we doubt not to be
godly, have been guilty of disobedience to their Guides, and of Schism, and
doing much, to the hurt of the Church? A very great sin. Yes, with a witness,
and would have deserved Sequestration at the least, if it had been committed by
persons of an-other persuasion, than your Party is of: but in your selves,
these and whatever sins else, Adultery, Murder, Incest, Denying of Christ,
cannot be of moment enough to cut a man off from the state of grace. But tell
it not in Gath, Vbi supra in Preface page 17.
publish it not in the streets of Askalon: You were loath, you say, these
things should have been made public, as knowing how unfit it was for the eyes
of the profane. In your Preface there.

This makes me reflect upon what you have written concerning men's placing their
Religion and holiness in their opinions, Treatisa of Conversion, page 297.
and so turning from the life of Faith and Love, to speculation and vain
janglings. This is a bait, you say, by which the Devil has caught multitudes
of souls in all ages of the Church, and especially of late: when he cannot keep
men in open profaneness, then he will tempt them to think, that such a Party,
and such a Sect are the only right and holy people; and therefore if thou get
but among them, and be one of that opinion and Party, then thou shall be saved.
And hence it is that we see that men who are so zealous for their Parties, and
glory so much in several opinions, do yet many, and very many of them live so
unacquaintedly with God and Heaven, and are such strangers to Christian
charity, and can freely reproach both common Christians and Ministers, and
speak evil of the things they understand not, and take their railing
Accusations for their Piety, and walk in discord and hatred, and disunion from
the Church of God, and be glad when they can bear down the reputation of their
brethren, whose labors are necessary for the good of souls. This I confess is
a most undeniable, though a most sad truth. But it would be considered withal,
Whether, it were not some of the present Leaders of the people, that have
caused them to err so horribly in this particular; and whether they do not
still flatter and sooth them up in it, by persuading them, they continue in a
safe condition, their state of Grace is no whit interrupted, they are very
Godly persons for all that?

These and such like Doctrines and practices are they; that give no less
scandal then advantage to the Socinians, as Szlichtingius upbraideth Meisner;
(disputing that Question with him. [Num ad regnum Dei possidendum necesso sit
in nullo peccato Evangelicae doctrinae adverso manner? In Praefat. page 5.
] Haec quaestio ita est comparata, says he, ut homines mirum in modum hic
semetipsos ludant ac decipiant. Aliter enim sese de ea sentire credunt, quam
revera sentiunt. Nam cum aperte negare non audeant, tanta sanctitate, and a
vitiis puritate ad regnum Dei postidendum opus esse; si penitius eorum sensum
mentemque excutias, long aliter statuunt. Tantoque nocentior est hic error,
quanto occultior. Meisnerus, certe ita hunc locum disputat, ut non tantum id,
quod asserit Socinus, se concedere dicat sed etiam long majorem sanctitatis
perfectionem requiri affirmet, Socinumque and exemplis, and dictis, and
rationibus, and omni denique argumentorum apparatu urget, quod aliquid de tanto
pietatis rigore remittat. At si quid in recessu lateat inspicias, deprehendes
omnia illorum de pietate dicta splendida, atque magnifica, eo tandem recidere,
ut in peccatis, vitiisque manentibus, quamvis ante vitae exitum deposita non
fuerint, inductis in eorum locum virtutibus, dummodo morientes meritum Christi
sibi applicent, peccatorumque dolor tangantur, Regni coelorum jus and
haereditatem asserant. Hoc vero quid aliud est, quam quod in speciem
necessarium ad regni Dei adeptionem esse dixeras, reipsa non necessarium esse
statuere? That is, [Whether it be necessary for a man, to the obtaining the
Kingdom of God, that he continue in no one sin which is contrary to the
Doctrine of the Gospel] This Question, says he, is so stated, that men do
strangely delude and cheat themselves in the case; whilst they fancy themselves
to have another sense of the business, then indeed they have. For although
they dare not flatly deny, but such an exact holiness and clearness from sin,
is needful to the obtaining the Kingdom of God; yet if we look more narrowly
into their sense and thoughts, we shall find them quite of another mind. Now
this error is the more dangerous for being so close and covert. Meisnerus in
his disputing the controversy does not only acknowledge what Socinus asserts,
but will have a far greater measure of sanctity required; and takes Socinus to
task, both with Examples, Testimonies, Reasons, and all manner of Arguments
else, for his remitting any thing of that height and rigor of Piety. But if a
man looks what lies within these men's breasts, he shall find all their high and
splendid professions of Piety signify no more at last than this; They believe
that though men lie in never so many sins and iniquities to their dying day,
without any regard to virtuous and good living, yet if at their expiration they
can apply the merit of Christ to themselves, and be touched with a remorse for
their sins, they may challenge the Kingdom of heaven as their due right and
inheritance. And what is this but to say in plain terms, that what they had
before affirmed in show to be necessary toward the obtaining Gods Kingdom, is
in very deed and really not necessary? Thus in his Praeface. And in his
Disputation he renews the reproach in these words; Page 50.
Jam ante monuimus, Meisnerum, and qui Theologiam istorum sequuntur, in speciem
rigidos esse pietatis propugnatores, reipsa tamen nihil minus quam hoc agere.
Nec ulla alia istius fucati rigoris est causa, quam quod non multum in eo ad
salutem situm esse putent, sive quis vera vitae sanctitate sit praeditus, sive
minus. Itaque de pietate sic loquuntur, tanquam si in alieno foro res ageretur.
Strenue pietatem extollunt, etiam minimos actus peccati damnare docent, dummodo
sibi sine salutis discrimine liceat non tantum actus vitiosos committere, sed
etiam in habitibus haerere. Probitas laudatur and alget. Revocate tantum ad
usum pietatem, and mox nobiscum sentieti^. That is, We told you formerly how
Meisnerus and the rest of the Disciples of that kind of Theology, are for their
out side very rigid Champions of Piety: but in truth they mind nothing less.
Nor is there any other reason for this their dissembled rigidnesse, but their
persuasion and belief that it is of little or no consequence to salvation,
whether a man be endowed with true Holiness or not. Hence it is that they
still speak of Piety, as if they were pleading a cause wherein themselves are
not at all concerned. They cry it up for excellent, and tell us that the
smallest sins will damn a man; but themselves the whilst will have leave both
for the Acts and Habit of sin, and yet without endangering their salvation:
they are hot in the commendation of Virtue, but cold in the practice of it.
Recall but that once, and you and I shall soon be of a judgment.

And now it will fall in very seasonably, to examine the truth of what you
would fain have granted you (because you are not able to prove it,) in the 36.
Section of your Preface. Where you urge Master Pierce (upon a false ground)
thus; Let that then be known to be the difference, that they Calvinists.
make God more gracious, and man more sinful and impotent than you do: and do
not say, that which is not so, that they make Godless Gracious, because they
make man more sinful. But we must not swallow so gross a fallacy, as you
would put upon your Reader; Do not say, that they make God less Gracious,
because they make man more sinful. Why, who does say so? That their making man
more sinful, is the Cause of their making God less Gracious? The Fallacy is
Causa pro non Causa. But as they assign other Reasons why you make God less
Gracious, so with Good Reason they affirm, that you make man less sinful,
(though in some sense more impotent.)

1. Which side is it, that restrains Gods will and intention of saving; to a
few, even of those, whom he calls to salvation? Is it not the Synod and the
Calvinists? Which side does extend Gods will and intention of saving to all
that are called, according to the holy Scriptures, which say, God would have
all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. 1 Timothy 2. and, He
would not that any should perish, but that all might come to repentance. 2 Pet.
3. Is it not Master P. Tilenus and the Remonstrants? which of them then make
God most Gracious? 2. Which of the Parties is it, that ascribes to God, none
but an external will, or an outward signification only, and that in the first
intention of God ineffectuall, when he calls the Reprobates to salvation; nay
rather, who is it that attributes to God plainly a feigned will, whereby he
would seem willing to save them, whom he has professedly willed and decreed to
Reprobate, that is, to destroy, for his own glory? Is this the Doctrine of the
Remonstrants, or of the Calvinists? 3. Who are they that do attribute to
Almighty God a will, whereby he wills that they whom he has by his own
immutable decree willed to reprobate, for the glory of his Name, should believe
in Christ, and if they will not believe (which he has willed to deny them the
grace to do) should become guilty of a greater condemnation? Is this suitable
to that Name proclaimed to Moses, Exodus 34.6. The Lord God Merciful and
Gracious? And is this the Doctrine of the Remonstrants, or of the Calvinists?

But you argue (Section 33. He that says [All that ever are sanctified truly,
shall be saved] does more advance the grace of God, than be that says [some
that shall never be saved, are sanctified.] Answ. 1. You must not obtrude a
fallacy upon us, A dicto simpliciter: For all that are truly sanctified shall
be saved, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. But
if they cease to be sanctified, the case is altered. Ezekiel. 18.24. 2 Pet. 2.20.

2. When you speak of advancing Gods grace, you may understand it, either of
Gods love and favor toward us, or of the effects thereof, viz. some habit or
quality, or operation, dwelling in us, or imprinted, or moving upon us. If you
take Grace in the first sense; then indeed you may be said to advance Gods
grace, when you tell men, they may often commit fornication, revile and slander
their Brethren, be disobedient to those Guides (both Civil and
Ecclesiastical) whom God has set over them, rend the Church by Schisms, and
yet continue in Grace and be eminent for Godliness; Nay in this sense you may
be said to advance Gods Grace, when you Proclaim a general Jail delivery for
the very Devils, as Origin did. But, I believe, God will Con you little thanks
(as we say) for such commendations of his Grace. If you think by such opinions
and doctrines to advance the Glory of his Grace; I must take the confidence to
declare otherwise. For it is his Grace in the second sense, that he desires
should be advanced (because that is the best way of advancing the other) and
the best measures we can take of the Glory hereof, are his own will revealed in
his word (by his Son and his Apostles) and they tell us Tit. 2.11, 12, 14. Ephesians.
1.6. 1 Pet. 2.9.
, to be zealous of good works, and to be holy in all manner of conversation and
godliness, is the best praise (we can render) of the glory of his Grace.
Hereby is my father glorified that ye bring forth much fruit. Joh. 15.8. And
thus the Remonstrants do more advance Gods Grace than the Calvinists.

As they make God more Gracious, so they make man more sinful, even such of
them, (if there be any such) as deny Original sin; for sure (1.) He is more
sinful, who is sinful by inherent pollution, than he that is sinful only by
an extrinsick imputation (as the Posterity of Adam are said by Calvin See in
the Epist. of the Exam. of Tilenus.
to be); For this way, Babes of a span long, and the Son of God may be sinful:
but that way, none but Devils, and men arrived to a capacity to consider and
make election. 2. He makes man more sinful that places the original fountain
of his uncleanness in his own heart, than he that derives that uncleanness
unavoidably to him, through foreign channels, from a spring head, that was
opened at a great distance from him, not only before he had power to oppose,
or protest against it, but before he had a being. 3. He makes man more sinful,
who makes his sin personally voluntary, and of his own free choice, than he who
makes it necessary and unavoidable (ab extrinseco). The Reason is, that in all
these Cases, the one does aggravate, the other does extenuate the sin.

But to proceed; He that provides a fair and sufficient excuse for Man's sin,
does make man less sinful, than he that provides none, but charge all his
sin, with all the aggravations of it, upon his own will; The Calvinists do the
first, the Remonstrants the last. That God does for the sin of the first
Parent, punish man with an impotencie, or utter inability to believe and obey,
and after that mulct of impotencie inflicted, that he does require of him the
Act of faith and obedience, which cannot be performed without a new power, He
that delivers this Doctrine, makes man excusable; The Reason is, there can be
no better excuse for the omission of a duty, than an utter inability to perform
it: and if he to whom the duty is supposed to be due has inflicted that
inability by way of punishment, before the obligation of the duty is of force,
in all reason such an obligation is to be void, and of none effect. For
example; A Prince commits a son to prison for his Fathers treason, (which he
will needs intail upon him,) gives order the man be put in irons, and secured
under custody; (and this is the Reprobates case, being tied and bound in the
chain of Adam's sin, and kept in thraldom under the power of the world and
Satan); afterward he causes proclamation to be made to summon that prisoner
to attend him at his Court, (though the former Decree for his restraint
continues in full force irreversibly) and in case he does not make his
appearance (which that Prince his own order and warrant unrepealed, has made
impossible for him) this poor prisoner is sentenced to have his present and
unavoidable misery augmented by the accession of new and greater torments. Now
in this case, whether this prisoners nonappearance at Court; (for disobedience
I cannot call it) ought to be accounted a crime, or rather held altogether
excusable, and a misery the more to be pitied in that it is unavoidable, I
leave to every unbiassed judgment to determine. But this is according to the
Doctrine of the Calvinists, as is evident from what has been said above.

2. He that says no man, whether Elect, or Reprobate, can abstein from sin,
unless he be kept back from sinning, by a special internal, and in the
intention of God, effectual grace administered every moment, He, when man does
sin, renders him excusable. The Reason is, because his excuse rests upon the
defect of that Divine Grace, which defect depends upon the sole will of God,
and which (what ever it was in Adam) is not now in the power of man to hinder.
But that the Calvinists say this, needs no other evidence than what has been
alleged already. Therefore they make man less sinful.

I confess, in another sense, you may be said, to make man more sinful (as he
that puts away his wife, is said, (in the Phrase of Scripture) to make her
commit Adultery, Mat. 5.32.) For 1. the Non-elect you make (in this sense)
disperately sinful: giving them too just an occasion to take up that
resolution of those wretches mentioned, Jer. 2.25. etc. 18.12. There is no
hope, but we will walk after our own devises, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart. Why should I attend upon Gods Ordinances,
read, hear, pray, endeavor to mortify lusts and appetites, and keep a good
conscience in all things, seeing these will (if not render me liable to a
soarer judgment, and greater condemnation) but make me inexcusable; and not
conduce at all, to my salvation, I being left in an utter incapacitie for that
enjoyment and happiness, by Gods eternal and immutable preterition? 2. As
this Doctrine makes some men (All the Non-elect) more desperately sinful, so
it tends to make others Presumptuously sinful; for, as no sin of theirs could
hinder their election, that Decree for their salvation being irrespectively
made in their favor, from all eternity: so no sins, how many or how enormous
soever (as was showed above) can hinder their final perseverance; (that being
an infallible and necessary effect of the said Decree of Election) and so all
the sins of persons under that Decree, are reckoned but infirmities, or
castigations proceeding from Gods paternall love (as M. Perkins says) that
shall never be able to excusse the spirit of Grace, but serve rather to promote
and confirm it, and likewise to advance their Glory.

And yet, (notwithstanding your Doctrine makes them thus p esumptuously
sinful; so fu l is it of contradictions, that) it makes them less sinful
too; for he whose sins cannot exclude him from the kingdom of heaven,
certainly is less sinful than he, whose sins do exclude him from it, (else
God should not judge men according to their works) But the sins of the Elect,
whether Adultery, Murder, Perjury, Incest, or the like; cannot exclude them
from the Kingdom of heaven; and yet the sins of the Non-elect, their Adultery,
Murder, Perjury, Incest, and the like do exclude them. If you say this is not
from the nature of the sin, but from Gods special indulgence and favor. I
reply, God has made but One Rule for all sorts of men, and it is peremptory.
Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
The works of the flesh are manifest which are these, Adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness,
revellings and such like: of the which I tell you, -- that they which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Now I demand; Are the sins, which
the Elect do at any time commit, such sins as these, yea or no? Is their
Adultery, drunkenness, sedition, heresy, such as these here mentioned by the
Apostle? If they he not such, then the Elect even when they do the same Fact
for nature, quality and substance, with the Non-elect, are notwithstanding
less sinful than they are; which is the thing to be proved. If they be the
same for heinousness, then by this General Rule, they must exclude them out
of heaven. For he that does these things whatever he be, shall not enter there;
This is further confirmed by that Rule in Logic; That an universal Negative
may be simply converted. See Doctor Jackson. 10. B. of the Comment. p. 3162.
If no Tree can be a Man, then no Man can be a Tree. If no Adulterer, no
Incestuous, no perjured, no seditious, no disobedient, heretical, unrighteous
person, nor doer of any of those works of the flesh mentioned by the Apostle,
can enter into the kingdom of heaven: Then no man whose entrance into that
kingdom is Immutably and irrespectively determined can be an Adulterer,
incestuous, perjured, seditious, disobedient, heretical, unrighteous person.
If you say, he may be such and yet Repent, and then be capable of entering into
that kingdom, which he was not before. I answer, That his entrance being
immutably and irrespectively determined, his want of Repentance can no more
hinder his entrance, than it can rescind the Decrees of God; and therefore
though you do but incline to think so of a person once sanctified, that though
he does fall into such wasting sins, Disput. of Justific. page 398.
if he be cut off by death before repentance, he shall be fully pardoned at the
instant of death, and so be saved; yet you say, of all the Elect, Account of
Persever. page
you are sure of it. Hence it appears that you hold such persons to be less
sinful then those of the Non-elect. Yea, their very sins of the same nature,
for substance and quality, with those of the Non-elect, to be less sinful.)
And this you aver expressly more than once in your Preface, for you say, Sect.
18, and 20.
The sin of David, Peter, etc. was exceeding different from the like Fact in a
Graceless man, in regard of End, Manner, Concomitants, etc. But here I must
expostulate. What other end would an unsanctified man propound in denying of
Christ, but his own safety to escape persecution? and did not Peter propound
that end to himself? And after what other manner and with what Concomitants
could it be attended in an unsanctified man? would he have stood to it with
more confidence, or have used bigger oaths and execrations? For David's sin,
what the manner and concomitants of that were, we have considered before; and I
would fain be satisfied what end he propounded to himself in that matter, more
than another Adulterer aims at, even the satisfaction of his lust? He did not
intertain such a thought surely, that it should conduce to Gods glory. You
disclaim that opinion your self, in your sheet annexed to your debate with M.
Barlow Of Saving Faith, page 92.
where you say; Either David in Adultery did desire flesh-pleasing for it self,
or for some other end. If for it self, then it was his ultimate end in that
Act: If for somewhat else as his end, For what? No one will say it was for Gods
Glory. And there is nothing else to be it. This was then your opinion.

Thus you see your Doctrine, as it makes God less Gracious, so it makes man
less sinful; whether you understand the Elect or Non-elect. And yet it makes
man more impotent too. (a strange Paradox!) But a true saying; for (according
to some of your Calvinists (as Piscator and Maccovius) it concludes, No man can
do less evil, nor more good than he does; His will being infallible and
irresistibly predetermined to every individual Act, as was declared above; so
that he can no more advance one single step further toward hell or heaven, but
as he is so predetermined, than add a cubit to his stature. And you make the
Elect so impotent (as I may say) in respect of sin, they cannot effectually and
eventually hinder, either their Conversion or final Perseverance; on the other
side, you make the Non-elect so impotent (and under the influences of Common
Grace too, as you call and define it) that they cannot so much as exert one
Preface Sect. 20.
Act of Saving love; nor intertain a good purpose or intention Disp. of Justis.
page 304.
. Such is your Sufficient Grace. Of which enough before.

SACRED AMULETS, OR Spiritual Charms Against the poisonous suggestions of the
Three Grand Tempters of Mankind, to prevent Apostasy.
I. The DEVIL.
Luke 22.31. Behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as
wheat.

Revel. 12.4. And the Dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be
delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born.

The AMULET.
Heb. 3.12. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you, an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God.

1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be sober, be vigilant: because your Adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour,

Jam. 4.7. Whom resist, steadfast in the faith; and he will flee from you.

II. The WORLD.
Mat. 4.8, 9. Again, the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain,
and shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them: And
says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me.

2 Cor. 6.8. By honor and dishonor: by evil report and good report.

2 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26, 27. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes
save one: Thrice was I beaten with rods: once was I stoned: thrice I suffered
shipwreck: a night and a day I have been in the deep: In journeyings ^ften: in
perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own contrymen, in
perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in
perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false Brethren.

Joh. 16.1, 2. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be
offended. They shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea, the time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think, that he does God service.

The AMULET.
1 John 2.15, 17. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world.
-- For the world passes away and the lust thereof: but he that does the will
of God abides for ever.

Phil. 4, 11, 12. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where,
and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to
abound, and to suffer need. I can do all things through Christ, which
strengthens me.

Luke 12.4, 5. Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that, have
no more, that they can do. But I will forewarn you, whom ye shall fear: fear
him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell: yea I say unto
you, fear him.

Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those things, which thou shall suffer, behold, the
Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall
have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee
a crown of life.

Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.

III. The FLESH.
Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked.

Jam. 1.14, 15. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust,
and entised. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin,
when it is finished, brings forth death.

The AMULET.
Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of
life,

Luke 21.34, 36. And take heed lest at any time, your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day
come upon you unawares. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape, -- and to stand before the son of man.

1 Pet. 2.11. Abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.

Job. 30.1. made a Covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid?

Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: and quicken thou me
in thy way.

Col. 3.5. Mortify your members which are upon the earth: etc.

1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by
any means, when I have preached unto others, I my self should be a castaway.

Ex Synodo Arelatensi, contra Lucidum Presbyt.
I. Anathema illi, qui per Dei Praescientiam (vel Decretum) hominem in mortem
deprimi dixerit.

II. Anathema illi, qui dixerit, illum qui periit non accepisse ut salvus esse
posset.

III. Anathema illi, qui dixerit, quod vas contumeliae non possit assurgere, ut
fiat vas in honorem.

IV. Anathema illi, qui dixerit, quod Christus non sit mortuus pro omnibus, nec
omnes salvos esse velit.

Prosper ad object. Gallorum III.
A sanctitate ad immunditiem, a justitia ad iniquitatem, a fide ad impietatem
plerosque transire non dubium est: and ad tales praedestinationem filiorum Dei,
Cohaeredum Christi non pertinere certissimum est.

Hieron. advers. Jovin. l. 11.
Tamdiu sciatis vos in generatione Domini permanere, quandiu non peccaveritis.
Et mox: Si peccaverimus, and per peccati januam ingressus fuerit Diabolus,
protinus Christus recedit.

August. de Bono Persever. cap. 8.
Deus autem melius judicavit miscere quosdam non perseveraturos, certo numero
Sanctorum suorum, ut quibus non expedit in hujus vitae tentatione securitas,
non possint esse securi.

Prosper ad object. Vincent. 12.
Praedestinatio Dei apud nos dum in praesentis vitae periculis versamur,
incerta est.

FINIS.
REFLECTIONS UPON A practical Discourse Lately Printed at Oxon.
Sir,
THe Practical discourse, you sent me, has given me a needless diversion.
For those Judgments (in my opinion) shall never pass the Muster, to be
engaged in these Controversies, that are not very high-proof against all the
impressions that can possibly be made by such weak discourses. I can as little
approve the man's Doctrine, as justify his Practice. Was not He sometimes
Scholar to Master B. and afterward his Usher at Westminster School? Had he not
once a design to supplant his Master; and was outed himself? Are not these
Sermons calculated, think you, to serve such unworthy ends? Does he not herein
endeavor to set forth God for a President, of such Decrees, as he would have
others execute; [viz. The Absolute Reprobation of a very deserving Master, and
the Absolute Election of a most unthankful Scholar?] I call it an Absolute
Election, presuming he does not expect such advancement for his works; they
having little or nothing of Merit in them, whether of Condignity, or Congruity;
Yet his Fides Praevisa, (held forth in these Sermons,) He thought happily, might
be a fair Qu^lification and motive to such an Election. But I am apt to
conclude, men (in these days of light and Reformation) will not assume or
exercise a Sovereignty more Absolute than what they ascribe to God himself. And
though they affirm, he passes his Eternal Decrees upon men, who lie [in Pari
statu vel conditione]: yet I have met with none so bold, as to affirm, that he
does Reject the worthy, though he Elects the unworthy. However Divine
Providence, I doubt not, will in time awaken the infatuated world to take
notice of what Complexion those men are, who pretend to be the greatest Patrons
and Advocates of that Horrible Decree. SUETONIUS giving account how Tiberius
was improved into the most intolerable Tyrant, attributes the Original of it
to his belief, That All things are wrought by a Fatality. How can those men be
convinced, P. Disc. etc. page 3.
they commit injustice, (when they invade the Rights of others) who persuade
themselves their wills are tied up so close to the will of God, that like
lesser wheels they move only as that Great Mover does guide them?

In the choice of his first Doctrine, I cannot but observe how Prudent the man
is, to prevent the danger of a Confutation; making All mankind (upon the
matter) Incompetent for such an undertaking. For you can hardly weigh the
Reasonableness of his Discourse, unless you put the Justice of Gods
Proceedings into the Balance with it; And if you do this, he presently cries
out upon your Incapacitie to be a Judge in such matters. The ways and counsels
of God, how profound and inscrutable soever, we are sure are not so establis'd
or carried on as to defeat the Ministeries of his Grace, of their proper
Vsefullnesse, or to dishonor his Essential Attributes. I would ask but this
one Question, Whether the Apostle did not Declare All the Conusell of God
(touching man's Salvation and Damnation respectively) unto the Church? Act.
20.27.
Who dares deny, what the Apostle asserteth of his own Ministry? If here were
all and that declared too; then is there no defect either in respect to the
extent, or to the perspicuity of this Object. If this Counsel be revealed, is
it not a Part of our duty, and our Reasonable service, Joh. 5.39. Romans 12.1.
to search into it, as well as the Bereans? Act. 17.11.
It Is strange that All, of his persuasion, should be able to determine, in
these ways and Counsels of God, (as they do most peremptorily) and that none
of mankind besides should be in a capacity to examine them? Sure God
understands man's capacity better than your Practical Discourser; yet how often
does he summon the sons of men, to debate the Equity and Justice of his
Proceedings, before the Tribunal of their own Reason? The Lord does not only
stand up to plead himself: Isa. 3.13.
a but he calls his people to the Bar too, that They may plead together. Isa.
43.26 Mica. 6.2.3.
Yea, and when they have done pleading, He is pleased to refer the Justice of
his Proceedings to the Sinners own sentence; Isa. 5.3, 4.
And now, O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you,
betwixt me and my vineyard. What could have been done more to my vineyard, that
I have not done in it? And by another of his Prophets he appeals to them in
these words; Ezekiel 18.25. Chap. 33.17
Hear now, O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not your ways
unequal? God will not only be justified Psalm. 51.4.
when he speaks, but be clear when he is judged too. But how can the Creature
bring in a verdict to clear Him, if he has not a Competent capacity, in some
measure, to judge of the Equity of his Proceedings? I need add no more, for
the force of those sacred Engines is abundantly sufficient to overthrow his
Hypothesis, though it had far stronger props, than such Arguments as he
produces to support it. But these being so feeble, I shall not give you or my
self the trouble to handle them. Only I shall vindicate the Sacred Text from
his misconstruction, and take my leave of this part of his Discourse. Nay but O
man, Quis tu! who art Thou! He interprets this of Man, [In whatever capacity
considered:] When it is as clear as the Sun by the foregoing verses, that he
speaks it of Man made obnoxious to the Sword of Divine justice, by having
filled up the Measure of his sin, in despising Gods Gracious Methods, and
Dispensations for his Conversion. For of whom speaks the Apostle this? Is it
not spoken of the stubborn Jews, who would not have Christ to reign over them;
who would not be gathered by his Gospel: but abused Gods Patience, Christ's
intercession, and the Miracles of the Holy Ghost, as Pharaoh had done those,
vouchsafed by the Lord, and his servant Moses? What then if God deals by these
Jews, now ( stubborn and Rebellious, as they are) as he dealt then by Pharaoh?
whom (though he highly deserved it, and had been swept away by that Plague,
according to Gods ordinary course of Justice; yet) Exodus 9.16.
He made him to stand, or kept him alive still to serve other ends of his
Divine Providence? It Is none but such clay as this, that vessels of wrath are
made Se^ Jer. 18. throughout.
of. And it is such a man whose insolency, the Apostle checks with his [Homo,
Quis tu!] Nay but, O man, who art thou! If the Malefactor comes to dispute the
just sentence of his upright Judge, it is time to take him up, as the Lord does
( Jer. 2.29.) Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed against
me, says the Lord. Such persons therefore, when God enters into Judgment with
them, must lay their hands upon their mouths Job 40.4.
. But this does not debar men the Privilege to examine the Equity and
Justice of those Decrees and Laws by which they are Governed, and upon which
their Eternal Weal or Woe depends. In this case Abraham thinks it no
undutifulnesse to be inquisitive into Gods Counsels and Proceedings, Genesis
18.23, 25.
and to expostulate about them; Will thou destroy the righteous with the
wicked? That be far from thee, to do after this manner, to slay the righteous
with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far
from thee: shall not the judge of all the earth do right? But whether your
Discourser be of Abraham's Judgment, I leave you to collect from his own
words; Page 2. Page 3.
He lays down this sense, That God acts all things according to the Dictates
of his Absolute, Sovereign and unaccountable will; And hereby the greatest part
of mankind are left in an hopeless and irrecoverable condition. Then he brings
in and presses an objection, Romans 9.
(out of verse. 19.) Thou will then say unto me, if our wills are tied up so
close to the will of God, that like lesser wheels they move only as that great
Mover does guide them; then why is God so Angry with sin and sinners? why does
he forbid, dehort, and threaten by his Prophets? To what end serve all those
examples of vengeance, which we ^remble to read of? for if it be so with us, we
may be miserable, but we cannot be sinful; if our spirits be put into an
unsuitable frame, so as that we walk contrary to God, it is our sad necessity
and not our fault; since none can alter, much less resist the will of God,
which alone has made us so. This is the objection. How does your Discourser
answer it? Does he vindicate the Goodness and Justice of God from the
blasphemy of this imputation? No. In stead of a Solution to that purpose, here
follows a clear Concession, as if the Objection were a perfect Truth; For thus
he proceeds, [ And now the 0bjection being pressed to such a degree of impiety,
that it does tacitly lay the guilt of all men's Transgressions upon God, the
Apostle thinks it high time to cut off all further arguing; which he does in
these words -- Nay but what art thou, O Man, who replyest against God? As if he
had said -- Do thou know who thou art, thou bold inquisitive Creature, or who
it is thou dealest with? Consider that thou art but a Man, and will thou
question thy Makers Justice? Forbear vain presumptuous man, stand off, and lay
thy hand upon thy mouth, for God is in the Bush, God is at the bottom of this
dispute, and therefore admire with reverence, what thou can not comprehend
with reason. What the Objector (in the Apostle) did but tacitly, he does most
expressly, viz. lay All men's Transgressions and Misery upon the Absolute and
unaccountable will of God; and no man may dispute against it; For this is his
Doctrine [Man, in whatever Capacity considered, is not a Competent Judge, of
the Equity and Justice of the Proceedings, ways and Counsels of God, in the
disposing and ordering of his Creatures.] And what remains then in this case,
but that Option of the Psalmist, Arise, O Lord, plead thine own cause?

For his Discourse on, Act. 13.48. I need say no more, then to evince, how
palpably he mistakes the sense of the Text. To this purpose, I shall not tire
you out, to examine a cloud of witnesses, that might be produced in favor of
the sense which he rejects: but satisfy my self, in discovering some of those
gross Absurdities, which follow upon his interpretation. If by [Ordained to
eternal life] we understand, [Absolutely Elected;] then it will follow; (1.)
That All the Praedestinated unto life, that were in this place, believed at
once; And (2.) that those which did believe, could not but believe; (3.) That
All they who did now embrace the Faith, (upon this preaching of the Apostle)
were Absolutely Elected; and that not one of them could forsake the Faith,
which he had embraced; (4.) That this was revealed, not only to S. Paul, but
to S. Luke also, concerning the Absolute election of every Individual of these
new Converts; How inevitable are these inferences, and yet how Absurd? how
ridiculous? On the other side, what shall we conclude of the rest who did not
believe at this Sermon? (1.) It follows, that they were All absolutely
Reprobated; and yet (2.) that God would have S. Paul command them All to
believe in Christ; and (3.) that S. Paul, when he knew them to be Reprobates,
and so in no capacity to believe, and be saved, yet He calls them unto Faith
and Salvation, and (4.) threatens them with eternal destruction for not
believing; and (5.) afterward upbraids them, that they judged themselves
unworthy of eternal life; and (6.) at last, when they would not believe, that
he did, for that cause, turn to the Gentiles; what a heap of foul Absurdities
are here! And (which is none of the least,) that S. Luke should give notice, by
this writing, That such as now believed were all absolutely elected, the rest
absolutely Reprobate); To what purpose should this be? or what influence could
it have upon them? It could serve no end of Divine providence; but might very
well serve the interest of Satan, as a means to tempt those Believers to
security, and the unbelievers to desperation, and a contempt of those
Ordinances, which, (if this exposition of the Text were true) they were assured
by S. Lukes Testimony, could never bring them benefit.

Having thus bereaved him of His Senses; his Reason must needs want that
solidity that should make it considerable, in the accounts of

Dear Sir Your Faithful Friend.

For Master B.
Errata, In the Preface.
Page 3. l. 25. r. As M. B. himself. sp. 20. l. 10 r. de fato. l. 25. blot out
(had) p. 24 l. 3. r. positivity. p. 42. l. 8, and 9. r. Master.

In the Apology.
Page 22. l. 21. r. in, 18. Art. l. 26. r. third and fourth. l. 30. r. into
fifteen Art. p. 31. l. 4. r. not effect. p. 37. l. 12. r. Not. 6. p. 39. l. 23.
r. and omit. p. 45. l. 19. r. costs and dam. p. 62. l. 5. r. add to p. 6. ^.
l. 14. r. Hols. p. 90. l. 2. r. Supralapsarian neither Existentialist, nor
Creabilitarian, as dross. line 28. read persons. page 94. lin. 24. read
Supralapsarian Creabilitarian. page 99. lin. 5. read Existentialists and
Creabilitarians as well as Sublapsarians, do all. p. 118. l. 14. propalandis.
l. 24. judicaret. p. 131. l. 3 r. if I add, in Tilenus his behalf, that. l.
24. r. ex post factum. p. 188. l. 29. r. they tell us page 189. in mar. l. 2.
r. par. 2. page 79. p. 200. l. 24. r. cast. p. 224. in marg. l. 5. r. Reject.
4, and 5. p. 231. l. 25. r. effectual. p. 237. l 18. r. Amesius p. 242. l. 27.
r. Martinius p. 253. l. 27. r. was one of the Synod. p. 259. l. 21. r.
elicited. p. 272. l. 9. r. imbuing it. p. 283. dele marg. note. 289. dele
(generosity) in marg. p. 335. l. 22. r. as well as. p. 345. l. 19. r. if it be.
p. 361. l. 19. r. impotency. p. 366. in marg. for 38, and 4. r. 3. and 4. p.
386. l. 10. r Sancti p. 388. l. 28. r. defend. d. p. 400. marg. r. Digress, p.
434. l. 21. r. indefectibilis. p. 438. l. 4. 454. l. 15. r. quin. p. 459. l. 9.
r. superesse. p. 470. l. 15. r. And. p. 480. l 11. r. wilfully. p. 488. l. 17.
but it is in. l. last. r. and the winds blew. p. 493. l. 28. r. his Election. p.
516, l. 13. r. papers.

The End.

