The Accomplished LADIES DELIGHT IN Preserving, Physic, Beautifying, and
Cookery. CONTAINING I. The ART of PRESERVING, and CANDYING Fruits and Flowers,
and the making of all sorts of Conserves, Syrups, and Jellies. II. The PHYSICAL
CABINET, Or Excellent Re^eipts in Physic and Surgery, Together with some
Rare Beautifying Waters, to adorn and add ^oveliness to the Face and Body: And
also some N^w and Excellent Secrets and Experiments in the ART of ANGLING. III.
The Compl^at COOK'S GUIDE, Or, directions for dressing all sorts of Flesh, Fowl
and Fish (...) English and French Mode, (...); and the making Pyes, (...) with
the Forms and (...)

(...) ^rged.

Licensed.

July 14th, 1686. Rob. Midgley.

TO THE LADIES AND GENTLEWOMEN.
LADIES,
THough there have been many Books extant of this kind, yet I think something
has been deficient in them all. I have therefore adventured to make another,
which I suppose comprehends all the Accomplishments necessary for Ladies, in
(...) this Nature. For you have here

1. The Art of Preserving and Candy^ all Fruits and Flowers, as also of making
Conserves, both wet and dry, and also the preparing of all sorts of Syrups,
Jellies, and Pickles.

2. Here are some Excellent Receipts in Physic and Surgery for curing most
Diseases incident to the Body: Together with some Rare Beautifying Waters,
Oils, Ointments, and Powders, for Adornment of the Face and Body, and to
cleanse it from all D^^ormities that may render Persons (...) there are also
added some choice Secrets and Experiments in the Art of Angling; a Recreation
which many Ladies delight in, and is not therefore thought altogether improper
in a Book of this Nature.

Lastly, You have here a guide to all manner of Cookery, both in the English
and French Mode, with the preparing all kind of Sallets and Sauces proper
thereunto.

Together with Directions for making all sorts of Pies, Pasties, Tarts, and
Custards, with the Forms and Shapes of many of them to help your Practice, with
Bills of Fare upon all Occasions. So that in the whole I hope it may deserve
the Title of the Accomplished Ladies Delight, and may acquire Acceptance at
your Fair Hands, whereby you will much Encourage and Oblige,

Ladies, Your very humble Servant, and Admirer, T. P.

The Art of Preserving, and Candying Fruits and Flowers, as also of making all
sorts of Conserves, Syrups and Jellies.
1. To make Quince Cakes.
BAke your Quinces in an Oven with some of their own juice, their Cores being
cut and bruised and put to them, then weigh some of this juice with some of the
Quince, being cut into small Pieces, taking their weight in sugar, and with the
Quince some quantity of the juice of Barberries, then take the clearest syrup,
and let it stand on the Coals two or three hours, and let them boil a little on
the fire, then Candy the rest of the sugar very hard, and so put them together,
stirring it while it is almost cold, and so put it into Glasses.

2. To make Conserve of Barberries.
When the stalks are picked off, boil them in fair water till they swell and be
very soft, then bruise them in a Mortar, then strain them, and boil them again
by themselves, then take for every pound of them two pound of sugar, and boil
them together, but not too long, for then it will Rope.

3. To make Conserve of Roses.
Take of the buds of red Roses, and slip away the white ends, and then slip the
rest of the Roses as small as you can, and beat them fine in a Marble Mortar;
and put to every pound of Roses, three pound and a half of Sugar, then put it
up in a Gally pot, and set it in the Sun for a fortnight.

4. To make Cinnamon Water.
Take a quart of White Wind, a quart of Rose Water, a Pint of Muscadine, half a
pound of Cinnamon bruised, lay the Cinnamon to steep in the wine twelve hours,
stirring them now and then, afterward put them into an Alembick, and still
them with a gentle fire, and you may draw off from it three pints: But if you
will not have it strong, instead of Muscadine put in so much Rose Water or
White wine.

5. To preserve Quinces white.
Take to every pound of Quince, a pound and a quarter of Sugar, clarify the
Sugar with the white of an Egg, core your Quinces, but not too much, then put
this Sugar, and Water, and Quince, being raw together, and so make them boil so
fast that you can see no Quince, but forget not to turn them, and take off what
scum you can, keep them boiling thus fast till you think they are enough.

6. To preserve Raspices.
Take of the fairest and well colored Raspices, and pick off their stalks very
clean, then wash them, but be sure not to bruise them; then weigh them, and to
every pound of Raspices, put six ounces of hard Sugar, and six ounces of
Sugar Candy, and clarify it with half a pint of fair water, and four ounces of
Juice of Raspices, being clarified, boil it to a weak Syrup, and then put in
your Raspices, stirring them up and down, and so let them boil till they are
enough, and you may keep them all the year.

7. To make Mackroons.
Take Almonds, blanch them, and beat them in a Mortar, with serced Sugar
mingled therewith, with the white of Egg and Rose Water, then beat them all
toge her till they are as thick as Fritters, then drop it upon your wafers, and
bake it.

8. To preserve Cherries.
Take some of the worst Cherries and boil them in fair water, and when the
Liquor is well colored, strain it, then take some of the best Cherries you can
get, with their weight in beaten Sugar, then lay one laying of Sugar and
another of Cherries, till all are laid in the Preserving Pan; then pour a
little of the liquor of the worst Cherries into it, boil your Cherries till
they be well colored, then take them up, and boil the Syrup till it will
button on the side of the dish, and when they are cold, put them up in a Glass
covered close with Paper until you use them.

9. To make Conserve of Oranges and Lemmons, or Pippins.
Boil any of these Fruits as you would do to make Paste thereof, and when it is
ready to fashion upon the Pye-plate, then put it into your Gally pots, and
never dry it; and this is all the difference betwixt Conserve and Paste, and
this serves for all hard Fruits, as Pippins, Oranges and Lemmons.

10. To make Symballs.
Take fine flower dried, and as much Sugar, as flower, then take as much whites
of Eggs as will make it Paste; put in a little Rose Water, with a quantity of
Corianderseed and Anniseed, then mould it up in the Fashion you will bake it in.

11. To make Syrup of Clove-gilly-flowers.
Take a pound of Clove-gilly-flowers, the whites being cut off, infuse them a
whole night in a quart of fair water, then with four pound of Sugar dissolved
in it, make it into a Syrup without boiling.

12. To make Syrup of Violets.
Take of Violet-flowers fresh, and pick a pound, clear water boiling one quart,
shut them up close together in a new glazed pot a whole day, then press them
hard out, and in two pound of the Liquor dissolve four pound and three ounces
of white Sugar, take away the scum, and so make it into a Syrup, without
boiling.

13. To make Marmalade of Quinces.
Take a bottle of water, and four pound of Sugar, and let them boil, together,
and when they boil, scum them as clean as you can, then take the whites of two
or three Eggs and beat them to Froth, put the froth into the pan to make the
scum rise, then scum it as clean as you can; take off the Kettle and put in the
Quinces, and let them boil a good while and stir them, and when they are boiled
enough, put them into boxes.

14. To make Hippocras.
Take a Gallon of White Wind, two pound of Sugar; and of Cinnamon, Ginger, long
Pepper, Mace not bruised, Grains, Galingal, Cloves not bruised, of each two
penny worth, bruise every kind of Spice a little, and put them together into an
earthen pot for a day, then cast them through your bags two or three times, as
you see cause, and so drink it.

15. To make Almond-Butter.
Take your Almonds and blaunch them, and beat them in a mortar very small; and
in beating put a little water, then when they are beaten pour in water into two
pots, and put half into one, and half into another, put Sugar to them and stir
them, and let them boil a good while; then strain it through a strainer and so
dish it up.

16. To preserve Quinces red.
Pare your Quinces and core them; then take as much Sugar as they weigh,
putting to every pound of Sugar one quart of water, boil your Quinces therein
very leasurely being close covered, turn them to keep them from spotting; and
when they are so tender that you may prick a hole through them with a rush, and
that they are well colored, then boil the Syrup till it will button on a dish,
and so put your syrup and them together.

17. To pickle Cucumbers.
Wash your Cucumbers clean, and dry them in a cloth, then take some Water,
Vinegar, Salt, Fennel-tops, and some Dill-tops, and a little Mace, make it
sharp enough to the taste, then boil it a while, and then take it off, and let
it stand till it is cold, then put in the Cucumbers, and lay a board on the top
to keep them down, and tie them up close, and within a week they will be fit to
eat.

18. To Candy Pears, Plumbs, and Apricocks to look as clear as Amber.
Take your Apricocks or Plumbs, and give every one a cut to the stone in the
notch, then cast sugar on them and bake them in an Oven as hot as for Maunchet
close stopped, bake them in an earthen Platter, and let them stand half an hour,
then take them out of the dish, and lay them one by one upon Glass plates, and
so dry them; if you can get Glasses made like Marmalet boxes to lay over them,
they will be the sooner Candyed. In this manner you may Candy any other Fruit.

19. To preserve Oranges.
Take a pound of Oranges, and a pound of Sugar, peel the outward rind, and
inward white skin off, then take juice of Oranges and put them into the juice,
boil them half an hour and take them off.

20. To make Oil of Violets.
Set the Violets in sallet Oil, and strain them, then put in other fresh
Violets, and let them lie twenty days, then strain them again, and put in other
fresh Violets, and let them stand all the year.

21. To make Cream of Quinces.
Take a roasted Quince, pare it, and cut it into thin slices to the core, boil
it in a pint of Cream with a little whole Ginger, till it taste of the Quinces
to your liking, then put in a little Sugar and strain it, and always serve it
cold to the Table.

22. To make a March-Pane.
Steep two pound of pickled Almonds one day and two nights in fair water, and
blaunch them out of it, then beat them well in a Mortar, and bedew them with
Rose Water, put to your Almonds so many pound of Sugar, and beat your sugar
with your almonds, then make very fine crust either of Paste or Water, and
sprinkle it with Rose Water, and Sugar; then spread the stuff on it, and bake
it at a very soft fire, always bedewing it with Damask water, Civet, and Sugar;
and lastly with a gut of Dates gilt, or long Comfits gilt, or with
Cinamon-sticks gilt, or the Kernels of the Pineapple, and so set it forth.

23. To make Almond milk.
Boil French Barley, and as you boil it, cast away the water wherein it was
boiled, till you see the water leave to change Color; as you put in more fresh
water, then put in a bundle of Strawberry leaves, and as much Cullumbine
leaves, and boil it a good while, then put in beaten Almonds and strain them,
and then strain it with Sugar and Rosemary, then strew some Sugar about the
dish, and send it to the Table.

24. To Preserve Apricocks or Pear-plumbs when they are green.
You may take any of these fruits and scald them in water and peel them, and
scrape the spungy substance of the Apricocks, or Quinces, so boil them very
tender, taking their weight in sugar, and as much water as to cover them, and
boil them very leasurely; then take them up and boil the Syrup till it be thick
and when they are cold put them up with your Syrup into your preserving Glasses.

25. To pickle French Beans.
You must take your Beans and string them, boil them tender; then take them
off, and let them stand till they are cold, put them into the pickle of Beer
Vinegar, Pepper and Salt, Cloves and Mace, with a little Ginger.

26. To make an Excellent Jelly.
Take three Gallons of fair Water, and boil in it a knuckle of Veal, and two
Calves feet slit in two, with all the fat clean taken from between the claws,
so let them boil to a very tender Jelly, keeping it clean scum'd, and the edges
of the pot always wiped with a clean Cloth, that none of the scum may boil in,
strain it from the meat, and let it stand all night, and the next morning take
away the top and the bottom, and take a quart of this Jelly, half a pint of
Sherry Sack, half an ounce of Cinnamon, and as much Sugar as will season it,
six Whites of Eggs very well beaten, mingle all these together, then boil it
half an hour, and let it run through your Jelly-bag.

27. To make Aqua Mirabilis.
Take of Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamums, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each one
dram, juice of Celandine half a pound, Spirit of Wine one pint, White Wind,
three pints, infuse them twenty four hours, and draw off a quart with an
Alembick.

28. Dr. Stevens water.
Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains of Paradise, seeds
of Annis, Fennel, Carraways, of each one dram; herbs of Time, Mother of Time,
Mint, Sage, Penny royal, Pellitory of the Wall, Rosemary, Flowers of Red Roses,
Camomile, Origanum, Lavender, of each one handfuls infuse them twelve hours in
twelve pints of Gascoign Wine, then with an Alembick draw three pints of strong
water from it.

29. To make good Cherry wine.
Take the Syrup of Cherries, and when it has stood a while, bottle it up, and
tie down the Cork, and in a short time it will be very good pleasant Wine.

30. To make Wafers.
Take a pint of flower, a little Cream, the yolks of two Eggs, a little
Rose Water with some searced Cinnamon and Sugar, work them together, and bake
them upon hot Irons.

31. To preserve Grapes.
Stamp and strain them, let it settle a while, before you wet a pound of Sugar
or Grapes with the Juice, stone the Grapes, save the Liquor, in the stoning,
take them off and put them up.

32. To pickle Purslain.
Take the Purslain and pick it into little pieces, and put it into a pot or
Barrel, then take a little water, vinegar and salt to your taste, it must be
pretty strong of the vinegar and salt, and a little Mace, and boil all these
together: and pour this Liquor boiling hot into the Purslain, and when it is
cold tie it close, but lay a little board on the top to keep it down, and
within a week or two it is fit to eat.

33. To preserve green Walnuts,
Boil your Walnuts till the water taste bitter, then take them off, and put them
in cold water, and peel off the bark, and weigh as much Sugar as they weigh,
and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on the fire, and when
they boil up take them off and let them stand two days, and then boil them
again once more.

34. To Preserve Currants.
Part them in the tops, and lay a laying of Currants, and a laying of Sugar, and
so boil them as fast as you do Rasberries, do not put them in the Spoon but
scum them, boil them till the Syrup be pretty thick; then take them off, and
let them stand till they be cold, and put them in a Glass.

35. To make Goose-berry Cakes.
Pick as many Goose-berries as you please, and put them into an earthen
Pitcher, and set it into a Kettle of water till they be soft, and then put them
into a sieve, and let them stand till all the juice be out, and weigh the
juice, and as much sugar as syrup, first boil the Sugar to a Candy; and take it
off, and put in the juice, and set them in the press till they be dry, then
they are ready.

26. To make excellent broth.
Take a Chicken and set it on the fire, and when it boyls scum it, then put in
a Mace, and a very little Oatmeal, and such herbs as the party requires, and
boil it well down, and bruise the Chicken and put it in again and it is good
broth: And to alter it you may put in 6 Prunes, and leave out the herbs or put
them in as you please, and when it is well boiled, strain it and season it.

37. To make Angellets.
Take a quart of new Milk, and a pint of Cream and put them together in a
little Runnel, when it is come well, take it up with a spoon, and put it into
the Vate softly, and let it stand two days till it be pretty stiff, then slip
it out and salt it a little at both ends, and when you think it is salt enough
set it a drying and wipe them, and within a quarter of a year they will be
ready to eat.

38. To make Jelly of Hartshorn.
Take four ounces of shavings of Hartshorn of the inside, and two Ale-quarts
of Water, put this in a pipkin and boil it very gently till it come to a quart,
the Hartshorn must be steeped 3 or 4 hours first, afterward put a little into
a saucer till it be cold, and if it be cold, and jellieth, it is boiled enough,
then being warm take it off the fire, and strain it hard through a cloth, and
set it a cooling till it be a hard Jelly, then take two whites of Eggs, and
beat them very well or with a sprigg of Rosemary or Birch, (but not with a
spoon) till a water come in the bottom, then put these beaten Eggs, and the
water thereof into a skillet and all the Jelly upon it with three spoonfuls of
damask Rose Water, and a quarter of a pound of sugar, and when it boyls, stir
and lay it pretty well, then strain it through a cloth, and let it cool, and
of this take four spoonfuls in the morning fasting, and four a Clock in the
Afternoon, and this is excellent good for the weakness in the back.

39. To preserve Damsons, Red, or Black Plumbs.
Take their weight in Sugar and water enough to make a Syrup to cover them, so
boil them a little therein being close covered, turning them for spoting, let
them stand all night in their own Syrup, then set them upon a pot of seething
water, and suffer your Plumbs to boil no faster, than the water under them, and
when they are both sweet and tender take them up, and boil the Syrup again till
they be thick, then put up your Plumbs and it together in your Preserving
Glasses.

40. To make Rosemary-water.
Take the Rosemary and the flowers in the midst of May before the Sun rise,
strip the leaves and flowers from the stalks, then take 4 or 5 Elecampane
Roots, and a handful or two of Sage, then beat the Rosemary, Sage and roots
together, till they be very small, then take three ounces of Cloves and as much
Mace, and half a pound of Anniseeds, and beat these Spices every one by
themselves, then take the herbs and the Spices, and put thereto 4 or 5 Gallons
of good White Wind, then put in all these herbs, Spices and Wine into an
earthen pot, and put the Pot into the ground about sixteen days, then take it
up and distill it with a very soft fire.

41. To make Pomatum.
Take fresh Hogs suet cleansed from the films and washed in White Wind one
pound, and as much sheeps suet washed in White Wind, then take about sixteen
Pomwater apples cleansed and boiled in Rose Water; add to these Rose-wood,
Sassafras, Roots of Orrice, Florentine of each six drams, of Benzoin, Storax,
Calamita, half an ounce of each, and so make it into an Ointment.

43. To make Oil of sweet Almonds.
Take dried sweet Almonds as many as you please, beat them very small and put
them into a rough hempen cloth, and without fire by degrees press out the Oil.

44. An Excellent Water against fits of the Mother.
Take Briony-roots, Elder-berries ripe, and dressed at a gentle heat in a
Furnace, and cleans'd from their stalks, of each two ounces; leaves of Mugwort,
Dittany, Featherfew, Nep, Basil, Pennyroyal, Rue, Sabine, all dried in the
Sun, of each half an ounce, peels of Oranges the outside dried, an ounce and a
half, Myrrh, Castoreum, of each three drams, Saffron one dram, powder them and
steep them eight days in two quarts of the Spirit of Wine; then strain them
through a very quick Hair-strainer, keep the strained liquor in a Glass very
well stopped.

45. To make Syrup of wormwood.
Take Roman Wormwood, or Pontick Wormwood half a pound, of Red Roses two
ounces. Indian spike three drams; old rich White Wind and juice of Quinces of
each two pints and a half, bruise them in an earthen Vessel twenty four hours,
then boil them till half be wasted, strain it, and put to the straining two
pounds of Sugar, and boil it to a syrup.

46. To make Conserve of Quinces.
Take three quarters of the juice of Quinces clarified, boil it until two parts
be wasted, then put to it two pounds of white Sugar, then boil them to the
thickness of Honey.

47. To make Syrup of Poppies.
Take the heads and seeds of white Poppy and black of each fifty drams, Venus
hair fifteen, Licorice 5 drams, Jujubes thirty drams, Lettice seeds forty
drams, and of the seeds of Mallows, and Quinces tied up in a fine rag, of each
one dram and a half; boil them in eight pints of water, until half be wasted,
strain it, and to every three pound of liquor put thereto Perrides and Sugar,
of each one pound; boil them to a Syrup.

41. To make Honey of Roses.
Take of pure white Honey despumed, fresh juice of red Roses one pound, put
them into a skillet, and when they begin to boil, throw into them of fresh red
Rose-leaves picked, four pounds, and boil them until the juice be wasted;
always stirring it, then strain it and put it up in an Earthen pot.

49. To make Syrup of Lemons.
Take of the Juice of Lemons purified by going through a Woolen strainer with
crushing, three quarts and a half, and of white Sugar 5 pound, boil them with a
soft fire to a Syrup.

50. To make Spirit of Wine.
Take of good Claret, or white wind, or Sack, enough to fill the Vessel wherein
you make your distillation to a third part, then put on the Head furnished with
Nose or pipe, and so make your distillation first in ashes, drawing about a
third part from the whole; as for Example, six or eight pints out of four and
twenty, then still it again in B. M. drawing another third part, which is two
pints, so that the oftener you distill it, the less Liquor you have, but the more
strong, some use to rectify it seven times.

51. To make Syrup of Maidenhair.
Take of the herb Maiden hair fresh gathered and cut a little, five ounces, of
roots of Licorish-scraped two ounces, steep them twenty four hours in a
sufficient quantity of Hot water, then boil them according to Art. Add four
pound of Sugar to five pints of the clarified liquor, and then boil them to a
Syrup.

52. To make Syrup of Licorish.
Take of the Roots of Licorish scraped two ounces, of Coltsfoot four handfuls,
of Maidenhair one ounce, of Hysop half an ounce, infuse them twenty four hours
in a sufficient quantity of water, then boil them till one half be wasted, add
to the strained liquor a pound of the best clarified Honey and as much white
Sugar, boil them to a syrup.

53. To make the Kings perfume.
Take 6 spoonfuls of Rose Water, and as much amber grease as weighs two
Barley Corns, and as much Civet, with as much Sugar as weighs two pence
beaten in fine powder, all these boiled together in a Perfuming pan, is an
excellent perfume.

54. The Queens perfume.
Take 4 spoonfuls of spike-water, and four spoonfuls of Damask water, thirty
Cloves, and eight Bay Leaves, shred as much Sugar as weighs two pence, all
these boiled make a good perfume.

55. King Edwards Perfume to make your house smell like Rosemary.
Take three spoonfuls of perfect Rosemary, and as much sugar as half a walnut
beaten in small powder, all these boiling together in a perfuming Pan upon hot
Embers with a few Coals, is a very sweet Perfume.

56. To make Conserve of Rosemary.
Take your Flowers of Rosemary, which you may gather either in March or
September when you have beaten them to pap, take three times their weight in
Sugar, pound them altogether and set them in the Sun and so use them.

57. To make Syrup of Cowslips.
Take the distilled water of Cowslips, and put there to your flowers of
Cowslips clean picked, and the green knobs in the bottom cut off, and boil them
up into a syrup, take it in Almond Milk, or some other warm thing; it is good
against the Palsy and frenzy, and to procure sleep to the sick.

58. To make Marmalade of Lemons and Oranges.
You may boil eight or nine Lemons or Oranges, with 4 or 3 Pippins, and draw
them through a strainer; then take the weight of the pulp altogether in Sugar
and boil it as you do Marmalade of Quinces, and so box it up.

59. To make Angelica Water.
Take a handful of Carduus benedictus and dry it, then take three ounces of
Angelica-roots, one dram of Myrrh, half an ounce of Nutmegs, Cinnamon and
Ginger, four Ounces of each, one dram and a half of Saffron, of Cardamons,
Cubebs, Galingal and Pepper, of each a quarter of an ounce, two drams of Mace,
one dram of Grains, of Lignum Aloes, Spikenard, Junius Odoratus; of each a
dram, Sage, Borage, Buglos, Violets, and Rosemary flowers, of each half a
handful, bruise them and steep them in a pottle of Sack twelve hours, and
distill is as the rest.

60. To make Quiddany of Cherries.
When your Cherries are fully ripe, and red to the stone, take them and pull
out the stones, and boil your cherries till they be all broken, then strain
them, and take the Liquor strained out and boil it over again, and put as much
Sugar to it as you think convenient, and when it is boiled, that you think it
is thick enough, put it into your boxes.

61. To dry Cherries.
Take six pound of Cherries and stone them, then take a pound of Sugar and wet
it with the juice of the cherries, and boil it a little, then put in your
Cherries and boil them till they are clear, let them lie in the syrup a week,
then drain them from the Syrup, and lay them on thin boards, or sheets of
Glass, to dry in a stove, turn them twice a day, and when they are dry, wash
off the clamminess with warm water, and dry them a little longer.

62. To make brown Metheglin.
Take strong Ale-wort, and put as much Honey to it as will make it strong
enough to bear an Egg; boil them very well together, then set it a cooling and
when it is almost cold, put in some Ale yeast, then put it in a strong Vessel,
and when it has done working, put a bag of Spices into the Vessel and some
Lemmon peel and stop it up close, and in a few days it will be fit to drink,
but the longer you keep it the better.

63. To Candy Oranges or Lemmons after they are preserved
Take them out of the Syrup and drain them well, then boil some Sugar to a
candy height, and lay your Peels in the bottom of a sieve and pour your hot
Sugar over them, and then dry them in a stove, or warm Oven.

64. To preserve Oranges after the Portugal Fashion.
Open your Oranges at the end, and take out all the meat, then boil them in
several waters, till a straw may go through them, then take their weight and
half in fine Sugar, and put to every pound of Sugar a pint of water, boil it
and scum it, then put in your Oranges and boil them a little more, then take
them up, and fill them with preserved Pippins, and boil them again till you
think they are enough, but if you will have them jelly, make a new Syrup with
the water wherein some sliced Pippins have been boiled, and some fine Sugar,
and that will be a stiff Jelly.

65. To make good Vsquebah.
Take two Gallons of good Aquavitae, 4 ounces of the best Liquorice bruised,
four ounces of Anniseeds bruised, put them into a wooden, Glass, or Stone
Vessel, and cover them close, and so let them stand a week, then draw off the
clearest and sweetest with Molosso's, and keep it in another Vessel, and put in
some Dates, and Raisons stoned; keep it very close from the Air.

66. To make Italian Biscuit.
Take serced Sugar, and a little of the white of an Egg, with some Ambergreece
and Musk, beat them all to a paste in an Alabaster Mortar, and mould it into a
little Anniseed finely dusted, then make it up in Loaves, and cut them about
like Maunchet, then bake them in an oven as hot as for Maunchet, and when they
are risen somewhat high upon the Plates, take them forth and remove them not
off the Plates till they be cold, for they will be very apt to break.

67. To make French Biscuit.
Take half a peck of flower, with four Eggs, half a pint of Ale-yeast, one
ounce and half of Anniseed, a little sweet Cream, and a little cold water, make
all into a loaf; and fashion it something long, then cut it into thick slices
like Toasts, after it has stood two days, and rub them over with powdered
Sugar, and lay them in a warm Sun, and so dry them, and Sugar them as you dry
them three or 4 times, then put them into Boxes for use.

68. To make Sugar plate.
Take serced Sugar, and make it up in a past with Gum-dragon steeped in
Rose Water, and when you have brought it into a perfect paste, roll it as thin
as ere you can, and then Print it in Moulds of what fashion you please, and so
let them dry as they lie.

69. To make Pomander.
Take half an ounce of Benjamin, and as much Storax, and as much Labdanum, with
six grains of Musk, and as much Civet, and two grains of Amber-grease, and one
dram of sweet Balsom, then roll it up in beads as big or as little as you
please, and whilst they are hot make holes in them to serve for your use.

70. To make Conserve of Damsons.
Take ripe Damsons and put them into scalding water; and half an hour after set
them over the fire till they break; then strain them through a Cullender, and
let them cool therein, then strain them (through a piece of Canvas) from their
stones and skins, and then set them over the fire again, then put them to a
good quantity of red wine, and so boil it, often stirring it till it be thick,
and when it is almost boiled enough, put in a convenient proportion of Sugar,
and stir it very well together, and then put it into your Gally-Pots.

71. To bake Oranges.
Peel all the bark off, and boil them in Rose Water and Sugar till they are
tender, then make your Pie, and set them whole in it, and put the Liquor they
are boiled in into the Pie, and season it with Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger.

72. To preserve Peaches.
Take a pound of your fairest and best colored Peaches, and with a wet linen
cloth wipe off the white hoar of them, then parboyl them in half a pint of
White Wind, and a pint and a half of running water, and being parboiled, peel
off the white skin of them and then weigh them; take to your pound of Peaches
three quarters of a pound of refined Sugar, and dissolve it in a quarter of a
pint of White Wind, and boil it almost to the height of a syrup, then put in
your Peaches and let them boil in the Syrup a quarter of an hour or more if
need require, then put them up and keep them all the year.

73. To Preserve Gooseberries.
Take Goose-berries, or Grapes, or Barberries, and take somewhat more than
their weight in sugar beaten very fine, and to lay one laying of Fruits, and
another of sugar, till all are laid in your preserving pan, then take six
spoonfuls of fair water, and boil your Fruits therein as fast as you can, until
they be very clear, then take them up, and boil the syrup by it self, till it
be thick; when they are cold put them into Gally-pots.

74. To preserve Pippins white.
Pare your Pippins and cut them the cross way, and weigh them, add to a pound
of sugar a pint of water; then put the sugar to the water and let it boil a
while, and then put in your Pippins, and let them boil till they be clear at
the core, then take them off and put them up.

75. To preserve Grapes.
Stamp them and strain them, and then let it settle a while, then wet a pound
of sugar or Grapes with the juice, stone the Grapes, save the Liquor in the
stoning, take off the stalks, give them a boiling, take them off, and put them
up.

76. To preserve Angelica Roots.
Wash the Roots and slice them very thin, and lay them in water three or four
days, change the water, every day, then put the Roots into a pot of water, and
set them in the embers all night, in the morning put away the water, then take
a pound of Roots, four pints of water, and two pound of Sugar, let it boil, and
scum it clean, then put in the roots, which will be boiled before the syrup,
then take them up and boil the syrup after, they will ask a whole days work
very softly, at St. Andrews time is the best time to do them in all the year.

77. To make Syrup of Quinces.
Take of the juice of Quinces clarifyed three quarts, boil it over a gentle
fire till half of it be consumed, scum it, and add to it three pints of red
wine, with four pound of white sugar; boil it into a syrup, and perfume it with
a dram and a half of Cinnamon, and of Cloves and Ginger, of each two scruples.

78. To make Walnut-Water.
Take of green Walnuts a pound and half, Garden Radishroots one pound, green
Asarabacca 6 ounces, Radish-seeds four ounces; let all of them being bruised be
steeped in three pints of White Wind Vinegar for three days, and then distill
them in a leaden Still till they be dry.

79. To make Treacle Water.
Take of the juice of green Walnuts four pound, juice of Rue three pound, juice
of Carduus, Marigolds and Balm, of each two pound, green Petasitis Roots one
pound and half, the Roots of Burs one pound, Angelica and Masterwort of each
half a pound, the leaves of Scordium four handfuls, old Venice-Treacle and
Mithridate, of each eight ounces, Canary wine six quarts, Vinegar three quarts,
juice of Lemons one quart, digest them 2 days either in horse-dung, or in a
Bath, the Vessel being close shut, then distill them in sand, in the
distillation you may make a Theriacal extraction.

80. To make Syrup of Cinnamon.
Take of Cinnamon grossly bruised four ounces, steep it in White Wind, and small
Cinnamon water of each half a pound, three days in a glass by a gentle fire;
strain it, and with a pound and half of sugar boil it gently to a Syrup. This
syrup refreshes the Vital Spirits, and cherishes the Heart and Stomach, helps
Digestion, and cherishes the whole Body exceedingly.

81. To make Syrup of Citron peels.
Take of fresh yellow Citron Peels, five ounces, the berries of Cherms, or the
juice of them brought over to us two drams, Spring Water two quarts, steep them
all night, boil them till half be consumed, take off the scum, strain it, and
with two pound and a half of the whitest sugar, boil it into a syrup; let half
of it be without Musk, but perfume the other half with three Grains of Musk
tied up in a rag.

82. To make Syrup of Hartshorn.
Take of Hart's-tongue three handfuls, Polypodium of the Oak, the roots of both
sorts of Bugloss, barks of the roots of Capers and Tamaris of each two ounces,
Hops, Dodder, Maidenhair, Balm, of each 2 handfuls, boil them in five quarts
of Spring Water till it comes to four, strain it, and with four pound of sugar,
make it into syrup according to Art.

83. An Oil Perfume for Gloves that shall never out.
Take Benjamin two ounces, Storax and Calamint each one ounce, but the two
first must be finely beaten by themselves: then take a pound of sweet Almonds
and mingle it with the Storax and Benjamin upon a Marble stone, and then put it
into an earthen pot with more Oil; then put in your Gloves powdered, and so let
it stand very close covered, and when you will perfume a pair of Gloves, take a
little fair water in a spoon and wipe your Gloves very fine with it; take
another spoon, and dip it in your Oil, and rub it on your Gloves, and let them
dry, this is excellent.

84. An excellent water for one that is in a Consumption.
Take three pints of Milk, and one pint of red Wine, twenty four yolks of Eggs,
beat them very well together, then add so much white-bread as will drink up the
wine, and put to it some Cowslip flowers, and distill them. Take a spoonful of
this Morning and Evening in Chicken or Mutton broth; and in the Month it will
cure any Consumption.

85. To make Barley water.
Take a pennyworth of Barley, a pennyworth of Raisins of the Sun, a
pennyworth of Anniseeds, an half pennyworth of Liquorish, about two quarts of
water, boil all together till half be consumed, then strain it, when it is
cold, drink it, your Liquorish must be sliced into small pieces.

86. Dr. Deodates Drink for the Scurvy
Take Roman Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, Scurvy Grass, Brooklime,
Water-creases, Water-trifoil, of each one handful, Dodder, Cetrach,
Scolopendria, Burrage, Buglos, Sorrel, Vervain, or Speedwel, of each half a
handful, Elicampane-root one ounce, Raisins of the Sun three ounces, slices of
Oranges and Lemmons, of each fifteen, boil or rather infuse these in a double
glass with so much White Wind as will make a pint and a half of the liquor when
it is done.

87. A Conserve for to strengthen the back.
Take Eringo-roots, and conserve them as you do damask white and red Roses, in
every respect, the pith being taken out; one pound and a half of Sugar is
enough for every pound of Roots, with three pints of water, stew them closely
at first as you do your Roses; if you add to them five or six grains of
Amber-grease beaten to fine powder, it will be much more Cordial.

88. To make an excellent Aqua Composita for a Surfeit or cold Stomach.
Take a handful of Rosemary, a root of Enulacampane, a handful of Hysop, half a
handful of Thyme, six handfuls of Sage, as much Mint, and as much Pennyroyal,
half a handful of Hore-hound, two ounces of liquorish well bruised, and as much
Anniseeds, then take two gallons of the best strong Ale, and take all the herbs
aforesaid, and wring them asunder, and put them into an earthen pot well
covered, and let them stand a day and a night; from thence put all into a brass
pot, and set it on the fire, and let it stand till it boil, then take it from
the fire, and set your Limbeck on the pot, and stop it close with paste that
there come no air out of it, and still it out with a soft fire, you may add to
it a handful of Red Fennel.

89. To make Balm-water.
Take four gallons of strong stale Ale: half a pound of Liquorish, two pound of
Balm, two ounces of Figgs, half a pound of Anniseeds, one ounce of Nutmegs,
shred the Balm and figgs very small, and let them stand steeping 4 and twenty
hours, and then put it in a Still as you use Aquavitae.

90. To pickle Broom-buds.
Take as many Broom-buds as you please, make linen bags and put them in, and
tie them close, then make some brine with water and Salt, and boil it a little,
let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the bags in
it, and lay some weight on them, let it lie there till it look black, boil them
in a little Cauldron, and put them in Vinegar a week or two, and they will be
fit to eat.

91. To make good Rasberry Wine.
Take a Gallon of Sack, in which let two gallons of Rasberries stand steeping
the space of twenty four hours, then strain them, and put to the Liquor 3 pound
of Raisins of the Sun stoned, let them stand together 4 or 5 days, being
sometime stirred together, then pour of the clearest and put it up in Bottles
and set it in a cold place, if it be not sweet enough you may put sugar to it.

92. To make excellent Hippocras in an instant.
Take of Cinnamon two ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each half an ounce, Cloves 2
drams, bruise these small, then mix them with as much Spirit of wine, as will
make them into a paste, let them stand covered in glass the space of 6 days in
a cold place, then press out the Liquor and keep it in a glass. A few drops of
this Liquor put into any wine gives it a gallant relish and Odor, and makes
it as good as any Hippocras whatsoever in an instant.

93. To make Artificial Malmsey.
Take two gallons of English Honey, put into it eight Gallons of the best
Spring water, set these in a Vessel over a gentle fire, when they have boiled
gently an hour take them off, and when they be cold put them into a small
Barrel or Runlet, hanging in the Vessel a bag of spices, and set it in the
Cellar, and in half a year you may drink thereof.

94. To make Artificial Claret Wine.
Take six Gallons of water, two gallons of the best Cider, put thereto eight
pound of the best Malaga-raisins bruised in a Mortar, let them stand close
covered in a warm place the space of a Fortnight, every two days stirring them
well together. Then press out the Raisins, and put the Liquor into the said
Vessel again, to which add a quart of the juice of rasberries and a pint of the
juice of black Cherries; cover this Liquor with bread spread thick with strong
Mustard, the Mustardseed being downward, and so let it work by the fireside
three or four days, then turn it up and let it stand a week, and then bottle it
up, and it will taste as quick as Bottle Beer and become a very pleasant drink,
and indeed far better and wholsomer than our common Claret.

95. To make Spirit of Amber-grease.
Take of Amber-grease two drams, of Musk a dram, cut them small, and put them
into a pint of wine, close up the Glass Hermetically and digest them in a very
gentle heat till you perceive they are dissolved, then you may use it; two or
three drops or more if you please of this spirit put into a pint of wine, gives
it a rich Odor, or if you put two or 3 drops, round the brims of the glass it
will do as well, half a spoonful of it taken either of it self, or mixed with
some specifical liquor is a most rich Cordial.

96. An Excellent sweet water.
Take a quart of Orange-flower water, as much Rose water, with four ounces of
Musk, Willow seeds grossly bruised, of Benjamin two ounces, of Storax an ounce,
or Labdanum 6 drams, of Lavender flowers two pugils, of sweet Marjoram as much,
of Calamus Aromaticus a dram, distill all these in a Glass Still in Balneo, the
Vessel being very well closed that no vapor breathe forth; Note that you may
make a sweet water in an instant, by putting in a few drops of some distilled
Oils together into some Rose Water, and brew them all together.

97. Dr. Burges's Plague water.
Take three pints of Muscadine and boil in it Sage and Rue, of each a handful
till a pint be wasted, then strain it, and set it over the fire again, put
thereto a dram of long Pepper, Ginger and Nutmeg, of each half an ounce, being
all bruised together, then boil them a little, and put thereto half an ounce of
Andramachus Treacle, three drams of Mithridate, and a quarter of a pint of
Angelica water. Take a spoonful or 2 of this Morning and Evening.

98. To dry Cherries or Plumbs in the Sun.
If it be small fruit, you must dry them whole by laying them abroad in the hot
Sun in stone or pewter dishes or tin pans, turning them as you see cause, but
if your Plumbs be large, slit them in the middle and lay them abroad in the
Sun, and if they be very large, then give each Plum a slit on each side, and if
the sun do not shine sufficiently, then dry them in an Oven that is temperately
warm.

99. To preserve Pippins green.
Take Pippins when they be small and green off the Trees, and pare three or
four of the worst, and cut them all to pieces, then boil them in a quart of
fair water till they be Pap, then let the Liquor come from them as they do from
your Quiddany into a basin, then put into them one pound of Sugar clarified and
put into it as many green Pippins unpar'd as that liquor will cover, and so let
them boil softly, and when you see they be boiled as tender as a Codling, then
take them up and peel off the outermost white skin, and then they will be
green, then boil them again in the Syrup till it be thick, and you may keep
them all the year.

100. To make Syrup of Hysop.
Take of Hysop one handful, of Figgs, Raisins, Dates, of each an ounce, boil
these in three pints of water to a quart, then strain and clarify it with the
whites of two Eggs and two pound of Sugar, and so boil them to a Syrup, and
being boiled enough keep them all the year.

101. To make Rosa-Solis.
Take Liquorish 8 ounces, Anniseeds and Carraway of each an ounce; Raisins
stoned and Dates of each 3 ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger, Mace, of each half an
ounce, Galingal a quarter of an ounce, Cubebs one dram. Figgs 2 ounces, sugar 4
ounces; bruise these and distill them with a Gallon of Aquavitae as the rest,
when it is distilled, you must color it with the Herb Rosa Solis or Alkanet
Root.

102. To make Muscadine Comfits.
Take half a pound of Musk Sugar beaten and searced, then take Gumdragagant
steeped in Rose Water and two grains of Musk, and so beat them in an Alabaster
Mortar till it come to a perfect Paste, then roll it very thin, and cut it in
small diamond pieces, and then bake them, and so keep them all the year.

103. To make Conserve of Burrage-Flowers.
Let your flowers be well colored, and pick the blacks from them, then weigh
them, and to every ounce of flowers you must take three ounces of sugar, and
beat them together in a stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle till they be very
fine; then take them out and put the Conserve into a Pipkin, and heat it through
hot, put them up and keep them all the year.

104. To Candy Ginger.
Take very fair and large Ginger and pare it, and lay it in water a day and a
night; then take double refined Sugar and boil it to the height of sugar again,
and when your Sugar begins to be cold, take your Ginger and stir it well about
while your sugar is hard to the Pan; then take it out Piece by piece and lay it
by the Fire 4 hours, then take a pot and warm it, and put the Ginger in it, tie
it up close and every other morning stir it about thoroughly, and it will be
Rock-Candyed in a little time.

105. To make Manus Christi.
Take half a pound of refined Sugar, and some Rose Water, boil them together
till it come to Sugar again, then stir it about till it be somewhat cold, then
take leaf Gold and mingle with it, then cast it according to Art in round
Gobbets, and so keep them.

106. To make Conserve of Strawberries.
First boil them in Water, and then cast away the water and strain them, then
boil them in White Wind, and work as in Prunes, or else strain them being ripe,
then boil them in White Wind and sugar till they be stiff.

107. To make Conserve of Pruans.
Take the best Pruans, put them into scalding water, let them stand a while
then boil them over the Fire till they break, then strain out the water through
a Cullender, and let them stand therein to cool, then strain the Pruans through
the Cullender, taking away the stones and skins, then set the pulp over the
fire again, and put thereto a good quantity of red Wine, and boil them to a
thickness, still stiring them up and down, when they are almost enough put in a
sufficient quantity of sugar, stir all well together, and then put it up in
your Gally-pots.

108. To make Crystal Jelly.
Take a Knuckle of Veal, and four Calves-feet, put them on the fire with a
gallon of fair water, and when the Flesh is boiled tender take it out, then let
the Liquor alone till it be cold, then take away the top and bottom of the
Liquor and put the rest into a clean Pipkin, and put into it one pound of
refined sugar, with four or five drops of Oil of Cinnamon and Nutmegs, and a
grain of Musk, and so let it boil a quarter of an hour leasurely on the fire,
then let it run through a Jelly-bag into a Basin, with the whites of two Eggs
beaten, and when it is cold you may cut it into lumps with a spoon, and so
serve three or four lumps upon a Plate.

109. To make Jelly of Strawberries, Mullberries, Rasberries, or any other such
tender Fruit.
Take your Berries and grind them in a stone mortar with four ounces of sugar,
and a quarter of a pint of fair water, and as much Rose Water, and boil it in a
skillet with a little Ising-Glass, and so let it run through a fine cloth into
your Boxes and you may keep it all the year.

110. To Candy Rosemary Flowers.
Pick your Flowers very clean, and put to every ounce of flowers two ounces of
hard sugar, and one ounce of Sugar Candy, and dissolve them in Rosemary
flower-water, and boil them till they come to a sugar again, when your Sugar is
almost cold, put in your Rosemary-flowers and stir them together till they be
enough, then take them out and put them in your boxes, and keep them in a store
for use.

111. To Candy Burrage-flowers.
Pick the flowers clean and weigh them, and do in every respect as you did your
Rosemary-flowers, only when they be Candyed you must set them in a Still, and
so keep them in a sheet of white Paper putting every day a Chafing Dish of
Coals into your Still, and it will be excellently candyed in a small time.

112. To make Bisket-Cakes.
Take a peck of flower, four ounces of Coriander-seed, one ounce of Annised;
then take three Eggs, three sponfuls of Ale yeast, and as much warm water as
will make it as thick as paste for Maunchets, make it into a long roll and bake
it in an Oven an hour, and when it is a day old, pare it and slice it, sugar it
with searced sugar and put it again into the Oven, and when it is dry take it
out, and new sugar it again, and so box it and keep it.

113. To make Paste-royal.
Take a pound of refined Sugar beaten and searced, and put into a stone Mortar,
with an ounce of gumdragagant steeped in Rose Water, and if you see your Paste
be too weak put in more sugar, if too dry more gum, with a drop or two of Oil
of Cinnamon, beat it into a perfect Paste, and then you may print it in your
moulds, and when it is dry, gild it, and so keep them.

114. To make Apricock-Cakes.
Procure the fairest Apricocks you can get, and let them be parboyl'd very
tender, take of the same quantity of Sugar whereof the pulp is, and boil them
together very well, always keeping them stiring for fear of burning to; when
the bottom of the skillet is dry they are enough, then put them into little
Cards sowed round about, and dust them with fine sugar, and when they are cold,
stone them and turn them, and fill them up with some more of the same stuff,
but let them stand three or four days before you remove them from the first
place, when you find them begin to Candy take out the Cards and dust them with
sugar.

115. To make Conserve for Tarts all the Year.
Take Damsons or other good ripe Plums, and peel off their skins, and so put
them in a pot, to Pippins pared, and cut in pieces, and so bake them, then
strain them through a piece of Canvas, and season them with Cinnamon, Sugar,
Ginger, and a little Rose Water: Boil it upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, till it
be as thick as a Conserve, and then put it into your Gally pots, and you may
keep it good all the year.

116. To dry Pippins.
Take the fairest yellow Pippins, and pare them, and make a hole through every
one, then parboyl them a little in fair water, then take them up, and put them
into as much Clarified sugar as will cover them, and let them boil very gently
a little while in that syrup, then take them out and put them into an earthen
Platter, then cast fine sugar upon them, and set them into the Oven half an
hour, then take them out, and cast some more sugar on them, (being turned) and
do so three times, and they will be well dried.

117. To make Paste of Genua.
Take two pounds of the pulp of Quinces, and as much of Peaches, strain it and
dry it in a Pewter-platter upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, then weigh it and boil
it to the height of Manus Christi, and then put them together, and so fashion
it upon a Pye-plate, and dry it in an Oven with a Chafing Dish of Coals till it
be through dry, and then if you please you may spot them with Gold.

118. To make Leach.
Make your Jelly for your Leach with Calves-Feet, as you do your ordinary
Jelly, but a little stiffer, and when it is cold take off the top, and the
bottom, and set it over the Fire with some Cinnamon and sugar, then take your
Turnsole being well steept in Sack, and crush it, and so strain it in your
Leach, and let it boil to such a thickness that when it is cold you may slice
it.

119. To dry any kind of Fruits after they are Preserved.
Take Pippins, Pears, or Plums after they are preserved out of the syrup, and
wash them in warm water, and then strew them over with sugar finely searced, as
you do flower upon Fish to fry, and set them into a broad earthen Pan, and lay
them one by another; then set them into a warm stove or Oven until they be dry,
and turn them every day till they are quite dry; and if you please, you may
candy them therewithal, cast sugar 3 or 4 times as you dry them.

120. To make Quiddany of Quinces.
Take the Kernels out of seven or eight great Quinces, and boil the Quinces in
a quart of spring water, till it come to a pint, then put into it a quarter of
a pint of Rose Water, and one pound of fine sugar, and so let it boil till it
come to be of a deep color, then take a drop and drop it into the bottom of a
saucer, and if it stand, take it off, then let it run through a Jelly bag into
a Basin, then set it over a Chafing Dish of Coals to keep it warm, then take a
spoon and fill your Boxes as full as you please, when they be cold, cover them,
and if you please to print it in moulds, wetting your moulds with Rose Water
and so let it run in, and when it is cold, turn it into Boxes.

121. To make Sweet Cakes without either Spice or Sugar.
Take Parsneps, and scrape or wash them clean, slice them thin, and dry them
well, beat them to powder, mixing one third part thereof with 2 thirds of fine
Wheat flower, make up your paste into cakes and you will find them very sweet
and delicate.

122. To make Wormwood Wine.
Take small Rochel or Camahe-Wine, put a few drops of the extracted Oil of
Wormwood therein, brew it together out of one pot into another, and you shall
have a more neat and wholesome wine for your body, than that which is sold for
right wormwood-wine.

123. To make sweet bags to lie among Linen.
Fill your bags only with Lignum and Rhodium finely beaten, and it will give an
excellent scent to your Linen.

124. To make Spirit of Honey.
Put one part of Honey to five parts of water, when the water boyleth dissolve
your Honey therein, scum it, and having boiled an hour or two, put it into a
wooden Vessel, and when it is blood-warm set it on the fire with Yeast, after
the usual manner of Beer and Ale tun it, and when it has lain some time it
will yield a Spirit by distillation, as Wine, and Ale will do.

125. To preserve Artichoaks.
Cut off the stalks of your Artichoaks within two Inches of the Choke, and make
a strong Decoction of the rest of the stalks, slicing them into thin small
pieces, and let the Artichoaks lie in this Decoction, and when you use them,
you must put them first in warm water, and then in cold, and so take away the
bitterness of them.

126. To make a Syrup for a Cough of the Lungs.
Take a Pottle of fair running water in a new Pipkin, and put into it half an
ounce of Sydrack, half an ounce of Maidenhair, and a good handful of
Elecampane Roots sliced, boil all together, until half be boiled away even to
Syrup, then put into it the whites of Eggs, and let it boil two or three walms,
and give the Patient a spoonful Morning and Evening.

127. To make Banbury Cakes.
Take four pound of Currants, wash and pick them very clean, and dry them in a
Cloth then take three Eggs, and put away one Yolk, and beat them and strain
them with Yeast, putting thereto Cloves. Mace, Cinnamon, and Nutmegs, then take
a pint of Cream, and as much Mornings Milk, and let it warm, then take Flower,
and put in good store of cold Butter and sugar, then put in your Eggs, Yeast,
and Meal, and work them all together an hour or more, then save a piece of the
paste, and break the rest in pieces, and work in your Currants, then make your
Cake what quantity you please, and cover it very thin with the paste wherein
were no Currants, and so bake it according to the bigness.

128. To make Ginger-bread.
Take a quart of Honey, and set it on the coals and refine it, then take
Ginger, Pepper, and Licorise of each a pennyworth, a quarter of a pound of
Anniseeds and a pennyworth of Saunders; beat all these and searce them, and
put them into the Honey, add a quarter of a pint of Claret Wine, or old Ale,
then take three penny Maunchets finely grated, and strew it amongst the rest,
and stir it till it come to a stiff paste, make them into Cakes and dry them
gently.

129. To make Wormwood-Water.
Take two Gallons of good Ale, a pound of Anniseeds, half a pound of Liquorise,
and beat them very fine, then take two good handfuls of the crops of Wormwood,
and put them into Ale, and let them stand all night, and let them stand in a
Limbeck with a moderate Fire.

130. To make Paste of Quinces.
First boil your Quinces whole, and when they are Soft, pare them, and cut the
Quince from the core, then take the finest Sugar you can get finely beaten or
searced, and put it in a little Rose Water, and boil it together till it be
stiff enough to mould, and when it is cold, roll and print it: A pound of
Quinces will require a pound of sugar, or thereabout.

131. To make thin Quince Cakes.
Take your Quince when it is boiled soft as before and dry it upon a Pewter
Plate with a soft heat, and stir it with a slice till it be hard, then take
searced sugar to the same weight, and strew it upon the Quinces as you beat it
in a wooden or Stone Mortar, and so roll them thin, and print them.

132. To make fine Cakes.
Take a pottle of fine flower, and a pound of Sugar, a little meal, and good
store of water to mingle the Flower into a stiff Paste, with a little Salt, and
so knead it, and roll out the Cakes thin, and bake them on Paper.

133. To make Suckets.
Take Curds, and the paring of Lemons, Oranges, or Pome Citrons, or indeed any
half ripe green fruit, and boil them till they be tender in sweet wort, then
take three pound of Sugar, the whites of four Eggs, and a Gallon of water, beat
the water and Eggs together, and then put in your Sugar, and set it on the
Fire; and let it have a gentle fire, and let it boil six or seven walms, then
strain it through a cloth, and set it on again, till it fall from the Spoon,
and then put it into the Rinds, or Fruits.

134. To make Leach Lombard.
Take half a pound of blanched Almonds, two ounces of Cinnamon beaten and
searced, half a pound of Sugar; beat your Almonds, and strew on your Cinnamon
and Sugar, till it come to a paste, then roll it, and print it as aforesaid.

135. To make a rare Damask Water.
Take a quart of Malmsey Lees, or Malmsey, one handful of Marjoram, as much
Basil, four handfuls of Lavender, one handful of Bay leaves, four handfuls of
Damask Rose-Leaves, as many Red Roses, the peels of six Oranges, or else one
handful of the tender Leaves of Walnut-Trees, half an ounce of Benjamin,
Calamus Aromaticus as much, of Camphire four drams, of Cloves an ounce, of
Bildamum half an ounce, then take a pottle of Running-Water and put in all
these Spices bruised into your Water and Malmsey together in a pot close
stopped, with a good handful of Rosemary, and let them stand for the space of
six days, then distill it with a soft fire, and set it in the Sun sixteen days,
with four grains of Musk bruised, this Quantity will make three quarts of Water.

136. To make Washing Balls.
Take Storax, of both kinds, Benjamin, Calamus Aromaticus, Lapdanum, of each
alike, and bray them to powder with Cloves and Orris, then beat them all with a
sufficient quantity of Soap till it be stiff, then with your hand work it like
paste, and make round balls thereof.

137. To make a musk ball.
Take Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Saffron, and Cinnamon, of each the weight of two
pence, and beat it to fine powder, add as much Mastick, of Storax the weight of
six pence, of Lapdanum the weight of ten pence, of Amber grease the weight of
six pence, and of Musk four grains, dissolve and work all these in hard sweet
Soap, till it come to a stiff paste, and then make balls thereof,

138. To make Imperial water.
Take a Gallon of Gascoign Wine, Ginger, Galingal, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves,
Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, Caraway-seeds, of each one dram, then take Sage, Mint,
Red Roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme, Camomile, and Lavender, of
eace a handful, then beat the spices small, and the herbs also, and put all
together in the Wine, and let it stand so twelve hours, stirring it diverse
times, then distill it with a Limbeck, and keep the first water, for it is best;
of a Gallon of Wine you must not take above a quart of water. This water
comfort the Vital spirits, and helps the inward diseases that come of
cold, as the Palsy, and Contraction of sinews, it also kills worms, and
comforts the stomach, it Cures the cold Dropsy, helps the stone and
stinking breath, and makes one seem young,

139. To make Verjuyce.
Gather your Crabs as soon as the Kernels turn black, and lay them a while in a
heap to sweat, then pick them from the stalks, blacks, and rottenness, then
crush and beat them all to pieces in a tub, then make a bag of course
hair-cloath as big as your press, and fill it with the crushed Crabs, then put
it into the press, and press it as long as any moisture will drop out, having a
clean Vessel underneath to receive the Liquor, then Tun it up in sweet
Hogsheads, and to every Hogshead put half a dozen handfuls of Damask Rose
Leaves, then bring it up, and spend it as you have occasion.

140. To make dry Sugar Leach.
Blanch your Almonds, and beat them with a little Rose Water and the white of
one Egg, and then beat it with a good quantity of Sugar, and work it as you
would work a piece of paste, then roll it, and print it, only be sure to strew
sugar in the print, for fear of cleaving to.

141. To make fine Jumbals.
Beat a pound of sugar fine, then take the same quantity of fine Wheat Flower,
and mix them together, than take two whites and one yolk of an Egg, half a
quarter of a pound of Blanched Almonds, then beat them very fine all together,
with half a pound of sweet Butter, and a spoonful of Rose Water, and so work it
with a little Cream till it come to a stiff paste, then roll them forth as you
please; you may add a few fine dried Anniseeds finely rubbed, and strewed into
the paste, with Coriander seeds.

142. To make dry Vinegar.
To make dry Vinegar, which you may carry in your pocket, you must take the
blacks of green Corn, either Wheat or Rye, and beat it in a Mortar with the
strongest Vinegar you can get, till it come to paste, then roll it into little
Balls, and dry it in the Sun till it be very hard, and when you have occasion
to use it, cut a little piece thereof, and dissolve it in wine, and it will
make a strong Vinegar.

143. To make excellent Date Leach.
Take Dates, and take out the stones, and the white rind, and beat them with
Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger very finely, then work it as you would work a piece
of paste, and then print them as you please.

144. To make white Jelly of Almonds.
Take Rose Water, Gum dragant, or Isingglass dissolved, and some Cinnamon grossly
beaten, boil them all together, then take a pound of Almonds, blanch them, and
beat them fine with a little fair water, dry them in a fine Cloth, and put
your Rose Water and the rest into the Almonds, boil them together and stir them
continually, then take them from the fire, and when it is boiled enough take it
off.

145. To Candy Orange Peels.
Take your Orange-Peels after they are preserved, then take fine sugar, and
Rose Water, and boil it to the height of Manus Christi, that is, till it is
sugar again, then draw through your sugar; lay them on the bottom of a sieve,
and dry them in an Oven after you have drawn Bread, and they will be Candied.

146. To make Paste of Violets.
You must take Violets ready picked, and bruise them in a Marble Mortar, and
wring the Juice from them into a Porringer, and put as much hard sugar in fine
powder, as the Juice will cover, dry it; and then powder it again; then take as
much Gum-dragant steeped in Rose Water, as will bring this sugar into a perfect
paste, then take it up and print it with your Moulds, and so dry it in your
stove.

147. To preserve Pippins Red.
Take your best colored Pippins and pare them, then take a piercer and bore a
hole through them, then make Syrup of them as much as will cover them, and so
let them boil in a broad preserving pan, put to them a piece of Cinnamon, and
let them boil leisurely close covered, turning them very often, or else they
will spot, and one side will not be like the other, and let them boil till they
begin to Jelly, then take them up, and you may keep them all the year.

148. To make Spirit of Roses.
Bruise the Rose in his own juice, adding thereto, being temperately warm, a
convenient proportion either of Yeast, or Ferment, leave them a few days to
ferment, till they get a strong and heady smell, near like to Vinegar, then
distill them, and draw so long as you can find any scent of the Rose to come,
then distill again so often till you have purchased a perfect Spirit of the
Rose. You may also Ferment the juice of Roses only, and after Distill the same.

149. To make Syrup of Elder.
Take Elder Berries when they are red, bruise them in a stone Mortar, strain
the Juice, and boil it away to almost half, scum it very clean; take it off the
Fire whilst it is hot, put in Sugar to the thickness of a Syrup, put it no more
on the fire when it is cold, put it into Glasses, not filling them to the top,
for it will work like Beer.

150. To make Orange water.
Take two quarts of the best Malaga-Sack, and put in as many of the peels of
Oranges as will go in, cut the white clean off, steep them twenty four hours,
then still them in a Glass-still, and let the water run into the Receiver, upon
fine Sugar Candy; you may still it in an ordinary Still.

151. To make a Cordial of great virtue.
Take a pint and a half of the strongest Ale may be gotten, twenty Jordan
Almonds clean wiped, but neither washed nor blaunched, with two Dates minced
very small and stamped; then take the pith of young Beef, the length of twelve
Inches, lay it in water till the blood be out of it, then strip the skin off
it, and stamp it with the Almonds, and Dates, then strain them altogether into
the Ale, boil it till it be a little thick, give the party in the Morning six
spoonfuls, and as much when he goes to Bed.

152. An excellent Surfeit-Water.
Take Cellandine, Rosemary, Rue, Pellitory of Spain, Scabious, Angelica,
Pimpernel, Wormwood, Mugwort, Bettony, Agrimony, Balm, Dragon, and Tormentile,
of each half a pound, shred them somewhat small and put them into a narrow
mouthed pot, and put to them five quarts of White Wind, stop it close, and let
it stand three Days and Nights, stirring it Morning and Evening, then take the
herbs from the Wine, and distill them in an ordinary Still, and when you have
distilled the Herbs, distill the Wine also, wherein is virtue for a weak
stomach. Take three or four spoonfuls at any time.

153. To make a Syrup for one short-winded.
Take a good handful of Hyssop, and a handful of Horehound, and boil them in a
quart of Spring Water to a pint, then strain it through a clean Cloth, and put
in Sugar to make it pleasant. Stir it Morning and Evening with a Licorise
stick, and take about three spoonfuls at a time.

154. To make Syrup of Sugar-Candyed.
Take Sugar-Candied, and put it into a clear bladder and tie it, but so that it
may have some vent, then put it into a basin of water, so that the water come
not over the top of the bladder, and cover it with a Pewter-Dish, and let it
stand all Night, and in the Morning take of it with a Licorise-stick.

155. To make an excellent Syrup against the Scurvy.
Take of the juice of Garden Scurvy Grass, Brook-lime and Watercresses, of
each six ounces, and after it has stood till it is clear, take sixteen ounces
of the clearest, and put to it four ounces of the juice of Oranges and Lemons,
make it a clear Syrup with so much fine sugar as will serve the turn.

156. To make Syrup of Roses.
When your Liquor is ready to boil, put as many Roses as will be well steept
into it, cover it close, and when the Roses are thoroughly white, then strain
it, and set it on the fire again, and so use it thirteen times, and to every
pint of your water or Liquor, you must put a pound of Sugar, and let it stand
together steeping for the space of one night, then scum it clean and seethe it
over a quick Fire a quarter of an hour, then take some whites of Eggs, and beat
them well together, take off your pot, and put in the whites, and then set it
on the fire again; and let it boil a good while, then let it run through a
Jelly bag, till it will stand still upon your Nail.

157. To make a Comfortable Syrup.
Take a handful of Agrimony, and boil it in a pint of water till half be
consumed, then take out the Agrimony, and put in a good handful of Currants, and
boil them till they are ready to break, then strain them, and make a Syrup of
them, then set it on a Chafing dish of Coals, and add thereto a little white
Saunders, and drink it either hot or cold.

158. To make an Almond-Caudle.
Take three pints of Ale, boil it with Cloves and Mace, and slice bread in it,
then have ready beaten a pound of Almonds blanched, and strain them out with a
pint of White Wind, and thick the Ale with it, sweeten it if you please, but be
sure scum the Ale when it boyls.

159. To Candy Cherries.
Take your Cherries before they be full Ripe, take out the stones, put
Clarified Sugar boiled to a height, and then pour it on them.

160. To make Rose Water.
Take a pint of Endive-water, two ounces of Saffron finely beaten, then steep
it therein all night, the next day boil it and strain out the Saffron, then
with Sugar boil it up to a Syrup.

161. To make Syrup of Saffron.
Stamp the Leaves, and first distill the juice being squeezed out, and after
distill the leaves, and so you may dispatch more with one Still, than others
will do with three or four, and this water is every way as Medicinable as the
other, serving very well in decoctions and Syrups, etc. Though it be not
altogether so pleasing to the smell.

162. To wake Suckets of Green Walnuts.
Take Walnuts when they are no bigger than the largest Hasel Nut, pare away the
uppermost green, but not too deep, then boil them in a pottle of water, till
the water be boiled away, then take so much more fresh water, and when it is
boiled to the half, put thereto a quart of Vinegar, and a pottle of Clarified
Honey.

163. To make white Leach of Cream
Take a pint of sweet Cream, and six spoonfuls of Rose Water, two grains of
Musk, two drops of Oil of Mace, and so let it boil with four ounces of
Ising-Glass, then let it run through a Jelly-bag, when it is cold, slice it
like brawn, and so serve it out. This is the best way to make Leach.

164. To preserve Pome-citrons.
You must take a pound and a half of Pome-Citrons, and cut them in halves and
quarters, take the Meat out of them, and boil them tender in fair water, then
take two pound of Sugar clarified, and make Syrup for them, and let them boil
therein a quarter of an hour very gently, then take them up, and let your Syrup
boil till it be thick; then put in your Pome-Citrons, and you may keep them all
the Year.

165. To pickle Clove-Gilly-Flowers for Sallets.
Take the fairest Clove-Gilly-Flowers, clip off the whites from them, put them
into a wide-mouthed Glass, and strew a good deal of Sugar finely beaten among
them then put as much wine Vinegar to them as will thoroughly wet them, tie them
up close and set them in the Sun, and in a little while they will be fit for
use.

166. To make Leach of Almonds.
Take half a pound of sweet Almonds, and beat them in a Mortar, then strain
them with a pint of sweet Milk from the Cow, then put to it one grain of Musk,
two spoonfuls of Rose Water, two ounces of fine Sugar, the weight of three
Shillings in Isin-glass that is very white, boil them together, and let it all
run through a strainer, then still it out and serve it.

167. To Candy Marigolds in wedges, the Spanish Fashion.
Take of the fairest Marigold Flowers, two ounces, and shred them small, and
dry them before the Fire, then take four ounces of Sugar, and boil it to a
height, then pour it upon a wet Pye-plate, and between hot and cold cut it into
wedges, and lay them on a sheet of white paper, and put them in a stove.

168. To candy Eringo Roots.
Take your Eringos ready to be preserved; and weigh them, and to every pound of
your Roots take of the purest sugar you can get two pound, and Clarify it with
the whites of Eggs exceeding well, that it may be as clear as Crystal, for that
will be best; it being Clarified, boil it to the height of Manus Christi, then
dip in your Roots two or three at once, till all be Candyed, and put them in a
stove, and so keep them all the Year.

169. To Candy Elecampane roots.
Take of your fairest Elecampane-roots, and take them clean from the syrup, and
wash the sugar off them, and dry them again with a linen Cloth; then weigh
them, and to every pound of roots take a pound and three quarters of sugar.
Clarify it well, and boil it to a height, and when it is boiled dip in your
roots, three or four at once, and they will Candy very well, and so stove them,
and keep them all the Year.

170. To make Cinamon-Sugar.
Lay pieces of sugar in close Boxes amongst sticks of Cinnamon, or Cloves, and
in a short time it will have the taste and scent of the spice.

171. To make a Trifle.
Take Cream and boil it with a cut Nutmeg, add Lemon peel a little, then take
it off; cool it a little, and season it with Rose Water and Sugar to your
taste, let this be put in the thing you serve it in, then put in a little
Runnet to make it come, and then it is fit to eat.

172. To make Quiddany of Plumbs.
Take one quart of the liquor which you preserved your Plumbs in, and boil six
fair Pippins in it, pared and cut in small pieces, then strain the thin from
it, and put to every pint of Liquor half a pound of sugar, and so boil it till
it will stand on the back of a spoon like a Jelly, then wet your Moulds, and
pour it thereinto, and when it is almost cold, turn it off upon a wet Trencher,
and so slip it into wet Boxes.

173. To Candy Barberries.
First preserve them, then dip them quickly into warm water to wash off the
ropy syrup, then strew them over with searced sugar, and set them into an Oven
or Stove three or four hours, always turning them, and casting more fine sugar
upon them, and never suffer them to be cold till they be dried, and begin to
look like Diamonds.

174. To make Cream of Apricocks.
First boil your Apricocks with water and Sugar till they be somewhat tender,
and afterward boil them in Cream, then strain them and season it with Sugar.

175. To make Quince Cream.
Take a roasted Quince, pare it and cut it into thin slices to the Core, boil
it in a pint of Cream, with a little whole Ginger till it taste of the Quinces
to your liking, then put in a little sugar, and strain it, and always serve it
cold to the Table.

176. To preserve Barberries.
Take one pound of Barberries picked from the stalks, put them in a pottle pot,
and set it in a brass pot full of hot water, and when they be stewed, strain
them, and put to them a pound and a half of Sugar, and a pint of red
Rose Water, and boil them a little, then take half a pound of the fairest
Clusters of Barberries you can get, and dip them in the syrup while it boyleth;
then take the Barberries out again, and boil the Syrup while it is thick, and
when it is cold, put them in the glasses with the Syrup.

177. To make a Cullice.
Take a Cock and dress him, and boil him in White Wind, scum it clean, and
clarify the Broth (being first strained) then take a pint of sweet cream, and
strain it, and so mix them together; then take beaten Ginger, fine Sugar, and
Rose Water, and put them all together, and boil it a little more.

178. To make a Cordial strengthening Broth.
Take a Red Cock, strip off the Feathers from the skin, then break his Bones to
shivers with a Rolling-pin; set it over the Fire, and just cover it with water,
put in some Salt, watch the scuming and boiling of it, put in a handful of
Hearts horn, a quarter of a pound of blue Currants and as many Raisins of the Sun
stoned, and as many Pruans, four blades of large Mace, a bottom Crust of a
white Loaf, half an ounce of China-Root sliced, being steeped three hours
before in warm water, boil three or four pieces of Gold, strain it, and put in
a little fine sugar and juice of Orange, and so use it.

179. To candy Grapes.
After they are preserved, then dip them into warm water to cleanse them from
the Syrup, then strew them over with searced sugar, and set them into an Oven
or Stove three or four hours, always turning them, and casting more fine Sugar
upon them, and never suffering them to be cold till they be dried and begin to
sparkle.

180. To make Sugar-cakes.
Take one pound of fine Flower, one pound of sugar finely beaten, and mingle
them well together, then take seven or eight Yolks of Eggs, then take two
Cloves, and a pretty piece of Cinnamon, and lay it in a spoonful of Rose Water
all night, and heat it almost Blood warm, temper it with the rest of the stuff,
when the Paste is made, make it up as fast as you can, and bake them in a soft
Oven.

181. To take spots and stains out of Clothes.
Take four ounces of white hard Soap, beat it in a Mortar with a Lemon sliced
and as much Roch Allom as an Hasel-Nut, roll it up in a Ball, rub the stain
therewith, and after fetch it out with warm water, if need be.

182. To keep Chestnuts all the year,
After the bread is drawn, disperse your Nuts thinly over the bottom of the
Oven, and by this means the moisture being dried up, the Nuts will last all the
Year; but if you perceive them to mould, put them into an Oven again.

183. To make Cucumbers green.
You must take two quarts of Verjuyce or Vinegar, and a Gallon of fair water, a
pint of Bay Salt, and a handful of green Fennel or Dill, boil it a little, and
when it is cold put it into a Barrel, then put your Cucumbers into that pickle,
and you may keep them all the year.

184. To preserve white Damsons Green.
Scald white Damsons in water, till they be hard, then take them off, and pick
as many as you please, take as much Sugar as they weigh, put two or three
spoonfuls of water, then put in the Damsons and the Sugar, and boil them, take
them off, then let them stand a day or two, then boil them again, take them
off, and let them stand till they be cold.

185. To make Cakes of Lemons.
Take of the finest double refined Sugar, beaten very fine, and fearced through
fine Tiffany, and to half a porringer of Sugar put two spoonfuls of water, and
boil it till it be almost Sugar again, then grate of the hardest Rinded Lemon,
and stir it into your Sugar, put it into your Coffins, and a paper, and when
they be cold, take them off.

186. To make Artifical Walnuts.
Take some Sugar plate, and print it in a mould made for a Walnut-kernel, and
then yellow it all over with a little saffron water with a Feather, then take
Cinnamon searced and Sugar a like quantity working it in a Paste with Gum-dragon
steeped in Rose Water, and print it in a mould made like a Walnut-shell, and
when the Kernel and shell be dry, close them together with Gum-dragon.

187. To make Black Cherry wine.
Take a Gallon of the juice of Black-Cherries, keep it in a vessel close
stopped till it begin to work, then filter it, and an ounce of Sugar being
added to every pint and a Gallon of White Wind, and keep it close stopped for
use.

188. To make Rose Vinegar.
Take of Red-Rosebuds (gathered in a dry time, the whites cut off, then dry
them in the shade three or four days) one pound, of Vinegar eight sextaries,
set them in the Sun forty days, then strain out the Roses and put in fresh, and
so repeat it three or 4 times.

189. To make Syrup of Vinegar.
Take of the Roots of Smalledg, Fennel, Endive, of each three ounces,
Anniseeds, Smalledg, Fennel, of each one ounce, Endive half an ounce, clear
water three quarts, boil it gently in an Earthen Vessel till half the water be
consumed, then strain and clarify it, and with three pound of Sugar and a pint
and a half of White Wind Vinegar, boil it into a Syrup.

This is a gallant Syrup for such whose Bodies are stuffed either with phlegm,
or rough Humors, for it opens obstructions or stopping, both of the stomach,
Liver, Spleen and Reins, it cuts and brings away tough Phlegm and Choler.

190. To make Syrup of Apples.
Take two quarts of the juice of sweet-scented Apples, and the juice of
Bugloss, Garden, and Wild, of Violet leaves, and Rose Water, of each a pound,
boil them together, Clarify them, and with six pound of very fine Sugar, boil
them into a Syrup, according to Art.

191. To make the Capon water against a Consumption.
Take a Capon the Guts being pulled out, cut it in pieces, and take away the
Fat, boil it in a close Vessel in a sufficient quantity of Spring water. Take
of this Broth three pints, of Burrage and Violet-water a pint and half, White
wine one pint, Red-Rose leaves two drams and a half, Burrage flowers, Violets,
and Bugloss of each one dram, pieces of bread out of the Oven half a pound,
Cinnamon bruised half an ounce. Still it in a Glass Still according to Art.

This is a Sovereign Remedy against Hectic fevers and Consumption, let such
as are subject to those Diseases, hold it as a Jewel.

192. To make Elder Vinegar.
Gather the Flowers of Elder, pick them very clean, dry them in the Sun, on a
gentle heat, and to every quart of Vinegar, take a good handful of flowers, and
let it stand in the Sun a fortnight, then strain the Vinegar from the flowers,
and put it into the Barrel again, and when you draw a quart of Vinegar, draw a
quart of Water, and put it into the Barrel lukewarm.

193. To make China Broth.
Take an ounce of China Root clipped thin, and steep it in three pints of Water
all night on Embers covered, the next day take a Cock Chicken clean picked, and
the Guts taken out, put in its belly Agrimony and Maiden hair, of each half a
handful, Raisins of the Sun stoned, one good handful, and as much French
Barley; boil all these in a Pipkin close covered on a Gentle Fire, for six or
seven hours, let it stand till it be cold, strain it, and keep it for your Use:
Take a good draught in the Morning and at four in the Afternoon.

194. To make paste of tender Plumbs.
Put your Plumbs into an Earthen Pot, and set it into a Pot of boiling water,
and when the Plumbs are dissolved, then strain the thin Liquor from them
through a Cloth, and reserve that Liquor to make Quiddany, then strain the
pulp through a piece of Canvas, and take as much Sugar as the pulp in weight
and as much water as will wet the same, and so boil it to a Candy height, then
dry the pulp upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, then put your Syrup and the pulp so
hot together, and boil it, always stirring it till it will lie upon a
Pye-plate, as you lay it, and that it run not abroad, and when it is somewhat
dry, then use it, but put to it the pulp of Apples.

195. To make Cream of Codlings.
First scald your Codlings, and so peel off the skin, then scrape the pulp from
the Cores, and strain them with a little Sugar and Rose Water, then lay your
pulp of Codlings in the middle of the Dish, and so much raw Cream round it as
you please, and so serve it.

196. To make Sugar of Roses.
Take of Red-Rose-leaves, the whites being cut off, an Ounce, dry them in the
Sun speedily, put to it a pound of white Sugar, melt the sugar in Rose Water,
and Juice of Roses, of each two Ounces, which being consumed by degrees, put in
the Rose-leaves in powder, mix them, put it upon a Marble, and make it into
Lozenges according to Art.

197. To make a Cream Tart.
Cut the Crust of a Manchet, and grate it small, and mix it with thick Cream,
and some sweet butter, then take twenty four Yolks of Eggs, and strain them
with a little Cream, putting thereto a good quantity of Sugar, mix these very
well, and set it upon a small fire, and so let it boil till it be thick, then
make two sheets of Paste as thin as you can, and raise the sides of one of them
the height of one of your fingers in breadth, and then fill it, and cover it
with the other sheet, then bake it half a quarter of an hour, then put Sugar on
it, and so serve it.

198. To make Artificial Oranges.
Take Alabaster Moulds made in three pieces, bind two of the pieces together,
and water them an hour or two, then take as much Sugar as you think will fill
your Moulds, and so boil it to a height, then pour it into your Moulds one by
one very quick: Then put on the Lid of the Mould, and so turn it round with
your hand as quick as you can, and when it is cold, take it out of the Mould,
and they will be both whole, and hollow within, and so it will appear, and
resemble the Mould wherein it is put, whether Oranges, Lemons, Cucumbers, or
the like.

199. To make Poppy-water.
Take of Red Poppies four pound, put to them a quart of White Wind, then
distill them in a common Still, then let the distilled water be poured upon
fresh flowers, and repeated three times, to which add two Nutmegs sliced, Red
Poppy flowers a pugil, white Sugar two ounces, set it to the Fire, to give it a
pleasing sharpness, and Order it according to your Taste,

200. To make Mathiolus Bezoar's Water.
Take of Syrup of Citron-peels a quart, and as much of Dr. Mathiolus great
Antidote, with five pints of the Spirit of Wine five times distilled over, put
all these in a Glass that is much too big to hold them, stop it close that the
Spirit fly not out, then shake it together, that the Electuary may be well
mingled with the Spirit, so let it stand a Month, shaking it together twice a
week (for the Electuary will settle at the bottom) after a Month pour off the
clear water into another Glass to be kept for your use stopping it very close
with Wax and Parchment, else the strength will easily fly away in Vapors.

201. To make Marimelade of Red Currants.
Take the juice of Red Currants, and put it into a pretty quantity of White
Currants, clean picked from the stalks, and buttons at the other end; let these
boil a little together, have also ready some fine Sugar, boiled to a Candy
height, put of this to the Currants according to your discretion, and boil them
together till they be enough, and bruise them with the back of your spoon, that
they may be thick as Marmalade, and when it is cool put it into Pots: You need
not stone the whole Currants unless you please.

202. To make a Syllabub.
Take a pint of Verjuice in a bowl, Milk the Cow to the Verjuyce, then take off
the Curd; and take sweet Cream, and beat them together with a little Sack and
Sugar, put it into your Syllabub pot, strew Sugar on it, and serve it.

203. To make pleasant Mead.
Put a quart of Honey to a gallon of water, with about ten spriggs of sweet
Marjoram, and half so many tops of Bays, boil all these well together, and when
it is cold, Bottle it up, and in ten days it will be ready to drink.

204. To make Steppony.
Take a Gallon of Conduit-water, a pound of blew Raisins of the Sun stoned, and
half a pound of Sugar, squeese the juice of two Lemons upon the raisins and
Sugar, and slice the Rinds upon them, boil the water, and pour it boiling hot
upon the Ingredients of an earthen pot, and stir them well together, so let it
stand Twenty-four hours; then put it into Bottles, having first let it run
through a strainer, and set them in a Cellar, or other cool place.

205. To make Syder.
Take a peck of Apples and slice them, and boil them in a Barrel of water till
the third part be wasted; then cool your water as you do Wort, and when it is
cold, you must pour the water upon three measures of grown Apples. Then draw
forth the Water at a Tap three or four times a day for three days together,
then press out the Liquor and Tun it up, when it has done working, stop it up
close.

206. To make Cock-Ale.
Take eight Gallons of Ale, then take a Cock and boil him well with four pound
of Raisins of the Sun well stoned, two or three Nutmegs, three or four flakes
of Mace, half a pound of Dates, beat all these in a Mortar, and put to them two
quarts of the best Sack, and when the Ale has done working, put these in and
stop it close six or seven days, and then Bottle it, and a Month after you may
drink it.

207. To make a Carraway-Cake.
Take three pound and a half of the finest flower, and dry it in an Oven, one
pound and a half of Sweet-butter, and mix it with the flower very small, that
none of it be seen, then take three quarters of a pint of new Ale-yeast, and
half a pint of Sack, and half a pint of New-Milk, with six spoonfuls of
Rose Water, and four yolks, and two whites of Eggs, then let it lie before the
fire half an hour or more, and when you go to make it up, put in three
quarters, of Crraway-Comfits, and a pound and half of biskets. Put it into the
Oven, and let it stand an hour and a half.

128. To make Strawberry-Wine.
Bruise the Strawberries, and put them into a linen bag which has been a
little used, that so the Liquor may run through more easily, then hang in the
bag at the bung into the Vessel. Before you put in your Strawberries, put in
what quantity of fruit you think good to make the Wine of a high Color during
the working, leave the bung open, and when it has worked enough, stop your
Vessel. Cherry-wine is made after the same Fashion, but then you must break the
Stones.

209. To make a Cordial Water of Clove-gilly-flowers.
Put Spirit of Wine or Sack upon Clove-gilly-flowers, digest it two or three
days, put all in a Glass-body, laying other Clove-gilly-flowers at the mouth of
it upon a Cambrick or Boulter-cloth, (that the Spirit rising, and passing
through the Flowers, may tinge it self of a beautiful Color) add a Head with a
Limbeck and Receiver: Then Distill the Spirit as strong as you like it, which
sweeten with Syrup of Gilly-flowers, or fine Sugar.

210. To make an Excellent Surfeit-Water.
Take Mint and Carduus 4 parts, Angelica one part, Wormwood two parts; chop and
bruise them a little, put a sufficient quantity of them into an ordinary Still,
and put upon them enough new milk to soak them, but not to have the Milk swim
much over them. Distill this as you do Rose Water, stirring it sometime with a
stick, to keep the Milk from growing to a Cake.

211. To make Mint-water.
Take two parts of Mint, and one part of Wormwood, and two parts of Carduus,
put these into as much New-milk as will soak them: Let them infuse five or six
hours, then Distill as you distill Rose Water, but you must often take off the
Head, and stir the Matter well with a stick: Drink of this water a Wine-glass
full at a time, sweetened with fine Sugar to your taste.

212. To Pickle Artichoaks.
Take your Artichoaks before they are overgrown, or too full of strings, and
when they are pared round, that nothing is left but the bottom, boil them till
they be indifferent tender, but not full boiled, take them up, and let them be
cold, then take good stale Beer, and White Wind, with a great quantity of whole
Pepper, so put them up into a Barrel with a small quantity of Salt; keep them
close, and they will not be sour, it will serve for baked Meats, and boiled
Meats all the Winter.

213. To make Rasberrie-Cream.
When you have boiled your Cream, take two Ladlefuls of it, being almost cold,
bruise the Rasberries together, and season it with Sugar and Rose Water, and
put it into your Cream, stirring it altogether, and so dish it up.

214. To make Snow-Cream.
Break the whites of six Eggs, put thereto a little Rose Water, beat them well
together with a bunch of Feathers, till they come perfectly to resemble Snow;
then lay on the said Snow in heaps upon other Cream that is cold, which is made
fit for the Table; you may put under your Cream in the bottom of the Dish, part
of a penny-loaf, and stick therein a branch of Rosemary or Bays, and fill your
Tree with the said Snow to serve it up.

215. To make Hydromel.
Take eighteen quarts of Spring Water, and one quart of Honey; when the water
is warm, put the Honey into it, when it boyls up scum it very well, even as
long as any scum will rise; then put in one Race of Ginger, sliced in thin
slices, four Cloves, and a little sprig of green Rosemary; boil all together an
hour, then set it to cool till it be blood-warm, and then put to it a spoonful
of Ale-Yeast, when it is worked up, put it into a Vessel of a fit size, and
after two or three days Bottle it up; you may drink it in six weeks or two
Months.

216. To make a whipped Syllabub.
Take the whites of two Eggs, and a pint of cream with 6 spoonfuls of Sack, and
as much Sugar as will sweeten it, then take a Birchen-Rod and whip it, as it
rises in the Froth scum it, and put it into the Syllabub-pot, so continue it
with whipping and scuming, till your Syllabub-pot be full.

217. To make Marmalade of Cherries.
Take four pound of the best Kentish Cherries before they be stoned, to one
pound of pure Loaf Sugar, which beat into small powder, stone the Cherries, and
put them into a preserving-pan over a gentle Fire, that they may not boil, but
dissolve much into Liquor. Take away with the spoon much of the thin Liquor,
leaving the Cherries moist enough, but not swimming in clean Liquor; then put
to them half your Sugar, and boil it up quick, and scum away the froth that
rises, when it is well incorporated and clear, strew in a little more of the
Sugar, and continue so by little and little, till you have put in all your
Sugar, which will make the Color the fairer: when they are boiled enough take
them off, and bruise them with the back of a spoon, and when they are cold, put
them up in dots.

218. To make a Flomery Caudle.
When Flomery is made, and cold, you may make a pleasant and wholesome Caudle of
it, by taking some lumps and spoonfuls of it, and boil it with Ale and
White Wind, then sweeten it to your taste with Sugar. There will remain in the
Caudle some lumps of the congealed Flomery, which are not ungrateful.

219. To preserve Fruit all the Year.
Put the fruit into a fit case of Tin, and soder it together, so that no Air
can get in; then lay it at the bottom of a cold Well in Running water.

220. To make a most rich Cordial.
Take Conserve of red Roses, Conserve of Orange Flowers, of each one ounce;
Confect. Hyacinthi, Bezoardick, Theriacal Powder of each two Drams, Confection
of Alkermes one dram, of powder of Gold, one scruple; mix all these well
together in the form of an Opiate, and if the composition be too dry, add to it
some Syrup of red Currants, as much as is needful; take of this Composition
every Morning the quantity of a Nut.

221. To pickle red and white Currants.
Take Vinegar and White Wind, with so much Sugar as will make it pretty sweet,
then take your Red and White Currants being not fully ripe, and give them one
walm, so cover them over with the said pickle, keeping them always under Liquor.

222. To make red Currants Cream.
Bruise your Currants with some boiled Cream, then strain them through your
strainer, or sieve, and put the liquid substance thereof to the said Cream,
being almost cold, and it will be a pure red, so serve it up.

223. To preserve Medlers.
Take the weight of them in Sugar, adding to every pound thereof a pint and a
half of fair water, let them be scalded therein, till their skin will come off,
then take them out of the Water, and stone them at the Head, then add your
sugar to the water and boil them together, then strain it, and put your Medlers
therein, and let them boil a pace till it be thick, take them from the Fire,
and keep them for use.

225. To make White Mead.
Take six Gallons of water, and put in six quarts of Honey, stirring it till
the Honey be thoroughly melted, then set it over the Fire, and when it is ready
to boil, scum it very clean, then put in a quarter of an ounce of Mace, and as
much Ginger, half an ounce of Nutmegs, sweet Marjoram, broad Thyme, and
sweet-Bryar, of all together a handful, and boil them therein, then set it by
till it be thoroughly cold, and then barrel it up, and keep it till it be ripe.

226. To make Naples-Bisket.
Take of the same stuff the Mackroons are made of, and put to it an Ounce of
Pineapple seeds, in a quarter of a pound of stuff, for that is all the
difference between the Mackroons and the Naples-Bisket.

227. To make Chips of Quinces.
Scald them very well, and then slice them into a Dish, and pour a Candy Syrup
to them scalding hot; and let them stand all night, then lay them on Plates,
and searce sugar on them, and turn them every day and scrape more sugar on them
till they be dry. If you would have them look clear, heat them in Syrup but not
to boil.

228. To make Lozenges of Roses.
Boil Sugar to a height, till it is Sugar again, then beat your Roses fine, and
moisten them with the juice of Lemons, and put them into it, let it not boil
after the Roses are in, but pour it upon a Pye-plate, and cut it into what form
you please.

229. To make Conserve of Bugloss-Flowers.
Pick them as you do Burrage-Flowers, weigh them, and to every ounce add two
ounces of loaf-Sugar, and one of Sugar Candy; beat them together, till they
become very fine, then set it on the Fire to dissolve the Sugar, and when it is
so done, and the conserve hot, put it into your Glasses, or Gally-pots, for
your Use all the Year.

230. To pickle Lemon and Orange-peel.
Boil them with Vinegar and Sugar, and put them up into the same pickle, you
must observe to cut them into small thongs, the length of half the Peel of your
Lemon, being pared, it is a handsome Savoury Winter Sallet; boil them first in
water, before you boil them in Sugar.

231. To make Goose-berry-Paste.
Take Gooseberries, and cut them one by one, and wring away the juice, till you
have got enough for your turn, boil your juice alone, to make it somewhat
thicker, then take as much fine Sugar as your juice will sharpen, dry it, and
then beat it again, then take as much Gum dragon steeped in Rose Water, as will
serve, then beat it into a Paste in a Marble-Mortar, then take it up, and print
it in your Moulds, and dry it in your stove, when it is dry, box it up for your
use all the Year.

232. To make Suckets of Lettuce-stalks.
Take Lettuce stalks, and peel away the outside, then parboyl them in fair
water, and let them stand all night dry, then take half a pint of the same
Liquor, and a quart of Rose Water, and so boil it to a Syrup, and when your
Syrup is almost cold put in your Roots, and let them stand all night to take
Sugar, then boil your Syrup again, because it will be weak, and then take out
your Roots.

233. To make Musk-Sugar.
Bruise four or five Grains of Musk, put it in a piece of Cambrick or Lawn, lay
it at the bottom of a Gally-pot, and strew sugar thereon, stop your pot close,
and all your sugar in a few days will both smell and taste of Musk, and when
you have spent that sugar, lay more sugar thereon, which will also have the
same scent.

234. To make Prince Biscuit.
Take one pound of very fine flower; and one pound of fine sugar, and eight
Eggs, and two spoonfuls of Rose Water, and one ounce of Carraway-seeds, and
beat it all to Batter all one hour, for the more you beat it, the better your
bread is, then bake it in Coffins of white Plate, being Basted with a little
Butter, before you put in your Batter, and so keep it.

235. To Candy Rose-leaves.
Boil Sugar and Rose Water a little upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, then put the
Leaves (being thoroughly dried, either by the Sun or by the fire) into the sugar
and boil them a little, then strew the powder of double refined sugar upon
them, and turn them, and boil them a little longer, taking the dish from the
Fire, then strew more powdered sugar on the contrary side of the Flowers.

236. To Preserve Roses or Gilly-Flowers whole.
Dip a Rose that is neither in the bud nor over-blown, in a syrup consisting of
sugar double-refined, and Rose Water boiled to its full height, then open the
Leaves one by one with a fine smooth Bodkin, either of bone or Wood, then lay
them on Papers in the heat, or else dry with a gentle heat in a close Room,
heating the Room before you set them in, or in an Oven, then put them up in
Glasses, and keep them in dry Cup-boards near the fire.

237. To make Jelly of Quinces.
Take of the juice of Quinces clarified six quarts, boil it half away, and add
to the remainder five pints of old White Wind, consume the third part over a
gentle Fire, taking away the scum as you ought, let the rest settle and strain
it, and with three pound of Sugar boil it according to Art.

238. To make Jelly of Currants.
Take two pound of good Sugar, and clarify it with whites of Eggs, then boil
it to a Candy height, that is, till it go into Flashes, then put to it five
pints, (or as much as you please) of the pure juice of red Currants, first
boiled to Clarify it, by scuming it, boil them together a while, till they be
scum'd well, and enough to become a Jelly, then put a good handful or two of
the Berries of Currants whole, and cleansed from the stalks and black end, and
boil them till they are enough. You need not boil the juice before you put to
the Sugar, neither scum it before the Sugar and it boil together, but then scum
it clean, and take care the juice be very clear, and well strained.

239. To make Syrup of Mint.
Take the juice of sweet Quinces, and between sweet and sour, the juice of
Pomegranats, sweet, and between sweet and sour, of each a pint and half, dried
Mint half a pound, red Roses two ounces, let them lie in steep one day, then
boil it half away, and with four pound of Sugar boil it into Syrup according to
Art.

240. To make Honey of Mulberries.
Take the juice of Mulberries and Black-berries before they be Ripe, gathered
before the Sun be up, of each a pound and half, Honey two pound, boil them to
their due thickness.

241. To make Syrup of Purslain.
Take of the Seed of Purslain grossly bruised, half a pound, of the juice of
Endive boiled and Clarified two pints, sugar two pound, Vinegar nine ounces,
infuse the seeds in the juice of Endive twenty four hours, afterward boil it
half away with a gentle Fire, then strain it, and boil it with the sugar, to
the consistence of a syrup, adding the Vinegar toward the latter end of the
Decoction.

242. To make Honey of Raisins.
Take of Raisins of the sun cleansed from the stones two pound, steep them in
six pints of warm water, the next day boil it half away, and press it stongly,
then put two pints of Honey to the Liquor that is pressed out, and boil it to a
thickness: It is good for a Consumption, and to loosen the Body.

243. To make a Syrup of Comfrey.
Take the Roots and Tops of Comfrey, the greater and the less, of each three
handfuls, red Roses, Bettony, Plantain, Burnet, Knot-grass, Scabious,
Coltsfoot, of each two handfuls, press the juice out of them, all being green
and bruised, boil it, scum it, and strain it, add to its weight of Sugar, and
make it into a Syrup according to Art.

244. To pickle Quinces.
Boil your Quinces whole in water till they be soft, but not too violently, for
fear of breaking them, when they are soft take them out, and boil some Quinces
pared, quartered and cored, and the parings of the Quinces with them in the
same Liquor to make it strong, and when they are boiled that the Liquor is of a
sufficient strength, take out the quartered Quinces and parings, and put the
Liquor into a pot big enough to receive all the Quinces, both whole and
quartered, and put them into it when the Liquor is through cold, and keep them
for use close covered.

245. To make Plague-water.
Take a pound of Rue, of Rosemary, Sage, Sorrel, Celandine, Mugwort, of the
tops of red Brambles, Pimpernel, wild Dragons, Agrimony, Balm, Angelica of each
a pound, put these compounds in a Pot, fill it with White Wind above the Herbs,
so let it stand four days, then distill it for your use in an Alembeck.

247. To make Quince-Cakes white.
First Clarify the Sugar with the white of an Egg, but put not so much water
to it as you do for Marmalade, before you Clarify it, keep out almost a
quarter of the Sugar, let your Quinces be scalded, and chopped in small pieces,
before you put it into the Syrup, then make it boil as fast as you can, and
when you have scummed it, and think it to be half boiled, then jamire it, and
let the other part of your Sugar be ready Candyed to a hard Candy, and so put
them together, letting it boil but a very little after the Candy is put to it,
then put in a little Musk, and so lay it out before it be cold.

247. To make red Quince-Cakes.
Bake them in an Oven with some of their own juice, their own Cores being cut
and bruised and put to them, then weigh some of the Quince, being cut into
small pieces, taking their weight in Sugar, and with the Quince some pretty
quantity of the juice of Barberries being baked or Stewed in a Pot, when you
have taken the weight in Sugar, you must put the weighed Quince, and above 3
quarters of the sugar together, and put to it some little quantity of water as
you shall see cause, but make not the Syrup too thin, and when you have put all
this together, cover it, and set it to the Fire, keep it covered, and scum it
as much as you can, when it is half boiled, then symer it, let the other part
of the Sugar have no more water put to it; then wet the Sugar well, and so let
it boil to a very hard candy, and when you think they be boiled enough, then
lay them out before they be cold.

248. To make clear Cakes of Quinces.
Prepare your Quinces and Barberries as before, and then take the clearest
Syrup, and let it stand on the Coals two or three hours, then take the weight
of it in Sugar, and put near half the Sugar to the juice, and so let them boil
a little on the fire, and then Candy the rest of the Sugar very hard, and so
put them together, stirring it till it be almost cold, and so put it into
Glasses.

249. To make Jelly of Raspices.
First strain your Raspices, and to every quart of juice add a pound and half
of Sugar, pick out some of the fairest, and having strewed sugar in the bottom
of the skillet, lay them in one by one, then put the juice upon them with some
sugar, reserving some to put in when they boil, let them boil a pace, and add
sugar continually till they are enough.

250. To make all sorts of Comfits, and to cover Seeds, or Fruits with Sugar.
You must provide a basin very deep, either of Brass or Tin, with two Ears of
Iron to hang with a Rope over an Earthen Pan with hot Coals, then provide a
broad pan for Ashes, and put hot Coals upon them, and another clean Basin to
melt your sugar, in or a skillet, as also a Ladle of Brass to run the sugar
upon the seeds, together with a slice of Brass, to scrape away the sugar from
the basin that hangs, if there be occasion, then take some of the best and
fairest sugar you can get, and beat it into powder, cleanse your seeds well,
and dry them in the hanging basin, put a quarter of a pound of seeds, whether
Anniseed, or Coriander-seeds, to every two pound of Sugar, and that will make
them big enough, but if you would have them bigger, add the more sugar, which
you must melt thus; put three pound of sugar into your basin, adding to it one
pint of clean Running-water, stir it well with a brazen slice, till it be well
moistened, then set it over a clear fire and melt it well, and let it boil
mildly till it Ropes from the Ladle, then keep it upon hot Embers but let it
not boil, and so let it run upon the seeds from the Ladle: If you would have
them done quickly, let your water be boiling hot, and putting a fire under the
Basin, cast on your sugar boiling hot, put but as much water to the sugar as
will dissolve the same, neither boil your sugar too long, which will make it
black, stir your seeds in the basin as fast as you can as you cast on the
sugar, at the first put in but half a spoonful of the sugar, moving the basin
very fast, rubbing the seeds very well with your hand, which will make them
take sugar the better, and let them be very well dried between every Coat,
repeat this rubbing and drying of them between every Coat, which will make them
the sooner rot, for this way in every three hours you may make three pound of
Comfits. A quarter of a pound of Coriander seeds, and three pound of Sugar will
make very large Comfits, keep your Sugar always in good temper, that it run not
into lumps. When your Comfits are made, lay them to dry on Papers, either
before the Fire, or in the hot Sun or in an Oven; which will make them very
white.

251. To Candy Nutmegs or Ginger.
Take a pound of fine Sugar, and six or seven spoonfuls of Rose Water,
Gum-Arabick the weight of six pence, but let it be clear, boil all these
together till they Rope, put it then out into an earthen Dish, put to it your
Nutmegs or Ginger, then cover it close, and lute it with clay that no Air enter
in, keep it in a warm place about twenty days, and they will Candy into a hard
Rocky-Candy; then break pour Pot and take them out: in the same manner you may
Candy Oranges and Lemons.

252. To make Curran-Wine.
Pick a pound of the best Currants, and put them in a deep strait mouthed
earthen Pot, and pour upon them about three quarts of hot Water, having first
dissolved therein three spoonfuls of the purest and newest Ale-yeast, stop it
very close, till it begins to work, then give it vent as is necessary, and keep
it warm for about three days; it will work and ferment, taste it after two days
to see if it be grown to your liking, then let it run through a strainer, to
leave behind all the Currants and the Yeast, and so bottle it up; it will be
very quick and pleasant, and is admirable good to cool the Liver and cleanse
the blood, it will be ready to drink in five or six days after it is bottled,
and you may drink it safely.

253. To make a Sweet-Meat of Apples.
Make your Jelly with slices of John-Apples, but first fill your Glasses with
slices, cut round ways, and pour in the Jelly to fill up the vacuities, let the
Jelly be boiled to a good stiffness, and when it is ready to take from the
Fire, put in some juice of Lemon and Orange, if you like it, but let them not
boil, but let it stand upon the fire a while upon a pretty good heat, that the
juyces may incorporate well, a little Amber-grease added does very well.

254. To make Conserve of Sage.
Take about a pound of Flowers of Sage fresh blown, and beat them in a Mortar,
afterward put them in a Glass and stop them close, and then set them by a warm
fire, or in the Sun, and be sure to stir them once a day at the least, and it
will keep good a twelve month at the least.

255. To make Paste of Cherries.
Boil some fair Cherries in water till they come to pap, and then strain them
through a sieve, then boil some good Pippins unto pap, also put a quarter of a
pound of the Apple-pap to a pound of the pap of Cherries, and mingle them
together, then dry it, and so make it up into paste.

256. To make Marmelade of Oranges.
After you have pared your Oranges very thin, let them be boiled in three or
four waters, even till they grow very tender, then take a quarter of a hundred
of good Kentish Pippins, divide them, and take out the Cores, boil them very
well to pap or more, but let them not lose their color, then pass your Apples
through a strainer, and put a Pound of Sugar to every pint of juice, then boil
it till it will Candy, then take out the pulp of the Orange, and cut the peel
into long slices very thin, put in your peel again, adding to it the juice of
two or 3 Lemons, and boil it up to a Candy.

257. To make a Paste of Apricots.
Let your Apricots be very ripe, and then pare them, then put them into a
skillet, and set them over the Fire without water, stir them very well with a
skimmer, and let them be over the Fire till they be very dry, then take some
Sugar and boil it into a Conserve, and mix an equal quantity of each together,
and so make it into Paste.

258. To Pickle Artichoak-Bottoms.
Take the best bottoms of Artichoaks, and parboyl them, and when they are cold
and well drained from the water and dried in a cloth, take away all the
moisture, then put them into pots, and pour your brine upon them, which must be
as strong as you can make it, which is done by putting in so much Salt to it as
will receive no more, so that the Salt sinks whole to the bottom; cover over
your Artichoaks with this water, and pour upon it some sweet Butter melted to
the thickness of two fingers, that no Air may come in, when the butter is cold,
set up your Pot in a warm place, covered close from Vermin. Before you put the
bottoms in a pot, you should pull off all the leaves and choke, as they are
served at Table: The best time to do this is in Autumn, when your plants
produce those which are Young and tender, for these you should Pickle before
they come to open and Flower, but not before their Heads are round, when you
would eat them you must lay them in water, shifting the water several times,
then boil them once again, and so serve them again.

259. To make Marmalade of Grapes.
Take of the fairest and ripest blew Grapes, gathered in the heat of the day,
that their moisture be dried up thoroughly, spread them upon a Table or Hindle
in a Room where the Air and Sun may come in, let them lie so for fifteen or
sixteen days, that they may not both sweat and shrink, if it be cloudy or cold
weather, you may put them into an Oven, when it is only warm, after which,
press them well with your Hands, cleansing them from all the seeds and stalks,
putting the husks and juice to boil in the Kettle, carefully scuming and
clearing it from the seeds, reduce this Liquor also to a third part,
diminishing the fire as the Confection thickens, stiring it often about with
your spoon to prevent its cleaving to the vessel, and to make it boil equally,
then strain it through a sieve or course Cloth, bruising the husks with your
wooden Ladle to squeeze out the Substance, and then squeesing it out in a
press, set it again on the fire, and let it boil once more, keeping it
continually stirring till you think they be sufficiently boiled, then take it
off, and pour it into earthen Pans, that it may not taste of the Kettle, and
being half cold, put it into Gally-pots to keep, let your pots stand open five
or six days, and then cover them with Paper that the Paper may lie upon the
Conserve, and when the Paper grows moldy put on another, till all the
Superfluous moisture is gone out, which will be in little time if your
Confection was well boiled, but if it were not you must boil it again.

260. To pickle Cornelians.
Gather the fairest and biggest Cornelians when they first begin to grow red,
and after they have lain a while, put them up into a Pot or Barrel, filling
them up with Brine, as for Artichoaks, and put to them a little green Fennel,
and a few Bay Leaves to make them smell well, then stop them up very close, and
let them stand for a Month, if you find them too Salt, make the Pickle weaker
before you serve them to Table.

261. To make Jelly of Apples.
Take either Pippins or John-Apples and cut them into quarters, either pared or
unpared, boil them in a good quantity of water till it be very strong of the
Apples, take out the clear Liquor, and put to it a sufficient quantity of Sugar
to make a Jelly, with the slices of Apples, boil all together, till the Apples
be enough, and the Liquor like a Jelly; or else you may boil the slices in
Apple-Liquor without sugar, and make Jelly of the other Liquor, and put the
slices into it when they be Jelly and it is sufficiently boiled, put to it some
juice of Lemon and Amber, and Musk if you will.

262. To make Jelly of Gooseberries.
Let your Gooseberries be full ripe, then strain them through a strainer, and
to every two pound of juice put three quarterns of Sugar, boil it before you
mixed it, and then boil it again together, when they are mixed try them upon a
plate; when it is enough it rises off.

263. To make Bragget.
Put two Bushels and a half of Malt to one Hogshead of water, the first running
makes half a Hogshead very good, but not very strong, the second is very weak:
Boil but half a quartern of Hops, put your water to the Malt the ordinary way;
boil it very well, and work it with very good Beer yeast: Now, to make Bragget,
take the first running of this Ale, but put less Honey in it than you do for
your ordinary Mead, put twice or thrice as much Spice and Herbs, then put it in
a Vessel, after its working with the Yeast, hang within it a Bag of bruised
Spices, rather more than you boiled it with, and let it hang in the Barrel all
the while you draw it.

264. To make Italian Marmalade.
Take fifteen pound of Quinces, three pound of sugar, and two pound of water,
and boil them altogether, when it is well boiled strain it by little and little
through a cloth as much as you can, then take the juice and put to it four
pound of sugar, and then boil it, try it on a plate, to know when it is enough,
and if it come off, take it presently off the Fire, and put it in Boxes for
your use.

FINIS.
Excellent Receipts IN Physic and Surgery.
1. An Approved Medicine for the Stone and Gravel.
TAke the hard Roe of a red Herring, and dry it upon a Tile in an Oven, then
beat it to powder, and take as much as will ly upon a sixpence every Morning
fasting in a Glass of Rhenish Wine.

2. An excellent Drink for the Scurvy.
Take a pound of Garden Scurvy Grass, six handfuls of Wormwood and Elder-tops,
one ounce of Carraway-seeds, and one ounce of Nutmegs, put them all together
into 6 Gallons of new Ale, and let them work together, and after a convenient
time of working, drink of it every Morning fasting.

3. A Receipt for the Gout known to be very helpful.
Take five or 6 black snails, and cut off their heads, then put to them one
pennyworth of Saffron, and beat them together, and spread it on a woolly side
of a piece of Sheeps Leather, and apply it to the soles of the Feet, anointing
the sore place with the Marrow of a Stone-Horse.

4. For Griping of the Guts.
Take Anniseeds, Fennel, Bay-berrie Juniper Berries, Tormentil, Bistort,
Balaustins, Pomegranate-pills, each one ounce, Rose-leaves a handful, boil them
in Milk, strain it, and add the Yolk of an Egg, six grains of Laudanum
dissolved in the Spirit of Mint, prepare it for a Glister, and give it warm.

5. A Sovereign Medicine for any Ach or Pain.
Take Barrows grease, a Lap full of Arch-Angel-leaves, flowers, Stalks and all,
and put it into an Earthen pot, and stop it close, and paste it, then put it in
an horse-dung-hill nine days in the latter end of May, and nine days in the
beginning of June, then take it forth and strain it, and use it.

6. For the Sciatica and Pains in the Joints.
Take Balm and Cinquefoyl, but most of all Betony, Nep, and Featherfew, stamp
them and drink the juice with Ale and Wine, Probatum.

7. For an Ague.
Take the Root of a blew Lilly, scrape it clean, and slice it, and lay it in
soak all night in Ale, and in the Morning stamp it and strain it, and give it
the Patient Lukewarm to drink an hour before the fit comes.

8. For all Fevers and Agues in sucking Children.
Take Powder of Crystal and steep it in Wine, and give it to the Nurse to
drink, also take the Root of Devils-bit, with the Herb, and hang it about the
Child's Neck.

9. A good Medicine to strengthen the Back.
Take Comfrey, Knot-grass, and flowers of Archangel, boil them in a little
Milk, and drink it off every Morning.

10. For the Headache.
Take Rose Cakes and stamp them very small in a Mortar with a little Ale, and
let them be dried by the Fire on a Tile-sheard, and lay it to the Nape of the
Neck to Bed-ward. Proved.

11. For the yellow Jaundice.
Take a great white Onion, and make a hole where the blade goes out, to the
bigness of a Chestnut, then fill the hole with treacle, being beaten with half
an ounce of English Honey, and a little Saffron, and set the Onion against the
Fire, and Roast it well that it do not burn, and when it is Roasted, strain it
through a Cloth, and give the juice thereof to the sick three days together,
and it shall help them.

12. For the black Jaundice.
Take Fennel, Sage, Parsley, Gromwell, of each much a like, and make Pottage
thereof with a piece of good Pork, and eat no other Meat that day.

13. For Infection of the Plague.
Take a spoonful of Running-water, a spoonful of Vinegar, a good quantity of
treacle to the bigness of a Hasel-Nut, temper all these together, and heat it
lukewarm, and drink it every four and twenty hours.

14. For the Cramp.
Take Oil of Camomile, and Fenugreek, and anoint the place where the Cramp is,
and it helps.

15. For the Ach of the joints.
Take Marshmallows and sweet Milk, Linseed, Powder of Cummin, and the whites of
Eggs, Saffron, and white grease, and fry all these together, and lay it to the
aching joint.

16. For an Ague.
Take a pottle of thin Ale, and put thereto a handful of Parsley, as much red
Fennel, as much Centory, as much Pimpernel, and let the Ale be half consumed
away, and then take and drink thereof,

17. To make the Countess of Kents Powder.
Take of the Magistery of Pearls, of Crab's-eyes prepared, Hartshorn, Magistery
of white Coral, of Lapis contra Yarvam, of each a like quantity, to these
Powders infused, cut off the black tops of the great Claws of Crabs, the full
weight of the rest: Beat these all into a fine powder, and searce them through
a fine Lawn searce: To every ounce of this powder add a Dram of Oriental
Bezoar, make all these up in a lump or Mass with Jelly of Hartshorn, and
color it with Saffron, putting thereto a scruple of Amber-grease, and a little
Musk finely powderd, and dry it in the Air, after they are made up into small
quantities, you may give to a man twenty Grains, and to a Child twelve Grains.
It is excellent against all Malignant and Pestilent Diseases, French Pox,
Smallpox, Measles, Plague, Pestilence, Malignant or Scarlet-Feavers, and
Melancholy, twenty or thirty Grains thereof being exhibited (in a little warm
sack, or hartshorn Jelly) to a Man, and half as much, or twelve Grains to a
child.

18. For the falling sickness, or Convulsions.
Take the dung of a Peacock, make it into Powder, and give so much of it to the
Patient as will lie upon a shilling; in a little succory-water fasting.

19. For the Pleurisy.
Take the round Balls of Horse-dung, and boil them in a pint of White Wind till
half be consumed, then strain it out, and sweeten it with a little sugar, let
the Patient drink of this, and then lie warm.

20. To prevent Miscarrying.
Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on black brown Paper, the breadth and length
of an hand, and lay it to the small of her back, and let her drink a Caudle
made of Muscadine, putting into it the husks of about twenty sweet Almonds
dried, and finely powdered.

21. For the Worms in Children.
Take Wormseed boiled in Beer and Ale, and sweetened with Clarified Honey, and
then let them drink it.

22. For the Whites.
Take white washed Turpentine, and make up in Balls like Pills, then take
Cinnamon and Ginger, and roll the balls in it, and take them as you would do
Pills, Morning and Evening. Proved.

23. For a dry Cough.
Take anniseed, Ash-seeds, and Violets, and beat them to powder, and stamp
them, of each a like quantity, then boil them together in fair water, till it
grows thick, then put it up, and let the Patient take of it morning and evening.

24. To make Unguentum Album.
Take a pint of Oyl-Olive, and half a pound of Diaculum, Anniseeds a pretty
quantity, and put them together, and put thereto a pound of Ceruse small
grounded, boil them together a little, and stir them always till it be cold,
and it is done.

25. To destroy the Piles.
Take Oil of Roses, Frankincense, and Honey, and make an Ointment of them, and
put it into the Fundament, and put Myrrh unto the same, and use often to anoint
the Fundament therewith, and let the fume thereof go into the Fundament.

26. For the Canker.
Take a handful of unset Leeks, with the Roots, and a small quantity of Yarrow,
and boil them in White Wind, till they be all very soft, then strain and
Clarify them, and let the Patient drink thereof Morning and Evening blood-warm.

27. For the Itch.
Take the Juice of Pennyroyal, the juice of Savin, the juice of Scabious, the
juice of Sage, the juice of Pellitory, with some Barrows grease and black-soap,
temper all these together, and make a Salve for the Itch.

28. For the King's Evil.
Take two ounces of the water of Broom-flowers Distilled, and give it in the
Morning to the Patient Fasting, and it will purge the Evil Humor downward, and
wastes, and heals the Kernels without breaking them outwardly.

29. To break an Imposthume.
Take a Lilly-root and an Onion, and boil them in water, till they be soft,
then stamp them, and Fry them with Swines grease, and lay it to the Imposthume
as hot as the Patient may suffer it.

30. For biting of a mad dog.
Stamp large Plantain, and lay it to the grieved place, and it will cure the
sore.

31. For the Green Sickness.
Take the Keys of an Ashen-Tree dried and beaten to powder, and take of red
Fennel, of red Sage, Marjoram, and Betony, and sees them in Running water,
from a pottle to a quart, then strain them, and drink thereof a good draught
with Sugar, Morning and Evening Lukewarm.

32. For Deafness.
Take of Wild Mint, mortify it, and squeeze it in the hand till it renders
juice, then take it with its juice and put it into the Ear, change it often,
this will help the deafness if the Person has heard before.

33. For the Dropsy.
Take a Gallon of White Wind, and put into it a handful of Roman Wormwood, and
a good piece of Horseradish, and a good quantity of Broom-Ashes tied in a
Cloth, then take a good bunch of Dwarf-Elder, beat it in a Mortar, and strain
out the juice, and put into the wine when you will drink it, but if the
Dwarf-Elder be dry, you must steep a good quantity in the Wine. Take of this
half a pint Morning and Evening.

34. For a sprain in the Back, or any other Weakness.
Take a quarter of a pint of good Muscadine, a spoonful of Madder, Incorporate
them well together, then give it the Patient to drink for three Mornings
together, and if need requires, you may use it often in a day, this will
strengthen the Back exceedingly.

35. An excellent Remedy for sore Eyes.
Take a Gallon of pure Running water, and eight drams of white Coperas, and as
much of fine white Salt, mix them together, and let it simper half an hour over
a slow fire, and then strain it for use.

Catholicon. 36. A most excellent Cordial.
Take half a peck of Ripe Elder-Berries, pick them clean and let them stand two
or three days in an Earthen pan, till they begin to hoar or mould, then bruise
and strain them, and boil the Liquor till half be consumed, then putting a
pound of Sugar to every pint of Liquor, boil them to Syrup.

37. A Medicine for an Ague.
Take a quart of the best Ale, and boil it to a pint, and let the Party lie
down upon a bed, and then let the Patient lie down upon a bed, and be covered
warm, when the first fit grudges, and let a basin be ready to vomit in.

38. Another for an Ague.
Take a large Nutmeg and slice it, and so much Roch-Allom beaten to powder, and
put them both into one pint of the best Whitewine, and incorporate them well
together, and let the Patient take one half thereof about half an hour before
the fit, and then walk a pace, or use some other Laborious Exercise, and when
the fit begins to come, take the other half, and continue Exercise. Both these
I have known to cure to Admiration,

39. For a great Lax or Looseness.
Take one quart of New Milk, and have ready one half pint of distilled Plantain
water, and set your Milk over the Fire, and when your milk by boiling rises up,
take two or three Spoonfuls, as occasion shall be, to allay the rising, and
when it rises again, do the like, and so in like manner till the Plantain water
be all in, and then boiling up as before, let the Patient drink thereof warmed
hot, or how else he likes it; I never yet have found it fail of Curing.

40. For curing of deafness.
Take herb of Grace, and pound it, then strain it, and take two spoonfuls of
the Juice, and put thereto one spoonful of Brandy-wine, and when it is well
evaporated, dip therein a little black wool or fine Lint, being first bound
with a silk thread, and put it into your Ear.

41. For the Scurvy.
Take half a peck of Sea-scurvy-grass, and as much Watercresses, of
Dwarf-Elder, Roman Wormwood, Red-Sage, Fumitory, Hartshorn, and Liver-wort, of
each one handful, wash the Watercresses, and dry them well, the other Herbs
must be rubbed clean, and not washed, then add one Ounce of Horse-Raddish, and
a good handful of Madder-Roots, beat these with the Herbs, and strain the juice
well out, for the last is best, then set it on a quick fire, and scum it clean;
then let it stand till it be settled, and when it is quite cold, bottle it up;
and keep it in a cold place, you must take four or five spoonfuls with one
spoonful of Syrup of Lemons put into it, each morning fasting, and fast one
hour after it.

42. An Excellent Remedy to procure Conception.
Take of Syrup of Mother-wort, Syrup of Mugwort half an Ounce, of Spirit of
Clary two drams: of the Root of English Snake-weed in fine powder one dram,
Purslain-seed, Nettle-seed, Rochet-seed, all in subtle Powder of each two
drams: Candied Nutmegs, Eringo-Roots, Satyrion-Roots Preserved, Dates,
Pistachoes, Conserve of Succory, of each three drams, Cinnamon, Saffron in fine
powder of each a scruple, Conserve of Vervain, Pineapple Kernels picked and
pilled, of each two drams, stamp and work all these Ingredients in a Mortar, to
an Electuary, then put it up into Gally-pots, and keep it for use: Take of this
Electuary the quantity of a good Nutmeg in a little Glass full of White Wind,
in the Morning fasting and at 4 a Clock Afternoon, and as much at night going
to Bed, but be sure do not use violent exercises.

43. For a sore breast not broken.
Take Oil of Roses, Bean-flower, the Yolk of an Egg, a little Vinegar, temper
all these together, then set it before the fire that it may be a little warm,
then with a Feather strike it upon the Breast morning and Evening, or any time
of the day she finds it pricking.

44. To heal a Sore breast when broken.
Boil Lillies in new Milk, and lay it on to break it, and when it is broken,
Tent it with a Mallow-stalk, and lay on it a plaster of Mallows boiled in
Sheeps Tallow: These are to be used if you cannot keep it from breaking.

45. For a Consumption.
Take a pound and half of Pork, Fat and Lean, and boil it in water, and put in
some Oatmeal, and boil it till the heart of the Meal be out, then put to it two
quarts of Milk, and boil it a quarter of an hour, and give the patient a
draught in the Morning, Afternoon, and Evening, and now and then some
Barley-water.

46. For the Falling. Sickness.
Take powder of Hartshorn, and drink it with Wine, and it helps the Falling
Evil.

47. For the Toothache.
Take Featherfew and stamp it, and strain it, and drop a drop or two into the
contrary Ear to the pain, and lie still half an hour after.

48. For a Wen.
Take black soap and mix with unslaked lime, made into powder, and lay it on
the Wen or Kernel.

47. For the Wind.
Take the juice of Red Fennel, and make a Posset of Ale therewith, and drink
thereof.

50. An Excellent Medicine for the Dropsy.
Take two Gallons of New Ale, then take Set-wel, Calamus Aromaticus, and
Galingale, of each two pennyworth, of Spikenard four pennyworth, stamp all
together, and put them into a Bag, and hang it in the Vessel, and when it is
four days old drink it Morning and Evening.

51. For a Scald Head.
Wash thy Head with Vinegar and camomile stamped and mingled together; there is
no better help for the Scald, or grind white Hellebore with swines grease and
apply it to the Head.

52. To make the Plague-water.
Take a handful of Sage, and a handful of Rue, and boil them in three pints of
Malmsey or Muscadine till one pint be wasted, then take it off the Fire, and
strain the Wine from the Herbs, then put into the Wine two pennyworth of
long-pepper, half an ounce of Ginger, and a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, all
grossly bruised, and let it boil a little again. Then take it off the Fire and
dissolve it in half an Ounce of good Venice-Treacle, and a quarter of an ounce
of Mithridate, and put to it a quarter of a pint of strong Angelica-water, so
keep it in a Glass close stopped, for your use. This water cures Smallpox,
Measles, Surfeits, and Pestilential Fevers.

53. A precious Eye-water for any diseases of the Eye, often proved.
Take of the best White Wind half a pint, of white-rose-water, as much, of the
water of celendine, Fennel, Eyebright, and Rue, of each two ounces, of
prepared Tutia 6 ounces, of Cloves as much, sugar Rosate a dram, of Camphire
and Aloes, each half a dram, wash the Eyes therewith.

54. A Cordial Julep.
Take water of Endive, Purslain, and Roses, of each two ounces, Sorrel-water
half a pint, Juice of Pomegranats, and for lack thereof, Vinegar four ounces,
Camphire three drams, sugar one pound, boil all these together in the form of a
Julep, and give 3 or 4 ounces thereof at a time.

55. To make the green Ointment.
Take a pound of Swines grease, one Ounce of Verdigrease, half a scruple of Sal
Gemmae, this ointment may be kept 40 years, it is good against cancers and
Running Sores, it fretteth away dead flesh, and brings new, and heals old
Wounds, put it within the wound that it fester not.

56. For fits of the Mother.
Take a brown Toast of four Bread, of the nether Crust, and wash it with
Vinegar, and put thereto black soap like as you would butter a Toast, and lay
it under the Navil.

57. For the Rickets in Children.
Take of fennel-seeds and dillseeds, but most of the last, boil them in Beer,
and strain it, and sweeten it with sugar, and let the Child drink often.
Probatum.

58. For the Skingles.
Take the green leaves of Coltsfoot stamped and mingled with Honey, and apply
it, and it will help.

50. To heal a Fistula or Ulcer.
Take figgs and stamp them, with shoo-makers wax, and spread it upon Leather,
and lay it on the sore, and it will heal.

60. For a Woman in Travel.
Take seven or eight leaves of Bettony, a pretty quantity of Germander, a
branch or two of Pennyroyal, three Marygolds, a branch or two of Hyssop, boil
them all in a pint of White Wind, or Ale, then put into it sugar and Saffron,
and boil it in a quarter of an hour more, and give it to drink warm.

61. To make a Woman be soon delivered, the Child being dead or alive.
Take a good quantity of the best Amber, and beat it exceeding small to powder,
then searce it through a fine piece of Lawn, and so drink it in some Broth or
Caudle, and it will by Gods help cause the Patient to be presently delivered.

62. For Infants troubled with Wind and Phlegm.
Give them a little pure Sugar-candy-finely bruised in Saxifrage-water, or
Scabious-water, in a spoon well mingled together.

63. A most excellent Medicine to cause Children to breed their Teeth easily.
Take of pure Capons grease very well clarifi'd the quantity of a Nutmeg and
twice as much of pure honey, mingle and incorporate them well together, and
anoint the child's gums therewith three or four times a day when it is Teething,
and they will easily break the Flesh and prevent Torments and Agues, and other
Griefs which usually accompany their coming forth.

64. For Agues in Children.
Take a spoonful of good Oil of Populeon, and put thereto two spoonfuls of good
Oil of Roses, mingle them well together, and then warm it before the Fire,
anoint the Child's Joints and Back, also his Forehead and Temples twice a day,
Chafing the Ointment well in.

65. To cause a young Child to go to stool.
Chafe the Child's Navel with May Butter before the fire, then take some black
Wool and dip it in the Butter and lay it to the Navel, and it will procure a
Stool; this is also good for one in years, that can take no other medicine.

66. For Worms in Children.
Take of myrrh and Aloes very finely powdered, of each a pennyworth, and put
thereto a few drops of Chemical Oil of Wormwood or Savine, and a little
Turpentine; make these up into a Plaster, and lay it to the Child's Navel.

67. To help one that is blasted.
Take the white of an Egg, and beat it in a mortar, put to it a quarter of an
Ounce of Coperas, and grind them well together till it come to an Ointment, and
therewith anoint the sore Face, and it will ease the pain, and take away the
swelling; and when it is well nigh whole, anoint the place with a little
Populeon, and that will make the skin fair and well again.

68. An excellent Salve.
Take half a pound of Beeswax, a pint of Sallet-Oyl, three ounces of Red Lead,
boil all together in a new earthen Pipkin, keeping it stirring all the while
till it grows of a darkish Color, then keep it for use, or make Sear-cloaths
of it while it is hot.

It is most approved against any pain, Sore, Scald, Cut, Burn; to strengthen
the Back, or remove any old Ach whatsoever.

69. A Julep of Dr. Trench for the fits of the Mother.
In the time of the year distill black-Cherry-water, Piony-flower-water,
Cowslip-water, Rue, or Herb-grace-water: then take of the waters of Cowslip,
Black-Cherries, Piony, Rue, of each an ounce, and add to them water of Castor,
half an ounce, Cinamon-water one dram, Syrup of Clove-gilly-flowers three
drams, mix all these together, and take two spoonfuls at a time of it, as often
as you please.

70. For a Tympany.
Take a handful of the blossoms of Mary-golds, stamp them, and strain them, and
give the juice thereof to the patient in a draught of Ale fasting.

71. To provoke Terms, a good Medicine.
Take Wormwood and Rue, of each one handful, with five or six Pepper-corns,
boil them all together in a quart of White Wind or Malmsey, strain it, and
drink thereof.

72. For the Bloody Flux or scouring.
Take a great Apple and cat out the Core, and put therein pure Virgins wax,
then wet a paper and lap it therein, then rake it up in the Embers, and let it
roast till it be soft, then eat of it as your stomach will give leave.

73. For a Rheumatick Cough or Cold.
Take a pint of Hysop-water, Syrup of Gilly-flowers, Syrup of Vinegar, Syrup of
Maidenhair, Syrup of Coltsfoot of each one Ounce, mingle them all together,
and drink it when you please.

74. To kill a Fellon.
Take an Egg and roast it hard, and take out the Yolk thereof, then roast an
Onion soft, and beat the Yolk and the Onion together, and lay it to the sore,
and it will kill the Fellon.

75. For the white Flux.
Take the powder of the Flower of Pomegranats, and drink it in red Wine.

76. For the red Flux.
Take Sperma Ceti, and drink it, and truss up your self with a piece of black
Cotton.

77. For the Cancer in a woman's breast.
Take the Dung of a Goose, and the juice of Celandine, and bray them well in a
Mortar together, and lay it to the sore, and this will stay the Cancer, and
heal it.

78. For an Ague in the Breast.
Take Grounsel, Dasie-leaves and roots, and course Wheat sifted, make a
Poultess thereof with the parties own water, and lay it warm to the breast.

79. For bleeding at the Nose.
Take Betony and stamp it with as much Salt as you can hold betwixt your two
fingers, and put it into your Nose.

80. For spitting of blood.
Take Smallage, Rue, Mints, and Betony, and boil them well in good Milk, and
drink it warm,

81. To staunch the bleeding of a Wound, or at the Nose.
There is no better thing than the powder of Bole-Armoniack, to stanch the
bleeding of a Wound, the powder being laid upon it, or for the Nose, to be
blown in with a Quist. Or take the shavings of parchment, and lay it to the
wound, and it stancheth and heals.

82. To make the Gascoign Powder.
Take of Pearls, white Amber, Hartshorn, Eyes of Crabs, and white Coral, of
each half an Ounce, of black thighs of Crabs calcined, two ounces; to every
ounce of this powder put in a dram of Oriental Bezoar, reduce them all into a
very fine powder, and searse them then with Hartshorn Jelly and a little
Saffron put therein, make it up into paste, and make therewith Lozenges, or
Torchises for your use.

Get your Crabs for this powder about May or in September before they be
boiled, dry your Lozenges in the Air, not by fire nor Sun.

83. For the Megrim, or Imposthume in the Head.
Take four penny-weight of the Root of Pellitory of Spain, a farthing weight of
Spikenard, and boil them in good Vinegar, and when it is cold, put thereto a
spoonful of Honey, and a Saucer-ful of Mustard, and mingle them well together,
and hold thereof in your mouth, a spoonful at once, and use this eight or nine
times, spitting it out continually.

84. For Pain in the Ears.
Take the juice of wild Cucumbers, and put it into the Ears, and it asswageth
the pain. Also put the Wood of green Ash in the fire, and save the liquor that
comes out at the end, and put it into the Ears, it causes the pain to cease,
and amendeth the Hearing; Also beat the juice of Wormwood, and drop it into the
Ears,

85. A precious Water for the Eyesight, made by K. Edward the sixth.
Take Smalledge, red Fennel, Rue, Vervain, Betony, Agrimony, Pimpernel,
Eufrane, Sage, Celendine of each a like quantity, first wash them clean, then
stamp them, and put them in a fair Brazen pan, with the Powder of fourteen or
fifteen Pepper-corns, fair searsed into a pint of good White Wind, put them
into the Herbs with three spoonfuls of Honey, and five spoonfuls of the water
of a Man-Child that is sound; mingle all together, and boil them over the fire,
and when it is boiled, strain it through a fine Linen Cloth; and put it into
a Glass, and stop it well and close till you use it, and when you need it, put
a little thereof into the sore eyes with a feather, but if it be dry, temper it
with White Wind, and it profits much all manner of sore eyes: This water was
used by K. Edward the sixth.

86. My Lord Dennies Medicine for the Gout.
Take Burdock-leaves and stalks, cut them small and stamp them very small, then
strain them, and cleanse them, and when you have so done, put them into
Glasses, and put pure Oil of Olives on the top of them, and stop it close from
the Air, and when you would use it for the Gout, pour it into a porringer, and
warm it, and wet Linen Clothes in it, and apply it warm to the grieved place,
warming your Clothes one after another, as they grow cold that are on.

87. Dr. Stephen's Sovereign Water.
Take a Gallon of good Gascoign Wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Cancel,
Nutmeg, Grains, Cloves, Anni-seeds, Carraway-seeds, of each a dram; then take
Sage, Mints, red Roses, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme, Camomile,
Lavender, of each a handful, then bray both Spices and Herbs, and put them all
into the Wine, and let them stand for twelve hours diverse times stirring them,
then distill in an Alimbeck, but keep that which you distill first by it self,
for that is the best, but the other is good also, but not so good as the first.
This water comfort the Vital Spirits, and helps inward Diseases which come
from cold; it helps Conception in Women that are barren, and kills Worms in
the body, it cures the old Cough, and helps the Toothache, it comfort the
Stomach, and cures a stinking breath, it preserves the body in good liking,
and makes them look young.

88. The Water called Aqua Mirabilis and Pretiosa, made by Dr. Willoughby.
Take of Galingales, Cloves, Mace, Cucubes, Ginger, Cardamum, Nutmegs,
Mellilot, Saffron, four ounces, and beat all these into powder, Agrimony-water
the quantity of a dram; and somewhat more; then take of the juice of Celandine
half a pint, and mingle all these together with a pint of good Aqua-Vitae, and
three pints of good White Wind; put all these together in a still of Glass, and
let it stand so all Night, and on the Morrow distill it with an easy fire as
may be. This water dissolveth the swelling of the Lungs without any Grievance,
and helps and comfort them being wounded, and suffers not the blood to
putrify; he shall never need to be let blood that uses this water, it suffers
not the Heat to burn, nor Melancholy, nor Rheum to have Dominion above Nature;
it also expels Rheum, and purifieth the Stomach.

89. To make Allom-water.
Take a pound of Allom, and beat it to powder, then take a Gallon of clean
water, and set it on the fire, letting it boil till all the Allom be melted,
then take it off the fire, and when it is cold, put it into a Glass, and keep
it for use.

90. To make an excellent Electuary called the Electuary of Life.
Take Scorlegio, Morre, Gentiana, Grandoret, and Jalaom, of each a like
quanity, stamp them and strain them, and mingle them with Honey that has been
well boiled on the fire, and scummed clean: This is excellent for sickness in
the Stomach, or pain in the Belly, Heart or Head, or for those that are bitten
with any venomous beast, or poisoned; it must be taken in water three or four
spoonfuls at a time in the Morning fasting; if the Disease be of any long time
standing, he must drink it fifteen days, together, and he will be whole.
Probatum.

91. Against heat of the Liver.
Take Fennel, Endive, Succory, Plantain, of each alike, distill them with red
Wine and Milk, and use it every Morning, nine spoonfuls at a time, with a
draught of Wine and Sugar, or else five spoonfuls thereof alone,

92. For Swooning fits.
For swooning, and weakness of the heart in Fever and Sickness, or if it come
from other cause, stamp Mints with Vinegar, and a little Wine, if the Patient
have no Fever, then toast a bit of bread till it be almost burnt, and put it
therein till it be well soaked, then put it in the Nose of the Patient, and rub
his Lips, Tongue, Gums, Teeth and Temples, and let him chew and suck the
moistness thereof and swallow it.

93. A Water for the Eyes, to make a man see in forty days, who has been blind
seven Years before, if he be under fifty Years of Age.
Take Smalledge, Fennel, Rue, Betony, Vervain, Agrimony, Cinquefoil, Pimpernel,
Eyebright, Celandine, Sage, of each a quartern, wash them clean, and stamp
them, do them in a fair mashing-pan, put thereto a quart of good White Wind and
the powder of thirty Pepper-corns, six spoonfuls of live honey, and ten
spoonfuls of the Urine of a Man child that is wholesome, mingle them well
together, and boil them till half be wasted, then take it down and strain it,
and afterward Clarify it, and put it into a glass Vessel well stopped, and put
thereof with a Feather into the eyes of the blind, and let the patient use this
Medicine at Night when he goes to bed, and within forty days he shall see: It
is good for all manner of sore eyes. Wild Tansie-water is good for the
Eyesight, and eating of Fennel seed is good for the same.

94. For a Web in the Eye.
The Leaves of white-Honey-Suckles-and Ground Ivy, of each a like quantity
ground together, and put every day into the Eye, cures the Web. Or else salt
burnt in a Flaxen cloth, and tempered with Honey, and with a Feather anointed
on the Eyelids, kills worms that annoy the Eyelids.

95. For the moist Scabs after the Smallpox.
Take Lapis Calaminaris, Litharge of Gold and Silver, of each two drams,
Brimstone and Ceruse two ounces, bring all these into a fine powder, and then
beat them in a Mortar with so much Barrows-grease as is sufficient to make it
up in an Ointment, and anoint the places therewith Evening and Morning.

96. To bring down the Flowers.
Take of Alligant Muskadine, or Claret a pint, burn it, and sweeten it well
with Sugar, put thereto two spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl; then take a good Bead of
Amber in powder in a spoon, with some of the Wine after it. Take this Evening
and morning.

97. To stay the Flowers.
Take Amber, Coral, Pearl, Jet of each alike, grind them to fine powder, and
searse them, take thereof as much as will lie upon a 6 pence with conserve of
Quinces, and drink a draught of new milk after it: Use this every morning.

98. To cure Corns.
Take beans, and chew them in your mouth, and tie fast to your Corn, and it
will help; Do this at Night.

99. To make Oil of Roses.
Take red Rose-leaves a good quantity, and stamp in a mortar, and put thereto
Oyl-Olive, and let it stand in the Sun twelve days, and then put it in a Glass,
and bind the Glass fast about with Ropes of Hay and set it in a panfull of
water, and let it boil softly two hours, and then let it cool, then put it in
small Glasses, and put thereto the leaves of red Roses all whole, and stop it
fast, and set it in the Sun for sixteen days, and so use it at your need.

100. For any Itch, or breaking out.
Take Frankincense, and beat it small in a Mortar, and mingle it with Oil of
Pays, and therewith anoint all over, and it will destroy the Itch.

101. For the Piles after Childbirth
Make a Bath of Wormwood, Southern-wood, Cinamon-Rinde; and the bark of Cassia
Fistula boiled well in Wine; when the woman delivered goes forth of the Bath,
put Bombace, or Cotton with powder of Aloes mixed with Oil of Pennyroyal, unto
her lower parts.

102. For a Stitch in the side.
Take three handfuls of Mallows, boil them in a little raw Milk, and put
thereto a handful of wheat-bran, and let them boil together, and then wring out
the Milk, and lay it hot to the Stitch, apply it often. Or take a few leaves of
Rue and Yarrow, stamp them together, and wring out the Juice and drink it with
a little Ale.

103. For a Tertian, or double Tertian Ague.
Take a good quantity of Celandine, a spoonful of salt, and the bigness of an
Egg in Leven, and as much Alligant and Spanish Soap, stamp them well in a
Mortar, and make a Plaster of them, and apply them to the Patients feet one
hour before the coming of the fit, add thereto four or five yolks of Eggs: Or
take of Anniseed-water the best you can get, half a pound of Oil of Vitriol,
shake them well together, and drink one or two spoonfuls thereof an hour before
the fit comes.

104. For the Spleen.
Boil the Rindes and Keys of an Ash-Tree very tender in White Wind, and drink a
good draught thereof for six or seven Mornings together, and it will much ease
the Patient, when you drink this, anoint the Spleen with Vnguentum Dialtheae
every Morning and Evening, applying also a plaster of Mellelot to the place.

105. An excellent Powder for the Green Sickness.
Take 4 scruples of gentian made into fine powder, of raspt Ivory, and
Hartshorn, of each two scruples, make these into fine powder, and give a
spoonful hereof with White Wind or the like at once.

106. A Drink that heals all Wounds, without any Plaster or Ointment, or
without any Taint most perfectly.
Take sanicle, Milfoil, and Bugle, of each a like quantity, stamp them in a
Mortar, and temper them with Wine, and give the sick that is wounded to drink
twice or thrice a day till he be whole; Bugle holds open the wound, Milfoil
cleanses the wound, fanicle health it; but sanicle may not be given to him
that is hurt in the head, or in the Brain-pan, for it is dangerous. This is a
good and tried Medicine.

167. For Pricking of a Thorn.
Take of Violet-Leaves one handful, stamp them together, and take a quantity of
Boars greafe, and of Wheat-bran one handful, set it on the fire in clean water,
and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Grief.

108. To make Oil of St. John's Wort, good for any Ach or Pain.
Take a quart of sallet-Oyl, and put thereto a quart of Flowers of St.
John's-wort well picked, let them lie therein all the summer, till the seeds of
the herb be ripe, the Glass must be kept warm, either in the sun, or the water
all the summer, till the seeds be ripe, then put in a quarter of St.
John's-wort-seeds whole, and so let it stand twelve hours, the glass being kept
open, then you must boil the oil 8 hours, the water in the Pot full as high as
the Oil in the Glass; when it is cold strain it, that the seed remain not in
it, and so keep it for your use.

109. For the Tissick.
Take two ounces of Licorice scraped and bruised, of figs three ounces, of
Agrimony, Hore-hound, Enula Campana, of each a handful, boil them all together
in a Gallon of water, till half be wasted, then strain the herbs from the
juice, and use it early and late. Also for the dry Tissick, stamp Fennel-Roots,
and drink the juice thereof with White Wind.

110. To make Oil of Fennel.
Put a quantity of Fennel between two Tile-stones, or plates of Iron, make them
very hot and press out the Liquor; and this Oil will keep a great while, for it
is good for the Tissick, dry Scab, Burning, and Scalding.

111. To make the Black Plaster for all manner of Griefs.
Take a quantity of Oyl-Olive, a quantity of Red Lead, boil these together, and
stir them with a slice of wood continually till it be black, and somewhat
thick; then take it off the fire, and put in it a pennyworth of red wax, and a
pound of Rosin, and set it to the fire again, but do not blaze it, and stir it,
then take it off and let it stand till it be cold, and make it in a lump: It is
good for a new Wound, or to stanch blood, pour a little of it into a dish, and
if it stick fast to the Dishes side, then it is enough, keep it for your use as
need requires.

FINIS.
Beautifying Waters, Oils, Ointments, and Powders, to Adorn and add Loveliness
to the Face and Body.
1. To make the Hair very Fair.
VVAsh your Hair very clean, and then take some Allom-water warm, and with a
Sponge moisten your Hair therewith, and it will make it fair. Or you may make a
Decoction of Turmerick, Rubarb, or the Bark of the Barbary-Tree, and so it will
receive a most fair and beautiful Color.

2. Another.
Take the last water that is drawn from Honey and wash your head therewith, and
it will make the Hair of an excellent fair Color, but because it is of a
strong smell, you must perfume it with some sweet spirit.

3. To make the Hair grow thick.
Make a strong Lie, then take a good quantity of Hyssop-Roots, and burn them to
Ashes, and mingle the Ashes and the Lie together, and therewith wash your head,
and it will make the Hair grow also the Ashes of Froggs burnt do increase Hair,
as also the Ashes of Goats-dung mingled with Oil.

4. To make the Hair grow.
Take Marshmallows, and boil them, Roots and all, and wash the head therewith,
and it will grow in a short time; also take a good quantity of Bees, and dry
them in a sieve by the fire, and make powder of them, and temper it with Oil
Olive, and anoint the place where the Hair should grow; also take the Oil of
Tartar, and warm it, and anoint any bald Head therewith, and it will restore
the Hair again in a short time.

5. To make the Hair fair.
Take the Ashes of a Vine burnt, of the knots of Barley-straw, and Licorice,
and Sow-bread, and distill them together in fair water, and wash the Head with
it; also sprinkle the Hair while it is Combing with the Powder of Cloves,
Roses, Nutmegs, Cardamum, and Galingale, with Rose Water; also the Head being
often washed with the Decoction of Beech-Nut-Trees, the Hair will become fair.

6. To make the Hair grow.
Take Hasle-Nuts with husks and all, and burn them to powder, then take
Beech-mast, and the leaves of Enula Campana, and stamp the Herb and the Mast
together, then seethe them together with honey and anoint the place therewith,
and strew the Powder thereon, and this will make the Hair grow.

7. To take away Hair.
Take the juice of Fumitory, mix it with Gum Arabic, then lay it on the place,
the Hairs first plucked out by the Roots, and it will never permit any more
Hair to grow on the place; Also anoint your Head with the juice of a Gloworm
stamped, and it has the same Virtue.

8. For the Falling of Hair.
Take the Ashes of Pigeons-dung in Lie, and wash the Head therewith, also
Walnut-leaves beaten with Bears-suet, restores the Hair that is plucked away.
Also the Leaves and middle Rind of an Oak sodden in water, and the head washed
therewith is very good for this purpose.

9. To make the Face fair.
Take the flower of Beans and Distill them, and wash the face with the water;
some say, that the Urine of the party is very good to wash the face withal, to
make it fair.

10. For cleansing the face and skin.
If the face be washed with the water that Rice is sodden in, it cleanses the
face, and takes away Pimples.

11. A Water to adorn the Face.
Take Eggs cut in pieces, Orange-peels, the roots of Melons, each as much as is
sufficient, in a large Vessel with a long neck, distill by an Alembick, with a
strong and careful fire.

12. To Beautify the face.
Take of Cuckow-pintle a pretty quantity, bruise the thick parts with
Rose Water, dry them by the Sun three or four days, then pouring more
Rose Water on it, use it.

13. To make the face look youthful.
Take two ounces of Aqua-vitae, Bean-flower-water, and Rose Water, each four
ounces, water of Water Lillies six ounces, mix them all, and add to them one
dram of the whitest Tragacanth, set it in the Sun six days, then strain it
through a fine linnen-Cloath, wash your face with it in the Morning, and do not
wipe it off.

14. A Water to take away Wrinkles in the face.
Take of the Decoction of Briony and Figgs, each a like quantity, and wash the
face with it.

15. An excellent water called Lac Virginis or Virgins Milk, to make the face,
Neck, or any part of the body fair and white.
Take of Alumen Plumosi half an ounce, of Camphire one ounce, of Roch-Allom one
ounce and a Dram, Sal Gemmi half an ounce, of white Frankincense two ounces,
Oil of Tartar one ounce and a half, make all these into most fine Powder, and
mix it with one quart of Rosewater, then set it in the Sun, and let it stand
nine days, often stirring it, then take litharge of Silver half a pound, beat
it fine, and searse it, then boil it with one pint of White Wind Vinegar till
one third be consumed, ever stirring it with a stick while it boyleth, then
distill it by a Philter, or let it run through a Jelly-bag, then keep it in a
Glass-Vial, and when you will use those waters, take a drop of the one, and a
drop of the other in your hand, and it will be like Milk, which is called Lac
Virginis; wash your face, or any part of your body therewith, it is most
precious for the same.

16. To take away Sun-burn.
Take the juice of a Lemmon, and a little bay salt, and wash your Face or hands
with it, and let them dry of themselves, and wash them again, and you shall
find all the Sun-burn gone.

17. To make the face very fair.
Boil the flowers of Rosemary in White Wind with the which wash your face? also
if you drink thereof, it will make you have a sweet breath. Also to make the
face white, make Powder of the Root of Serpentine and of Powder of Sepia, and
mingle them with Rosewater, and let it dry and then let it be put to the same
water again, and dry again; do this four or five times, and then use to anoint
the face therewith.

13. To clear the Skin and make it white.
Take fresh Boars grease, and the white of an Egg, and stamp them together with
a little powder of bays, and therewith anoint the Skin, and it will clear the
Visage, and make it white.

16. To take away freckles in the face.
Anoint your Face with Oil of Almonds, and drink Plantain water, or anoint your
Visage well and often with hares blood.

20. To smooth the Skin.
Mix Capons grease with a quantity of Sugar, and let it stand for a few days
close covered, and it will turn to a clear Oil, with which anoint your Face.

21. To blanch the Face.
Take the pulp of Lemons, and take out the Kernels, and put to them a quantity
of fine Sugar, Distill these, and keep the water to wash your Face every Night.

22. For Morphew, or Scurf of the Face or Skin.
Take of Brimstone beaten into powder two Ounces, mix it with as much black
Soap that stinketh and tie the same in linen cloth, and let it hang in a pint
of strong Wine-Vinegar, or Red-Rose-Vinegar, for the space of eight or nine
days; and therewith wash any kind of Scurf or Morphew, either in Face or Body,
dipping a Cloth in the Vinegar, and rubbing it therewith, and let it dry of it
self. Also drink the water of Strawberries distilled, or Tincture of
Strawberries, it certainly kills Morphew or scurf.

23. For taking away Spots in the face, after the Small-Fox.
Mix the juice of Lemons with a little Bay Salt and touch the Spots therewith
oftentimes in a day, for it is excellent good.

24 A good Ointment for the same.
Take Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of white Lillies, of either one ounce; Capons
grease, Goats Tallow of each four drams, Litharge of Gold one dram and half,
Roots of Briony and of Ireos, of either one scruple, Sugar Candy white one
dram, make Powder of all those that may be brought into powder, and searse
them, then put them all in a Mortar together, beat them together, and in the
working put thereto Roses, Bean-flower, and white Lilly-water, of each a good
spoonful, put in by little and little, and so work them together till they
become an Ointment; anoint your face, and hands with it every Evening, and in
the Morning wash it away in water boiled with Barley, Wheaten-bran and with the
seed of Mallows.

25. To take away the holes or Pits in the Face by reason of the Smallpox.
For helping of this Accident I have tried many things, and the best means I
have found, is to wash the Face one day with the distilled water of strong
Vinegar, and the next day with the water wherein Bran and Mallows have been
boiled, and continue this twenty days or a Month together.

26. For the Redness of the Hands or Face after the Smallpox.
Take Barley, Beans, Lupines, of each one handful, bruise them all in a Mortar
grossly, and boil them in three pints of water till it grow thick like a Jelly,
then strain it, and anoint the Face and hands 3 or 4 times a day, for three or
four days together, and then wet the Face and hands as often with this water
following.

27. Another.
Take Vine-leaves two handfuls, Bean-flower, dragon, Wild Tansie, of either one
handful, Camphire three drams, two Calves Feet, the pulp of three Lemons, a
pint of raw Cream, shred the Herbs small, as also the Lemons, and break, and
cut the Calves Feet small; then mix them together, and distill it in a Glass
still, and use it. Also the water of May-dew is excellent good for any high
Color, or redness in the Face.

28. For Pimples in the Face.
Wash your Face with warm water when you go to bed, and let it dry in; then
take the white of an Egg and put it into a Saucer, and set it upon a
Chafing Dish of Coals, and put it into a piece of Allom; beat it together with
a spoon till it become thick, then make a round Ball, and therewith anoint the
Face where the Pimples are.

29. For Heat and swelling in the Face.
Boil the leaves or blossoms of rosemary, either in White Wind, or fair water,
and use to wash thy hands and face therewith, and it will preserve thee from
all such inconveniences, and also make both thy face and hands very smooth.

30. For a Red Face.
Take Brimstone that is whole, and cinnamon, of either of them an even
proportion by weight, beat them into small powder, and searse it through a fine
cloth upon a sheet of white paper to the quantity of an ounce or more, and so
by even proportions in weight, mingle them together in clean clarified Capons
grease, and temper them well together till they be well mollified, and put to
it a little Camphire to the quantity of a Bean, and so put the whole Confection
in a Glass and use it.

31. To take away Pimples.
Take Wheat Flour mingled with Honey, and Vinegar and lay it upon them.

32. An Excellent Ointment for an inflamed Face.
Take an Ounce of the Oil of Bays, and an Ounce of Quicksilver, and put them
in a bladder together with a spoonful of fasting spittle, and then rub them
well together, that none of the Quicksilver be seen, take of this Ointment
when it is made, and anoint the face therewith, and it will heal it well and
fair. Proved true.

33. For a rich Face.
Take three yolks of Eggs raw, as much in quantity of fresh butter, or Capons
grease without salt, camphire two pennyworth Red-Rose-water half a pint, two
Grains of Civet, and boil all these together in a Dish, then strain them
through a clean Cloth, and set it to cool, and take the uppermost, and use it.

34. To make the Skin white and clear.
Boil two ounces of French Barley in three pints of Conduit-water, change the
water, and put in the barley again; and do this till your barley do not
discolor the Water, then boil the last three pints to a quart, then mix half a
pint of White Wind therein, and when it is cold, wring the juice of two or
three good Lemons therein, and use it for the Morphew, heat of the face, and to
clear the skin.

35. An Excellent Pomatum to clear the Skin.
Wash Barrows grease or Lard often times in May-dew that has been clarified in
the Sun till it be exceeding white; then take Marsh-Mallow-Roots. scraping of
the outsides, make thin slices of them, and mix them, set them to macerate in
a Balneo, and scum it well till it be clarified, and will come to rope, then
strain it, and put now and then a spoonful of May-dew therein, beating it till
it be through cold in often change of May-dew, then throw away that dew, and
put it in a Glass, covering it with May-dew, and so keep it for your use.

36. To take away Spots and Freckles from the Face and Hands.
The Sap that issues out of a Birch-Tree in great abundance, being opened in
March or April and a glass Receiver set under it to receive it: This cleanses
the Skin excellently, and makes it very clear, being washed therewith. This
Sap will dissolve Pearl, a Secret not known to many.

37. To take away Freckles and Morphew.
Wash your Face in the wane of the Moon with a Sponge; Morning and Evening with
the distilled water of Elder-Leaves, letting it dry in the skin; you must
Distill your Water in May, This I had from a Traveller, who has cured himself
thereby.

38. To make the Teeth white and Sound.
Take a quart of Honey, and as much Vinegar, and half so much White Wind, boil
them together, and wash your Teeth therewith now and then.

39. A Dentifrice to whiten the Teeth.
Take of Hartshorn and horses Teeth, of each 2 ounces, Sea-shells, common
Salt, Cypress-Nuts, each one ounce, burn them together in an Oven, and make a
powder, and work it up with the Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, and rub the Teeth
therewith.

40. To make the Teeth as white as Ivory.
Take Rosemary, Sage, and a little Allom and Honey, and boil them together in
fair Running-water, and when it is well boiled strain out the fair water, and
keep it in a Glass, and use it sometimes to wash your Mouth and Teeth
therewith, and it will make them clean: Also wash your Teeth with the Decoction
of Lady Thistle-Root, and it will cleanse and fasten the Teeth and the sore
Gums made whole: also the Root of Hore-hound drunk or chewed Fasting, does
quickly heal the Gums, and makes the Teeth clean; Strawberry-leaves also
cleanses the Teeth and gums, a sure and tried Experiment.

41. To make the Teeth white.
Take one drop of the Oil of Vitriol, and wet the Teeth with it, and rub them
afterward, with a course Cloth; although this medicine be strong, fear it not.

42. For a stinking Breath.
Take two handfuls of Cummin, and stamp it to powder, and boil it in Wine, and
drink the Syrup thereof Morning and Evening for fifteen days, and it well help.
Proved.

43. To make Breath sweet.
Wash your Mouth with the water that the shells of Citrons have been boiled in,
and you will have a sweet breath.

44. To Sweeten the breath.
Take Butter and the juice of Featherfew, and temper them with Honey, and take
every day a spoonful. Also these things sweeten the Breath, the Electuary of
Aromaticks, and the Peel of Citrons.

45. To cleanse the Mouth.
It is good to cleanse the Mouth every Morning by rubbing the Teeth with a
Sage-leaf, Citron-peels or with powder made with Cloves and Nutmegs; forbear
all Meats of ill digestion, and raw fruits.

46. For Running in the Ears.
Take the juice of Elder, and drop it into the Ear of the Party grieved, and it
cleanses the matter and the Filth thereof, also the juice of Violets used, is
very good for the Running of the ears.

47. For Eyes that are blood-shoot.
Take the Roots of red Fennel, stamp them, and wring out the juice, then temper
it with Clarified honey, and make an Ointment thereof, and anoint the Eyes
therewith, and it will take away the Redness.

48. To make the Hands white.
Take the Flower of Beans, of Lupines, of starch-Corn, Rice, Orice, of each six
ounces, mix them and make a powder, with which wash your hands in water.

49. A delicate washing-ball.
Take three ounces of Orice, half an ounce of Cypress, two ounces of Calamus
Aromaticus, one ounce of Rose-leaves, two ounces of Lavender flowers; beat all
these together in a Mortar, searsing them through a fine searse, then scrape
some Castle-soap, and dissolve it in rose water, mix your powders therewith and
beat them in a Mortar, then make them up in balls.

50. For the Lips chopped.
Rub them with the Sweat behind yours Ears, and this will make them smooth and
well colored.

51. To prevent marks of the Small Pox.
Boil Cream to an Oil, and with that anoint the whales with a Feather as soon
as they begin to dry, and keep the Scabs always moist therewith; let your Face
be anointed almost every half hour.

52. To take away Child-Blains in the hands or feet.
Boil half a peck of Oats in a quart of water till it grow dry, then anoint
your Hands with Pomatum, and after they are well Chafed, hold them within the
Oats as hot as you can endure them, covering the Bowl wherein you do your hands
with a double cloth to keep in the steam of the Oats, do this three or 4
times, and it will do: You may boil the same Oats with fresh water 3 or 4 times.

53. To take away Pock holes, or any Spots in the Face.
Wet a Cloth in White-Rose-water, and set it all Night to freeze in the
winter, then lay it upon your Face till it be dry, also take two or three
poppies, the reddest you can get, and quarter them, taking out the Kernel, then
distill them in a quart of red Cows-Milk, and with the water thereof wash your
Face.

54. An excellent Beauty Water, used by the D. of C.
Take of white Tartar two drams, Camphire one dram, Coperas half a dram, the
whites of three or four Eggs, the juice of a couple of Lemons, Oil of Tartar
four ounces, and as much Plantain-water, white Mercury a pennyworth, two
ounces of bitter Almonds; beat all these to powder, and mix them with the Oil
and some water, and then boil it upon a gentle fire, strain it, and so keep it;
when you use it, you must first rub your Face with a Scarlet cloth, and at
Night wash your Face with it, and in the Morning wash it off with Bran and
White Wind.

55. Against a stinking breath.
Take a handful of Wood-bine, and as much Plantain, bruise them very well, then
take a pint of Eye-salt, and as much water, with a little Honey and Allom; keep
all these waters together in a Glass, and wash your Mouth well therewith, and
hold it in your Mouth, and it will destroy all Cankers, and cure a stinking
breath, and preserve the Teeth from rottenness.

56. To procure an Excellent Color and Complexion to the Face used by the C.
of S.
Take the juice of Hyssop, and drink it in a Morning Fasting, half a dozen
spoonfuls; in Ale warm, it will procure an Excellent Color, is good for the
Eyesight, destroys Worms, and is good for the stomach, Liver, and Lungs.

57. To keep the Teeth white, and kill Worms.
Take a little Salt in a Morning fasting, and hold it under your Tongue till it
be melted, and then rub your Teeth with it.

58. To procure Beauty, an Excellent Wash.
Take four ounces of Sublimate, and one ounce of Crude-Mercury, and beat them
together exceeding well in a wooden Mortar, and wooden Pestle; you must do it
at least six or eight hours, then with often change of cold water, take away
the salts from the sublimate, change your water twice every day at least, and
in seven or eight days it will be dulcified, and then it is prepared; lay it on
with Oil of white Poppy.

59. A beauty-water for the Face, by madam G.
Take Lie that is not too strong, and put two peels of Oranges, and as much
Citron-peel, Blossoms of Cammomile, Bay Leaves, and Maidenhair; of each a
handful, of Agrimony two or three ounces; of barley-straw chopped in pieces a
handful, as much Fenu-greek, a pint of Vine-leaves, two or three handfuls of
Broom-blossoms; put all these into the Lie, and mingle them together, and so
wash the Head therewith, put to it a little Cinnamon and Myrrh, let it stand,
and wash your Face therewith every evening. It is good to wash the Head, and to
comfort the Brain and Memory.

60. Against stink of the Nostrils.
Take Cloves, Ginger, and Calamint, of each a like quantity, boil them in
White Wind, and therewith wash the Nose within; then put the powder of Piritrum
to provoke one to sneeze. If there be phlegm in the head, you must first purge
the Head with Pills of Colchie, or of Hiera picra: Or if the stink of the Nose
come from the Stomach, Purge first.

61. To make the Hands white.
To make the Hands white and soft, take Daffodil in clean water till it grow
thick, and put thereto powder of Cantarium, and stir them together, then put
thereto raw Eggs, and stir them well together, and with this ointment anoint
your hands, and within three or four days using thereof, they will be white and
clear.

62. A sweet water for the Hands.
Take of the Oil of Cloves, Mace or Nutmegs, three or four drops only, and
mingle it with a pint of fair water, stirring them a pretty while together in a
glass having a narrow mouth, till they are well mingled together, and wash your
hands therewith, and it will be very sweet water, and will cleanse and whiten
the hands very much.

63. For Heat and Worms in the Hands.
Bruise a little Chick-weed, and boil it in Running water; till half be wasted
away, and wash your hands in it as hot as you can suffer it, for the space of
six days, and it will drive away the Heat or Worms in the Hands.

94. To make the Nails grow.
Take wheat flour and mingle it with Honey, and lay it to the Nails, and it
will help them.

65. For Nails that fall of.
Take powder of Agrimony, and lay it on the place where the Nail was, and it
will take away the aching, and make the Nails grow.

66. For cloven Nails.
Mingle Turpentine and Wax together, and lay it on the Nail, and as it grows
cut it away, and it will heal.

67. For Nails that are rent from the flesp.
Take some Violets and stamp them, and fry them with Virgins wax and
Frankincense, and make a plaster, and lay it to the Nail, and it will be whole.

68 Another.
Anoint your fingers with the powder of brimstone, Arsnick, and Vinegar, and in
a short time you shall find great ease.

69. For Stench under the Arm-holes.
First pluck away the Hairs of the Arm-holes, and wash them with White Wind and
Rose Water, wherein you have first boiled Cassia Lignum, and use it three or
four times.

70. For the Yellow Jaundies.
Take the juice of Wormwood, and Sorrel, or else make them in Syrup, and use to
drink it in the Morning.

71. To take away Warts from the Hands or Face.
Take Purslain, and rub it on the Warts, and it makes them fall away; also the
juice of the Roots of Rushes applied heals them.

72. To smooth the Skin, and take away Morphew and freckles.
Anoint the Face with the blood of a Hare or Bull, and this will take away
Morphew, and Freckles, and smooth the Skin.

A Supplement of some Rare Beautifying Waters, Oils, Ointments, and Powders.
1. A Beauty Water.
TAke of Bean-flowers six handfuls, Lemon-water one pint, Lilly-Roots eight
ounces, Bean flower a pound, Gum-Arabick and Tragacanth of each one ounce,
distill all these together, and wash the face therewith.

2. Another by an Approved Author.
Take of distilled Turpentine 2 pound, Frankincense three ounces, Mastick,
Dragons-blood of each half an ounce, powder them, and mix them with
Turpentine-water, and distill them again, then take of fresh Hogs grease melted,
one pound, Cloves 2 Drams, three Nutmegs, Gold one dram, Silver two drams,
powder them finely and distill them in an Alembick.

3. To take away Freckles and Scars in the Face.
Take of Aqua vitae four times Distilled three parts, the tops of Rosemary
flowers two parts, steep them together a day and a night in a Vessel well
stopped, then Distill them.

4. To make the Face fresh and Ruddy.
Use the shavings of Brazeel-Wood dissolved in Rose Water with a little
Camphire added thereto, and you will find it very effectual to make a good
Color and Complexion.

5. To make the Face youthful.
Take two Calves-feet, River-water nine quarts, boil them till one half be
wasted, then add one pound of Rice, the crumb of a penny Loaf softened in Milk,
fresh Butter, whites of Eggs with their shells, mix them all, and boil them,
and Distill all the water from them, to which add at last Camphire and Sugar,
each a little, and it will be excellent.

6. A Water to whiten the Skin, and take away Sun-burn.
Take of Rain water, the juice of ^unripe Gripes, each a like quantity, boil
them together till one half be consumed, then whilst it boyls, add so much
juice of Lemons as was boiled away before, when it is boiled then take it off,
and add four whites of Eggs after it is cold, and keep it for your use.

7. To clear the face and Skin.
Take of Lilly-roots roasted under the Ashes one pound, bruise them in a
Mortar, to which add Sugar Candy three ounces, make an Ointment to apply to the
face.

8. To take away Ring-worms in the face.
Take of Vinegar, of Squills two ounces, Aloes, the juice of sour Dock, Oil of
Tarter, of each 3 Drams, make a Liniment.

9. For Beautifying the Face, an approved Ointment.
Take of Citron Ointment fresh made three ounces, sweet Almonds very well
bruised, flower of beans of each one dram, the bone of the fish Sepia,
Hartshorn; Barley-flower, each 2 drams, incorporate them all with Honey.

10. Another Excellent Beautifyer.
Take of Pomatum two ounces, Citron Ointment four ounces, mix and anoint the
Face therewith Night and Morning, and afterward wash your face with
Bean-flower-water.

11. An Ointment to illustrate the Face.
Take the Oil of the Marrow of a Heart two ounces, Oil of Goard-Seeds one ounce,
Goats fat, washed Turpentine, each half an ounce, new wax three drams, melt them
by the fire, then add Mastick, Borax burnt, each two drams, mix them, and make
an Unguent, with which anoint the face at night, and in the morning wash it off
with bran-water.

12. To curl the Hair.
Take a quantity of Pine Kernels burnt and beat to powder, mix them with Oil of
Myrtles, make an Ointment therewith, and anoint the Head.

13. To make the Hair black.
Take the juice of red Poppy, the juice of green Nuts, Oil of Myrtles, Oil of
Costomary, each one part, boil it a while, and anoint the Hair therewith.

14. An excellent Beautifyer for the face used by the Venetian Ladies.
Take of burnt Tartar half a pound, powder it and dry it as they do Salt, then
take that Salt, and put it within the whites of Eggs boiled.

15. To cure a red Face.
Take four ounces of Peach Kernels, Goard-seed two ounces, bruise them, and
make an Oil to anoint the face Morning and Evening.

16. To increase the Hair.
Take the Seeds of Marshmallows a sufficient quantity, boil them in common
Oil, with which anoint the Hair. Also the Oil of Earthworms does increase the
Hair.

17. To make the Breasts small.
Take of Roch-Allom powdered, and Oil of Roses of each a like quantity, mix
them together and anoint the breasts therewith.

18. To take away the Wrinkles of the Face.
Take Oil of Turky-millet, and the decoction of the Berry of the same, and it
will distend, mollify, and consolidate Wrinkles, also Oil of Nuts is very good
for the same.

19. To cleanse the Body and make it comely.
Take of Sage, Lavender-flowers, Rose-flowers, each two handfuls, a little
Salt, boil them in water or in Lie, and make a Bath not too hot, in which bathe
the body two hours before meat.

26. A sweet scented Bathe for Ladies.
Take of Roses, Citron-peels, Citron-flowers, Orange-flowers, Jasmine, Bays,
Rosemary, Lavender, Mint, Pennyroyal, each a sufficient quantity, boil them
together gently, and make a Bath, to which add Oil of Spike six drops, Musk
five Grains, Amber-grease three grains, sweet Asa one ounce, let her go into
the Bath two hours before Meat.

21. To make the Body fat and comely.
Take of Milk and Spring Water each one pint, boil them together till the water
be consumed, then add Sugar of Penedies, fresh Butter each one ounce, oil of
sweet Almonds newly drawn half an ounce, give them one boiling more, and so let
it be taken betimes in a Morning fasting, and sleep upon it.

FINIS.
depiction of lady and gentleman fishing

New and Excellent Experiments and Secrets in the Art of Angling. Being
directions for the whole Art.
To make the Lines.
TAke Care that your Hair be round, and free from Galls, Scabs, or Frets, for a
well chosen, even, clear, round Hair, of a kind of a glass-colour, will prove
as strong as three uneven scabby Hairs, that are ill chose.

Let your Hair be clean washed before you go about to twist it, and then not
only choose the clearest Hair, but Hairs that are all of an equal bigness for
such do usually stretch all together, and not break singly one by one, but
altogether.

When you have twisted your Links, lay them in water for a quarter of an hour
at the least, and then twist them over again before you tie them into a Line,
for those that do not so, shall usually find their links to have a Hair or two
shrunk, and be shorter than all the rest, at the first fishing with it, which
is so much of the strength of the Line lost, for want of wetting it at first,
and then re-twisting it, and this is most visible in a seven Hair Line, which
has always a black hair in the middle, called by Anglers, the Herring bone:
Those Hairs that are taken from an Iron-gray, or a Sorrel Stone-Horse, and the
middle of the tail are best.

A Cement for Floats to fish withal.
Take black Rozin beaten, Chalk scraped, Beeswax bruised, of each a like
quantity; melt all these over a gentle small coal fire in an earthen Vessel
well leaded, and so warming the two quills, fix them with a little of it; it
cools immediately, and being cold, is so hard, strong and tite, that you can
hardly pull the two Quills asunder with both your hands, without breaking them
in pieces.

To sight your Caps for the float aright.
Let the uppermost be at the distance from the top of the quill, and the lower
Cap near to the end of the quill, as in the description of it.

To dye Bones or Quills red for ever.
Take some Urine, and put into it as much Powder of Brazil as will make it very
red, which you shall know by dropping some with a Feather upon a piece of white
Paper, and put therein bones or Quills, being first well scraped, and laid a
while in a water made of Argol, and let them lie in it ten or twelve days, then
take them out, and hang them up till they are dry, and rub them with a dry
Linen Cloth; and they will be of a transparent Color.

Observations.
A Pike is called. The first Year a Shotterel. The second, a Pickerel. The
third Year, a Pike. The fourth Year, a Luce.


Fish are fattest about August.

All Fish are in season a Month or six Weeks after they have spawned.

To cleanse Worms.
Take a piece of a Hop-sack (because that is not so close struck in the Weaving
as other Cloth is) and wash it clean, and let it dry, then take some of the
Liquor wherein a piece of fresh Beef has been boiled, but be sure you take not
the Liquor of Salt Beef, for that will kill all the worms, dip the piece of
Hop-sack in the Liquor, and wring it out, but not hard, so that some of the
Liquor abide in the Cloth; put the worms into this Cloth, and lay them in an
earthen Pot, the Worms will run in and out through the Cloth, and scour
themselves; let them stand from Morning to Night, then take out the Worms from
the Cloth, and wash the Cloth as before, but not dry it, and wet it again in
some of the Liquor; thus do once a day, and thus you will not only preserve
your worms alive for three Weeks, or a Month, but also make them red and tough.
Probatum.

The Secrets of J. D.
Would thou catch Fish?
Then here is thy wish;
Take this Receipt
TO anoint thy Bait.
Thou that desire to fish with Line and Hook,
Be it in Pool, in River or in Brook,
To bliss thy bait, and make the fish to bite,
Lo here is a means, if thou can hit it right.
Take Gum of Life fine beat, and laid to soak
In Oil, well drawn from that That which kills the Oak, I conjecture to be Ivy,
which kills the Oak.
Fish where thou will, thou shall have sport thy fill.
When twenty fail thou shall be sure to kill. Probatum.
It Is perfect and good, if well understood;
Else not to be told, for Silver nor Gold.
To unloose the Line in the Water.
Of these there are several sorts, according to several Men's fancies; that
which I approve of as being the surest, is a forked stick about two yards long.
if it be not long enough to reach the bottom, you may lash it to any other
stick,

These fish rise best at a fly
Salmon. Trout. Vimber. Groyling. Bleak. Chevin, or Chub. Roch. Dace.
Ad Capiendum Pisces.
Recipe mucilag. vel Scholar. Fort. (Anglice white Mullen. collectae circa
medium Maii, quando Luna sit plena, distemperata cum nigro sale and serva in
olla terrea, and quando vis occupare, unge manus and lava eas in loco ubi sunt
Pisces.

A good Bait for fish all Seasons of the year.
Take Wheat Flour, and Tallow of a new slain Sheep, and the white of an Egg,
beat them all together, and make a paste therewith, and bait with it.

Roch and Dace.
From the tenth of March to the tenth of May is the spawning time for Roch and
Dace.

A Paste for Roch, Dace and Chub.
Fine Manchet, old fat Cheese of the strongest, Rusty Bacon, beat these in a
Mortar, and moisten it with a little Brandy, and color it with Turmerick or
Cambogia, or red Vermillion,

Baits.
1. Take the flesh of a Rabbit, or a Cat cut small, and Bean-flower, and for
want of that other flower; mix these together, and put to them either Sugar or
Honey (but I judge Honey the best) beat these together in a Mortar, or
sometimes work them in your hands, (being very clean) then make it into a ball,
but you must beat it so long, till it be so tough, that it will hang upon the
hook, yet not too hard neither, that you may the better dough, knead with your
Paste a little white, or yellow wool; if you would have this Paste keep all the
Year, then mix with it Virgins-Wax and Clarified Honey, and work it together
with your hands before the fire, then make it into balls, and it will keep all
the Year.

2. Another.
Take an handful or two of the best and biggest Wheat you can get, boil it in a
little Milk (as Furmety is boiled till it be soft) and then fry it very
leasurely, with Honey, and a little beaten Saffron dissolved in Milk; you will
find it a choice bait, and good I think for any Fish, especially of Roch, Dace,
Chub and Chevin.

3. Another.
The Tenderest part of the Leg of a young Rabbit, Whelp, or Catlin, as much
Virgins-wax, and Sheeps Suet: beat them in a Mortar till they are well
incorporated, then with a little Clarified Honey, temper them before the fire
into a paste.

4. Another.
Sheeps-Kidney-Suet, as much old strong Cheese, fine flower, or Manchet; beat
it into a paste, and soften it with Clarified Honey.

5. Another.
Sheeps-blood, old Cheese, fine Manchet, Clarified Honey; make all into a
paste, as before.

6. Another.
Cherries, Sheeps-blood, Saffron, fine Manchet, make all into a paste, as
before: You may add to any of these, or other pastes, Cocalus Indiae, Assa
foetida; Oil of Polypody of the Oak, the Gum of Ivy dissolved; I judge there is
virtue in these Oils, but especially in the Gum.

7. Another.
Pull off the Scale from a boiled Prawn or Shrimp, bait the Hook with it, and
it is an excellent bait for Roch, Dace, and Bleak.

8. Another.
Bean-flower, Honey, and the white of an Egg made up into a paste, is an
Excellent and long Experienced bait for small fish. Which if they once taste
of, they will never forsake till death.

9. Another.
Gentles, of which kind, the best are those that are bred upon a Cat, because
they are quickest and liveliest.

If you put some Gentles into a box, where Vermilion has been, they will live
in it two or three days, and will become of a very transparent color, and keep
so in the water when you fish with them.

When you fish in a Quick Stream, a long Quill or Float is best.

But in an Eddy or still stream, the shorter the Quill or Float is, the better.

When you fish at the well boats, or at the bankside, be there at half Ebbing
water, and fish upon those well-boats that lie nearest to the shore, till the
water falls away from them, then go to the outermost Boats.

Some of the well-boats do sheer to and again from the place where your
Ground-bait lies, to prevent which, and that you may always fish in that place
where you have cast your Ground-bait, you must have a Buoy to lie out, and then
you are sure to fish right.

10. Another.
Dry Sheeps-blood in the Air upon a dry board, till it become a pretty hard dry
lump, then cut it into small pieces for your use.

11. Another.
You shall find in the Months of June, July, and August, great quantities of
Ant-flyes, go to the Anthils, and take a great handful of Earth, with as much
of the Roots of the Grass as you can; put all into a large glass bottle, then
gather a Pottle of the blackest Ant-flyes, but take heed you bruise them not;
Roch and Dace will bite at these flies under water, near the Ground.

Directions how to make your Paste.
First, wash your hands very clean, then get some of the finest Manchet, of two
or three days old, and cut away all the crust, then lay it in water, or Milk,
which is better, let it tie no longer than till it is soaked just thorough,
then squeeze all the water very well, then knead it in your hands very well,
with a little bit of sweet butter to make it stiff, color it with Vermillion,
if you make it over night, keep it in a wet Linen Rag, all the water being
wrung out of it; in the kneading scrape a little old Cheese among it.

How to Bait with Gentles.
Put your Hook through the middle part of the Gentle, and no more, then he will
live longest; I mean through the skin and no more; but if you could get some
Oil of Ivy, that is rightly taken from the Tree in the Month of May, and cast
but two drops of it among the Gentles before you use them, you would have sport
beyond expectation.

When to drag upon the Ground, and when not.
When you fish in a quick Stream drag a Quils length, or more.

Also when the water is not clear, but of a white or clay color, and if you
put a little piece of Scarlet a little above the Hook, the fish will see the
bait the better.

Sometimes when you are at the sport the Wind arises, and makes your Float
dance upon the waves, then always observe, and watch well the motion of your
float under water, and not the top of your Float.

I saw an Angler whipping for Bleaks and Dace with a May-flie, but he put on a
Gentle upon the Hook besides, and he had excellent sport.

Carp and Tench.
Bait.
1. A Carp will take a red Worm dipped in Tarr, at the bottom.

2. Malt-flower, old Cheshire Cheese, English Honey, Eggs, temper these
together with a little water, (but I should think Milk is far better) color it
with Saffron, and put as much upon the Hooks as the bigness of a large
Hasle-Nut.

Bait the place where you intend to Fish, very well over night with Grains and
Blood: the next Morning very early fish for him with a well scoured Lob-worm;
or the Paste above mentioned.

You may dip your worm in Tar, and try what that will do.

A Carp chooses the deepest and stillest places in ponds and Rivers, and so
does the Tench, and also green weeds, which he loves exceedingly.

Late in the Evening the Ale, Grains, and Blood.
Well mixed together is Bait very good.
For Carp, Tench, Roch, and Dace to prepare,
If early in the Morn at the River you are.
Strong tackle for Carp, for Roch and Dace fine
Will help thee with fish sufficient to Dine.
For the Carp, let thy bait the knotted worm be.
The rest love the Cadis, the Paste or the fly.
Chub, Pike, and Bream.
The Pike chooses Sandy, or Clay ground in still Pools full of Fry; the Bream
loves a gentle stream, and the broadest part of the River, the Chub loves the
same ground and Spawns in May.

depiction of freshwater fish: eel, pike, bream, carp, tench, perch, barbel,
and trout Eele Pike Bream Carpe Tench Perch Barbel Trout




One who was the best trouler of Pikes in England, used always to troul with a
Hazle-Rod twelve Foot long, with a Ring or wyre in the top of this Rod for his
Line to run through, within two foot of the Rod there was a hole to put him in
a winder, to turn with a barril, to gather up his Line, and loose it at his
pleasure; this was his manner of trouling with a small Fish.

There are several other ways to take Pikes, there is a way to take a Pike,
which is called the Snap, for which Angling you must have a pretty strong Rod,
for you must Angle with a Line no longer than your Rod, which must he very
strong, that you may hold the fish to it; your Hook must be a double Hook, made
of a large wyre, and Armed with wyre one or two links long; you must bait the
Fish with the Head upwards, and the point must come forth of his side a little
above his vent.

In all your baitings for a Pike, you must enter the Needle where the point
comes forth, so draw your Arming through, until the Hook lies as you think
fit, then make it fast with a thread to the wyre, but first tie the thread
about the wyre, otherwise the fish will skip up and down, so fall to work: The
bait must be a Gudgeon, a small Trout, Roch, or Dace.

Now I will pawn my Credit, that I will show a way, either in Ware, Pond, or
River that shall take more Pikes than any Trouler shall do by Trouling; and it
is this.

First take a forked stick, a line of twelve Yards long wound upon it, at the
lower end leave a Yard to tie, either a bunch of flaggs, or a Bladder; to Buoy
up the Fish, to carry the bait from the Ground, that the fish may swim clear,
the bait must be alive, either a small Trout, Gudgeon, Roch, or Dace, the
forked stick must have a slit on the one side of the fork to put the Line in
that the live fish may swim at the gauge you set the fish to swim at, that when
the Pike takes the bait, the Pike may have the full liberty of the Line for his
feed; you may turn as you please of these loose in the Pond or River all day
long, the more the better, and do it in a pond-wind: the Hooks must be double
Hooks.

To Bait the Hook.
Take one of the Baits alive, and with your Needle enter the fish within a
straws breadth of the gill, so put the Needle in betwixt the Skin and the Fish,
then draw the Needle out of the hinder most fin, drawing the Arming through the
Fish, until the Hook come to lie close to the body, but I hold it better, if it
be Armed with wyre, to take off the Hook, and put the Needle in at the hinder
most fin, and so come forth at the Gill, then put on the Hook, and it will hurt
the live Fish the less, so knit the Arming with the live fish to the line.

But I judge the baiting with a live fish is done far better, as it is done,
baiting with a Minew to fish for a Trout.

A Rod twelve foot long, and a ring of wyre,
A winder and Barril will help thy desire,
In killing a Pike: but the forked stick.
With a slit and a Bladder, and the other fine trick,
Which our Artist call Snap, with a Goose or a Duck,
Will kill two for one if thou have any luck.
Chub takes a black Snail about August; and for a Bait, take the fourth Receipt
prescribed for Roch and Dace, but color it with Saffron, or Gambogia.

The Pike in the month of March, before which time it is good fishing for him,
but after March it is not good till the middle of May: A Smelt is a rare bait,
a pole for trouling should be eleven foot long, for the Snap twelve foot.

When you troul, the head of the fish must be downward at the bent of the Hook,
but when you Snap, the head must be upward at the Shank of the Hook.

If you fish at a Snap for a Pike, give him leave to run a little before you
strike, and then strike the contrary way he runs.

If you fish with a dead bait for him, take this as a most excellent one.

Take a Minew or yellow Frogg, a Dace or a Roch, and having dissolved some Gum
of Ivy in Oil of Spike, anoint your bait therewith, and cast it where the Pikes
frequent; and when it has lain a little while at the bottom, draw it up to the
top, and so up the Stream, and if pikes are in the place where you fish, you
will quickly perceive them to follow it with much eagerness.

Perch.
The Perch loves a gentle stream, of a reasonable depth, seldom shallow.

Baits.
1. His bait is most commonly a red knotted worm or a Minew.

2. Another.
Make a bait with the Liver of a Goat, and bait your Hook therewith.

3. Another.
Take yellow Butterflyes and Cheese made of Goats milk, of each half an ounce,
of Opopanax the weight of two French Crowns, of Hogs-blood half an ounce,
Galbanum as much; pound them all well, and mix them together, pouring upon them
Red Wine, and make thereof little balls, such as you use to make Perfumes into,
and dry them in the shade.

4. Another.
To bait your Hook with a live Minew, when you Fish for a Trout, or Petch with
a Running Line.
First put your Hook in at his Mouth, and out at his gill, then having drawn
your hook 2 or 3 Inches beyond or through his Gill, put it again into his
Mouth, and the point and Beard out of his tail, and then tie the Hook and his
Tail with a white Thread, which will make it the apter to turn quick in the
water then pull back that part of the Line which was slack, when you put your
Hook into the Mouth the second time, I say, pull that part of it back so that
it shall fasten the Head, that so the body of the Minew shall be almost
straight on the hook; then try how it will turn by drawing it cross the water,
or against the Stream, and if it do not turn nimbly, then turn the Tail a
little to the right or left hand, and try again till it turn quick, for if not,
you are in danger to catch nothing, for know that it is impossible it should
turn too quick; but if you want a Minew, then a small Roch; or Stickle-back, or
any other small Fish will serve as well; If you salt your Minews you may keep
them three or four days fit for use, or longer; Bay Salt is best.

5. Another.
To Bait with a Lob-worm, to fish for a Trout or Perch with a Running line,
with a Swivel.
Suppose it be a big Lob-worm, put your Hook, into him above the middle, then
draw your Worm above the Arming of your Hook, enter your Worm at the Tail end
of the Worm, the point may come out toward the Head, and having drawn him above
the Arming of your Hook, put the point of your Hook again into the very Head of
the worm, till it come to the place where the point of the hook first came out,
and then draw back that part of the worm that was above the Shanker Arming of
the Hook. And so fish with it, you cannot lose above two or three Worms before
you attain to what I direct you, and having attained it, you will find it very
useful, for you will run upon the ground without tangling, but you must have a
Swivel.

Trout.
The Trout loves small purling Brooks, or Rivers that are very swift, and run
upon Stones, or Gravel, he feeds while he is in strength in the swiftest
streams behind a Stone, Log, or some small Bank that shoots into the River,
and there lies watching for what comes down the Stream. He spawns about October.

Baits.
1. You shall find in the Root of a great Dock, a white Worm with a red Head,
with this Worm fish for a Trout at the bottom, he lies in the deep, but feeds
in the Stream.

2. Another.
He also takes very freely a worm, called a Brandling, of which sort the best
are found at the Beargarden amongst the Bears Dung.

An Universal Bait to take all manner of Fish, but especially Trouts, which
has been Experienced by an ancient Angler, and made by a Chemist, in 1668.
Take of the juice of Camomile two spoonfuls, Oil of Spike four drums, Spirit
of Vitriol one ounce, Oil of Comfrey by Infusion six drams, Goose-grease one
ounce; Dissolve these over the fire, being well melted, let it stand till it is
cold, then put it into a strong Glass, and let it stand three or four days
before you stop it up with a good cover made of parchment and Leather, and it
will keep good for seven Years.

Gudgeons.
A Gudgeon spawns in May, and sometimes in April.

Baits.
A Gudgeon takes nothing but a red knotted worm in a Horse Dung-hil.

Barbel.
The Barbel (as Gesner says) is one of those leather mouthed Fishes, having
his Teeth in his Throat.

There are diverse ways of fishing for him, as with a Casting-Line of small
Whip-Cord, a Plummet, and a pair of small drablers of Hair.

Others fish for him with a standing-Line, either of Silk, or some Brass wyre
well kneaded, with a Plummet of one, two, three, or four ounces, according to
the swiftness of the stream, and a pair of drabbers, as before.

Some fish for Barbel with Castihg-Lines, as at London Bridge, a Plummet of one
pound and half, and a pair of drabbers.

There is yet another way (though against the Statute, and forbidden by the
Court of Aldermen) and that is by scratching with Hooks without Beards.

Baits.
His bait is a green Gentle, strong Cheese, sometimes a Lob-worm, and sometimes
a piece of pickled herring.

Eels.
To reckon up the several ways of taking Eels, were almost, If not altogether
impossible; and therefore I shall only tell you how the Anglers here in London
take them.

Take a shooting line, of 10, 12, 14, 16, or 20 hooks, as many, and as few as
you please; and this cannot be but an excellent way, either in Pond, River or
Moat.

The manner of making it is very well known to all those that sell Hooks and
Fishing-Tackle in Crocked Lane, where you may buy them ready made.

Baits.
His bait is green Gentles, strong Cheese, Lobworms, pickled Herring,
powdered-beef, or periwinkles.

Your Plummet must be three pound, or 3 pound and a half of Lead.

Bream.
The Bream loves a red worm, taken at the root of a great Dock, it lies wrapped
up in a knot, or round clue. He chooses the same waters as the Pike.

Salmon.
The Salmon loves large swift Rivers, where it ebbs and flows; he spawns at
the latter end of the Year.

To fish for Salmon.
The first thing you must gain, must be a Rod of some ten foot in the stock,
that will carry a top of 6 foot, stiff and strong, the reason is, because there
must be a wyre Ring at the upper end of the top, for the Line to run through,
that you may take up, and loose the Line at your Pleasure, you must have the
winder within two foot of the bottom of your Rod, made in the manner expressed,
with a spring, that you may put it on as low as you please.

The Salmon swimmeth most commonly in the midst of the River, in all his
Travels he desires to see the uppermost part of the River, traveling on his
journey in the heat of the day, he must take a bush, if the Fisherman espy
him, he goes at him with his Spear, and so shortneth his Journey.

The Angler that goes to fish for him with a Hook and Line, must Angle for him
as nigh the middle of the water as he can get with one of these.

Baits.
Take two Lob-worms, and put the hook so near through the middle of them, that
the four ends may hang of an equal length, and so Angle as near the bottom as
you can, feeling your Plummet run on the ground, some 12 inches from the hook.

If you Angle for him with a Fly (which he will rise at like a Trout) the fly
must be made of a large hook, which hook must carry six wings, or four at the
least; there is judgment in making these Flies.

The Salmon will come at a Gudgeon in tne manner of a Trouling Line, and comes
at it bravely, which is fine Angling for him; you must be sure your Line be of
twenty six, or thirty yards long, that you may have your convenient time to
turn him; or else you are in danger to lose him, but if you turn him, you are
likely to have him, all the danger is the running out both of Salmon and Trout.

You must forecast to turn the fish as you do a wild horse, either upon the
right or Left hand, and wind up your Line as you find occasion in the guiding
the fish to the shore, having a large Landing hook to take him up.

Close to the bottom, in the midst of the water,
I fished for a Salmon, and there I caught her.
My Plummet twelve inches from the large hook,
Two Lob-worms hung equal, which she never forsook;
Nor yet the great hook, with the six winged Fly,
And she makes at a Gudgeon most furiously.
My strong Line was just twenty six yards long,
I gave him a turn, though I found him strong.
I wound up my Line, to guide him to Shore,
The Landing hook helped much, but the Cookery more.
The Names of the Flies that are used in Angling: with the times when they are
in Season, and what the Bodies and Wings are made of.
1. A Stone Fly, which is in season in April, the body of it is made with
black-wool, made yellow under the wings; and under the Tail; the Wings are made
of a Mallards Feather. 2. A ruddy Fly is in season in the beginning of May; the
body is made of red wool wrapped about with blue silk, the wings are made of the
wing of a Drake, and a red Hackle. 3. The yellow or greenish fly, in season in
May, made of yellow wool, his wings made of red Hackles, and the wing of a
Drake. 4. The Dun fly is sometimes of Dunwool, and sometimes black, in season
in March; his wings made of Partridge-feathers; black Drakes feathers, and the
feathers under his tail. 5. The black fly in season in May, made of black-wool,
and wrapped about with Peacocks Tail, his wings the feathers of the wings of a
brown Capon, with the blew feathers in his head. 6. The sad yellow fly, in
season in June, made of black wool, with a yellow List on either side; the
wings of a Buzzard, bound with black braked Hemp. 7. The Moorish fly, in season
in June, made of duskish wool, the wings the black male of a Drake. 8. The
tawny fly, good till the middle of June, made of Bears-wool, the wings made
contrary one against the other of the whitish Male of a wild Drake. 9. The Wasp
fly, in season in July, made of black-wool, wrapped about with yellow Silk, the
wings of a Drakes feather, or Buzzards. 10. The Shell fly, good in the middle
of June, made of greenish wool, wrapped about with Pearl of a Peacocks tail; the
wings of a Buzzards Feathers. 11. The dark Drake-Fly, made of black-wool wrapped
about with black Silk; in season in August, the wings, the Male of the black
drake with a black head. 12. The May-fly, made of greenish colored Cruel, or
Willow color, and darken it in most places with waxed Silk; or Ribb'd with a
black hair, or some of them Ribb'd with Silver thread, and such wings for the
color, as you see the Fly to have at that Season. 13. The Oak-Fly the body
made of Orange-tawny, and black Cruel; the wings the brown of a Mallards
Feather.
The best way of Dressing these, and all other sorts of Fish, you may find in
the next Part following.

FINIS.
The Complete Cook's Guide or Directions for the Dressing of all Flesh, Fowl,
and Fish, both in the English and French Mode; with the preparing of all manner
of Sawces and Sallets proper thereunto. Together with the making of all Sorts
of Pyes, Pasties, Tarts, and Custards; with the Forms and Shapes of many of
them. With Bills of Fare, both for Ordinary, and Extraordinary.
1. To make a Lamb-Pye.
FIrst, cut your Lamb into Pieces, and then season it with Nutmegs, Cloves, and
Mace, and some Salt with Currants, Raisins of the Sun, and sweet butter; and if
you will eat it hot, when it is baked put in some Yolks of Eggs, with
Wine-Vinegar, and Sugar beaten together, but if you will eat it cold, put in no
Eggs, but only Vinegar and Sugar.

2. To make a Rice Pudding.
Take thin Cream, or good Milk, of what quantity you please, boil it with a
little Cinnamon in it, and when it has boiled a while, take out the Cinnamon,
and put in Rose Water, and Sugar enough to make it sweet and good; then having
your Rice ready beaten as fine as Flower, and searced as some do it, strew it
in, till it be of the thickness of a Hasty pudding, then pour it into a Dish,
and serve it.

3. To make Cheese-Cakes, the best way.
Take two Gallons of New Milk, put into them two spoonfuls and a half of
Runnet, heat the Milk little less than blood-warm, cover it close with a
Cloth, till you see the Cheese be gathered, then with a scumming-dish, gently
take out the Whey, when you have dreyn'd the Curd as clear as you can, put it
into a Sieve, and let it drain very well there; then to two quarts of Curds,
take a quart of thick cream, a pound of sweet butter, twelve Eggs, a pound and
half of Currants, a penny worth of Cloves, Nutmegs and Mace beaten, half a pound
of good Sugar, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water; mingle it well together, and
put it into Puff-paste.

To make an Egg-Pye, or Mince-Pye of Eggs.
Take the Yolks of two dozen of Eggs hard boiled, shred them, take the same
quantity of Beef Suet, half a pound of Pippins, a pound of Currants well washed
and dried, half a pound of Sugar, a pennyworth of beaten Spice a few
Carraway-Seeds, a little Candied Orange-peel shred, a little Verjuice and
Rose Water, fill the coffin, and bake it with gentle heat.

5. To Carbonado Mutton.
Broil a Shoulder, or Breast of Mutton, then scotch them with your Knife, and
strew on Minced Thyme and Salt, and a little Nutmeg; when they are broiled,
Dish them up: The sauce is Claret Wine boiled up with two Onions, a little
Camphire and Capers with a little Gravy, Garnished with Lemons.

6. To stew a Pheasant, French fashion.
Roast your Pheasant till he be half Roasted, then boil it in Mutton-Broth, and
put into the broth whole pepper, whole Mace, and sliced Onions and Vinegar,
and make it sharp, and put in Pruans and Currants, and color your broth with
bruised Pruans.

7. To make Bisket-Bread.
Take half a peck of Flower fine, two Ounces of Anniseeds, two Ounces of
Coriander-seed, the whites of six Eggs, a pint of Ale-yeast, with as much warm
water as will make it up into a Paste, so bake it in a long Roll; when it is 2
days old, pare it, and slice it, then Sugar it, and dry it in an Oven, and keep
it all the year.

8. To make a dish of Marrow.
Take a pint of fine Past, and roll it very thin, then take the Marrow all as
whole out of the bones as you can, and cleave it into four quarters, then take
it and season it with a little Pepper, Salt, Sugar and Dates small minced, then
lay one piece in your Paste, and make it up like a Pescod, so make half a dozen
of them, and fry them in Clarified butter, scrape Sugar on them, and serve them.

9. To make a Herring-pye.
Put great store of sliced Onions, with Currants and Raisins of the Sun, both
above and under the Herrings, and store of Butter, put them into your Pie, and
bake them.

10. To make Black-Puddings.
Take a quart of Sheeps-blood, and a quart of Cream, ten Eggs, the yolks and
the whites beaten together, stir all this Liquor very well, then thicken it
with grated bread, and Oatmeal finely beaten, of each a like quantity,
Beef Suet finely shred, and Marrow in little lumps, season it with a little
Nutmeg, Cloves, and Mac^ ^ed with salt, a little sweet Majoram, Thyme, and
Pennyroyal shred very well together, and mingle them with the other things,
some put in a few Currants, then fill them with clarified Guts, and boil them
very carefully.

11. To make a good Spanish Olio.
Take a Rump of Beef, or some of a Brisket or Buttock, cut it to pieces; a Loyn
of Mutton with the Fat taken off, and a fleshly piece of a Leg of Veal, or a
Knuckle, a piece of inter-larded Bacon, three or four Onions, or some Garlic,
and if you will, a Capon or two, or else three great Tame-Pigeons. First, put
into the water the Beef and Bacon, after a while the Mutton, Veal, and Onions,
but not the Capons or Pigeons, only so long till they are boiled enough, if you
have Garavanza's put them in at the first, after they have been soaked with
Ashes all night in heat, wash them well in warm water, or if you have Cabbage,
Roots, Leeks, or whole Onions, put them in time enough to be sufficiently
boiled. You may at first put in some crusts of Bread, or Venison Pye-Crust, it
must boil in all five or six hours gently, like stewing: After it is well
boiled, a quarter, or half an hour before you intend to take it, take out a
porringer full of broth, and put to it some Pepper, and five or six Cloves,
and a Nutmeg, and some saffron, and mingle them well in it, then put that into
the Pot, and let it boil, or stew with the rest a while, put in a bundle of
sweet herbs, Salt must be put to it when it is scum'd.

12. To stew Venison.
If you have much Venison, and do make many cold baked Meats, you may stew a
Dish in haste thus, When it is sliced out of your Pie, Pot, or Pasty, put it in
your stewing Dish, and set on a heap of coals, with a little Claret Wine, a
sprigg or two of Rosemary, half a dozen Cloves, a little grated bread, Sugar
and Vinegar, so let it stew together a while, then grate on Nutmeg, and Dish it
up.

13. To boil a Leg of Veal and Bacon.
Lard your Leg of Veal with Bacon all over, with a little Lemon peel amongst
it, then boil it with a piece of Middle-Bacon, when your Bacon is boiled, cut
it in slices, season it with Pepper and dried Sage mixed together; Dish up your
Veal with the Bacon round about it, send up with it, saucers of green sauce,
strew over it Parsley and Barberries.

14. To make Furmety.
Take French-barley, and pick it, and wash it, lay it in steep one Night, then
boil it in two or 3 several waters, and so cover it as you would do Wheat to
make it swell, then take a quart of good Cream, and boil it with a Race of
Ginger cut in 2 Pieces, one blade of Mace, and half a Nutmeg all in one piece,
then put thereto so much of the Barley as will thicken it, and when it is
almost boiled, stir in 2 or 3 yolks of Eggs well beaten; and so strained with a
few beaten Almonds and Flower, or five spoonfuls of Rosewater, then take out
the whole spices and season your Furmety with salt, and sweeten it with sugar,
and serve it.

15. To make a Pig Pie.
Flea your Pig, and cut it into pieces, and season it with Pepper, Salt,
Nutmeg, and large Mace, lay into your Coffin, good store of Raisins of the Sun,
and Currants, and fill it up with sweet Butter, so close it, and serve it hot.

16. To make a Neats-Foot-Pye.
First boil your Neats Foot, and take out the bones, then put in as much
Beef Suet as in quantity thereto, and so mince them, then season them with
Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Sugar, and Salt, and put it into your Coffin with some
Barberries, Currants, and Raisins of the Sun, then bake it and always serve it
hot.

17. To make an Orangado Pie.
Make a handsome thin Coffin, and hot buttered Paste, slice your Orangado, and
put over the bottom of it, then take some pippins, and cut every one into eight
parts, and lay them in also upon the Orangado then pour some syrup of Orangado,
and sugar on the top, and so make it up, and bake it, and serve it up with
sugar scraped on it.

18. To make a Pork Pie.
Boil your Leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, and bake it
five hours in a round Pie.

19. To make a Fricacie of Veal.
Cut your Veal in thin slices, beat it well with a rowling-pin, season it with
Nutmegs, Lemons, and Thyme, fry it slightly in the pan, then beat two Eggs, and
one spoonful of verjuice, put it into the pan, stir it together, fry it, and
dish it.

20. To make a Quince-Pye
Take a Gallon of Flower, a pound and half of butter, six Eggs, thirty quinces,
three pound of Sugar, half an ounce of Cinnamon, half an ounce or Ginger, half
an ounce of Cloves, and Rose Water; make them into a Tart, and being baked,
strew on double refined sugar.

21. To make Gooseberry fool.
Pick your Goosberries, and put them into clean water, and boil them tlll they
be all as thick that you cannot discern what it is, to the quantity of a quart,
take six Yolks of Eggs well beaten with Rose Water, before you put in your
Eggs, season it well with sugar, then strain your Eggs, and let them boil a
while, put it in a broad dish, and let it stand till it is cold, and serve it.

22. To make a Tart of Green-Pease.
Boil your Pease tender, and pour them out into a Cullender, season them with
Saffron, Salt, sweet butter and Sugar, then close it, and let it bake almost an
hour, then draw it forth and Ice it, put in a little Verjuice, and shake it
well, then scrape on sugar, and serve it.

23. To Souce an Eel.
Souce an Eel with a handful of Salt, split it down the back, take out the
Chine-bone, season the Eel with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and sweet Herbs minced;
then lay a pack thread at each end and the middle roll up like a Collar of
Brawn, then boil it in water, salt and vinegar, a blade or two of Mace, and
half a slice of Lemon, boil it half an hour, keep it in the same liquor two or
three days, then cut it out in round pieces, and lay six or seven in a dish
with Parsley and Barberries, and serve it with vinegar in saucers.

24. To make a Bacon tart.
Take a quarter of a pound of the best Jordan-Almonds, and put them in a little
warm water to blanch them, then beat them together in a Mortar with three or
four spoonfuls of Rose Water, then sweeten them with fine sugar; then take
Bacon that is clear and white, and hold it upon the point of a Knife against
the fire, till it has dropped a sufficient quantity, then stir it well together,
and put it into the paste, and bake it.

25. To make an Vmble-pye.
Lay Beef Suet minced in the bottom of the Pie, or slices of Inter-larded
Bacon, and cut the Umbles as big as a small Dice, cut your Bacon in the same
Form, and season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, fill your pyes with it, with
slices of Bacon, and butter, close it up, and bake it; Liquor it with Claret,
Butter, and stripped Thyme, and so serve it.

26. To keep Asparagus.
Parboyl your Asparagus very little, and put them into clarified Butter, cover
them with it, and when the Butter is cold, cover them with Leather, and about a
Month after refresh the Buttter, melt it and put it on them again; then set
them under ground, being covered with Leather.

27. To roast a Haunch of Venison.
If your Venison be seasoned, you must water it, and stick it with short sprigs
of Rosemary; let your sauce be Claret wine, a handful of grated Bread, Cinnamon,
Ginger, sugar, a little vinegar; boil these up so thick, as it may only run
like batter; it ought to be sharp and sweet: Dish up your Meat on your Sauce.

28. To Carbonado Hens.
Let your Sauce be a little White Wind and Gravy, half a dozen of the yolks of
hard Eggs minced, boiled up with an Onion, add to it grated Nutmeg; thicken it
up with the yolk of an Egg or two, with a ladlefull of drawn butter; Dish up
your Hens, and pour over your sauce, strew on yolks of Eggs minced, and garnish
it with Lemon.

29. To fry Artichoaks.
When they are boiled and sliced fitting for that purpose, you must have your
yolks of Eggs beaten with a grated Nutmeg or two; when your pan is hot, you
must dip them into the Yolks of Eggs, and charge your pan; when they are fried
on both sides, pour on drawn butter; And if you will fry Spanish Potato's, then
the Sauce is Butter, Vinegar, Sugar, and Rosewater; these for a need may serve
for second Course Dishes.

30. To make a Hedge-Hog-Pudding.
Put some Raisins of the Sun into a deep wooden Dish, and then take some grated
bread, and one pint of sweet Cream, three yolks of Eggs, with two of the
whites, and some Beef suet; grated Nutmeg and Salt, then sweeten it with Sugar,
and temper all well together, and so lay it into the dish upon the Raisins,
then tie a Cloth about the dish, and boil it in Beef-broth, and when you take
it up lay it in a pewter Dish, with the Raisins upper-most, and then stick
blanched Almonds very thick into the pudding, then melt some Butter, and pour
it upon the pudding, then strew some sugar about the dish, and serve it.

31. To stew a Leg of Lamb.
Cut it into pieces, and put it into your stewing-pan, being first seasoned
with Salt and Nutmeg, and as much Butter as will stew it, with Raisins of the
Sun, Currants and Goosberries; when it is stewed, make a Caudle with the Yolks
of two or three Eggs, and some Wine-vinegar and sugar beaten together, and put
it into your Meat, and strew all a little longer together; then dish it, strew
sugar on the brims and serve it hot.

32. To bake a Pickerel.
Boil your Pickerel, and pull out the ribs and bones, then put into your Paste,
and season it with pepper and salt, and put in some butter, and raisins of the
Sun, and so bake it.

33. To make a Haggess-Pudding.
Take a fat Haggess, parboyl it well, take out the kernels, shred it small, and
temper it with a handful or two of grated Manchet; then take three or four Eggs
well beaten, Rose Water, Sugar, Cloves, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Mace finely
beaten, Currants and Marrow good store; temper them altogether with a quantity
of Cream, being first moderately seasoned with Salt.

34. Te make a dish of Meat with Herbs.
Take Sives, Parsley, Thyme, Marjoram, and roast three or four Eggs hard, and a
quantity of mutton suet, beef or lamb, chop them fine altogether and season it
with Cloves, Mace, Ginger, sugar, and Cinnamon, and a little Salt, then fry them
with a little sweet butter.

35. To make Cream of Eggs.
Take one quart of Cream, and boil it, then beat four whites of eggs very well
with two spoonfuls of Rose Water; when the Cream is boiled enough, take it off
the fire, and when it is cool, stir in the eggs with a little salt, then
garnish your dish with fine sugar scraped thereon, and serve it always cold for
a closing dish.

36. To make a fine Pudding in a dish.
Take a penny white-loaf, and pare off all the crust, and slice it thin into a
dish with a quart of Cream, and let it boil over a Chafing Dish of coals, till
the bread be almost dry, then put in a piece of sweet butter, and take it off,
and let it stand in the dish till it be cold, then take the yolks of three
Eggs, and the quantity of one with some Rose Water and Sugar, and stirring them
all together, put it into another dish well buttered and bake it.

37. To boil Scollops.
First boil the Scollops, then take them out of the shells, and wash them, then
slice them, and season them with Nutmeg, Ginger and Cinnamon, and put them into
the bottom of your shells again, with a liittle Butter, White Wind, Vinegar,
and grated bread, let them be broyled on both sides; if they are sharp, they
must have Sugar added to them, for the Fish is luscious, and sweet naturally;
therefore you may broyl them with Oyster-Liquor and Gravy, with dissolved
Anchovies, minced Onions and Thyme, with the juice of Lemon in it.

38. To boil Wild-Ducks.
First half Roast them, then take them off, and put them in a shallow broad pan
that will contain them, with a pint of Claret Wine, and a pint of strong broth,
a dozen of Onions cut in halves, a Faggot or two of sweet Herbs, with a little
whole Pepper, and some slices of Bacon; cover your pan, and let them stove up,
add gravy to part of the Liquor, at least so much as will serve to Dish them:
Garnish them with Bacon and Onions if you please.

39. To make a Venison-Pasty.
When you have powdered your Haunch of Venison or the sides of it, by taking
away all the bones, and sinews, and the skin or fat, season it with Pepper and
Salt only, beat it with your Rolling-pin, and proportion it for the Pasty, by
taking away from one part, and adding to another, your paste being made with a
peck of fine Flower, and about three pound of butter, and twelve Eggs, work it
up with cold water into a stiff paste as you can, drive it forth for your
Pasty, let it be as thick as a Man's Thumb, roll it up upon a rouling-pin, and
put under it a couple of sheets of Cap-Paper well flowered, then your white
being already minced and beaten with water, proportion it upon the pasty to the
breadth and length of the Venison, then lay your Venison in the said white,
wash it round with your Feather, and put on a border, season your Venison on
the top, and turn over your other leaf of paste, so close up your Pasty; then
drive out another border for garnishing the sides up to the top of the pasty,
so close it together by the rolling-pin, by rolling it up and down by the sides
and ends, and when you have flourished your garnishing, and edged your pasty,
vent it at the top, set it in the Oven, and let it have 4 or 5 hours baking at
the least, and then draw it.

49. To make a Damson-tart.
Take Damsons, and seethe them in Wine, and strain them with a little Cream,
then boil your stuff over the fire till it be thick, and put thereto sugar,
cinnamon, and ginger, but set it not in the Oven after; but let your paste be
baked before.

41. To roast a Rabbet with Oysters.
Wash your Rabbet, and dry it well, then take half a pint of Oysters, wash
them, and wipe them clean one by one, and put them into the Rabbets belly, a
couple of Onions shred, whole Pepper, large Mace; two or three spriggs of
Thyme, sow up the belly; and for the sauce, as usual, the liver and parsley; and
a hard Egg, shred them together, and beat some butter thick; put into the dish,
and serve it.

42. To stew Collops of Beef.
Take of the buttock of beef thin slices, cross the grain of the meat; then
hack them, and fry them in sweet butter; and being fried fine and brown, put
them in a pipkin with some strong broth, a little Claret Wine, and some Nutmeg;
stew it very tender, and half an hour before you dish it, put to it some good
Gravy, Elder-vinegar, and a Clove or 2; when you serve it, put some juice of
Orange, and three or four slices on it, stew down the Gravy somewhat thick, and
put unto it when you dish it, some beaten butter.

43. To make a Beef-pasty like red Deer.
Take fresh Beef, of the finest, without sinews or suet, and mince it as small
as you can, and season it with Salt, and Pepper, and put in two spoonfuls of
Malmsey, then take Lard, and cut it into small pieces, and lay a layer of Lard,
and a layer of Beef, and lay a shin of Beef upon it like Venison, and so close
it up.

44. To bake a Hare.
Take the best of the Hare minced and seasoned with Pepper, Salt and Mace, then
make a proportion of the head, or shoulders, as you make for an Hare-pasty, and
lay in a layer of Flesh, and a layer of Lard, and butter aloft and beneath, and
make a Gallentine for it in a Saucer.

45. To boil a Salmon.
Take as much water as will cover it, then take Rosemary, Thyme and
Winter-Savoury, and Salt, boil all these very well, and then put in some
Wine-Vinegar, and when your Salmon is boiled, let him remain in the same water
always until you have occasion to eat of it.

46. To make an Oyster-pye.
First dry your Oysters, and then put them into your Coffin with some butter,
and whole large Mace, and so bake it; then take off the Lid, and fill it up
with more butter, putting some of the Liquor of the Oysters also thereunto,
then season it well with Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table at the first
Course.

47. To butter Eggs upon toasts.
Take twenty Eggs, beat them in a dish with some Salt, and put butter to them,
then have two large Rolls, or fine Manchets, cut them in Toasts, and toast them
against the fire, with a pound of fine sweet butter, being finely buttered in a
fair clean Dish, put the Eggs on the Toasts, and Garnish your Dish with Pepper
and Salt, otherwise half boil them in the shells, then butter them, and serve
them on Toasts, or Toasts about them.

48. To make a Fricacie of Chickens.
Scald three or four Chickens, and flea off the Skin and Feathers together, put
them in a little water; take half a pint of White Wind, and two or three whole
Onions, some large Mace and Nutmeg tied up in a cloth, a bundle of sweet
herbs, and a little Salt, and put them all in a Pipkin close covered; let them
simper a quarter of an hour; then take six yolks of Eggs, half a pound of sweet
butter, four Anchovies dissolved in a little broth; shred your boiled Spice
small, take a quarter of a pound of Capers, and shred them very small, put the
Anchovies dissolved into the Eggs and Butter, and Capers, and so stir it
altogether, over a Chafing Dish of coals, till it begin to thicken, then take
the Chickens out of the broth, and put lear upon them, serve them with sippets,
and Lemon sliced.

49. To make an Eel-pye with Oysters.
Wash your Eels, and gut them, and dry them well in a cloth; to four good Eels
allow a pint of Oysters well washed, season them with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg,
and large Mace, put half a pound of butter into the Pie, and half a Lemon
sliced, so bake it; when it is drawn, take the Yolks of two Eggs, a couple of
Anchovies dissolved in a little White Wind, with a quarter of a pound of fresh
butter, melt it, and mix it altogether, and make a lear of it, and put it into
the pie.

50. To make Puff-paste.
Break two Eggs in three pints of Flower, make it with cold water, then roll it
out pretty thick, and square; then take so much butter as paste, and divide
your butter in five pieces, that you may lay it on at five several times, roll
your paste very broad, and break one part of the same butter in little pieces
all over your paste, then throw a handful of Flower slightly on, then fold up
your paste, and beat it with a Rolling-pin, so roll it out again; thus do
several times, and then make it up.

51. To make Barley-broth.
Put your Barley into fair water, give it three qualms over the fire, separate
the waters, and put it into a Cullender, boil it in a fourth water with a blade
of Mace, and a Clove; and when it is boiled away, put in some Raisins and
Currants, and when the Fruit is boiled enough, take it off, and season it with
White Wind, Rose Water, Butter, and Sugar, and a couple of Yolks of Eggs,
beaten with it.

52. To bake a Pig.
Take a good quantity of Clay, and having molded it, stick your Pig, and blood
him well, and when he is warm, put him in your prepared Coffin of Clay, thick
every where, with his Hair, Skin, and all (his Entrails drawn, and Belly sowed
up again) then throw him into the Oven, or below the Stock-hole under the
Furnace, and there let him soak, turn him now and then when the clay is
hardened, for 12 hours, and he is then sufficiently baked, then take him, and
break off the Clay, which easily parts, and he will have a fine crispy coat,
and all the juice of the Pigg in your dish, remember but to gut a few leaves of
Sage, and a little Salt in his belly, and you need no other sauce.

53. A grand Sallet.
Take a quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun, as many blanched Almonds, as
many Capers, as many Olives, as much Samphire, as many pickled Cucumbers, a
Lemon shred, some pickled French-beans, a wax Tree set in the middle of the
Dish, pasted to the dish; lay all their quarters round the Dish, (you may also
mince the Flesh of a Roasted Hen, with Sturgeon and Shrimps) and garnish the
dish with cut Beans and Turnips in several Figures.

54. To make a Sallet of a cold Hen or Pullet.
Take a Hen and roast it, let it be cold, Carve up the Legs, take the Flesh and
mince it small, shred a Lemon, a little Parsley and Onions, an Apple, a little
Pepper and Salt, with Oil and Vinegar, garnish the dish with the bones and
Lemon Peel, and so serve it.

55. To boil a Capon, Pullet, or Chicken.
Boil them in good Mutton-broath, with Mace, a Faggot of sweet Herbs, Sage,
Spinach, Marygold leaves and flowers, white or green Endive, Burrage Bugloss,
Parsley and Sorrel, and serve it on sippets.

56. To stew Ducks the French fashion.
Take the Duck and half Roast it, put half a score of Onions in the belly
whole, some whole Pepper, a bundle of Thyme, and a little Salt, when it is half
Roasted, take it up and slash it into pieces, put it between two dishes, and
pierce the Gravy, mix some Claret Wine with that Gravy, and a little sliced
Nutmeg, a couple of Anchovies, wash them and slit them, slice the Onions in the
Ducks belly, cover the Dishes close, so let them stew while enough, take some
butter, beat it thick, and shred a Lemon in it, and serve it: Garnish your dish
with the Lemon Peel, and your Onions.

57. To make a Florentine.
Take the Kidney of a Loin of Veal, or the Wing of a Canon, or the leg of a
Rabbit; mince any of these small with the Kidney of a Loin of Mutton, if it be
not fat enough, then season it with Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs and Sugar, Cream,
Currants, Eggs, and Rosewater; mingle these four together, and put them into a
dish between two sheets of paste, then close it, and cut the paste round by the
brim of the dish; then cut it round about like Virginal keys, turn up one, and
let the other lie, prick it, bake it, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

58. To make Curd Cakes.
Take a pint of Curds, four Eggs, take out 2 of the whites, put in some Sugar,
a little Nutmeg, and a little Flower; stir them well together, and drop them
in, and fry them with a little butter.

59. To roast a Leg of Mutton the French way.
Take half a pound of Mutton, and a quarter of a pound of Suet, season it with
sweet Herbs; and a little Nutmeg, and two or three shallots; slice these very
small, and stuff the Mutton round; then take some of the best Hackney Turnips,
and boil them in Beef-broth very tender, then squeeze the water from them a
little, set them in the dish under the Leg of Mutton, when it is half roasted,
and so let the gravy drop into them; and when the Meat is roasted, serve them
in the dish with it, with a little fresh Butter and Vinegar: Garnish your dish
with sliced Onions and Parsley, and some of the Turnips sliced.

60. To stew a Carp.
Take a living Carp, and knock him on the head, open him in the belly, take
heed you break not the gill, pour in a little Vinegar, and wash out all the
blood, stir it about with your hand, and keep the blood safe; then put as much
White Wind into a pan or skillet, as will almost cover, and set it on the fire;
put to it an Onion cut in the middle, a Clove or less of Garlic, a Race of
Ginger shred, a Nutmeg quartered, a Faggot, or bundle of sweet herbs, and three
or four Anchovies; your Carp being cut out, and rubbed all over with salt, when
the Wine (into which you may put in a little water) does boil, put the Carp in,
and cover him close, and let him stew up about a quarter of an hour, then put
in the blood and Vinegar, with a little Butter, so dish up the Carp, and let
the Spawn, Milt and Revet be laid upon it, the Liquor that boiled him, with the
butter is the best sauce, and is to be eaten as broth: Garnish the dish with
Lemons and grated bread.

61. To make Marrow-Puddings.
Take a pound of the best Jordan-Almonds, blanch them, beat them fine in a
stone or wooden Mortar (not in brass) with a little Rose Water, take a pound of
fine powder-sugar, a penny-loaf grated, Nutmeg grated, a pint of Cream, the
Marrow of 2 Marrow-bones, 2 grains of Ambergris, mingle them all together
with a little salt, fill the skins, and boil them gently as before.

62. To make a Sack-Posset.
Set a Gallon of Milk on the Fire, with whole Cinnamon and large Mace, when it
boyls stir in a half, or whole pound of Naples-bisket grated very small,
keeping it stirring till it boyls, then beat eight Eggs together, casting of
the whites away; beat them well with a Ladle-ful of Milk, then take the Milk
off the fire, and stir in the Eggs; then put it on again, but keep it stirring
for fear of curdling; then make ready a pint of Sack, warming it upon the
coals, with a little Rose Water, season your Milk with sugar, and pour it into
the Sack in a large basin, and stir it a pace, then throw on a good deal of
beaten Cinnamon, and so serve it up.

63. To hash a Rabbit.
When your Rabbit is washed you must take the Flesh from the bones, and mince
it small then put to it a little strong broth and Vinegar, a'n Onion or two,
with a grated Nutmeg, and let it stew up together, then mince a handful of
boiled parsley green, with a Lemon cut like Dice, and a few Barberries, put it
into the Hash, and toast it altogether, and when it is enough, put a ladle full
of sweet butter to it, and dish it upon the Chines, and garnish it with Lemons.

64. To make a Fresh Cheese.
Take some New Milk, or Cream, and a Race of Cinnamon, scald it, then take it
off the Fire, sweeten it with fine Sugar, then take a Spoonful of Runnet to two
quarts of Milk, set it by, and keep it close covered, and so let it stand, when
the Cheese comes, strew a little fine Sugar, and grated Nutmeg, and serve it in
with sippets, sops in Sack, or Muskadine.

65. To make an Artichoak-Pye.
Take the bottoms of six Artichoaks, boiled very tender, put them in a dish and
some Vinegar over them, season them, with Ginger and Sugar, a little Mace
whole, and put them in a coffin of paste, when you lay them in, lay some Marrow
and Dates sliced, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom, with good store
of butter, when it is half baked, take a Gill of Sack being boiled first with
sugar, and a peel of Orange. Put it into the Pie, and set it in the Oven again
till you use it.

66. To make Marrow-Pasties.
Shred the Marrow and Apples together, and put a little sugar to them, put them
into puff-paste, and fry them in a pan with fresh butter, and serve them up to
the Table, with a little white sugar, strewed on it.

67. To make green Sauce.
Take a good handful of Sorrel, beat it in a Mortar with pippins pared and
quartered, with a little Vinegar and Sugar; put it into saucers.

Or take Sorrel, beat it, and stamp it well in a Mortar, squeeze out the juice
of it, and put thereto a little Vinegar, Sugar, and two hard Eggs minced small,
a little Nutmeg grated, and Butter, set this upon the coals till it is hot, and
pour it into the dish on the sippets: This is sauce for Hen, and Veal and Bacon.

78. To pickle Oysters.
Take a quart of the largest great Oysters with, the Liquor, wash them clean
and wipe them, add to them a pint of fair water, and half a pint of Whitewine
Vinegar, half an ounce of whole Pepper, an handful of Salt, a quarter of an
Ounce of large Mace, with the Liquor of the Oysters strained; put all together
in a pipkin over a soft fire, let them simper together a quarter of an hour;
when the Oysters are enough, take them up, and put them up into a little fair
water and Vinegar till they be cold, the pickle boiling a quarter of an hour
after the Oysters are taken up; both being cold, put them up together. When you
use them, garnish the dish with Barberries and Lemons, and a little Mace and
Pepper, and pour in some of the pickle.

69. To make Scotch Collops of Veal.
Cut out your Fillet into very broad slices, fat and lean, not too thick: Take
eight Eggs, beat them very well with a little Salt, grate a whole Nutmeg take a
handful of Thyme, and strip it, then take a pound of Sausages, half a pint of
stewing Oysters of the largest, wash and cleanse them from the Gravel, then
half fry your Veal with sweet butter, then put in your Sausages and Oysters,
then take a quarter of a pound of Capers, shred them very small, with three
Anchovies dissolved in White Wind and fair water, so put in your Eggs, shred
Capers and Anchovies, Butter and Spice, and mingle them, and strew them in the
pan upon the Veal and Oysters, serve it with sippets, with a little fresh
Butter and Vinegar, with Lemons sliced, and Barberries, with a little Salt. You
must have a care to keep the meat stirring, lest the Eggs curdle with the heat
of the fire.

70. To make a rare White pot.
Take three pints of Cream, whole Cinnamon, a little sliced Nutmeg, set on the
Cream and Spice, and scald it, take a penny-loaf, and slice it very thin, take
a couple of Marrow-bones, lay the Marrow sliced on the bottom of the dish, upon
the Marrow lay the Bread, then lay Raisins of the Sun over the Bread, and lay
Marrow again as before: To the three pints of scalded Cream, add nine yolks of
Eggs well beaten with Rose Water, sweeten the Cream with white Sugar, and take
out the whole Cinnamon, and beat the Cream, and Eggs well, fill up a broad
shallow basin and bake it, when it is enough scrape fine sugar on it, and stick
it with red and white Muscadoes, and so serve it.

71. To make a very fine Custard.
Take a quart of Cream, and boil it with whole Spice, then beat the Yolks of
ten Eggs, and five whites, mingle them with a little Cream, and when your Cream
is almost cold, put your Eggs into it, and stir them very well, then sweeten
it, and put out your Custard into a deep dish, and bake it, then serve it in
with french Comfits strewed on it.

72. To make Minced Pyes of an Eel.
Take a fresh Eel, flea it, and cut off the Fish from the bones, mince it
small, then pare two or three Wardens, or Pears, mince of them as much as of
the Eel, temper them together, and season them with Ginger, Pepper, Cloves,
Mace, Salt, a little Sanders, some Currants, Raisins, Pruans, Dates, Verjuice,
Butter and Rose Water.

73. To bake Rabbits to be eaten cold.
When your Rabbits are parboyled, take out all the bones you can well take out,
and lard them, then season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs,
with a good quantity of Savoury, and forced Meat; then put them into your
prepared coffin, put in butter, and close your Pie, bake it, and when it is
cold fill it with clarified Butter.

74. To bake a Joll of Ling in a Pie.
Let your Ling be almost boiled, and then season it with Pepper only (the skin
being first taken off) strew the bottom of your prepared coffin with an Onion
or two minced small; close your Pie, and bake it; then take the Yolks and
Whites of about a dozen Eggs, not boiled altogether hard, mince them small with
your Knife, and put them into drawn Butter, toss them together, then draw your
Pie, and pour in this Lear of Eggs all over, and shake it together, so put on
your Lid, and Dish your Pie.

75. To bake a Turkey.
Boil and Lard your Turkey, when it is parboyled, season it with Pepper, Salt,
and a little Cloves and Mace; then put him into your prepared Coffin, lay on
butter and close it: put the Head on the top with your garnish, then bake it,
and fill it with Clarified Butter when it is cold.

76. To Roast Calves feet.
First boil them tender, and blanch them, and being cold, Lard them thick with
small Lard, then spit them on a small spit, and Roast them; serve them with
sauce made of Vinegar, Cinnamon, Sugar and Butter.

77. To bake a Goose.
Break the bones of your Goose; and parboyl him, then season him with Pepper
and Salt, and a little Cloves and Mace, if you please, you may bake a Rabbit or
two with it, because your stubble-Geese are very fat, and your Rabbits dry, you
need not lard either, bake it in good hot butter paste.

78. To make Apple-Pyes to fry.
Take about twelve Pippins, pare them, cut them, and almost cover them with
water, and almost a pound of sugar, let them boil on a Gentle Fire close
covered, with a stick of Cinnamon, minced Orange-peel, a little Dill seed
beaten, and Rose Water, when this is cold and stiff, make them into little
Pasties with rich Paste, and so fry them.

79. To make a Rare Dutch Pudding.
Take a pound and a half of Fresh Beef, all lean, with a pound and a quarter of
Beef Suet, both sliced very small, then take a stale halfpenny loaf and grate
it, a handful of Sage, a little Winter-savoury, and a little Thyme, shred all
these very small, take four eggs, half a pint of Cream, a few Cloves, Nutmeg,
Mace, and Pepper finely beaten; mingle them all together very well with a
little Salt, roll it all up together in a green Colwort-Leaf, and then tie it
up hard in a Linen Cloth; Garnish your Dish with grated bread, and serve it
up with Mustard in saucers.

80. To make Sausages.
Take Pork, more lean than fat, mince it exceeding small together, then take
part of the Fleak of Pork, which is the suet in pieces about the bigness of the
top of your finger, season each a part with Sage minced, good store of Pepper,
and Salt, with some Cloves and Mace mixed in the seasoning each of them, then
take small sheeps-guts, and cleanse them, (some use Capons-guts) and fill them
with your Funnel, always putting some of the fleak between the minced, if you
have it ready, you may sprinkle a little sack on the top of the sausage-meat,
and it will make it fill the better.

81. To Stew Beef in Gobbets, the French Fashion.
Take a Flank of Beef, or any part but the Leg, cut it into slices, or Gobbets
as big as Pullets Eggs, with some Gobbets of fat, and boil it in a pot or
pipkin with some fair spring water, scum it clean, and after it has boiled an
hour, put to it Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, great Onions, some Salt, Cloves,
Mace, and whole Pepper; cover it close, and stew it till it be very tender; and
half an hour before it is ready put into it some picked Thyme, Parsley,
Winter-savoury, sweet Marjoram, Sorrel and Spinach, (being a little bruised
with the back of a Ladle) with some Claret Wine; Then dish it on fine sippets,
and serve it to the Table hot; Garnish it with Grapes, Barberries or
Goosberries: Or else use Spices, the bottoms of boiled Artichoaks put into
beaten Butter, and grated Nutmeg, garnished with Barberries.

82. To boil a Capon, or Chicken with Sugar-Pease.
When the Cods be but young, string them, and pick off the Husks, then take two
or three handfuls and put them into a Pipkin, with half a pound of sweet
butter, a quarter of a pint of fair water, gross Pepper, Salt, Mace, and some
Sallet-Oyl; stew them till they be very tender, and strain to them three or
four Yolks of Eggs, with six spoonfuls of Sack.

83. To boil Perches.
Let your Liquor boil, and your pan be seasoned with a little White Wind, a
couple of Onions cut in halves, a bunch of sweet Herbs, and a little white
Pepper; boil them up very quick, and flea them on both sides, and dish them
upon sippets, Then take a little White Wind, Gravy and Vinegar, with a grated
Nutmeg, and almost boil it over a Chafing dish, then pour sweet butter over it;
Garnish it with Barberries and sliced Lemons.

84. To boil Eels.
Cut the Eels and stew them; when they are half done, beat a little Ale with
Vinegar and put into the Liquor with some Parsley and sweet Herbs; Dish them
and serve them up in their Broth with a little salt.

85. A Turkish Dish of meat.
Take an inter-larded piece of Beef, cut it into thin slices, and put it into a
pot with a close cover, or stewing pan; then put into it a good quantity of
clean picked Rice, skin it very well, and put into it a quantity of whole
pepper, 2 or 3 whole Onions, and let it boil very well, and take out the
Onions, and dish it on sippets; the thicker it is the better.

86. To boil a Chine of Beef powdered.
Take either a Chine, Rump, Surloin, Brisket, Rib, Flank, Buttock, or Fillet of
Beef, and give them in Summer a weeks powdering, in Winter a Fortnight, you may
stuff them, or let them be plain; if you stuff them, do it with all manner of
sweet Herbs with fat Beef minced, and some Nutmeg; serve them on brewis, with
Roots, or Cabbage boiled in Milk, with beaten butter.

87. To make a Hash of a Capon or Pullet.
Take a Capon, or Partridge, or Hen, and Roast them, and being cold, mince the
brains and wings very fine, and tear the Legs and Rumps whole, to be
Carbonaded; then put some strong Mutton-broth, or good Gravy, grated Nutmeg, a
great Onion and Salt, then stew them in a large Earthen Pipkin, or sauce-pan,
stew the Rumps and Legs in the same strong broth in another pipkin; then take
some light French bread chipt, and cover the bottom of the dish, steep the
bread in the same broth, or good mutton Gravy, then pour the Hash on the
steeped bread, lay the Legs and the Rump on the Hash with some fried oysters,
sliced Lemon and lemon peel, the juice of an Orange, and yolks of Eggs
strained, and beaten butter, Garnish the dish with carved Oranges, Lemons, etc.
Thus you may hash any kind of fowl.

88. To dress a Cods head.
Cut off the Cods-Head beyond the Gills, that you may have part of the body
with it, boil it in water and salt, to which you may add half a pint of
Vinegar, the Head must be little more than covered; before you put it into the
Cauldron, take a quart of the biggest cleanest Oysters, and a bunch of sweet
Herbs and Onions, and put them into the mouth of the Head, and with a pack
thread bind the Jaws fast, you must be sure to pick it, and wash it very clean:
When it is boiled enough, take it up, and ^t it a drying over a Chafing Dish of
Coals, then take the oyster Liquor, four Anchovies, and a sliced Onion, put to
them a quarter of a pint of White Wind and sweet-butter, and melt them
together, and pour it on the Gods-head; stick all, or most of the oysters upon
the Head, or where they will enter, and garnish it over with them; grate on a
little Nutmeg, and send it smoking up; Garnish the brims of the dish with
Lemon, and sliced Bay Leaves.

89. To boil Widgeons or Teal.
Parboyl your Widgeons or Teal, and then stick whole Cloves in their breasts,
put into their bellies a little Winter-savory or parsley; boil them in a pipkin
by themselves, thicken it with Toasts, season it with Verjuice, Sugar, and a
little Pepper; Garnish your Dish with Barberries and Pruans, and so serve them.

90. To make a Veal-Pye.
When your Paste is raised; then cut your Leg of Veal into pieces, and season
it with Pepper, Nutmeg and salt, with some whole large Mace, and so lay it in
your prepared Coffin, with good store of Raisins of the Sun, and Currants, and
fill it up with sweet butter, then close it, and set it in the Oven, and when
baked, serve it hot.

91. To make a fried Pudding.
Take grated bread, Currants, Cloves and Mace, with Beef suet and sugar, and one
yolk of an Egg beaten, mix all well together, and make them into flat bowls,
then fry them in Beef Suet, and Garnish your dish with Sugar, serve them always
at the first Course.

92. To bake a breast of Veal.
First parboyl it, and take out the long bones, and so lay it in a Dish in
Vinegar two or three hours, then take it out, and season it with Pepper and
salt, and so lay it into a thin fine paste* with good store of fine sweet herbs
finely chopped, (...)good store of Butter or Marrow; then bake it (...) put in
some juice of Oranges and serve it hot.

93. To make a Paste for all manner of Tarts.
Take very sweet butter, and put into fair water, and make it boil on the fire;
then take the finest flower you can get, and mix them well together, till it
come to a paste, and so raise it; but if you doubt that it will not be stiff
enough, then you may mix some yolks of Eggs with it, as you temper all your
stuff together,

24. To make a baked Pudding.
Grate a penny-loaf, and put thereto more suet, then bread minced small, with
some Nutmeg and Sugar, and two yolks of Eggs, tempering it only with
Rose Water; Then Butter a little pewter Dish in the bottom, and put your stuff
after it is well tempered thereinto, then bake it, when it is baked, stir it up
from the bottom of the Dish, and so turn the underside uppermost, then strew
some Sugar, upon it, and upon the brims of the Dish, and serve it first to the
Table.

95. To boil Sparrows, Larks, or other small Birds.
Take a Ladle full of strong Mutton-broath, a little whole Mace, and a handful
of Parsley, put in a little Winter-savoury, season it with Verjuice, Sugar, and
a little Pepper, thicken it with a spoonful of Cream, and the yolk of an egg.

96. To boil a Capon with Asparagus.
Boil your Capon or Chicken in fair water, and some salt, then put in their
bellies a little Mace, chopped parsley, and sweet butter; being boiled serve
them on sippets, and put a little of the broth on them; Then have a bundle or
two of Asparagus boiled, put in beaten butter, and serve it on your Capon or
Chicken.

97. To boil a Chicken or Capon in white Broth.
First boil the Capon in water and salt, then 3 pints of strong broth, and a
quart of White Wind, and stew it in a pipkin with a quarter of a pound of
Dates, half a pound of fine Sugar, four or five blades of large Mace, the
Marrow of three Marrow-bones, a handful of white Endive, stew these in a pipkin
very leasurely, that it may but only simper, then being finely stewed, and the
broth well tasted, strain the yolks of ten-Eggs, with some of the broth; before
you dish up the Capons or Chickens, put the Eggs into the broth, and keep it
stirring, that it may not curdle, give it a Walm, and set it from the fire; the
Fowls being dish'd up, put on the broth, and Garnish the Meat with Dates,
Marrow, large Mace, Endive, preserved Barberries, Oranges, boiled Skirrets,
Pomegranats, and Kernels. Make a Lear of Almond-paste, and Grape verjuice.

98. To boil a Capon with Sage and Parsley.
First boil it in water and Salt, then, boil some Parsley, Sage, two or three
Eggs hard and chop them; then have a few thin slices of fine Manchet, and stew
all together, but break not the slices of bread; stew them with some of the
broth wherein the Capon boyls, some large Mace, Butter, a little White Wind,
or vinegar, with a few Barberries or Grapes; dish up the Chickens on the sauce;
and run them over with sweet Butter, and Lemon cut like Dice, the peel being
cut like small Lard, and boil a little peel with the Chickens,

99. To fry Rabbits with sweet Sauce.
Cut your Rabbet in pieces, wash it, and dry it well in a Cloth, take some
fresh butter, and fry the Rabbet in it, when your Rabbet is little more then
half fried, take some slices shred very small, a quarter of a pint of Cream,
the yolks of a couple of eggs, some grated Nutmeg and salt, when the Rabbet is
enough, put them into the pan, and stir them altogether; take a little vinegar,
fresh butter and sugar, melt it together, and so serve it with sippets, the
dish garnished with Flowers, etc.

100. To make a French Pottage called Skink.
Take a leg of Beef, and chop it into three pieces, then boil it in a pot with
three pottles of Spring Water, a few Cloves, Mace and whole pepper; after the
pot is scumm'd put in a bundle of sweet Marjoram, Rosemary, Thyme,
Winter-savoury, Sage and Parsley, bound up hard, some Salt, and two or three
great Onions whole, then about an hour before dinner put in three Marrow-bones,
and thicken it with some strained Oatmeal, or manchet sliced and steeped with
some Gravy, strong broth, or some of the pottage; then a little before you dish
up the Skink, put into it a little fine powder of Saffron, and give it a walm
or two; Dish it on large slices of French Bread, and Dish the marrow-bones on
them in a fine clean large dish, then have two or three manchets cut into
Toasts, and being finely Toasted, lay on the Knuckle of Beef in the middle of
the Dish, the Marrow bones round about it, and the Toasts round about the dish
brim; serve it hot.

101. To make Gooseberry Cream.
First boil, or you may preserve your Gooseberries; then having a clear cream
boiled up, and seasoned with old Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mace, Sugar. Rose water and
Eggs, dish it up, and when it is cold, take up the Gooseberries, with a pin,
and stick them on in rounds as thick as they can lie upon the said cream,
Garnishing your dish with them, and strew them over with the finest Sugar, and
serve them up.

102. To make a Quaking Pudding.
Take a quart of sweet Cream, and near half a pound of Almonds blanched, and
finely beaten, then strain them, and boil it with large mace, and season it
with Rose Water and Sugar, then take ten Eggs, and five of their whites well
beaten with small Cinnamon, and two or three spoonfuls of flower, mix all well
together. and make it of the thickness diagrams of pastry shapes for various
pies, pasties, tarts, and custards Double Borderd Custard Vmble Pie Sturgen Py
Custord Carp Pie Custord Oister Pie Orangado py Goosbery Tart Custord Lumber py
Chicken py Minced py Tongue py Lumber py Minced py Minced py Custord Presarud
Tart Custord


of Butter, then wet a Cloth and rub it with Flower, tying your Pudding round
therein, and boil it in Beef-broth two hours; take it up, and put a little
White Wind, Sugar, and sliced Nutmeg into a Pewter-dish, and put your pudding
into it; then scrape some Sugar on the brims and serve it.

103. To make Clouted Cream.
Take new Milk and set it on the fire from Morning till Evening. but let it not
boil; And this is called my Lady Youngs Clouted Cream.

104. To Souce a young Pig.
Scald a young Pig, boil it in fair water and white wind, put thereto some
Bay Leaves, whole Ginger and Nutmegs quartered, and a few whole Cloves, boil it
thoroughly, and let it lie in the same broth in an Earthen pot.

105. To make Polonian Sausages.
Take the Fillets of a Hog, chop them very small with a handful of red Sage,
season it hot with Ginger and Pepper; then put it into a great Sheeps gut, let
it lie three nights in Brine, then boil it, and hang it up in a Chimney where
Fire is usually kept. These Sausages will keep a whole Year, and are good for
Sallets, or to garnish boiled Meats, or to relish a Glass of Wine.

106. To keep Salmon fresh a whole Month.
First boil your Salmon as usually, then put it into an earthen pot, and cover
it in good Whitewine Vinegar, putting thereto a branch of Rosemary, and keep it
very close covered, and so you may keep it, that it will retain its perfect
taste and delicacy for a Month or more.

107. To make tender and delicate brawn.
Put a Collar of Brawn in a Kettle of water, and set it into an Oven, as for
Houshold-bread, cover it close, and let it stand as long as you would do bread,
and it will be very excellent Brawn.

108. To keep powdered Beef after it is boiled, sweet five or six Weeks.
When your Beef has been powdered about a fortnight, then boil it well, and
dry it with a cloth and wrap it in dry clothes, and put it into some pot or
Vessel, and keep it close from the air, and it will keep sound two or three
Months.

109. To dress Neats-tongues and Vdders.
When they are boiled enough in Beef-broath. and scumm'd, you must have your
Turnips ready boiled, cut in pieces, and soaked in butter, or else Colliflowers
and Carrots, or all of them; then put the Turnips all over the bottom of a
large Dish, then slice out the Tongues, and lay the sides one against another,
slice the Udders, and lay them between, opposite to one another; Garnish the
Colliflowers all over them, and the Carrots up and down between the
Colliflowers, with Barberries and Parsley on the brim of the dish.

110. To make Pannado.
Take a quart of Running-water, and put it on the Fire in a skillet, then cut a
little Roll of bread in slices, about the bigness of a groat, and as thin as
Wafers, lay it on a dish on a few Coals, then put it into the water, with two
handfuls of Currants picked and washed, a little large Mace, when it is enough
season it with Sugar and Rose Water.

111. To make Liver Puddings.
Take the Guts of a young Hog, wash them very clean, and lay them two or three
days in water, take the Liver of the same Hog and boil it till it will grate,
then grate it very small and fine, take to the weight of the Liver almost the
weight of Beef Suet, season it with Salt, Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg finely
beaten, a penny loaf grated, a pound of the best white Sugar, two pound of good
Currants, a pint of good Cream, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, three Eggs,
mix all together to such a thickness, that you may fill the Guts, then prick
them, and put them into boiling water, and keep an even Fire for half a quarter
of an hour; then take them up, and lay them upon straw, you must have a care
not to tie them too hard, nor too slack, lest they break in boiling.

112. To make a rare Citron-Pudding.
Take a penny loaf and grate it, a pint and half of Cream, half a dozen of
Eggs; one Nutmeg sliced, a little salt, an Ounce of Candyed Citron sliced
small, a little Candied Orange-peel sliced, three Ounces of Sugar, put these
into a wooden dish well flowered, and cover it with a Cloth, and when the
water boyleth put it in, boil it well, and serve it up with Rose Water and
Sugar, and stick it with Wafers or blanched Almonds.

113. To bake a Gammon of Bacon.
Water it fresh enough, and sees it as tender as you may to handle it, then
pull off the skin and stuff it with Parsley, Pennyroyal, Thyme, Marjoram,
Marygolds, Camomile and Sage, chop them small, and season them with Salt and
Pepper, Cloves, small Raisins, yolks of Eggs hard roasted, then stuff your
Bacon, and cut of the lean of the Bacon; and mince it small, and take a handful
of your stuffing, and mingle it with three or four yolks of raw Eggs, and then
put it upon the gammon, then close on the skin again, and close it in past.

114. To boil Woodcocks or Snites.
Boil them either in strong broth, or in water and salt, and being boiled,
take out the Guts, and chop them small with the Liver, put to it some Crumbs of
grated White-bread, a little Cock-broth, and some large Mace, stew them
together with some Gravy, then dissolve the Yolks of two Eggs in some
Wine-Vinegar, and a little grated Nutmeg, and when you are ready to dish it,
put in the Eggs, and stir it among the Sauce with a little butter, dish them on
sippets, and run the Sauce over them with some beaten butter and capers, a
Lemon minced small; Barberries, or whole pickled Grapes.

115. To make a made dish of Apples.
Put on your Skillet of water with some Currants a boiling, then pare about a
dozen of Pippins, and cut them from the core into the said water, when they are
boiled tender pour them into a Cullender, when the water is drained from them,
put them into a Dish, and season them, (but stay till they are cold, left it
melt your Sugar) with Sugar, Rose Water, Cinnamon, and Caraway-seeds, then roll
out two sheets of paste, put one into the dish bottom, and all over the brims,
then lay the Apples in the bottom round and high, wet it round, and cover it
with the other sheet, close it, and carve it about the brims of the dish as you
please, prick it, and bake it, scrape Sugar upon it, and serve it up.

116. To make a Fool.
Set two quarts of Cream over the Fire let it boil, then take the Yolks of
twelve Eggs, and beat them very well, with three or four spoonfuls of cold
Cream, and then strain the Eggs in the Skillet of hot cream, stirring it all
the time to keep it from burning, then set it on the fire, and let it boil a
little while, but keep it still stirring for fear of burning, then take it off,
and let it stand and cool, then take two or three spoonfuls of Sack, and put it
in the Dish with four or five sippets, set the dish and Sippets a drying, and
when they be dry that they hang to the dish, sweeten the Cream, and pour it
into the dish softly, because the sippets shall not rise up; this will make
three dishes: When it is cold it is fit to be eaten.

117. To boil Flounders or Jacks the best way.
Take a pint of White Wind, the Tops of young Thyme and Rosemary, a little
whole Mace, a little whole pepper, seasoned with Verjuice, Salt, and a piece of
sweet butter, and so serve it; you may do fish in the same Liquor three or four
times.

118. To boil a Haunch of Venison.
First stuff your Venison with a handful of sweet Herbs, and parsley minced
with a little Beef suet, and yolks of Eggs boiled hard; season your stuffing
with pepper, nutmeg, ginger and Salt; put your Haunch of Venison a boiling,
being powdered before; then boil up three or four Colliflowers in strong broth,
and a little Milk; when they are boiled, put them forth into a pipkin, add to
them drawn butter, and keep them warm by the Fire; then boil up two or three
handfuls of Spinach in the same Liquor, when it is boiled up, pour out part of
the broth and put in a little Vinegar, and a Ladleful of sweet butter, and a
grated Nutmeg, your dish being ready with sippets in the bottom, put on the
Spinach round toward your Dish side: then take up the Venison, being boiled,
and put it into the middle of your dish, and put in your Colliflowers all over
it, pour on your sweet butter, over your Colliflowers, and garnish it with
Barberries, and the brims of the Dish with green Parsley minced, Cabbage is as
good, done in the same manner as Colliflowers,

119. To make an Eel-Pye.
Wash, flea, and cut your Eels in pieces, put to them a handful of sweet Herbs,
parsley minced with an onion, season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves; Mace and
Nutmeg, and having your Coffin made of good paste, put them in, and strew over
them two handfuls of Currants, and a Lemon cut in slices, then put on butter and
close the pie, when it is baked, put in at the Funnel a little sweet butter,
White Wind and Vinegar, beaten up with a couple of yolks of Eggs.

120. To bake Steaks the French way.
Season the Steaks with Pepper, Nutmeg; and Salt lightly, and set them by; then
take a piece of the leanest of the Leg of Mutton, and mince it small with some
Beef Suet, and a few sweet Herbs, as Tops of Thyme, and Pennyroyal, grated
bread, yolks of Eggs, sweet Cream, Raisins of the Sun, etc. Work all these
together, and work it into little balls, or puddings, put them in a deep round
Pie on the steaks; then put to them some butter, and sprinkle it with Verjuice,
close it up, and bake it, when it is enough cut it up, and liquor it with the
juice of two or three Oranges or Lemons.

121. To make a Warden or Pear-pye.
Bake your Wardens or Pears in an Oven with a little water, and a good quantity
of Sugar, let your pot be covered with a piece of dough; let them not be fully
baked by a quarter of an hour: when they are cold, make a high Coffin, and put
them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinnamon, Sugar, with some of
the Liquor in the pot, so bake it.

122. To stew a Trout.
Take a large Trout fair trimmed, and wash it, put it into a deep Pewter Dish;
then take half a pint of sweet Wine, with a lump of butter, and a little whole
Mace, Parsley, Savoury and Thime; mince them all small, and put them into the
belly of the Trout, and so let it stew a quarter of an hour, then mince the
yolk of an hard Egg, and stew it on the Trout, lay the Herbs about it, scrape
on Sugar, and serve it up.

123. To make Sauce for Pigeons.
Melt some Vinegar and Butter together, and roast some Parsley in the belly of
the Fowl; or else Vine-leaves, and mix it well together, and pour it on.

124. A general Sauce for Wild-fowl.
The most general Sauce for Wild Fowl roasted; as Ducks, Mallard, Widgeon,
Teal, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plovers, Puets, and the like, is only Mustard; and
Vinegar, or Mustard and Verjuice mixed together, or else an Onion, Water and
Pepper.

125. To Roast a Cows Vdder.
Boil your Udder very well, then stick it thick all over with Cloves, and when
it is cold spit it, and lay it to the fire and baste it very well with sweet
butter, and when it is sufficiently Roasted and brown and draw it in the Fire,
and put some vinegar and butter on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and crumb in some
white-bread and boil it till it be thick, then put to it good store of sugar
and Cinnamon, and putting it into a clean dish, lay the Cows Udder therein, and
trim the sides of the dish with sugar, and so serve it.

126. To make a Spinage-Tart.
Take of good Spinach, and boil it in White Wind till it be very soft as Pap;
then take it and strain it all in a pewter dish, not leaving any unst^ained:
Put to it rose water good store of sugar Cinnamon, and rose water, and boil it
till it be as thick as Marmalade, then let it cool, and afterward fill your
Coffin and adorn it, and serve it, it will be of a green Color.

127. To make a Tart of Rice.
Pick your Rice very clean, and boil it in sweet Cream till it be very soft,
then let it stand and cool; put to it good store of Cinnamon and sugar; and the
yolks of a couple of Eggs, and some Currants; stir and beat all well together:
Then having made a Coffin as for other Tarts put your Rice therein and spread
it all over the coffin, and break many small bits of sweet butter upon it all
over, and scrape some Sugar over it, then cover the Tart and bake it, and serve
it as other Tarts.

128. To make a Codling-Tart.
Take green Apples from the Tree, and coddle them in scalding water, without
breaking then peel the thin skin from them, and so divide them into halves, and
cut out the cores, and so lay them into the coffin, and do as in a Pippin-Tart,
and before you cover it when the Sugar is cast in, sprinkle good store of
Rose Water on it, then close it, and do as in the Pippin-Tarts.

129. To make Pippin-tart.
Take of the fairest Pippins, and pare them, and then divide them just in
halves, and take out the cores clean; then roll the coffin flat, and raise of a
small verg of an inch or more high; lay the Pippins with the Hollow side
downward, close one to another, then put in a few Cloves, a stick of Cinnamon
broken, and a little piece of butter, cover all clean over with sugar, and so
cover the coffin, and bake it as other Tarts; when it is baked, boil some
Butter and Rose Water together, and anoint the Lid all over with it, then
scrape, or stew on it good store of Sugar, and so set it in the Oven again, and
then serve it up.

130. To make a Cherry-tart.
Take the fairest Cherries you can get, and pick them clean from Leaves and
stalks, then spread out your coffin as for your Pippin-tart, and cover the
bottom with Sugar, then cover the Sugar all over with Cherries, then cover
these Cherries with Sugar, some sticks of Cinnamon, and a few Cloves; then lay
in more Cherries, Sugar, Cinnamon and Cloves, till the coffin be filled up, then
cover it and bake it in all points as the Codling, and Pippin Tarts, and so
serve it. In the same manner you may make Tarts of Gooseberries, Strawberries,
Rasberries, Bilberries, or any other Berry whatsoever.

131. To make a Mince-Pye.
Take a Leg of Mutton, or a neats-Tongue, and parboyl it well, the Mutton being
cut from the bone, then put to it three pound of the best Mutton-Suet shred
very small; then spread it abroad, and season it with Salt, Cloves and Mace,
then put in good store of Currants, great Raisins and Pruans clean washed and
picked, a few Dates sliced, and some Orange-peels sliced: then being all well
mixed together, put it into a Coffin, or many coffins, and so bake them, and
when they are served up open the Lids, and strew store of Sugar on the Top of
the Meat, and upon the Lid.

132. To make a Calves-Foot-Pye.
Boil your Calves-Feet very well, and then pick all the meat from the bones,
when it is cold shred it as small as you can; and season it with Cloves and
mace, and put in good store of Currants, Raisins and Pruans, then put it into
the coffin with good store of sweet butter, then break in whole sticks of
Cinnamon, and a Nutmeg sliced, and season it with Salt, then close up the
coffin, and only leave a venthole, put in some Liquor made of Verjuice, Sugar,
Cinnamon, and butter boiled together, and so serve it.

133. To make a Tansie.
Take a certain number of Eggs, according to the bigness of your Drying Pan,
and break them into a dish, taking away the white of every third Egg, then with
a spoon take away the little white Chicken-knots that stick upon the yolks,
then with a little cream beat them very well together, then take of green Wheat
blades, Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves; Spinach and Succory, of each a like
quantity, and a few Walnut-Tree-buds; chop and beat all these very well, and
then strain out the juice; mix it then with a little more cream, put to it the
Eggs, and stir all well together; then put in a few crumbs of fine grated
bread, Cinnamon, Nutmeg and Salt, then put some sweet butter into a Drying Pan,
and as soon as it is melted, put in the Tansey, and fry it brown without
burning, and with a dish turn it in the pan as occasion shall serve, strew good
store of Sugar on it, and serve it up.

134. To stew a Pike.
After your Pike is dressed and opened in the back, and laid flat, as if it were
to Fry, then lay it in a large Dish, put to it White Wind to cover it, set it
on the coals, and let it boil gently, if scum arise, take it off, then put to
it Currants, Sugar, Cinnamon, Barberries, as many Pruans as will garnish the
Dish, then cover it close with another Dish, and let it stew till the Fruit be
soft and the Pike enough, then put to it a good piece of sweet butter; with
your Scummer take up the fish, and lay it in a dish with sippets, then take a
couple of Yolks of Eggs only and beat them together well with a spoonful of
cream, and as soon as the Pike is taken out, put it into the broth, and stir
it exceedingly to keep it from curdling, then pour the broth upon the Pike,
and trim the sides of the Dish with sugar, pruans, and barberries, with slices
of Oranges and Lemons, and so serve it up.

135. To Roast Venison.
If you will Roast any Venison, after you have washed it, and cleansed all the
blood from it, you must stick it with cloves all over on the outside, and if
it be lean, lard it either with Mutton, or Pork-lard, but Mutton is best, then
spit it, and Roast it by a soaking Fire, then take Vinegar, crumbs of Bread. and
some of the Gravy that comes from the Venison and boil them well in a Dish,
then season it with Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger and Salt, and serve the Venison upon
the sauce when it is Roasted enough.

136. To Roast a piece of fresh Sturgeon.
Stop your Sturgeon with Cloves, then spit it, and let it Roast very leasurely,
basting it continually, which will take away the hardness; when it is enough,
serve it upon the Venison sauce, with salt only thrown upon it.

137. To boil a Gurnet or Roach.
First draw your Fish and then either split it, or Joint it open in the back,
and truss it round; then wash it clean, and boil it in water and Salt, with a
Bunch of sweet herbs; then take it up into a large Dish, and pour into it
Verjuice, Nutmeg, Butter and Pepper, after it has stewed a little, thicken it
with the Yolks of Eggs, then remove it hot into another dish, and garnish it
with slices of Oranges and Lemons, Barberries, Pruans and Sugar, and so serve
it up.

138. To make a Carp Pie.
After you have drawn and washed, and scalded a fair large Carp, season it with
pepper, salt and nutmeg, and then put it into a coffin, with good store of
sweet Butter, and then cast on Raisins of the Sun, the juice of Lemons, and
some slices of orange-peels, and then sprinkling on a little vinegar, close it
up, and bake it.

139. To make a Chicken-pye.
After you have trussed your Chickens, then break their Legs and Breast-bones,
and raise your crust of the best Paste, lay them in a coffin close together,
with their Bodies full of Butter, then lay upon them, and underneath them,
currants, great Raisins, Pruans, Cinnamon, Sugar, whole Mace and Sugar, whole
Mace and Salt; then cover all with good store of butter, and so bake it, then
pour into it white wind, rose water, sugar, Cinnamon, and vinegar mixed together,
with the Yolks of two or 3 Eggs beaten amongst it, and so serve it,

140. To make Almond-water.
Take blanched Almonds beaten in a Mortar very small, putting in now and then
one spoonful of cream to keep them from oyling: then boil as much cream as you
please with your beaten Almonds, together with a blade of Mace, and season it
with Sugar, then strain it, and stir it till it be almost cold, and then let it
stand till you serve it, and then garnish your dish with fine sugar scraped
thereon.

141. To make an Almond-Pudding.
Take two pound of blanched Almonds, and beat them small, put thereto some
Rose Water and Ambergris often thereinto as you beat them, then season it
with Nutmeg and sugar, and mix them with grated bread, beef suet, and two Eggs,
and so put it into a dish, tying a cloth round about, and so boil it.

142. To make Water Gruel.
Take a pottle of water, a handful of great Oatmeal picked and beat in a Mortar,
put it in boiling, when it is half enough, put to it two handfuls of currants
washed, a Faggot or two of sweet Herbs, four or five blades of large Mace, and
a little sliced Nutmeg, let a Grain of Musk be infused a while in it, when it
is enough, season it with sugar and rose water, and put to it a little drawn
butter.

143. To stew Sausages.
Boil them a little in fair water and salt, and for sauce, boil some currants
alone, when they be almost tender, pour out the water from them, and put to
them a little White Wind, Butter and Sugar, and so serve it.

144. To make a rare Fricacie.
Take young Rabbits, young chickens. or a rack of Lamb; being cut one Rib from
another, and parboyl either of these well in a Drying Pan with a little water
and salt, then pour the water and salt from it, and fry it with sweet butter,
and make sauce with three yolks of Eggs beaten well, with six spoonfuls of
Verjuice, and a little shred Parsley, wi h some sliced Nutmeg, and scalded
gooseberries, when it is fried, pour in the Sauce all over the Meat, and so let
it thicken a little in the pan; then lay it in a dish with the sauce, and serve
it.

145. To make an Oatmeal pudding.
Take a pint of Milk, and put to it a pint of large, or midling Oatmeal, let it
stand on the Fire till it be scalding Hot, then let it stand by and soak about
half an hour, then pick a few sweet Herbs, and shred them, and put in half a
pound of currants, and half a pound of suet, and about two spoonfuls of Sugar,
and three or four Eggs; these put into a bag, and boiled, do make a very good
Pudding.

146. To make an Almond-tart.
Raise an excellent good Paste with six corners an Inch deep, then take some
blanched Almonds very finely beaten with Rose Water, take a pound of Sugar to a
pound of Almonds, some grated Nutmeg, a little Cream, with strained Spinach, as
much as will color the Almonds green, so bake it with a gentle heat in an Oven
not shutting the door, draw it, and stick it with a Candied Orange, Citron, and
put in red and white Muskadine.

147. To boil Pigeons with Rice.
Boil your Pigeons in Mutton-broth, putting sweet herbs in their bellies, then
take a little Rice, and boil it in Cream with a little whole Mace, season it
with sugar, lay it thick on their Breasts, wringing also the juice of a Lemon
upon them, and so serve them.

148. To barrel up Oysters.
Open your Oysters, take the Liquor from them, and mix it with a reasonable
quantity of the best White Wind Vinegar, with a little Salt and Pepper; then
put the oysters into a small Barrel, and fill them up with this Pickle, and
this will keep them six months sweet and good, and with their natural taste.

149. To make a Cowslip-tart.
Take the blossoms of a Gallon of Cowslips, mince them exceeding small, and
beat them in a Mortar, put to them a handful or two of grated Naple-Bisket, and
about a pint and a half of Cream, boil them a little on the Fire, then take
them off, and beat in 8 Eggs with a little Cream, if it do not thicken, put it
on the fire till it does gently, but take heed it curdles not, season it with
Sugar, Rosewater, and a little Salt; Bake it in a dish, or little open tarts;
it is best to let your Cream be cold before you stir in the Eggs.

150. To bake a Calves head to be eaten cold.
You must half boil a fair Calves head, then take out all the bones on both
sides, and season it with the aforesaid seasoning, and Lard it with Bacon, and
a little Lemon Peel; then having a coffin large enough, not very high, nor very
thick, but make it four square, lay on some sheets of Lard on the top and
butter, when it is baked and cold, fill it with clarified butter.

151. To make Pear-puddings.
Take a cold capon, or half roasted, which is much better, then take suet shred
very small, the Meat and Suet together, with half as much grated bread, two
spoonfuls of flower, Nutmegs, Cloves and mace, sugar as much as you please,
half a pound of currants, the yolks of two Eggs, and the white of one, and as
much Cream as will make it up into a stiff Paste; Then make it up in Fashion of
a Pear, a stick of cinnamon for the stalk, and the head of a clove.

152. To make a Hotch-pot.
Take a piece of Brisket of Beef, a piece of Mutton, a knuckle of Veal, a good
Cullender of Potherbs, half minced carrots, onions and cabbage a little broken,
boil all these together until they be very thick.

153. To make a Tart of Medlers.
Take Medlars that are rotten, then scrape them and set him upon a Chafing Dish
of Coals, season them with the Yolks of Eggs, sugar, cinnamon and ginger; let it
boil well, and lay it on paste, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

154. To make a Lemon-Candle.
Take a pint of white wind, and a pint of water, and let it boil, put to it
half a Manchet cut as thin and small as you can, put it in with some large
Mace, then beat the yolks of two eggs to thicken it, then squeeze in the juice
of half a dozen of Lemons, and season it with Sugar and Rose Water.

155. To make an Italian Pudding.
Take fine Manchet, and cut it in small pieces like Dice, then put to it half a
pound of Beef Suet minced small, Raisins of the Sun, Cloves, Mace, Dates
minced, Sugar, Marrow, Rose Water, Eggs and Cream, mingle all these together,
put them in a buttered dish, in less than an hour it will be well baked, when
it is enough, scrape on Sugar and serve it up.

156. To make a Rare Pudding to be baked or boiled.
Beat a pound of Almonds as small as possibly, put to them some Rose Water and
Cream as often as you beat them; then take one pound of Beef Suet finely minced
with five yolks of Eggs, and put two or three whites, make it as thin as Batter
for Fritters, mixing it with sweet thick cream, seasoning it with beaten Mace,
Sugar and Salt, then set it into the Oven in a Pewter dish, and when you draw
it forth, strew some Sugar on the top of your Pudding, and Garnish your dish
with Sugar, and serve it always first to the Table.

157. To make a Gooseberry Custard.
When you have cut off the sticks and Eyes of your Gooseberries, and washed
them, then boil them in water till they will break in a spoon, then strain
them, and beat half a dozen Eggs, and stir them together upon a Chafing Dish of
coals with some Rosewater, then sweeten it very well with sugar, and always
serve it cold.

158. To make a Fricacie of Rabbits.
Cut your Rabbits in small pieces, and mince a handful of Thyme, and Parsley
together, and season your Rabbits with a Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; then take two
Eggs and Verjuice beaten together, then throw it in the pan, stick it, and dish
it up in sippets.

159. To make Cracknels.
Take 5 or 6 pints of the finest Wheat flower you can get, to which put in a
spoonful, and not more of good Yeast; then mingle it well with Butter, Cream
and Rose Water, and Sugar finely beaten and working it well into paste, make it
into what form you please and bake it.

160. To make Pancakes.
Put eight Eggs to two quarts of Flower, casting by four whites, season it with
Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves, Mace and Salt, then make it up into a strong
Batter with Milk, beat it well together, and put in half a pint of Sack, make
it so thin that it may run in your pan how you please, put your pan on the fire
with a little butter, or suet, when it is very hot, take a cloth and wipe it
out, so make your pan very clean, then put in your Butter, and run it very
thin, supply it with little bits of Butter, and so toss it often, and bake it
crisp and brown.

161. To make a Junket.
Take Ewes, or Goats-Milk, or for want of these Cows-Milk, and put it over the
Fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet, then pour it out into a dish, and
let it cool, then strew on some Cinnamon and Sugar, and take some of your Cream
and lay on it, scrape on sugar and serve it.

162. To make Excellent Marrow-Spinage-Pasties.
Take Spinach and chop it a little, then boil it till it be tender; then make
the best rich light crust you can, and roll it out, and put a little of your
Spinach into it, and Currants, and Sugar, and store of lumps of Marrow; clap the
Paste over this to make little Pasties deep within, and fry them with Clarified
butter.

163. To make a Pine-Apple-tart.
Beat two handfuls of Pine-Apples with a pricked Quince, and the pulp of two or
three pippins, when they are well beaten, put to them half a pint of Cream, a
little Rosewater, the yolks of six Eggs, with a handful of sugar, if it be
thick, add a little more Cream to it, so having your thin low Coffins for it
dried, fill them up, and bake them; you may garnish them with Oringado, or
Lozenges, of Sugar plate, or what else you please.

164. To dry Neats-tongues.
Take Bay Salt beaten very fine, and Saltpeter of each alike, and rub over
your Tongues very well with that, and cover all over with it, and as it wastes,
put on more, and when they are very hard and stiff they are enough, then roll
them in bran, and dry them before a soft Fire, and before you boil them, let
them lie one night in Pump-water, and boil them in the same water.

165. To stew Birds the Lady Butlers way.
Take small Birds, pick them, and cut off their Legs, fry them in sweet butter,
lay them in a cloth to dry up the butter, then take Oysters and mince them,
and put them in a dish, put to them White Wind and Cinnamon, put in the birds
with Cloves Mace and Pepper; let all these stew together covered till they be
enough, then put into it some Sugar, and some toasted Manchet, and put it in
the dish, and so serve it up to the Table.

166. To make a sweet Pie with Lamb-stones, and Sweet-breads and sugar.
Slit the Lamb-stones in the middle, and skin them, wash the Sweet-breads, both
of Veal and Lamb, and wipe them very dry; take the Lambs Liver, and shred it
very small, take the Udder of a Leg of Veal and slice it, season all with a
little Salt, Nutmeg, Mace and Cloves beaten, and some whole Pepper, then shred
two or three pippins, and Candied Lemon and Orange-peel, half a dozen Dates
sliced, with Currants, white Sugar, a few Carraway-seeds, a quarter of a pint of
Verjuice, and as much Rose Water, a couple of Eggs; roll up all these together
in little puddings, or balls made green with the juice of Spinach, and lay a
Pudding, then a Sweat-bread, then a Lamb-stone, till you have filled up the
Pie, and cover them with dates, and sliced Citron and Lemon. When it is drawn,
take two or three yolks of Eggs, beat them, and put to them a little fresh
butter, White Wind and Sugar, and pour it into the Tunnel, scrape some loaf
sugar upon the Lid, and so serve it.

167. To roast Eels.
When they are flayed, cut them to pieces, about three or four Inches long, dry
them, and put them into a dish, mince a little Thyme, two Onions, a piece of
Lemon Peel, a little pepper beaten small, Nutmeg, Mace and Salt, when it is cut
exceeding small, strew it on the Eels, with the Yolks of two or three Eggs,
then having a small Spit (or else a couple of square sticks made for that
purpose) spit through the Eels cross-ways, and put a bay-leaf between every
piece of Eel, and tying the sticks on a spit, let them Roast; you need not turn
them constantly, but let them stand till they hiss, or are brown, and so do
them on the other side, and put the Dish (in which the Eel was with the
seasoning) underneath to save the Gravy, baste it over with sweet butter. The
Sauce must be a little Claret Wine, some minced Oysters with their Liquor, a
grated Nutmeg, and an Onion, with sweet butter and so serve it.

168. To boil Cocks or Larks.
Boil them with the Guts in them in strong broth or fair water, and three or
four whole Onions, large Mace and salt, the Cocks being boiled, make sauce with
some thin slices of manchet, or grated bread in another Pipkin, and some of the
broth where the Fowl or the Cocks boil, then put to it some butter, and the
Guts and Liver minced, then take some yolks of Eggs dissolved with Vinegar, and
some grated Nutmeg, put it to the other ingredients, stir them together, and
Dish the Fowl in fine sippets, pour on the sauce with some sliced Lemon, Grapes
or Barberries, and run it over with beaten butter.

169. To broyl Oysters.
Take the biggest Oysters you can get, then take a little minced Thyme, grated
Nutmeg, grated bread, and a little Salt, put this to the Oysters, then get some
of the largest bottom-shells, and place them on the Grid-Iron, and put two or
three Oysters in each shell, then put some butter to them, and let them simper
on the Fire till the Liquor bubbles low, supplying it still with butter, when
they are crisp, feed them with White Wind, and a little of their own Liquor,
with a little grated Bread, Nutmeg and minced Thyme, put as much only as to
relish it, so let it boil up again, then add some drawn butter to thicken them,
and Dish them.

170. To pickle Oysters.
Take a quart of the largest great Oysters with the Liquor, wash them clean,
and wipe them, add to them a pint of fair water, and half a pint of White Wind
Vinegar, half an ounce of whole Pepper, an handful of Salt, a quarter of an
Ounce of large Mace, with the Liquor of the Oysters strained; put all together
in a Pipkin over a soft Fire; let them simper together a quarter of an hour;
when the Oysters are enough take them up, and put them into a little fair water
and vinegar till they be cold; let the pickle boil a quarter of an hour after
the Oysters are taken up; both being cold, put them up together: When you use
them, Garnish the dish with Barberries and Lemon, and a little of the Mace and
Pepper, and pour in some of the Pickle.

171. To make English Pottage.
Make it with Beef, Mutton and Veal putting in some Oatmeal, and good
Pot Herbs, as Parsley, Sorrel, Violet-leaves, and a very little Thyme and sweet
Marjoram, scarce to be tasted, and some Marygold leaves at last; you may begin
to boil it over Night, and let it stand warm all night, and make an end of
boiling it next morning; it is good to put into the pot at first twenty or
thirty corns of whole Pepper.

172. To stew Beef.
Take very good Beef and slice it very thin, beat it with the back of a knife,
put to it the Gravy of some Meat, and some Wine, and strong broth, sweet Herbs
a quantity; let it stew till it be very tender, season it to your liking, and
garnish your Dish with Mary-gold Flowers, or Barberries.

173. To make excellent Minc'd-Pyes.
Parboyl Neats-Tongues, then peel and hash them with as much as they weigh of
Beef Suet and stoned Raisins, and picked Currants; chop all exceeding small, that
it be like Pap; employ therein at least an hour more than ordinarily is used,
then mingle a very little Sugar with them, and a little Wine, and thrust it up
and down some thin slices of green Candyed Citron-peel, and put this into
Coffins of fine light well reared crust; half an hours baking will be enough:
If you strew a few Carraway-Comfits on the top, it will not be amiss.

174. To pickle Roast Beef, Chine, or Surloin.
Stuff any of the aforesaid Beef with Pennyroyal, or other sweet Herbs, or
Parsley, minced small, and some Salt, prick in here and there a few whole
cloves, and Roast it; then take Claret Wine, Wine-Vinegar, whole Pepper,
Rosemary, Bays and Thyme bound up close in a bundle and boiled in some
Claret Wine, and Wine-Vinegar; make the pickle, and put some Salt to it, and
pack it up in a barrel that will but just hold it, put the pickle to it, close
it on the Head, and keep it for your use.

175. To make a double Tart.
Peel Codlings tenderly boiled, cut them in halves, and fill your Tart; put
into it a quarter of an hundred of Codlings, a pound and a half of sugar, a few
Cloves, and little Cinnamon, close up the Coffin and bake it. When it comes out,
cut off the lid, and having a lid cut in flowers ready, lay it on and garnish
it with Preserves of Damsons, Raspberries, Apricocks and Cherries, and place a
preserved Quince in the middle, and strew it with Sugar-biskets.

176. To make a Warden or Pear-Pye.
Bake your Wardens, or Pears in an Oven with a little water, and a good
quantity of Sugar, let your pot be covered with a piece of Dough, let them not
be fully baked for a quarter of an hour, when they are cold make a high Coffin,
and put them in whole, adding to them some Cloves, whole Cinnamon, Sugar, with
some of the Liquor they were baked in, so bake it.

177. To bake a Pig Court-Fashion.
Flea a small young Pig, cut it in quarters, or in smaller pieces, season it
with Pepper, Ginger and Salt, lay it into a fit coffin, strip, and mince small
a handful of Parsley, six sprigs of Winter-savoury. strew it on the Meat in
the pie, and strew upon that the yolks of three or four hard Eggs minced, and
lay upon them five or six blades of Mace, a handful of Clusters of Barberries,
a handful of currants well washed and picked, a little Sugar, half a pound of
sweet butter, or more; close your pie, and set it in an Oven as hot as for
Manchet, and in three hours it will be well baked, draw it forth, and put in
half a pound of Sugar, being warmed upon the Fire, pour it all over the Meat,
and put on the pye-lid again, scrape on Sugar, and serve it hot to the Table.

178. To make a Pudding of Hogs Liver.
Boil your Liver, and grate it, put to it more grated bread the (...) with as
much fine flower as of either, pu^ ^welve Eggs to the value of a Gallon of this
mixture, with about two pound of Beef Suet minced small, and a pound and half
of Currants, half a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, a good quantity of Cloves
and Mace, Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Ginger, all minced very small mix all these with
sweet Milk and Cream, and let it be no thicker than Fritter-batter, to fill
your Hogs-guts, you make it with the Maw, fit to be eaten hot at Table; in your
knitting or tying the Guts, you must remember to give them three or four Inches
scope: In your putting them into boyling-water, you must handle them round to
bring the meat equal to all parts of the Gut; they will ask about half an hours
boiling, the boiling must be sober, if the Wind rise in them, you must be ready
to prick them, or else they will fly, and burst in pieces.

179. Olives of Beef stewed and Roasted.
Take a Buttock of Beef, and cut some of it into thin slices as broad as your
hand, then hack them with the back of a knife, Lard them with small Lard, and
season them with pepper, Salt and nutmeg; then make a farsing with some sweet
herbs, Thyme, Onions, the yolks of hard Eggs, Beef Suet or Lard, all minced,
some Salt, Barberries, Grapes or Gooseberries; season it with the former Spices
lightly, and work it up together, then lay it on the slices, and roll them up
round, with some Caul of Veal, Beef, or Mutton, bake them in a Dish in the
Oven, or Roast them; then put them in a Pipkin with some Butter and Saffron, or
none; blow off the Fat from the Gravy, and put it to them, with some
Artichoaks, Potatoes, Skirrets blanched, being first boiled, a little
Claret Wine, and serve them on sippets, with some sliced Orange, Lemon,
Barberries, Capers or Gooseberries.

180. To make French-barly Posset.
Put two quarts of Milk to half a pound of French-Barley, boil it small till it
is enough; when the Milk is almost boiled away, put to it three pints of good
Cream, let it boil together a quarter of an hour; then sweeten it, and put in
Mace and Cinnamon, in the beginning when you first put in your Cream; when you
have done so, take White Wind a pint, or Sack and White wine together of each
half a pint, sweeten it as you love it with Sugar, pour in all the Cream, but
leave your Barley behind in the skillet; this will make an excellent posset
nothing else but a tender curd to the bottom; let it stand on the coals half a
quarter of an hour.

181. To bake Chucks of Veal.
Parboyl two pound of the lean flesh of a Leg of Veal, mince it as small as
grated bread, with four pound of Beef Suet; then season it with biscuit, Dates
and Carrawayes, and some Rose Water, sugar, Raisins of the sun, and Currants,
cloves, mace, nutmegs and Cinnamon, mingle them all together, fill your pyes,
and bake them.

182. How to stew a Mallard.
Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up and cut it in little pieces,
then put it into a Dish with the Gravy, and a piece, of fresh butter, and a
handful of parsley chopped small, with two or three Onions, and a
Cabbage-Lettuce, let them stew one hour, then season it with pepper and salt,
and a little Verjuice, and so serve it.

183. To stew a Rabbit.
Half Roast it, then take it off the Spit and cut it into little pieces, and
put it into a Dish with the Gravy, and as much Liquor as will cover it, then
put in a piece of fresh butter, and some powder and Ginger, pepper and salt,
two or three pippins minced small, let these stew an hour, and dish them upon
sippets, and serve it.

184. To make a Pigeon Pie.
Truss your Pigeons to bake, and set them, and Lard the one half of them with
Bacon, mince a few sweet herbs and parsley with a little Beef Suet, the Yolks
of hard Eggs, and an Onion or two, season it with Salt, beaten Pepper, Cloves,
Mace, and Nutmeg, work it up with a piece of butter and stuff the bellies of
the Pigeons, season them with Salt and Pepper as before: Take also as many
Lambstones seasoned as before, with six Collops of Bacon, the Salt drawn out,
then make a round Coffin and put in your Pigeons, and if you will put in
Lambstones and Sweetbreads, and some Artichoak-bottoms, or other dry Meat to
soak up the Juice, because the pie will be very sweet and full of it; then put
a little White Wind beaten up with the yolk of an Egg, when it comes out of the
Oven, and so serve it.

185. To stew a Fillet of Beef the Italian Fashion.
Take a young tender Fillet of Beef, and take away all the skins and sinews
clean from it, put to it some good White Wind in a bowl, wash it and crush it
well in the Wine, then strew it upon a little pepper, and as much Salt as will
season it; mingle them very well, and put to it as much Wine as will cover it,
lay a Trencher upon it to keep it down in a close pan with a weight on it out,
and let it steep two Nights and a Day, then take it out, and put it into a
pipkin with some good Beef-broath, put none of the pickle to it, put only
Beef-broath, and that sweet, and not salt, cover it close, and set it on the
Embers, then put to it a few whole Cloves and Mace, and let it stew till it be
enough; it will be very tender, and of an excellent Taste: Serve it with the
same broth as much as will cover it.

186. To boil a Capon or Chicken with several Compositions.
You must take of the skin whole, but leave on the Legs, Wings and Head; mince
the body with some Beef Suet, or Lard, put to it some sweet herbs minced, and
season it with Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Salt, two or three Eggs, Grapes,
Gooseberries, or Barberries, bits of Potato or Mushromes; in the Winter, with
Sugar, Currants and Pruans: Fill the skin, prick it up, and stew it between two
Dishes, with large Mace, and strong broth, pieces of Artichoaks, Cardones, or
Asparagus and Marrow, being finely stewed, serve it on carved sippets, and run
it over with beaten butter, Lemon sliced, and scrape on Sugar.

187. To boil a Leg of Pork.
Cut your pork into slices very thin, having first taken off the skinny part of
the Fillet, then hack it with the back of your Knife, then mince some Thyme and
Sage exceeding small, and mingle it with Pepper and Salt, and therewith season
your Collops; and then lay them on the Gridiron; when they are enough, make
sauce for them with Butter, Vinegar, Mustard, and Sugar, and so serve them.

188. To make a Fricacie of Partridges.
After you have Trussed your Partridges, Roast them till they are almost
enough, and then cut them to pieces, then having chopped an Onion very small,
fry them therewith; then put to them half a pint of Gravy, 2 or 3 Anchovies, a
little bread grated, some drawn butter, and the Yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs beaten up
with a little White Wind, let them boil till they come to be pretty thick, and
so Dish them up.

189. To bake Calves-Feet.
You must season them with pepper, Salt and currants, and then bake them in a
pie, when they are boked, take the yolks of three or four Eggs, and beat them
with Verjuice, or Vinegar, Sugar, and grated Nutmeg; put it into your pie, then
scrape on Sugar, and so serve it.

190. To fry Neats-tongues.
First boil them, and after blanch them, and then cut them into thin slices;
season them with Nutmeg, Sugar, Cinnamon, put to them the Yolks of raw eggs; and
a Lemon cut into little square pieces, then fry them in spoonfuls with sweet
butter; make your sauce with White Wind, Sugar, and butter, heat it hot, and
pour on your tongues, scrape sugar on it, and serve it.

191. To roast a Hare.
When you Case your Hare, do not cut off his hinder Legs or Ears, but hack one
Leg through another, and so also cut a hole through one Ear and put it through
the other, and so Roast him; make your Sauce with the Liver of the Hare boiled,
and minced small with a little Marjoram, Thyme and Winter-savoury, and the
yolks of 3 or 4 hard eggs, with a little Bacon and Beef Suet, boil this all up
with water and Vinegar, and then grate a little Nutmeg, and put to it some
sweet butter, and a little Sugar; dish your Hare, and serve it. This may also
serve for Rabbits.

192. To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters.
Parboyl your Oysters, then mince Winter-savoury, Thyme, parsley, and the yolks
of five or six hard Eggs, hard boiled; add to these a halfpenny loaf of grated
bread, and three or four yolks of Eggs; mingle all these together with your
hands, when you have spitted your Mutton, make holes in it as big as you think
convenient; put in your Oysters, with the other ingredients, about twenty five
or thirty Oysters will be enough, let it Roast indifferent long, then take the
remainder of a quart of Oysters, for you must have so many in all, and put them
into a deep dish with Claret Wine, two or three Onions cut in halves, and two
or three Anchovies; put all this in the Dripping-pan under your Mutton and save
your Gravy, and when the Meat is enough, put your sauce upon the Coals, and put
to it the yolk of an Egg beaten, grated Nutmeg, and sweet butter; Dish your
Mutton, and pour in your oysters, sauce and all upon it, Garnish your dish with
Lemons and Barberries.

193. A Rare broth.
Take a couple of Cocks, and cut off their Wings and Legs, and wash them clean,
and parboyl them very well, till there rise no scum, then wash them again in
fair water, then put them in a pitcher with a pint of Rhenish-wine, and some
strong broth, as much as will cover them, together with a little China-Root, an
ounce or two of Hartshorn, with a few Cloves, Nutmeg, large Mace, Ginger
shred, and whole Pepper, and a little salt; stop up your Pitcher close, that no
steam may come out; boil the Pitcher in a great pot of water about six hours,
then pour out the broth, and strain it into a Basin, and squeeze into it the
juice of two or three Lemons, and so eat it.

194. To bake Sweet breads.
Boil your Sweetbreads, and put to them the yolks of two Eggs new laid, grated
Bread, with some parboyled Currants, and three or four Dates minced and when you
have soason'd it lightly with Pepper, Sugar, Nutmeg and salt, put to it the
juice of a Lemon; put up all these together into puff-paste, and so bake it.

195. To make Pottage of French-Barley.
Pick your Barley very clean from dirt and dust, then boil some Milk, and put
i^ in while it boyls, when it is boiled put in a little Salt Sugar, large Mace,
and a little Cream; and when you have boiled it pretty thick, dish it, and
serve it up with Sugar scraped thereon.

196. To boil a Hanch of Venison.
First stuff your Venison with a handful of sweet Herbs and Parsley minced with
a little Beef Suet, and some yolks of Eggs boiled hard; season your stuffing
with Nutmeg, Salt and Ginger, having powdered your Hanch; boil it, afterward
boil up two or three Colliflowers in strong broth, adding to it a little Milk,
when they are boiled, put them into a pipkin, and put to them drawn butter,
keeping them warm, then boil up two or three handfuls of Spinach in the same
Liquor, when it is boiled up, pour out part of your broth, and put to it a
little Vinegar, a Ladle-ful of sweet butter and a grated Nutmeg, your dish
being ready with sippets on the bottom, put the Spinach round on the sides of
your Dish, when the Venison is boiled take it up, and put it in the middle of
the dish, lay your Colliflowers over it, pour on sweet butter over that,
Garnish it with Barberries, and some parsley minced round the brims of the dish.

197. To make a Florentine of Sweeet-breads, or Kidneys.
Take three or four Kidneys, or Sweet-breads, and when they are par-boyled,
mince them small; season it with a little Cinnamon and Nutmeg, sweeten it with
sugar and a little grated bread, with the Marrow of two or three Marrow-bones
in good big pieces, add to these about a quarter of a pound of Almond-past, and
about half a pint of Malaga Sack, two spoonfuls of Rose Water, and Musk and
Ambergreece, of each a grain, with a quarter of a pint of Cream, and three or
four Eggs, mix altogether, and make it up in puff paste, then bake it; in three
quarters of an hour it will be enough.

198. To stew a Rump of Beef.
Season your Beef with some Nutmeg grated, together with some Salt and Pepper,
season it on the bony side, and lay it in the pipkin with the Fat side
downward, then take two or three great Onions, and a bunch of Rosemary tied up
together with three pints of Elder-Vinegar, and three pints of Water, stew all
these three or four hours together in a pipkin close covered over a soft fire;
Dish it upon sippets, blowing off the Fat from the Gravy, put some of the Gravy
to the Beef; and serve it up.

199. To make Pottage of a Capon.
Take Beef and Mutton and cut it into pieces, then boil a large earthen pot of
Water, take out half the water, put in your Meat and skim it, and when it boyls
season it with Pepper and Salt; when it has boiled about two hours, and four
or five Cloves, half an hour before you think it is enough, put in your Herbs,
Sorrel, Purslain, Burrage, Lettuce and Bugloss, or green Pease, and in the
Winter, Parsley-roots, and white Endive, pour the broth upon light bread
toasted, and stew it a while in the dish covered. If your water consume in
boiling, fill it up with water boiling hot. The less there is of the broth, the
better it is, though it be but a porringer-full, for then it would be as stiff
as Jelly when it is cold.

200. To make a Pie with Pippins.
Pare your Pippins, and cut out the cores, then make your Coffin of crust, take
a good handful of Quinces sliced, and lay at the bottom, then lay your pippins
a top, and fill the holes where the Core was taken out with Syrup of Quinces,
and put into every pippin, a piece of Orangado, then pour on the top Syrup of
Quinces, then put in Sugar, and so close it up, let it be very well baked, for
it will ask much soaking, especially the Quinces.

201. To boil Pigeons the Dutch way.
Lard and set your Pigeons, put them into a pipkin, with some strong broth made
of Knuckles of Veal, Mutton and Beef, let them be close covered, and when they
are scum'd, put in a Faggot of sweet herbs, a handful of Capers, and a little
large Mace, with a few Raisins of the Sun minced very small, about six Dates
quartered, a piece of butter with two or three yolks of hard Eggs minced, with
a handful of Grapes or Barberries, then beat two yolks of Eggs with Verjuice,
and some White-bread, a Ladle-full of sweet butter, and a grated Nutmeg, serve
it upon sippets.

202 To make excellent Black-Puddings.
Beat half a score Eggs, the Yolks and Whites together very well; then take
about a quart of Sheeps-blood, and as much Cream, when you have stirred all
this well together, thicken it with grated bread, Oatmeal finely beaten, of
each a like quantity, add to these some Marrow in little lumps, and a little
Beef Suet shred small season it with Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, mingled with salt, a
little sweet Marjoram, Thyme, and Pennyroyal shred very well together; mingle
all together, put to them a little Currants, cleanse your Guts very well, fill
them, and boil them carefully.

203. To make a Pie of Neats-tongues.
Parboyl a couple of Neats-Tongues, then cut out the Meat at the Root-end as
far as you can, not breaking it out at the sides; take the Meat you cut out,
and mingle it with a little suet, a little Parsley, and a few sweet herbs, cut
all very small, and mingled together, season all this with Ginger, Cloves,
Mace, Pepper, Salt, and a little grated bread, and as much Sugar, together with
the yolks of three or four Eggs; make this up together, and season your
Tongues, inside, and outside, with your seasoning aforesaid, and wash them
within with the yolk of an egg, and force them where you cut forth the meat,
and what remains make into a forced; then make your paste into the Fashion of a
Neats-Tongue, and lay them in with puddings, and little balls, then put to them
Lemon and Dates shred, and buttter on the top, and close it, when it is baked,
put in a lear of the Venison-sauce, which is Claret Wine vinegar, grated bread,
Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, boil it up thick, that it may run like butter, and let
it be sharp and sweet, and so serve it.

204. To stew a breast or loyn of Mutton.
Joint either your Loyn or Breast of mutton well; draw it, and stuff it with
sweet Herbs, and Parsley minced; then put it in a deep stewing-dish with the
right side downward, put to it so much White Wind and strong broth as will stew
it, set it on the Coals, put to it two or three Onions, a bundle of sweet
Herbs, and a little large Mace; when it is almost stewed, take a handful of
Spinach, Parsley and Endive, and put into it, or else some Gooseberries and
Grapes; in the Wintertime, Samphire, and Capers; add these at any time; dish
up your Mutton; and put by the Liquor you do not use, and thicken the other
with yolks of Eggs and sweet Butter, put on the sauce and the Herbs over the
Meat; Garnish your dish with Lemon and Barberries.

205. To make a Sallet of green Pease.
Cut up as many green Pease as you think will make a Sallet, when they are
newly come up, about half a foot high; then set your Liquor over the Fire, and
let it boil, and then put them in, when they are boiled tender put them out,
and drain them very well; then mince them, and put in some good sweet butter,
salt it, and stir it well together, and so serve it.

206. To make a Sallet of Fennel.
Cut your Fennel while it is young, and about 4 fingers high, tie it up in
bunches like Asparagus, gather enough for your Sallet, and put it in when your
water is boiling hot, boil it soft, drain it, dish it up with butter, as the
green Pease.

127. To make a Tansie of Spinach.
Take a quart of Cream, and about twenty Eggs without the Whites, add to it
Sugar and grated Nutmeg, and color it green with the juice of Spinach; then
put in your dish, and squeeze a Lemon or two on it; Garnish it with slices of
Orange, then strew on sugar, and so serve it.

208. To make a Hash of Ducks.
When your Ducks are roasted, take all the flesh from the bones, and hash it
very thin, then put it into your stewing-pan with a little Gravy, strong
broth, and Claret Wine, put to it an Onion or two minced very small, and a
little-small Pepper, let all this boil together with a little salt, then put to
them about a pound of Sausages, when you think they are ready, stir them with a
little butter drawn: Garnish it with Lemon, and serve it.

209. To make French Puffs with green Herbs.
Take a quantity of Endive, Parsley and Spinach, and a little Winter-savoury,
and when you have minced them exceeding small, season them with sugar, Ginger,
and Nutmeg; beat as many Eggs as you think will wet your Herbs, and so make it
up; then pare a Lemon and cut in thin slices, and to every slice of Lemon, put
a slice of your prepared stuff, then fry it in sweet butter, and serve them in
sippets, after you have put to them either a Glass of Canary or White Wind.

210. To make excellent stewed broth.
Take a Leg of Beef, boil it well, and scum it clean, then take your bread and
slice it, and lay it to soak in your Broth, then run it through a strainer,
and put as much into your Broth as will thicken it; when it has boiled a
pretty while, put in your Pruans, Raisins and Currants, with Cinnamon, Cloves,
and Mace beaten; when your Pruans are boiled, take them up, and run them also
through a strainer, as you did the bread, then put in half a pint of Claret,
then let it boil very well, and when it is ready, put to it Rose Water and
Sugar, and so serve it.

211. To stew a dish of Breams.
Take your Breams and dress them and dry them well, and salt them; then make a
Charcoal Fire, and lay them on the Grid-iron over the Fire being very hot; let
them be indifferent brown on both sides, then put a Glass of Claret into a
Pewter dish, and set it over the fire to boil, put into it two or three
Anchovies, as many Onions, and about half a pint of Gravy, a pint of Oysters,
with a little Thyme minced small; when it has boiled a while, put to it a
little melted Butter and Nutmeg. Then dish your Bream, and pour all this upon
it, and then set it again on the Fire, putting some yolks of Eggs over it.

212. To boil a Mullet.
Having scalded your Mullet, you must save their Livers and Roes, then put them
in water boiling hot, put to them a Glass of Claret, a bundle of sweet Herbs,
with a little Salt and Vinegar, two or three whole Onions, and a Lemon sliced;
then take some whole Nutmegs and quarter them, and some large Mace, and some
butter drawn with Claret, wherein dissolve two or three Anchovies; dish up your
Fish, and put on your sauce, being first seasoned with Salt. Garnish your
dishes with fried Oysters and Bay Leaves; and thus you may season your Liquor
for boiling most other fish.

213. To Farce, or stuff a fillet of Veal.
Take a large Leg of Veal, and cut off a couple of Fillets from it, then mince
a handful of sweet Herbs and Parsley, and the yolks of two or three hard Eggs;
let all these be minced very small, then season it with a couple of grated
Nutmegs, and a little Salt, and so Farce, or stuff your Veal with it, then lard
it with Bacon and Thyme very well, then let it be Roasted, and when it is
almost enough, take some of your stuffing about a handful, and as many
Currants, and put these to a little strong broth, a Glass of Claret, and a
little Vinegar, a little Sugar and some Mace: when your Meat is almost ready,
take it up and put it into this, and let it stew, putting to it a little butter
melted, put your Meat in your dish, and pour your sauce upon it, and serve it.

214. To make a Pudding of Oatmeal.
Take a quart of milk, and boil it in a Skillet, put to it a good handful of
Oatmeal beat very small, with a stick or 2 of Cinnamon and Mace; put in this
Oatmeal as much as will thicken it, before the milk be hot, then keep it
stirring, and let it boil for about half an hour, putting into it a handful of
Beef suet minced, very small, then take it off, and pour it into a dish, and
let it stand to cool; if it be too thick, put to more milk, then put in a
Nutmeg grated, a handful of sugar; with three or four Eggs beaten, and some
Rosewater, then rub the Dish within with Butter, and pour out your Pudding into
it, let it be as thin as Batter, let it bake half an hour, scrape sugar on it,
and serve it up.

215. To make a Pudding of Rice.
Take a good handful of Rice beaten small, and put it into about three pints of
Milk, adding a little Mace and Cinnamon, then boil it, keeping it always
stirring, till it grow thick, then put a piece of butter into it, and let it
boil a quarter of an hour, then pour it out to cool, then put to it half a
dozen Dates minced, a little Sugar, a little beaten Cinnamon, and a couple of
handfuls of Currants, then beat about half a score Eggs, throwing away two or
three of the whites, put in some salt, butter the bottom of your Dish, pour in
your Pudding, bake it as before, put on a little Rose Water and sugar, and
serve it.

216. To make a Florentine of spinach.
Take a good quantity of Spinach, to the quantity of two Gallons, set your
water over the Fire, and when it boyls very high, put in your spinach, and let
it remain in a little while, then put it out into a strainer, and let it drain
very well, and squeeze out all the water, then take it and mince it small with
a Candyed Orange-peel or two, add to it about three quarters of Currants boiled
also, season it with salt, Ginger beaten, Cinnamon and Nutmeg; then lay your
paste thin in a dish, and put it in, adding butter and sugar, close it up,
prick it with holes, and bake it, when it is nigh baked, put into it a Glass of
Sack, and a little melted butter and vinegar, stir it together with your knife,
scrape sugar upon it, and serve it.

217. To make a Tansey of Cowslips.
Take your Cowslips or Violets, and pound them in a wooden or Marble Mortar,
put to them about twelve Eggs, with three or four of the Whites taken out,
about a pint of Cream, a quartern of white Sugar, Cinnamon beaten small; Nutmeg,
and about a handful of grated bread, with a little Rose Water, then take all
these together, and put them in a skillet with a little butter, and set them
over the Fire, stirring it till it grow thick; then put your frying pan on the
fire, and when it is hot, put some butter into it, and then put in your Tansey;
when you think it is enough of one side, butter a Pewter Plate, and turn it
therewith, when it is fried, squeeze on a Lemon, scrape on Sugar, Garnish it
with Oranges quartered, and serve it.

218. To make excellent white Puddings.
Take the Humbles of a Hog, and boil them very tender, then take the heart, the
lights, and all the Flesh about them, picking them clean from all the Sinewy
skins, and then chop the Meat as small as you can, then take the Liver, and
boil it hard, and grate a little grated Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Sugar,
and a few Carraway-seeds, with the Yolks of four or five Eggs, and about a pint
of the best Cream, a Glass of Canary, and a little Rose Water, with a good
quantity of Hogs suet and salt, make all into Rouls, and let it lie about an
hour and half before you put it in the Guts, laying the guts a steep in
Rose Water before, boil them, and have a care of breaking them.

219. To stew Flounders.
Draw your Flounders, and wash them, and scotch them on the white side, being
put in a dish, put to them a little White Wind, a few minced Oysters, some
whole Pepper, and sliced Ginger, a few sweet Herbs, two or three Onions
quartered, and Salt; put all these into your stewing-pan covered close, and let
them stew as soon as you can, then dish them on sippets; then take some of the
Liquor they were stewed in, put some butter to it, and the Yolk of an Egg
beaten, and pour it on the Flounders; garnish it with Lemon, and Ginger beaten
on the brims of the Dish.

220. To draw Butter for Sauce.
Cut your butter into thin slices, put it into your dish, let it melt leisurely
upon the Coals, being often stirred; and after it is melted, put to it a little
Vinegar, or fair water, which you will, beat it up till it be thick, if it keep
its color white, it is good, but if yellow and turned, it is not to be used.

221. To Roast a Salmon whole.
Draw your Salmon at the gills, and after it is scaled, washed and dried, Lard
it with pickled herring, or a fat Eel salted; then take about a pint of Oysters
parboyled, put to these a few sweet herbs, some grated bread, about half a
dozen hard Eggs, with a couple of Onions; shred all these very small, and put
to it Ginger, Nutmeg, Salt, Pepper, Cloves, and Mace; mix these together, and
put them all within the Salmon at the Gills: put them into the Oven in an
Farthen pan, born up with pieces of Wood, in the bottom of the dish, put
Claret Wine, and baste your Salmon very well over with butter before you put it
in the oven, when it is drawn, make your sauce of the Liquor that is in the
pan, and some of the spawn of the Salmon boiled with some melted Butter on the
top, stick him about with Toasts and Bay Leaves fried, take out the Oysters
from within, and Garnish the Dish therewith.

222. To make Excellent Sauce for Mutton, either Chines, Legs or Necks.
Take half a dozen Onions shred very small, a little strong broth, and a glass
of White Wind; boil all these well together; then take half a pint of oysters,
and mince them with a little Parsley, and two or three small Bunches of Grapes
if in season, with a Nutmeg sliced, and the yolks of two or three Eggs, put in
all these together with the former, and boil it, and pour it all over your
Meat, and then pour some melted butter on the top, and strew on the Yolks of
two or three hard Eggs minced small.

223. Another good Sauce for Mutton.
Take a handful of pickled Cucumbers, as many Capers, and as much Samphire; put
them into a little Verjuice, White Wind; and a little strong broth, and a
Lemon cut in small pieces, and a little Nutmeg grated; let them boil together,
and then beat them up thick, with a ladleful of Butter melted, and a couple of
Yolks of Eggs, and a little Sugar; Dish your Meat upon sippets, pour on your
sauce, and garnish it with Samphire, Capers and Barberries.

224. To make Sauce for Turkies or Capons.
Take a two penny white-leaf, and lay it a soaking in strong broth, with
Onions sliced therein, then boil it in Gravy, together with a Lemon cut in
small pieces; a little Nutmeg sliced, and some melted, put this under your
Turkey or Capon, and so to serve it; you will find it excellent Sauce.

225. To starch Tiffanys or Lawns.
You must Soap your Tiffany on the Hems or Laces only with brown Soap, then
wash them very well in three Lathers pretty hot, and let your last Lather be
made thin of the Soap, do not rince them, nor wring them hard, then dry them
over Brimstone, and keep them all the time from the Air, for that will spoil
them, then make your starch of a reasonable thickness, and blew it as you
please, and to a quarter of a pound of starch, put as much Allom as a
Hazle-nut, boil it very well and strain it, and while it is hot, wet your
Tiffanys with it very well, and lay them in a Cloth to keep them from drying,
then with your hands clean and dry them, then hold your Tiffany to a good Fire
till they be through hot, then clap them and rub them between your hands from
the Fire till you see they be very clear, then shape them by a piece of Paper,
cut out by them before they are washed, and Iron them with a good hot Iron, and
then they will look Glossy like new Tiffany. And so you also starch Lawns, only
remember to Iron them upon a cloth wetted and wrung our again, and turned on
the wrong side, and instead of starch, you may sometimes use Gum-Arabick in
water; and when it is dissolved, wet the Lawns in that instead of starch, and
hold them to the Fire as aforesaid, clapping and rubbing them till they are
very clear.

226. To make clean Gold and Silver Lace.
You must pull off your Lace from your Garment, and being laid on a clean
Table, take a little burnt Alum, beaten very fine, and with a small brush rub
it all over very well till you find it comes to its color, then shake it, and
wipe it very well over oftentimes with a clean Linen cloth.

227. To cleanse all sorts of Silver plate.
Wash your Plate in sope-suds, and dry it very well, and if any spots remain,
take Salt and Vinegar and rub them out, then daub your Plate all over with
Chalk and Vinegar, and lay it before the Fire, or in the Sun to dry, then rub
it off with warm linen clothes very well, and it will look like new.

228. To wash silk Stockens.
Make a strong lather with Soap, and pretty hot, then lay your stockings on a
Table, and take a piece of such Cloth as the Seamen use for their Sails,
double it up, and rub them soundly with it, turn them first on the one side,
and then on the other, till they have passed through three Lathers, then rince
them well, and hang them to dry with the wrong side outward, and when they are
near dry pluck them out with your Hands, and smooth them with an Iron on the
wrong side.

229. To make clean Points and Laces.
Take new white-bread and pare off the Crust, then lay your point upon a clean
cloth on the Table, and rub the white-bread all over upon them, and afterward
rub it over again with a small clean brush and the crumbs of bread, till you
have rubbed it very clean, then cleanse it from the bread, and gently slap it
over with a clean Linen Cloth; in the same manner you may take off the soil
from Tabby, Taffety, or white Satin, or any other colored, if it be not too
much soiled and greasy.

230. To get ink Spots out of linen.
As soon as any such accident happens, lay it immediately in Urine, and there
let it lie all night, and the next day wash it out of the Urine, and put it in
fresh Urine, and the next day wash it out again, and in so doing two or three
times, you will find the spots and stains quite gone.

123. To take Spots of Grease out of Silk, Stuff or Cloth.
Wet a linen rag in fair water, and then put a live Wooden or Seacole upon it,
and close it up about the cole, and presently lay it upon the greasy Spot
whilst it is smoking hot, and when you perceive it to cool, do so again till
the spots are taken out.

232. To take away the stains of Linen Cloth, caused by any sort of fruit.
Take any of your Garments so stained before they are washed, and run every
spot thereof very well with a little butter, then let it lie a little while in
scalding hot Milk, and when it is cooled, rub the spotted places in the Milk
till they are quite out, and then wash it out with water and soap.

233. To wash white sarsenet.
First take your Sarsenet, and spread it very smooth and straight upon a board,
and spread soap upon those places that are soyled, and afterward take a hard
brush that is small, and dip it in water, and make an indifferent thick Lather,
and with the brush rub your Sarsenet well with it the right way of the silk,
and when one side is well washed, wash the other also, then make a clean Lather
scalding hot, and put in your Hoods double into it, and cover it up, and so
fast as you wash them into it, give them three good washes upon the board, and
after the first Lather, let the rest be very hot, and cast them in a scald
every time, then make up a scalding hot water, and after you have steeped some
water of Gum Arabic, put it therein, adding thereunto some smalt to blue it a
little, let the hoods be doubled up therein, and close covered for an hour, and
when you take them out, dip them very well all over, and fold them up in a very
small compass, and smooth them very well betwixt your hands till they be more
than dry, after you have smoothed them over Brimstone, then smooth them with
Hot Irons the way you washed them, and upon the right side of the Sarsnet.

234. To wash black Sarsenets.
Wash them the same way with the other, only rince them in small Beer, without
any Gum, and Iron them upon a Woolen Cloth on the wrong side.

235. To wash colored Silks.
They must be washed the same way with the white Sarsenet, only you must not use
any blew with them, neither must you smoke them over Brimstone, but in all
things else you must do as in the White-Sarsnet.

236. To Embroider Belts, Bodices, or Petticoats.
Get your Pattern drawn, and then form it about with what you like best, black
Gimp or other, and fill up the under parts and leaves with saxen-stitch, some
light and some darker, and let the upper parts and Seeds of Flowers be done
with high work, as Purple stich or others, and let the stalks be all alike with
a great Gimp twisted, you may make your Flowers of what fancy you please in
shadows, and being well shadowed they will appear very Natural.

247. To wash and Starch Points.
You must first put your points into a Tent, then take very good Soap, and make
a strong Lather therewith, then take a small brush and dip it therein, and
therewith rub your Point very well on both sides, and continue so to do till
you have washed it in four Lathers, and then wash it in fair Water only, and
afterward in blew water, and then take some starch that is made thin with
water, and wash it over on the wrong side with your Brush, and so let it dry,
then lay it upon a Table, and with an Ivory Bodkin made for that Purpose, open
it in the closest and narrowest parts thereof, then open the Gimp, and
overcast, and also all the Ilet-holes, and when they are thus opened you must
Iron them on the wrong side, but be sure your water be warm that you may make
your lather with, and let not your water with which you wash them be too blew.

248. To fry Salmon.
Take a Jole, Chine or Rand, and fry it in Clarified Butter, when it is stiff
and crisp fried, make sauce thereof with a little Claret Wine, sweet Butter,
grated Nutmeg, slices of Orange, and Oyster liquor, stew them altogether, and
pour on the sauce, and on that Parsley, Alisaunder, and Sage-leaves fried in
butter.

Because many Books of this Nature have the Terms of Carving added to them, as
being necessary for the more proper Nominating of things; I have thought good
also to add them: As also some Bills of Fare, both upon Ordinary and
Extraordinary Occasions.

Terms of Carving both Fish, Fowl, and Flesh.
ALlay a Pheasant. Barb a Lobster. Border a Pasty. Break a Deer or Egript.
Break, a Sarcel, or Teal. Chine a Salmon. Culpon a Trout. Mince that Plover.
Rear that Goose. Sauce a Capon, or tench. Cut up a Turkey, or bustard. Dismember
that Heron. Display that Crane. Disfigure that Peacock. Fin that Chevin. Leach
that brawn. Lift that Swan. Timber the Fire. Tire an Egg. Tranch that Sturgeon.
sauce a Place or Flounder. Side that Haddock, Splay that Bream. Splat that
Pike. Unbrace a Mallard. Under-Tench a Porpuss. Unjoynt a Bittern. Unlace a
Coney, Untach that Curlew. Untach that Brew. Spaul that Hen. String that
Lamprey. Tame a Crab. Thigh a Pigeon, and Woodcock, and all manner of small
birds. Transon that Eel. Truss that Chicken. Tusk a Barbel.
Particular directions how to Carve according to the Former Terms of Carving.
Unlace that Coney.
LAY your Coney on the back, and cut away the Vents, then raise the Wings, and
the sides; and lay the Carcass and the sides together; then put to your sauce,
with a little beaten Ginger and Vinegar.

Thigh a Woodcock.
Raise the Legs and Wings of the Woodcock, as you would do of a Hen, then take
out the brains, and no other sauce but salt.

Allay a Pheasant.
Raise the legs and Wings of the Pheasant, as of a Woodcock, as also of a
Snite, and a Plover, and only salt.

Display a Crane.
Unfold the legs of the Crane, and cut off his Wings by the Joints, then take
up his Wings and legs, and make sauce of Mustard, Salt, Vinegar, and a little
beaten Ginger.

To cut up a Turkey.
Raise up the leg very fair, and open the Joint with the point of your Knife,
but cut it not off, then lace down the breast with the point of your knife, and
open the breast Pinion, but take it not off, then raise up the Merry-thought
betwixt the breast bone and the top, then lace down the flesh on both sides the
breast bone, and raise up the Flesh called the brawn, and turn it outward upon
both sides, but break it not, nor cut it off, then cut off the Wing-pinions at
the joint next the Body, and stick in each side the Pinion in the place you
turned out the Brawn, but cut off the sharp end of the pinion, and take the
middle piece, and that will fit just in the place; you may cut up a Capon or
Phesant the same way.

Break a Sarcel, or Teal, or Egript.
Raise the Legs and Wings of the Teal, and no sauce but Salt.

Wing a Partridge, or Quail.
Raise his legs and wings, as of a Hen, and if you mince him, make Sauce with a
little White Wind, and a little beaten Ginger, keeping him warm upon a
Chafing Dish of Coals till you serve him.

To Unbrace a Curlew, or brew.
Take either of them, and raise their Legs, as before, and no sauce but Salt.

To Unbrace a Mallard.
Raise up the Pinion and Legs, but take them not off, and raise the
Merry-thought from the breast, and lace down each side with your Knife, waving
it to and fro.

To sauce a Capon.
Lift up the Right Leg of the Capon, and also the Right Wing, and so lay it in
the Dish in the posture of flying, and so serve them; but remember, that Capons
and Chickens, be only one sauce, and Chickens must have green sauce or Verjuyce.

Bills of Fare for all times of the Year; and also for Extraordinay Occasions.
A Bill of Fare for the Spring Season.
1. A Collar of Brawn and Mustard. 2. A Neats-Tongue and Udder. 3. Boiled
Chickens. 4. Green Geese. 5. A Lumbard-Pye. 6. A dish of young Rabbits.
Second Course.
1. A Haunch of Venison. 2. Veal Roasted. 3. A Dish of Soles or Smelts. 4. A
Dish of Asparagus. 5. Tansie. 6. Tarts and Custards,
A Bill of Fare for Midsomer.
1. A Neats-Tongue and Colliflowers, 2. A Fore quarter of Lamb. 3. A
Chicken-pye. 4. Boiled Pigeon. 5. A Couple of stewed Rabbits. 6. A Breast of
Veal Roasted.
Second Course.
1. An Artichoak-Pye. 2. A Venison-Pasty. 3. Lobsters and Salmon. 4. A Dish of
Pease. 5. A Goose-berry-Tart. 6. A dish of Straw-berries.
A Bill of Fare for Autumn, or Harvest.
1. A Capon and White broth. 2. A Westphalia Ham, with Pigeons. 3. A Grand
Sallet. 4. A neats-Tongue and Udder roasted. 5. A Powdered Goose. 6. A Turkey
Roasted.
Second Course.
1. A Potato, or Chicken-Pye. 2. Roasted Partridges. 3. Larks and Chickens. 4.
A Made dish. 5. A Warden-Pye, or Tart. 6. Custards.
A Bill of Fare for Winter Season.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. A Lambs Head and white broth. 3. A Neats-Tongue and
Udder roasted. 4. A Dish of Minc'd-Pyes. 5. A Venison, or Lamb-pye. 6. A dish
of Chickens.
Second Course.
1. A side of Lamb. 2. A dish of Wild ducks. 3. A Quince-Tart. 4. A Couple of
Capons Roasted. 5. A Turkey Roasted. 6. A Dish of Custards.
A Bill of Fare upon an extraordinary Occasion.
1. A Collar of Brawn. 2. A Couple of Pullets boiled 3. A Bisk of Fish. 4. A
dish of Carps. 5. A grand boiled Meat. 6. A grand Sallet. 7. A Venison Pasty.
8. A Roasted Turkey. 9. A Fat Pig. 10. A powdered Goose. 11. A Haunch of Venison
roasted. 12. A Neats-Tongue and Udder roasted. 13. A Westphalia Ham boiled. 14.
A Joll of Salmon. 15. Minced pies. 16. A Surloyn of Roast beef. 17. Cold baked
Meats. 18. A dish of Custards.
Second Course.
1. Jellies of all sorts. 2. A dish of Pheasants. 3. A Pike boiled. 4. An
Oyster-pye, 5. A dish of Plovers. 6. A dish of Larks. 7. A Joll of Sturgeon. 8.
A couple of Lobsters. 9. Lumber pie. 10. A couple of Capons. 11. A dish of
Partridges. 12. A Fricacy of Fowls. 13. A dish of wild-ducks. 14. A dish of
crammed Chickens. 15. A dish of stewed Oysters. 16. A Marchpane. 17. A dish of
Fruits, 18. A dish of Tarts.
A Bill of fare for fish-days.
1. A dish of Butter and Eggs. 2. A barrel of Oysters. 3. A Pike boiled. 4. A
stewed Carp. 5. An Eel-pye. 6. A Pole of Ling. 7. A dish of green fish buttered
with Eggs. 8. A dish of stewed Oysters. 9. A Spinach Sallet boiled. 10. A dish
of Soles. 11. A Joll of fresh Salmon. 12. A dish of Smelts fried.
Second Course.
1. A Couple of Lobsters. 2. A roasted Spithcock. 3. A dish of Anchovies. 4.
Fresh Cod. 5. A Bream roasted. 6. A dish of Trouts. 7. A dish of Place boiled.
8. A dish of Perches. 9. A Carp farced. 10. A Potato-Pye. 11. A dish of Prawns
buttered. 12. Tenches with short broth. 13. A dish of Turbut. 14. A dish of
Eel-pouts. 15. A Sturgeon with short broth. 16. A dish of Tarts and Custards.
A Bill of Fare for a Gentleman's House about Candlemas.
1. A Pottage with a Hen. 2. A Catham Pudding. 3. A Fricacie of Chickens. 4. A
Leg of Mutton with a sallet. Garnish your dishes with Barberries.
Second Course.
1. A Chine of Mutton. 2. A Chine of Veal. 3. A Lark pie. 4. A Couple of
Pullets, one Larded. Garnished with Orange slices.
Third Course.
1. A dish of Woodcocks. 2. A couple of Rabbits. 3. A dish of Asparagus. 4. A
Westphalia Gammon.
Last Course.
1. Two Orange-Tarts, one with Herbs. 2. A bacon-Tart. 3. An Apple-Tart. 4. A
dish of bon-Chriten-Pears. 5. A dish of Pippins. 6. A dish of Pearmains.
A Banquet for the same season.
1. A dish of Apricocks, 2. A dish of Marmalade of Pippins. 3. A dish of
preserved Cherries. 4. A whole red Quince. 5. A dish of dried sweet-meat.
Reader,
I Have here presented to thee the order of a Feast, and a Bill of Fare, which
was taken out of the Records of the Tower; I have done it the rather, that thou
may see what Liberality and Hospitality there was in Ancient times amongst
our Progenitors; like this to Solomon's Royal House keeping, yet he was one that
was endued with wisdom from above; by which liberality his Subjects were made
rich, so that silver was as plenty as Stones in the streets of Jerusalem, and
there was Peace in all his days: According to his Judgment from his inspired
Wisdom, so was his Practice, and so was his Declaration; for food and raiment
is all the Portion that man has in this life.

Thus hoping to see Liberality flourish amongst us once more, as in old time,

I remain thine, B. H.

A great FEAST made by George Nevil Chancellor of England, and Archbishop of
York, in the days of EDWARD the Fourth, 1468.
0300 QUARTERS of Wheat. 0300 Tun of Ale. 0100 Tun of Wine 0001 Pipe of
Ipocras. 0104 Oxen 0006 Wild Bulls. 1000 Muttons. 0304 Veals. 0304 Porks. 0400
Swines. 3000 Geese. 1000 Capon. 3000 Piggs. 0400 Plovers. 0100 Dozen of Quails.
0200 Dozen of Fowls called Rees. 0400 Peacocks. 0400 Mallards and Teals. 0234
Cranes. 0204 Kidds. 3000 Chickens. 4000 Pigeons. 4000 Coneys. 0200 Bullers.
9400 Heronshaws. 0200 Pheasants. 0500 Partridges. 0400 Woodcocks. 0100 Curlews.
1000 Egrites. 0504 Stags, Bucks and Roes. 0103 Pasties of Venison cold. 0508
Pikes and Breams. 6000 Dishes of Jelly. 0103 Cold Tarts. 3000 Cold Custards.
1500 Hot Venison Pasties. 3000 Hot Custards. 0013 Porrosses and seals.
Besides abundance of Sweetmeats.

The great Officers.
Earl of Warwick Steward. Earl of Northumberland Treasurer. L. Hastings Cup
bearer. Lord Willowby Carver. Lord John of Buckingham Controuler. Sir Richard
Stanwig Surveyor. Sir William Worlly Marshall of the Hall. Eight Knights of the
Hall. Eighty Esquire of the Hall. Two other Surveyors of the Hall. Sir John
Malbiury Pantler Two Esquires Keepers of the Cubbard. Sir John Pracenock
Supervisor of the Hall.
Estates sitting in the Hall.
At the High Table.
The Archbishop in his State, on his Righthand, the Bishops of London, Durham
and Elie. On his Left Hand, the Duke of Suffolk, the Earls of Oxford and
Worcester.
At the second Table.
The Abbots of Saint Mary's. The Doctors of Halls of Rivones. The Queresters of
Rivones The Prownes of Durham, of Girglen, and of Berlenton, of Giserow, and
others, the number of eighteen.
At the third Table.
The Deans of York, the Lords of Cornwel, York, Durham, with forty eight
Knights.
At the fourth Table.
The Deans of Durham and of Saint Ambroses, all the Prebends of the Minster.
At the fifth Table.
The Mayors of York and Calice, and all the Aldermen.
At the sixth Table.
The Judges of the Land, four Barons of Exchequer, and 26 Counselors.
At the last Table.
Sixty nine Knights, wearing the Kings badges and his Arms.
Estates sitting in the chief Chamber.
At the first Table.
The Duke of Gloucester the Kings Brother, and upon his Right hand the Duke of
Suffolk, and upon his left hand the Countess of Westmorland and Northumberland,
and two of the E. of Warwicks daughters.
At the second Table.
The Barons of Greystock, with 3 other Barons.
At the third Table.
Eighteen Gentlemen of the said Lands.
Estates sitting in the second Chamber.
At the first Table.
The elder Duchess of Suffolk, the Countess of Warwick and Oxford, the Ladies
Hastings and Barwick.
At the second Table.
The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the Lords of Fitshugh only with
two Barons.
At the third Table.
Fourteen Gentlemen, and 14 Gentlewomen of quality.
In the low Hall.
Four hundred and 12 of the Nobility with double service.
In the Gallery.
0200 Noble men's servants, with their servants. 2162 1100 Inferior Officers,
with their servants. 1500 Other meaner servants of all Offices. 0062 Cooks.

FINIS.
The Table to the Art of Preserving, Conserving, and Candying.
A.
ALmond Butter 4 Almond Caudle 38 Almond Milk 6 Angelets to make 9 Angellica
Roots Preserved 18 Angelica water 13 Apricock Cakes 27 Apricocks preserved 6
Aqua Composita 21 Aqua mirabilis 7 Artichoak bottoms pickled 63. 30 Artichoaks
to pickle 51 Artificial Claret Wine 22 Artificial Malmsey 22 Artificial Oranges
47 Artificial Walnuts 44
B
Banbury Cakes 31 Barberries candyed 44 Barberries preserved 42 Barley water 20
Baum water 21 Biscuit cakes to make 27 Black cherry wine 44 Bragget to make 65
Broom buds to pickle 21 Burrage Flowers to candy 27 Dr. Burges Plague water. 23
C.
Cakes of Lemon 44 Capon Water 45 Caraway Cake 49 Candying Pears, etc. 3 Caudle
of great virtue 37 Cherries to candy 39 Cherries dried in the Sun 12 Cherries
Preserved 2 Cherry wine 7 Cherries to dry 23. 12 Chestnuts kept all the Year 43
China broth 46 Chips of Quinces 54 Crystal Jelly 26 Cinnamon sugar 41 Cinnamon
water 2 Clove-gilly-flowers to pickle 40 Comfortable Syrup 38 Comfits of all
sorts 60 Conserve of Barberries 1 Conserve of Burrage flowers 25 Conserve of
Bugloss flowers 54 Conserve of Damsons 10 Conserves of Oranges 16, 3 Conserve
of Pruans 26 Conserve of Quinces 11 Conserve of Roses 1 Conserve of Rosemary 13
Conserve of Strawberries 25 Conserve of sage 62 Conserve to strengthen the back
20 Conserve for Tarts all the Year 28 Cock-Ale to make. 49 Cordial
strengthening broth 42 Cream of Apricocks 42 Cream of Codlins 46 Cream of
Quinces 5 Cream Tarts 47 Cornelians to Pickle 64 Cordial water of
Clove-gilliflowers 50 Cucumbers to pickle 3 Cucumbers preserved green 43
Cullice to make. 42 Currants preserved 8 Currants Wine 61
D.
Damask water 33 Damsons preserved 10, 44 Dr. Deodates drink for the Scurvy 20
Date Leach 35 Dry Vinegar to make 35
E.
Elder Vinegar 46 Ellecampane roots candyed. 41 Eringo Roots Candyed 40
Excellent Broth 8 Excellent Hippocras presently 22 Excellent Jelly. 6 Excellent
surfeit water 37 Excellent sweet water. 25
F.
Fine cakes 32 Flymery Caudle 52 French Beans to pickle 6 French Biscuit to make
16 Fruits dried 29 Fruits preserved all the Year. 52
G.
Ginger to candy 25 Gingerbread to make 31 Gooseberrie cakes 8 Gooseberries
preserved. 17 Gooseberry Paste 55 Grapes to Candy 43 Grapes preserved 17
H.
Hartichoaks preserved 30 Hippocras to make 22, 4 Honey of Mulberries 57 Honey
of Raisins 57 Honey of Roses 11 Hydromel to make 51
I.
Jelly of Almonds white 35 Jelly of Apples 64 To make Crystal Jelly 26 Jelly of
Currants 56 Jelly of Hartshorn 9 Jelly of Quinces 56 Jelly of Strawberries and
Mulberries 26 Jelly of Gooseberries 65 Jelly of Raspices 59 Imperial water 33
Italian Biscuit 15 Italian Marmalade 65 Jumbels to make 34
K.
Kings perfume 12 K. Edw. perfume 13
L.
Leach of Almonds 40 Leach Lambard 32 Leach to make 29 Lemon and Orange-peel
pickled 55 Lozenges of Roses 54
M.
Manus Christi to make 25 Marmalade of Cherries 52 Marmalade of Currants 48
Marmalade of Grapes 63 Marmalade of Oranges 62 Marmalade of Oranges and Lemons
13 Marmalade of Quinces 3 Mackroons to make 2 Marchpanes to make 5 Marygolds
candyed 40 Mathiolus Bezoar water 48 Mead or Metheglin 94, 12 Mead pleasant to
make 49 Medlers preserved 53 Mint water 57 Muscadine Comfits 25 Musk balls to
make 33 Musk Sugar 55 Mulberries preserved 57
N.
Naples biscuit to make 54 Nutmegs to candy 61
O.
Oranges and Lemons candyed 15 Oranges to bake 17 Orange peels candyed 35
Oranges preserved 5 Oranges preserved Portugal way 15 Orange water 36 Oil of
sweet Almonds 10 Oil of Violets 35, 5
P.
Paste of Apricocks 62 Paste of Cherries 62 Paste of Genua 28 Paste of Quinces
32 Paste Royal 27 Paste of tender plums 46 Paste of Violets 35 Peaches
preserved 17 Pears or plums to Candy 6 Perfume for Gloves 19 Pippins dried 28
Pippins preserved green 24 Pippins preserved red 36 Pippins preserved white 17
Plague water 58, 23 Pomecitrons preserved 39 Pomander to make 16 Pomatum to
make 10 Poppy water, 47 Prince biscuit 55 Purslain to pickle 8
Q
Quiddany of Cherries 14 Quiddany of Plums 41 Quiddany of Quinces 29 Queens
perfume 13 Quince cakes 1 Quince cakes clear 59 Quince cakes red 59 Quince
cakes white 58 Quince cakes thin 32 Quince cream 42 Quinces preserved red 4
Quinces preserved white 2 Quinces to pickle 58
R
Rasberry cream 51 Rasberry wine 21 Raspices preserved 2 Red currants cream 53
Red and white Currants Pickled 53 Rich cordial 53 Rose leaves candyed 56
Rosemary water 10 Rosemary Flowers candyed 26 Roses preserved whole 56 Rosa
Solis to make 24 Rose Vinegar 44 Rosewater 39
S
Snow cream 51 Spirit of Ambergreece 23 Spirit of honey 30 Spirit of roses 36
Dr. Stephens water 7 Steppony to make 49 Strawberry wine 50 Spots out of
Clothes 43 Suckets to make 32 Suckets of green Walnuts 39 Suckets of Lettice
stalks 55 Sugar cakes to make 43 Sugar Leach 34 Sugar of Roses 47 Sugar plate
to make 16 Surfeit water 37 Sweet cakes without Sugar 29 Sweet meat of Apples
61 Sweet bags for linen 30 Syllabub to make 48 Symbals to make 3 Syrup of
Apples 45 Syrup of Citron peels 19 Syrup of Cinnamon 19 Syrup of Comfrey 58
Syrup of Cowslips 13 Syrup of Clove-gilly-flowers 3 Syrup of elder 36 Syrup of
hartshorn 19 Sprup of hysop 24 Syrup of licorice 12 Syrup of Lemons 12 Syrup of
the lungs 30 Syrup of Maiden hair 12 Syrup of Mints 57 Syrup of Poppies 11
Syrup of Purslain 57 Syrup of Quinces 18 Syrup of Roses 38 Syrup of Saffron 39
Sprup for short wind 37 Syrup of of sugar candy 37 Syrup against scurvy 38
Syrup of Violets 3 Syrup of Wormwood 11 Syrup of Vinegar 45 Syder to make 49
Spirit of Wine 12
T.
Trifle to make 41 Treacle water to make 18
V.
Verjuice to make 34 Vsquebah to make 15
W.
Walnuts preserved 88 Walnut water 18 Washing balls to make 33 Wafers to make 7
Waters against consumption 22 Water against fits of the Mother 10 Wormwood Wine
30 Wormwood water 31 White Damsons preserved green 76 White leach of Cream 39
White Mead 54 Whipped Syllabub 52
The Table to Physic and Surgery, Beautifying Waters and Secrets of Angling.
A.
ACh of the joints 68 Ach or pain 67 Ad Capiendum Pisces 69 Agues in the breast
79 Agues in children 77, 67 Agues to cure 68, 67 Medicine for an Ague 72
Another ibid Another ibid Allom water to make 82
B.
Back to strengthen 67 Baits for Barbels 122 Baits for Bream 123 Baits for Carp
or Tench 114 Baits for Chub and Pike 144 Baits for Eels 122 Baits for Fish all
the year 149 Baits for Gudgeons 121 Bait with Gentles 113 Bait for Perch 119
Bait for Roch, etc. Bait for Salmon 123 Bait for Trouts 121 Beauty water for
the face 98, 99 Beautifying Ointment 103 Beauty water approved 102 99 Beauty
water called Lac Virginis 90 Bath for Ladies 105 Body to make fat and comely 105
Body to cleanse 105 Breasts to make small 105 Blasting to cure 77 Biting of a
mad dog 71 Bleeding at the nose 79 Bleeding of a wound 79 Bloody Flux, etc. 78
Black Plaster for all grief 87 Bone or Quills dyed Red for Fishing 108 Breath
to make sweet 96 98 Breath to sweeten another 96 Heal a sore Breast when broken
74
C.
Cancer to cure 79, 70 Cancer in a woman's breast 79 Caps to sight for Fishing
108 Cement for floats to fish 16 Childblains in Hands or Feet 97 Conception to
procure 73 Consumption to cure 74 Cough dry to cure 69 Cordial Julep 75 Corns
to cure 84 Cramp to cure 68
D.
Drink for Scurvy 73 Deafness to cure 71 Deafness another 72 Delicate washing
ball 95 Dentifrice for the teeth 95 Drink to heal wounds 86 Dropsy to cure 74,
71 Dropsy another 76
E.
Ears running to help 96 Ears pained to cure 80 Electuary of life. 82 Excellent
Beautifyer 104 Excellent Beauty water 99 Excellent salve 78 Eyes blood-shot 97,
71 Eye-water 71, 75
F.
Face and skin to cleanse 92 Face to make youthful 90 102 Face fresh and ruddy
102 Face to beautify 91, 90 Face to make fair 90 Face very fair 91 Face pitted
by small Pox ib. 93, 94 Face to whiten 91, 90 Face to Illustrate 98 Falling off
Hair 89 Falling sickness or convulsions 74, 9, Falling sickness another 77
Fevers or Agues in children 74 Fellon to kill 79 Fishing lines to make 107
Fishing lines to unloose 109 Fits of the Mother 76 Fistula or Ulcer 76 Fits of
the Mother, a Julep. 76, 78 Flowers to bring down 84 Flowers to stay ib. Flies
used in angling 110 Flux red to cure 79 Flux white to cure 79 Freckles in the
face 95 ibid. 95 Freckles and Morphew ib.
G
Gascoign powder to make 80 Gout to cure 66 Gout, Lord Dennies medicine 81
Green sickness to cure 71 Green sickness a powder 76 Griping of the gutts 66
H
Hands to make white 99, 97 Hands to whiten 99, 97 Hands a sweet water 100 Hair
to curl 104 Hair to make black ibid. Hair to increase ibid Hair to make grow
88, 8, 6 ibid. Hair to grow thick 88 Hair to make fair 89 Hair to take away 88
Headache to cure 67 Heat of the liver 83 Heat and swellings in the face 93 Heat
or Worms in the Hands 100
I.
Jaundice black to cure 68 Jaundice yellow to cure 67 Imposthume to break 70
Inflamed face to cure 94 Itch or breaking out 85 70 Itch another 85
K.
C. Kents powder 68 King's Evil 73
L
Lax or Looseness 72 Lips chopped 97
M.
Marks of the small Pox 97 Megrim or Imposthume 80 Miscarrying to prevent 69
Moist scabs in small pox 84 Morphew or Scurf 92 Mouth to cleanse 96
N.
Nails cloven 100 Nails that fall off ibid. Nostrils stinking 99
O
Oils of Fennel ^ Oil of St. John's wort 86 Oil of Roses 84 Ointment green 76
Ointment for Pimples 94
P
Paste for fishing 110 Piles to destroy 70 Piles after childbirth 85 Pimples in
the face 85, 93 Pimples another 93 Plague to cure 68 Plague water 75 Pleurisy
to cure 69 Pockholes in the face 98 84, 85 Pomatum to make 95 Powder for
Green Sickness 86
R
Red face 84, 94 Redness of hands and face 93 Redness another ibid. Rich face
94 Rheumatick cough 79 Rickets in children 76 Ringworms in the face 103
S
Scald head 75 Sciatica 67 Scurvey to cure 73 Scurvey a drink 66 Secrets in
Angling 147 Shingles to cure 76 Skin to clear 103, 94 Skin to whiten 91, 94
Skin to smooth 91, 101 kin white and clear 90 Sore eyes 91 Sweet bath for
Ladies 91 Sore breasts to cure 74, ib. Spitting of blood 79 Spleen to cure 85
Sprain in the back 71 Stinking breath 98, 96 Stich in the side 85 Stench under
the Armholes 101 Stone and gravel 73 Sunburn to take away 91 ibid. Swooning
fits 91, 83 Dr. Stephens water 81
T.
Terms to provoke 78 Teeth to make white 96 95 Teeth to kill worms in them 99
Teeth white as Ivory 96 Teeth in children 77 Tooth ach to cure 74 Tertian Ague
85 Thorn to draw out 86 Timpany to cure 78 Tissick to cure 86
U.
Vnguentum Album 70
W.
Warts in the face 101 Washing ball to make 97 Water for Eyesight 80 Water for
Eyes 83 Water for sore eyes 80 Web in the eye 83 Wen to cure 74 Dr. Willowbies
water 82 Wind to help 74 Wind and Phlegm in children 77 Woman in travil 76 Woman
soon delivered ibid. Worms in Children 69, 77 Worms another 108 Worms to
cleanse for fishing 108 Wrinkles in the face 104, 90 Whites to cure 69
Y.
Yellow Jaundice 101 Young Children to stool 77
The Table to the Complete Cooks Guide.
ALmond Cream 165 Almond pudding 165 Almond tart 167 Applepies to fry 147
Artichoaks fried 134 Artichoak pie 144 Asparagus all the year 133
B.
Bacon tart 133 Barley broth 140 Beef pasty like Red Deer 138 Beef to keep
sweet 156 Beef to stew 149 Beef to stew French fashion 148 Black puddings 148,
129 Birds to stew 131 Biscuit bread 129 Brawn tender 155 Breams stewed 117
Breast of Mutton stewed 185 Breast of Veal baked 151 Butter to draw for sauce
190 Black Sarsnet to wash 195 Belts and Bodice embroidered 195
C.
Calves foot pie 163 Calves feet baked 179 Calves feet roasted 147 Calves head
baked 168 Capon or Pullet boiled 141 Capon boiled with sage 153 Capon with
Sparagus 153 Capon with sugar Pease 149 Capon with White broth 152 Capons or
Chicken compounded 179 Carp pie 165 Carp to stew 142 Cheescakes to make 128
Cheese fresh to make 144 Chine of Beef Powdered 150 Cherry tart 162 Chicken pie
165 Chucks of Veal to bake 177 Citron pudding 157 Clouted cream 154 Cods head
to dress 150 Codling tart 161 Cocks or Larks to boil 272 Collop of beef stewed
138 Cows Vdder roasted 161 Cowslip tart 189 Cream of eggs 135 Cracknels to make
170 Custards to make 146 Curd cakes 142
D.
Damson tart 137 Dish of marrow 129 Dish of meat of Herbs 135 Dutch pudding 148
Ducks stewed 141 Double tart 175
E.
Eels to boil 149 Eel pie 159, 128 Eels to souse 133 Excellent minced pies 162
Egg pie 128 Eggs buttered on toasts 139 Eel pie with Oysters 139 Eels to Roast
172 English pottage 173 Excellent black puddings 184 Excellent white puddings
181
F.
Feasant stewed 129 Flounders to boil 158 Flounders stewed 190 French barley
posset 177 French potage or Skink 207 Fricacy of Chickens 139 Fricacy of Rabbit
169 Furmity to make 131 Fricacy of Veal. 132 Fillet of Veal stuffed 187
Florentine to make 141 Fool to make 158 Fricacie of Partridges 179 Florentine
of Sweet breads 182 French Puffs with Herbs 186 Florentine of spinach 189
Fillet of Veal stewed 178
G.
Goose to bake 147 Gooseberry cream 154 Grand sallet 141 Green sauce 144
Gooseberry fool 132 Gammon of bacon bakt 157 Gurnet or Roch boiled 164
Gooseberry custard 169
H.
Haggis pudding 135 Haunch of venison boiled 159 Haunch of Venison roasted 183,
134 Hare to roast 180 Have of a Capon 150 Hen carbonaded 134 Herring-pye 129
Hotchpotch to make 168 Hedghog pudding 134 Hare to bake 138 Hash of a Duck 186
I.
Italian pudding 169 Junket to make 170 Joll of Ling baked 147 Inkspots out of
linen 193
L.
Lamb pie 127 Leg of Pork broiled 179 Lemon Caudle 168 Leg of Veal and Bacon
131 Leg of Lamb stewed 135 Leg of Mutton French way 142 Laces and points to
cleanse 193
M.
Made dish of Apples 158 Mallard to stew 239 Marrow pasties 144 Marrow puddings
143 Medlar-tart 127 Minced pies of Eels 146 Mutton carbonaded 128 Minced pie
174, 219 Marrow spinach Pasties 170 Mullet to boil 187
N.
Neats-foot-pye 131 Neats tongues to dry 171 Neats tongue pie 184 Neats-tongue
fried 180 Neats tongue, etc. 156
O.
Oatmeal pudding 188, 166 Oysters to pickle 173, 145 Orangada pie 112 Oyster
pie 138 Oysters to barrel 167 Oysters to broil 176 Olives of beef stewed 176
P.
Pannado to make 156 Paste for all tarts 152 Pear or Warden pie 161 Perches to
boil 149 Pig to bake 175, 140 Pig to souce 154 Pigeon pie to make 178 Picherel
to bake 135 Pippin pie 183, 162 Polonian sausedges 155 Pottage of a Capon 183
Pudding to bake 152 Pudding of Rice 188 Pudding of Hogs Liver 176 Pig-pye 131
Pork pie 132 Puddings fried 151 Pike to stew 168 Pigeons boiled with Rice 167
Pear-puddings 168 Pancakes to make 170 Pudding fine in a dish 136 Pine
Apple-tart 170 Pottage of French Barley 181 Pigeons boiled the Dutch way 183
Points to wash and Starch 183 Puff-paste to make 140
Q.
Quaking pudding 154 Quince tart 132
R.
Rabbits to bash 143 Rabbits to bake 146 Rabbits to stew 177 Rare broth 181
Rice pudding 128 Rice tart 161 Roast beef pickled 174 Rabbit with Oysters 137
Rabits to fry 153 Rare fricacie 166 Rump of Beef stewed 182
S.
Sallet of a cold Hen 141 Sallet of green Pease 185 Salmon to boil 138 Sack
Posset to make 143 Sauce for Mutton 191 Sauce for Pigeons 160 Sauce for Turkeys
and Capons 191 Sauce for wild fowl 160 Sausages to make 148 Scotch Collops of
Veal 145 Scollops to broil 136 Shoulder of Mutton and Oysters 136 Spanish Olio
130 Sparrows and Larks boiled 152 Stewed broth to make 186 Salmon to keep fresh
155 Sturgeon fresh to roast 164 Sausages to stew 166 Sweet pie with Lamb stones
171 Sallet of Fennel 185 Salmon roasted whole 190 Silver and Gold lace to clean
193 Silver plait to cleanse ibid. Silk stockings to wash ibid. Spots of grease
out of silk 194 Stains in linen cloth 193
T.
Tansey to make 163 Tansey of cowslips 167, 189 Tart of spinach 189 Trout to
stew 160 Tart of green pease 132 Turkey to bake 147 Turkish dish 149 Tansey of
spinach 186
U.
Veal pie 151 Venison pasty 136 Venison to stew 130 Vmble pie 133 Venison to
roast 164
W.
White sarsenet to wash 151 Warden or Pear-pye 175 160 Woodcocks and Snites to
boil 170 Water gruel to make 166 Widgeons or Teal boiled 151 Wild ducks to boil
136 Whitepot to make 146
FINIS.

