INQVIRIES Into the causes of our miseries, whence they issue-forth upon us:
And reasons wherefore they have born us down so low; And are like to carry us
yet lower.

The Independents and the way of worship, they stand-up for, is renderd clear
of this grievous charge, That they hold forth the licentiousness of wicked
consciences; Tolerations of all sorts of most detestable Schisms, Heresies,
and Religions, as Idolatries Paganism, Turs^sme, Judeisme, etc. so opening a
floodgate to let in this inundation of sins, and sorrows upon the Land.

This charge is drawn-up against the Independents, by three worthies, men, I
think, of name, all (1) D. P. P. P. Pryn Esquire; But more fully and with more
devouring words, if more can be, by Dr. A. Steuart in his last book, which, in
reference to the Brethren, thousands in Israel, relisheth as does the Gall of
Aspes, or Adders poison under the tongue.

In six Sections. Whereof the first only is here; A Just vindication of the
way of worship very commonly misunderstood; very falsely interpreted; but very
truly called Independent.

Most humbly devoted to the Honor of Almighty God; and King of Saints;
presented to all the three Assemblies in all the three Kingdoms, in Parliament
now, with hearts engaged upon the great matters of the Kingdom: but before and
above all, to beat out a way of worship, holding forth to the world, a
sutablenesse to the Great God, full-up to His Mind and Rule in His Scriptures:
humbly presented to all these, and to all Christian people whose habitation is
on earth, and conversation in Heaven.

By Hez. Woodward.

Prove. 25. 18. A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is a
ma^^le and a sword, and a sharp arrow.

Job 42. 7. My wrath is kindled against thee, and thy two friends, for ye have
not spoken of Me the thing that was right.

Isa. 2. 23. Woe unto them that take away the Righteousness of the Righteous
from him.

Warranted by the God of Heaven, being ordered according to His Churches book
on earth; and published for His Churches sake in the very close of this year
1644.

Section I. Where the Reader is satisfied in point of Licencing books,
Informed in the meaning of those words Dependent Independent: And the men so
called, are cleared from the cavils of the froward; Mistakes of the ignorant;
heavy charges of knowing men; with other grace matters worthy all men's sad and
serious considerations.

Section II. Some praecognita matters already known, and granted are premised;
As that the evils of Sin and Punishment are from our selver; Punishments are
merae, mearly so where Gods Hand is immediate, and Man passive; or mixtae,
where Gods Hand is and man's also; what God dies, and Man does, Gods Hand has
the pre-eminence; Gods End and Man's Ends, how differents Gods End the Glory of
His excellent Goodness, His Churches Glory alse, Some things granted in point
of Reformation, how active the Devil with his servants are in Reforming times,
and have been always, as at this day, etc.

Section III. Enquiries touching Peace, what it is; how we improve the Peace we
have. Who they be that petition for Peace, and of whom; whether not of those
who world, but cannot give it: And of those, who if they could, will not give
it while the world stands, being adversaries and enemies to their own peace; to
the peace of God and good men; and true Religion of God, the worshipping of Him
in spirit and truth. All this declared and confirmed by two most notable
stories out of the Chronicles of God.

Section IIII. Conclusions ^^uching war, that it is an evil, an only evil;
that our war is no more unnatural, than it is for fire to burn; nor a civil
war, as when a Kingdom fights against it self; but sacred, when the kingdom
of darkness fights against the kingdom of light, as now it is.

Enquiries touching the Battles of the Lord, what they are; who fight these
Battles; and what Soldiers they ought to be; how furnished; What hinders
victory; what brings it as upon Eagles wings.

Section V. Enquiries touching our keeping Covenant, and Fasting days; what we
do, and what our Ministers should do before us.

Section VI. Enquiries touching our evil Doctrines, and what may be the causes
thereof; and whether the remedies used for the removing these Causes are
sovereign, having the stamp of God upon them, and warrant from His mouth.

Section 1.
REader, now that you have taken-up the book, I Will do my best, to close with
thee at the first, as one, not a little ambitious of thy favor: and therefore
can be content to crave thine eye and ear both, thy best attention all along.
Do not fear to afford me this favor; I crave it for Gods sake; for His Causes
sake; for His servants sake; for your sake; the Lord knows, and not mine own;
Doubting not to speak all along, like a free man, and a true Subject; and not
as one abusing my liberty or my glory: But using it as a subject of the Lord
Christ, to His glory, and the good of my Brother: Therefore I cannot doubt
neither, That my words, I shall speak, can need an Apology: And yet, that my
words may have a good relish upon your palate, and a sweeter touch upon your
ear, I will preface a little touching some matters first.

1 Touching my license here, I have no Imprimatur, no license to speak. To
which I could answer, Yes, that I have, for by the grace of God, Truth, and
Reason, the old Licensers of old, have licenced my words all along. And truly
my spirit could never go forth with any other way of licensing, or midwifring
such births as are books into the world; surely no better hand to officiate
there, than what Truth and Reason affords me. And if so be our Conceptions and
Births want either one or both, let the parent smart for his lie; and be fast
locked in Bedlom till he recover his wits again: And if he be Libellous, as too
many are, let his own place the pillory instruct him to better manners. But if
he hasblasphemed God, or the King of Saints, lot him find neither friend nor
enemy, but let him dye, if he has blasphemed his God. Gods Law this, and man's
Law that, carried all along through a series of time, and never interrupted,
nor reversed, or made null till it came thorough the Inquisition Court at Rome,
whence we have our Imprimatur, Let this be printed. And then sure enough it
served to promote the Doctrines, and practices of the Church there, which my
soul abominates. It will be said here, That I go a crosse-way to an Ordinance
of Parliament. Truly that startles me not a little; the Lord knows, I look upon
an Ordinance of Parliament as an Ordinance of God, not to be disputed, but
obeyed. I kiss the hand of Authority, and am ready to be called forth to its
foot therefrom to be made Active or Passive: yet I cannot conceive, that I have
gone a crosse-way to that Ordinance for licenfing-books. I went, in obedience
thereunto, craving a license, though I think it my due, and ought to be given
me: but could not obtain it. The truth is, If the Book bear Independent upon
its front, and be thought to speak for that way (which God Himself will clear
and justify before all the world) it is silenced before it speaks. And so is
dealt more injuriously with, than have been the greatest offenders in the
world: for they have had leave to speak for themselves in all ages of the world
upwards to as it is at this day. It is replied, That writing for this way of
Church Government does but hinder our course in the way of Reformation, making
the Divisions greater, and the Rent wider. I answer; If I were persuaded so, I
would rather put my hand in fire then unto paper. But I am persuaded in my
heart clean otherwise, and by the grace of God shall be able to make it appear
in the sequel all along. It is said again: These are my thoughts; that this
scrible will do no hurt, will not make the rent wider; my Judgment only. I
answer, not mine only; I have asked advise about it, enquired seriously into
the matter, and why should I be ashamed to say more: I have given up my
judgment unto the Lord, and I have this answer from him, and assistance from
his right hand, so guiding mine, That I shall, so I hope, and am confident,
speak nothing which shall dishonor his holy, holy, holy, name; nor his cause,
nor his people, the congregations of God. I have a sober confidence, that I
have license from Gods hand, and shall keep close to the word of his mouth, and
therefore since I could not have a license from man, I can be careless of it.

That it may not be said, I am ashamed of my name, for indeed I am not, being
it was a very good man's name (which yet I know cannot make the man the better)
I have, for commanding reasons affixed my name; though very unwilling to appear
so openly, as I was most willing to do with a Licenced. But the want of it can
be no shame to me: some little blame rather to him, who would not give it me;
having no time to enquire into the papers, as some (too superstitiously
perhaps, but their superstition teaches) were wont to do, to enquire into a
paper, which lay as low as their foot, before they would put their foot upon it
with neglect; lest the name of their God, or something of God should be there.
Certainly the Name of God is here; and I will not doubt to say again, I have
His License to print it.

But the great stop was because this answering is like to cause answer upon
answer. I answer. God knows that, and will turn all to good. I am a free man,
and may take my liberty, not standing charged as servants do, not to answer
again. And indeed I cannot conceive what they can answer, unless, as some did,
who had spoke roughly enough, and being modestly reproved for being so rough,
answered, as roughly; that, since their hand was in, they were resolved to put
it forth again as roughly as ever. As pleases men let it be; but if I am
honored with any answer from a Doctor (for the other, that learned and
excellent man, I hope his apprehensions are more digested now, and he has
repented of them, that they were indeed subitan, but for) the Doctor, I hope he
will learn at length to reprove his Brother modestly and meekly, and then I
shall accept his reproof with all thankfulness; but if any roughness appear
as it has to others, which I must rather expect, his reproof will do me no
good; I shall slight it sure, putting it to some privy shame, or open reproof.
And so much touching licencing books, and my want in that particular. And so I
come to that my soul does more desire to give you satisfaction in according to
the Scriptures of God; and to unfold your understanding. First touching the
true sense and meaning of these words Dependent and Independent, as I find them
legible and explained through the Doctrines and Conversations of those men
amongst us, called by that name.

Briefly now, and as is best fitting this place. Dependent is a learing upon
the Lord Christ, the only Beloved of the soul; upon His hand for strength;
upon His mouth for Direction. It is a settingup the Lord Christ as King; yea,
it is the advancing of the Lord Christ in all His offices, King, Prophet, and
Priest, to, in, and over His Church, the souls and spirits of men. It is a
cleaving of the soul to Christ, a closing of the heart with Him, saying, Thou
Lord art my Righteousness, and my strength; and my wisdom, and my glory, and
my crown of rejoicing. This is to be Dependant, when our Lord Christ, who is
All to the soul, has all its Dependence. And this is to give the Lord God His
due, the glory of all His attributes, specially these two, the glory of His
power, and of His wisdom: And to the Lord Christ King of Saints, His dues, the
glory of all His offices, anointed of the Father King, Prophet, and Priest of
His Church. And hence I issued my thoughts, and thus concluded, That the people
(no matter whether many or few; poor or rich; learned or unlearned, Master or
Disciple, that the people) we call Independants are the most Dependent persons
in the world. This is the sum, I shall return to this again. Now to the other
word.

2 Independent; What is that? I Will tell you what it is in the judge^ent of,
(they say) as good a Logician as is in England, now he is here, I Will name him
for honor sake, Doctor Adam Steuart, adding only this, the Lord add to His
Logic, that one thing necessiry, which one man calls Baptized Reason, He and we
mean, sanctified by the Word and prayer in the Holy Ghost: and then he will be
good indeed; Page ^8.
This man says (A) That Independent is a proud and abominable word, proper to
God Almighty: B It is granted so to be, as He consters the word, and in vulgar
construction also, as we silly men understand it too; that to be Independent,
is to be as an Island cut off from other Land; to live as men turned-in-upon
themselves, regarding themselves, bearing fruit to themselves, (as an empty
vine) to Nemini fructuosa. Hos. 10. 1.
do as they list, speak as they please, to hold out and maintain what Doctrines
agree best with flesh and blood; and to spread them abroad before Israel, and
before the Sun, under the very look of the Magistrate; What has he to do with
them? Be they Jews, or Gentiles; Turks, or Infidels; Atheists or Papists; be
what they will be, as abominable as they are rendered to be, or as we can
conceive them to be, why yet, it is their conscience so to be, and what has
the Magistrate to do there, or with them? So Dr. Adam Steuart forces matters
against these men; and forces his conscience too, I verily think all along.

I should have been fuller here. But, Reader, if this be true in whole or in
part; if these men, we call Independents, be such men in judgment and in
practice, as they are suggested to be, then let the Civil Magistrate do with
them, as K. Hez. with the Altars and high places, pluck them down; lay them
even with the ground; leave them not while there is any one standing; And as
with the brazen Serpent, that King dealt with, grind their faces, beat them as
small as the dust, and then hold them up to the wind, throw them into the
River, as the best Christians were dealt with of old, that the enemy might take
from them, as he could, all Hope of a better Resurrection, let, I say, the
Magistrate do as much to these men, for so much King H^zekiah did to the
forementioned Idols; And it is fullup to the mind and heart of Dr. A. Steuart,
and so it follows in his Logic; and so he concludes against them seven times
at least, That these men are as contrary to the true Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipine, as Altars and Idols were and now are. I Will speak for these men, and
though they need not my Apology, yet I think my self charged so to do; I
have observed their conversations; I have heard their Doctrines almost these 16
years; I have read them, specially of late; with all diligence; these, I mean,
touching Church Government: I shall speak now in the Language of the three
Tribes, as heartily as they did, being verily persuaded, so these men would
speak to clear themselves in these matters so forced against them. Joshua 22.
ver. 22. The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, He knows, and Israel be
shall know, if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord,
(save us not this day;) That we have spoken or done ought to turn from
following the Lord; or if to offer to the Lord prayers of our own; or to the
people, the Church of God, Doctrines of our own, Ordinances of our own, let the
Lord Himself require it: And let him, to whose hand, the Lord has committed
the sword, consecrate the fame sword on us, to the cutting of us off from the
earth. So these servants of the Lord can say.

And Reader, be not deceived with vain words, but be persuaded in thy heart,
that these men so slandered, do regard others as they stand charged by the
word of God to regard them. They account thy soul, and mine more precious then
is the whole world, and all the treasures there, (for these may be valued but
the soul cannot) And knowing the terrous of the Lord, they persuade men to be
reconciled. They abominate those in Doctrines and practices, al which turn
away from following the Lord. Deuteronomy. 13.
They know the Command of the Lord is in as full force and virtue now, as ever
it was, let such practisers (intisers rather) be cut off, that their mouths
neay be stopped. They admit not of any Toleration, neither that Jews nor Papists
be tolerated in a Kingdom any surther then as means may be used, whereby to
enlarge the bounds of their Lord Christ's Kingdom, To bring them under the
subjection of the Gospel, so far to be tolerated, no farther; not as Jews and
Turks are tolerated, for gain of money; or as we tolerated Papists here,
suffered them in the Land, and engaged our selves against all means for their
conversion, that is abominable. But to suffer them amongst us with a pure aim
to the gaining of souls, and a single eve to Gods Glory, this is tolerable
sure, for it is according to the will of God, that the bounds of his Sons
Kingdom should be enlarged, and all means used whereby to concince the
ganesayers, To Conquer the Rebellious; to make them obedient both in word and
deed: And for this great conquest over the souls and spirits of men, the
throwing down those Reasonings, the strongholds there, for this mighty work,
the sword of the Spirit, the word (...)
of God is appointed and consecrated for that very end by God himself, so I
say; nay, so the Lord God says, and so say the Indepeaedents from his mouth.

A. But it is a proud and an abominable name, proper to God Almighty, says the
Doctor.

B. Proper to him indeed, to him alone, and yet not improperly given to a
peculiar people, a Royal Priesthood to be Independent upon man, Dependant upon
the Lord Christ, leaning upon that beloved; the only stay and staff of His
People.

A. The very name Independent renders them odious to all men, It overthrows all
kind of government, takes away the rights and privileges of Assemblies,
Councels, Sinods, takes from them their dues.

B. Noe, These men give to men their dues. all and every whit to the least
scruple. They will raise men up to their proportioned height, no highter, for
that were to do unto men the greatest injury that could be imagined; to raise
up men above the Stars of God, is to throw them down even to the sides of
the pit. To make men Lords over the consciences of men, is to render them
abominable to God and good men; and as Antichristians every whit, as are
Archbishops and Bishops. They will give unto men the power which God allows
them, They will raise-men-up to their proper pegg, as high as befitteth the
highest creatures upon earth, yet so as exalting ever more the high God their
Creator, and the Lord Christ King of Saints. These men will appeal also to men
in point of Counsel and power both, so far as they will consult with the
Scriptures of God, with their Rule and Judge there, both one: So Dependant they
are even upon men. Independent in this sense only, not bottoming themselves, or
their faith upon men: for that were to do as a foolish builder who built his
house upon the sands: nor stating their determinations touching Church
Government after the minds and pleasures of men, not as they say, and would
have it; but as the Scriptures of God will have it, where they have their Rule.

A. But who shall be judge of that rule?

B. A strange Question; The Spirit of God there, for as was said, He is the
Rule and Judge both. And this seems to come up close to the good word of God
which we read; And the reamnant of Jacob shall Micah. 5. 7.
be in the midst of many people as a dew from the Lord, as the showethe rs upon
the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor wayteth for the sons of men. And
thus, Sir, I have given you as plain and brief * a Commentary on these It is
more enlarged in my Answer to six Questions (24 will shrink up 10 so few)
which wayt a license, but have lost, nothing by wanting so long.
two words, Dependent and Independent as possibly I could. And now if you will
reckon me among the Independents, I shall account it no wrong, I shall not put
it to the head of injuries. And (2) then account me in the number of such evil
doers, and Troublers; that I do help with them, to open a floud-gate, etc. If
or so they are suggested, to do. Truly, (Sir) I must account this an honor:
For fo they persecuted (A lesser matter then this, in fight, is registered a
persecution, when it was as this is, against the beloved child and faithful
servant of the Lord, who walked after the Spirit, so they that were after the
flesh persecuted) the first Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, all the
Saints and Armies of Martyrs upward to, as it is at this day. Therefore as the
saying is verbera, pursue your persecutions (you do it I know out of
ignorance) sedaudi, beware and consider what you do; and now harken while I
shall endeavor to render you satisfied touching these two matters, especially
the second.

(1) I am indeed an Independent in judgment, my soul goes out with them in
that way; with them, persuaded in my soul, that their aim is wholly to the
setting up the Lord Christ, Him in all His Offices, in and over the Church, in
the souls, and spirits of men. And that their eye is single in all this,
looking strait-on to the Glory of the high God, and salvation of souls.

(2) And that Independencie is no more, nor any more intended by it, then
purely to take themselves and others off from their own bottomes, that all
might be set upon the Foundation indeed, the Rock of Ages, the Lord Jesus
Christ.

(3) And all this so as they give the Rulers of the people, their standing;
firm, fast, and unshaken, like the perpetual hills and everlasting mountains,
A fast-standing, I say, while the world stands in their full power, force, and
virtue; for no Law or Ordinance have they against this the Rulers standing,
being the Ordinance of GOD appointed and decreed by Himself.

(4) For that way of worship, and Church Government my judgment stands for, I
am verily persuaded it is the way of the New Testament; new if you will, but no
more Novell than is that Testament.

(5) For their walking in that way, it is in such order, with such agreement,
complying of Spirits, such an eying and fixing upon the rule, what is decent
and expedient, what serves most aptly, tends most compendiously to promote the
edification, the building-up of the Temple of Christ; That I have this
persuasion, that they who have observed the way, and the brethrens walking in
it, will speak of it in the Apostles words; Joying and beholding your order
and your steadfastness Col. 2. 5.
of your faith in Christ.

Truly, Sir, my judgment is, for that way of Government, Gods way, I am verily
persuaded; As, for man's way, Master or Discipline my judgment is not for it,
further then as they walk in the way with a right foot; nor for their
gathering of Churches further then as they do it by the call of the word, so
as man may not be said to do it, but God rather by the call of His Spirit and
word of His truth. Nor is my Judgment for men's scatternings in the way, though
there will be scatterings there; Let those scatterers be marked and rebuked
sharply, for they should walk exactly; All about them in sight, clothes,
gesture; And all from without them in the eyes and ears of men, their words
and actions, should be vocal, all, as we say, speaking forth holiness to the
Lord; grace and edification to the hearers and beholders. But yet if men walk
as men scattering their ways, yet these their scatterings must not cast a
reproach upon the holiness of Gods way, after which my soul goes forth. And
yet my foot, my standing I mean, is in the other way, whereof my thoughts have
been ever honorable as becomes; So of my Minister also, one that fears
God above many; set over me in that way of Church Government, I reverence him
heartily: I approve his care, and acknowledge his aims and ends to be holy
just and good; The glory of God, The eternal good of souls.

A. What, and yet your judgment for the other way? surely look what way the
judgment goes, your foot should go; where your heart can fix, there your
standing should be.

B. Truly it may be a truth in what you say, but I am not resolved so: For,
first, I stand not alone but together with a whole household with me, in
several relations to all these, as a Husband, a Father, a Master; And, truly,
I dare not attribute so much to my judgment, or to a way, I think more
excellent, as to fit loose from my Reverend Pastor: or remove my self and mine
(for I cannot allow of a ^ragling family, the head going one way, and the other
part another way, I said my self and mine) from under his care and charge,
whom, I know the Lord has set to look, and see-over me and mine.

2 I stand still in my spirit, resolved there, that, seeing by a good
providence, two parties have so eagerly clashed together, and so charged
themselves, and before their God, to find out the way of God, both of them I
hope, with pure aims, and a single eye, (I am at an agreement with my
thoughts) That the good Lord will beatforth and make plain his own way; so as,
what lay too loose and scattering in the one way, shall be gathered-up and
strengthened: and what might be too high, and rough in the other way, may be
taken down and made more level, smooth and strait for us to walk in; I mean,
and I am full of hope so it will be, That there will be, by the good hand of
God upon His servants, notwithstanding their charging and recharging, a sweet
compliauce anon, an yielding and bending each to others way, as near as can be
(keeping near and close to the Word) and as is becoming Brethren, holding the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: I stand still in my spirit and full
of hope, touching this matter, The meeting of both these ways inone, the good
and Holy way. Though truly, I cannot conceive wherein the Independants can
yield one foot, or one hoof of a foot (for they must be dainty if not
imperious in Gods matters) except in point of power; An high point that, where
and in whom it must be stated: state it where they will, (for I know they will
state it as near as possibly they can look, to the mind, and will of their God,
in his Scriptures:) But I would not have that, which the Scripture calls the
keys, entrusted in our hands, common people. For truly what ever we think we
know, yet is it a point of knowledge too high for us, to know how to use them.
Yet I could speak much more in the commendations of us Laymen, then I can for
the Clergymen: for when we were at the worst, we were better then our
teachers, not half so brutish as they; sound some of us, when our Ministers
were rotten most of them; sound in the faith, when our Ministers were
abominably here^icall, touching the Lords Day, his worship and service on that
day. The Consideration whereof, if sad, and serious, and well laid to heart,
may be of force sufficient, to make the best Clergymen in the Land, to walk
softly, sorrowing under the sense thereof after a godly sort: more of this
hereafter. Now this one thing more, I profess heartily I can discern nothing
in this way of Church Governmen, which my vain heart (the Lord knows I am as
far from judging another heart, as I am from knowing my own, yet know that I)
can except against it, but that it is the way of wisdom, too high for a fool;
and that is my foolish exception. I were injurious to set down that I see not;
or to conceal that I see with all mine eyes, no thing but Holiness all along
this way, such as stands diametrally cross to a man's own way; and therefore
man stands so cross unto it, I mean my self still, or this self where ever it
is. It charge every man with his Brother, to be his keeper, Me, to wat^h over
him; and him to watch over me. To bear each others burden; supply each others
lack, that there be no lack to any member of the Body; An excellent way and
must be taken, else the Body may swim now, and perhaps fink anon; It may be so
bowed-down with pressing wants, that, though It lives at present, yet may it
famish in the house next day, or starve in the streets next night, if this care
be not taken, as sure enough it is not. But this care is taken, even over the
Bodies, That there be no lack to them. The care over the soul exceeds, as that
exceeds the Body. And so they stand charged in their care each over other: Oh
this, and more there is, is an hard burden, this self will not bring our
shoulders to it: And yet we owe, in point of bearing each the others burden, so
much as this, to our enemies Ox or Ass, even his, that hates us; how much
more to the soul of our Exodus 23. 4^ 5.
brother? But I say, we fly-off from this duty; we stand naturally cross
centered to it, all our way; for indeed there is to my discerning, nothing, but
God in the way, with whom the heart would not close; Whereas in the way we call
Praesbyterian [As it has been ordered; understand me so, for as it is ordering,
It will be Independent sure; this being granted That a strict Presbyterian is a
True Independent: And a Rigid Presbyterian is as high as was a Lord Bishop, and
but a little below a Pope, In that way] there is much of man, to say no more,
but too much of man's Institution, with which the heart can close but too well.
And this confirms me, That the way we call Independent is the True way of
Worship: Because it is so spiritual, so cross to man's way and will worship,
as they do find it to be, who walk in it with a right foot; And this was the
very Argument, whereby Luther confirmed himself, and all his friends touching
the prosecution of a great cause, the Truth and Prosperity of the same; It is
of God, says he, and it shall prosper: Why prosper? or how proves he that? for
it exalts the Lord: and depresseth man: It renders God All to His people; and
men's devices, how specious soever, of small account, or nothing at all. And so
much, Sir, to resolve you, which way my judgment goes; and yet why I keep my
standing. I desire now heartily to give you satisfaction in the second place.

2 Touching that heavy charge against the Independents, That they open a
flood-gate, etc. It is true, I read it here and there, under three and more
men's hands; And if to accuse be enough, these 3. men, not to name the fourth,
have done enough, To stir-up the Inhabitants of the Land, to come-out against
these their Brethren, as we ought now, every mothers child, to come-out against
grievous woulves. Surely as these men's words are hard; so are their Deeds
ungodly against their Brethren, the Messengers of the Churches, and the glory
of Christ. They have set them forth as the Apostle says, he and his companions
in the Gospel, were set-out, the last, men exposed to the most open and
extremest shame, and pain both, as it were appointed to death, by the teeth of
the most Ravening Beasts; the last upon the Theater to be made a gazing-stock
there-on to Angels and Men. So it is now, for they have set-forth their
Brethren, the last, as the most execrable and accursed persons, and accordingly
to be dealt-with; sitto be cast-out and more, but I Will say no more, but this
said before They have set them forth the last, as it were appointed to Death:
And the way of Independency, they make the people believe, It is as a gulf,
which receives all-I know not what to call that all, but they say, That all the
filth or corruption of Manners and Doctrines emptieth it self-in thither, into
that gulf, as into a Common-shoare. These are hard and Devouring words; and if
so be their Deeds are not ungodly, yet they have done enough by their words to
stir-up all the Inhabitants of the Land to put-forth a rough-hand against them,
who have lived at peace by them, and spoke good things for them, before their
God, touching their everlasting peace. That I may not seem to render their
words, harder then they are, and more devouring, we will hear what their
tongues say in print (1) D. P. P. puts down six secundary Causes of our
Plagues, the continuance of them; And the Independents he ranks them with the
first of these six. The other [whom I need not name, being a man of such
Renown, and name, (and for high Desert I heartily acknowledge) that his name
only has rendered his subitane Apprehensions, in deed and truth such, to seem
good and solid Reasons; and so to pass through the City, as having Truth and
Reason in them: when as indeed and Truth, they have neither the one nor the
other; but, as subitane Apprehensions use to be, the weakest and sleightest as
ever came from so solid a man upon so weighty a business as is Church
Government, yet they take with the people] This man of Name, seems to make a
question, and resolved all the world That Independencie is a Seminary of
Schifmes: A flood gate to let in an inundation, etc. So the Querist.

The third person, Doctor A Steward renders the Independents as abominable and
pernicious both to Church and State, as are Altars and Orgon-pipes; Crosses,
and Crucifixes: Papists, and Atheists, yea Sodomites in Isreal's Land, as odious
and pernicious as are these accursed persons and Things. There is the charge
full-out, as Ponderous as man can render it, and it renders the Brethren as
odious to the world as man can make them. I should tell you here, how they have
drawn-up to this conclusion, I mean, from what premises they have concluded, as
we heard; But truly I find a diversion in my thoughts, and I must follow them,
though I digress a little, that so I may come to the visions of God.

I am verily persuaded, that these servants of the Lord, I mean these, who, or
wherever they are, that walk in the way, exactly, precisely, as they ought to
walk, (I have nothing to say unto others,) do see these visions frequently
now adays, now that they hear such devouring words, and might fear, but thar
the fear of God overrules in their hearts, the hand of violence put-forth
against them, also, ungodly deeds; Now is the time for God to appear for them,
and to say, I am your God: for so has been His manner in all perilous times, so
to appear to and for His servants, as the Churches Chronicles do tell us all
along; but lie keep to the Scriptures of God, and read backward there. Saint
Paul heard devouring words, and felt ungodly deeds; his Adversaries thrust him
iuto the prison, there he lay-fast, shut up, and in the dark, not a Cranny
open to letin Light; Then was Gods time to appear. Then expect the visions of
God: And so it was; And behold a great light; The light of God shined-in upon
him, and his fellow prisoner; Indeed the Lord reserves the greatest lights for
the darkest rooms, Prisons and Dungeons; The strongest Consolations for the
weakest hearts, when they are fainting; The sweetest, the goodest words, The
Lord speaks always to His people in their wilderness. That he does; and so
we will read on retrograde.

Saint Mark tells us a notable story, I do not remember the Chapter, but the
matter I remember very well; That the Lord Christ had made a man every whit
whole; He threw-out the devil who did trouble the man's Body, I think, his
soul too; for shure He dealt with the man, after his manner, like a Tormemor.
The Lord has set His poor servant free from his Adversary, that delights in
proud wrath, And oh how feign would this servant, so delivered, have kept still
with the Lord Christ; but his Lord suffered not; but bid him go to his house;
then to the Synagogue, give glory to God; but do not say what I have done for
thee. The man's heart was full, his tongue must needs utter it; he exalts and
maguifies the Name of the Lord. The Scribes and Pharisees could not endure it,
so they excommunicated the poor man, they thrust him out of their Synagogues.
Then was the Lords time, They had cast him-out, now the Lord receives him-in:
He says unto His poor Cast-out (in effect) have men thrust out a rough-hand
againsh thee? Thou shall be at no loss by that, I Will take thee by the hand.
Have they cast thee out of their Synagogue? thou shall not be dismayed at that,
but well apaid rather; I Will receive thee into my Bosom. To run-back in my
thoughts through all the Old Testament even to the beginning, then I Will fix my
thoughts upon Jacob; He saw much trouble in his days; And Three of his days
exceeded, and were very perilous; But which is most remarkable; Those were the
days, which his Lord God chose to appear unto him in. The first day, when he
was leaving his Country; and his fathers house; bidding farewell, to all his
comforts and contentments there, a dear Father, and an indulgent mother; when
he must depart from all those, and with a sad heart doubtless, Then behold the
vision of God; then God appears, God in Christ, Gen 28. Jacob sees, Ladder,
heaven reaching down to e^^th, and earth rea^hing up to heaven, all meeting
together in on Christ. Genesis ^1.
then Jacob sees God, and hears Him speak good and comfortable words; I will
be with thee, Jacob; where thou art I will be; A Father to thee, and a Mother
both, as loving and tender over thee, as she was; I Will be thy stay, and staff,
bread shall be given thee, and thy water shall he sure; I Will be thy God, Jacoh,
I Will be All: so as thou shall say, having Me, thou have enough, and enough, God
and All. Jacobs second perilous day was, when he saw Labans countenance changed
toward Him, not as before. If the countenance is changed, the heart is changed
sure; for the heart changes first; and Jacob may expect ungodly deeds,
doubtless it was a perilous day with him. But then God appears to Jacob; it
Was Gods time, and he says, I Will be with thee, And saying so much, He has said
All. Jacobs third time, that was perilous indeed, it exceeded all comparison,
for he was distressed on that day. Jacob is returning to His Country and he
hears His brother Esau is coming to meet him (a poor weak man with Genesis 32.
his feeble folk) and foure-hundred men with him. Then Jacob was greatly
afraid and distressed, says the Text: And then, on that very Day, the day of
Jacobs trouble, His Lord appears; And not alone; He has His Angels with Him;
Gods Host; Nor is that all; Jacob shall have a double guard now, that he is
distressed, Two Hoasts for Esau's one; And an Infinite strength, above his
brothers; his strength is the strength of men; Jacob has the strength of
Angels; the Host of God; Nay Hosts of Angels, Machanajim, two Hosts; for then
perils were doubled.

It is the Lords manner so to do, Blessed be his Name; When the sound of Danger
is lowdest in his servant ears; and their eyes can behold nothing but
troubles, and fears round about; Then expect, ye servants of the Lord (ye that
wait His Time, and attend His pleasure) then expect to see visions, and great
salvations: the visions and salvations of God: so it has been from the
beginning of the world; and so it will be to the worlds end. And now I return
where I break off, to that heavy-charge drawn-up against the Brethren. We must
see whence they have concluded, from what premises, I mean, That their brethren
must be cut asunder, so one concludes; ense recidendum: That they must be
thrust-out of the Kingdom, as the most abominable, and the most accursed
things ought to be; so the Doctor concludes: from their own premises all along,
which their own hearts suggested. But without their leaves, we will examine how
their conclusion follows, from my premises, which I have taken from the
Scriptures of God. And so I will recall the premises, and then the charge,
these 3 men have drawn-up from the premises, which are summarily these. The
servants of the Lord do Advance their Lord Jesus Christ, as sole Lord over His
Church; They depend upon Him; He is their Righteousness, their Strength, their
Councellor in whom they glory. There is their great Dependence, Thereon they
Rest, and are still; Be men mad with rage; and the earth never so unquiet, they
are a quiet habitation still; for They know whom they have Trusted: Where their
great Dependence is, for all Church and State matters, even upon the Lord God
Almighty. Dependent they are too upon men, though they put no great trust
there: neither stay nor staff, God knows, yet dependent upon man, for his
advice, and counsel: And accountable for their actions unto men also, who
shall, in the name of Christ, require an account of them, or of their
repentance, and faith toward God. They will Appeal to men also, (that is the
great question) so be they will Appeal to the Scriptures (thereunto is their
great Appeal) to the Rule and Judge there. So Dependent these men are, whom we
call (I would we had a fitter name, since it is so ill understood, and
construed: but sure we have not a fitter name then) Independent, for herein
they are content and desire rather to be accounted, and called by that name,
because they have concluded from their Lords own mouth, and from the practice
of His Disciples in the best times purely primative, That every particular
Congregation has from Christ absolute power, to exercise of and in it self,
every Ordinance of God. No Dependencie in Government, or direction in worship,
from any other than from Christ their Lord and Lawgiver, made unto His Church
their wisdom, their righteousness, their Justification, and their Glory:
(Sir) There are the premises, Now mark what these three men infer, how they
draw-up rheir charge from hence. (1) Ergo, These Independents are the prime and
chief causes of our plagues and miseries, says the first scribe. (2) Ergo,
These Independents, are the Seminary of, etc. and open a floud-gate to all etc.
says the Lawyer this once, and I think never but this once, clean besides
the case, doubtless God has forgiven him, so have his good brethren too, (3)
Ergo, Those Independents are as abominable, as were Altars, High Places, the
Brazen serpent, when made an Idol; so abominable are these men, and to be dealt
with by the Rulers hands, as those Dunghill gods were dealt withal, when they
were throwne-out as an abomination, and accursed things; so these men should be
dealt withal, says the Doctor, and so concludes. And yet has set down no
premises taken out of the Word of God, whence he concludes so, though by his
conclusion he has rendered the brethren the most odious men and abominable, that
are in the world, the causes of all the miseries and distractions here. Well,
let him go on: so will I; and by the grace of Almighty God, I will contest
against this conclusion with all the power God will be pleased to vouchsafe
unto me: And though I shall conclude nothing, yet I shall make such inqairies
into our miseries, the causes thereof, as that these inquiries only shall
serve to make a full discovery to all the world, touching those matters; and
with the same labor I shall render the Independents and the way of worship (I
have not called it their way or man's way,) as white from those blacks cast upon
them, and the way, as is the cloth that has gone through seven la^ers; I
shall have free leave for this sure, a license I mean to enquire what may be
the cause of our woes, and sighs, That every one may put it to question in his
own heart; set-up the Inquisition court there, and so resolve the Question. But
this is the subject matter of the Third Section.

Here Sir I have given forth the premises, touching the Independents and their
Doctrines, as the good word of God gives-themforth to me; and I have set down
the Conclusion, which three men, one after another, as if all had one and the
same Spirit, have drawn from premises of their own, deducible neither from
Scripture, nor from Reason. no, nor from sense neither, unless their own, and
that darkened with prejudice all along. Surely the man, that has so much
Logic, should not have so done, (I suppose the other two, have as my self,
and other men have, very little, or none, at all in comparison with him,) But
he should not have so concluded against his brethren, That they are as plagues
and pests, in Judah Land, even as were Altars, High Places, the vilest Idols
there; And yet has set down no premises, and so forth, as aforesaid. It is
replied.

A That the two brethren plead for a Toleration; And that pleading carries more
danger in it to Church and State, than does the pleading for the Service-Booke,
Archbishops, and Bishops, Altars, and Organs, Crosses and Crucifixes, that
these may stand in their full force power and virtue. And from hence the Doctor
has so concluded, against his Brethren, for the casting-of them all forth.

B. I Answer and grant, That the two Brethren do plead for a Toleration, not
of all Religions sure, no, nor of any, which withdraws from God; surely no
sober man can plead for such a Religion. They plead for a Toleration of that
Religion or way of worship, which they are persuaded in their soul,
drawes-neerest to God; And for Toleration of these men amongst us, who have
ever lived peaceably with us, have spoken good things for us before the Throne
of God, whose Doctrines have come-up fully to the good word of God, and their
conversation also as becomes the Gospel. Now God forbid, that any rough-hand
should be put-forth against these men, Yea, God forgive our hard words and
unchristian thoughts that way.

A. But surely, many, whom we call, and they call themselves, Independent, do
think themselves exempt from all Laws, except that law, which rules in their
members: And think, as the Nimrods and Giants of the world do think, themselves
accountable for their Actions to none but God.

B. It were well, if they could bethink themselves seriously, That they are
accountable to God: but so they do not think; But this I know, That many walk
disorderly, loose from their God; the Gospel; and way of His worship. But if
there be any, who understand Independency so, let them be as odious, and
abominable in man's eye, as the Giants and Nimrods of the world, (mighty
hunters before the Lord) are in Gods eye: and let all men come out against
them, as they should do against such mighty oppressors; To thrust them out of
the Land. Now let us hear also what is commonly said.

A. That more have fallen off from that way, we call Independent, walking their
own way, following their own fancies, than from the other way of Church
Government. We know not how many have gone-out from us, unto them, been
received there, and then have turned away from them again, unto abominable
ways of errors, not to be remembered here. I answer.

B. This may be, and yet the way good and Holy; yea an Argument all this, of
the goodness and Holiness of the way, because so many have turned to it, and
then quickly away from it. They wentout from us, but they were not of us, says
the Apostle: And lightly come, lightly gone, says the Proverb. These entered
upon the way without due consideration, upon very light motions; before they
weighed and pondered their own way, or the way they were entering upon. And so
they are like a ship without balas; or as a cloud without rain, carried about,
etc. Here now, if my advice were worth acceptance, it should be this, to the
Masters of the Assemblies; That they would be as dainty in their choice of
Members, as Paul would have Timothy to be in laying on his hand, which we call
ordination. Let it appear, that the Word and Spirit gathers members into a
Church fellowship, and not the call of men: Which will appear, if enquiry be
made first, whether they have counted their cost. That is a great inquiry. And
whether their fellowship is with the Father and the Son; and are resolved to
maintain the same fellowship in that Church Communion, they are now entering
upon, taking cure and charge one over another, as before said, such as is
comely for a communion of Saints? If they can in sincerity and truth of heart
make clear answers thereunto, that they have no low Aims; nor base ends moving
them to come-over to the way: but only the glory of God, and their more
comfortable vvalking still searching the Scripture: and vvalking humbly with
their God: Surely if so, there will be be no fear of falling-off; but fully
assured we may be they will vvalk-on strait forward, and hold-on to the end.
They are the light, inconsiderate, unsavourie, unballased Christians, such as
never count their cost, that are the sickle men; who would seem to be some
bodies when indeed they are Nothings:: and yet would be accounted Independent
men, taken off from themselves, and the world, and from every bottom there;
founded and rooted in Christ, wholy Dependent upon Him, the Rock of Ages: And
yet walk as without God in the present World; as they have the men of the
World for an example, quite loose from God and good-men. Oh! this is
Abominable; and will be bitterness at the last. To shut-up this; They that
are received into Church Communion should be men fearing God, and hating
covetousness, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: Men, that
can hear, and read, and sing, and pray, and all in the Spirit: Men that walk
with God, filled with the Holy Ghost: And these will serve to make Church
officers too. It will be said again.

A. But why do I make so large exceptions against the Doctors book? I was not
provoked.

B. Not provoked! Indeed I was, and so I think is every good man; To see such
a -- I cannot tell what to call it, Charge is too soft a word, drawn-up
against the Brethren, upon the front of his book, and in the face of the World.
Surely, if I had seen such -- an Indictment against the Presbyterians, I should
have said as much against it and as heartily. And I persuade my self, they do
vvish, That the Doctors book, and such like, had never seen the Sun: or, coming
abroad, had been dealt with, as their Authors would have their brethren done
unto, thrown into the fire to be purged there. And truly if my book be so
accounted of by any sober Christian, as a troubler of the Churches peace, let
it go with its fellows, such troublers, and let me be thrust-out after it. But
the Dr. Himself does not account me a troubler, a flatterer he says I am. I
must reply to this first.

If I would flatter, and had skill that way, as truly I have none, but if I
had, I would not flatter the Brethren, we call Independents; men set forth the
last, as aforesaid; I would not flatter them; In the eye of the world, I say of
the world, I am better than they, and better accounted of then they. But yet we
will hear how the Dr. charge all those, that speak for the Independents or
the way of Government, thus he says, or to this purpose; That the men, who
treat on their side, do bespeak them, and the people with high strains of
Rhetorique and large laudatives concerning them: And for his part, he has been
a little too free that way, and he craves pardon, Let him have it, for his
tongue in print may assure us, and all the world, that, if he has given his
Brethren their dues, which he owoth to every man, sweet and fair language, he
will retract now, and do so no more, But to quit my self of that my soul
abhors, base flatteries, giving that to men, which I know they deserve not,
This I will say, and not crave pardon for my expression, The Lord God of gods,
the Lord God of gods, He knows, That my heart and soul has gone-out with my
words all along. I have not strained my conscience in any word I have spoken
touching our Brethren, and their way; It is a beautiful way in my eye, and
they have walked with a right-foot in that way, sor ought I can discern, or can
ken to the contrary. One or more of that side or way, may have spoken
improperly enough, as the Dr. argues their words, he heard from them in the
pulpit. Very likely all that. Alas! Men may walk as men; And it is far from me
to commend man's way: It is Gods way I contend for; man may speak also (it is
not proper to say, he may, but he does) not always as the oracle of God. He is
a perfect man, says S. James, and I believe He knew none such in the world,
that trips not in his tongue, and foot also, who was not an offender in a word,
yes, and in deed too.

The Nations are but as a drop of the bucket, and the Isles as the small dust
of the balance, in comparison with the great God; How small and light a thinst
then is he, we call man? Surely surely when we way him, we must give him his
full allowance, for he is many grains too light: And yet I must not call him
R^c^: a fool, a Mat. 5. 22. (...) Vacuus in mis.
light and empty fellow; If I call my brother so, I am in danger of a Council;
the Synod may talk with me for it. and it is fit they should, I abominate
jeering or scoffing, or any lightness at all; If any for the Independent way are
faulty therein, they are clean out of the way of God, and good men; and far
from the end they seem to propose, the persuading with, and reducing their
brother into the way of holiness. And he who is bitter, is far-out too. And
now I feel my self plucked by the ear. I have heard it argued against me
more than once, That I blame Mr. Ed: bitter language, when mine is more bitter.
Is it so? let me be blamed for that, and I ask him pardon too. But I protest
now before the Lord and his people, That though I have been accused, yet I was
never shown the words, which might argue this bitterness charged upon my
Spirit; If such they are in any corner of my book, which can bear such a
construction, they slipped from me before I was aware, yet I will own them, if
there they be, as my own, the fruit of my own Spirit, and reprove my self and
my words more than another need to do; yea, and abominate such words also,
all and every one, which have such an Aspect upon my brother, but I say again,
and I say truly, I have not yet found any such word in my book: but I can too
easily over-looke my own words or actions, as an unfit Judge in such matters.
Yet let me tell you what I ought to do, and what I would do, so I shall the
better argue against my three brethren hereaster. That if I were to speak to
Turker or Jews; Atheists or Papists; the most untoward and roughest men in the
world, yet I would render my words as smooth as oil, and as s^ft as Butter,
that the men I speak unto might know in their hearts, and be persuaded in
their souls, that I have no war against them in my heart; no, but that I
keowing the terror of the Lord, do seek their peace, their souls peace;
that I would perfwade with them for their everlasting good: And by this means J
would hope to make my words keen in the hearts of our Lords, and His Christ's
chiefest enemies; and if J had a word from the Lord, by the grace of God, that
J would fet-on with all my might, but with the spirit of meekness. We have an
excellent pattern for this; To speak so to my Brother, as that my Brother may
perceive that I would do^ him good with all my Heart and all my soul: For so
the high God, the great Lord of heaven and earth, Even so he speaks to his
poor servants; I will do you good (says He) with My whole heart and My wh^le
soul. Oh the goodness of God! His kindness to his creatures, so he treates
with men! O! blessed be His name. Have these three servauts of the Lord
imitated their Master? I should not put it to Question, for past all Question
they have done clean contrary. What the good King said in the Anguish of his
Spirit, the same these men have said in the tartness frowardness, eagerness
Isa 38.
of their own (...) bitterness bitterness, bitterness in their tongues, and
that could not be but when there is more in the heart, abundance of
bitterness there; whence it is that their pens have been dipped in vinigar
and steeped as in gall: bitterness, bitterness, as if they intended not, as
sure they did not, to inform their brethren, and recall them from error, if in
any they are, but to inbitter their spirits, and give them a bill from their
hands, in full assurance, that they will endeavor, without the grace of God,
to discover and lay open their brethrens nakedness to all the world, with
their whole heart, and with their whole soul. Is this to imitate the Lord God
Father of mercies, God of, all Consolations? To put this out of question i will
say this more, that there is not a man, on this side our narrow seas, whose
hand has appeared for the Presbyterian way of Church Government, not one man
(except that excellent man Mr. Herle, it were a notable indignity offered unto
him, not to except him) that has not bent the same hand against his brethren,
making his words sharp as arrows shot-out against their very faces; I had
almost said, and hearts too, so giving all the world to know (I speak my
jealousy at least) that their passions are strong, but their cause is weak.
But this I know; That we have not so learnt the Lord Christ; This is not after
our Lords manner, nor after the Customs of the Churches of God. I have said
what I have to say touching this filthy and putred matter, which like a box
of the vilest and impurest ointment, is suffered to run abroad through Church
and State to fill the house there with its filthy savor. I Will close this box
with this stopple, it may be of use to stop the mouth against devouring words;
Such kind of vvritings or Reasonings, savouring so strong of flesh and blood,
will never do the world good, to make them know they lie in evil; Nor the
cause good, mighty Adversaries thereunto; nor the Church good, To make them
know their sins, and confess their errors; never do the State or Church good
this way, while the world stands, unless by accident, as the Logicians say
(i e) by the wise disposing, and gracious ordering of an Almighty hand: so they
shall do all good; But not per se, as we say, not by their own natural
working, while the world stands. And when the world must fall to pieces, and
the Things there crumbled all to nothings; and the persons there must render an
account of all they have said, and done, then these kind of writings will be
bitterness, bitterness. Their Authors shall taste, if they repent not, of
their own Gall, and wormwood, there, which they themselves have put-in: and it
shall be their drink, and portion for ever. Then the tongue, which was seton
fire of hell, and repented not, shall have Hell and fire long enough, as long
as eternity is long, for ever and ever.

It is a sad period, I will not put Amen to it: my soul deprecates, prays
against this end. But I Will pray in prayer, if I could in prayer I would pray;
Lord give the brethren all four, (I might say fourscore, here, and there, and
every where, give them Lord, repentance for all their hard words and ungodly
deeds against the brethren, the faithful servants of the Lord, Amen: make
them Lord as all the Tribes shall be, all one, as one stick in Thy hand, to
beat away the dogs and swine: All as one assembly of Saints, built-up as a
Ciey that is compacted together; or as a house founded upon the Rock of Ages,
fast and sure for ever, notwithstanding, the fierce winds, great rains, and
water-flouds; for this Rock is our Rock: He will be our guide, even unto the
death. 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9. Finally be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of
another, be as brethren, be pitiful be courteous: Not rendering, evil for
evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are
thereunto called, that you should inherit a blessing.

FINIS.

