GNOSTN TOY THEOY KA GNOSTN TOY XPISTOY, OR, THAT WHICH MAY BE KNOWN OF GOD BY
THE BOOK OF NATURE; And the excellent Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST by the BOOK OF
SCRIPTURE.

Delivered at St Mary's in Oxford,

By EDWARD WOOD M. A. late Proctor of the University and Fellow of Merton Coll.
Oxon.

Published since his death by his brother A. W. M. A.

1 Cor. 2. 2. (...).

OXFORD, Printed by H. H. Printer to the University, for Jos. GODWIN, and EDW.
FOREST. 1656.

ORNATISSIMO, NOBILI NECNON CLARISSIMO VIRO D. IONATHANI GODDARD MEDICINAE
DOCTORI, ET INCLYTI COLLEGII MERTONENSIS CUSTODI, IN ANTIQUISSIMA UNIVERSITATE
OXONIENSI

ANTONIUS WOOD

COLLEGII PER PRUDENTIAM SUAM OPTIME GUBERNATI ALVMNVS, HAS PRIMITIAS MODO
FRATRIS DEFUNCTI SUO PATROCINIO HUMILITER

Dat, Dicat, Dedicat. THE PUBLISHER to the Courteous Reader.
THe Author of these Sermons being lately fallen asleep, and having had no
Admission, while he was Living, to be recommended to Public View, the
Persuasion and Importunity (since his death) of some of my Friends, and such as
may challenge no small Interest in me, has (though unwilling) induced me to
Adventure to Exhibit this Little Volume to look out and do Service in the
World. He himself whilst he lived Wrote it, and doubtless he had finished it,
if God had lent him longer Life: but it fared so with him, as once with
Hezekiah, Esaias 37. 3. The children were come to the birth, and there was not
strength to bring forth. I have as a Brother, though not as a skillful Midwife,
done what I could to bring it forth, by collecting it out of his Paper-books,
and some other loose Writings from his private Study, which was the only
Remora to it is more Sudden, and much desired Birth.

Some Errata's since have passed the Press (which perhaps will not so well
relish with thy Palate) but I wholly rely upon thy Courteous Ingenuity to pass
them over with Silence.

Thou may here expect that I should speak something in Commendation of this
Work, which is not, happily, so fitting, it being both hard for one Brother to
praise another without Boasting: moreover, for me to seek thy Approbation of
it by any Fair and Plausible Inductions, were altogether to Distrust, if not
Impare the worth of it. I know the work it self will sufficiently Praise him,
especially, if thou will vouchsafe to peruse it Charitably (I mean, without
any Detracting Calumnies or Cynicall Censures) which if thou do, thou shall
find his Spirit in them, and in a manner hear him, (although Dead) yet
Speaking unto thee: and shall hereby much persuade the Publisher to leave off
(at least in some measure) grieving for, and lamenting over his once Living,
and always Loving Brother, and shall rather divert the stream of his Affections
into a strong current of Haleluiah's, for the Hopes that he has (especially
from those that willingly entertain a Dead man's works and retain his words in
their Living Hearts) of doing good by this his Publication, which is the desire
of

Thy Servant A. W.

ROMANS 1. 19, 20. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God has showed it unto them.

For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead, so that they are without excuse.


THere are three books wherein the Deity may be plainly read and discovered,
the book of nature, the book of the creatures, and the book of the Scriptures:
this latter was peculiar to the Jews, the two former common both to Jew and
Gentile; for unto the Jews were committed the oracles of God, because they
were his peculiar people, unto the Jew and Gentile the light of nature, and use
of the Scriptures, because they both were men, and inhabitants of the world.
Now out of these three books our Apostle labors to convince of
unrighteousness the two great enemies of our justification by faith in Christ,
the self-conceited Jew, and the Idolatrous Gentile: for however the one might
pretend unto salvation by virtue of their inherent righteousness, and the
other hope to escape damnation by their ignorance of the Law, which threatens
death to the breakers thereof, yet our Apostle in this his Epistle does plainly
demonstrate, that neither the righteousness of the one was so commensurate and
answerable to the law of God, as to attain heaven and avoid the curse, and
that the ignorance of the other was not so great, as that thereby they might
become inexcusable, and without offense toward God; both Jew and Gentile are
sinful, for there is none that does good, no not one, and therefore both Jew
and Gentile are liable unto damnation; the Jews, because it is impossible for
them to keep the Law, from the observance of which they expected life; the
Gentile, because they were not obedient unto those common notions, and
implanted truths they had of God and moral honesty. For however they pretended
not to know God, and therefore not to hold the truth in unrighteousness, as
it is evidently shown they do in the foregoing verse; yet our Apostle does by
force of Argument take away their false pretenses, and plainly convinces them
of both in the words of my Text, which, as I suppose, are brought in to prevent
a secret objectio^ that the Gentile might frame against the doctrine of the
precedent verse: for the Apostle being about to prove our justification only
by faith, does in the 18. verse dispute negatively, and show that works, in
which both Jew and Gentile trusted, could never justify, they being so far
from making us appear righteous before God, that the wrath of God is revealed
against them, for the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. The best works of natural men
cannot free them from being guilty of ungodliness and unrighteousness, from
the breach of the first and second Tables, and therefore is the wrath of God
revealed from heaven, even against the best works of men. But what kind of men
are these that stand thus charged with ungodliness and unrighteousness? Why?
Such, says Saint Paul, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; but you
Gentiles do thus hold the truth in unrighteousness, it is you that suppress,
smother, and imprison those truths that are in you concerning God and your
neighbor, and therefore it is you primarily, who stand guilty of
unrighteousness and ungodliness: and here you may suppose the froward Gentile
muttering within himself, and thus cavilling at the Apostles minor, what Saint
Paul, will you say, we hold the truth in unrighteousness? whereas we are
altogether ignorant of God: the Jews indeed are without excuse, because in the
Scriptures God is plainly revealed unto them; but as for us we sit in
darkness, and the shadow of death, without the least glimmering or knowledge
of God, and therefore pray forbear so hard a censure: no, says the Apostle,
say what you will, yet there is a light within you, and there are creatures
without you, that will easily confute your fond opinion; it is not for Gentiles
to plead ignorance, because that which may be known of God is manifest in
them, for the invisible things of him, etc. So then you may have here the
Gentiles plea refuted; they secretly seem to plead not guilty to the Apostles
charge of their withholding the truth in unrighteousness: their plea seems
to be taken from their ignorance of God, and could they have maintained this,
they might easily have eluded that; wherefore Saint Paul to take away all
shifts and evasions from them, and the better to confirm his charge, brings in
two bills of reply against them, the first is grounded upon that natural light
which God has manifested unto them concerning himself; the second upon the
creatures, which with a dumb kind of eloquence did every where proclaim the
power of their Maker, and which were as a conduct and guidance unto them into
the knowledge of the Godhead, which they vainly pretended to be ignorant of. To
the first of these grounds I shall speak at present, and only more distincly
handle what I have heretofore in a private Congregation represented in gross.

Take the words as they lie in themselves, and you shall find in them aliquid
allegatum, and aliquid probatum, an allegation, and a proof or reason of this
allegation. The Gentile seems to plead ignorance; the Apostle alleges the
contrary, because, says he, that which may be known of God is manifest in
them: and lest he should seem to stick here, he brings in further evidence and
proof, for what he had said in these words, for God has shown it unto them.

In both you may be pleased to take notice of, First, the matter alleged,
their knowledge of God, (...), that which may be known of God, or that which
is knowable of God, namely, by natures discovery, not by extraordinary
revelations, and Evangelicall dispensations, as Vorstius and others without
reason conceive. For this (...), in the preceding verse, which according unto
Beza, and the best expositors is nothing but a natural knowledge of God, and
of good and evil; the knowledge of God necessarily Implying, or at least upon
inevitable consequence bringing in the knowledge of good and evil.

2. Secondly, you may observe the qualification or manner of this their
knowledge, (...), it is manifest as the light which shines in them, and is so
clear, that do what they can, they can never shut their eyes against it, or
wholly blot it out.

3. Thirdly, here are the subjects in whom this knowledge resides, (...) in
them (viz.) in the Gentiles, which some translate, amongst them, and so refer
this knowledge to their learned ones, and Philosophers, who have left every
where in their writings evident testimonies thereof; but our own translation,
as I conceive, is most proper and nearer the original, and so in them will be
as much as in their minds and consciences, as you will further hear anon.

Fourthly, here is the Author of this knowledge in them, (...), God, ushered in
with the rational particle (...), for God has shown it unto them, God, that
is, partly by the light of nature in their consciences, and partly by the
conduct of the creatures, has so plainly declared and showed himself unto the
Gentiles, that they cannot pretend their ignorance of him, or of their duty
toward their neighbor.

From the words thus opened you may gather this Observation, That there is, and
ever has been in all men, even in the Gentiles, a Natural light, whereby they
have been directed unto God, and natural goodness.

In the prosecution of which I shall show you, First, what is meant more fully
by this Natural light.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to demonstrate that it is and ever has bin in all
men, even in the Gentiles.

Thirdly, I shall enquire; whether or no, this natural light were sufficient
unto the salvation of the Gentiles.

And Lastly, I shall deduce some practical inferences, from what shall be said
for our own use. For the understanding of the first point, namely what is
meant, by this Natural light, or light of nature, we must note that man may be
considered, either in his primitive creation, or in his corrupted sinful
estate; if we consider, man first in his created integrity: so without doubt
this light was a clear, distinct, penetrative and unerring light: for God
framing all things according to that exact plat-forme and Idea, which was
eternally in himself, did accordingly bestow upon his creatures all things
requisite unto their several species and conditions, and therefore man being
the Masterpiece, (as I may so speak) of all his works, was by him primitively
Invested with more noble endowments then any other creature whatsoever: for
whereas other things were either by instinct or immediate direction of God
ordered unto their several ends and his glory, man alone amongst the rest did
clearly and rationally apprehend the will and greatness of his maker; other
creatures did blindly serve him in their several Ranckes and orders, but man
being farther enlightened with an understanding and reasonable soul, did
freely, and with choice cleave unto him as his chiefest good, so that Adam by
virtue of that excellent light which God had infused unto him, did know God,
and his will savingly, and with such a perfection as was most proper for his
condition. For though it may be true what the Schoolmen say, that this
concreated light and knowledge in our first parents might have been further
increased by rational discourse, and supervenient grace, yet doubtless in it
self, without any further addition it was sufficient to lead them into a
saving knowledge of the will and true worship of God; these divine rays so
enlightening the whole man, that the great Mysteries of God and salvation were
as distinctly impressed upon his soul, as the Image of the Sun ever was upon
the most pure and Crystalline glass.

But now, Secondly, as the most beautiful picture, being sullyed and dawbed
over, does loose much of its form and grace, so likewise that excellent image
of God in man, being once besmeared over with sin, did loose very much of its
pristine glory and goodness, and therefore no wonder if the same light and
knowledge of God in man, which before was so clear and distinct in us, is now
through sin become dull, confused, and faint; for it is the nature of sin
always to overcast and unite the soul with ignorance, as you may every where
read in the Scriptures of the blindness, darkness, and ignorance of men in
the state of Nature. Sin then interposing between God and us, this glorious
light suffered a very fearful Eclips, and as the faint glimmerings of a Lamp
or Candle in the socket, was mingled with very much darkness and confusion:
for though through sin it was not quite extinguished in us, as plainly
appears by the text, yet so far was it dulled that we cannot by the remainders
thereof either read the will of God, or from it derive any comfort unto our
selves. For as by a dull and obscure taper we may perhaps view a body in
gross, whereas we cannot through the weakness of the light scan each
particular part of it; why so here, by this light of nature we may apprehend
indeed God and his worship in general, but we can never thereby dive more
particularly into his will, or those his attributes of grace, pardoning mercy,
love unto us in Christ, and the like, which none can fully understa^d without
faith in Christ in whom alone are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2. verse. 3.

Well then, to draw to an head, by comparing these our two estates together, you
may easily conceive what is meant by this natural light, or light of nature;
for it is nothing else but those common ordinary notions and conceits remaining
in the minds and consciences of men concerning God and natural goodness: in
the first verse it is called the truth, because of those plain convictions it
has upon the consciences of natural men, and therefore they that resist this
light, and walk not according unto its dictates are said to hold the truth in
unrighteousness, that is, unjustly to stifle and keep under those
apprehensions of God and goodness, from appearing in their Lives or Actions.
And in the second of this Epistle, and the thirteenth, it is called the Law
written in their hearts, from the command and awful power it has over the
hearts of men, in which it is engraven as with the point of a diamond; and
therefore Iamblicus an eminent Author calls it an inbred and immovable notion.
We style this light of nature, common, ordinary notions and conceits; common
they are, because they are congeniall, and imbred in all men; and ordinary,
because, though all men naturally have some slight and catching conceits at
God, yet they neither know aright who or what kind of God this is, and
therefore you may read Act. 17. verse. 23. of an Altar amongst the Athenians
inscribed, Unto the unknown God: and Christ said the Samaritans worshipped
they knew not what, Joh. 4. 22. Secondly, we say that these notions remain in
the minds and consciences of men; for first, in the minds reside those (...),
those speculative, prime and fundamental truths, namely, that there is a God,
that all effects have dependence upon some cause, and the like. And secondly,
because in the consciences of men reside those (...), those practical and
moral principles, by which we conclude within our selves, that since there is
a God, he is to be worshipped, that we ought to do unto others as we would have
them do unto us, that we ought to deal justly with all men, and the like.
From whence it is that the Apostle says of the Gentiles, that they do by
nature the things contained in the Law, even the Gentiles have a natural Law
imprinted in their hearts, by which they are carried unto those Common general
duties which concern God and their neighbor; which will further be cleared
unto you if you consider with me the second point, namely, that this light of
nature is in all men; or rather thus, that there are some Common notions of God
and goodness imprinted in the hearts of all men, even of the Gentiles. There
is no man so over dawbed with sin and filthynesse, so benighted and overclouded
with wretched ignorance, but has oftentimes the flashes and immediate
representations of the Deity darting in upon him, and there is noe man of so
debauched and loose a life, so benumbed and frozen affections, but has ever
and anon the secret whips and girds of a conscience to restrain him, together
also with natural Impressions of goodness to thaw and melt him into more
ingenuity; Now then that this light of nature,

First, as it relates unto God, is in all, may appear both by scripture and by
reason; as for scripture were there no other, my text would be sufficient proof
that that which may be known of God is manifest in them, that is in the
Gentiles, and so consequently in all. That which may be known of God, whereby
is employed, that there are some things concerning God above the pitch and kenne
of this natural light, the mysteries indeed of the Trinity, of the Incarnation
of Christ and the like are Riddles unto nature, neither can they ever be reached
unto by humane disquisition; Yet it still remains certain that that which
may be known of God, namely his being, his omnipotence and the like is
manifest in them. In the 17. of the Acts verse. 26, 27, 28. you may have another
proof for the Apostle there in his Sermon unto the Athenian Heathens, showing
that God was not so far from them, but that he might even Palpando inveniri, as
Beza translates it, be groped after, and easily found out. By that little
natural light that was in them they might tracke the footsteps of Divinity,
and happily find out in whom they lived, moved, and had their being: And so in
the Acts, chap. 14. verse. 17. it is said that God left not himself without
witness. There is within us an inbred light, as a domesticke Chaplain
continually to teach us, and without us rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, as so many visible witnesses to take away ignorance, and all excuse
from us; wherefore that of the Psalmist, The fool has said in his heart,
Psalm. 14. 1. must not be understood as if a wicked man (for he is the fool
here) could quite obliterate and put out the light of nature, and Knowledge of
God in him (for Atheism can never find a perfect and continual assent in the
heart of man) but only that he so works and lives without the fear of God,
as if he were fully persuaded that there were no God at all. The reasons then
to prove that the Knowledge of God is in all men Naturally, may be many, I
shall name only two or three, and let pass the common consent of all Nations.
Nulla gens tam barbara est, says Tully, there is no nation so barbarous and
destitute of Common reason, as not to acknowledge a God; to let pass also the
Natural discourses, and ultimate resolutions of the minds of men into some
Supreme cause, and first Mover of all things.

1. First, the testimonies of the Heathens themselves do sufficiently evidence
the truth; it is Paul's way of arguing with the Athenians, as certain also of
your own Poets have said, we are also his Offspring, Acts 17. 28. He infers
their knowledge of God, and the truth of his worship from their own mouths,
and so may we also. Plato calls a man (...) a creature naturally religious, and
a worshiper of God: yea himself has written so Divinely and Reverently of
God, that many of the Ancients have gone about to prove him a Christian; though
Bernard truly and wittily says, whilst many would feign make Plato a Christian
they prove themselves heathens. It would be as endless as it is needless to
produce here the several testimonies which Heathen Authors do every where give
to this truth, some amongst them sealing it with their blood, others every
where professing it in their writings: and however there have been some few
amongst them, who have denied this truth, yet I am persuaded their tongues went
not along with their hearts. It Was more their desire that there should be no
God, then their opinion that there was none. As guilty prisoners wish the death
of their Judge, only because they conceive him to be the instrument of their
condemnation: in like manner these and such like men being conscious to
themselves, of their own desperate wickedness desire the not being of him
whose Justice they well know must needs take notice of and severely punish
their offenses.

For, secondly, the Testimonies of their Consciences will easily declare that
they have such a light and knowledge of God within them. There is no man so
great, so absolute and independent from the command and beck of others, but is
sometimes awed and controled by a Power within his own breast, and those secret
checks and lashes of Conscience upon the commission of some notorious offense,
must needs make the stoutest sinner confess a power above him, which he
fears, and a God unto whom he is accountable for all his Offenses. Hence the
Apostle showing the works of the Law to be written in the Hearts of the
Gentiles, amplifies it further, and adds this as a kind of a reason, their
consciences also bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another, Romans 2. verse. 15.

Thirdly, the very multiplicity of the Heathenish Gods may (as I suppose)
plainly show that they had this indelible principle written in their hearts;
for though some of them had as many Gods as they had Onyons and Leekes in their
gardens; and though the Worship they ascribed unto these their Deities was as
various as the several nations and opinions of men were; yet these their
various Worships and Opinions of a God did plainly denote, that a God it was
whom they sought and hunted after; for though they erred in particulars, yet
they all agreed in this General, that a God there was. As the water of the
same fountain may be diversely spread into several streams and eddyes, yet
all these several streams and eddyes fall into one sea; so likewise though
this principle of nature may flow and be divided into various opinions
concerning God, yet these various opinions do all meet and concenter in this
General notion and conceit of a God. And therefore the Apostle says that the
Athenians did generally worship the true God under the false mask and
Inscription they gave unto him of the Unknown God, as you may see Acts 17.
verse. 23.

But, secondly, this Light of Nature as it relates unto Natural goodness is
in all men; Natural goodness I say, for as for that legal goodness which
supposes, the righteousness of work, it is impossible for any son of Adam to
have, for by the deeds of the Law there shall be no flesh justified in his
sight, Romans 3. 20. And as for that Evangelicall goodness which supposes the
righteousness of faith, no unbeliever can partake of it, for faith comes by
hearing and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10. 17.

It remains then that the Gentiles only had and still have the remainders of
Natural goodness alone left in them; now that they had this will better
appear by distinguishing of Natural goodness, which is either civil or
morrall; civil goodness I shall define to be that inbred propension in all
men to maintain societies and natural life. This certainly was, and at this
day is in the Heathens themselves: from whence else have proceeded those
excellent positive Laws and Constitutions of Solon, Draco and others, by which
as by so many sinews and ligaments, Commonwealths has bin joined and
compacted together? From whence those noble inventions and sciences of Physic,
Mathematick, Astronomy and the like, without which man's life would be neither
comfortable not delightful? From whence those inferior Mechanical arts, by
which rude and undigested things are curiously modified and prepared for the
use of man? From whence are these, I say, and many of the like nature, but from
that inbred Natural Life of Goodness in man, guiding and directing him unto
the common Public good of humane society? Hence we read of Jaball and Juball
and Tuball-Cain Genesis 4. cunning artificers and curious inventors, which yet
notwithstanding were all mere natural men of the cursed race, and without the
Covenant and Church of God.

The second sort of natural goodness may be called moral, and it consists
(as I conceive) in a man's obedience unto the dictates of reason, in embracing
virtue and voiding vice. That the Gentiles were thus morally good, those
admirable examples of their Justice, Fortitude, Temperance, and other the like
virtues, do sufficiently declare. Some of them being so exactly rigorous in
administering of Justice, that they have not spared their own sons offending:
some again devoting themselves, and exposing their own throats to the sword
for the good of their country: Others so Abstemious and Temperate, that in the
greatest feasts of their Princes, they have not so much as touched any wine:
Others so Chaste, that they have not admitted into their sight any object that
might provoke them unto lust. It were easy here to make a particular induction
through all the Commandments of the second Table, and prove unto you as as well
by instances of Scripture, as from profane authors, how that the Gentiles by
their exact outward conformity unto reason, evidently showed the work of the
Law to be written in their hearts. But examples of this kind are infinite; and
not only examples, but precepts also; for what excellent rules do they every
where prescribe for the steering and directing a man in the paths of Virtue?
What grave and sage precepts, eschewing of evil, embracing of good? We must
indeed confess, that these grave precepts, these excellent rules, however in
general known and prescribed, were yet notwithstanding, when they came
particularly to be applied, oftentimes little used or made good by the practice
of their own Authors: such was that overruling power of Passion in the
strictest Professors, that some of them have lived in the common practice of
those vices which their judgments otherwise have disallowed; as we may read
concerning Aristotle, then whom no one has more commended chastity; and yet so
little did he observe his own rules, that he would feign make a Goddess of his
impure strumpet, and so Canonize his own lusts. Who writ more divinely
concerning the contempt of the world then Seneca? and yet who a greater
worldling? who more covetous then himself? as both Tacitus and Suetonius note
of him. Who seemed better furnished with Moral principles then Zeno and
Socrates? and yet even they so little obeyed them, that they relapsed into
unnatural lusts, as Plutarch and Laertius observe of them, and as Saint Paul
of other Gentiles in the latter end of this Chapter. Wherefore it will not be
amiss, now in the third place, to enquire, whether or no this Light of Nature
be sufficient unto salvation: or, whether one may be saved by this light of
nature without says in Christ? This says our Mountacute, in the first of his
Ecclesiastical Apparatus, is the opinion of many of the Fathers, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Justin Martyr, Cyril of Alexandria, and others whom he there
reckons up: how ever this same Author shows the contrary opinion of most of
the rest; and sure I am that Austin in many of his books de Civitate Dei, is
against them, and so are most of the Schoolmen, the Modern especially, together
with most of the Popish Doctors and Protestant reformers. But to omit the
citation of their words, which you may elsewhere find, that I may according to
the judgment and sense of the best divines briefly and clearly state the point,
I shall premise these four things.

1. That the ignorance of Christ cannot in it self excuse a man, and free him
from damnation. There is a twofold ignorance you know, either juris, when a man
is ignorant of what he is bound to know; or facti, when he is only ignorant of
some particular circumstance of what is done: this latter may excuse, as
appears in the case of Abimelech: Genesis 20. 6. the former does not; and
therefore God having revealed his will in the Scriptures concerning himself
and Christ, every man upon forfeiture of his salvation, was and is bound to
know it. As if a Prince should publish a Proclamation out of a man's hearing,
and in his absence, it is not his absence, or the not hearing thereof that can
exempt him from punishment, if he disobeyes it.

2. Secondly, that there are, and ever have been most of the Gentiles utterly
destitute of any knowledge of Christ; and that whether it be an explicit,
distinct, particular knowledge of him, and his offices, or an implicit only
and general, concerning the truth and subsistence of such a Savior: and
therefore the incarnation of Christ is called an hidden mystery to former ages.
Col. 1. verse. 26. and Saint Paul calls those times before Christ, the times of
ignorance, Act. 17. 30.

3. Thirdly, that the knowledge of Christ, and faith in him, is every way
necessary unto salvation; necessary as the only means for the obtaining of
it, for there is no other name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved,
Act 4. 2. and necessary by virtue of the injunction and positive command of
God, for this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23.

4. Fourthly, that God may instill oftentimes this faith into the hearts of
many by means altogether unknown unto us, and therefore that we ought not
altogether to despair of the salvation of such Gentiles, who have endeavored
in their life time to follow the lights and dictates of right reason. I speak
not this, as if God were bound to bestow faith or salvation upon such men, but
only to magnify the unsearchable riches of his Mercy. And to gain a more
charitable construction upon our following conclusion, these things then being
premised, we assert the negative part of the question, and ground this
conclusion, namely, that no Gentile living and dying without faith in Christ
can be saved by walking according to the light of nature.

The truth of this may, first, appear by considering the imperfection and
worthlesnesse of their best natural works and virtues. We do not deny all
manner of reward or profit unto such Gentiles who lived more virtuously then
others; for besides the present tranquillity of Conscience they enjoyed in this
world, like enough their torments may be more tolerable in the next: but this
we may safely say, that the strictest of them either in life or profession
could never fulfill the law, and so consequently never attain unto salvation.
For there never has been any more then two ways unto heaven, either by the
Law, or by the Gospel; but as for the Law, it was impossible for them to
fulfill it, and as for the Gospel, it is supposed in the question that they
never believed it. I know very well, that there have been many who have gone
about to Canonize the Gentiles for their excellent virtues; amongst whom is
Zuinglius of latter days, and some of the Fathers of old: but certainly had
they weighed even their best Actions in the balance of the Sanctuary, they had
found them lighter then vanity it self. There are two things (as I conceive)
mainly considerable in every action, the principle from whence it proceeds,
and the end unto which it is directed; now both these in the Gentiles were
carnal, and not the least way acceptable to God: for as for the Principle and
fountain of their actions it was flesh, but flesh and blood can never inherit
the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor, 15. 50. And that which is borne of the flesh is
flesh, John 3. 6. And as for the end of their Actions, it was usually ambition
and hope of praise, or covetousness and hope of reward. And this was the
righteousness of the Pharisees, and yet our Savior says except our
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat: 5. 20. It Is the end that
makes the Action Good or Bad. Almesgiving Materially and in it self considered
is a good act, but then being performed by a Pharisee, for a bad end, it became
evil: and so likewise the Virtuous Actions of the Gentiles may according to
their outward matter be Morally good, when as if we consider either the
Principle from whence they proceeded, or the End unto which they were directed,
they were but at the best Splendida peccata, handsome and well dressed sins,
and therefore neither ex congruo, as some of the Arminians and Papists hold,
leading unto further Grace, nor at all Acceptable in the eyes of God.

Secondly, this may further appear by considering the necessity of Faith unto
salvation. For if it be true, that without faith it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11. 6. and if it be true also, that this only is life eternal to
know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, Joh. 17. 3. Then doubtless are
those in a very sad condition who never so much as heard of this Author of
Salvation, this Christ, in whom only God is well pleased. And however some men
urge, that there is no such necessity for the Gentiles believing, because it
was impossible for them thus to believe, having had heretofore no incomes or
way to come to the knowledge of him; we answer.

First, that absolutely there is no such impossibility; for then how came Job
and others Gentiles into the pale of the Church: and according to some, the Law
of Nature was sufficient to discover unto them a Christ; though this savours
too much of Pelagianisme.

Again, secondly, what though it was impossible for them barely by the light
of nature to believe? yet shall we tax God of tying his creatures to
impossibilities? certainly we cannot; for it was not Gods fault but man's, who
by his sinful fall contracted unto himself and his posterity such an
impossibility. But I must hasten.

Thirdly, this may further be made good unto you, by considering the vast
disproportion and enmity that is between a Natural understanding and
Spiritual Mysteries. The natural man, says the Apostle, receives not the
not the things of the spirit of God, for they are spiritually discerned, 1
Corin. 2. 14. (...), it is, say some expositors from the narrowness and
incapacity of the intellective faculty to receive those (...), In the text
indeed they are said to know the things of God but not the things of the spirit
of God; and good reason to for it, for as water can ascend no higher then just
the spring or fountain from whence it is derived, even so the knowledge which
flows from the light of Nature can mount no further, then into those things
which are proportioned and level with the same light. Should you tell a Pagan
of three distinct persons united in the same nature, of an Infinite God wrapped
up and cloysterd in Finite humane flesh, of being twice borne before he can
become a child of God; would he not (think you) rather laugh at, then believe
the discourse, and suppose you rather went about to puzzle then instruct him?
Doubtless a Bat may as soon face the Sun at noone day, or a purblind man read
the smallest print at a miles distance, as a Carnal man can dive into, or
discover such abstruse, sublime Mysteries. It Is the Word alone and spirit of
God that unlocks unto us these hidden things of God, which blockish nature can
never understand, much less discover. And therefore when Paul spoke unto the
Athenians concerning the Resurrection, the text says some of them mocked, and
the same Apostle in the 1 Cor. 7. 2. says the Gospel was unto the Greeks
foolishness: even the most learned of the Gentiles counted these mysteries
ridiculous and absurd things. Unto these reasons I might add many more, and
answer some objections, but I am afraid I should be tedious. Give me leave now
but in a word or two particularly to apply of this point unto our selves, what
has been Doctrinally spoken as touching the Gentiles, and so I shall conclude.

First: then this should make us bewail the sad loss we sustained by Adams
Apostasy; us I say, for we are all by nature Gentiles, neither is there any man
borne a Christian, As then when the sun is in a very great Eclipse, every man
is apt to be struct with horror and Amazement, so likewise when we consider,
how strange an Eclipse this primitive glorious light has suffered through
sin, we ought to be smitten through with grief, and seriously to bewail the
cause of it. When a man looks upon the Venerable ruins of some ancient,
stately edifice, how apt is he to weep and melt over its desolations? And
shall Man, that admirable fabric and Master-peice of his Creator, fall into
such confusion and darkness, and we be insensible of his ruins, and, as Nero
once did upon Rome, look merrily upon his destruction? Certainly, were not a
man wholly Engulphed in carnal pleasures, were not his heart so deeply steeped
in worldly delight, he would sometimes let fall a tear or two upon the sad
relics of his Primitive Glory, and mourn over his former happiness, now
entoumbed in nothing but Misery and Darkness. For doubtless great matter
there will be of sorrow unto us, to see that glorious fabric and beautiful
Image of God sullied over with sin and ugliness; that Understanding which is
the candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27. Now so overcharged with ignorance,
unbelief and falsehood; with ignorance, in being not able to fathom either
natural Causes or supernatural mysteries; with unbelief, in its
backwardness to assent unto such things which are beyond the reach of purblind
nature; and with falsehood, in its misapprehending and misjudging the truths of
God: to see likewise what rebellious tumults and disorders there are in those
Affections, which Originally were quietly subordinated unto the dictates and
guidance of Reason; how madly they cast off the reins, and rush into sin, as
a horse rusheth into the battle; how wildly they rage and Tyrannize over the
discursive rational faculty, either bribing it to assent unto such things
which upon deliberation it must needs disapprove off, or else violently tugging
and haling it to give way unto the Execution of them. To consider also how that
Conscience which primitively did enjoy a sweet tranquillity and peace, is now
lashed with the guilt of Sin, affrighted with the glarings and
preapprehensions of Hell fire, yea and become a very (...) a bugbeare unto us,
a speculum and looking glass to reflect unto us both our Temporal and
Eternal misery. I might here make an Anatomy of the whole man, and show unto
you how in every part and faculty of the soul that Glorious Light, which God
originally imprinted in our first parents, is now dim and almost quite
extinguished through sin, such is the strange malignity of it to deface and
blurre the clearest Characters of God and Goodness in man. And therefore it
should mightily humble every one of us, when we consider, that the Light
whereby we primitively were directed unto Heaven, and so sweet a communion with
God himself, is now so obscure in us, that we are feign to grope after him in
the dark, with whom before we had so familiar Acquaintance. And then it should
cause us to pray unto God, to enlighten our minds, to repair this decayed
lump with the Oil of his Grace, that we may be enabled to seek after him in
the way that he will be found, to bring us out of darkness into his mavelous
light; out of the darkness of ignorance, that we may rightly know him and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent; out of the darkness of error, that we may
know the truth, and discern things that differ; and out of the darkness of
unbelief, that believing on him we may not see death, but have everlasting
life.

But now, secondly, as we ought to be humbled in the sense of this our great
loss, so ought we likewise, since God has manifested it unto us, and it is
his gift, to be thankful for the remainders and sparks of this Light that now
remain in us: for whereas God might have wrapped us up in eternal darkness,
and have made us as brutish and irrational as the Beasts we formerly had
dominion over, yet such was his goodness to us, that in the midst of
judgments he remembered mercy; and though by reason of sin he might have
deprived us of the very footsteps and relics of Natural Goodness, yet has
it pleased him still to lend us so much light, as may be a witness unto
himself, and a Pole Star as it were, to direct us in the paths of Goodness
and Civility. Admirable has been the effects which even this light has
produced from mere natural men; those rational discourses, and deep
searchings into the bowels of nature, those sublime and raised speculations in
things Philosophical, those rare examples of Temperance, Sobriety, and
Justice, and what not? amongst the very Heathens, those curious inventions of
Arts and Sciences, their civil deportment, and exact conformity unto the laws
and constitutions of their Superiors. What are all these, I say, and many of
the like nature, but products and rays of this Light? But now as water, the
further it is from the fountain, the less pure and wholesome is it, so that
strength of Reason in the Heathen Philosophers, by how much the more it wanders
from God the Author of it, by so much the more deadly and poisonous was it
unto them. God did manifest unto the Gentiles many useful and excellent
things, but says the Apostle, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened. Mark the evil fruits of unthankfulness, they did not acknowledge
the Author of these gifts in them, and what followed? they became Vain in
their reasonings, or disputations, when God did once leave them unto their own
brains, whereunto they ascribed all their learning. What silly, simple
conclusions did they frame concerning him? some, even of their wisest, denying
his Providence, others again thinking, forsooth, that the management of the
world would be too great a labor for One God, divided the burden between
Multitudes of them, Jupiter, Pluto, Neptune, and I know not whom of their own
stamp and making: so strangely was their reasons infatuated, that though they
professed themselves to be wise, yet they became fools, and changed the glory
of the incorruptible God, etc. Wherefore it mightily concerns every one of us
in special, whom God has advanced above the rude and ignorant multitude, to
ascribe all our parts and learning unto God, as the Author of every good and
perfect gift: who as he can instill the greatest Knowledge into the dullest
piece of earth, so can he infatuate and destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Let not then the wise man
glory in his wisdom. Alas, without Gods blessing 'twill prove unto him, as
one says, but as the precious stone in a toad's head, rather a disease then an
ornament; and as he said falsely of Paul, we may say truly of many men, that
much learning has made them mad: for there may be a kind of rational
madness; a man may cum ratione insanire, and that when being unthankful unto
God for what he has, he makes his learning the fuel of his pride, and so by
his reason argues himself into hell. Remember the miserable end of Herod, a
wise and eloquent man without doubt, for such did the plaudit of the people
after his oration proclaim him to be; and yet he was eaten up of worms. Why?
because, says the Text, he gave not God the glory. We are apt to ascribe all
our wit and learning unto our own reasons and inventions, but take heed, God
resists the proud; he can by one blast of his displeasure enfeeble and weaken
the powers of the soul, besott and infatuate the strongest judgment, befoole
and benumme the quickest wit; he can send an Apoplexy upon thee, to take away
thy Memory, as Pliny somewhere reports of Messala Corvinus, that after a
sickness he forgot his own name: he can lay asleep our understanding in a
Lethargy, yea he can in the midst of our pride and unthankfulness dissolve
into nothing by a sudden death all our arts and learning, and then where is the
wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world?

3. The consideration of that knowledge of God and those moral virtues in the
very Gentiles, should shame and reprove many amongst us, who, even amidst the
glorious Light of the Holy Gospel, do fall far short of them. There are many
men, even in the Christian world, who, out of a certain proud curiosity, and
damnable Scepticisme, will call into question the very being of God, and think
they are then more learned, when they contradict the unanimous consent and
current of all men: and there are others again, who, out of an affected kind
of Atheism, and that they might better practice their impieties, do endeavor
to suppress and smother all thoughts arising in them of God, Providence,
Resurrection, Heaven, and Hell. The former of these you may term the
Speculative, the latter the Practical Atheist, then whom, says Picus
Mirandula, there is no greater monster in the world. The Scepticisme, or rather
Atheism of the one, their own consciences in this world may undeceive, the
flames of Hell in the next will more fully resolve; the desperate wickedness
of the other, if unrepented of, must expect by so much the severer censure of
Gods wrath, by how much the light they sin against is the greater. For tell me
thou wretch, whosoever thou art, what Hell, what flames shall be prepared for
thee? when an Ethnic Cato shall come and plead before that dreadful
Tribunal, his equity and justice, and thou a Christian Magistrate shall be
arraigued for thy partiality and wrong dealing: when a Plato shall present
before God his studiousnesse and temperance, and thou a Christian Scholar shall
be condemned for thy Idleness and drunkenness; when a Stoic shall stand
before the throne with his preciseness and strict living, and thou a
Protestant shall shake in the apprehensions of thy former looseness and
irregular walkings. What shall I say? when a poor Heathen, who had nothing but
the dim snuff of natural light to direct him, shall be pronounced more
righteous the^ thou, who have lived many years together under the bright
beams and sunshine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Be afraid then and
confounded ye sinners in Zion, you that dare so audaciously to commit those
sins under the glorious aspect of the Gospel, which those who had but the
faint glimpses of the Deity would have startled at. Be ashamed that any man
should have occasion to cry out, O Holy Socrates, Holy Plato, and O Devilish
Christian, O wicked Protestant. Our engagements are now greater to serve God,
and our accounts will therefore be more heavy if we disobey him: the times of
former ignorance God winked at, but now the axe is laid to the root of the
tree. Every tree therefore that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn
down and cast into the fire.

4. Fourthly and lastly, the consideration of the Insufficiency of this Light
of nature to save the Gentiles, should teach us, First, everlastingly to admire
and adore the unfathomable judgments of God unto these Gentiles of old, who
suffered them to walk in their own ways, without any glimpses or knowledge of
a Savior, that we might tremble at his deep stupendous dispensations toward
these poor sinners, and for ever extol his mercies toward us, in reserving
us unto such glorious times as these of the Gospel are, wherein the Mysteries
of Christ are not so much as mussled up in Types and Figures as among the
Jews, much less wholly wrapped up in darkness, and kept totally undiscovered,
as they were from the Gentiles; but every where gloriously displaid and
unfolded before our eyes. And secondly, it may teach us, that neither Learning
nor Moral Honesty can simply in themselves, conduce any thing unto salvation;
for both these the Gentiles had in a very eminent manner, and yet for ought we
know they may be now frying in the slames of Hell. First then, not learning;
could a man with Solomon dive into the nature of all things, even from the
tallest Cedar to the lowest shrub, could he speak in as many Languages as ever
the several builders of Babell did, or did all the natural wisdom of men and
Angels concenter and meet in him, yet by all these he is no nearer salvation
then a beggar, or an Actour dressed in Royal apparel is unto a throne: Surgunt
indocti, etc. it is a common but true saying: Illiterate ignorant men do
oftentimes rise up and carry away the Crown of glory, whilst we with all our
learning sink deeper into destruction. Doubtless, if Natural Abilities could
avail any thing unto salvation, those infernal damned spirits had long since
reobtained their Heavenly stations; who yet, notwithstanding all their
primitive created wisdom, or their now experimental acquired knowledge, are,
by reason of their sin, bound in chains of eternal darkness, and are there
still reserved unto the judgment of the great day. I do not come here to
declaime against Humane Learning; Friends (I suppose) it will find many, even
in this our age; Enemies I am sure it has none, but the ignorant: yet this we
may safely say, that without Grace it is but enmity against God, so far namely,
from attaining Heaven that it rather makes a man an instrument and weapon of
Hell, and Marshals sin (as I may so speak) in battle array against God. For
unless it be duly tempered and corrected with Grace, there is I know not what
secret poison and malignity in it, (...) as the Apostle expresses it, 1 Cor.
8. 1. to inflate and puff men up, to Avocate and take off the mind from
heavenly meditations, to bewitch and ensnare the heart with the name of
applause and credit of the world; to throw the brain into strange contrivances
and excessive cares and turmoyles, how to preserve our reputation, how to rise
and grow great in the world, how to promote Faction and Interest, how, finally,
to please men rather then God. Whereas on the other side, there may be no
greater promoter of Gods Glory then a Sanctified Scholar; for as in a Picture,
though the dark obscure Colors do add no real worth unto the more Oriental
and bright ones, yet they serve to commend and set them forth; in like manner,
though the supernatural gifts and graces of God may perhaps be nothing
bettered by Humane Learning, yet concurring in the same person, they mutually
add luster, and Ornament to one another. Who a more meek and pious man then
Moses? and yet he was Learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians. Who more
Zealous and fervent in the cause of God then Paul? and yet he was brought up at
the feet of Gamaliel. The sum of all is this, Natural Abilities sublimated
and refined by Grace may much advance Gods Glory and our own salvation, but
without faith, and in themselves, they cannot bring us one step forward in our
way to Heaven, nor set us above the pitch of Heathens, Gentiles, mere Natural
men.

And as Learning and Natural Abilities cannot, so neither can Moral Honesty
or civil life lead us in themselves unto heaven. A civil carriage a mild and
humble behavior, temperance in diet, abstinence from outward gross acts of
Vice, are things very commendable in themselves, as tending much to the
advancement of Humane Society, to the removing of scandals amongst Brethren,
and to the avoiding of temporal judgments: but then these and other the like
virtues, if they may be so termed, a Cato, a Scipio, a mere Gentile may have,
and yet be in a damnable Estate. Though a picture be never so exquisitely and
curiously drawn, yet it is still but a picture, without life, sense or motion;
and so though a man come never so near a Saint in outward appearance, yet he
is but a man, dead in sin, and without the life of Christ. There may be in
some men Politic and Secular Ends to bias them in outward goodness, there may
be in others Carnal Fear to restrain them from evil, there may be also a
kind of conformity to the Present fashion of Religion, which may put a man upon
a morose behavior, upon superficial and outward acts of piety: but then are
not all these their Righteousnesses, think you, as filthy rags? when as they
neither proceed from a right principle, the spirit of life; nor are performed
in a right manner, neither in sincerity, nor true obedience; nor directed unto
a good end, the Glory of God, and edification of their neighbors. So then from
hence we may learn, that neither the Heathen, nor any else can attain unto
Heaven by all their Learning, Virtues, Moral Honesty or Goodness whatsoever.

ROMANS I. 20. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world,
etc.
THus much shall suffice to be spoken concerning the light of Nature: from this
verse we shall show you the knowledge we have of God from the Creatures. Where
you have,

1. First, the object known, and that either generally set down, the
invisible things of him, or more particularly explained, even his eternal
power and Godhead. Those invisible things of God are his eternal power and
Godhead.

2. Secondly, here is the time when these invisible things began to be known
from the creation of the world.

3. Thirdly, because all knowledge is originally founded in the Senses, here is
the outward instrument, the sight, are clearly seen, and the inward instrument
whereby we attain this knowledge, the understanding, being understood. And
because no object in se, much less invisible things, can be seen without some
medium to conveigh it unto the organ, you have here,

4. Fourthly, the Species, (as I may so speak) or means by which we come to
see these invisible things, the Creatures, are clearly seen and understood by
the things that are made.

5. Fifthly and lastly, here is the end why God did thus manifest this knowledge
unto them, viz. that they should be without excuse. For the invisible things,
etc. In the former verse the Apostle shows that the Gentiles might know God by
the Light of Nature, and lest they should pretend that not to be sufficient, he
confirms it by the outward testimony of the creatures in these words, for the
invisible things of him, etc. It Is true, God is wrapped up in such a glorious
light, that no created eye is able to behold him, nay the Seraphims themselves
are said to cover their faces with their wings, as dazzled with that glory and
luster that beams from him: and how, may the Gentile say, can we see this God
who dwells in inaccessible light? How can we blear-eyd worms see him, who is
invisible? why says Saint Paul, these are vain pretenses, for the invisible
things etc. Alas! you can look no where about you, but you may see this
invisible God: each creature reads a Divinity Lecture unto you, and may
catechize you in the knowledge of his eternal power and Godhead: (...), for
the invisible things of God. etc. By which we must not, as Origin did,
understand Angels, for the Gentiles might by the light of Nature, and by
rational discourse and resolution of one cause into another, have gathered
that there was a God, and yet for all that be ignorant of Angels, as being
creatures in themselves not any wise subject unto sense, from whence their
knowledge was deduced: neither could they clearly understand either the nature
or being of them by any sensible creature. By invisible things then here, we
must understand nothing else but what the Apostle sets down: viz. his eternal
power and Godhead: by which is meant that continual Power, by which he
created, and upheld all things, and that incomprehensible Nature of his, or, as
Musculus says, his goodness; his Power is every where laid open, and his
Nature may every where be understood by the things that are made, (...), from
the creation of the world. By (...) here, many will have signified the creature
of the world, and so they will read it, for the invisible things of him, the
creatures of the world, are clearly seen, etc. And this mistake (as I suppose)
gave occasion to Bernard to interpret it of man, as being called creature
(...), Mark. 16. 15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel, (...)
to every creature, that is, to every man. But doubtless, neither the opinion
of one or the other can here take place; for besides that it may make some
Tautology in the words, since that (...) and (...), the creatures and the
things that are made will be all one; besides this inconvenience, I say, the
drift of the Apostle, and the elsewhere using of the same word for the creation
it self, as Mark. 10. 6. from the beginning (...) of the creation God made
them male and female, together with the proposition (...), which usually
denotes the date or time from whence a thing is deduced, does make men consent
unto our translation, and so from the creation of the world, is nothing else
but that the creatures ever since the foundation of the world, have always
proclaimed and set forth the glory and power of their Creator. Are clearly
seen, being understood, (...). The Hebrews, says Grotius on the place, do
usually express both the inward and outward senses by the term of seeing, so
that according to him, if I misconstrue him not, these two may imply the same
thing. But whether they do or no it matters not much: sure I am that the
Apostle going about to show by what degrees and steps we may Naturally come to
the knowledge of God, it will better consist with the meaning of him to
conceive, by (...), to be meant the outward Contemplative sense of seeing, by
(...) the inward Discursive Faculty of the understanding. For the creatures are
first offered to the sight, and from thence are conveyed to the
understanding, which presently must needs collect some Supreme Author and
Maker of them. The beasts may see the creatures, but they cannot know God from
them, because they are void of reason; A man sees, and concludes there is a God
from them because his sight is improved and backed, on by an understanding.
(...) by the things that are made, that is, by the whole Creation, Sun, Moon,
Stars, Water, Earth and all. Some by this word understand the works of God in
general, and so include the works of Providence as well as the works of
Creation, which sense, since it offers no injury to the Text, I shall make bold
to follow, and show how as well by the works of Providence as Creation God may
be known. For that they are without excuse. (...), It Is in the margin, that
they may be without excuse, which I conceive to be the most gennine and nearest
translation of the two. For indeed this (...) here in the Text may denote the
end for which the knowledge of the creatures was manifested unto the Gentiles,
as well as the consequent, or what followed upon the manifestation of them. But
what may some one say? Does God give knowledge only to condemn us? does he
manifest his creatures unto the Gentiles merely to make them inexcusable
before him? We answer that the original and primary end why God primitively
impressed upon man the light of nature and the knowledge of the creatures, was
that thereby he might know and worship him aright; for had man continued in his
Created integrity, these two Books had been sufficient to instruct him in the
service of his Maker; but now man by sin having defaced that Glorious Image
of God wherein he was made, it was not possible for him either by the light of
Nature, or conduct of the Creatures to attain unto Heaven: there being another
new way found out to save man, even by the Blood of Jesus, the two former are
made altogether ineffectuall, either to guide him in the true Worship of God,
or instruct him in any saving knowledge of him. Well then, what must be the end
and use of them? they remain still that is certain, the light of Nature is yet
in us, though much blotted, the Creatures in themselves are as capable to guide
us unto God, as ever, though through man's Blindness and Ignorance they are
made ineffectuall: therefore there must needs step in another end and use of
them, and that is to stop our mouths, and make us void of excuse before God.
Had this light of Nature, and book of the Creatures been never made
effectual unto man's salvation, the Gentiles who had never any other light,
might very well plead excuse; but now they being by our own default become
unavailable, and God being not at all bound to bestow any further light upon
any, it comes to pass that the Gentiles being not able to walk according to
the knowledge they primitively had, are left without excuse. So then the
Essential, Primary end of the Light of Nature, and the Creatures was to
instruct man in the knowledge and true worship of God; the consequentiall, if I
may so term it, and accidentary end is to the intent that they may be without
excuse. This shall suffice concerning the words themselves, on which I have
been the larger, because the Exposition of them may give much light to my
ensuing discourse, which shall be grounded upon this proposition: viz. That
God, though in his own Nature invisible, may yet by a Gentile, a mere
Natural man, be reached unto, and discovered in his Works. For the better
clearing of this Point, it will be convenient to distinguish concerning the
Works of God, which are either ad intra, or ad extra; those ad intra are such
which have no other object then God himself, and are eternally bounded within
his own nature; such as are the Eternal generation of his Son, and
Proceeding of the Holy Ghost: now as no one knows the inward workings and
contrivances of the mind, save the spirit of a man, or he to whom he reveals
them, in like manner, there is no one that can fath om, or dive into these
inward essential Works of God, save God himself, or those to whom his Word
has communicated them: nay indeed the best Saints of God in this their Earthly
Tabernacle, though never so much enlightened by his Word and Spirit, cannot
perfectly know, or conceive these his ineffable Works and Mysteries. True,
they may substantially and in general know that such Works there be, for they
are revealed in his Word; but then the strange manner of the Generation of the
one, and Proceeding of the other, that admirable Energy and divine Reflection,
by which he understands himself from all Eternity, they cannot but by Analogy,
faint resemblances and conjectures apprehend: much less then can a mere
Natural man, a Gentile discover and trace either God in these Works, or these
Works in God. The second sort of Gods Works are those ad extra: viz. such
whose effect is in something without himself, or whose proper subject is the
Creature: and these again are either such which do chiefly concern us in
another case, as the Election of some unto salvation, and reprobation of other
unto damnation, or else such which immediately concern either the Being, or
Preservation of the Creature in this world; and these properly are the Works
of Creation and Providence; and from these chiefly (I say) it is, that a
Natural man knows God. This we shall prove, First, in the Works of Creation.
Secondly, in the Works of Providence. And first we shall show in general,
that the Creatures in themselves do every where set forth and proclaim a God.
Secondly, we shall show by what ways and means the Creatures do thus bring
us unto the knowledge of God.

1. First then, that the creatures do every where proclaim a God is manifest
from Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. the heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handy work, etc. That glorious canopy which we behold
above us, however in it self mute and dumb, does yet notwithstanding set
forth, as it were, unto us a declaration of it is Creatour's Power, Goodness,
and Wisdom: of his power in the framing and contriving so excellent a piece;
of his Goodness, in ordering all it is Motions and Revolutions unto the benefit
of his Creatures; and of his Wisdom in allotting it so commodious a position
and structure unto the performance of those offices, to which he has ordained
it: and so verse. 2. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge: that is, does sufficiently Discipline and Instruct men in the
knowledge of God, so that the most sottish and rude Gentile cannot plead
ignorance. For what though their Philosophers alone could tell the several
virtues and influences of the Stars, the periodicall motion of the Sun and
Moon, their just Horizontall elevation and depression, and the like; yet day
unto day, and night unto night does sufficiently show forth, even to the most
ignorant, who is the Author of this their Succession and Revolution: for so
the Psalmist goes on verse. 3, 4. there is no speech nor language where their
voice is not heard, their line, Scriptura ipsorum, their writing is gone out
throughout all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. Mark here
how the Creatures are made the praecones, as it were of God, the Cryers and
Heralds of his glory. Doubtless there is a certain kind of dumb eloquence,
even in Inanimate Creatures to persuade men to subscribe unto the mighty
Creator of all things. Wherefore it was not without some cause, that Hermes an
Ancient Philosopher among the Heathens, called the world the Image of God: for
as the coin of a King does represent the King whose coin it is, or as in the
beholding of a curious Edifice, we cannot choose but in it admire the Art and
Dexterity of the Artificer; in like manner the admirable structure of this neat
Universe, the curious and subordinated disposition which one creature has to
another, the exact Symmetry and proportion of each part unto the whole, must
needs lead us unto the Creator of them, and cause us to admire the infinite
Power and Perfection of him, who out of nothing could raise so glorious a
fabric. As then Protogenes at the very sight of a curious picture did
presently guess it to be the workmanship of Apelles, because he knew that none
could do the like; so likewise in the contemplation of these glorious
Creatures of God, we may straightway conclude him to be the Author of them,
because they are beyond the contrivance and art of any other: For there is no
finite being that can make or add one hair unto our heads, much less can
contribute any sense, life, or vital motion unto any thing. Many men indeed,
as Zeuxis, Albertus Magnus, and others have endeavored to imitate the God of
nature in his works, but never could any one by all his Apish art, frame a
natural and real creature: for besides the limitednesse of his Nature, the
narrowness of his Understanding, the inabilities of him to find out the true
form, and peculiar operations of all things, there is a certain stubbornness
and disobedience (if I may so speak) in the matter it self, whereby it
scorns, as it were, to be wrackt and tortured into another form, then what
the Sovereign of all things is pleased to impresse upon it. God can out of
dust build a man, but it is impossible for any man, be he of the most exquisite
wit, invention, and judgment as he will, ever to raise the least contemptible
Creature out of the most refined Matter. It remains therefore that the most
minute, inconsiderable, least thing in the world does proclaim the power and
greatness of a God, and so consequently lead us into the knowledge of him in
whom all things live, move and have their being; for as pricks and quavers in
Music do commend the cunning of the Artist, as well as louder and longer
notes; or as the least pin or wheel in a watch, both by its Use and
Ornament, does set forth the art of the Watch-maker, even so the meanest and
least of Gods creatures do sufficiently proclaim the Power, Wisdom, and
Virtue of their maker. Hence it is that the snow and hail are by the Psalmist
brought in praising of God, Psalm. 148. 8. The whole world what is it else
says Cusanus but God Paraphased and expressed: here is the only difference
between the smaller and greater creatures, that in the one, God is set forth
in Characters as it were, in the other, in more great and Capital Leters.

But thus much concerning the first point, which is to show in general that
God is every where proclaimed and set forth by his Creatures. We shall now,
secondly, show you how, and in what way God may be known by his Creatures.
Theodoret, says there be five ways by which we may come to the knowledge of
God: the first is, by considering the Heavens, the Moon and the Stars which
he has ordained, the various motions, designs, and influences, the ranks and
battalies (as I may so speak) of that Heavenly Host do abundantly show that
there is some Supreme General and commander, by whose Wisdom and conduct they
are thus managed. His second way is by considering the Elements below; that the
wild raging Ocean should not presently overslow the whole face of the ground
and that the Earth, naturally the heaviest of all simple bodies, should yet for
all that be above the Waters: doubtless this is not from any blind chance or
fortune, but from a God, which stilleth the raging of the Seas and madness of
the Waves, and who, from the creation, for the good and commodity of man, gave
the Earth the upper hand of the Waters. His third way, is from the structure of
Man's Body; we need go no further then our selves (as you shall hear more at
large) for the knowledge of God: he is the worse of Scepticks, that will deny
himself, and the truth of his own being; and he the most ignorant of
Atheists, who cannot from himself conclude a God. 4. From the invention of
Arts and Sciences, which doubtless are from God as being only the Author of
every good and perfect gift. His fifth and last way, is from the Command and
Rule which men have over Other Creatures; for doubtless it is God alone and not
chance that causes beasts of far greater strength then any man patiently to
submit unto his yoke and dominion. These are the five ways of Theodoret by the
which (says he) we may come to know God. But I dare not trespass so much upon
you, as particularly to explain them. I shall only therefore in general show
by what degrees and steps, or rather, by what kind of workings the
understanding may argue from the Creature to the Creator: and the first way by
which we may thus know God, is per viam negationis, by denying: that is, such
things to the Creator, which we find to be imperfections and defects in the
Creature; for when a Natural mind shall consider that corruption which the
Creature is subject unto, those blemishes which it is sullied withal, it must
needs conclude some higher Being, which is not incident to any of these. As
Errata's and faults in Printing do suppose a more perfect copy, so likewise
the imperfections and defects of the Creature, which are as it were the very
transcript of God himself, may put us in mind of a more Perfect Original, and
Exact platform of all things. The Psalmist, Psalm. 115. 8. says of Idols, that
they that make them are like unto them, that is, as vain, mutable, and
perishing as themselves: whereby likewise it implies on the contrary, that the
true God is not like unto his Creatures in any such respect; because they all
participating whatsoever they have of him, and depending on him, are subject to
be destroyed, and altered according to the pleasure of him that made them, for
has not the Potter power over his clay? but now God being neither subject to
any superior or inferior Cause, must needs be in himself Incorruptible,
Immateriall and Unchangeable. Many things are in God, which also by way of
Analogy and resemblance are in the Creatures, as Goodness, Truth, etc. and
many things are in the Creatures, quatenus Creatures, which cannot at all be
Predicated, or spoken of God: such as are Locality, Finitenesse, a limited
power, and the like; now as a mere Natural man will conclude Positively, that
there is a God, who is all goodness, all truth, because he sees the Creatures
depending on him, to have something of these in him; so likewise may he
negatively conclude, that there is a God, who is neither Finite, of limited
Power, or in a Place, because he sees these to be Imperfections, and
Impotencies in the very Creatures. As for example, to explain my meaning, in a
curious Picture a man may not only discover the eminent art of the Limner, but
also gather, that though it be quatenus a Picture very Exact and Perfect, yet
that it is withal very much deficient, and destitute of those perfections of
the Limner, life, sense, and motion: so likewise though the Creature, sub
ratione creaturae, may be in it is kind perfect, yet we may notwithstanding,
from it is being a Creature Finite, and limited, conclude that there is a God,
who is not subject to this Finitenesse, and limitednesse, but is an Infinite,
Incomprehensible God, Blessed for ever. The second way by which we may gather
that there is a God by the Creatures, is per viam causalitatis, by way of
causality and influence (as I may so term it;) for when a man shall look out
into the world, and behold the admirable and beautiful Palace, how stately it
is roofed above with an Heaven, every where spangled and adorned with shining
Pearle-like Stars, how curiously it is paved below with an Earth, always
teeming with Riches and Varieties, how strongly fenced and walled about with an
Ocean full of those scaly inhabitants, the Fish thereof; when we consider (I
say) the World with the Glory thereof, we must needs acknowledge some one as
the First causer of it; and unto whose glory, as it is ultimate end, it is
ordained, even God Almighty, From whom and unto whom are all things. As in the
viewing of a Clock, the hammer striking upon the bell, leads us unto the next
wheel, that immediately moves it, this wheel unto another that moves it also,
and so we are led on till at last we come to consider the Artificer himself
that Originally caused them all thus to move: so likewise from the dependences
and subordinations which one Inferior cause has upon another, we are brought
to the consideration of the Supreme Governor and Mover of all. I (says God)
will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the earth shall
hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel: Hos.
2. 21, 22. Here is the order and concatenation of Inferior Causes; Jezreel
crying unto the corn, and the corn unto the earth, the earth unto the
heavens, and both corn, earth, and heavens crying and leading unto God. You
know that absurdities will follow in Philosophy, upon the allowing a progressus
ad infinitum (i. e.) an endless rising up of one Cause above another, without
a non ultra, and resting in one Prime and Original one, which may stay and
ease the mind in it is inquiries and porings upon the reasons of things. The
inconveniences that would follow upon such a position were (as I conceive) next
unto the Light of Nature, the maine ground and motive that made the Heathen
acknowledge a God: and hence it was too (as I suppose) that though many amongst
the Heathens maintained the World to be Eternal, yet they acknowledged withal
God as the Cause of it: As the Sun is the cause of light, though light be
coexistent with the Sun. True, there were some few amongst them, who held
that God was not the Cause of the world, but Austin very well called this their
opinion intollerabilis error, a most intolerable, senseless error, as being
repugnant to the very Light of Nature, and convictions they might have from the
very Creatures themselves. I might here enter very pertinently upon a discourse
against the Eternity of the World, but it being a business of Philosophy, and
besides having not had time to weigh and debate the matter in mine own
thoughts, I shall omit it. What remains is this, that God by way of Causality,
or by our arguing from the effect to the cause, may be known in the Creatures.
The third way by which we may know God in his Creatures is per viam eminentiae,
which flows from the two former: for because God has not those Imperfections
in Being and Operation as his Creatures have, and because he is the Prime Cause
and Mover of all things, therefore it will follow, that he is the most Perfect
Being, that he does Eminently contain whatsoever worth and goodness is
scattered in his Creatures: as we may argue and say, that because all light
that is in the air, be it little or much, proceeds from the Sun, and
therefore the Sun has it in a more eminent and excellent degree; so likewise
may we conclude, that since all Power, Goodness, Love, and the like, issues
from God unto the Creatures, therefore God has these infinitely more excellent
in him, then the Creatures. Therefore we read that in God are riches of grace,
and treasures of wisdom, and the like: Ephesians. 2. 7. Col. 2. 3. In the Creature
there is no Goodness, but what is derivative and participated of God, but what
is dregg'd and allayd with evil, and therefore Finite and Limited. But now
Goodness is Essential unto God, and therefore, as himself, is Infinite,
Independent, pure, without measure; and therefore as the Sun has for these
many years together scattered light, and influence, days and years upon the
world, and yet does still remain the same Sun, as full of light as ever; so
likewise, though God from the Creation of the world has not ceased continually
to bestow, and communicate his riches unto his several Creatures, yet he is
still the same God, as Rich in Goodness as ever. Wherefore doubtless it will
come to pass, that by these glimmerings, and faint rays of Goodness in the
Creatures, a mere Natural man, an Heathen may conclude that there is a God,
in whom such Goodness dwells more fully and plentifully.

And so much shall suffice to be spoken concerning the second point, and the
Doctrinall part of my Text; let me crave your patience now, but to wind up
all in a word of Application, and so I shall conclude.

This should confute the damned Atheists who either in Speculation or Practice
does deny the Being of that Deity, whom these creatures do so clearly
represent, and voluntarily hoodwinke himself from beholding the footsteps of
these Infallible things of God, in the Works which he has done; for so says
the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 5. This they are willingly ignorant of, that by the Word
of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the waters.
Doubtless those men were wilfully blind, who when the Glorious Book of the
Creatures is laid wide open before them, can yet notwithstanding not read the
Author of them: for look up unto the Heavens thou Atheist, and view that
Glorious cover, which every where attires this Lower world, and then tell me,
is it not a God that thus speadeth out the Heavens like a curtain? are not
those glorious bodies the Works of his hands? or think thou that Chance or
Fortune could so uniformly, for so many thousand years together, turn about
that vast body of the Sun, which so constantly, as a bridegroom comes out of
his chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run his course? Think thou
that those Stars thou beholdest, were set a running by any kind of Fate? or
that they throw down their Influences upon us by any design of their own,
without a guidance of Providence? Look down upon the Earth: and tell me who
was it that laid the foundations, and the corner stone thereof? Who was it that
founded it upon the Floods? Could it be brought to pass by Chance, or any
Confluence of Atoms, that this little ball of Earth should hang up in the air
thus Immovable, poys'd by it is own proper weight, and not rather reele to and
fro, and stagger like a drunken man; that the wild Ocean does not challenge the
upper hand of the Earth, and overflow the surface of it; that even the Rain
should so strangely ascend up into the Clouds, and there be Bottled up for the
use of man: and that there should be no means, even in the joint Powers of all
men, to unstop those bottles, or command the least drop from them? From whence
come all these things? must thou not of necessity say, from some Almighty
Power, who hangs the Earth upon nothing, and who rules the raging of the
Sea, and madness of the waves, and who binds up the waters in the thick
clouds, and the clouds are not rent under them. There is not a Creature in the
world, from the highest Heaven, to the lowest earth, from whence thou may not
copy out a Lesson of the Eternal power and Godhead, and in whom as in a
glass, thou may not see the Invisible things of him clearly reflected unto
us from the things that are made. The serious contemplation of which, cannot
but make the most Sottish Atheist cry out with the Prophet. O Lord, how
manifold are all thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all, the earth is
full of thy riches.

2. Secondly, hereby we may be taught, what is the right use of Philosophy, and
other the like Arts, whereby we make inspection into the Creatures, namely,
that thereby we may be raised up unto the consideration of Gods Eternal Power
and Godhead. The examining and considering of the Creatures, should raise our
minds up unto God. There is no man so much an Atheist, but, if he has eyes
and reason, may be convinced of his folly by the very Creatures: For as Job
said unto Zophar, Job 12. 8, 9. Speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee,
and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee. Who knows not that in all
these the hand of the Lord has wrought this? So we may say unto such men, go
to the Inanimate Creatures, and they will teach thee God; go to the
Vegetatives, and thou shall find that every Herb proclaims a God; go to the
Sensitive Creatures, and there thou shall find the young ravens calling upon
him for meat, and upbraiding thy damnable fottishnesse, who deniest him whom
even they acknowledge: go, lastly, unto thy self, and so the very
consideration of that curious art, and cunning in the contrivance of thy own
Body, will lead thee up into heaven, and unto a God, and make thee cry out with
the Psalmist, I am wonderfully and fearfully made, marveilous are thy works.
Methinks it might be a notable way to convince an Atheist, even by the
structure of his own Body, and instead of more subtle Arguments, to read an
Anatomy Lecture unto him: for doubtless, could he be but distinctly led
through all the Regions of the Body, and there be shown, in the upper room
thereof, the curious fabric of the tender Brain, lodged in its several
cells, and strongly fortified with a wall of scull, and the unknown Labyrinths
and Meanders of an innumerable company of veins continually watering it: in
this also could he but be made to understand the incomparable structure of the
Eye; without, empaled about with strong bones, and sheltred with their lids,
which as trap-doores being let down hinder foreign injuries; within, adorned
with its several Tunicles and Humors, with its Membrains and Nerves, which
constantly supply unto it Spirit and vigor from the Brain: from the very
Motion of which Eye toward heaven it was, that Tully concluded a God there,
able to help it. Could he (I say) be further shown the convenient position of
the Heart, whereby, as from the Center, it does give Life and Motion to the
whole; the orderly Pulsations of it, whereby the blood, which otherwise would
become thick and muddy, is made to run clear and sweet throughout all the
Conduits of the Body. To be short, were he made acquainted with the position,
and several offices of the cooling lungs, the seething Stomach, the dying
Liver, the fertile Womb, wherein, as the Prophet speaks, he is so curiously
wrought. Besides these, were he shown the excellent use, and admirable
composure of the Muscles, Arteries, Veins, Bones, Cartilages, and all other
Organs and parts which concur to the making up of this Little World; what
think you then, would this Atheist say? would he not presently cry out
wonderfully, and fearfully am I made, none but the Power of God can make these,
and none but the Wisdom of God can dispose these so made, unto so excellent
uses. Certainly, the very consideration of a Body so neatly joynted and
compacted together, so rarely contrived in the mutual Offices and Helps of
each part unto the other, so well ordered and disposed in every the least
Particle and Minute fibra thereof, must needs raise a mind not wholly shut up
in darkness, and wilful ignorance to the contemplation of the Power and
Wisdom of God. 'Twas a notable complaint somewhere of Galen in one of his
books de usu partium, that men would be very apt to admire the Art and
Workmanship of a Phidias, or an Apelles, but then very backward and averse from
admiring and considering of God in this his far more excellent work of Man.
I fear I may take up his complaint in these our days: Many amongst us do know
much of the Nature of the Creatures, and of the body of man, but then, I fear,
it is a little vain discourse and ostentation, or a satisfaction of our
Curiosities that is aimed at herein, more then the Praise and the Glory of God,
and the better contemplating of him in his Creatures: whereas those that
pretend unto the study of Nature, and the Creatures, have most reason of all
other men to be Religious, and to think upon God, because they cannot but
continually view in them the Finger, and Footsteps of God himself. 'Twas
therefore a true saying of a renowned Statesman and Scholar of our own, that a
smattering of natural Philosophy inclines men to Atheism, a deeper knowledge
thereof brings them about to religion: because they better knowing the chain
and link of things within themselves, and the several strange Natures and
Generations of them, will the easier be led unto God, and his providence.
Doubtless could but a good Philosopher, and a good Christian concenter in the
same Person, as his Piety would much elevate his Philosophy, so would his
Pbilosophy much confirm and advance his Piety: for certainly a serious
inspection into the Creatures must needs then work much upon his Affections,
and beget in him a farther Obedience unto love, fear, and admiration of that
God, whom by experience he finds to be the Author, Preserver, and Governor of
so Wonderful Works. The Book of the Creatures, indeed, cannot alone instruct
us in a Saving knowledge of God, but being bound up together, as it were, with
the Book of the Scriptures, we may see in them much of God, and learn much
from them for the advantage of our Salvation.

3. Thirdly, then we should be exhorted every one of us to study God in his
works.

1. Be exhorted to study him in his Creatures; behold a fair Volume laid open
before your eyes, each Legible Character whereof does no less speak the
Intention and Study, then Command the Admiration. To pass by so Excellent
Works without any consideration, will argue a Base Stupidity in us, and a
baser Contempt of Gods glory. Shall a Play or a Romance, shall an Aristotle, or
a Tully take up our Meditations, our days and nights, and shall not the Works
of God have our spare Hours, those Works, which, being duly considered, may be
as so many rounds in Jacobs Ladder to lead us into Heaven, and give us a Glimps
of that Infinity, which bleare-eyd Nature can never so well kenne or mount
unto? For what Seneca said of a Man, we may say likewise of all other
Creatures, there dwells a God and Divinity in them; in the meanest, namely, of
them we may trace the footsteps of a Deity, and find out him in whom we live,
move, and have our being. Since then God has endowed us with so noble a Sense,
as our sight is, whereby we may clearly see those Invisible things of him, and
since this Light of ours is further improved by the eye of an understanding
soul, let us not be as the Psalmist calls them, Brutish Men that know not these
things: As Beasts which commonly look upon this Palace and no more. But when
we view these Bodies of ours, let us endeavor to see a God, who covered us in
our Mothers Womb, and who still upholdeth these Mud-wals of clay by the Power
of his Word. When we walk into the feilds and there look upon the corn, the
Herbs and the grass, let us meditate upon the God of them, who once said, let
the earth bring forth grass, the herb yiedling flowers, and the fruit-tree
yiedling fruit after his kind: and it did so; and if so be God so cloth the
grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven;
shall he not much more cloth thee, O thou of little faith? When thou look up
into Heaven, meditate upon that God, which ordained the Moon and the Stars,
and which makes Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the Chambers of the south.
When thou viewest any Creature, consider whose stamp it bears, and whose
goodness is shown in the creating and preserving of it: Lastly, let us be
exhorted to study God in his Works of Providence, and in his dispensations
toward mankind; there are many, even amongst us Christians, who seeing things
happen contrary to their desires and Carnal Reasons, as the godly to be
dejected, and the wicked advanced, do implicitly deny a God, or at least
wise, with the Epicureans, think that he sits idle in Heaven, without any
respect or care had unto Mankind: whereas, did we not measure the depth of Gods
dispensations by our own shallow carnal reasons, we might even in the
greatest huddle and confusion of things see a God, steering and directing them
all to his own Glory. Though then thou see sin every where, even in the
streets, to abound, know also that there is no evil in the City which the Lord
has not done; though thou see the ungodly to flourish like a green bay tree,
and with David art puzzled with the consideration of it, yet with him enter into
the House of God, and then thou shall see the end of these men, namely, how
that there is a God, who sets them in slippery places, and who only feeds
them for the day of slaughter.

Well then, to conclude, both in the Works of Creation and Providence, we
ought to study God, because that in them we may read those invisible things of
him: both of them are as spectacles unto us, to help us in the viewing of this
Invisible God; and though indeed in Christ and in the Scriptures, we may read
him far more distinctly, yet so long as we are in these our Earthly
Tabernacles, we ought to make use of these Representations of his Majesty, till
the time come, when we shall not stand in need of these spectacles, when this
glaste of the Creatures shall vanish in the General Conflagration of all
things, and then we shall behold him face to face, and enjoy a most glorious
prospect of his Divinity in those new heavens for evermore.

FINIS.
2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, etc.
WE are now to speak concerning the perspicuity and perfection of the
Scriptures; concerning which I shall be more brief as I told you, because they
have been so largely handled already by sundry learned men, unto the substance
of whose writings there can indeed scarce any thing be added, unless perhaps
farther illustration, and a more practical handling of them; the perspicuity
of Scripture may be inferred from the use of it, here set down by the Apostle,
it is profitable for Doctrine, (says he) for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness; four uses are here made mention of in
Scripture, the two Doctrinall, teaching of truth and confuting errors; the two
last practical, correction of vice and instruction of holy conversation; from
whence I infer, that since it does thus teach, thus convince, it must needs
carry with it such a light and evidence of truth, that neither its doctrines
may be rejected through their obscurity, nor its arguments gainsayd for want of
cleerenesse, and since also it is useful for Reformation of manners, and
direction in a holy life, needs must its rules for this purpose be so plainly
set down, that every one concerned in such dutys, may be thereby instructed
unto holiness, the Scriptures may be termed the first Elements of a Christian,
a Child may go to school unto them, for says the Apostle they are profitable
(...), that is, as the word implies, for instruction of Children, even a Child
may spell out the Scriptures, what is his duty toward God and his neighbor,
and doubtless if a Child may read and understand the Scriptures, they are not
so obscure, so intricate, so perplexed as some conceive them to be: in
prosecution therefore of this point we shall show 1. that the Scriptures are in
themselves perspicuous. 2. That they are more or less perspicuous according to
the diversity of the subjects entertaining them. 3. We shall endeavor to show
some reasons why God has left some places more obscure then other.

1. First, that the Scriptures are in themselves perspicuous, may appear by
several texts. Ps. 19. 8. The commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening
the eyes; they are pure, and therefore not alloy'd with any muddinesse, or
clouded with any obscurity; they enlighten the eyes, and therefore carry along
with them such evident plainness, that he who is not quite blinded may easily
perceive the truth of them: So Ps. 119. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet,
and a light unto my paths; it does, that is, by its perspicuity, and
clearenesse, both as a lamp and light direct me in all my goings: hence also
it is, that the Scripture is called 2 Pet. 1. 19. A light that shines in dark
places, denoting out unto us, that the word not only in its own nature is
light, but also that wheresoever it comes it dispelleth darkness, as the Sun
at his appearance forces away the night, the foggs and mists, as Solomon, a
man of the profoundest wisdom that ever lived, said, that he writ to give
subtility to the simple, to the young men knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1. 4.
there is in the Word of God such innate plainness and perspicuity, that the
simplest man may thereby be enlightened, the youngest instructed: but here when
we say the Scriptures are plain and easy to be understood, we must distinguish
concerning fundamentalls and things necessary to be known, and
circumstantialls, or such things whose exact knowledge is not so necessary unto
salvation, those matters which belong unto a saving knowledge of God are
plainly set down, such as are the commandments, and the doctrine contained in
the Apostles Creed, but now there are some things, which either relating to
some particular customs of the Jew or Gentile, or unto the proper times
wherein the Scriptures were severally writ, may be accounted hard, and not so
plain, as that we may prima front and without much learning and study
understand them; however, a Christian may be saved without any knowledge of
these, though not so without the other: A man may go to Heaven without knowing
whether the Temple were built in such or such a year, or whether Job lived
before Moses or after him, yet he cannot without understanding that he must
believe in Christ, that he is a sinner, and the like: thus in other sciences
there are some indemonstrable principles so plainly set down, that no man can
question them, and other things again not altogether so essential, somewhat
doubtful and darkly proposed: but what may some one say, the Mystery of the
Trinity, and the distinction of the persons in the Godhead are fundamental
doctrines, yet they are above the reach of reason, and therefore obscure: well
it is true, these and the like Doctrines are obscure, but then as in Geometry,
the same thing may be dark in its self, and yet by a demonstration plainly
set down unto us in holy writ, and we ought to be contented with what that
teaches us concerning them, and however the very fundamentalls of our Religion
are by some disputed of, and called into question, yet this proceeds rather
from the perverseness and crookedness of men's minds, then that they are
obscure and doubtfully set down in Scripture, neither are they less to be
received of us, because they question them, then the doctrine of motion is in
Philosophy, though a certain foolish Philosopher did once deny it: So the
Apostle says 2 Pet. 3. 16. that there are somethings in Paul's Epistles hard to
be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstastable wrest, as they do
also the other Scriptures unto their own destruction: mark here, there are
somethings (...), not all things, but some things only, namely such as he
speaks of here in this Chapter, the last judgment and destruction of the
world, the time and manner of which things are not essential unto our
salvation, and these things so hard, are wrested by unlearned unstable men,
that is, men ignorant of the Scriptures and not balanced with the Spirit,
unholy, ungodly men, and therefore as the same sun may be light, and yet not
appear so to be unto a blind man, the same book plain and legible, and yet
unto dull and dim eyes, dark and obscure; in like manner, the same things,
which are plain and perspicuous unto the Godly Regenerate men, whose eyes God
opens, are for the most riddles and strange things unto the wicked, whom the
God of this world has blinded: we shall therefore in the Second place show
you, that they are more or less perspicuous according to the diversity of the
subjects entertaining them; objective, and in themselves, they are perspicuous,
but subjective, and in respect of men, they are more or less plain, according
as men are Regenerated or Unregenerated: the whole world you know is divided
into the Regenerate and Unregenerate, this is an adequate division of all men,
and therefore we shall

1. Enquire concerning the the plainness and obscurity of the Scriptures in
relation unto irregenerate men, and we shall lay down this position, that noe
wicked irregenerate man can savingly know the Scriptures; or thus, that the
Scriptures though plain in their natures, are yet dark and obscure unto
irregenerate men: If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2
Cor. 4. 3. our Gospel says the Apostle is as clear as the light, but who can
find fault with the Sun if it gives not light to a blind man, it is hid
indeed, but then it is to those that are lost, to ungodly men; for the carnal
man preceiveth not the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. the Scriptures all
throughout contain in them Spiritual things, and therefore as a mere sensible
Creature cannot judge of the discourses and reasonings of men, so neither can a
mere rational man perceive or disscover the Mysteries of the Spirit, which is
only proper to him, unto whom the Spirit reveals them, as the Apostle
elsewhere speaks; you know the Scripture is divided into the Law and the
Gospel, and unregenerate men are said to be either within or without the
Church, now an unregenerate man, a Gentile without the Church, may have an
historical knowledge of the Law, for says the Apostle Romans 2. 14. they do by
nature the things contained in the Law, but as from an old eaten manuscript a
man may gather a word or sentence or two, when yet notwithstanding he is not
able to find out the drift, scope, and end of it, because through its
ancientnesse it is much worn and perished; in like manner from those old
relics and vestigies of that Law written in the hearts of the Gentiles they
might discover some things which pertained unto their duties toward God and
their Neighbor, but then they could not know therefrom the intent of the Law,
which was to drive them to a Christ, they could not know, that by it they could
not be justified, they understood not the end and drift for which God wrote
this Law in their hearts, and therefore though they might have an Historical,
yet they could not have a Saving knowledge thereof.

But Secondly, as for the Gospel, a Gentile cannot have either an Historical
or saving knowledge of it without it be preached unto them, or by some
extraordinary way, unknown unto us, infused into them, for Faith (ordinarily,
that is) comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, therefore the
opinion of those, who think that by the light of nature a man may come to the
knowledge of Christ and the Gospel, is to be rejected.

2. Secondly a Christian unregenerate man within the Church, may have an
Historical contemplative knowledge of the Law and Gospel, but no saving
particular knowledge of either, for it is to them foolishness, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
and therefore it is rather a scandal and stumbling block unto them, then a
light and saving rule, it cannot be expected therefore that the Scriptures
should seem plain unto them, whose noisome lusts do cast a mist and a cloud
before their understandings, and whose interests and prejudices against the
Doctrine of them, suffers them not to behold their purity and cleernesse.
Secondly, as ungodly irregenerate men cannot have any saving clear knowledge of
the Scriptures; so on the contrary, Godly regenerate Christians may have it:
for unto them alone it is given to know the secrets of the Kingdom of God, but
to others in parables, that when they see, they should not see, and when they
hear, they should not understand; and so 2 Cor. 3 15, 16. it is said, until
this day when Moses is read the veil is laid over their hearts, nevertheless,
when they shall turn unto the Lord, the Veil shall be taken away. Repentance
and the Spirit of regeneration does remove all obstacles, and dispell all
clouds, which do otherwise overcast the understandings of natural men; there
are many things contained in Scripture, there is History, which in general,
though not in each particular circumstance, may easily be understood of an
enlightened Christian; there are Prophesyes which are either fulfilled, or yet
remain unaccomplished, the former may be known by applications of their events,
the latter we may assure our selves will be fulfilled in their appointed time;
there are commands of God, which being a declaration of his will, are plainly
set down, and are as plainly understood, for a Christian knows the mind of
Christ, and the will of his Father; there are also Promises, which being made
only to Gods Children, are by them only rightly apprehended, for unto Abraham
and his seed were the Promises, Gal. 3. 16. There are lastly, threatenings,
which being denounced against sin, are truly feared of those alone who make
conscience of sinning; as a strange language does seem very uncouth and
ridiculous, unto such as have no experience of it, whereas on the contrary, it
is most acceptable and delightful to such as understand it: in like manner the
language of the Scriptures, however they may seem strange and unreasonable to
such as are not acquainted with God and his holy Word, yet to a Regenerate
Child of God, and such an one as rightly understands them, they are had in
great esteem, yea and are more precious to them then the honey or the
hony-combe; now we delight only in such things which we understand, for
Knowledge according to Aristotle is the rest of the Soul, a man may pore and
read all day in a Book, yet if he understands not, 'twill minister little
comfort, or pleasure to him, and therefore the Scriptures being so great a
delight unto the Godly, for says David, My delight is in thy Law, and my study
therein day and night, it will follow, that they do easily understand the
meaning of them: but may some one say, does not David pray also unto God to
give him understanding that he may learn his Commandments, how are they then
so easily to be understood of an Elect Child of God? we answer, that in this
place Ps. 119. 73. the Prophet does not speak of an outward understanding of
the Scriptures, for who doubts but that a Grammatical and Historical
knowledge he had of them, but he prays for an inward assurance and comfort
from them, which ought continually to be the prayers of every one who intends
to benefit by the reading of them; besides, this avails nothing, for we do
not say that the Scriptures are plain unto any, without Gods opening their
eyes, and revealing unto them the mysteryes of his Kingdom: farther, a man may
say, that if the Scriptures are thus plain, as you will have them, what need
you then take all this pains in expounding of them, to what purpose are so
many Commentators and Interpreters of them? We answer, that though the Doctrine
of Faith be plainly set down, yet other things there be in the Scripture,
which may by reason of our ignorance stand in need of a Commentary, which also
may be farther useful for the more largely opening of the Scripture, which a
new beginner cannot do himself, thus the Elements of Euclide are very plain
and perspicuous in themselves, though notwithstanding for the benefit of young
beginners they are farther illustrated and demonstrated by those that write on
him: thus you see then, that the Scriptures are plain and perspicuous unto a
Regenerate Child of God, though unto wicked Unregenerate men of the world they
may appear otherwise, not through any defect of light in themselves, but
through the muddinesse and darkness of their own minds; As unto diseased and
ill affected eyes, all things even the brightest, will appear of the same
yellow color that they at present are affected with.

But here I had almost forgotten to put you in mind of this caution: viz. That
though all things necessary unto Salvation are plainly delivered in
Scriptures, yet that they were not so plainly held forth unto the Faithful
under the old Testament, us now they are unto them under the New, for we must
know that the Promises under the Law were either Clouded and Mufled up in Types
and Figures, or else couched and employed only in Symbolicall figurative
expressions; for the Prophets of old did seldom speak but in figures: Moses
his face did shine indeed, but then there was a veil over it, and so Christ
was represented indeed under the Old Testament, but through a cloud and mist,
hence the Apostle says that the mystery of the Gospel was kept secret since
the world began, but now it is made manifest; that is, compare the times of the
Old Testament with these of the New, and the Gospel then will seem quite to
have been hid, in comparison of what it is now, for so we must understand the
words, it being the manner of the Scriptures, when they compare two things
together, to express the less negatively: a knowledge of Christ without doubt
the ancient Jews had, for otherwise to what purpose would it be said Joh. 8.
56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he sow it, and was glad,
and that they dranck of that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that rock
was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. to what purpose also would those Promises and
Prophesys of Christ be, unles they had had some knowledge of him; a knowledge
then they had of him, that is certain, but then this was only a confused,
implicit knowledge of him, not a distinct, particular, and explicit one: as
now we know in general, that great will be the Glory that shall be revealed
upon us in Heaven, both in body and soul; but yet we cannot define certainly
what kind of Glory it will be, until this Mortal shall have put on
Immortallity, this Corruption that Incorruption: so likewise the Patriarchs of
old knew, and believed in a Christ to come, but then they did not explicitly
and distinctly understand his particular Offices, his Death and Resurrection,
and the like, for of these the Apostle tells us for a time, because the fuller
manifestation of these mysteryes was reserved until the fulness of time, and
the accomplishment of them; hence the Apostle says, that the Fathers of Old
did not actually receive the Promises, but says he, they saw them afar off,
and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, Heb. 11. 13. As therefore a man
by the help of a glass may discover another at three or four miles distance,
and not be able distinctly and thoroughly to view him all over; so likewise the
faithful in old time, thorough the glass of the Law, did know Christ's
coming; but then they saw him afar off, says the Apostle, and therefore he
could not circumstantially and clearly be manifested unto them; and so likewise
it is in relation unto the knowledge of the Trinity and other mysteries; they
were darkely and emblematically, as I may so speak, hinted only in the Old
Testament, God thus ordering it, that his people might more eagerly desire and
pray for their fuller revelation. But now to us under the New Testament, these
things are more clearly laid open unto us, so that we ought not to exspect
farther revelation of them, then what we have in the Word already; for says
the Apostle, All the Promises of God in him are yea and Amen: that is, they are
thoroughly accomplished and perfected in him, and therefore they must needs be
more plain and evident unto us now, then they were unto the Fathers of old
time: the Old Testament then, and the matter therein contained, was not
altogether so perspicuous unto the faithful before Christ, as now it is unto
us after him: and this shall suffice for the second point, and so much also
shall suffice briefly for the perspicuity of the Scriptures. We shall now
speak something concerning the perfection of them; as the Scriptures are
perspicuous, so also they are most perfect, (that is) necessary to be known of
us in relation both to our faith and manners: this is plain from the end of
them here set down, Namely, that the man of God may be made perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works: from whence we may conclude, that if the
Minister of the Gospel, for he is the man of God, may out of the Scriptures
furnish himself with all things necessary, both for his Salvation and his
office, it will follow that they are fully perfect for instruction of all men,
both in Doctrine and manners; this will farther appear from Ps. 19. 7. The Law
of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: and Ps. 119. 96. I have seen an
end of all perfections, but thy commandment is exceeding large: and so Luke
16. 29. Abraham there shows in the Parable, that Moses and the Prophets were
sufficient to keep men from damnation, even the doctrine of the Old Testament
contains in it al things necessary for man's Salvation: whoever denies the
truth of this point, must of necessity say, that either first God did not
perfectly and fully reveal his will to the Prophets and Apostles: which how
absurd it is the Scriptures teach; for Joh. 14. 26. it is said there, that the
spirit should teach them all things: and Joh. 16. 13. the Spirit will guide you
into all truth; or else they must say, that the Prophets and Apostles did not
set down the full and perfect substance of what was revealed unto them, which
Saint Paul does plainly seeem to contradict, for Act. 20. 27. I have not
shunned (says he) to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Or else
thirdlly, he must be forced to say, that it seemed not good to the Spirit fully
and perfectly to reveal the will of God, and so in writing to transmit it unto
posterity, for thus the Papists say in defense of their traditions, that God
indeed did reveal to the Prophets and Apostles his whole will, concerning our
Salvation, but yet all was not written, but some things were communicated say
they, viva voce unto the rest of the Church, which never were written, but
still were derived unto posterity: but does not this opinion plainly accuse
the Scriptures of falsehood, when it is said Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Whatsoever things I
command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto nor diminish from
it, and Gal. 1. 9. If any man Preach any other Gospel unto you then that ye
have received, let him be accursed: which two texts being compared with that of
Exodus 24. 4. Where it is said, that Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and
with that forementioned place of the Acts, where Paul says, that he did not
shun to declare unto them all the Counsel of God: these places I say, compared
with one another, do evidently show that all things necessary for Salvation
were written; and that this written word alone ought to be the rule and canon
of our faith: for since by them we attain unto Eternal Life, we are made wise
unto Salvation, since by them also the man of God is made perfect, and
thoroughly furnished: Without controversy they contain in them all things
necessary to be known of us, either in regard of our faith or manners, all
things necessary I say, for otherwise many other things there might be
traditionally conveyed unto the Church, such as are the perpetual virginity of
Mary, the names of Jannes and Jambres mentioned by Paul only, the Prophesy of
Enoch, Jude 14. part of the Gencology of Christ, Luke 3 Satan striving for
Moses body, Jude 9. and other the like, which things they may be known or not
known, without any prejudice to our Salvation; and being not doctrinall, may
very well be received from hand to hand, and not mentioned in Scriptures: but
how say the Papists, can ye know Canonical books from Apocriphall but by the
tradition of the Church? We answer, that these may be distinguished from the
other, by that innate light, majesty, and truth that is in them; besides,
though a new convert and beginner may first learn it from the Church, yet
afterward they know it upon grounds of Scripture; thus an ignorant man may be
told of the Kings coin, but it is not that telling, but the Kings stamp that
makes it current and good coin. Again, for the maintenance of their unwritten
traditions they urge that of the 2 These. 2. 15. Therefore brethren stand fast,
and hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word or our
Epistle, then which says Whitaker, Nullum probabiliorem Papistae locum
inveniunt: but unto this we answer, that they were the same things which Paul
spoke and writ; so that the word (...) does not signify a diverse doctrine from
that which afterward was written; and so also the particle (...) is not
always a note of disjunction, but sometimes also of conjunction, as may
appear by comparing the Original of the 1 Cor. 13. 8. Besides this, it
appears that the Canon of the new Testament was not yet established: Yea says
the same Whitaker I affirm, that there was no book unless it were the Gospel
of Matthew before the Epistles to the Thessalonians, wherefore though the
Apostle did bid the Thessalonians hold fast that Doctrine or those Traditions,
which he delivered unto them, yet they might very well be, and indeed according
to substance were, set down in writing afterward by the same Apostle;
wherefore briefly to conclude this point, since these Scriptures are purposely
written for our learning, and to be are witness of Christ, and to teach the
way unto everlasting life, doubtless God will have no Doctrine received of us
but what is in them, or consonant unto them; Traditions then however in point
of ceremony, discipline, or other less substantial matters, may be received,
yet in points of faith and Doctrine they are in no wise to be obtruded upon us,
or entertained by us. And thus much briefly for the Authority, Perspicuity,
and Perfection of the Scriptures, concerning which, I might have spoken far
more largely out of the Fathers, Common-places, Catechists, and Polemicall
Divines, but intending brevity upon this point, I thought it more useful for
you and my self, wholly to examine the aforesaid points by Scripture, yet so,
that I have given you a short glance and view of what they have said too. I
shall only now shut up all with a use or two of what has been now and
heretofore spoken. Hence then

1. We may learn the excellency David said of Goliath his sword, there is none
to that, 1 Samuel 21. 9. So may we say of the Scriptures, there is none to them,
the word of God is as a two edged sword dividing between the Joints and the
Marrow, so that what Aristotle said of the knowledge of the soul, that a little
of it was better then a great deal of another science: We may also say of the
knowledge of the holy Scriptures, a little knowledge of them will stand us in
more steed, then all the vain and perishing knowledge of profane Writers:
Could the time and shortness of our lives suffer us to swallow up and devour
whole Libraries, as big as that of Alexandria, or this of our own: were it
possible for us critically to go over and examine all those elaborated pieces
of humane invention, could we perfectly Anatomize and trace nature in all her
secret windings and operations; yet all this knowledge in it self, however it
may place us above the clouds in men's opinions, may for all that be an occasion
for God to hurl us deeper into Hell: But behold here a Book, that is able to
make us wise unto Salvation, that directs and points us out a way unto eternal
Life, yea which raises our minds up unto the contemplation of those mysteries,
which the Angels themselves did desire to peep into; a Book that unlocks unto
us the very Cabinetand secret Counsels of God himself, that reveals and
lays open those mysteries of Godliness, those hidden things of God, which
were before from all eternity clasped up in the hosome of the Almighty, that
gives a landscape as 'twere, and map of Heavenly Joy, that out of darkness
brings us into mavelous light, that makes us from Children of wrath to
become heirs of Heaven; from slaves freeborne; from Devils to become Saints.
All other books, either by the teeth of time are worn out of memory, or in
the ruins of Kingdoms receive their graves, but not one jot or tittle of this
shall pass away, 'till all things be fulfilled. It has been hitherto for some
thousand years preserved amid'st the hatred of all the world against it, the
persecutions of Tyrants, the malice and fury of Devils, and shall so unto the
end of the world continue, though wicked men, Tyrants, and Devils should all
combine their joint forces to extinguish it, they may with more success and
easiness go about to blot the Sun out of the Firmament, then to take this
glorious Light from the Church and people of God: so that it was not without
much reason that a holy Man once said, That he had rather all the books beside
in the world should be burnt, than that one leaf of Gods Word should be
destroyed: for doubtless the least sentence therein comprised, is more worth
then all the voluminous Ofsprings and works of man's brain. Wherefore

2. This should exhort every one let the word of God dwell in you, that is, let
it be as familiar unto you, as he that dwells under the same roof with you,
and not only so, but dwell in you richly, let your minds be as thoroughly
adorned with them, as a great man's house is with rich utensills and hangings,
and now let us examine our selves whether we do thus earnestly search after
them, whether our hearts be thus furnished with them; are we not rather like
those Canonists of the Church of Rome, who some say will confirm their Law
text, and this too taken upon trust from others, or like that Bishop mentioned
in the book of Martyrs, who thanked God he never knew what was meant by the
Old or New Testament: doubtless there is no greater folly or madness in the
world, if we rightly consider it, then to hanker after humane knowledge, and to
be careless of divine understanding, greedily to devour husks, and yet to
loath Manna, and like those Indians, to prefer toys and baubles before Gold
and precious treasure. But I need not (I hope) accuse any here of any such
ignorance or neglect; all that I desire is, a more diligent studying of the
word, and more conscionable practice of it; for reading and knowing without
practice, will but aggravate our damnation: however, we ought to be stirred up
to so necessary a duty as this is, especially in such times, wherein the
meanest sort of people will upbraide our neglect of it, amongst many of whom,
to our shame be it spoken, the Bible according to the letter is better known
then ever Aristotle was amongst us, and will it not then much redound unto our
disgrace, if the Apron shoud pose the Gown in those things which most concern
them, if poor illiterate Mechanics should in the Doctrine of the Scripture
confound a Learned Rabbi. My Brethren, you cannot be ignorant what prejudices
some of the meaner sort of people have against us in this respect, and
therefore besides the Salvation of our souls, which should be the main end of
all, even politic respects should engage us to double our diligence in
studying of the Holy Scriptures; for believe me, however easy they may seem to
some, yet the full and clear understanding of them may very well take up our
whole care and studyes; there are Originalls to be known and consulted withal,
antiquity to be searched into and discussed, several places to be reconciled,
various acceptations of words and phrases to be weighed, and compared together:
there are besides these many things without the Scriptures very needful,
Grammar, to know the propriety of words: Rhetoric, to understand the several
Tropes and figures contained therein: Logic, to deduce consequences, and
artificially to open places of Scripture: and all three together, properly and
distinctly to analyze, resolve, and open the particular chapters and Books
thereof; which I conceive to be the nearest, and most compendious way for the
understanding the drift and scope of Holy writ: now all these should be as so
many several ties and engagements upon us continually to strike upon this
anvile, night and day to study, read, and meditate upon the Holy Scriptures,
especially for us who either actually are in, or else intend the calling of the
Ministry. But what may some of the younger sort here say, if the Scriptures be
so hard as you make them, your exhortation will little prevail with us, you
will rather deter us from reading them: to such I answer, that though many
things in Scriptures be hard, yet the maine Doctrines thereof, which concern
our Salvation, are plainly set down, and as easily to be understood; besides,
as the Orator notes of the Elements of Sciences, and Sciences themselves, that
they seem hard and difficult only to the first undertakers of them: so may we
say of the Holy Scriptures, their seeming difficulties will easily be
conquered, and made unto those that familiarly use and read them, as a strange
language by use and custom becomes easy and familiar; there are many things
indeed in holy writ foulded up in obscurity, but this is to make us more
earnestly pray unto God to open our eyes, that we may behold the wondrous
things of his Law: this is to tame the pride and arrogance of our nature, which
is apt to spurn and undervalue things obvious, this is to inflame and raise up
a generous holy mind unto a continual reading and studying of them; for as we
count that man most valiant, who will venture upon hard and difficult
enterprises, in like manner may we esteem that man most holy and best minded,
who will (as I may so speak) dare to be pious, and conquer all the seeming
difficulties of the Holy Scriptures with his desire to know them, and his
industry to find them out; wherefore as the voice once said unto Austin, so let
me say unto you all, tollite, legite, take up the word, read it; perhaps you
may find something therein that may dampe and frighten your wild lusts, as they
say that holy Father was presently converted upon the reading of that text Romans
13. 12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off
the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light: tollite, legite,
perhaps you may find there something that may strike into your souls an holy
amazement and sacred horror for your sins past, as Junius says of himself,
that he was stricken with amazement by a divine kind of Authority, and so
turned from his Atheism upon the reading of the 1 Chapter of John: Again,
tollite, legite, perhaps you saw light through some temptations answered, some
grievances of Conscience pacifyed upon thy diligent observance of his word,
some judgment denounced against thy sins, some good thing or other, that may
either comfort thee, or encourage thee in thy farther reading of them: tollite,
legite, take it up and read it, but read it with reverence, it is the Word of
God, read it with discretion and judgments, by marking the connection of them,
by comparing one place with another, and by examining all things according to
the Analogy of Faith, and by applying that which thou read unto thy own
particular use and estate: read it lastly with method and order, distinctly
going over that Book which thou undertakest, least thou be always learning and
never come to the knowledge of the truth. Oh but read it I do, perhaps two
Chapters a day, besides I hear it read twice a day in this very place, but yet
I can find no Spiritual comfort from it, it does not move me for all that,
what shall I do then to have comfort from it? The answering of this case will
be very proper for us; for many of us I doubt not do hear and read the word,
but then I fear we are as little moved with it as the benches we sit upon, or
the ground we tread on; but let such a man consider his fearful estate, who
can thus hear judgments denounced and yet not be shaken, mercies promised and
yet not be melted; let him consider what a fearful thing it is to hear or
read God speaking, and he to have his mind another way, for God to thunder out
in his Word, and yet he to sleep all the while securely in his sin: how can
he expect Heaven who is thus careless of the instrument of his Salvation?
doubtless that God who commanded the Jews in the 6. Deuteronomy. 8. To bind his Laws
for a sign upon their hands, and that they should be as frontlets between
their eyes, and that they should write them upon the posts and gates of their
houses, must needs be mightily provoked at their contempt, who will not give
his word any admission into their hearts or ears, wherefore if such men do
desire to be moved, or to receive any comfort from their reading or hearing the
word,

1. They must continually pray unto God to take from them their heart of stone,
and give unto them an heart of flesh, bestow upon them likewise the Spirit of
wisdom and revelation of the knowledge of him that the eyes of their
understanding being enlightened, they may know what is the hope of their
calling, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17.

2. They must examine themselves what worldly cares do distract their minds,
what prejudices and temptations do enter into their hearts at the reading of
the Word, which are like the thorns (in the parable) choking the good seed of
the Word.

3. They must seriously meditate upon the Word, read, and endeavor to remember
it, for as meat does that man little good, whose stomach has not a retentive
faculty in it to retain and digest it, in like manner the Word of God being
not chewed upon (as 'twere) by meditation, and well remembered, does become
useless and unprofitable to us; so then we must not only read the Word, but we
must practice it also, we must lay it up in our hearts, and bring forth the
fruits of it in a holy and Godly Conversation. I might here farther enlarge
upon this point, and confirm my exhortation of reading the holy Scriptures
from their plainness and perfection, their subject and matter of them
altogether divine, from their end, the Glory of God and man's Salvation, from
their principal Author, GOD, and from many other Arguments, but I shall crave
leave here abruptly to break off and conclude.

2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
COncerning the Book of Nature and the Creatures we have already spoken, we
are to speak Concerning the Book of the Scriptures; by the two former I told
you we had only a confused ineffectuall knowledge of God, by this latter we
have a more clear, distinct, and saving knowledge of him; should we have been
left only to the light of nature within us, and the conduct of the Creatures
without us, we might have eternally groped in darkness, and never have come
unto Salvation, for though these may direct us unto a God, yet they do not
properly unto a Christ, nature can never thoroughly discover the will of God,
and the right means unto Salvation, and though God be delineated and drawn out
(as 'twere) in his Creatures, yet it is but in dark colors, seen he may be,
and understood in them, but never exactly worshipped and served through them,
there must be then some higher Principle and fountain, from whence we may draw
the knowledge of his will, his grace, and goodness toward mankind, his love
unto us from all Eternity in designing his Son to dye for us, and to reveal
unto us all those high mysteries of Religion, which otherwise nature can never
reach unto; now that which does these things must needs be the Word of God,
which instructing heretofore the old Patriarchs, either by Oracles or Vision,
was at length by Moses proclaimed unto the Church, and set down in writing,
that so all might plainly see who he was, what kind of worship he did approve
of, and by what means he would bring them unto Heaven, so that as Christ said
unto the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. 22. That both she and her nation worshipped
they knew not what, we say likewise of the Gentiles, they worshipped they knew
not what God, or the true one in a false manner, for before Christ's time Gods
words being consined and closetted within the Church of the Jews, no wonder
that the Gentiles without the pale became vain in their imaginations, and
worshipped the Creature more then the Creator; and now after Christ, many
Nations either through malice rejecting the Scriptures, or through negligence
being ignorant of them; no wonder that they are given up to worship the Host of
Heaven, and to follow after Idols, and lying vanities: for as old and dim
eyes, though they may behold a fair volume, yet they cannot speak or read
perhaps two words together without the help of spectacles, or some other
glass; in like manner, though a purblind natural man, a Gentile, may see God
in the large volume of his creatures, yet without the light and help of holy
Scriptures he can never discover his will, and the true manner wherein he will
be worshipped; the Scriptures alone are the Cannon and Rule unto which we must
square our selves in the service of God, the principium cognoscendi, that
instrument and ladder, whereby we may climb up into Heaven, and have a more
intimate and clear knowledge of God, then possibly we can attain unto, either
by the light of nature, or conduct of the Creatures. Wherefore leaving the two
former Books of Nature and the Creatures; we must enter now into a higher
form (as it were,) and learn the book of the Scriptures; it shall be my
task therefore at present to open unto you the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures
out of these words, in prosecution of which, as of all other heads ensuing, I
shall as I have told you endeavor to couch my matter in as short a room as I
can, that so I may the more speedily go over the sum and substance of
Christian Religion, which is the intent of this exercise, and then I shall with
all plainness, perspicuity, and method both open and apply the Doctrine,
familiarly illustrating those things that are knotty and hard, without rambling
and fetching in of things which will not consist with my intended brevity and
method: As for the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, which being a beaten path,
I shall with less pains go over. These words as I conceive are the most
pertinent whereon I may build it, which are brought in as an argument to
strengthen and confirm the Doctrine which Timothy had sucked in even from his
youth, and received from Paul, for he showing (in the beginning of this
Chapter) the dangers of the latter times, and the errors of evil men and
seducers, does give his Son Timothy an antidote aginst their poison,
exhorting him in the 14. verse, to continue in the Doctrine which he had
received: the times indeed are very evil, errors very rife, persecutions
every where offered to the professors of the Gospel, but (says he) continue
thou in the things which thou have learned etc. this exhortation he seems to
press by several arguments, thou must continue in sound Doctrine.

1. Because thou have learnt it, it was to that purpose deposited with thee,
and instilled into thee, that thou might continue in it.

2. Because thou have been assured of it, and therefore 'twould argue want of
Judgment and folly in thee to fall from it, and because thou know of whom
thou have learned it, not from any impostor or seducer, but from a Paul, an
Apostle acted by the Spirit, and teaching nothing but what he has from Christ
and the Holy Ghost, and therefore whose authority ought to bind thee to
persevere in the things thou have learned.

3. O Timothy thou must continue in those things thou have learned, because
from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, v. 15. thou have been so long
versed in the sacred truth, so long learnt and received it, that now it would
be a most base thing for thee to recede from it; read it thou have from thy
Child hood, and therefore hold it fast thou should in thy riper years; this
argument he backs on

4. From the perfection and profitable effect of the Sacred Scriptures, they
are able to make thee wise unto Salvation through faith which is in Christ
Jesus, thou must therefore continue in the Doctrine and Word of God, because if
thou believe in that, it is able to instruct thee unto Heaven, and eternal
Salvation, these arguments he puts down in the 14, and 15. verses, now he goes
on in these words read unto you to persuade him to persevere in the faith and
Doctrine of the Scriptures, for says he, all Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, the Authority therefore of it should bind thee to continue in the
maintenance of it; and it is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for instruction in righteousness, and therefore the great profit
of it in instructing thee in all things, which tend to Religion or well living,
and also its perspicuity in laying down all manner of things plainly, which
make either for Doctrine, or for decision of controversies or for regulating
men's manners, either in public or private; and then in the 17. verse, the
Apostle confirms his exhortation from the end of the Holy Scriptures, which
is, that the man of God may be perfect, etc. it is perfect in it self, and
therefore it does make men perfect, and thoroughly instructed unto all good
works: since then says Paul the Doctrine which thou have learnt has so noble
an Author of it as God, has so profitable an use as to make men wise unto
Salvation, to instruct, to reprove, to correct, and since it has so admirable
perfection in it, as to make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished
unto all good works, good reason then my son Timothy, that be the times what
they will, be errors never so plausibly entertained, and truth never so
violently opposed, that thou notwithstanding should continue in the things
which thou have learned, in the Doctrine of the Scriptures which thou have
received: And this is the drift of the Apostle in this Chapter. The well
understanding of which, together with the words read unto you, will much
conduce to the opening of this my present Doctrine of the Scriptures: I shall
therefore expound the words themselves more distinctly, and in the opening of
them briefly touch upon some things, which I cannot handle at large, and then
I shall come to what I mainely intend: well then here is the subject spoken of,
the Scripture, set forth by its Author, GOD, by its use, it is profitable for
Doctrine etc. by its end, which is, that the man of God may be perfect etc. All
Scripture (...) all writing, for so the Word of God is called Scripture by way
of eminency, it is the chiefest of al other writings which are so far accounted
good or bad as they come near to, or decline from this: but here says Beza,
when the Apostle says all Scripture, we must take heed least we understand any
besides that which we call Canonical, (that is) such books, which by reason
of their Antiquity, their argument, and divine doctrine they treat of, their
efficacious and lively manner and method of their discourses, are the Canon,
yea rule and touchstone, by which all Doctrines and Writings whatever are to be
tried; for there are other Books which either because the names of their
Authors were unknown to the Prophets and Apostles are called Apocryphal or
hidden, which though otherwise containing many useful and profitable
instructions, are yet notwithstanding to be hid and laid aside, when any truth
comes to be tried. And therefore when our Apostle says that all Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, we must exclude those Apocryphal Books, for
since they are neither written in the Hebrew tongue, nor by any Prophet, of
which Malachy was the last, nor taken notice of by Christ and his Apostles,
since also they contain many things absurd and contrary one to another, we
have reason to suspect that they were never given by inspiration of God: (...)
all Scripture is inspired of God, or as the word implies breathed from God;
those notions, words, and phrases, which may every where occur in holy Writ,
were dictated unto the penmen thereof by the Holy Ghost himself, so that
Prophesy came not of old time by the will of men, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved, 2 Pet. 1. 21. wherefore we read not, thus says Jeremiah, or
thus says Isaiah; but thus says the Lord, and the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it: but what may some say, is all that is contained in the Scripture the
Word of God? Why then those impostures and calumnies of Satan set down in the
3. of Genesis and 4. of Matthew; those erroneous sayings of Jobs Wife unto him, to
curse God and dye, with the like, are the Word of God. We answer, that these
and the like sayings only historically set down, being abstractedly in
themselves considered, are not from God; but then consider the truth of them,
and the end for which they are set down, so they are: As we may say, that
Tacitus is the Author of that whole Book, though many things in it are
supposed to be spoken from other men; and as the same wax, though of litte
worth in it self, yet sealed and put in a bond may be of great concernement
and value, in like manner those speeches of Heathen Authors cited by the Holy
Ghost, as that of Aratus Act. 17. 28. and that of Epimenides Titus 1. 12.
though of little worth, as they came from such men, yet being inserted into
holy writ receive divine Authority, and may be of great moment unto our
Salvation; many things there be also in Scripture, which quoad praeceptum may
have greater Authority then other, but ratione Authoris are equal. As the
Commandments of the first Table are more severely enjoined then those of the
second, yet the same God writ them both; thus gold may be more precious then
gold in weight and shape, though not in purity: it remains then, that all
Scripture some way or other is given by inspiration of God, and therefore it is
all one to say, the Scripture says, and God says, as may farther appear from
the 9. of the Romans 25. verse. and Gal. 4 30. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable: many are the commodities of the written
Word, for besides that it is a standing rule, whereby we may try all other
Doctrines, as the Bareans tried Paul's Doctrine by searching the Scriptures,
whether those things were so, Act. 17. 11. and therefore as those that carry
false and Adulterate coin about them cannot endure to hear of a touchstone,
so likewise those cheates in Religion, the Papists, will not suffer the
Scriptures to be read, least thereby their impostures should be laid open, and
their folly appear unto all men: besides, this commodity I say, the Apostle
says, that it is profitable,

1. For Instruction, (...), for the discovering (that is) of such things unto
us, which without it we could never have known; there are Mysteries of
Godliness, and abscondite hidden things of God, which humane reason can never
unvaile or fathom; that an infinite God should be cloystered up in a Virgins
womb, that he should leave Heaven and lie in a Manger for the Redemption of
his enemies, and the like, is above the reach and disquisition of a natural
understanding, and therefore we must of necessity be farther enlightened by the
Word of God before we attain unto the knowledge of these things; it is
profitable also for instruction of us in the fall and restoration of man, in
the Sacraments, yea in all things necessary unto Salvation; it instructs and
teaches us how wretched we are by nature, how happy by Grace, how to beat
down principalities and powers, how to want, and how to abound, how finally to
be wise unto Salvation:

2. It Is profitable says he (...) for reproof, there is no error so
plausibly broached, so strongly fortifyed and maintained by humane reason, but
may be beat down and vanquished by Scripture, and therefore says the Apostle
He that is Spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man,
1 Cor. 2 18. He that is rightly informed in the holy Scriptures, he to whom the
Spirit has revealed the will of God, and who knows the mind of Christ, may
without the assistance of foreign traditions, testimonies of the Fathers, and
the like, not only know, but also confute such errors: as are repugnant unto
sound Doctrine and the Analogy of Faith: the Word of God is called a light:
Psalm. 119. 105. and therefore as by light only we know what darkness is, so
by the same word may we understand what is erroneous and false in religion: As
we say, that a right thing is a sufficient judge of its own straitness and the
crookedness of another body: so that there is an elencticall power (as I may
so speak) in the very Scriptures themselves, to stop the mouths of gainsayers,
and to quash and put to silence the impious opinions and errors of ungodly men.

3. It Is profitable for correction, (...), for the reformation (that is) for an
amendment of all things amiss, either in life or manners; there is not the
least deviation from the Law of God, either in thought, word, or deed, but it
does espy and correct. A man can never sin so closely but it will find him
out, for the Word of God tries the reins and the heart, it is a two edged
sword, dividing betwixt this joints and the marrow, and is a discoveres of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. As it does teach what things are
right, so it does correct and amend what things are out of order.

4. It Is profitable for instruction (...), instruant Patriarchae etiam
errantes. The title of the 32. Psalm is a Psalm of instruction, the word
seems to me to imply the great profit of the Scriptures, even for the
instruction of Children and young men: so far was our Apostle from forbidding
any of what sort soever the reading of the Scriptures, that he makes it one of
the main ends and uses of the written Word to instruct all men, even unto
Children: hence it is that v. 15. the Apostle approves in Timothy, that from a
Child he had read the Scriptures: and I am verily persuaded that the Romanists
withhold the reading of Scriptures from the people more out of a point of
policy, then Religion, or ground they have for it out of the Word it self; for
it seems altogether repugnant, first, to the Commands of God, who enjoined
Moses to read the Law before all Israel, Men, Children, and strangers within
thy gate without any distinction, Deuteronomy. 31. 12. And who bids us search the
Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39? and who commands that the Word of God should dwell in
us richly and abundantly? Had not laymen and ordinary people souls to be
saved, as well as the greater Cardinals and Priests, there were some reason
that these precious things should not be cast unto such dogs, these Jewels to
such Swine, but they expecting life from the same Christ as greater Scholars,
why should they not with them have the same means to obtain it? if the
command of God lie thus indefinitely upon all men, why should they be debarred
from obeying that command? Secondly it is repugnant to the very design of God
in revealing his will in the Holy Scriptures, for whatsoever things were
written a foretime were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15. 4. why was the word
written, but that we might have hope? and shall not a layman have hope of
Salvation? will you exclude the common people from the hope of Heaven? if not,
why then shall they not have this hope through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures? again, Ephesians. 6. 12. 17. the Apostle there showing how that we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalites and powers, etc.
bids them therefore take to themselves the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: and now ought not poor ignorant
souls thus to wrestle, thus to fight against powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickedness in high places? why
then shall they not have this comfort? Why should they not be armed with that
sword of the Spirit, the Word of God? When a Prince sets forth a
Proclamation it is penned in a language that all his Subjects may understand it,
and doubtless it is the intent and end of God in proclaiming his Will and Word
unto mankind, that all his People should read and understand what wondrous
things he there reveals for their Salvation; for otherwise what a vain
unprofitable thing would it be to kindle a light merely to put it under a
bushel, to bestow a rich treasure upon us (for so the Word is called) to be
hid and clasped in a box: to give us a rule whereunto we should square our
lives, even his Holy Word, only that it should be shut up and cabineted in an
unknown language: it is in my judgment the highest piece of injustice in the
Church of Rome thus to deprive the people of the bread of life, and instead
thereof to obtrude upon them their own hypocritical leaven, their fopperyes
and traditions; to obstruct and seal up the fountain, and then to feed them
with the muddy streams of their own inventions; yea indeed to damn men's souls
merely out of a divelish kind of policy to secure their own state and interest:
but say they, there is no such necessity certainly for the common peoples
reading the Scriptures, when as in the times of the old Testament there were
many Believers, as Job and his friends, who yet living not among the Jews, to
who^ then only were committed the Oracles of God, were destitute of the holy
Scriptures: we answer, that as for Job and his friends they lived by
computation of the best divines before the Law and the written Word; whereas
had they lived after it they had been bound to have the Scripture after it was
delivered; besides, what if it be granted that some believers there were under
the Old Testament, who de facto had not the Scriptures, must it therefore now
de jure be true, that the commonalty ought not to have them? under the Old
Testament perhaps God might by vision, or some other extraordinary way, reveal
his will unto some of the Gentiles, as unto Job and others before their
Conversion, which ways being not now to be expected, reason it is that all
People should now fetch their knowledge of God from the Scriptures. Again,
they object that Paul writ not his Epistle unto the Romans in Latin, which was
their vulgar tongue, but in Greek, therefore to put the Scriptures in a vulgar
tongue is not needful: we answer, that the reason of this was, that those
sacred monuments of Paul being to instruct all people besides the Romans, the
Spirit thought it most convenient to write it in such a language which might
most universally be understood, now that the greek was then most known unto all
Nations appears not only out of profane Authors, but also out of the
Scriptures themselves: as from Romans 1. 16. and other places, where the Apostle
under the name of Greek comprehends all the Gentiles: but we must not here
stand too long upon these things; it remains that since the Scripture is
profitable for instruction in Righteousness, good reason therefore it is, that
all people being thus to be instructed should read the holy Scriptures, whose
end it is (as the Apostle goes on) that the man of God may be perfect and
thoroughly furnished unto all good works, (...), i. e. by comparing the 1 Timothy
6. 11. with this, the Minister or interpreter of God, such as Timothy was
himself, that he might be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works:
that he namely, who is of greatest concernement, and knowledge in the Church,
may out of the Scriptures furnish himself with the knowledge of such duties,
which belong unto God and his neighbor, there is no kind of good work or
duty, which can be thought upon, but the Scripture does prescribe and prepare
us unto: and this is the meaning of the words, on which I have been the longer,
because by them I have taken occasion to resolve you of such doubts, which for
brevity sake I cannot at large and distinctly handle: from the words themselves
you may note these three common observations.

1. That the Scriptures are of divine authority, for they are inspired of God.

2. That they are most perspicuous, and in the main most easily to be
understood: for otherwise how could they be profitable for our instruction in
righteousness.

3. That they are most perfect: for if the Minister himself can draw out of
them all things necessary unto his duty, it will follow doubtless that they
contain all things necessary for our Salvation, and that they are most perfect.

1. Then we shall show, that the Scriptures are of Divine authority: what these
Scriptures are none here I suppose can be ignorant of, for you must needs
conclude from what has been spoken, that they are the Word of God, or holy
books written by the inspiration of God, to make us wise unto Salvation; so
that in the very frontispeice (as 'twere) of the definition you may discover
from whence they proceed; God is the Author of them that is certain, and
'twere as absurd for a Christian to deny this, as for any man to deny that
beams and rays proceed from the Son, and therefore he that calls into
question, or denis that the Scriptures are the Word of God, is as unworthy the
name of a Christian, as he is of a Philosopher or a Metaphysitian, that
disallowes of a natural body or entity, because these are things which are
necessary to be presupposed of him: should all the men of the world unanimously
conspire to deny that the Scriptures are the Word of God, yet are they no less
divine and authentical then the Sun would be light, if all men otherwise
were blinded: let Turks and Pagans say what they will, yet the Scriptures will
be still Gods word, and there are such sufficient reasons for to prove it, that
he that is not either wilfully blinded or maliciously bent must needs confess
the same; for that they are from God, and so in themselves of divine Authority,
sundry reasons may be given, we shall only for brevity sakename three or four:
For besides that they do most clearly reveal unto us the nature and works of
God, as the three Persons in the Trinity, the mystery of the regeneration, and
the like things, altogether above the reach and contrivance of man; besides the
impartialnesse and candor of the Penmen of them, for so Moses sets down
the incest of his Parents, of whom he was begotten, Ex. 6. 2. and his own
disobedience, Numb. 11. 11. Jonah his murmering, and Jeremiah his fretting,
which undoubtedly shows that they were not biassed with any carnal respects,
but altogether overruled and inspired by an higher Spirit; besides also the
quality and condition of the Penmen, Amos an heardsman, Matthew a publican, the
Apostles many of them fishermen, which evidently show that there was some
higher power which did instill into them that profoundnesse of wisdom, which
all the art and Philosophy in the world can never reach unto: Add to these the
consent and holy conspiracy (as 'twere) between all their writings,
notwithstanding the great difference of times they wrote in, the remoteness of
places, and the diversity of matters whereof they have written; so incredible
and divine is their mutual harmony, that you would rather think one man writ
them with diverse penns, then that diverse men writ them by one Spirit; besides
these and sundry other reasons, I say, which may sufficiently declare who is
the principal Author of this holy writ, another great argument and testimony
of their original is, first, the truth and events of Scripture Prophesyes; Can
any man, Angel, or created being foretell future contingent events, can they
tell the very name of a man, and the time of his birth a hundred years before
hand, as the Spirit by Esaias did concerning Cyrus? and in the 1 of the Kings 13.
concerning a Josias by name above 300 years say Annalist's before he was
borne? could ever any of the cheating Oracles of the Heathens, or any
counterfeited Sybill tell of a Messiah to be borne 4000 years after, and then
to come to pass just as 'twas foretold, as it did according to the promise
made to Adam, Genesis 3. 15. we our selves of this Nation are living examples of
the truth of holy predictions and succeeding events, the Scriptures many
thousand years ago did foretell the calling of the Gentiles, for in him say
they shall the Gentiles trust, and all the ends of the earth shall see the
Salvation of God, and behold the Prophesy accomplished in our selves: we who
heretofore sat in darkness and the shadow of death, do now lie under
glorious light, who before were not a people, but are now a people; 'twere
endless to relate unto you all the Prophesyes which were exactly accomplished
according to the times, places, and circumstances foretold:

2. But secondly, the miracles that were wrought by, and did accompany the
teachers and writers of the Word, may sufficiently confirm our faith in the
authority of the Scriptures themselves, unless we are worse then the
Magitians, who upon the Miracle of lice could cry out this is the finger of
God, Exodus 8. 19. but how may we know that the Miracles we read in the Gospells
are true, since by some the Gospel it self is doubted of? Answer, that were
they not true they would have either been refuted or rejected by the men of
those days, but so far were they then from that (as a learned man notes)
that Josephus a Jew, an enemy to the Christian truth, did acknowledge Christ to
be the worker of many miracles.

A 3d main argument of the Divinity of the Scriptures, may be that admirable
force and power which they have upon the minds and hearts of men, which believe
in them, sometimes to humble and cast down, sometimes to comfort and raise up
the Spirits, what vigor does it put into a man enabling him to resist even his
own desires, to fight against his own flesh and blood, to suffer and bear all
afflictions and tribulations for Christ his sake: show me any humane eloquence
that can alter and change the very natures of men, that can overawe, keep
under hatches the rebellions, mutinies, and motions of the flesh, that can put
a Felix into a trembling, a stubborn Pharaoh into a relenting, that can give
light unto the simple, stop the mouth of gainsayers, that can divide between
the heart and the world, between a man's self and his self; humane eloquence
that can only move and persuade, this force and command; it comes with an
(...), thus says the Lord, and therefore exacts obedience. Add to all these
the testimonies of all times concerning the Scriptures, their Antiquity, Moses
being borne before the very Gods of the Heathens, the latest of the Prophets
matching the antientest of the Philosophers; add also their constant
preservation and continuance even till now, maugre all the fury and rage of
Tyrants, the malice of Devils and divelish men, who have done, and do still
oppose these holy writings; add finally unto all these, the testimonies of an
army of Martyrs, maintaining even to death the truth of the Scriptures; men of
all sorts, ignorant, who though they could not dispute, could yet dye for the
truth, wise, rich, poor, of all ages and sexes, women, children, aged folks,
enduring all manner of torments, with all manner of torments, with all patience
and constancy for the maintenance of Gods Word, and the truths therein
contained; these with many other reasons may sufficiently demonstrate, that God
alone is the Author of the Scriptures: but now as there may be many witnesses
unto a bond, and yet still all be of little moment, unless the seal be put on
too, in like manner all these witnesses and arguments here produced will be of
little concernement unto our Salvation, unless they be sealed with the Spirit
of promise, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 1. 13. we may be convicted by the
foregoing arguments that God is the Author of the Holy Scriptures, but yet
they can never per se work faith nor a full assurance of them, unless the
Spirit which bears witness unto our Spirits, jointly cooperates and opens
our eyes more fully to see this light: for as Hagar, Genesis 21. 19. could not see
the fountain that was near her until God had opened her eyes, so neither can
we perfectly discern or savingly know the holy Scriptures until the Holy
Ghost does open our eyes, as David speaks, to behold the mavelous things of
the Law: we have* therefore occasion here to enquire, how it may appear unto
us that the Scriptures are the Word of God, or how a man may savingly and
truly know that the Scriptures are the Word of God and of divine authority?
the Papists they say that the reason why they believe the Scriptures are the
Word of God, is because the Church says so, we say that the reason why we
believe them so to be, is because they are in themselves worthy of all belief,
and because the Spirit of God witnesses and seals unto our Spirits that they
are the Word, of God; now whether the witness of men, or the witness of God
be greater, judge ye: however it has been a point very much controverted and
canvassed on both sides, therefore I shall endeavor briefly and clearly to
state it, and to make you understand the absurdity and vanity of their
position. Our thesis, on which I shall ground my Discourse, shall be this,
namely that the Authority of the Scriptures in esse cognito and quoad nos does
not so depend on the Church as on their own innate light, and testimony of the
Spirit within us: the terms of this Thesis being explained you will easily
understand the whole matter; I say then, that the Authority of the Scriptures
in esse cognito, and quoad nos, for though some of the Papists have been so
impudent as to affirm, that the Scriptures have no more divine authority in
them without the Testimony of the Church, then Aesops Fables or Ovid's
Metamorphosis has, yet some of the modern and ingenuous of them do
acknowledge, that in themselves indeed they are of divine authority, yet this
cannot (say they) otherwise appear unto us then by the testimony of the
Church: we say then, that they may otherwise appear unto us to be Gods Word
then by the church, as we may know that light is light, and gold is gold by
their own qualities and luster, without any man's telling of us that they are
so; besides, if they are as they confess of divine authority in themselves, by
what Law then can their Church usurp authority over them, unless (as needs it
must come to pass) they account the authority of their Church above that of
God, and so become no less blasphemers then absurd.

2. I say, that the authority of the Scriptures in esse cognito and quoad nos,
does not so much depend upon the Church, as on their own innate light, and
testimony of the Spirit within us; does not so much I say, for I do not deny
but that the Church is a great confirmer of the truth and divinity of the
Scriptures, and that it does execute many good offices toward them. As

First, it is a witness unto them, and a keeper and preserver of them; but now
will any one be so absurd to say, that the records or writings of a King do
receive authority from their Notary or Register, because he keeps them?

Secondly, the Church may discern and judge between true and false
supposititions Scriptures, and that by examining them according to the
original Canon and platform of Moses his Law, for my sheep says our Savior
John 10. hear my voice, and so can distinguish it from another; but now as a
Goldsmith may by his weights and touchstone distinguish Gold from Copper, and
yet not be said to make the Gold, yea or to make it so unto us, but only to
make us the more easily believe that Gold it is, in like manner the Church in
its examining and distinguishing of Scriptures can be only said to confirm unto
us the divinity of them, not in any wise, either in themselves or unto us, to
make them divine.

The third thing that the Church does, is to preach and divulge the Scriptures;
but now as we believe and obey the Proclamation of a King, not because such an
one proclaims it, but for it self, so likewise we obey and believe the
Scriptures not for the Church, but its own sake.

Fourthly, the Church does expound and interpret Scriptures; but now as a
faithful Interpreter of an Ambassador does not either add or take from the
true sense and meaning of him, so likewise neither does or ought the true
Church to add or diminish any thing of Holy Writ, and therefore much less
has it power to make it in any wise of any greater price or value then really
it is in it self, and this is all the true power that the Church can challenge
in relation unto the holy Scriptures: wherefore the true Church we honor in
respect of these things, but we do not adore it and make it of greater
Authority then the Scriptures themselves. Wherefore

3. We say, that the Authority of them does not so much depend on the Church,
as on their own innate light, and testimony of the Holy Spirit within us; their
own innate light I say for says Chamier there is in the Scriptures a
peculiaris genius and strein, whereby they may upon examination be easily
discovered to be the Word of God, as a Critic will know by the phrase and
style, and the like, that such a book is Lyvies, such an one Juvenalls, so also
will a Christian upon the due search and trial of the holy Scriptures by their
matter Heavenly, by their style deep, and by their divine phrase mystical,
presently conclude that they are the Word of God, and that they can have no
other Author then the King of Heaven: and then farther I say there is required
a Testimony of the holy Spirit within us, which Spirit is as I may so speak
the seal unto all the rest, and peculiar only to Gods Children, a man may by
the hearsay of the Church historically know the Scriptures, but this will no
more comfort his heart then the discourses concerning honey and sweet-meates
will the stomach: a man may also be convicted of the truth of the Word from
those arguments I pressed even now, and yet he may be no more converted by them
then the Jews were at the Miracles of Christ, which they knew were wrought by
a divine power: well then what is it that must ultimately persuade us and
assure a child of God certitudine fidei with an assurance of faith that the
Scriptures are the Word of God? the Church that cannot, for how can that infuse
faith, which the Scriptures every where set forth to be the Gift of God? what
then is it that assures us? doubtless the Spirit of God co-working with us,
and upon our prayers and diligent reading and examining of the Word, assuring
us that this Word which was thus confirmed by miracles, thus verifyed by the
truth of the Prophesyes contained in it, this Word that has so perfect a
consent within its self, that has so admirable efficacy upon the hearers and
readers thereof, that has been so wonderfully preserved in all ages, that this
Word, and this Word only, is the Word of God, and of divine authority; so then,
the Church that can only report unto us, the Spirit that does firmly persuade
us; the Church that can ministerially only ingenerate an opinion in us, the
Spirit a Faith and certainty of the Scriptures: as then men may hear a very
great report of another worth, learning, and counsel, and yet be never fully
satisfied concerning it, till they find it so to be by their own experience; or
as those Samaritans who did believe in part on Christ for the saying of the
woman, were yet notwithstanding further confirmed and established in the faith
of him, when they heard his own words John 4. 24. in like manner though we may
historically believe that the Scriptures are the Word of God because the Church
says so, yet this testimony of the Church does minister little assurance or
satisfaction unto a child of God, until it be farther backed on and
established by a farther testimony of the Spirit, which undoubtedly must be the
firmest assurance a man can have, because it is that alone which does open the
eyes to behold the wondrous things of the Law, Psalm. 119. 18. it is that alone
which leads into all truth, Joh. 16. 13. it is that alone which inseparably
accompanys the faithful in the Scriptures, My Spirit which is upon thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, Isa.
59. 21. and therefore it is that alone which gives strongest evidence unto its
self speaking in the Scriptures, if ye receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater says S. Paul; the witness of the Church is but the
witness of men, therefore the witness of the Spirit is greater: but say they,
the Spirit speaks by the Church, and therefore we must believe the Church
only when it testifyes of the Scriptures: Whitaker answers for me, that if so
be the Spirit does thus speak by the Church, from whence then has the Church
this assurance but from the Spirit, and so our belief of the Scriptures must
ultimately resolve of necessity into the Testimony of the Spirit: again they
say, that the Church was before the Scriptures; we answer, no by no means, for
then how can the Word be called the everlasting wisdom of God, and the
immortal seed, of which the Church is borne: the Church was before the written
Word but not before the unwritten. Ask a Papist how they know that the Church
is of such authority, and they will prove it by the Scriptures, and therefore
the authority proving, must needs be of greater esteem, and before the
authority proved: but is not the Church called the pillar and ground of truth?
yes, but what does a candle receive any light from the candlestick, because it
sticks in it? what though the Church is the seat and mansion place of the
Scriptures, yet were it possible that there were no Church in the World, yet is
not the Scripture of less authority then now it is; the Church then is only a
ministerial pillar to preserve, keep, and set forth the word, not a
fundamental one to uphold and give being unto it: and here I might wade
farther into a Discourse concerning the authority of the Church and the
Scriptures, but it having been so fully handled already and answered by
multitudes of eminent men, I shall go no farther: it remains that I should
practically apply what has been already spoken, but this, together with the
other propertyes of Scriptures, their perspicuity and perfection, I shall leave
to the next part.

This is the AUTHORS last Sermon that ever He preached, which was at S. Mary's
in Oxon. March 20. 1655.
Phil. c. 3. v. 8. first part. Yea doubtless and I count all things but loss,
for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.
IN this Chapter the Apostle arms his Philippians against their false
teachers, by opposing his own judgment and example to their erroneous and
lying suggestions. There were a company of profane persons started up in the
Church of Philippi, whom Paul counts no better then dogs, evil workers, and
of the concision, verse 2. who instead of circumcising their hearts, went about
rather to cut and rend asunder the Church; these men now being left to be
brought from their old fleshly confidences, the works of the Law, did vaunt
much of their outward privileges, and would fain slink into circumcision, and
other ceremonial performances, and join them with Christ, teaching that these
were necessary to Justification, as well as faith in him. The Apostle therefore
in zeal to the truth, and the better to quell these false Doctors, deals with
them at their own weapon; and because he must needs Glory, when they force him
to it, he falls upon them with his own privileges, and shows wherein he may
boast as well, nay more then the best of them; if any man thinks he has
whereof he may trust in the flesh, I more, v. 4, 5, 6 but well, (says he) do
you think that either you or I are the better for these things, or a jot the
nearer Heaven? certainly in no wise, and therefore I would have you Philippians
(to whom I write) take notice for your own example, that I am of a contrary
judgment to these seducers; for what things were gain to me etc. it is true
indeed says Saint Paul before my conversion, I verily thought circumcision,
outward privileges, and my own legal righteousness a great gain and vantage
to me; I soothed my self up (vain Pharisee as I was) and thought Heaven was my
due and right; but when once the knowledge of Christ dawned in upon me, those
things which in my judgment were (...) gain, profitable to me (that is) and
meritorious in order to my Salvation, I presently thought to be (...), things
that I were like to loose by, should I trust in them, rather hinderers then
promoters of my Salvation; yea doubtless and at this present time, now that I
am a grown Christian, rooted and settled in the knowledge of Christ; yet I count
my present good works and righteousnesses yea (...) Quaecunque in mundo sunt
(says Ambrose) all my learning and parts, every thing besides, but loss,
pernicious, raw, empty things for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord. The more I know Christ, the less still of good I know by my
self, after all things I find it best to rely upon his imputed
righteousness; so that the words of my text are a confirmation, or if you
will, a farther amplification of what he said in the preceding verse: (...) yea
doubtless in good truth, what I said (verse 7.) was true at my first
conversion, is much more true now, viz. that I count all things as loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: So that here Paul
passes his vote for the knowledge of Christ, against all things besides; in
this there is (...) excellency admirable virtue; in those nothing but (...)
(...) loss and dogs meat, fit only for such dogs as false teachers to seduce
and delight in: the words in themselves and in their relation to the former,
will afford many observations.

1. Obs. That no outward privileges are of any profit to Salvation: Paul,
circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a
Hebrew of the Hebrews, when he comes to know Christ counts all these but loss.

2. Noe righteousness of our own either before or after conversion can
justify us before God. Those outward good works, by which Paul thought in his
Pharisaicall condition to have gained Heaven by, before his conversion, he
counts loss; yea doubtless and all things besides, he means his goodness
also after conversion, this he counts no better for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus.

3. That there is an extraordinary excellency in the knowledge of Christ above
all things besides; or if you please, that the knowledge of Christ is the most
excellent knowledge that is. I might prosecute all these, but I shall pitch
only on the latter, as being most suitable to the place and company I speak
to. In prosecution of the point, I shall show unto you first, what is meant by
the knowledge of Christ. Secondly, I shall show unto you what qualifications
there be in this knowledge, that may denominate it so excellent. Thirdly, I
shall more particularly show unto you, whence it is that this knowledge is so
excellent. Fourthly, apply the point.

1. What is meant by the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord: there is a twofold
knowledge of things; first, a bare Historical and speculative, the second a
practical experimental knowledge; The first is only a superficial view, and
glance of the understanding upon the truth and being of things; thus the Devils
do believe, and thus even reprobates may know Christ; As a man may know a
country in a Map or table, which yet he is never like to see; so may the most
debauched wicked wretch in the world have some scantling book-knowledge of
Christ, and yet never enjoy him in Heaven hereafter; he may be able to draw a
scholastic Metaphysicall scheme of Christ his natures, his offices, his states
of humility, exaltation, and the like; he may be able to discourse profoundly
of his Incarnation, the Hypostaticall union, and whole mystery of our
redemption, and yet with all his learning sink deeper into Hell: though his
brain may be full of notionall truths, yet his heart may be empty of any
comfortable experiences of his Lord and Savior, He cannot with Thomas say, my
Lord and my God; but as the Grecks, that came up to worship at the feast Joh.
12. would feign see Jesus, yet more out of curiosity, then desire to be
instructed by him; so do such seek after and study Christ more in order to the
satisfaction of their understandings, then conversion of their souls. But

2. There is a practical experimental knowledge, where the truths that we
know have a strong impression upon our souls, so as to work and transform
them into the same image with the thing known; when we do not rest in the bare
contemplation of the thing, but perfectly love and are ravished with the
excellencyes of it: and this is that knowledge of Christ that Paul prefers in
the text, he counts all things as loss and dung in comparison of it, the more
he knew Christ, the less he regarded other things; the more he was taken with
him, the more willing was he to be ruled by him as his Lord, to obey his
precepts, to be answerable to him in all things; now this practical knowledge
of Christ includes therefore these three things as I suppose in it.

First, Assent to his Doctrine, Word, and Promises. Every science before it is
perfectly gotten supposes an assent to some undemonstrable principles, which
are foundations of it; thus, for one instance; before the understanding can
build farther in the Mathematics it presumes this as a ground that Totum est
majus sua part: so that even in these things faith seems to be principium
intellectus, as Cusanus speaks, the prime engine that sets the understanding
aworke in the pursuit of knowledge; and therefore we can never come to a
distinct saving knowledge of Christ, unless we first believe in his Word and
Doctrine; A Turk may know Christ so far as by hearsay and History, yet he
cannot be said savingly to know him, because he denies his assent unto the
Gospel, which is the ordinary way of discovering him to a man; As when those
that pretend to be disciples of any great Philosopher or Scholar do wholly
submit themselves to his dogmata, writings, and opinions; as for example, the
Peripateticks to Aristotle; the Scotists to Scotus; the Thomists to Thomas his
Doctrine; insomuch that they do even swear to resign up their judgments to
the words of their Master, why so? much more ought Christians to give their
assent unto the Word of their Lord and master Christ; therefore John 10. it is
said, that his Sheep hear his voice and follow him; they presently adhere to
his word, and accordingly obey him in it, He that hears my Word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, Joh. 5. 24. we must first
hearken to his Word before we can believe on him, and have everlasting life.

Secondly, it implies affection to Christ. For as Gods knowing his people
implies his love toward them in Scripture, the Lord knows the way of the
Righteous, Psalm. 1. v. 6. so his peoples knowing of God implies also affection
toward him; hence Christ says that he knows his sheep, and is known of them,
John 10. 14. which implies on both sides a mutual love to each other: for so
expressly v. 15. he says he will lay down his life for his sheep. Hence
ignorance is every where in holy writ made the ground of men's hatred and
disaffection to Christ, and his people; had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. and John 15. 21. and c. 16. v. 3. All
these things (meaning persecutions) says Christ, they will do unto you,
because they have not known the Father nor me: did a man thoroughly and savingly
know Christ he would be more in love with him; for there is such an intimacy
and union between the truth and goodness of divine objects, that whosoever
rightly understands the one will presently embrace the other; so that be sure,
that is but a vain empty knowledge of Christ, where the characters of it are
not imprinted in our hearts and affections; even in common discourse, when we
say I know such a one is of excellent parts, of a sweet and good disposition;
this implies our secret esteem and respect unto the person; and how can we be
said truly to know him as the fairest of ten-thousand, as our Savior,
Reconciler, Lord and God? unless our hearts be carried forth in a high esteem
and love of him: it is said Jam. 2. 19. The Devils do believe and therefore
tremble; certainly did they know there was any mercy in store for them (as now
there is nothing but vengeance) as they now tremble and fear, so they would
then love and admire Christ; and did we but justly understand the admirable
goodness and excellencies of Christ, we should be more taken with him, we
should keep his commandments with more observance, and fear more to displease
him then we do. O let us never say we know Christ, that we have intimacy and
acquaintance with him, when our hearts are far from him; when we have an Idea
of him in our Brain, and not so much as a lust Crucified by the Knowledge of
his death, not one grace the more implanted by the knowledge of his
Resurrection; when we pretend to know him, yet grieve his Spirit, wound his
glory, trample under foot his blood, disobey his precepts, and prefer a
Barrabas, a robber, a sin that dispoiles him of his Glory before the Lord of
life; believe it, this knowledge of Christ is scientia affectiva; it must sink
deeper then so into our affections, and transform the whole man into the image
of Christ, otherwise it is but a counterfeit, not a real knowledge of him.

Thirdly, this practical knowledge of Christ implies a particuliar application
of him to our own souls; what good will it do me to know there is gold in the
Indies, unless I had it in my coffer, or to know when I am hungry that there
is in such a place honey and food, unless I did taste it my self? no more good
will the knowledge of Christ do us, unless we do eat him and drink him by
faith, and can say with Paul in the text, I know him to be my Lord that has
redeemed me and will save me: you will not count him a good Physician that
knows only the name, figure, and shape of an herb in Gerhard or Mathiolus,
and not the use and application of the same, and so neither can ye call him a
knowing Christian that can discourse only of Christ in general, being in the
mean while ignorant of the benefits and the comfortable application of them:
he may still for all this lay under the curse, under the pangs of conscience,
the sense of the wrath of God, the tyranny of sin and Satan, unless he can
feel Christ's spirit, as Thomas did corporally, and say, My Lord and My God,
Joh. 20. 28. in all true knowledge the Acts of the understanding are reflexive,
the soul will start back and rebound upon its self, it will first go out
unto Christ its direct object, and then turn in upon its self, and examine
its own interest in him. Hence says Saint Paul in the 2 Cor. 13. v. 5. Examine
your selves whether you be in the Faith, let your souls retire into
themselves, and there diligently examine the matter, and you will quickly find
whether you believe in Christ or have any communion with him, which cannot be
rightly known unless you so examine your selves, and so much shall suffice to
be spoken of the first point.

The second is the qualifications of this knowledge.

1. It Is a revealed supernatural knowledge. Flesh and blood has not revealed
it unto thee, says Christ of himself to Simon Peter, but my Father which is
in Heaven, Mat. 16. v. 17. neither carnal reason nor humane wisdom can ever
suggest Christ unto us: it is God alone that reveals his Son in us, Gal. 1.
v. 16. Nature can rise no higher then things within its own bounds and sphere:
As water cannot run above its own fountain: now the knowledge of Christ does
much exceed the reach of natural disquisition, it is the wisdom of God in a
mystery, hidden wisdom, which none of the princes of this world knew, 1 Cor.
2. we attain usually unto natural knowledge by much industry and turmoile of
body and mind, when our understanding does out of some imperfect hintes, and
blushes of the causes of things, by degrees hack and hew out the truth of them,
and by much labor and toil we get and serve out of nature the small knowledge
that we have; whereas now all the toil and study in the world will never
advance a mere natural man to the knowledge of Christ, because I suppose he
has not so much as a hint from nature to set him a work in the pursuit of it:
that there should be three persons in the Essence, that the second of these
persons, God the Son, should be made man, and be degraded to the form of a
servant, be borne of a virgin, dye, and in death get a victory over death, and
the like, are such riddles to a natural man, that he cannot possibly receive
them, as the Apostle expresses it 1 Cor. 2. 15. neither can he in his most
extravagant and roving apprehensions fasten or light upon them: which makes me
think that Trismegistus and Plato had been peeping into the books of Moses,
when they speak so emphatically of the (...), yea and the Spirit of God, as
they are quoted by Lud. Vives and Morney in their books de veritate
Religionis, so that the mere historiall knowledge of Christ does originally
arise from revelation, how much more then does the true saving knowledge of him
descend immediately from the Spirit of God, enlightening our understandings to
see him, opening our hearts to embrace him, and guiding us into all truth, it is
not our poring upon a body of Divinity, our running over the Schoolmen, and
spending our oil and labor in the bare speculation of these truths, that
bring us to a saving knowledge of Christ; but we must be all taught of God, and
wait upon the blessed influences of his Spirit with an humble soul, with
prayers and tears, and fasting and weeping and mourning for our ignorance,
that God would come from above into us and instruct us in the excellent
knowledge of him, who indeed to them that perish is foolishness, but to them
that are called the wisdom of God, and the power of God.

2 This is the alone saving knowledge, that is, this is life eternal that they
might know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Ioh.
17. 3. There is no other name given under Heaven by whom we can be saved; and
he is the way, the truth, and the life, and the door by whom alone we have
entrance into Heaven, how can we enter into life, but by the way, by the door?
how can we see the Father but by the Son, who reveals him? So that to
assign Salvation to such as never so much as dreamed of Christ, is a
presumption not justifiable by Scripture or reason: I cannot conceive how the
dim snuff of natural light should be sufficient to guide a man to Heaven.
It Is only that light of the world, as the Evangelist says, that (...), that
Sun of the soul (as the Father styles him) that shows us the way to
eternal happiness, since without faith in him it is impossible to please God,
and all the best righteousnesses of natural men are but menstruous rags,
splendid abominations; A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit, neither
do we gather grapes of thorns; we may in charity hope, we cannot out of the
Scripture conclude, that any are saved without the knowledge of Christ: neither
the Jews simply by their Law, nor the Gentiles by their Philosophy could ever
reach Heaven. Though Clemens Alexandrinus, and many of the Schoolmen, and
Zuinglius seem to teach the contrary, perhaps more out of charity to so many
poor souls, that otherwise they thought must inevitably perish, then any
solid grounds they had from Scripture for it: and seriously who could without
trembling think of the sad condition of those poor wretches that the revealed
Word of God concludes them under, were it not for this, that God has
unsearcheable ways to save those that we most despair of, that the insinite
merciful creator can by means altogether unknown to us, display his Son
even to those that sit in darkness, and the regions of death. But to hasten.

3. This knowledge of Christ is a pleasant knowledge: All knowledge (as the
Philosopher notes) carries a secret content and pleasure along with it, and
therefore videre and speculari quaerimus ut gaudeamus; As delightful colors
are unto the eye, so is truth unto the understanding, a comfortable refreshing
thing; now the knowledge of Christ must be pleasant in its very first dawning
to a benighted soul, for the entrance of it gives light and understanding to
the simple, Ps 119. v. 130. must not the approach of light be needs be pleasant
to those under the poles after half a years darkness, or unto such as are
borne blind, or have been kept in a dungeon all their days before; and can the
Sun of Righteousness think ye be otherwise when he rises in a poor soul,
that has laid thirty, forty, perhaps fifty years togeither in blindness and
ignorance? O how comfortable a thing will it then be unto him to see himself
translated out of darkness into mavelous light, to find the eyes of his
understanding opened, the veil taken off, and his sins pardoned, which were
as a thick cloud to hinder him from the sight of his Savior, all the ways of
wisdom are ways of pleasantness and her paths peace, Prove. 3. 17. What more
pleasant then light? why Christ is the true light: Joh. 1. what more
delightsome to the taste then honey? His statutes are sweeter then the honey or
hony-combe, Psalm. 19. what more takes us then ease and rest? his very yoke is
easy and his burden light, Mat. 11. it is ignorance of Christ that makes his
ways seem unpleasant to us; for no man ever took any pleasure in that which
he understands not; hence those inward loathings of his Word, those risings and
heart-burnings against the simplicity of the Gospel in profane persons; these
are people of no understanding, they never knew what belonged to the inward
comforts and refreshments of the Spirit; what delight there is in keeping Gods
Law, what pleasure it is for a thirsty soul to drink of the water of life, for
a hungry soul to feed upon Manna and the bread that came down from Heaven?
they know what comfort there is in the kisses of his mouth, in his love that is
better then wine, in his abode and supping with you; and therefore no wonder
that all their delight is to dowze themselves in carnal pleasures, to eat and
drink and rise up to play, that they are so averse from duties, so sad and
heavy in spiritual performances, that they so much loath his Word, his people,
his Ambassadors, his gracious motions, and invitations, the truth of all is
this, they know not Christ, and therefore they have no pleasure in him.

4. This knowledge is a satisfying knowledge: other knowledge is like some
sance, which when you receive into you, begets a fresh and new appetite; the
knowledge of the one thing does set the teeth on edge, as here, and makes us
thirst after more, whereas Christ is an object fitted and suited to the most
vast and boundless desires of the soul, and therefore what the Phylospher
said of natural knowledge, we may more properly say of divine, that it is (...)
a rest and repose of the soul; whereas natural bodies in their proper places,
so the soul of man rests contented and satisfied in Christ, in whom are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. v. 3. There is enough in
him to fill the soul up to the brim, and to answer all the impatient rovings
and agitations of our Spirits after knowledge; in him dwells all fulness,
fullness of Grace to sanctify us, fulness of righteousness to justify us,
fulness of Glory to crown us: no natural object can satisfy the soul,
because the desires there of being boundless, and infinite, it presently
digests and swallows up all finite things, but now Christ both in his nature
and Graces is so commensurate and proportionable an object for the soul, that
it may eternally feed upon him to full content and satisfaction; His mercies
infinite, his love infinite, his Graces are inexhaustible, for God has not
given the Spirit by measure, and his gifts and graces are compared by the
Prophet to a feaest of marrow and fat things, Is. 25, v. 6. because as these do
satisfy the sensual, so those the intellectual appetite, it satisfies the
longing soul and fills the hungry soul with goodness, Psalm. 107. v. 9.
wherefore then says the Prophet Esaias 55. v. 2. do ye spend money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which satufyeth not, Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight
it self in fatness.

Lastly, This is an ever-increasing rising knowledge, there is a growth in it 2
Pet. 3. 18. we go from one degree of it to another 'till we become perfect men;
in our first conversion we are but children and babes in Christ, of little
understanding and knowledge, 'till by prayer, temptations, experiences, often
supplies and returns of grace, we become strong in faith, nothing doubting,
and increase in wisdom and all spiritual understanding, Christ does not
discover himself all at once to the Soul but (...) and (...) peicemeale Heb.
1. 1.
and in diverse manners, here a little, and there a little. As in natural
science the mind does not usually graspe and comprehend the whole
circumference of a thing together, but insensibly by degrees creeps upon truth,
takes and (as I may so speak) steals off that veil that hides the nature of
it from us; thus Christ by degrees irradiates and shines upon the soul, and so
we may be the more sensible of our former ignorance, and more thankful for our
present illumination: he never so clearly presents himself to any, but that
the knowledge is still improveable, and may receive farther increase; for at
the best in this world we do view but in a glass darkely, we are feign to
borrow the spectacles of his Word, his ordinances, and his Sacraments to look
on him, our Iusts and corruptions as so many evil vapors hinder us from a
full prospect of him, yet generally we see him clearer and clearer, as these
rags of flesh wear and rot from off us, 'till at length when the soul is
got lose of this prison of clay, it knows him immediately without the help of
a glass, now we know him but in part, but we shall know him even as also we
are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

The third point is to discover unto you more particularly wherein the
excellency of this knowledge consists, and it is I suppose 1. In the object and
things known. 3. In the influences it has upon the party knowing.

1. The things known by this knowledge of Christ are most excellent: the nobler
the object, the nobler the science; now in what noble sublime matter this
knowledge deals, is plain; whether we consider the personal excellenceis of
Christ, the graces and perfections of his nature, the glory, beauty, and
comeliness of his person, which must needs ravish, and take up our thoughts;
though to fasten here and go no farther is but to admire the glittering of the
show, not considering the pearls within, and to pore upon a picture, not
regarding the living party it represents. Faith as the Spouse in the Canticles
seems to be pleased even with the outward draught and comeliness of a Savior,
to see him in glory sittting at Gods right hand, but then it eyes him chiefly
as a crucified Savior; as therefore Paul desires to know nothing but Christ
and Him Crucified, as the only and chief concernment to him; or whether the
Promises of Christ, those breasts of consolation at which this knowledge lies
still sucking and delighting it self in, they are excellent things, precious
Promises, in which the soul can find more comfort then in all the earthly
joys and pleasures of this world; or lastly, whether we consider the mysterys
it contains, they are admirable mysteryes, and without controversy (says the
Apostle 1 Timothy 3. v. 16.) Great is the mystery of Godliness, God was manifest
in the flesh, justified of the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into Glory; Every trade and
profession we say has a mystery in it, something (that is) which is not known
to every one: sure I am, that a Christians profession is altogeither taken up
in a mystery, such a mystery that had the Angels themselves (pardon the
expression) been bound prentice to understand it, they had without Gods
special revelation remained altogeither ignorant of it; for the 1 of Pet. 1.
12. it is said the Angels themselves do desire to look into it: even now that
this great mystery of our Redemption is made manifest unto the world, see it is
so full of admirable inscrutable excellencys, that the Angels themselves
desire yet to be Pupills unto it; and are curious to learn more continually of
it.

2. The excellency of this knowledge may be discovered in the effects and
influences of it; which are first, to discover God more clearly unto us:
secondly, to discover our selves unto our selves.

1. It discovers God more clearly unto us, for Christ is the brightness of his
Glory, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1. 3. So that look as we
know the Sun by its light, and a natural father usually by his Son, who
carries his substantial image, so is God seen in Christ, and therefore the
Apostle Col. 1. v. 15. says, he is the Image of the invisible God, God
himself he lives in inaccessible light, no man can see him and live, but it
has pleased him to manifest himself in Christ, in whom dwells the Godhead
bodily, whatsoever glory, whatsoever wisdom, whatsoever power is in God, is
plainly drawn forth and expressed in Christ; he is the essential substantial
copy (if I may so speak with reverence) of his Father, in whom alone he is
most legibly and clearly to be read; the creatures indeed do in their kind
represent God, but then a very broken and imperfect copy they are of him, so
that the Gentiles by falsely spelling and putting togeither their letters read
God in a monstrous prodigious manner and become vain in their imaginations,
and their foolish hearts were darkened, Romans 1. As men that read in an old
moth-eaten broken manuscript may easily mistake the original meaning; so
methinks the Gentiles having nothing to study God in, but the dull and dark
print of the Creatures, presently fell into gross mistakes and multitudes of
errors concerning him, for they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into
an image made like unto coruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts
and creeping things, Romans 1. v. 23. but now Christ is so clear a representation
of his Father, that if we know him aright, we cannot mistake God at all, He and
his Father are one, so that you may comprehend and know him as it were, for he
that sees him sees the Father, and he that comes to him, comes to the
Father, as in St John it is every where expressed.

2. This knowledge of Christ discovers our selves also unto our selves: the
knowledge of our selves is one of the best and most divine knowledge that is:
Ecaelo descendit the heathen could say, now we cannot know Christ aright, but
we must know our selves also, know in what a miserable and wretched estate we
are without him, how vile and loathsome we are in our own natures, how base and
worthless our best performances, how ugly and deformed our persons, and our
services are in the eyes of God. As when the beams of the Sun come into a
room they discover all the dust and filthiness in the room, so when Christ
beams in upon the soul, the filthiness and corruption of our hearts and
lives do straight way appear, we then see what a horrid thing sin is, that
put so blessed a Savior to so cruel a death: we see what a cursed slavery we
are all in by nature, to the law, to sin, to Satan, till the Son does make us
free: before we know Christ, the Devil does cast a mist before our eyes, and
so hood-winks our souls that we cannot see where we are, what we are, or
whither we are going; till he takes the veil from off our eyes, and then by
our present light we know what it was to be in darkness: Through Grace we
know what sin is, how to debase our selves and advance Christ.

First, Is it so, that the knowledge of more to be desired then gold, yea then
most fine gold, more precious then Rubies; is it the glory of a Christian to be
more perfect in this, to teach this, to learn this? then it should reprove all
those who make not this the main end and scope of their studies and endeavors.
As

1. Such carnal dispensers of the Word, that use rather to speak in enticing
words of man's wisdom, then in demonstration of the Spirit and power; and that
dress their discourses in the Apish and foolish conceptions of man's wit;
neglecting in the mean while the sacred Word, which alone is able to make both
themselves and their Auditors wise unto Salvation; such in the language of S.
Paul do make the Cross of Christ of none effect, 1 Cor. 1. 17. whilst they
labor to possess men with the love of their affected streines more then with
the naked and simple truth of the Gospel: and therefore the good Apostle
professes, that he did determine to know nothing amongst the Corinthians, save
Jesus Christ and him crucified: He could have flaunted as well as the best of
those seducers, and have trimmed his speeches with as much elegancy as any, but
says he, away with such trash to the herd of mankind, that had rather feed
upon such husks then the bread of life; let others vaunt as they please, and
you expect what you will from me, yet this is my resolution not to know any
thing saving Jesus Christ: and therefore exceedingly to be blamed are all they,
that contrary to his Word preach to the ear and not unto the heart; and seek
rather to gratify the sensual corrupt affections of men, then to implant in
them the saving knowledge of Christ. O beloved! we are to deal with the souls
of men; to rescue them from Hell, and to pluck them out of the paws of the
Devil, by whom they are led captive. We meet again too too often with poor
ignorant wretches to instruct, who scarce know whether there be any Christ, any
Holy Ghost; more-over we are not to deal with flesh and blood, but with
principalityes and powers; the lusts of men they are to be blasted and beaten
down by us; the consciences of men to be wrought upon and satisfied, sins to be
convicted the righteousness of Christ to be pressed; the Cross of Christ
which is foolishness to the world to be preached; this is our labor, this our
work, and what need we then to daube with untempered mortar, and to mix
humane inventions with sacred truths: why is that zealous thirst after
applause, and to set up our selves more then our Savior? why is it then men
desire oftentimes more to display their own reading then the knowledge of
Christ and him crucified? not as if there were no use of humane learning in the
mystery of the Word, Paul himself made use of a Poet to convince the
Athenians, Act. 17. nor do we speak this to countenance those that do the
work of the Lord negligently, and bring the lame, saplesse, undigested
notions, to this sacrifice: doubtless God that requires the whole man,
requires the brain as well as the heart in this service, and he gives us
talents not to lay up in a napkin, but to bring themforth as occasion shall
require for his Glory and the Churches good; we all know by sad experience,
into what disorders and inconveniences, the contempt of secular learning has
brought many giddy souls of this Nation, and how prostituted and disregarded
the careless management, and wanton itch of preaching has made the office of
the ministry. O that God would be pleased to convince all of us, especially the
forward youth of this University, of the tremendous burden that lies upon the
shoulders of a Minister, Opus Angelis formidandum, but to return: I say we do
not hereby discountenance learning, or learned and painful preaching,
especially in due place and time, but only we ought to take heed, that Hagar
do not justle out Sarah; that the handmaid, secular learning do not take
place in our affections above the free woman, the knowledge of Christ; that our
Sermons savor not more of learning, then of grace, and that our design be not
to get more admirers of our parts, then Disciples of Christ.

2. This would reprove all those in general, that are more in love with humane
knowledge, then that the knowledge of Christ, are more taken with an Aristotle,
a Plato, perhaps a Romance, or playbooke, then a Prophet or an Apostle;
suffering in the mean while poor illiterate men to rise up and carry away
Heaven from them, whilst they with all their learning sink down into Hell; I
wish there were not too many in the world more intimate with nature then with
Grace; and less Christians then Scholars; but let me ask these great Masters
of Israel why the mysteries of the Gospel, and the knowledge of Christ should
be so much slighted by them? is it because it is foolishness unto them, why let
them know, that the foolishness of God is wiser then men; and all the empty
cisternes of worldly wisdom, are nothing comparable to those treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, that are hid in Christ: or is it because there is more
reputation that attends worldly knowledge? why alas! what credit is it to be
accounted wise amongst a company of fools? and such the Scriptures every where
term the world and carnal men; the World indeed vilisies and hates Christ,
because it knows him not, but then Christ professes he will not know them at
the last day, and O then what will become of the wise, the Scribe, the disputer
of this world? will it not then appear that the wisdom of this world was
foolishness; and that they bought the esteem of learning at a dear rate,
when they shall see indeed, that not many wise men after the flesh are saved;
or lastly, is it because they find more content in worldly wisdom? why let
the wise man speak what content there can be therein Eccles. 1. 18. in much
wisdom there is much grief, and he that increases knowledge, increases
sorrow: how much toil and vexation in getting it, how much care for fear of
loosing it, yea how little comfort in the enjoyment of it? so many lusts still
interposing and clouding their severest meditations, so much thoughtfullnesse
to uphold their esteem in the world, so much envy at others eminency, so much
distraction by occasion of new doubts and difficulties etc. whereas now the
true saving knowledge of Christ brings a serenity and composedness of mind
with it, purges and resineth the soul from those dark mists of corruption,
sanctifyes and sweetens all other learning, and exercises all other parts
which are but loss and dung without it; and why then should this so excellent
knowledge be thought so contemptible amongst many? why should they as so many
wild Indians prefer glass, beads, and toys before precious stones? or like
that Schoolmaster fancyed by Rob. Gallus gnaw upon flintes and pebbles amidst
sweet-meates and most delicate fare? why should men be so greedy after the
jejune and empty knowledge of the creatures, and yet so remiss in the pursuit
of Heavenly wisdom? O that we could all understand that the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom, and the greatest glory of our wisdom to be wise
unto Salvation.

3. Therefore this should exhort us all to study Jesus Christ; and to labor
after the knowledge of him, whom only to know is eternal life: all knowledge
is in it self desirable; it being the best gloss and varnish that sets forth
an intellectual being; and hence says Lactantius, God has lim'd and armed
man's inside with reason that he might distinguish him from all the creatures of
lower forms; so that he seems lesser then a man, that is not taken even with
natural truth and wisdom; and certainly he is less then a Christian, that
desires not Heavenly and Spiritual wisdom: it is natural for all things to
desire their perfection; now then as the knowledge of natural things is the
perfection of a man, so the knowledge of Christ is the perfection of a
Christian, and therefore Solomon bids us seek after it more then choice gold,
Prove. 8, v. 10. we all desire wisdom, why in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom, and therefore enough to fill up all the vast and boundless desires
of our immortal souls; it is only fools that despise wisdom, Prove. 1. as
therefore you desire not to be branded with the name of fools, go unto Christ,
who is the wisdom of God, the author of of every good and perfect gift, and
if any of you lack this wisdom let him ask of God, that gives unto all men
liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him, Jam. 1. v. 5.

So that the 1. direction for the attaining of this knowledge of Christ may be
the prayer of faith, let him ask in faith nothing wavering, pray unto God that
he would show thee thy natural blindness, ignorance, and stupidity; what a
fool thou art by nature; how destitute of any saving knowledge; and that then
he would send his Spirit into thy inward parts, to enlighten thy mind and to
bring thee out of darkness into mavelous light; pray unto him that Christ
may be made unto thee wisdom, that thou may know him here in his Person, in
his Offices, in his benefits, know him in the pardon of thy sins, in the
subduing of thy corruptions; as thy King that will save thee, thy Priest that
has redeemed thee, thy Prophet that does instruct thee.

2. Labor to see the inconveniences and miseries that will follow upon thy not
knowing of Christ; indeed we can know nothing besides him that can minister any
comfort unto us; in Heaven above what is to be known there? but an angry sin
revenging God, an implacable judge, whom no man has seen, nor ever shall see
in the way of mercy, unless the Son reveal him unto him: in the earth, what
objects can we fix upon that are not our mortal enemies without Christ? all
the Creatures they are ready to snap at us, and revenge the quarrel of God
against sin upon us: in Hell what can we know but that it is our place, that
it is prepared alone for those that know not God? for so says the Apostle, that
Christ at the last day shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels,
in flaming fire to take vengeance on those that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
again, labor to see what inconveniences the want of the saving knowledge of
Christ will bring us unto; a man that walks in the dark will be ever apt to
stumble and fall, and so it is here, he that is without any Spiritual light
within, must needs walk in much danger; thus the Gospel was to the Jews a
stumbling block, because they were ignorant of its excellencies; and thus the
ordinances of Christ are stumbling blocks to them that know him not, they hate
them, the people of Christ are despised, they having no knowledge eat them up
as they would eat bread, Psalm. 14. 4. did men but thoroughly know Christ, they
would be more in love with his ordinances, with his people, with his Ministers,
with Salvation, with their own souls: labor then to see these inconveniences
of spiritual ignorance, be ashamed of thy self, and lay about thee with all
thy might for to gain more knowledge. To this end,

3. Study Christ's books, the Holy Scripture, and thou shall by the grace of
God come to a knowledge of him: these alone are able to make thee perfect and
wise unto Salvation; they are those wells out of which we may draw plenty of
the waters of Salvation; those precious mines out of which we may dig
treasures of wisdom; let us search them therefore not with a search of
curiosity, to discourse and talk of them, but with a search of humility to
amend our lives by them, and to furnish our selves with the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ; other books can only unfold nature unto thee, and that
but imperfectly too: this reveals mysteries that Angels themselves did desire
to peep into: so that there is more real worth comprised in one versicle of
them, then there is in all the voluminous Offsprings and works of man's brain;
as the very shavings and filings of gold and precious stones are of more value
then whole heaps of dirt and pebbles.

To conclude therefore, since we have so excellent a knowledge before us, more
to be desired then Gold, yea then much fine gold, more precious then Rubies,
since we have such plentiful mines before us, as the Scriptures, out of which
we may dig these treasures, what remains but that we still labor to grow in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and continually
to study him on earth, whom we all hope to enjoy in Heaven: as travelers will
learn the manners and customs of the people and country they are to go unto;
so let us study Heaven and Christ in his Word, that so we may comfortably
possess him at the end of our pilgrimage in Heaven hereafter. We know not how
soon Christ may summon us before him, and that day come, when our selves and
all our natural knowledge must be wrapped up in the same sheet together; the
shortness and uncertainty of our days bespeaks our double diligence, and no
longer to play the truants in the School of Christ, but to redeem the time we
have lost, and to improve the few days we have before us toward the
advancement of this knowledge: let us study Christ, let us preach Christ, let
us live to Christ, that so these seed plots of learning may not be accounted
the seminaries of Atheism and heresy, as the Schools of the Philosophers were
in primitive times, but the Seminaries of the knowledge of Christ: far be it
that in these our Christian Athens there should be an unknown God, an unknown
Christ; great are our means, our advantages, and oportunities in the attaining
of this knowledge, and great therefore and sad will be our accounts at the
last day, if we neglect it: As therefore we tender the good of oursoules, as
ever we expect the fruition of Christ in glory, let it be our constant care to
study him here, and to contemplate him in the glasses of his word and
ordinances, till at length this our imperfect knowledge of him be swallowed up
in vision, and a comfortable enjoyment of him, with whom is fulness of joy
and pleasures for evermore.

FINIS.

