AN APPEAL To the Churches of Christ for their Righteous Judgment in the
Matters of Christ, the concernments of All His Glory, over whom there is a
Defense. Whether the way of Christ with His people be not paved-forth as a
Causey-way before them in His Scriptures, and to be Traced by the footsteps of
all His near ones. Here you have the Epistles only. The first to the Churches,
giving them some short account of their matters. The second unto the Minister
who enjoined that work. The third to some Neighbour-Ministers for their
judgment therein. The fourth to the Christian Reader.

An high way shall be there, and a way, and shall be called the way of
Holiness. The unclean shall not passe-over it. The wayfaring men, though
fools, shall not err therein. Isa. 35. 8. They have reproached the footsteps
of thine Anointed, O Lord, Ps. 89. 51. The poor commits himself unto Thee,
Psalm. 10. 14. Ipsa Dei Ecclesia quae in omnibus esse debet
Placatrix Dei, quid est aliud quam exacerbatrix?
The very Church of God [in account with men] that should walk worthy of the
Lord unto all pleasing, and so appease His wrath, what else do they, but by a
contrary walking, imbitter His Holy Spirit, and provoke wrath. Salv: 3 Book
page 87. LONDON; Printed according to Order for Henry Cripps in Pope's Head
Alley. 1656.

WE are bold, upon the account of Truth, and right of humanity, to require this
of him that reads this, That he would not condemn a part, till he understand
the whole [which shall be, if God permit, held-out before him in due time] If
he will read any, let him read all, and forbear censuring till he has don
reading.

But so well can we observe the perverse actings of men, that we have
concluded, we shall never obtain, what of right, we may require, and they of
manners should grant: for they fear, lest overcome of us, of the Truth we
mean, hearing the loud cry of it, like thunder in their ears, they should be
forced to give-up themselves, as Conquered by it. Lact. 5t Book first Chap.

Every man truly fearing God [Godly in Christ Jesus] rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth; He is more than glad, He triumphs in
this, That Truth has Conquered him, and so is willing, yea and more than
willing, rejoycingly willing, to embrace it, and be led Captive by it. Naz.

To all those, who look for New Heavens, and a New Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness, hastening unto the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, when
shall be a Restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all
His Holy Prophets since the world began.
Dearly Beloved in the Lord, Called and faithful, Followers of God as dear
Children; we, surely the meanest, and most worth-lesse among you all, have very
lately, (such lingering Spirits we have, O how loath to come out of our Sodom!)
asked the way to Zion, with our faces thither-ward; and out of that broad way,
we are pulled, the Lord being merciful to us, in laying ^^^ld upon our hand.
And now we speak often one to another (The Love of Christ constraining) and to
as many as will hear us, saying, Come, and let us join our selves unto the
Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten.

But see! and no more but what ye have seen, and do see all the day long, how
many Adversaries from without, as many and more dangerous from within, still
still opposing, contradicting, and blaspheming, how many? yet Blessed be our
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we faint not; He, that at the first
laid hold upon our hand, will hold us by the hand; It is enough; We shall
never look back to Sodom more, though our hearts, left to themselves, are as
bad as whose are worst, and could easily forgett Lot's wife; and those many,
who have drawn back unto perdition.

But not to detain you long here. We may say as Luther said, He did not find
the rude and rascal Company so averse from, contrary to, and set against the
Lords work, in his days, as he did, you know, whom. We leave others to their
own experiences in these matters. This is ours; We find none so opposite to
us, as are the Ministers of the Gospel, all and every one of them, that are of
Mr Humphs: persuasion; (far be it from us to mean or point to any other,
whom we love, and honor heartily.) To open our matters morefully unto you,
Thus it is; We are questioned, yea charged by a godly Minister, as we suppose,
who yet does sense and Practice with Mr Hs: That our way is not right, because
averse from and contrary to (indeed it is, as the two remotest extremes are to)
the said Ministers his way and persuasion, In point of Church. Administrations.

Now we suppose, ye have read or heard, what that Gentleman's persuasion is, and
how much he has said for it; how much also four Worthies of the Lord, one
after another, have said against him, withstanding him to his face. Indeed so
much they have said, and so clearly from the Scriptures, That to us, it seems
as much a wonder, That Ministers of the Gospel should, after all this, commend
that way, bend to it, walke-on in it, speak for it, draw Disciples after them
(with so much ease and delight, to walk together with them, that is no wonder)
as it was to hear a Pope commended, the very plague always of the Christian
world; And Hildebrand, among that cursed crew, extolled for a very holy Man,
and a Panegyric written of him; And yet, though he was, say their own men, the
worst of all men, so bad, that we should blush to hear how bad he was, why
yet, All the world wondered after the Beast? Whence we have concluded, That
there is no person so vild, but his own have loved and commended him. Nor any
error so gross, nor opinion so deformed, nor example so pernicious, but as it
is the more agreeing with the world, and to that principle within us, which
drives us to incline toward it; so has it always found many Patrons
standing. up in their might for it, and many following after it. And therefore
our wonder cease as to that matter. For

1. The Scripture must be full filled. A Carnal Ministry always has been,
now is, and now is the time of their manifestation we hope, (which being well
set is settling.) That they do belong to that Out. Court, where the charge is,
Leave it out, Measure it not. And

2. This their way, which is their folly, must needs be, as very taking with
themselves, so must it be justified and maintained by them, being Calculated
merely for a Carnal interest. And

3. As taking with the people, as that can be, which is most pleasing and
taking; as sweets with us which choke us; and grass with sheep which rotrs
them; for what more pleasing than is this, To wallow in every mire of sin
like a Swine; and yet to be wellcommed to the Lords Table as a Saint? No
marvel that many turne-in hither, and follow these pernicious ways. So our
wonder cease.

We crave leave to proceed, That we may give you an account, why we, the
poorest of the flock, have appeared against this way? Because after all this,
these, the Lords Worthyes have said, We are questioned and charged, as
aforesaid, that we walk by a fancy, if we do not walk that is sense and
practice with Mr Humphs: and those Ministers of his persuasion and practice,
which is an abhorring to our Spirits. And now in point of Duty to our God, to
our selves, to our Brethren, whom we love, as our selves, we could not be
silent; For Si accusaius non respondeat, aut crimininis convictus, aut cerse
suspectus videatur.
Silence, when we are charged, either makes a full conviction, or strengthens
suspicion. Truly we saw it clearly our Duty, to vindicate that, which should
be more precious to us, than the Gold of Ophir; The Glory of God; The honor of
His House; our own credit, in disaspersing our selves, and giving witness to
our wronged innocence, as we could; our Brothers eternal good was also full in
our eye; as it is in our heart, the weal, or prosperity of his everlasting
Soul.

This farther account, we must give of our work, the exposing of it, to the
view of the world; it amounts to a great volume, containing 60 sheets, and
more, which few or none of our Rank, whom yet we have a special eye of Respect
unto, have spare money to get, or spare time to read; so as we are
constrained to send it forth by peece-meale, part after part, eight in all,
which, we Conceive, may be made entyre, and complete, containing distinct
Subjects. And we begin, for the same reason, with the Epistles, which show the
occasion, Contents, drift, scope, and end of the whole, and every part; That
Epistle to the Christian Reader we judge, of much concernment to him, and may
suffice for his Information, in the highest matters, though he could reach to
no more.

We have yet farther Reason, which mooves strongly with us to do as aforesaid
in the sending forth of our Matters piece after piece. (The maine and chiefest
we omit, being a point of Discretion we think so to do; Only it may suffice
to know ultra posse non est esse. What more is left to you to think) for

1. The matters we are upon, and manner of handling them will not down with the
people (we speak after our Country manner) no more than Gall and Worm wood
will; yet we speak not this in reference to our Country style or Dialect, but
in reference to the Truths here, which ye know are biting, still, yea
tormenting Viritates mordaces.
flesh and blood. Indeed our matters are rough and harsh, not one smooth word,
as flesh will say, all along (yet, we hope, through Grace, that strengthens,
we are not wholly unacquainted with Paul's holy craft, and blessed guile) for we
fear God, and seek to please Him, and our Neighbor for his Good to
Edification. Now they, that, with Ahab, count nothing good but what destroys
them soul and body anon-after, though it seem good now at present, God forbid
we should please such, for they cannot be pleased but with Deceits, Prophesies
of wine and strong Drink. So now few will read us. The Gallioes of these
times, loose and profane Libertines, these regard none of these things;
Carnal Gospellers, formal professors, those regard as little: What or
whosoever Rebukes ungodliness, or would advance the power of godliness, is an
abomination to them: Smooth upon smooth runs smoothly away; And that which is
sweet, goes down sweetly. More of that which is sweet (said Chrysostomes
hearers of old, as He tells us) though it choke us.

Yet O that they could consider the later end, what a sower farewell sweet will
have. O that they could bethink themselves what will become of them in that
day, when the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall
overflow the Hiding place, and the well built wall, in conceit, shall be rent
with a stormy wind in His fury, when it shall be said, Where is the daubing
wherewith ye have daubed it? Isa. 28. 17. Ezekiel. 13. 11, 12. And

2. Good Ministers, and a good people, not a few, as in charity we are ready to
Judge, will stick at our matters; for our affections cannot easily fall-in
there (the greater is our fault, if not our crime) where our judgment
falls-out. And

3. In the last place; we are indeed the poorest of the flock, truly and
indeed less than the least. And ever the less any one is, the less regard will
be had to what he says (It would go to the heart of them, if it were so with
their God, but with Him the fatherless find mercy, a gracious welcome, yea a
glorious acceptance, but we were saying) The worth of the speaker, adds
weight to his words; for as the man is, among men, such is his strength, and as
his worth is, such is the worth of his words. This only we can say, and we
trust in singleness of heart we do say it, That (1) we love the Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity. And (2) That our intentions are single, and carry level, in
desire and endeavor, to his Glory, and our Brothers everlasting good. And then
we may conclude, so may you with us, as a worthy man concludes for us all, The
singleness of the intention, is the Sacrificium, Medullatum. Mr. Jen. upon
Jude 371.
sweet of a performance, and makes it even a Sacrifice with MARROW.

Here we break-off, commending you to God, and the Word of His Grace, praying
with all prayer together with you; That He, who is able to build-us-up, and to
give us an inheritance among all them who are sanctified, would make us
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle us; for so an entrance shall be ministered
unto us abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, Amen.

Seen, allowed and subscribed by their Pastor,

HEZEKIAH WOODVVARD.



A faithful Account given-in by faithful Brethren of the same mind, way and
judgment, in the matters of Christ; To a faithful Minister of Christ (as it
is meet for them to think) upon his earnest request, or rather Charge, That
they would give him Scripture-grounds or reasons of their judgment and
practice, somewhat different, if not Contrary to his,
In Reference to these particulars.
I. To Free admission of all Infants to Baptism, and growne-persons to the
Lords Table. II. To the observation of that Day we commonly call Christmas Day.
III. To Forms of prayer; specially the Lords prayer; and four Queries
thereupon. Relating
IV. To a National Church, whether ours is as the Jews was? V. To the
principles of Infant Baptism. VI. To the power, The Law of a Relation written
upon the heart of Ministers and people by the finger of God, has to make them
walk with a right-foote in the way of God.
These are digested into seven Sections; the Contents whereof you have in the
Epistle to the Rev: Ministers.

Job 32. 17, 18. I will answer also my part, I also will show my opinion; for I
am full of matter, the Spirit within me constrains me. Jer. 23. 28. He that
has a Dream, let him tell a dream? he that has my word, let him speak my
word, faithfully: What is the Chafe to the Wheat, says the LORD? Titus 1. 9.
Holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound Doctrine, both to Exhort, and to Convince, the gainesayers. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
Be ready always to give an answer to every Man, that asks you a reason of
the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. A Letter annexed to these
Papers, when by the Brethren, they were presented to the Reverend Minister,
requiring a Reason of their doings.
Dear Sir.
THere is no little Difference betwixt us Opinionum varietas and opinantium
unitas, non sunt (...).
in opinion, none at all, we trust in Affection; which shall appear, we hope,
on our part, in the manage of the Debate between us all along. It were well if
we could be every way accorded. And we think these words press hard upon us,
to strive in this thing, that there be no strife at all. There was a strife
between the heardmen of Abraham's Cattle, and the heard-men of Lotts Cattle, and
the Canaanite and the Perrezite dwelled then in the Land, Genesis 13. 7. They did
not walk in wisdom toward them that were without. The enemies of God could
discern, being quicksighted that way, There were animosities -- that which
should not be among the Lords own people: Therefore faithful Abraham,
bestirres himself, for it was high time, and sprang, or ran- in (to use that
word, and witness the (...).
haste he made) Let there be no strife I pray thee between Acts 14. 14. 16. 29.
thee and me, and between my heardmen and thy heardmen, for we be
men-brethren, verse 8: This is commended to Acts 7. 26.
your serious thoughts, and the Lord grant it may abide upon ours. For
Divisions among brethren, makes friends mourn, and enemies within laugh and
scorn, and hinders them that are without from making offer to come in. Let
Gods people walk as becomes, study to be quiet, follow after peace, act
nothing while they be angry, not giving place to it, no not for an hour, for
that were to give place to the Devil. The Preacher tells us, that anger
rests in the bosom of fools; and passion dwells at the sign of folly; we
are never angry, and sin not, but when we are angry at nothing but sin.
Factions cause Fractions; Unity makes strong. David prayed heartily, so shall
we by his grace, Lead me in a plain path because of mine observers, Psalm. 27.
11 Enemies we read, who are observers, they note diligently what we that are
men-Brethren do: The Lord humble us for the pride of our hearts (It is likely
you may pray so too,) from whence comes wars and fightings among us? For
until we are well humbled, we shall do nothing well, nor can we suffer, as
Christians for well-doing. The Lord humble us, such need we have to pray this
prayer again, make us vile in our own eyes, and then it will be no trouble at
all how vile we are in others eyes. And all our things shall be done in
Charity, (which shows us what we are Non facium bonas vel malos mores, nisi
boni vel mali amores. Aug. Ep: ad Maced:
) wherein we should abound one toward another.

We come to that now, we would say to you at the porch, or entrance to our
work.

We have answered your desire in giving you here an account of your matters;
how short of your expectation, or full-up unto it we know not. Only this we
know, our strong desire and earnest endeavors were to please God, and our
Neighbor for his Good to Edification in all we have done, keeping close to His
rule laid before us in His Word. And having so done, we would hope, we have not
displeased you. This being the way, you and we must take if we go right; In
the active obedience, what we do, we labor to please God; In the passive, we
endeavor, what He does may please us. Exceeded we have all expectations, yours
and our own, in the largeness of our Work, whereunto we will say as
follows.

1. It falls out in matters of this Nature as in building, The cost and pains
amounts to double as much, as at first was intended.

2. Your Brothers Book of Infant Baptism accidentally coming to our hands (for
as we heard not of it, so we sought not for it) put us to an after-trouble,
altogether as great as the former.

3. If it be said, we are tedious herein, we can clearly say, it was to make
Truth's clear, we considered withal to whom we speak, at least, whom we
would have to hear, poor simple ignorant Country folk, who are taken wholly
with the rind or bark, the outside of Sacrament, to whom if you speak
concisely, little and short, you speak nothing at all; possibly a man may,
though we cannot, speak much in a little; but surely we commonly understand
but little in much: Therefore it was not beside our purpose to be so large, nor
beyond the mark we sended to.

4. You speak highly of Mr. Hus: we suppose it was in favor to his way, and
in love to us, that we might walk in his way. We would suppose also, thus
highly you spoke of him, hearing much good of him, from those that may have
little good in them, we mean, you might speak by hearsay, not by what you
had found in him, by reading his Books, you call them too, The works of the
flesh. So we would suppose, because we would not question the soundness of
your judgment, as to those matters you may find in the work he has made.
But whatever you do, or have done, we judge of a Man by his works, as of a
tree by his fruits. And this we must say of him, as once holy Fox of an unholy
Bishop, He was a Divine little seasoned with the Gospel. And for his book,
said that Saint on earth, long since in Heaven, I would tell him to his Teeth,
were we face to face, That it is a grievous plague to the Common safety of
Christians. Yet because you might intend our good in mentioning, that -- Man
and his works unto us (and surely through grace, for we have it in us readily
to comply with, and greedily to catch at such works of the flesh, but through
grace, we have, as others may do, gained much good by it, to advance our Love
to Gods way, and our hatred to his) we will return your Love as we can, only
in this, making honorable mention unto you, of three the Lords Worthies, (we
need not mention Doctor Drake to you) that have made Answer to Mr Humphs: Mr
Anthony Palmer, Mr Hum: Saunders, (whose book, has worthy Mr Tho: Mantons
Epistle before it) Mr John Collins; we mention them in the same order, they
came forth, and to our hands; and not before we were Come to the Close of our
work. The last of these, Mr Jo: Collins has given the people an Antidote
against the poison of his last book. We heartily Commend these to your
reading; knowing no other means, whereby to commend our Love unto you.

And so, Sir, having more to say to your beloved Brethren, and by us as much
honored; and then to the Christian Reader, we will leave the matters here
under Debate, to better judgment; And the Lord God of judgment be with them,
that shall make judgment thereof, which by the supply of the Spirit is what it
is, as we by His grace are what we are. Only this we would Remember your
self, your Brethren, and our selves off, That all those matters we have,
perhaps, too rigidly, or possible, too hastily and inconsiderately passed our
judgement-upon, must have another day of hearing, and then be called over
again. Therefore we say again. The Lord help us to give up our judgments
unto the Lord, that so we may judge righteous judgment. And to begin at home
with our selves, judging there every one of us, where God has made us Judges:
And enquire in the first place what truth is wrought in the inward parts, which
will quickly shew-forth it self in out-workes, so as others may see what is
within, by what is done without, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

So we heartily take our Leave of you for this time, and at this place; and
Leave you and your Brethren to your own time for perusal of these matters, as
they shall be presented to your hands, and then to deal therein, as they,
after serious debate about them, shall require.

And the Lord God prosper you, and bless your Labors faithfully undertaken
for Him, as sure He will if you Labor earnestly, to be accepted in Him, as the
ambitious Man does to clamber to the pinnacle of honor here below. And with
you bless all your faithful Brethren all over the Nation, with one mind,
heart, lip, and shoulder, That by your and their means, the glorious Sun of
the Gospel may spread all over the same, as the morning spreads upon the
mountains, That His people all may walk by the light thereof, as Friends and
Fellow-helpers to The Truth, preaching one thing, and praying as all may agree,
whereunto all the good people in all the Nations will say Amen; and we with
them, Amen and Amen.

To the Reverend and Learned, Mr John Bateman, Mr Will: Jemmatt, Mr Simon Ford,
Mr Christop: Fowler, Mr Will: Brice, Mr Tho: Owen, Mr -- Hartley.
Dear and honored Sirs.
WE the poorest of the flock, and in the account of the World (which was, and
now is, the Case of our betters) as the filth there and offscouring of all
things, have found our selves pressed, after we had made our addresses to God,
to appeal unto you, who stand in His steed, and are Stewards in His house,
hoping you can look off from our persons, as mean and despicable as ye can
think us, and look on the matters here presented before you, of near
alliance, we judge to your office, which is to take care, that all things be
done in Gods house according to decency, and right order, as well becomes
those, who have this still in their thoughts, how they may magnify their
office, and give up their account with joy, when the time comes they must be
no longer Stewards. This is the scope we drive to, as He knows, That knows
all things.

The things insisted upon here, are digested into seven Sections, four
refer to the clearing of these particulars.

1. Whether all Infants borne of Baptized Parents, are to have admission To
Baptism?

2. Whether all persons are to have the like free admission to the Lords Table?

3. Whether the observation of the Day we commonly call Christmas, may pass
with the allowance of any true Christian?

4. Whether forms of prayer are good for the evil, or of any use for the good
to teach them to pray? And in reference to the Lords Prayer there are four
Queries. 1. Whether a wicked Man may say that prayer? 2. Whether a godly-man
may take it into his Closet? 3. Or a godly Minister into his Pulpit? 4. Whether
a godly Parent may teach it his Children? Together with these this is is
queried and resolved, whether John taught his Disciples to pray by giving them
forms of Prayer to say?

All these we have from Gods word, as we suppose, resolved in the Negative,
being pressed to give our persuasion in reference to these matters.

5. And in the fifth Section have endeavored to make full proof, That it is
the Duty of every godly Minister resolved in his Conscience as to the Negative
in all these, to hold it forth before his people in due time and place.

6. In the sixth, after we have given a fuller account of our matters, which,
for haste, was omitted in our Preface, we argue against a National Church,
that ours is not as the Jews once was; and we give our reasons wherefore we
contend against it; As also against the principles of Infant Baptism as they
are declared unto us.

7. In the seventh, and the Last, is shown how prevailing The Law of a
Relation written upon the heart by the finger of God, is with Ministers and
people to point them to, and to hold their foot fast in the way of holiness.

We suppose now, ye would be cleared in this first, why we meddle in these
matters? To this we humbly offer you a very brief account in this place,
having spoken largely unto it in the second part of our Preface, and first
leaves in the first, and sixth Sections.

1. We have, through unspeakable grace, our fellowship with the Father, and
with His Son Jesus Christ; And Gospel Communion one with another: And, bending
toward Church Order, as the Head and King thereof, has taught us in His
Gospel, we are to hold it out from His Word, having a loud Call so to do,
That our works are wrought in God, in the power and strength of God; at the
Command and by the Authority of God; And that we are not afraid of the light,
but readily offer our selves and our works unto it; to the balance, or to the
touchstone, not doubting but they shall be found weight and right; And that our
practice shall be found regular according to Gods Word in all things so far
as the Father of lights has been pleased to Communicate of His light unto us,
from which we would not decline willingly an hairs breadth for all the worlds
good: for should we do so, we should live, not, (which is charged against us
by one amongst you) by faith in Church Order, but by fancy. The matters we have
been questioned about, are here debated on in the four first Sections; wherein
we humbly give our opinion, and tell our persuasion as we stand fully satisfied
in our own minds, who must live by our own Faith, Romans 14. 5. 23. We will
only repeat what hereafter we have said to this our undertaking; we have
been, if we may ufe that Persian word, angariati; Compelled to do, as now we
have done.

2. In the second place, it is likely ye would have our Reason, wherefore we
appeal to you? It was because we were not willing to stand to the Umperage of
one single person among you, for though with us it is a very small thing, that
we should be judged of him, or of man's judgment; Yet he being of the same
judgment, in point of free admission to the Lords Table (so he has declared
himself) with Mr Hums: that unworthy man, whom the Lord God we fear in his
righteous judgment has given over to a mind void of judgment. Therefore we
have made our application to you, beloved in Christ, who can so well remember,
we must all appear, before God, give to Him an account of our doings, to whose
judgment, in His own matters, we all appeal now, for to that we must stand
anon after. We would add to this some particulars more, for the further
clearing our selves, and our undertakings unto you. And

1. We would speak two things (which were omitted in our Preface to the first
Section) (1) To that remote right an Infant has to Baptism borne of wicked
parents. The judgment, you know, of Divines very Learned, and godly, and
possibly your own judgment also. To this we tell our persuasion, and our
Faith, That a parent notorious for his Deboisery may Cut Off himself and his
posterity from all Church privileges, as well now as formerly it was: When
Ismael a member of the Church and Circumcised, grew to a profane mocking of
Isaac, he was cast-out of the Church as unworthy to continue in that holy
fellowship, Genesis 21. 9, 10, 11, 12. And Esau his Fathers darling being very
indulgent to him; yet for his profaneness, despising his birthright, the
hand of God cut him off from the inheritance both of the birthright, and of the
blessing. Whence it was, That he was deprived of Church Fellowship, and his
posterity deprived both of Church Fellowship and of the seal of the Covenant.
And so Jeremiah reckoneth-up Edom among the Nations uncircumcised, Jer. 9. 26.
It is our persuasion as we find it made out by others, That a Debauched parent
may cast himself out of the Church now, and from all privileges of the same,
as soon and sooner now under this Gospel light, than they did under the
Starre-light of the Law. And (2) Those godly Ministers, that do admit all
Infants to Baptism upon account of that remote right there-unto, when they
speak de jure what ought to be, (as he that has spoken last, has spoken much
that way) they speak, as he, very safely and holily, Children of Beleiving
Parents should be admitted to Baptism. But when they speak de facto, what is
done, and allowed off to be done, here they walk at large, and give more
Liberty, than, we humbly conceive, the word of God, gives them. But howsoever,
if they can satisfy their Consciences in a larger latitude, they will not, we
hope, judge others that cannot so do; Conscience being such a tender thing,
and cannot be forced no more than a parable ought to be.

2. We have spoken somewhat Confidently against free admission to the Lords
Table, as they use to do who are persuaded, they have truth on their side; and
the word of truth to warrant what they say. And indeed the more arrogantly Mr
Hums: has spoken to maintain the Affirmative, the more confidently we have
spoken in maintenance of the Negative: for why should not we be as bold for our
Lord Christ, as he is, beyond all expression, shamelessly bold against Him. We
are persuaded in our souls, That the Lord of glory has written in so fair
and legible Characters, who are, and who are not to be admitted to His table,
that He who runs may read. We have heard of a Godly man, that said to a wanton
Lady (complaining of the darkness and obscurity of the Scriptures, though too
well acquainted with the works of darkness) what more plain than this Madam,
said he? Thou shall not commit Adultery. So indeed we may say, what more plain
that this, If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my
Ier. 15. 19.
Mouth; Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. What more
plain then this? They shall teach my people the difference between Ezekiel. 44.
23.
the holy and profane; and cause Men to discern, between the unclean, and
the clean. And what more plain then is the complaint of the Lord against
those Priests, who did not do according to their Charge? Her Priests have
violated my law; and have profaned my holy things: how so? They have put Ezekiel.
22. 26.
no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they showed
difference, between the unclean, and the clean. What more plain then this?
If any Man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 John 10.
or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner,
with such an one no not to eat. Such gross sinners are no more to be suffered
in Holy Assemblyes, then swine in your garden, than toads in your dishes, than
dead flies in a box of ointment (to use worthy Mr Burgess his gloss upon that
Scripture) What more plain than this? Ye cannot be 1 Cor. 10. 21.
partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils. What more plain then
this? What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? What communion
has light with darkness? What Concord has Christ with Belial? or what part
has he that beleiveth with an Insidell? And what agreement has the Temple of
God with Idols? 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17.
Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them,
and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people;
Wheresore Come out from among them, and be ye separate says the Lord God, and
touch not the unclean thing. What more plain than all this; and this which
follows. There shall in no wise Revel. 21. 27. 22. 15.
enter into it any thing that defiles. Without shall be dogs. Ye know what
the Learned say of those Scriptures. All agree, we think, That the house of
God, the Church of the living God must be kept clean by the Stewards there of.
Leg. Aug Martor. in Revel. 11. 1, 2.


Thus we have believed; and thus confidently we have spoken in all things where
we observed the Spirit with the Word going before us; and herein we appeal to
you, as to the Truth of these matters resolved in the Negative we may err, as
weak simple men use to do; but this we can say, we do not err in our
hearts; if we err, It is as a wearied traveller may do, he erreth in his way,
but sore against his will, and thanks him heartily, that will tell him he is
out of the way; and points him to it. And

3. We hope, we have not done that which we abhor to do, made the least
reflection of Dishonor upon you, or any of your brethren of the Presbyterian
way. Some one of us have read their books, wherein they declare their
Steward-like care to keep the Table of the Lord from profane mixtures. And
what they have spoken with the mouth, and declared with their pen de jure what
ought to be, we would hope they perform with their hands, de facto, that is,
they practice accordingly, as they stand cleared in their judgments they ought
to do. Yet

4. We cannot see, how the Godly Ministers can answer their God, or their own
Consciences, when they can maintain fellowship and keep Communion with such
as they judge not godly, being of their own opinion and in their way; And not
maintain fellowship (it is clear some of them do not) with such as in
charity they judge godly, because they are not of their opinion and in their
way. Idem est motus ad Imaginem, and ad rem. Arist. Qui amat suprd, amat infrd
upon, 1 John 5. 1.
A godly man loves all that are godly; and those most, that most excel in
godliness, in them he delights, with them he converseth, them he honors.
Sicut se habet simpliter ad simpliciter, it a magis ad magis, If Godliness be
the reason why we love, then the more godliness, the more love.

5. We can speak this clearly, though we are divided from some in our
opinions, yet not from any in our affections, how different soever unto us in
their judgments. We love him, and them dearly, we oppose in these following
matters heartily. We can say, and do, as we say, love Mr Hums: though we do
not dislike only, but loath his -- Scrible as we should do sin or hell it
self. For surely the sin of Division is the greater, when we make Religion
to Patronize it. It is the manner not of a few to divide from one another,
under a pretense, as if they made it Religion to bite and devour one another.
Surely this virgin is forced, for there is nothing more contrary to the Name or
nature of Religion, than to cause or further-on divisions. Dictam esse
Religionem, quod quasi in fascem Domini vincti and religate sumus dixit.
Hieron. By Religion we are made Gods bundle, first tied to Him, then one to
another.
Religio a religando, The name caries strong union with it from binding us
again to God, and to one another, after we were divided from Him by our sin.
We hope, we shall be found all along so far from doing that, which Nazianzen
Orat. 12.
condemns in pleading for the Truth, belly one another; we are fastened to
Christ, yet loosened our selves; we are for peace, yet we fight one with
another; so far from this too ordinary among Christians (as if that were the
way to maintain Truth) that we shall not let a rude word pass from us. Yet if
any should sound that way, or be mistaken rudely for Cuttingly, (we English it
sharply,) Let it be understood as it is meant and intended, spoken against Mr
Hums: only, (against whom we could sharpen our words, as Paul did his against
Elimas, Acts 13. 9, 10.) and those that are fully of his way and judgment, and
this after they had read his (how loath we are to call Books, observing, That
great Philosopher, and Learned Lo: Verul: denies that name to things of that
make, having neither reason, nor honesty to patronize them, And savouring worse
in the Nostrills of all the Godly, we think, than do the worst excrements of
the Dragon) whereby that rude man, justifies his way, and in so doing has
dealt rudely with our Lord and Master in heaven, blaspheming His practice with
His Saints, when he tabernacled on the earth.

6. If it be objected against us, That (1) we censure the writings of the
Learned and godly; we humbly reply no; we censure them not, we bring the
writings of men (in reference to set forms of prayer) to the Scriptures of
God, the duty of every man, laying them in that balance, and trying them by
that touchstone, whether they hold weight, and prove themselves Gold. Those
more Generous Eereans might have trusted Paul as soon as any man alive, That
he would not speak a word, which wanted a grain of weight, yet their ears (a
pair of balances in the Hebrew) would weigh the words of Paul, though He had
an infallible Spirit, and spoke by inspiration immediately from heaven; Auditus
and Intellectus, hearing and understanding should go together; and that each
may do its proper work, our ear must try man's words, not taking them-up upon
Trust. Indeed what the Lord God speaks once, we should hear twice, without
more to do, only to do it in our lives, as those use to do, who have heard
God speak with the sensitive ear of their bodies, and the intellectual ear
of their souls; and so what He spoke once, they heard twice.

And, if it be said in the second place, that we do unbecoming our mean
Condition, when we take upon us to advise and Council our betters; Let it be
observed, That our Counsel is pointed to them only before mentioned; and
these have as much need of it, as any persons ye or we know in all the world.
Yet ye shall find, we hope, this Counsel is given in much love. And if it be
so taken, all will be well, though it be a Reproof, which is good Counsel
made keen and sharpened; and not a hairs-bredth from our Rule; Them that sin,
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy: 5. 20. (scandalously and to the offense of others, as
Mr Humps: has done, and as do all that are in his way) Rebuke before all,
that others also may fear. We would add hereunto, That we know no other way
to manifest our Love openly, but by open Reproof; Open Rebuke being better
then secret Love, Pro. 27. 5. And to hate a brother, and not to rebuke him, are
equivalent expressions in that Law, Levit. 19. 17. we are assured we have not
brought a railing accusation against that Railing man; for so we should not
have done, had we contended with the Devil. But so he has done with worthy Dr
Drake, taking his Lords part against that Scrible, wherein he blasphemeth his
Lord; and then what wonder if he raileth upon his servant.

7. We have but two words more, and then we have done. If ye find Art wanting
here all along (It were a wonder ye should not, if you daine to look through
any part of it) it is a small want; and not unbecoming us to speak like our
selves. We love the Cause dearly we here maintain, relating as we judge, so
nearely to our Lord Christ and his people. It is better to be straightned in
expression, than in affection. If there be much of heart, it matters not how
little of Art there be: for what some men most admire, God least regards, as
that useful man speaks Mr Venning.
after his manner; It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.
Zeal without knowledge wants eyes; knowledge without zeal wants feet. If it
makes way at all, it is after a snayles pace, coldly, heavily, dully. We doubt
not to answer that man, that should say to us as Erasmus to Luther, You are hot
like fire; as Luther answered Erasmus, You are cold like frost in Gods matters.
We are persuaded Zeal is more wanting all along than is knowledge, though
there may be a want also; and we well know what is the cause of that want of
zeal we mean; For they that warmed their hearts at the Fire of Gods love,
think zeal it self to be Coldness, and Fruit fulness to be barrenness,
as said holy Sibbes.

8. If our prudence be questioned here, no great matter neither, If having
less of the Serpent, we have more of the Dove. I desire said Luther in his
Epistle to his friend Gerbelius, to approve my self a faithful servant of
Christ and His Church, if I cannot be a prudent one.

Drawing up to a close, we would only add this, our only desire in reference
to what we have spoken of our selves, here or hereafter shall speak (for so we
are compelled) That it may be understood spoken not so much to show what our
Seize are in the things of our Lord, as what in desire and endeavor, we
would attain unto. But specially, That it may be understood of them all over
the Nation, who walk with a right foot in a Gospel way.

We will close our Letter unto you, and with you all, if it may be, in Paul's
words, we think, we can speak them heartily. God is our record, how heartily
we long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. And Phil. 1. 8, 9, 10,
11. Strive we with God in prayer for one another, and we shall not strive in
anger one against another.
this we pray, That your Love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in
all judgment. That ye may approve things that are excellent; that ye may be
sincere, and without offense, till the day of Christ, Being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise
of God. Amen.

To the Christian Reader.
HAving named thee Christian, we account thee one of the very best or very
worst in all the world; like those figgs (Jer. 24. 3.) If good, very good; If
bad, very bad; or like the Vine (Ezekiel. 15) If fruitful, the very best; If
barren, the very worst; worse than thorns and briars, these will serve to stop
a gap better than Roses or Rosemary; These serve for some use, so not a barren
Vine, nor a See D. G. Trial of growth. p. 19.
barren Christian; he does but cumber the ground, he shall be taken away and
cast into the fire, says the Lord, Joh. 15. 2. 6. 26. His being a branch in
Christ, (which we must observe in passage) shall not help him at all, but
rather further increase, and hasten his condemnation, being to be understood in
respect not of internal implantation, but external profession; he has the
visibility of a branch, not the reallity; not by any internal communion, but
outward profession, as a branch that has no coalition with the tree, nor
receives any juice or nourishment from it; so neither has this person any
inward participation of efficacy from Christ; he is in Him by outward baptism
only, but not baptized into Christ by the inward work of the Word and Spirit
(in those that are grown up to years, for the Spirit works alone in Infants
as wonderfully, as is the knitting and growing of the bones in the womb of her
that is with Child) whereof he gives clear evidence, not having put-on
Christ, nor walking in Him, he is not united to Him; he has no communion with
Him, no participation from Him of life and holiness, therefore he must be
taken away, and cast into the fire. It shall be dealt unto him as unto the
barren Vine, which being not for fruit, must be for fuel, Ezekiel. 15. 4. Once
more and more plainly, Thou art as the Jew was, If indeed a Jew, and inwardly,
he was one of the excellent of the earth. But if one outwardly, and in name
only, he was the basest of all men. A very provocation to God, and a very
abomination; for, saying he was a Jew, he blasphemed, Rev. 2. 9. and a very
loathsome person he is among the living in Jerusalem, Christians indeed, being
dead while he lives, and then continuing such, how dead will he be when he
dies, being twice dead; now dead as to that death we are all involvedin by
nature; and dead to all the means of quickening, and plucked-up by the roots;
in no capacity now by the sent of water to revive and quicken again, which
soarest judgment can befall none but the Jews then and Christians now. This
being a point of so great and general concernment, In our tenderest love unto
Thee, we take leave to be more large that we may be more plain about it. And
truly our Drift is to remove some grand-mistakes, relating to this Name and
Thing we commonly call Christian or Christianity; There are some errors about
it, which we have heard or read some-where, may be called Beelzebub- errors,
being as pernicious, we think, and damnable, as any heresy can be: so as, if
we are taken with them, we are fearfully mistaken, and undone for ever; We
would narrow these things what possibly we can. This is the first grand-errour.

1. That the Civil honest man, he is the Christianman, who attends only the
Negative Commandments, Thou shall not kill. He has obeyed God therein, for he
has laid violent hands upon no man. Nor has he committed bodily adultery with
Maid or Wife; he stands clear to God as to that matter also; nor has he
violently taken away any man's goods, a sin to be punished by the Judges, he is
clear at that point too; He minds Affirmative precepts as well as the Negative,
though he understands them not at all, in their comprehensive sense or
latitude. This is the Christian man though, And his negative godliness, he is
neither drunkard, nor murderer, whore-master, nor theife, shall entitle him to
Church-communions here, and to fellowship with the Saints hereafter.

A grand a Beelzebub error! That any man living under the means of salvation,
instructed out of Gods word daily, should get pass for a Christian, and knows
nothing as he ought to know touching the depth and breadth of the mystery of
original sin, nor of the mystery of the duties comprehended in Gods law, and
then nothing at all of the mystery of Grace by Jesus Christ. A Christian,
though but in his own conceit; for he is indeed, living in a land of visions,
much worse than is the worst heathen, though you suppose him a Sodomite, or a
worshipper of the Devil.

2. There is another mistake much the same with the former: That there is a
middle person or a middle state between good and evil, godly (in Christ Jesus)
and ungodly (out of Christ.) The truth is, there is nothing between good and
evil, light and darkness, no medium of participation between these extremes.
Solomon, Eccles. 9. 2. ranks all in two orders, so does a greater than
Solomon, our Lord and Master, Math. 5. 45. This is the dichotomie, the division
that runs through the whole world, righteous or wicked, good or bad, clean
or unclean; good and evil in a remiss degree may be mingled in the same
person, but no man's person is in a middle state between good and evil. And
suppose him, as here we must, to be a Christian, he is very good or very bad,
the best in all the world, or the very worst; there is not an almost a
Christian in all the world, he is altogether or not at all a Christian, and
then worse than can be the worst heathen in all the world. And it is a
pernicious conceit to think the contrary, and minds us how Mr Smith, an able
Preacher in his time, argued the deadliness of that Conceit (take it in
passage) The woman in travel was almost delivered, not altogether, which cost
the life of the Mother and the Infant both. It is so in Christianity, in a
Christian land we mean, where Christ is preached, to be almost a Christian,
that is, to be altogether an heathen and worse, though the worst among the
heathens.

It matters not then, where thou, or we rank our selves; and as little where
our Ministers rank us, nor what account we have of our selves, nor how our
Ministers reckons of us, or deals forth unto us. What are we in Scripture
account, among whom does the word of God rank us? we have read some-where,
That Scripture-Christianity is as far different from that, which passes for
Christianity in the account of most men, as the Sun is from a Glow-worme, which
is but a slimey earth-worme, and casts some luster in a dark night.
Therefore for the remooving of this mistake, let us hear what the holy
Scripture says, Thou may be more chained-in than is another from running-ut
into the same excess of riot; but if this be all, this is nothing at all to
render thee a Christian. This is the Division; Thou art changed in thy nature,
and in thy actions, or not changed; renewed in the spirit of thy mind, or not
renewed; renewed in the out ward-man in practice and conversation, and in the
inward man in thy mind, yea in the spirit of thy mind, if not in both, then
in neither of both; Thou art of the first Adam, in whom all dye; or taken out
of him by the glorious work of the Spirit of Grace with His word, and
brought-up to the second Adam, in whom all are made alive; thou art dead or
alive, dead in trespasses in sins, or being quiokened by the Word and Spirit,
thou art alive to God. In a word, for we would feign remoove this mistake; Thou
art light, or thou art darkness; and do not dream, as thou regardest thy
precious soul; for it is but a dream that there is a middle thing betwixt
these extremes, thou art marvelously light, or marvelously dark, light it
self or darkness it self. If light in the Lord (Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 9.)
then how marvelous is that light! if darkness, how great is that darkness!
When the light that is in thee is darkness, and while the Sun of the Gospel
shines round-about thee: we say again, how great is that darkness, the
greater and more hideous, the more glorious the light is.

And let not that which looks like light deceive thee, nor thy looking more
like a Christian than others may do; thou will be the worse for that, for
looking like a Christian, and not one indeed, thou will look like an Ape in
Christianity, whose great deformity is, (And therefore we hold in great scorn
to be likened unto an Ape) in this, because he is so like man. Copper, we know,
is never rejected but when it would pass for silver; The Devil was never so
like himself as when he seemed covered with Samuels Mantle, or looked like an
Angel of light; as a Christian in name only looks never so like a Devil, as
when he looks like a Saint at the Lords Table.

3. A third mistake, and if we mistake not one of the greatest magnitude, what
Christianity or a true Christian is? He is one (the common conceit) that does
perform some known duties, and abstaineth from gross sins, This is well and
to be commended, but if this be all, we know who condemns it to the lower
most hell; for what is it, in dread of that wrath that is written, shall be the
portion of those familyes who call not upon Gods name, (Jer. 10. 25.) to pray
in thy closet, and with thy family, and then go to Church, while yet thou
do speak and do evil things as thou can, Jer. 3. 5. only for shame of
the world thou abstainest from gross sins. All this is searce Christianity
in form, it will hardly render thee a Christian dealbatum, whited over to use
Mr Calvin's word upon Mat. 23. 27. At the most, all this and more than this
makes thee but like a dead corpse, as sometimes thou have observed stuck with
sweet flowers all over it, or like a dunghill covered with scarlet.

To cast-out this Beelzebub-errour, pray to God for his eye salve, that thou
may see and perceive, hear and understand; That a form of Christianity is
nothing in power, it is but a form. That a name without the thing is worse
than nothing; like a dream, that an hungry man is eating, who, when he is
awakened, feels himself hungry and sees nothing. It is like a Title without
reality, a miserable comfort, to be titularly rich, and really poor. To
beare-up a man's self upon fleshly privileges is an high presumption, and the
higher thou art built-up upon it, the more terrible thy ruin will be; for if
the flesh of Christ profits nothing, Joh. 6. 63. And if we now know not
Christ after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16. less must we know a Christian after the
flesh, because he bath some carnal or fleshly privilege: Well; he is not a
Christian then who has no more but what we may call flesh, some outward thing;
but he is a Christian truly and indeed, in whom Christ 2 Cor. 13. 5. Col. 1. 27.
himself is the hope of his glory; for Christ without us, all that glorious
Redemption wrought by him, but a broad and without doors in the world, can
profit us no more, than clothes on another back, or meat in another
stomach, or the spirit of holiness in another heart; A Christian indeed is
Christ in the soul, the Anointing of Christ, the new creature, the divine
nature, the image of holiness rooted in the heart, and fruited in the life; he
is, as the whole Church, and every part is, the habitation of Ephesians. 2 22.
God by the Spirit. He is godly in Christ Jesus; the power of godliness is in
him, and with him, his whole conversation is a mere mortification, a very hell
to flesh Perpelua na^ violentia.
and blood; he is still offering a sacred violence thereunto; he prays, and in
prayer, prays earnestly; he hears, and he hears in hearing, he hears as for
his life, in desire and endeavor that he may hear, and live. There is no duty
he performs, but it puts him to cost; a mere outside Christian, not so, he
will hear and pray, but all this he can do with little or no trouble, all his
care is for this, that his flesh be put to no cost; he would rather perform an
hundred thousand Religious duties, than to put himself to the torment of
crucifying one lust pleasant or profitable. Once more.

This Christian indeed speaks of the Sacraments, as the holy Scripture does,
contemptibly of them, when these are rested upon, and gloried in, as they are
by the outside-man, this Christian in name only. Circumcision is nothing, and
avails nothing; Baptism as little, and avails as little. The Passover is
nothing, and avails nothing. Receiving at the Lords Table is as little, and
avails as little. The new creature is all, and does all, and receives all,
the Lord Christ and all, our Passover sacrificed for us. Thus contemptibly as
the sacred Scripture does, he speaks of the Sacraments, when as aforesaid.
But when the Institution is observed, together with the proper use of them, and
blessed intendment the Lord Christ had in the instituting of them, then as the
Scripture does, so does he speak gloriously of them. And so we come to the
fourth.

4. The fourth mistake, as great, and deadly, as any of the former, How thou
came to thy Christianity? or how thou waste made a Christian? The common
conceit is, and a mere conceit it is, That to be sprinkled on the face with
water makes us Christians; This was our conceit, and we are sure it is thine, if
thou art not truly a Christian? Thou wast baptized, and ever since in thine
own account, and others, a Christian. Thou art not wholly, or altogether
mistaken herein, yet such a mistake there may he that may procure thee
desperate sorrow at the end of thy days, when thou art launching forth into
the wide Ocean of Eternity, where thou must continue for ever, either
everlastingly blessed, or unspeakably miserable for ever and ever.

Outward Baptism gave thee thy name Christian; but there is a work wrought
within by the Spirit and the Word on Gods part, and faith on thine, that gives
with the Name the thing, and the name without the thing is nothing, and renders
thee worse than nothing, a mere vanity, a thing of nothing. All holy actions
come from within first, and thence to the outward man: A Christian, within
first, then, sure enough, he is one without. Therefore to remove this grand
error, or to do what we can, observe well what was hinted before, and we can
but repeat it now. It is the voice of Christ in the Ministry of His Gospel,
heard, obeyed and believed, that makes us true Christians. All the Angels in
Heaven, much less all the waters in the Sea, are not able to turn one sinner
upon earth, and make him clean, that is, make him truly Christian; but the
Word in the Spirits hand, having the Lords seal of Institution upon it, that
only can do it. Now put this to thy heart as thou can. Have thou heard God
speaking his Word unto thee? that is, has the Spirit. spoke the Word to thy
spirit, which the Minister spoke to thy ear? (as far as he could possibly
carry it, to the ear, and so far when time was, his hand bare the water to
the face.) Has thy heart heard the Word, has thy soul been listod up to it?
And in making answer hereunto the Lord God charge thee not to hearken what
thy own heart says, the most notorious deceiver, the veriest jugglar in the
world; no nor what the Minister says, if he speaks his own words, which are
but his dreams, and not the words of his God, being as his mouth and standing
in his stead. Hearken what the Lord says in his Word, That thou art not made
Christian, if the Word in the Spirits hand has not made a through change in
thee, as well of thy nature as of thy actions, This is the only means, where
and when God gives them, whereby we are translated from darkness to light;
from death to life; life and mortality is brought to light to the soul by the
Gospels voice, or the voice of Christ in the Gospel; which alone quickens the
dead, awakeneth the sleeper, bids him standup for his light is come; Put it
then to the question, Have thou heard this voice? Thou have; Then thou art a
Christian indeed; Thou haste not heard this voice, Then thou art, as was said,
worse than an Infidel in the remoatest parts of the world, being but a washed
heathen, and do slightingly pass over the means, whereby thou might
understand thy case, and the way to better it: And now if thou will seal the
Stone upon thy graves mouth, and make thy condition irrecoverable, (which we
would be as loath Thou should do, as that thou should thrust thy self
upon the mouth of a Cannon charged against thy breast with a Bullet of a
tallent weight) yet if thou art resolved to undo thy soul for ever, hasten
(so Satan, and thy foolish heart will advise thereto, and thy Minister will
admit thee) together with the herds and droves of men in thy case unto the
Lords Table, to receive Christ there, whom thou haste rejected in the Gospel;
This will do it, and nothing more certainly than this, for there thou shall
eat and drink damnation to thy self, not discerning the Lords body.
Therefore desire of the Lord He would make thee serious in this matter. Has
the Word been prevailing in thy soul, to make thee a child, a son or a
daughter? Then thou haste the heart of a Child to thy heavenly Father; Thou will break his Commandments as willingly and studiously as thou will thy
bones; and offend Him, with full consent of will, when with the same will thou
offendest the apple of thine eye; And now thou may be assured He has the
heart of a Father toward thee; Thou haste the privilege of a Child, a
warranted right to all Church Communions here; thou art instated-in and
possessed-off, being newborn, all thy soul can desire, open the mouth of it
never so wide; Only we repeat again, make it thy work and thy very
buisnesse to make this sure to thy own soul, thou art borne again. Its mere
presumptionesse, as holy Bolton said to his dear Children when he was dying,
To think that God will receive our souls to heaven, whom He has not renewed
here on earth; This being a grounded truth, for a man to be always the same,
he was from the womb, borne a child under wrath, and in that state dying, is
certain and irricoverable death.

Oh! this undoes many, even all that are undone, are undone by it; As they
never dream of a change, which death will one day make upon them, so they
never desire a change, that grace in this present life should work on them,
Therefore hear the Counsel that worthy man Master Burgess gives thee; As Job
said of the change by death, He would every day wait till his change come, Job
14. 14. Do thou say of this change by grace, I will every day pray, hear,
read, meditate, mourn and roar out before God, every day and all the day
long, till this spiritual change come; And do not accept of the Ministers
invitation to the Lords Table (though thou find him very gentile and
courteous this way) before this change be wrought, or in a way of working; for
hear what that worthy Man says; Heathens, Fornicatours, Idolaters,
Adulterers, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, became washed
and cleansed by the Word; but washed Fornicatours, Idolaters, etc. we mean,
Baptized Drunkards, Thieves, Covetous, These sit under the Word and reform
nothing, but make a scorn of it. What may be the reason? Why? They live in the
practice of known sins, and in the neglect of known duties, under the daily
exercise of the Word, and yet frequent the Lords Table, which has provoked a
spiritual Censure, and sorest judgment, now wholly inflicted upon them;
whence it is as the Clay under the Sun, so these become more obdurate under
the Word, from which judgment the Lord deliver thee and us all.

But beware of this as thou tenderest thy life, (therefore we caution thee
again,) That thou do not go to the Lords Table in a conceit, presumption
rather, thou shall receive Christ Jesus the Lord there, whom thou haste not
received in the Ministry of the Gospel. Remember and forget not, The rock
shall not be removed out of his place, as was spoken by Job, that is, God will
not change the course, which He has settled as firmly as the Rocks, or as the
Earth, He will not alter His method, nor go out of the way He has prescribed;
His Word shall profit thee first, before any thing else shall or can; thou must
keep close to His way, if thou look to attain His end.

We intended more to thee, so dearly we love thee, as to mind thee well, there
are but two Masters that can be served, and to which of these thou art an
obedient servant, the Apostle will tell thee. Romans 6. 16, 17, 18. (2) And as
there are but two ranks or sorts of people, whereof before, so also but two
ways, the road way of the world, the broad way; the road way of the Lords
redeemed ones, the way of holiness, where the unclean cannot pass, nor any
Lion can be, nor ravenous Beasts, being a straight and a narrow way, which
these cannot endure, And thou must certainly know in what way thy foot
walks, for suppose it the narrow way, and thou will find thy flesh pinched,
if not tormented. (3) And that there are but two Mansion houses, where thy
soul anon, and thy body anon after, must dwell that long day, or night of
eternity, the narrow way tends to the one, the broad way to the other; If now
thou will confer with flesh and blood, we know what way thou will choose, the
broad way, and hell to be thy Mansion house for ever; for though thou may
have, as the wicked may have, a Velliety, a faint will for Heaven, to dye the
death of the righteous, and that thy last end may be like his; yet, walking in
that broad way, the strength of thy will carries thee hell-ward, that horrid
place of darkness, Therefore give-up thy hand to God, having fixed thy eye
upon His Word, and say, Lord pluck me into the way, and lead me in it, and
suffer me not to decline from it.

In all this we intended to be more large; And to touch lightly upon other
things also, the subject matter of the following discourse, but this well
digested and pondered-on may suffice; And it will be sufficient, though thou
read not one word of the Book; for suppose thou art made a Disciple indeed,
a Christian in truth, thou will separate from the world, at the Lords Table,
nor will thou eat, that is, familiarly converse with the men of the world,
unless necessarily (as a Physician with the sick) having thy warrant for it,
thou may convey good unto them, and thine own affairs may require it. And
(2) Thou can no more observe the day, the men of the world call Christmas,
than thou can profane the Lords day; for thou may have heard that one
being asked whether he did observe the Lords day, keeping it holy? Yes, said
be, for I am a Christian. And do you observe Christmas day, to keep it holy?
No, said he, for then I were no Christian, unless in name, and that is nothing
indeed. A true Christian flees from Idolatry, for what has he any more to do
with Idols? And be will not put up his Petitions in another words, he praises
God for what he has received, he prays to God for what he would receive; he
confesses the sins he has committed, all this with his own mouth: He used
set forms of Prayer, when time was, he was a Christian in name only; but now
that he is, through grace, a Christion indeed, he remembers heartily, that a
prayer by the Book left him as cold as it found him, it had no more heat in
it, than has cold Iron or frost, and had he not laid them aside, he had proved
a Christian when an Ape prooves a man; he bares himselfe-up as formerly, upon
the crutches then, as others now do, and he was as well in his own conceit
as others now are; bare forms never put the flesh to any pain; But to feel
no pain, Comes, we know, from the rottenness of the flesh as well as
soundness. A dead Christian, such as he, that has but a name that he lives,
feels no pain, he presumes all is well with him, and presumption being a
sin of mans-selfe flattering-heart, meets with no trouble; though he be
desperately wicked, that is, deadly sick unto death, yet ask him how he does,
and he says well, for he was baptized when time was, and dealt with as a
Saint, he thanks his good Minister, ever since he grew up to the years of
understanding. But little does he know how hardly that disease is curable, that
is so like to health; Ille morbus vix sanabitur, qui sanitatem vinitatur.
one says, seldom or never; and he adds, None are more desperate than
those, that are least despairing in their own selves, through not of the grace
of God; presumers therefore are in the more desperate condition, by how much
they are the less despairing. But what a sad thing is it that men should
presume they are rich and want nothing, when they are miserably poor and want
all things, we will pity those deluded mad men, who are persuaded, they are
such great persons, and have such large estates, when in the mean time they
lie miserable and wretched bound up in chains in a dark dungeon; such a
spiritual madness is upon most, and this renders them more mad, if more can
be; they were baptized, and upon that Infant privilege, have free admission to
the Lords Table, without making the least profession of faith and repentance,
wherein it comes to pass, that as they live like mad men, so they are like to
ciye, being strongly persuaded still upon principles of Infant Baptism, That,
they are Disciples and Saints, while they are Drunkards and Devils; they are
sheep and lambs, when they are dogs and swine; And call themselves grapes
and figs, when they are thorns and thistles, to use, and so to end with that
Learned Mr Burgess his words:

Love, that spares no cost, nor feels any burden, has drawn us-out thus
far, consider what has been said, meditate upon it, be wholly in it, and so
doing, whoever fares ill, thou shall fare well.

FINIS.

