THE TWO VVitnesses: Discovered in several SERMONS Upon the eleventh Chapter
of the Revelation, wherein, after the Prophecy opened, the great Question of
these times. VIZ. Whether the two Witnesses are slain, yea or no, is modestly
discussed. Preached at Lawrence-Jewry in London, by F. W. Lecturer of the said
place.

It is this seven and twentieth day of April, 1643.
Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament, concerning
Printing, That these Sermons entitled, The two Witnesses, be Printed for Luke
Fawn.

JOHN WHITE.



London, Printed by J. R. for Luke Fawn and are to be sold at the sign of the
Parriot in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

To the Reader.
IT has perhaps already been wondered at, that such a one as I, whose
meannesses are not unknown, have been so hardy, as to adventure to preach upon
a Theme so knotty and perplex, as is the Prophecy of the two Witnesses, and
now to make those Notions more public, may possibly revive the wonderment, and
this second undertaking render me more hardy (that I say no more) then did the
former. In neither perhaps am I wholly to be excused; yet when you know all, at
least I may be pardoned.

The great desire I had to gain some light to these dark times, drew me to
bestow several exercises upon this Subject; the desire of some friends drew me
thus to publish them. If for the first I be challenged, it must indeed wholly
fall upon my self; If for the latter, there are those that must share the blame
with me.

For the Subject, I cannot conceive how that should come unacceptable to any;
we all strongly desire to know what shall become of us: And could we but meet
with any divine Prognostication, calculated for these times, and also for this
our Meridian, nothing more welcome: Such do some conceive is this Prophecy of
the Witnesses; which whether so or no, once I am assured; the clearing of this
same, would accordingly, or help our preparations for such a storm as this
shall bring with it; or else relieve us from much discouragement and fear,
while we daily look for it.

It is indeed a matter intricate, dignus vindice nodus, such as not unworthily
is become the great Enquiry of these times, and doubtless worthy a much other
hand then mi^e, who first professedly undertook it: which duly weighing. I
have endeavored, with all becoming modesty, to deal ^n it.

It was not (if I know my heart) the great confidence I had upon my self, that
made me adventure upon this so difficult undertaking; nor yet the presumption I
had, I could do much in it. Only I have thought I might either contribute
somewhat my self in this business, at least should provoke others that might
contribute: In which latter, sure I am, I have not been mistaken; for though
before I began, there was deep silence in this matter, yet since have several
fallen upon it professedly also.

If you meet with mistakes in this Discourse, to some the difficulty of the
business will easily entitle me; to others, the want of time to make serious
revisings: In which latter, I must needs tell you I was much straightened. I had
but those Notes I used in Preaching, whereby immediately, and not from any
other Copy, I was fain at once to form and transcribe these; the Press drew
them from me piece after piece; and many times preventing the quickness of my
writing, stayed for me; I having never had the opportunity till all had passed
the Press, to view altogether. In all which the equal Reader will consider me;

Whose I am engaged in my measure to serve him, FRA: WOODCOCKE.

THE Two VVitnesses.
REVEL. 11. VERSE. 3. and so forward to the 15. And I will give power unto my
two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy one thousand two hundred, and
threescore days Clothed in Sackcloth, etc.
THE main reason, why I undertook the task of this Prophecy, Is to try to
satisfy that common question almost in every ones Mouth, What will become of
us? What do you think of these times? To answer this from providence, seemed
to me altogether impossible, they are dispensed toward us with so much variety:
We fear to day, hope to morrow; so that from our present condition, there is no
presaging what will be our future. But then I thought 2 Pet. 1. 19.
could we find out some more sure word of prophecy; such as might in a more
special manner relate to our times, this might contribute much to our
satisfaction, in the insufficiency of the other. And while I was thus casting,
this prophecy of the two Witnesses, offers it self, of all those that I can
imagine most likely to aim at our times, and so best to serve the purpose above
mentioned. This apprehension made me close with it, of which having given this
short account; I now proceed to give an account of the Prophecy it self.

And for coherence, that we may know where about we are, take this much; Some
great Interpreters conceive the holy Ghost having finished the prophecy of the
Seals, only somewhat remaining of the last Trumpet, because there was an other
prophecy. viz. That which set forth the condition of the Church, (beginning
and ending with that of the Seals) not as yet mentioned; till such time as so
much of the Churches ^tate, as I may call it, was measured forth as of the
former, he sets back the mention of the seventh Trumpet from its due place in
the t^nth Chapter till this be done; which being done in the former part of
this Chapter, to the 15 verse; there the seventh Trumpet is brought in to be
the common close and Catastrophe of them both.

By this reckoning, the beginning of this eleventh Chapter, wherein you have a
Temple, Altar, and worshippers measured, presents Verse. 1.
to us the Churches condition in the Apostles days, and those primative times
near about, and that which immediately follows, the Churches state now gotten
within the verge of those times wherein Antichrist was to prevail. This latter
Verse 2.
I readily embrace; but that by the former should be meant the condition of the
Church in the Apostles times, to me seems altogether doubtful.

I should rather with submission conceive, By the Temple, Altar, and
Worshippers, are meant respectively, the pure worships and worshippers,
continuing all the time of Antichrist, the measuring of these denoting this
much, That during this time of Antichrists pre^^^ing, God would own so much
worship in so many worshippers, and no more. But for the outer-Court, (...)
that is, false worship, and the Gentiles therein, which are false worshippers,
who are cast forth unmeasured, neither of these would God own, either for
worship, or for worshippers.

If this, the meaning of the former words, join this of the witnesses to them,
and the dependence lies clearly thus: Then when the Antichristian Gentiles
begin to take possession of the outward Court, when Antichrist begins to sit in
the Temples of 2 These. 2. 4.
God; about this time came forth these two witnesses to prophecy in Sackcloth.

Having found out thus much for connection, we proceed now to take a view of
the Prophecy it self, the bulk whereof seems thus much: About the time when
Popery begins to spread, there shall be raised up by a divine hand, a
generation of men, testifying against it, who continuing their witness in all
its time, shall be slain at last by the Popish faction, but not long after rise
again, their rising procuring the Popish factions downfall.

This in the general: more particularly in this third Verse, where we begin,
you have,

Witnesses. two. Prophecy. Sackcloth. a thousand two hundred and threescore
days: of these in this order:
Witnesses, and so called, because they bear witness to truth, and holiness,
against all the errors, and unholynesse of Antichrist; so is Christ several
times called the faithful witness, and this by way of emminence, and because
bearing Revel. 15. and 3. 14.
witness to all truth against all errors, and impieties whatsoever. You see
why they are called witnesses.

two. And two they are (say some,) because few; Two making the least number; or
two in regard of the two Testaments, which these avow the truth of; they bear
witness to what is contained in both the Testaments: or else two, in regard of
the types they are presented by, which are set down by pairs, two and two, as
we shall see hereafter, our two witnesses; especially, because in the Law, no
accusation would pass, unless asserted by two or three witness; Deu. 17. 6.
Matthew. 18. 16.
so that accordingly, if an accusation come against Antichrist, there must not
be lesse^ then two witnesses to avow it. Thus you have their number also, they
are two witnesses.

employment next follows, with the manner of performance (for I shall put both
together), they prophecy in Sackcloth. They prophecy, that is, they instruct
the people in the good way, testifying by all means, Whether by preaching,
writing, or otherwise against Antichristian impieties; prophesying being Acts
2. 17. Romans 12 6.
not here strictly taken for a foretelling things to come; or else, for
preach^^^^

1. Did God raise up Witnesses, all the times of Antichrist? then in the
darkest times of Popery God has not left himself without a People; they have
been few. I confess, reduced to the least number sometimes, yet never has
that darkness so wholly blinded all, nor their cruel persecutions so swept
away all, but there have been some Witnesses in all the times of Antichrist
testifying against him.

If therefore they ask us Where was our Religion before Luther; a common
question, and with which they think they have sped us: Why sure wheresoever
these Witnesses were, it was both them; and if these were as old as Antichrist,
as appears by the Text they are; if they will say their Antichrist is elder
then Luther, they must say our Religion was before Luther also.

2. Forasmuch as God raised up some in all times to testify against Popery,
it is plain God did not leave himself without Witnesses Acts 14. 17. 2 These. 2.
^1.
among the Popish Idolaters, sent those among them who would have healed
Babylon, though she refused to be healed; and if so, how justly are they given
over to strong delusions to believe a lie, who when they had the truth, would
not receive it in the love of it? yea, how just shall be the downfall of that
Babylon, how for ever inexcusable when judged, to whom when the Lord has sent
a continued succession of Witnesses, rising up early and senaing them, yet
would not hearken, has still refused to be ^er. 51. 9.
healed.

3. From hence that they are called Witnesses, we learn to what a height and
heynousnesse the errors and impieties of Popery were arrived: had they been
weaknesses, infirmities, they had been born withal; love had covered them, had
they been only infirmities; and sure without a bearing with weaknesses in
Church societies, it is not possible to hold fellowship together: but when
these must be openly witnessed against, to join was damnable, and to dissemble
was no better, when 'twas not sufficient to believe with the heart, but there
must be profession made Romans 10. 10.
also; sure these abominations must be of a high strain, th^se could be
reckoned for weaknesses no longer.

5 Forasmuch as the Witnesses are but two, the smallest number, you hence see
what the Synagogue of Rome gains by boasting the Catholic Church, glorying in
her multitude; could they have given us a better Argument to prove them
Antichrist, the Beast, the Whore, the Gentiles by, when these fill the world,
the Holy City the outward Court, and but two Witnesses to oppose all this
multitude?

Go on therefore, glory in your multitudes, boast your universality, we yield
to you the whole world wonders after the Reve. 13. 3.
beast, while but two Witnesses oppose him.

5. Do the witnesses Prophecy in Sackcloth, kept down, and at an under through
the potency of the Antichristian faction? then judge who have been most like to
be these witnesses; whether these, who taking unwearied pains, preaching in
season, and out of season, could scarce get wherewith to maintain a poor
family; yea, many times through persecution, thrown out of all; or else th^se
who seldom preaching, and when they did, not in Sackcloth, you may be sure,
such who lived as lords indeed, and kept their Courts like Princes; judge
whether of these are likest to be the witnesses in Sackcloth; yea learn not to
wonder, if you have known some godly and painful Ministers could scarce by all
their pains and industry, get them bread; when yet the Romish Prelaticall
Clergy, have been lords of all, wonder not at it alas, 'twas their time to
Prophecy in Sackcloth.

VERSE. 4. These are the two Olive trees, and the two Candlesticks standing
before the God of the earth.
HAving spoken already concerning the title, number, and office of these
Witnesses, together with the manner and continuance of them in their office;
next we should enquire who these Witnesses are, to which in this 4 verse, and
those that next follow we have answer, these verses together offering a full
draught, and description of them.

But before I come to open the words, I should first acquaint you what the
thoughts of some are in this question, beginning with the Popish first; which I
shall only mention, and leave it.

They, therefore following some of the Ancients, and they the Hebrew Doctors,
tell us, these two Witnesses are Enoch Origin. Lactan. Hilar.
and Elias, who shall come somewhat before the end of the world, preaching
Repentance to the Jews, at that time mistaking Antichrist (some strange
Chymaera born of the Tribe of Bell. de Pa. Romans l. 3.
Dan) for the Messiah; which Antichrist shall after some space slay these two
Witnesses, Enoch and Elias; but in the end, the Jews being converted, shall
make an end of him. This the Popish conceit.

Among our selves, I do not find us perfectly agreed who these Witnesses are:
Some for whom we owe much to God, Brightmans Na^ier. Beda.
and to whose dis^overies we are greatly indebted (after some of the Ancients)
conceive the two Testaments are the two Witnesses. The two Testaments (say
they) together with the godly people, are these two Witnesses.

I should not dare to deny the Scriptures are the Testimony of these Witnesses,
^ut that the Scriptures should be the Witnesses them^^lves, when yet the
Witnesses are described as persons, as men, are descri^ed by men, men that have
lived in former ages brought in to personate these Witnesses, are described by
actions that have been done by men before, and which men only are capable to do
again; that notwithstanding all this we should pronounce the Scriptures are
these Witnesses; for my part, I speak it with submission, I cannot understand.
The Scriptures are the Testimony of these Witnesses indeed, but seem not with
congruity to be the Witnesses themselves.

But I shall detain you no longer from the Text, in mentioning any more
opinions, suffice it we have hitherto seen who are not these Witnesses; but now
examine the Text, and from thence we may be told who they are: In which the
holy Ghost comes so quick, after their number, office, manner of performing,
(...) touched upon in the verse before, that almost before a man could well ask
but Who are these Witnesses, he is answered in these words; These are the two
Olive Trees, and the two Candl^sticks standing before the God of the earth.

Which first draught and description of these Witnesses, we find almost word
for word fetched from the 4 Chapter of Zach. whitherto having recourse, if we
can learn what, and who are meant by the two Olive trees there, it will much
ready us to know whom we are to understand by the two Witnesses here, they
being by that same representation set forth to us.

In that Chapter therefore (for I must send you thither) the Prophet in a
Vision seeing a Golden Candlestick, with seven Zach. 4. 2, 3, 4.
Lamps, and seven Pipes; and on each side of the Candlestick two Olive trees
emptying golden Oil into the Pipes; which not knowing what to make of, and
enquiring of the Angel that talked with him, receives this in answer:

The Candlestick thou saw, with all its Lamps burning (being Verse. 6, 7, 9,
10.
one of the chief Utensiles about the Temple, and not to be brought thereinto,
till the building thereof is finished) betokens the building and perfecting of
the Temple. The Candlestick betokens the Church; and the Candlestick furnished
complete with Lamps, the restoring the Church and Worships from those maims and
ruins which during the time of the Captivity they had layn under.

The Prophet satisfied in the mystery of the Candlestick, yet Verse. 11, 12
further enquires; and What ure the two Olive trees standing on Verse. 14.
either side the Candlestick? After this question twice asked, the Angel gives
answer in the last Verse, almost the words of my Text; These are the two
anointed Ones; or as the Original, (...)
These are the two Sons of Oil, standing before the Lord of the whole earth.

But now if any after all this remaining unsatisfied, shall yet Rabbi David,
Kimchi. Rabbi Solo: Iarchi.
further enquire who these anointed Ones are: I answer, with consent of best
Interpreters, They are Zerubbabel, and Joshua, and with them the Elders and
Priests respectively; who because they spent themselves and their endeavors in
building the Temple, and were Instruments of light and encouragement, in the
conduct of the great Church Affairs, typed out by the Candlestick, with much
elegancy of resemblance, are presented as two Olive trees dropping golden Oil
into a golden Candlestick.

So then the two Olive trees emptying golden Oil into the Candlestick, in
Zachary, are two eminent ranks of men; Zerubbabel Ezra 6. 14. Zach. 3. 8.
and the Elders one; for the Elders joined themselves in the work with him, and
Joshua, and the other Priests, the other; which Priests also were assisting to
Joshua. In short, they are godly Magistrates and Priests who did bestow
themselves in building, restoring, finishing the Temple, Church, Worships, all
having gone to wrack the while of the Babylonish Captivity.

Bring all this but home now, and by this account, the two Witnesses described,
and typed out by two Olive trees, must be Zerubbabel and Joshua; for their
quality, they must be godly Magistrates and Ministers: and then because Olive
trees dropping Oil into Candlesticks, (which we saw before betokened restoring,
building, caring for the Temple, Church-Worships) these must bestow themselves
in caring for Church, Ordinances, and Worships also, which is their employment.

And truly what can we oppose? For if the two Olive trees dropping Oil into
the Candlesticks, were in their first use and intention peculiarly apted to
denote Magistrates and Ministers, men of like quality as were Zerubb: and
Je^hua; and then their employment in caring for Church, Worships, and the like:
The holy Ghost transferring the same type from thence hither, whereby to
describe these two Witnesses; who sees not they must needs be persons of like
quality, godly Magistrates and Ministers, and of like employment; they must
bestow themselves in caring for Church, and Worships also.

I do not deny there be some differences between the two types, both in the
mention, as likewise in the meaning, yet not such as to overthrow the
foundation of the resemblance. For Instance,

1. There in Zachary you have no Temple built, and therefore they to begin the
world anew, to begin to build almost from the Foundation: but here in the
beginning of this 11 Chapter, you sinde a Temple complete and entire; so that
the work of these Chap. 11 1
is not so much to build a Temple anew, as to preserve and keep that in
measure, and from Antichristian encroachments which they had, and to re-gain so
much of the outward Court as they could, which now Antichrist, with the
Antichristian Gentiles, had wholly in possession. This the first difference,
they seem to begin their Church-work from the beginning, these not so much to
begin, as to preserve and recover what was lost by the usurpations of
Antichrist: here they have a Temple, only the outward Court taken from them;
there they have as yet no Temple at all.

2 There you have but one Candlestick, here two; which whether because the
Church about this time was to be divided into Eastern and Western, as some
conceive; or else two, because the Churches were about this time of the
Witnesses to be reduced to the least number, even to two, as others; or whether
two Candlesticks here, and but one there, because the Jewish Church was but
one, the Christian Churches are many, as others; or whether any other may be
the reason, I not determine. You have the differences: but that in the main
they agree, take notice of these severalls for the purpose:

1. As there you have a Candlestick, signifying a Church; so here Candlesticks,
signifying Churches also; so I would understand them: In no wise conceiving the
two Witnesses to be the two Candlesticks, as they are said to be the two Olive
trees before; and therefore I had rather read as they do; These are the two
Olive trees, with, or by the two Candlesticks, as is the manner of the Hebrews
sometime to render their copulative: for it is evident (...) loco (...) 1 Samuel
14. 18. and alibi.
from the first Chapter of this Revel. and 20. That Candlesticks are Churches;
The seven Golden Candlesticks, says the holy Ghost, are seven Churches.

2. As two Olive trees there, show two ranks of men, namely, godly Magistrates
and Ministers, so by the two Olive trees here, we understand men of the like
condition, godly Magistrates and Ministers also.

3. As those by dropping Oil into a Candlestick, are so presented restoring the
Jewish Church, so the Witnesses by dropping Oil into these Candlestick as
Instruments of light and grace (both which Oil in Scripture does aptly
signify) do keep alive and lighted the Churches all the times of Antichrist,
and by this light restore, recover them, as also expel and win upon that
darkness, which had gained much upon the world before. 1 Samuel 16. 22. Psalm.
102. 26. Ier. 52. 12. compared with 2 Ki. 25 8.


4. As those are said to stand by the God of the earth, which whether it means
their stable and firm abiding (for so much the word not unfrequently
signifies) or whether by it be meant they minister before the Lord (for so
also it is often used) these likewise stand before the God of the earth, these in
dropping Oil into the Candlesticks, spending themselves in caring for Church
and Worships, they minister before the God of the earth also. Thus you have the
Agreement.

Draw up now the sum of all this Verse together; and it is in short this:

In that the holy Ghost describes the two Witnesses by two Olive trees dropping
Oil into the candlesticks, a type formerly used to signify Magistrates and
Ministers bestowing themselves in caring f^r Temple, Church, Worships then
decayed, it is as much as if he should tell us; These Witnesses are godly
Magistrates and Ministers, who during the times of Antichrist, shall bestow
themselves in maintaining what of Church and Worships they have; reforming,
repairing, restoring as there is need, and regaining what has been lost by
Antichristian en^roachm^nts.

And that all this has come to pass accordingly; That there have been such
persons, and they done all that we now mention, how obviously were we
acquainted with the Ecclesiastical Histo^y would it appea? how clearly should
we see, not only the common sort of people, such as those poor men of Lions,
but Ministers, yea Nobles, yea Princes and Emperors have been of these
Witnesses; who not only have dropped Oil into the candlesticks, but even their
blood also, in preserving them pure, and endeavoring to reform them from
Antichristian impiety.

So you have the meaning of the words: the Observations now follow:

1. In that the Witnesses are typed out, and described by persons of quality,
for such Zerubbabel and Jeshua were; how likely is it, these Witnesses must be
persons of quality, as they were: And if they were Magistrates and Ministers,
by whom they are set forth and presented, how warranta^ly may we pronounce
these Witnesses are Magistrates and Ministers also. I do not deny but even the
meanest, testifying against Antichrist, is in a sort a Witness: but to be a
Witness by way of eminence, to be such by office (as I may say) and so
authoritatively to bear witness, this seems restrained only to men of
quality: and when the event answers accordingly (as was in part hinted before)
me thinks there needs no further question in the business: when Histories will
tell us, besides a succession of godly persons in the Ministry, there were also
in the Magistracy, even in the highest places thereof, that did oppose
themselves against the Idolatry and Tyranny of Antichrist (such as were Picus
Mirandula, John Frederick Duke of Saxony, the Lantgrave, Ernestus Brunswick his
son: Emperors also, Henric. 4. Henric. 5. L^wis. 4. with others; besides some
of the Princes of this and other Kingdoms) And so it appears they have been
Magistrates and Ministers in deed, and in event, even just such as were the
types before, by which they are showed forth: Judge whether from all we may not
safely pronounce; The Magistrates and Ministers opposing Antichrist, are the
two Witnesses.

2. Are Candl^sticks Churches? this learns us whence alone (as from the
ordinary means) Spiritual and saving light is to be expected; it is from the
Churches, from the candl^sticks: and sure repair we to any other Societies of
men whatsoever, and so far as they have nothing common with these, so far
there is no saving light at all in them: Here only it is that the Scriptures
appear as a flaming Beacon upon a hill, by which the Ministers, Matthew. 5. 15.
as so many candles, being lighted, and set up in the candlestick, give light
to all them that are in the house; all that is without this Verge being nothing
else but pitchy darkness.

And if so, what a sad thing to be without a candlestick; or as Rev 2. 5.
Christ once threatened Ephesus, to have the candlestick taken away. How sad was
the condition of the Egyptians, when in regard Exo 10. 23
of that plague of darkness then upon them, no man did rise from his place for
the space of three days? How much more sad in Spiritual regards is their
estate, who are without a Candlestick, and so in Spiritual darkness, knowing
not whither they go? 1 John 2. 11. Mat. 8. 12.
Nay, Is not this that utter darkness the Jews are threatened withal, whereby
seems meant, if well considered, as well their unchurch'd condition in this
life, as their state of condemnation in the life to come when: the Kingdom of
heaven, the Candlestick, was taken away; from that time they have been cast
forth into utter darkdesse.

3. Are there two candlesticks in all this time? then sure that cannot but be
too hard a censure, that cries down all as Antichristian Churches,
Antichristian Ministers, all this time; it is true, the Churches are now reduced
to the smallest number, yet is there a number however, two Churches, two
Candlesticks at least in all the time of the prevailings of Antichrist.

4. Are the Witnesses Olive trees, dropping Oil into the candlesticks? this
tells you whereabout the proper work of these Witnesses lies; it is about the
Candlesticks, it is Church-work theirs, their care, their business, is to have
an eye to the Candlesticks: And if so, however then they look after Liberties,
Properties, Safety, etc. yet their main care must be Church-work, preserving,
reforming, restoring in Church matters, matters of Worship, this should be the
chief care and endeavor of these Witnesses; which does not a little reflect
upon us in this Kingdom, who have spent much time, much pains, in securing
Liberties, Properties, and providing for our safety; but little Oil all this
while dropped into the Candlesticks, little proportionably bestowed in
Church-work; which possibly is not the least reas^n, Why after all this time,
we are so far to seek; neither the work of Reformation, nor our own Safety to
this day being advanced to any desired perfection.

VERSE. 5. And if any man will hurt them, sire proceeds out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies: And if any man will hurt them, he must in this
manner be killed.
HAving presented some few lines to ward a perfect draught of these Witnesses,
and in them discovered what they are to the Church, namely, as Oil unto the
Candlestick; in our further description of them, we come now to show what they
are to those that do oppose them (for they meet with opposers) and how well
appointed they are to give them as hot as they bring, that shall dare to
attempt any wrong or violence upon them. This you have discovered in these
words; And if any man will hurt them, etc.

In which, who so dim sighted, as not to perceive Moses and Elias as with the
finger pointed at? both which, when enemies have risen up against them, have
had the wrong by sire avenged upon those enemies. So you read of Moses in the
16 of Numb. when Korah, and with him two hundred and fifty chief men of the
Congregation, make there a tumult against him: at the 35 verse of that Chapter,
Fire proceeds from the Lord, and destroys those two hundred and fifty. Of
Elias also, you have it storied in the 2 of Kinos and 1. When that Idolatrous
Ahaziah sends two Captains, with fifty men apiece, one after the other, to lay
hold upon the Prophet; upon his word, fire comes down Ver. 11, 12.
from heaven, and destroys both the Captains, and both their fifties.

Both these you have here a reference to, and this not only because of the
same thing done, but (which is my apprehension, which also I touched upon
before) because there is a resemblance intended betwixt the doers also. I said
before, the two Olive trees did not only signify the like common work
happening to Zerubbabel and Jeshua, and to the Witnesses, but seemed to hold
forth a likeness or samenesse in the quality of the persons also. So likewise,
when in a further description of these Witnesses; we have them rendered such,
Out of whose mouths sire procceding, destroys their enemies (a plain allusion
to Moses and Elias) I should conceive, it is not only to show the same thing
done by all of them, and no more, but to tell us the persons in resemblance are
another Moses and Elias also.

And to make this yet seem more likely, observe we how just their work falls
alike to all of them. Does Moses lead Israel out of Egypt? and do not these
Witnesses lead the Christian Israel out of the Romish Egypt, of which no
question Moses his former leading was a type? And does Elias stand zealous for
God, in that grand Apostasy of Israel, no doubt a type of this grand Apostasy
of Antichrist; and are not the Witnesses clothed with the zealous Spirit of
Elias; nay, is it not doubled upon 2 Kin. 2. 9.
them, who dare contend with the Antichristian Apostates, even then when their
Idolatries have so over overwhelmed the world, that they only are left
opposing?

And if this so, and there is no new thing in all this, the same Scene come
about again; what strange thing to see the same actors? and if now in the last
act of the world there is a bringing out of Egypt, such as was before; a
contending with Apostates, as there was before; how every way elegant to make
Moses and Elias the actors here also.

Having thus found out the Witnesses to be Moses and Elias now, as we saw them
Zerubbabel and Jeshua (men of like quality and employment) before, lest we
mistake the special thing that is here mentioned done by them; we now proceed
to a particular examination of it, If any man will harm them, fire proceeds,
etc.

Which words we must in no wise understand in the letter. To think these
Witnesses should indeed breath forih fire, and so destroy their enemies; what
weakness, or else perverseness at best, would any such thought argue? And if
not in the letter, then must we borrow the word (...) hither, which we find
expressly adjoined to Sodom and Egypt at the 8 Verse of th^s Chapter; and then
we are to enquire what mystical fire the Scripture mentions, and so what
spiritually or mystically the phrase imports of fire proceeding out of their
mouths and de^ouring their enemies.

To answer this in short: The Word of God in Scripture is several times
compared to fire, Jer. 20 9. Jer. 23. 29. Is not my Word like as a fire, says
the Lord? But especially cast your eye upon the 5 of Jer. 14. where you find
the Lord thus bespeaking the Prophet: And I will make my Word in thy meuth
fire, and this people as wood, and it shall devour them.

A place so parallel, so plain an interpretation of what we have in hand, that
to me it seems altogether needless to enquire any further meaning. Observe it,
there you have the Lord threatening that People by the Prophet, but his word is
slighted, and the Prophet that delivers the message misused; for this cause,
the Lords Word in the Prophets mouth shall be fire, and that People wood, and
it shall devour them. So here, you have the Witnesses testifying against
Antichrist, for his great impieties; this testimony of theirs is slighted,
themselves opposed and misused; to avenge which indignity, fire comes out of
their mouths, takes hold of their opposers, they threaten Judgments, God
accordingly executes them; thus fire proceeds out of their mouth, and devours
their enemies. All this but confirming that of the Apostle; The Gospel, and its
Ministers, have in readiness ^ Cor. 10. 6.
to avenge every disobedience.

Nor let any man stumble at the expression, They said to d^stroy their enemies,
who yet do but only denounce destruction: ^or it is an easy thing to show,
That what Gods Minist^rs denounce in his Name, that they themselves are said to
do.

Ezekiel in denouncing Judgment against the City, Ezekiel. 43. 3. is there said
to destroy the City. So when the Witnesses, in the Lords Name, and by his
direction, denounce destruction to their enemies, they likewise are then said
to destroy their enemies.

If now unto the former of denouncing Judgments, you add also their praying
Judgments upon incorrigible enemies (which seems not unlikely to be meant here
also) you have then the sense thus much:

Then when the Witnesses pray Judgments,, and denounce Judg^ments upon their
enemies, then does fire proceed out of their mouth, and d^stroyes their
enemies.

And whereas you have it repeated, [And if any mon will hurt them] and again
[If any man will hurt them] repetition betokening certainty (so Joseph
interprets the doubling of the Vision Genesis 41. 32
shown to Pharaoh, to note the certainty thereof) it is as much, as if in other
words the holy Ghost had said, If any man shall presume to hurt these
Witnesses, that man certainly shall be destroyed.

The meaning given thus piecemeal, put all together, and the result is this:
These two Witnesses, formerly Zerubbabel and Jeshuah, now because of like
spirit, and employment, but expressly because in like manner protected from
enemies, are Moses and Elias, whom if any man shall attempt to harm, by
denouncing and praying Judgments, they procure certain destruction upon them.

And now having opened the words, before I proceed to draw out any
Observations, give me leave to satisfy for what I took on trust before; of
which, till now, I could make no ready payment.

I formerly gave this one reason why the Witnesses are said to be two, viz.
Because they are described by pairs, but then showed no such thing. Now you
have seen two pair already, Zerubbabel and Jeshuah, one; Moses and Elias
another; and there is one other pair behind, not yet come into mention.

I said before, The Scriptures, the two Testaments, were the Testimony of these
Witnesses, but denied them to be the Witnesses themselves, because they are
described as men, and by men, but then gave proof of neither; but now I hope
it is evident they are described as men, and men of former times, such as
Zerubbabel and Jeshua, brought in to personate these Witnesses which, together
with that which follows, gives abundant, and every was satisfying evidence in
this matter.

The Observations now follow:

1. Does fire proceed out of th^se Witnesses mouths, destroying their enemies?
then must none think to harm these Witnesses impune: they must not hope to
carry it scot-free, be they who they will be, that shall presume to offer
violence to th^se Witnesses, either by praying, or d^nouncing Judgments, they
do procure destruction and ruin upon their enemies.

2. Are the Judgments of God denounced [fire?] Then wonder not that waxie
hearts are melted by them, as was the heart of Josiah; and on the contrary, the
clayie hearts of others more 1 Chro. 34 29.
hardened, and their chaffie hearts burnt up and devoured by them; marvel not
at all, it is so, the Judgments of God denounced, they are fire.

3. In that it is repeated, If any man will harm these Witnesses, h^ must be
destroyed; take notice of the certain vengeance that does a wait the
persecutors of these Witnesses: Let them flatter themselves in their present
impunity as they list, and because sentence is not speedily executed upon them
for their violence done Eccles. 8. 11.
unto these Witnesses, therefore please themselves in pursuing of them still;
yet withal remember a certain and inevitable destruction will at last seize
upon them.

VERSE. 6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy: and have power over waters, to turn them into blood; and to
smite the earth with all plagues as often as they will.
NOw forward with our description, in which having already seen how well able
these Witnesses are to repay the wrongs done to their own particular, wherein
also we have received further light concerning their persons; proceed we now
on, and we shall further understand in what manner they are furnished to avenge
the Churches wrongs, almost deprived of being, if not wholly of appearance,
through the spreading and prevalence of the Antichristian Apostacy.

This you have laid down in these words, These have power to shut heaven, etc.

In which you may observe a threefold power wherewith these Witnesses are
invested:

1. A power to shut heaven that it rain not. 2. A power to turn waters into
blood. 3. A power to smite the earth with all plagues as often as they will.
Before you heard they pursue their enemies with fire, here they shut heaven
against them, turn their waters into blood, and smite their earth with all
plagues as often as they will. What a miserable plight are the enemies of these
Witnesses in, who have the fire armed against them before, and now the benefits
of heaven, earth, water, all taken from them?

But let us take them in order; first, These have power to shut heaven, that it
rain not in the days of their prophecy: In which Jam. 5. 17.
who sees not the forementioned Elias a new pointed at, of whom it is recorded,
that praying he shut up heaven that it rained not, (the same thing here
mentioned) and this for three years and a half; the just term of these
Witnesses prophecy in sackcloth.

But that we mistake not by understanding all this in the letter, I mean either
the thing it self, or the time, we must again borrow the the word (...),
enquiring out a mystical understanding of them both.

For the time I have touched upon it before, and hereafter may have occasion
further to show it is to be reckoned according to the prophetical account,
every day in this three years and a half, being put for a year, as is the
manner of prophesies sometime to reckon, and then for their shutting up heaven
that it rain not; we shall now try to find out some mystical meaning of it.

For this purpose therefore, in that Matt. 16. 19. you have mention of Keys
shutting heaven: heaven is then shut, according to the mind of that place,
when such as live in ignorance, profaneness, idolatry, or any the like gross
wickedness, are by the Ministry of the Word, declared a people to who no
comfort, no forgiveness, no heaven does belong.

However I doubt not but the same thing is meant in both places, yet in regard
it is there, heaven shut that people cannot enter, here heaven shut that it do
not rain, and so, though in substance they come both to one, yet the allusion
seems not so clear; we shall therefore try further.

The glad tidings of the Gospel are several times in Scripture compared to
rain, (this me thinks will nick the allusion:) I say again, the tidings of
forgiveness, mercy, etc. are oftentimes in Scripture compared to rain; so
Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Isa. 45. 8, etc. and sure could we stay to show it, we should
find the resemblance patt, and every way answeing. Does rain refresh the weary
and thirsty earth? does it soften? does it make frutfull? and do not the glad
tidings of the Gospel, the tidings of peace, forgiveness, refresh, soften,
make fruitful also?

This so, shall we say accordingly, then do these Witnesses shut heaven that it
rain not, when they with hold all tidings of forgiveness, mercy, peace, from
the Antichristian Gentiles, while they continue such, (the Church the mean
while being refreshed with these showers every day) and further declare, as
that third Angel does, Chap. 14. verse. 9, 10, 11. (who no doubt is of these
witnesses) that such as those who worship the Beast, and receive his mark,
shall drink of the wrath of God; no mercy, no forgiveness at all appertains to
them And thus the former shutting heaven in Matthew. and the withholding of the
rain of heaven here, do now appear to be the same; of which the sum in short
is this much.

As Elias shut heaven that it rained not upon those apostate Israelites while
they clave to Baal, which plainly is h^re alluded to; so while these
Antichristian Gentiles continue such, these two Witnesses hold back all tidings
of mercy and forgiveness, (that blessed rain so chearing and refreshing weary
souls) declaring them while in that condition, a people to whom no
forgiveness, no heaven, but rather wrath, hell, and everlasting vengeance
appertains.

We have seen the Witnesses power to shut heaven that it rain not, laid open;
their turning waters into blood, and smiting the earth with all plagues, as
often as the will, next follows; which in regard they both concern the same
thing, as may appear by and by; in the handling of them therefore we shall join
both together.

And here me thinks we meet with some thing like the vials, those seven vials
(I mean) emptying out upon Antichrist the seven Rev. 15. 1.
last plagues of the wrath of God. And because this seems not unlikely, and the
clearing of this will help us to understand the words; as also not a little
cond^ce to satisfy in that great question, Whether the time of these witnesses
be past, yea or no, (as we shall see hereafter:) our satisfaction in which is
the great design we drive in all this undertaking: we shall therefore first
enquire, whether at all we have any thing here relating to the vials, yea, or
no; and when this is done, then proceed to take a view of the words more
particularly.

The grounds persuading to believe the Vials are here meant, are such as these.

1. Those plagues of the Vials, and these here, do fall together into the same
time, the space of the sixth Trumpet receives both of them. The Vials (so many
wastes and graduall destructions of the beast) must needs be pouring forth the
time of the sixth Trumpet: for at the beginning of the seventh, with which the
last Vials falls in, the beast his time is no more: [the beast, Antichrist] is
then destroyed by an utter and irrecoverable destruction. The tenth Chapter of
this Prophecy, and sixth verse, compared with the sixteenth Chapter, 17, and
19 Verses, cleers this same to any, that shall with care and observation
examine them.

And that the plagues here mentioned bear the same date, fall in with the time
of the sixth Trumpet also, hence appears; for these plagues being chiefly drawn
forth by these witnesses toward the end of their Prophecy, and that ending
with the sixth Trumpet [the second Wo] as is plain from the 13 and 14 verse. of
this Chapter; who sees not that these fall in with the time of the sixth
Trumpet also? And so because those plagues, and these here, are both wrapped up
in the sixth Trumpet, and so fall into the same time, this is one inducement
persuading they are the same plagues also.

2. Those who pour forth the Vialls, and the Witnesses who inflict the plagues
here mentioned, seem all the same persons. The Angels who pour out the Vialls
described coming forth of the Temple, clothed with pure and white linen, and
their breasts Cha. 15. 6.
girded with golden girdles, who are they but godly ones, whether Magistrates
or Ministers; who appertaining to, or coming forth of Reformed Churches, do
pour forth the Vialls. And are not the Witnesses who execute these plagues
godly Magistrates and Ministers, who pertrining to the Temple mentioned at the
first Verse of this Chapter; that is, The Churches reformed, come forth thence,
and inflict these plagues upon the Antichristian Gentiles? And indeed how can
we imagine that any should come forth of Reformed Churches, and pour out a
Vial a plague, upon the Antichristian party, and not be of these Witnesses?
when such is the nature of the plagues contained in the Vialls, as we may see
by and by, that in nothing can any more openly and effectually witness against
Antichrist, and the Antichristian brood, then by pouring out any of these
Vialls upon them. They are the same persons then, the godly Magistrates and
Ministers of Reformed Churches, that pour forth the Vials, and that execute the
plagues the Text here mentions.

3. As they fall out at the same time, are inflicted by the same hands, so upon
enquire you will find them the same plagues also. To clear this same: Have you
here [a turning waters into blood?] upon the pouring out of the second and
third Vials you have the waters then turned to blood also. Chap. 16. 3, 4.


Do you read here [of plaguing the earth, with all plagues] mark it [plaguing
the earth] what can hereby be meant, but the other Vialls? all whereof at the
first verse of the 16 Chapter, are to be poured upon the earth, the Ang^ls
there are commanded to pour all their Vialls upon the earth also? Add this now
to the former; These plagues are inflicted at the same time, by the same hands,
yea, are the very same plagues; and now who sees not the Vialls are here
pointed at (which was the thing in question) and when the holy Ghost tellsus*
The W^itesse^ turn waters into blood, smite the earth with all plagues (as in
the Text) who sees not it is as much as if in other words we had been told,
These witnesses are they who pour forth the Vialls?

I must not dissemble what dissent I find in this matter, some conceiving,
these plagues here mentioned, do rather relate to some of the foremost
Trumpets, which sounding, you find the like plaguing the earth, and turning of
waters into blood, even Chap. 8. Verse. 7. 8.
such like plagues as you have here mentioned.

With submission I cannot conceive those plagues to be the same with those of
the first and second Trumpet, for these Reasons:

1. Not to mention those, which prove these the same with the Vialls, first,
because these fall within the time of the sixth Trumpet, as (we showed before)
and therefore cannot be the plagues of the first and second Trumpet; the
consequence is clear, because the plagues comprised in the time of the sixth
Trumpet, must needs be a long space after the plagues comprised in the time of
the first and second Trumpet; the sixth Trumpet being a good space after the
first and secnod Trumpet.

2. Those plagues of the former Trumpets, and these of the Witnesses, fall not
upon the same subject: those of the former Trumpets, as is evident to any
observant Reader, falling upon Rome Christian; these of the Witnesses falling
upon Rome Antichristian: to clear this latter (the former being without
question) And is it not so, when because of these plagues, you have Verse. 7.
Antichrist in the very next words, waging War wit these Witnesses, and
slaying them? Is it not plain these plagues fall upon Verse. 20.
the Antichristian Party, when they are brought in at the tenth Verse,
rejoicing for their slaughter, and this expressly the reason, Because they were
now got shut of those, who while they lived, tormented them with all these
plagues? The subject then of these is Rome Aniichristian; of the other, Rome
Christian; and if so, they neither fall within the same time, nor upon the same
subject, it is evident they cannot be the same plagues (the thing contended for)
and if these be not the same, there being none other in all this Prophecy that
do resemble them, save only the Vialls, it remains an unshaken truth, the
plagues here mentioned are no other then the Vialls.

This much gained, we now proceed particularly to examine the words; These have
power over waters, to turn them into blood, etc. In which who beholds not
another pair, even Moses and Aaron, now coming forth to personate these
Witnesses: of whom we read in sacred Story. That bringing Israel out of Egypt,
they turned the Egyptian waters into blood, plagued the earth, etc. Exodus 7.
Exodus 8.
the very same you have here done by the hands of these Witnesses. And now you
have the last pair, where by these Witnesses are described: Formerly they were
Zerubqabell and Jeshua, after that Moses and Elias, now in the close of this
representation they are Moses and Aaron: There now wants nothing to make the
description of these Witnesses complete, but that we see what it is these
Witnesses do, that makes them appear another Moses and Aaron; which done, we
have then at once a full description and view of these Witnesses.

To this therefore I hasten, in entrance where upon, let me warn you as I did
before, you are not to understand this same in the letter, namely, That indeed,
and in the letter, the Witnesses should turn waters into blood; but as we
understood their destroying their enemies with fire, their shutting heaven that
it rain not, mystically before, so must we understand their turning waters into
blood also.

But because I have already shown these plagues are no other then those of the
Vials, the better to compass the meaning, it will not be amiss for us to turn
over to the 16 Chapter of this Prophecy, where the Vialls are by the holy
Ghost professedly mentioned, where if we find what is meant by [turning waters
into blood, and smiting the earth with plagues there] we shall clearly see what
to understand by them here also, they being all one, only here but glanced at,
there by the holy Ghost professedly and at large discovered.

In that 16 Chapter therefore (for I turn over thither) we find that upon the
pouring forth of the second and third Vials, the waters are turned into blood,
hoth these I conceive are here pointed at. For the holy Ghost, seeming in this
place to give a touch upon the Vials, summing them up briefly under two Heads,
viz. either plagues on the waters, or plagues on the eatrh, and so to be
apprehended, thrusting as many as would fall under an head together, there
being two Vials that will come under this head of [turning waters into blood]
who does not readily conceive both these Vials must hereby be hereby signified?
So that it will be needful we enquire the meaning of them both.

To begin therefore with the second Vial, the first of those that turn waters
into blood, which in that 3 Verse of the 16 Chapter we find is poured out upon
the Sea, and the effect, it become as the blood of a d^ad man. This Vial (say
some of our best Cha. 16. 3.
Interpreters, whom I must trust at present, it requiring no small time
professedly and to purpose to speak to these Vials) was then poured forth, when
all the Popish Doctrines being gathered into one by the Council of Trent,
afterward by Bellarmine, and others: the godly Ministers of the Reformed
Churches, by their writings, discovered all that Sea of of Popish Doctrine to
be but as the blood of a dead man, no living blood of Jesus Christ discoverable
in it all; and those that live no other life then what they draw from those
corrupt Doctrines, to be in a dead, damnable, and undone condition.

This the second Vial.

The third is poured forth upon the rivers, and fountains at the 4 Verse, and
the effect is, these become blood also.

And then was this Vial poured forth (say Interpreters, whom I again refer to)
when in the times of Queen Elizabeth this State made a Law against Priests and
Jesuits, enacting it Treason for any to seduce this People to the Romish
Religion; upon which several of them, as Campian, Ducket, Sherwin, and
afterward others were executed: and when at this day according to that Law we
execute a Priest, or Jesuit; then do we pour forth this Vial upon the
Antichristian Waters, and they become blood.

By this reckoning (and so to bring all home to the Text) then are the
witnesses said to turn the Antichristian Waters into blood; when by their clear
writings, and other ways they discover all that Sea of Popish doctrine to be
but as the blood of a dead man; and further do execute their Priests, and
Jesuits, who as Rivers* do derive and carry from place to place, the Waters of
this noisome Sea, thereby to poison, and destroy the souls of seduced people.

And by the way, who is not now fully satisfied, the Witnesses pour forth the
Vials (the thing we so industriously proved before) when having but mentioned
two Vials, we find the godly Magistrates and Ministers of the reformed Churches
(whom all along we have shown to be these two Witnesses) have already poured
forth both of them? The former, the godly Ministers, such as Chemnitius,
Chamier, Junius, Reignolds, etc. The latter, the godly Magistrates, as certain
of the number of these Witnesses also. Thus these Witnesses turn Waters into
blood. The next thing that follows, And they smite the earth with all plagues,
as often as they will; this falls now in order to be enquired concerning.

And to be short, what can this mean, but (which we touched upon before) the
pouring forth the other Vialls, all which at the first Verse of that 16
Chapter, are commanded there to be poured forth upon the earth? And if this be
so, you have then the sum of the former, and of this same, in one word this
much, In that the Holy Ghost tells us, these Witnesses turn Waters into blood,
and smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will, it is all one, as
if he had said. These Witnesses do pour forth all the Vials.

And now by this time you have had the Witnesses at full showed forth, you have
seen who they are. They are Zerubbabel and Jeshua; Moses and Elias; Moses and
Aaron: you have seen what they do. They spend themselves into the Candlesticks;
to the Churches they are as Oil is to the Lamps; nourishing, and keeping them
alive all the time of Antichrists prevailing; if any attempt to wrong them,
fire proceeds out of their mouths, and destroys such as do attempt it. And for
the wrongs the Antichristian Gentiles offer the Church, these Witnesses shut
heaven upon them, that it rain not, nay pour forth all the Vials of the wrath
of God upon them.

Thus you have all the active part of these Witnesses already drawn forth. That
which follows, is their passive, which when I have touched upon one or two
observations from these last words, I shall without any other interruption fall
upon. The Observations are these:

1. Is heaven shut by these Witnesses, so that no rain falls upon the
Antichristian party, all the glad tidings of forgiveness, and reconciliation
withheld from them? How sad must needs be the condition of such a people? What
have they to soften them, to make them fruitful, when no rain at all falls
upon them.

2. How fruitful on the contrary should we be, who live under the droppings of
heaven, and are refreshed with the former, and latter rain always in their
seasons? Poor Papists have no rain: Yea, how much the rather should we
endeavor fruitfulness, Isa. 5. 5, 6.
lest for default, that same be made good upon us, which once the Lord
threatened, his Vineyard withal, he would takaway the hedge, and would command
the clouds, that they should rain no rain upon it.

3. Do the Witnesses pour forth all the Vials? No marvel then, they are said
to torment them thot dwell upon the earth; No Verse. 10.
marvel, those same Inhabitants of the earth rejoice, they are got rid of
them, as they do, when by the hands of these Witnesses, is emptied forth so
much wrath upon them.

VERSE. 7. And when they have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them.
WE have ere while seen who these Witnesses are, what they do, how grievously
they torment Antichrist, with his party: which because these Witnesses do not
carry impune, Antichrist not sitting down unrevenged, it now follows, we see
what is done to them, and how they are repaid for all the plagues wherewith
Antichrist, and his party have by them been tormented: This is laid down in the
words above mentioned, as also them that follow; And when they have finished
their testimony, the beast, etc.

In which who so observes, shall find as clear an allusion to our Savior, as
set forth in the story of his death, resurrection, and ascending up to heaven,
as before to any of the types, whereby these witnesses were formerly
represented.

Our Savior when he had preached near three years and half; about the number
of the days of the Prophecy of these Witnesses, was by Pilate, and so by Rome
then Heathen, as the Witnesses by Rome now Antichristian, put to death. After
three days, there being a great earthquake rises again, and not long after, is
received up to heaven in a cloud. To all which who sees not a plain allusion
intended; when in the description of these witnesses sufferings, and after
restoration, you have mention of the like death, earthquake, resurrection,
and ascending up to heaven in a cloud also? So that if before in what they did,
they were like Zerubbabel and Jeshua; Moses and Elias; Moses and Aron, here for
what they suffer, and the sequel, they are clearly resembled to that faithful
and true witness Jesus Cha. 5. 14.
Christ.

This much in the gross, but look more particularly, and you shall find in
what is mentioned of these Witnesses sufferings, such specialls observable as
these;

1. There is war waged with these witnesses, and the consequent the Witnesses
overcome, and killed.

2. The enemy that wages this war, The beast that ascends out of the
bottomless pit.

3. The time when this war is waged, and these witnesses overcome, and killed
by this beast, and this is (says the Text) when they have finished their
testimony. I shall address my self to speak of these in this order: First, the
war waged and the consequents, then that which follows in the order above
mentioned.

And for this war waged with these Witnesses, we must not think this is the
first, which has ever been raised against them: as though the Witnesses, had
met with no opposings, all the time of their prophecy (continuing so many
hundred years) till just toward the end, and close of it, we must not so
conceive at any hand: For if you consult, the thirteenth Chapter, and seventh
verse, you find the beast (these Witnesses enemy, and as old, as are these
Witnesses) so soon almost as he receives being, receives power to make war
with the Saints, and to overcome, Cha. 13. 2.
and kill them. And in the twelfth Chapter and last verse, the Dragon who
substitutes this beast, and on whom he estates his power, throne, and great
authority (himself being now no longer able to hold them in his own name) as
soon as ever the Woman was escaped into the wilderness, which is now several
hundred years agone, he goes forth under covert of this beast, To make war
with the remnant of her seed, which kept the Chapl 12. Verse. ult.
Commandments of God, and had the testimony of JESUS CHRIST.

And sure the event shows as much, when above four hundred years agone, in that
one Kingdom of Gaul (now called France) if Perionius may be believed, at least
ten hundred thousand of those godly Waldenses and Albigenses were butchered by
this beast. And can we imagine so many Saints slain, and none of these
Witnesses among all these numbers?

This war then here mentioned, supposes not the Witnesses untouched all the
time of their prophecy before, but rather seems to hold forth some eminent
war, now at last to be raised against them; which perhaps, because it shall
differ from all the former in the quality of it, or specially in the success,
striking of all the Witnesses there, where it is done, which no other war had
perhaps done before, is therefore by the Holy Ghost thought fit only to be
mentioned.

Nor yet therefore can we say this war shall be more grievous and bloody then
all the former, possibly it is not mentioned for any eminent bloodshed
accompanying it, but rather (as some conceive) for a sign of the instant, and
near approaching ruin of Antichrist, which but a little after follows it
however; I dare not say this last war, shall be eminent for bloodshed beyond
all the former, for this reason I now offer. If this same killing of these
Witnesses can not be understood in the Letter, viz. That indeed, and in the
Letter these Witnesses should be slain, but a mystical killing is only here
understood; then sure this cannot be a killing so very bloody: But that this
must be understood not of a real killing, but a mystical hence appears: Such
as is the resurrection of these Witnesses mentioned at the eleventh Verse, such
must needs be the killing, here mentioned, for of opposites there is the same
reason. But their resurrection Oppositorum eademratio.
we must needs understand mystically, for of no resurrection properly so
called, do we read before the twentieth Chapter of this prophecy, which must
necessarily Cha. 20. 5.
follow some space the rising again of these Witnesses here mentioned.

This then is a mystical killing, a throwing them from place, out of office,
some civil death: As when a man in place formerly, now thrown out, may be said
to be killed in his office, is dead in law: So these, ceasing from place in
Church, and Commonwealth, which as Magistrates and Ministers, they sometimes
enjoyed, and this accompanied perhaps with the killing of some of them indeed;
this seems the killing of the Witnesses, we are to understand here.

I say again the killing of these Witnesses by this reckoning, seems no other,
then the throwing them from that station, which once they held in the Reformed
Churches, being taken off from executing that Magistracy, that Ministry they
once had; and this possibly attended with the real slaughter of some of them,
Though the other, the killing of them in their office, seem the main, and more
general slaughter here intended.

Having seen what is done to these Witnesses, [They are slain] we next enquire
who slayes them, and to this the Text makes answer, The beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit: this now next in order comes to be handled.

For this therefore you may take notice, there is a several Chap. 4. Verse. 6,
7, 8, 9. Chap. 13. Verse. 1. and 11.
mention made of beasts in this prophecy; in the fourth Chapter you have four
beasts spoken of, in the thirteenth Chapter there is mention made of two; one
with two horns, another with ten: But no where do we find a beast ascending
out of the bottomless pit, this character being expressly affixed, save only
in the 17 Chapter of this Prophecy, whitherto having recourse Cha. 17. 8.
(where the holy Ghost seems not more to prophecy, then interpret) we shall
best find what is meant by the beasts ascending out of the bottoml^sse pit here
mentioned, and so in conclusion who it is that does slay these Witnesses.

In that 17 Chapter therefore you have a woman presented sitting upon a
Scarlet-colored beast, having seven heads and ten Verse. 3.
horns. In the opening whereof, the woman is expressly by the holy Ghost called,
The great City which rules over the Kings of Verse. 11.
the earth; that is, Rome; for at that time Rome only of all the Cities of the
world, was capable of any such description; and if so, the Woman be Rome, it
must needs follow the Beast she sits upon must be the Roman Empire, this
follows so clear from the former, none needs to make question of it.

But because the Roman Empire in its Bulk considered, and according to its
materiale, does no more ascend out of the bottomless pit then other Empires
and Kingdoms do; to loose this knot, hear a little further: The holy Ghost
showing the mystery of the seven heads, and ten horns, tells us, The seven
Verse. 10.
heads are seven Kings, or seven kinds of Government, five whereof, namely,
That of Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Decemviri, and Dictators, were expired
already; one, namely, That of Caesar's, was, it was when John saw this Vision;
and the seventh, that of Popes, was to come; and when it comes, this kind of
Government Verse 8.
was to ascend out of the bottomless pit. So that by this account, not so much
the Empire, the body of the Beast, as the seventh head of this Beast, comes out
of the bottomless pit; or else thus, The Empire, as ruled by the Popes, and
thus cast into an Antichristian Form, this is the Beast ascending out of the
bottomless pit; The Roman Empire Antichristianized, is the Beast ascending out
of the bottomless pit slaying these Witnesses.

But why is this kind of Government said to ascend out of the bottomless pit?
I was once thinking the same thing meant by this expression, as by the same
Beast's ascending out of the Sea, at the 13 Chapter and 1 Verse; which Sea is
frequently in Scripture called the Abyss, or bottomless pit; and there, as in
other places, signifies no more then a multitude of people, which because
subjecting themselves to the Government of this Beast, thence is this Beast
said to rise out of the Sea. But when I find that none of all the former heads
but might in this sense be said to ascend out of the bottomless pit; namely,
Because arising from the multitude of people subjecting themselves to them, and
yet find none of them said to rise out of the bottomless pit, save this last,
this of Popes only, it clearly to me holds forth thus much. The other kinds
of Government, shadowed out by the former heads, had somewhat of God in them.
at worst were but the Ordinances of men; but this seventh head, this Government
of Popes, this has its original from hell, its coming, as the Apostle speaks,
is after the working of Satan, it is his divising, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
comes from the bottomless pit, and shall in due time be sent thither back
again.

So that add this to the former, and the Roman Empire under the seventh head,
namely, that of Popes (a Government devised, (...).
and established by the contrivance of hell, the workman-ship of Satan) this
is the Beast ascending out of the bottomless pit, slaying these Witnesses.

You have seen then the enemy that wages War with these Witnesses, and slayes
them; the next thing we are to enquire, is the time when these Witnesses are
slain, and this is then when they have finished their testimony; this now
follows to be enquired concerning.

I find this [(...)] several ways translared; some render it as here, [when
they have finished;] others, and those very accurate Interpreters, translate
the Aorist by the future, and so render it [when they are about to finish;]
which latter if so, the meaning must fall thus, then when the Witnesses draw
toward end of their mourning testimony, the Church by this time being in some
good measure reformed, and having now gained much ground upon Antichrist, are
ready to throw off their Sackcloth, then the Beast ascending out of the
bottomless pit, makes War with them, and slayes them.

So that putting all together, viz. Their killing, The beast that kills them,
and The time when they are killed; and you have the meaning of all at one view
thus much:

Then when the Witnesses are about to close up their testimony, and having done
much in reforming the Church, having regained much of the utter Court, which
Antichrist had gained whole possession of before, are now about to put off
their Sackcloth, the Antichristian power, at this time collecting it self,
possibly by murdering some, but chiefly by putting them from their places,
disinabling, suspending, and silencing, shall thus overcome, kill, and make an
end of these Witnesses.

And now perhaps it will be expected, especially having so fair a hint given by
the Text; we should come to some determination Whether the killing of these
Witnesses be past yea or no; but in regard we shall be furnished with most
light then when we have heard the Prophecy speak out, we shall therefore
adjourn the decision till the last, still continuing to proceed forward in
opening the Prophecy; only before we do proceed any further from this last
verse, we now opened, take these observations:

1. Are the Witnesses slain when they have done their testimony? Hence take
notice, Best men, and best Offices, are sometime of all other the worst
rewarded: here are Witnesses, calling sinners home from dangerous and perishing
ways, beseeching them to turn from dumb Idols, to serve the living God, then
which none can do a better Office, yet after all their pains bestowed, they are
killed for a recompense.

2. Are these slain then when their mouths are stopped, when they cease to
witness? By this account men live no longer then they work; and whosoever has
left off to do the Lords work, as the Apostle speaks in another case, is dead
while he lives; he that 1 Timothy 5. 6. Rev. 14. 13
has rested from his labor, by this reckoning is no other then dead.

3. Does the Beast slay these Witnesses? Oh the plague this Beast, this
Antichrist is to the world! but two lights leading a blind world from
perdition, and the Antichristian power puts them both out, slayes both the
Witnesses.

4. Does the Beast ascend out of the bottomless pit, the Antichristian kind
of Government, ascend out of hell? sure then they much mistake themselves that
tell us it is jure divino: they much mistake its original, that tell us it is
from heaven: it is from hell, from the bottomless pit, if we believe the
Scriptures; there it had its conception, and shall in due time be returned
thither back again.

VERSE. 8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City,
which is Spiritually called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified.
OUr last work concerned the killing of the Witnesses; It follows now we look
what becomes of their dead bodies, in these words; And their dead bodies shall
lie in the street, etc.

The slaughter of these Witnesses being for the most part an unbloody
slaughter, the killing of them in their Office, as we saw before, by the like
proportion; their lying d^ad, what can it mean but their continuing in that
state of civil death, which their former slaughter brought them into. They
remaining suspended from the execution of that Office which as Magistrates and
Ministers they held before, remaining silent, not prophesying, not witnessing
any thing authoritatively as they did formerly; this seems meant by the
Witnesses lying dead. I say again, Their mouths were stopped at what time they
were slain, and since then they continue silent, dead to all that life which as
the Lords Prophets and Witnesses they lived before; thus they lie for some
space as dead corpses after their slaughter.

But passing from this, let us take a view of the place where these Witnesses
lie dead, this follows, and it is [In the street of the great City, spiritually
called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.]

A place so at large set forth, and by such apt resemblances, as indeed it
seems even next door to naming it; in the description whereof, the holy Ghost
bestows so many words, that when he wo^ld not name it, yet would seem to make
such sure work, that any who had but half an eye, should not miss the
understanding of it.

This place, because it will afford much variety of matter not unprofitable, we
shall therefore take a more exact view of it, enquiring, first, What this great
City is? Then, what the street? Why this great City is called Sodom? Why Egypt?
Why the place where our Lord was crucified?

For the first of these; Whereas it is said the dead bodies of these Witnesses
do lie in the street of the great City; by the great City, it seems we must
necessarily understand Rome. So much is understood by this same expression, the
holy Ghost himself inerpreting at the 17 Chapter of this Prophecy, and last
Verse: And when further you have mention of [the great Whore] [Great Babylon]
and the like, still Rome is meant by all those expressions: Cha. 17. 1. Chapter 16
19. Chapter 20. 10.
Only once in this book the new Jerusalem (extant after the fall of Babylon) is
called the great City; but that the new Jerusalem should be meant by the great
City here, none can be so far lost to all understanding as once to imagine it.

And sure not without cause is Rome called great Babylon, the Ch 16. 19.
great City; for whether you take greatness to signify an amplitude of power,
(for so sometimes it is used to signify) hence the great King is as much as
King of kings: or take greatness for Psalm. 48. 2.
spa^iousnesse: What City can compare with Rome in either of these?

In the former; What City can, when you have Rome by the holy Ghost himself
described [the great City that rules over the Kings of the earth:] Nineveh,
Babylon, no City ever extending Chap. 17. ult.
its power so far as Rome.

And for spaciousness which can, at this day, when but a part of it remains;
it is 15 or 16 miles in compass within the Walls (if Lipsius may be believed)
but when this Prophecy Admirand. lib. 3.
was written, it was then in compass 42 miles: And is not this then with good
reason called the great City?

I know Bellarmine, with some other Popish Writers, as also Bell lib. 3. de Pa.
some late ones of our own, contend Jerusalem must be here meant the great
City; but how likely, let others judge: For first, for extent of power, none
will say it ever came near Rome, 'twas utterly inconsiderable to Rome, which
was indeed urbs Hicronim.
caput orbis, the City, the Empress of the World; yea, which at once did
swallow up Jerusalem with all its Territory, and little less then an hundred
times as much as all that came to: And for spaciousness, take this record
concerning Jerusalem; Wilhelmus Tyrius, l^b. 8 de bello sacro urbs min^r
m^^imis mediocribus mai^r.
It was a City less then the greatest, greater then the least, a midling City
(as we say) this is all that can be said for the compass of it: which if so,
Jerusalem then cannot be the great City here meant; and if not Jerusalem, then
must Rome be it; for besides Jerusalem, there is none else that stands in
competition. Rome then is the great City; but now the street of the great City
follows, that must be our next enquire.

And concerning this same, it is not to be conceived (I suppose) a street
properly so called, such as every great City has many of; for besides, That
Armies do not use to make the City, and so no one street of a City their place
of fight, which yet they must say who shall here be peremptory for the letter:
besides this (I say) neither was our Savior crucified in any street of the
City, but without the Gat^, who yet is said there to be crucified Heb 13. 1^
where these Witnesses lay dead, even in the street of the great City; from all
which it appears not to be a street properly so called, and therefore some
other must be enquired after.

Shall we therefore say the street of the great City means the Romish
Territority, the space wherein the Romish Government is exercised. This seems
not unlikely; and if the word [(...)] signifying [a street] be well examined,
(...) often by the Lxx, translated (...) signifies, Quicquid est extra, regio
etc. Job. 5. 10. Likewise (...) rendered also by the Lxx (...), will not
gainsay, but a whole country may be called (...). Vid. Mede Com. Apoca.
it will be found not altogether to abhor from such a meaning. In regard
therefore this cannot be a street properly so taken, and then further it is but
one street, such as the greatest Cities seem to have but one of; though of
streets properly so taken, there is no City but has many, as also because the
word [(...)] will bear it; be the Roman Territory, that space wherewith the
Roman Jurisdiction is co^xtended [The street of this great City.]

But now why is this great city Spiritually called Sodom? this next follows to
be enquired concerning.

This word [(...), Spiritually] bars us out from any thought that this City
here mentioned should be Sodom indeed; No, this City is spiritually Sodom; and
yet not [spiritually] as often the word is taken, viz. when [earthly and
carnally] are opposed, for so both the one City and the other have little to do
with any thing spiritual in this meaning: But [spiritually] it is Sodom, that
is, this great city Rome is Metaphorically Sodom, it is Sodom by way of
resemblance; this is meant, when you have Rome called [spiritually Sodom.]

And that this is so, and there is a clear resemblance betwixt them, who so
shall compare them each to other, will no longer make question. For instance,
Sodom, to which Rome is here resembled (not to name other things) was the most
silthy place then in being in the world: we read the story of that notorious
wickedness of theirs in that nineteenth of Genesis. From which Genesis 19.
the sin of Sodomy taking its name, retains it to this day. And for the great
City of Rome here mentioned; sure for uncleanness it is nothing at all behind
Sodom: For look upon her spiritual uncleanness, and because of these you
have her called the great Whor^, the mother of Harlots and abominations of the
R^v. l. 17. and 5.
earth: she being the parent of all abominable Idolatries whatsoever. And for
carnal uncleanness, let him speak, who thus upon his knowledge reports her.

I pudor ad villas, si non patiantur easdem, Bapt Mantu:

Et villae vomitas: Roma est jam tota Lupanat.
Who also taking his leave of Rome, thus be speaks her. Vid. Fran: Petrat.
Epist. 20.


Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse, revertar,
Cum leno meretrix, scusra Cynaedus ero.
But then for the sin of Sodomy it self (the foundation of this resemblance)
is there any thing more common in this City then this most infamous
wickedness, that of the Epigramatist speaks a great deal both of wit, and
truth together.

Roma quid est? Amor est, quem dat preposterus ordo,
Roma mares: noli dicere plurascio.
Can this sin be a stranger in that City, when Jerome, Zeged, Brightman.
Mutius does dare to write in the defense of this sin of Sodomy, and these
writings of his, allowed by the Bull of Pope Julius the third? When also the
Archbishop of Beneventum, becomes so lost to all shame, as to make a Panegyrie
in commendation of this most detestable wickedness. But no more of this, least
I wrong modest spirits. In short the uncleanness of this place are not to be
mentioned; of which (I say no more) if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant
still; for my part I had rather he should be so, then by my inveighing against
them, so to come to learn them. Sufficient I am sure has been discovered, to
show that Rome is Sodom, which was our purpose. Next we proceed to enquire,
why it is called [Egypt.]

And doubtless, the resemblance holds as well in this, as in the former; as if
we but take a view thereof, we shall easily discover. Observe therefore: Egypt
was a place for Idolatry, none like it; none had more gods then they; and then
their Herodat. Juve: Saty: 15.
gods some of them, were Cats, Crocodiles, Serpents, Oynions, (as the Satyrist
scoffs at them) even the vilest, and most abject creatures. And does not the
resemblance every way answer. Have any people more gods then are to be found in
the Romish Egypt? Can you come into any place of theirs, any Temple, any
Oratory, where you do not find every Wall, every Window, every corner thronged
with them. And then to give divine honor to a pair of shoes, a shirt, a pair
of breeches, with Carthus: Alexand: Hal: Thomas Cajetan Bonavent. Bellar.
infinite such kind of Relics (then which both their opinion, and practice
speaks nothing more common) is not this every way as bad as to worship a Cat, a
Crocodile, or any other such vile creature.

But this is not all; As Egypt was an Idolatrous place, so was it to the people
of God, a place of cruelties, it was to them the house of Iron bondage. However
it was friendly at first, yet Deu 4. 20. Exodus 1. 8.
when an other King arose that knew not Joseph: then did Egypt begin to show it
self; then, lest Israel should overmuch increase, they must be had to the fiery
furnace, if so be the toil, and anguish Verse 11. and 14.
hereof might lessen, and consume them; When this succeeds not, then all the
mal^-children must be destroyed as soon as born; that thus stopping the spring,
the stream, within a while might wither, and be cut off also.

And has not all this been done in the Romish Egypt? What ever fair quarter
the Church at first found among them, it was not long before the Dragon, (a
title formerly given to Pharaoh, Isai. 51. 9. Chap. 12* Verse 1, 2, 3, 4.
but now entailed upon the Heathen Roman Emperors:) does stand before the
woman new in travel, ready to destroy the Malechild so soon as ever it was
born. When this takes not, then are they brought unto the furnace, and however
the people of God Verse. 13. and 17. Sanguis martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
did multiply in their persecutions, and their numbers increased by those very
courses they took to lessen them, in like manner as did Israel before; yet was
not the furnace of the Romish Egypt, less scorching then of the other; nay
rather, the furnace in this Egypt, is heated seven times hotter then ever that
of the former. It could be no less, when besides all those who were put to
death in the ten Primative persecutions, at least ten hundred thousand of the
Waldenses and Albigenses (as was hinted before) are after made away by the
Antichristian Power. And since those bloody times to our days, no fewer
destroyed by this Egyptian fiery furnace also. In the first thirty years after
the Order of the Jesuits was brought forth, were Baldwin de A^tich cap 6. Fra:
Iunius and Tilmus ad Bell.
slain of godly Christians near ninety thousand: And the Inquisition it self,
in the space of scarce thirty years, made away with no less then a hundred and
fifty thousand: whereto if we should add all the blood of Martyrs spilt in
Germany, France, and England, together with that Protestant blood now shed in
Ireland, what would all this amount unto? but the former is sufficient for our
purpose; and what has been said abundantly showing that Rome is to the people
of God the house of Bondage: for which, together with its notorious Idolatry,
it is not unelegantly by the holy Ghost styled another Egypt.

Rome then for its Idolatry, and Cruelty apparently is Egypt; now next we
enquire (which in the Text follows) why it is resembled to the place where our
Lord was crucified.

The Jesuits, to the end they might deliver their beloved Rome from the foul
and odious stains here asperst upon her, will needs turn Ribera Apoc 11. number.
12. Bellar: lib 3. de Pap: To.
all this over to Jerusalem, telling us Jerusalem is the place here described;
for where (say they) was our Lord crucified, but only at Jerusalem?

Of our own there are that carry it thus; As Rome before was for its
filthiness Sodom, as also Egypt for Idolatry, and cruelty; so now in her
blasphemous Mass, for crucifying Christ Petra Epist. 19.
afresh every day, and killing these Witness, as once indeed she did Christ
himself, is therefore here called Spiritually Jerusalem: But if this please
not, you may refer this clause to that which went before, I mean those words
[the street of the great city] as if the Verse ran thus; And their dead bodies
shall lie in the street of the great city, where also our Lord was crucified.
According whereunto the meaning must be this; Our Savior was crucified in the
street of the great city, where also lie dead the bodies of these Witnesses.

Jerusalem, how then in any street of Rome?

Jerusalem, That was the certain, literal place (as I may call it) where he
was crucified: yet in regard he was not put to death by any power the Joh. 18.
31
Jews had, (for they acknowledge, It was not lawful for them, to put any man
to death) but by the Roman power, in regard Pilate a Roman Judge passes
sentence: And further, because adjudged to dye a Roman death: And this in a
place, at that time under the Roman Jurisdiction, within the Roman Territory;
therefore with good congruitie, he is here said to be crucified in the street
of Rome also. In brief, our Savior was crucified within the Roman
jurisdiction: This (as we saw before) is [The street of the great City.]

Gather up now the sum of all the former into one, and the result of all, is
clearly thus much. These Witnesses formerly slain in their office; and now
continuing in that state of civil death their slaughter brought them into,
thus lie dead within the Dominion, and Territory of Rome; which Rome is for her
filthynesse [Sodome] for her Idolatry, and cruel persecuting of the people of
God [Egypt;] which when heathen puts our Savior to death, now Antichristian
puts to death his Witnesses. The words thus opened, the observations now follow.

1. Is the street of the great City the [Roman Territory:] then if the salying
of the Witnesses should be yet to come; as also to be accomplished in all the
Roman territory; then only out of the Roman territory, can be exemption
expected from this slaughter; only in the further parts of the world, or some
more privileged place nearer home (if there be any such) can any Witnesses
hope this killing shall not befall them?

2. Is Rome [Sodome]? Take notice then of that strange blindness, or rather
perverseness of the Romish Crew: Rome is in their apprehension, and in their
mouths also [Sancta Roma,] holy Rome;] notwithstanding (there being no place
so unholy) it is by the holy Ghost deservedly called Sodom.

3. Is Rome become [Sodome?] Observe from hence, the sad, yet proper punishment
of Idolatry: Rome through her Idolatry, is by a just judgment, transformed
into Sodom. These by their Idolatrous imaginations depose the Lord into the
likeness Rom 1. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
of themselves. God by a just punishment deposes them into worse then very
beasts. For this cause God gives them over to vilo affections. They entertain
unbecoming thoughts of God, and God gives them to do things altogether
unbecoming themselves.

4. What a mercy was it to be delivered from Rome? What a mercy was it for Lot
to be delivered out of Sodom? from so much filthiness, and from such an
unclean Generation, the beholding whereof could be no other to a gracious
heart, then a 1 Pet. 2. 7.
continual vexation?

5. If Rome from her Idolatry and cruelty is become another Egypt, How
thankful then should we bear our selves for our deliverance from it? an
Idolatrous place, as also a cruel; such as would by the former destroy the
soul; or if it could not that, then by the latter the body: should not the
deliverance from such a place, be always had in remembrance?

6. If Rome be Egypt; Ah cruel they that have formerly, and daily do contend
to bring a poor escaped people into Egypt back again. Israel had a Law, That
none should bring again a Deuteronomy. 23. 15.
servant, who because of the harsh usage of his Master, had got away from him:
This was, and yet continues to be our case, and is among us the great quarrel
at this day: Poor we, are escaped from Egypt, from Rome, being able to bear her
harsh usage no longer; and cruel hard-hearted they, by all endeavors possible
will try to bring us thither again.

7. Is Rome the place [where our Lord was crucified?] Oh the destruction and
vengence that does await Rome! when God shall recompense upon her the blood of
Proph^ts, the blood of Saints, yea, the blood of all that are slain upon the
earth, and after all this shall come to reckon with her for shedding the blood
of Cha 18. 24
his only beloved Son, for crucifying the Lord of glory also, What a vengeance
must all this be recompensed withal!

VERSE. 9. And they of the People, and Kinreds, and Tongues, and Nations, shall
see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in graves.
WE have formerly seen these Witnesses slain, by whom, as also where they lie
dead; but now, when we should attend them to their graves, we cannot, there is
this hinders (says the Text) Their dead bodies are not suffered to be put in
graves.

The enquiry of the meaning of this, is our present business: In the endeavor
whereof, for better order sake, we shall observe:

1. What it is that is further done to these Witnesses after they are slain; In
these words [They are looked upon, and not suffered to be put in graves.]

2. The persons that look upon them, and will not suffer them them to be put in
graves, pointed at in these words, [They of the People, and Kinreds, and
Tongues, and Nations] these look upon the dead Witnesses, and will not suffer
them to be put in graves.

3. How long this gaze of theirs lasts, and the Witnesses thereupon kept
unburied; which these words also give us knowledge of, It Is [three days and an
half.] They of the People- and Kinreds, and Tongues, and Nations, shall see
their dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer them to be put
in graves.

In the foremost of these (which will perhaps take in the second in the
scanning) I must needs acknowledge there is a knot; which because it seems to
lay it self open to two, different, and opposite meanings, and both very
plausible, renders the matter difficult whether to take of them.

The question is, Whether this [looking upon these dead Witnesses, and the not
suffering them to be put in graves,] be done in favor, or dis-favour of them;
and accordingly as you incline in this question either to the one side, or to
the other, so will there a suitable meaning offer it self to you. To instance
therefore; here is one interpretation the words seem to like of. The Beast, the
Romish Antichrist with his accomplices, having stopped the mouths of all the
Witnesses, thus slaying them, and now further devising some way, that being
thus slain, they may never rise again, never witness more against him, thus
trying to throw them into the Grave, to shut and seal the graves-mouth upon
them; in attempting hereof, is by the Reformed people (through the Ministry of
the Witnesses, by this time grown into great multitudes, and already provoked
for the slaughter of these Witness^s) resolutely opposed; which Antichrist
perceiving, and fearing lest upon further attempts they might become desperate,
fits down content only to have thrust these Witnesses from their places, and
stopped their mouths for present, not daring to make any further attempt at all
against them. Thus they of the Kinreds, and Tongues, and People, and Nations,
do hinder, that Antichrist (who has slain these Witnesses) should yet proceed
so far as to throw them into graves; And to this interpretation these
Considerations seem to give countenance:

1. It is not the Inhabitants of the earth (by which name the Popish faction
are commonly known in this Revelation) who keep the Witnesses from being
buried; for then the matter had been put besides all question; but on the
contrary, it is [They of the Kinreds, and Tongues, and People, and Nations] these
will not suffer the Witnesses to be put in graves; by which, who can be meant
but the Reform^d p^opl^? Those you have indeed brought in rejoicing, at the
following Verse, for the slaughter Verse. 10.
of the Witnesses; who, had they been here meant also, probably not this so
different, but the same expression had served to point at them in both places.

2. The Original Text seems to contribute something toward this
Interpretation; where you read, [(...)] being all put partitively; As if the
holy Ghost should say; [And some of them of the Kinreds, and People, and
Tongues, etc. some of finer mettle, choyce^ spirits] these shall not suffer the
Witnesses to be put in graves.

2. This is one Interpretation, and indeed in the general plausible, though (I
must confess) looking a little nearer, to see how particulars will hold, there
seems some difficulty: For instance; stating the Reformed people k^^p the
Witnesses from burying; but what can be meant by their looking on their dead
bodies? (so says the Text) They look upon their dead bodies three days and an
holy; Is it any pleasure for them to have their eyes so long upon their dead
Witnesses? Abraham, when his beloved Sarah Genesis 23. 4.
was dead, then buys a place to bury his dead out of his sight: were it never
so great delight to look on them while alive, sure it can be none to look on
them when dead. And then again, what can we understand by those graves, which
according to this Interpretation, the Reformed people are said not to suffer
these Witnesses to be put into? shall we say this they mean, [they keep them
from being killed indeed] but where find we that [not suffering to be buried]
should mean, not [suffering to be killed] what analogy between these? And
indeed it is a hard matter to assign any condition which holds resemblance, or
analogy with those graves, which the Reformed people (according to this
Interpretation) are said to keep the dead Witnesses from.

So you have the first meaning the words seem to allow of; The other is this:

The Romish Antichrist with his party, having stopped the mouths of these
Witnesses, thus slaying them, after this shall with scorn, and insultation look
upon their dead bodies: And if any should come as Joseph of Arimathea, to beg
the body of Joh. 13. 39
one of these dead Witnesses, or should try to hide or shelter these
Witnesses, as Obadiah did the Prophets in the Cave; no, they 1 Kin. 18. 4 and
13.
must not; such is the savagenesse of this Beast, with his accomplices, they
forbid any to harbor, entertain or countenance these silenced Witnesses, thus
not suffering their dead bodies to be put in graves.

And if this sense shall pass, then have we a fair and obvious understanding
of both those particulars, which in the former we scarce knew what at all to
make of. The former [They look upon them] according to this Interpretation, the
meaning must be, [They look upon them in derision.] So they did upon our
Savior, when he was upon the Cross; The people, with the Priests, beholding
of him, derided him, Luke 23. 25. And is it not an usual thing, in this manner
for them to be looked upon, who having been formidable before, are now brought
down, and become at an under? Cast your eye upon that 14 of Isa. and 16, and
you will thence easily know, what it is for any Isa. 14. 10. and 16.
to be looked upon in the case above mentioned; Observe the words a little,
[They that see thee, shall narrowly look upon thee] Mark you, Here Is a looking
upon the Babylonian Monarchs now fallen; well, and what say they? Is this the
man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake Kingdoms? Art thou also
become weak as one of us? See how they insult over that fallen Monarchy.

And then for their [not suffering them to be put in graves] which was the
other expression, we knew not what to make of in the former Interpretation
(still retaining the analogy) it has this meaning, [They shall deny them
shelter, hiding place, and the like] So that if any had a desire to entertain
them into their houses, so to bury them within their private Walls, it must not
be: The Beast will not allow so much honor done to these Witnesses, as to
suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.

In both which, there seems an allusion to our Saviors case, just after he was
crucified; whose dead body was indeed bestowed upon Joseph of Arimathea, when
he came to beg it, but had it not been because the next day was a high day with
the Joh. 19 31.
Jews, it had hung a longer space upon the Cross, to be the object of the
gaze, and scorn of all that should pass by. But these more cruel then the
Jews, at least not fearing their Festival. Verse. 10.
(mentioned in the Verse following) should be profaned by the bodies of the
Witnesses lying unburied in the street, will not at any hand suffer them to be
put in graves; but there they must lie to be looked upon, the scorn and
derision of all; as our Saviors had been also, had not the solemnity of the
day following prevented.

And now to render this Interpretation more likely, take these Considerations:

1. To deny the dead burial, sounds always a dis-favour; a great dis-favour
from him that does deny it; a great indignity to him to whom it is denied: was
it no indignity to Jehoiakim, that he is threatened to be buried with the
burial of an Ass? He Jer 22. 19.
should have no burial at all, or none worth having? As also to the Babylonian
Monarchs, That they should be cast out of their graves, as an abominable
branch? Would this be no indignity, no Isa. 14. 19.
dis-favour to them?

2. That which appears the main support of the other Interpretation (namely,
because it is not the inhabitants of the earth are said to keep them from their
graves, but The Kinreds, and People, and Tongues, and Nations; implying
thereby, That not the Popish Party do it, but some other) will not hold; both
(notwithstanding the different expression) seeming indeed to mean the same
persons. They do so at the 13 Chap. of this Prophecy, the 7 and 8 V. In the
former whereof, I mean the 7. you find the Beast has power given him, over all
Kinreds, and Tongues, and People, and Nations: In the latter, All that dwell
upon the earth worship him. Here they are all one: But now if any man should
question whether that power over Kinreds, and Tongues, and People, and Nations,
do not mean a power by persecuting, to over-master, and so implying no
voluntary subjection of these, as of the other: the 17 Chap. and 15 verse puts
this out of question, where you find, The waters which the woman sits upon,
that is, which subject Chap. 17. 15.
themselves to her, are people, and kinreds, and tongues, and nations.

3. These same who look upon the dead Witnesses in this ver. appear the same
with those, on whom great fear falls, when they see them stand upon their feet,
and so rise again at the 11 verse. They do so; for who could they be in
likelihood, that see them after the three days and a halfstanding upon their
feet, but those who during the space of three days and an half looked upon
them? And by the same argument, are they not the same with those who at the 12
verse (beholding these Witnesses ascension) are there expressly called their
enemies? for who in likelihood sees these Witnesses after three days and an
half ascending, but those who all the while before looked upon them? yea I
should offer it, Whether the Nations that look upon these Witnesses here, and
those which at 2 ver. tread under foot the holy City, be not all one: The same
original word [(...)] expresses both; and if these Nations Verse 2.
here be but the same with those who tread under foot the holy City, we need no
further question whether friends or foes keep them unburied, or whether this be
done in favor, or dis-favour of the Witnesses: To all which this seems to add
some confirmation, That therefore it appears they will not suffer them to be
put in graves, that they might glut their eyes with looking upon them; So the
Text, They look upon them, and will not suffer them to be put in graves, as
though they could never have their fill of such a pleasing spectacle as is the
dead Witnesses.

You have now both the Interpretations. The one understanding this [looking
upon the Witnesses, and not suffering them to be put in graves] done in favor
to them, the other disfavour: neither of them unlikely, and therefore I shall
leave every one, after the reasons on both sides well weighed, to take which
himself best pleases; though for my own part I must confess I rather incline
to this latter, It Is done in dis-favour.

And now you see this large handling of the first thing mentioned; namely, [the
looking upon the Witnesses, and not suffering them to be put in graves] has
(according to our former intimation) prevented a large enquiry in the second: I
mean [the persons looking upon the Witnesses, and not suffering them to be
buried] and so will not hold us long off from that [space of time wherein these
Witnesses being looked at, are not suffered to be buried] which was the last
thing in these words to be enquired concerning.

For if so be these Witnesses are kept out of their gaves in savor to them,
according as the former meaning would have it, then [they of the Kinreds, and
Tongues, and Nations] must needs be the Reformed people; but if this be done in
dis-favour, as the second Interpretation carries it, then must [they of the
Kinreds and People, and Tongues and Nations] without all controversy mean the
Popish Party.

Unless we say some kind of middle people may possibly be understood
(somewhat differing from the Inhabitants of the earth, the through Papists) who
formerly having showed themselves friends, and yielding some shelter to these
Witnesses from the storms that had before droven them from their own places;
yet now seeing the great power of Antichrist, fall in with him as the stronger,
now no longer affording any shelter, any hiding place to these Witnesses. Which
of these [the Kinreds, and People, and Nations] mean, I shall no further
determine, but from it, pass on to enquire, how long the Witnesses are looked
upon, and kept unburied, by the People, and Tongues, and Nations, which (says
the Text) is Three days and an half; the last thing we were to enquire after,
and comes now to be handled.

Concerning which three days and an half, I shall not say as some do, it
signifies some very short time, yet not at all limited, Paraeus Com^ Apo.
or determinate; I shall not say so: for, being that it is a broken number
[three days and an half] as broken numbers use to do, it must needs signify a
time determinate.

Nor further can this signify the same space with the Witnesses Prophecy
(which yet some imagine) for that of the Witnesses Deuteronomy. Exp.
Prophecy, is three years and an half; this, of their lying unburied, but
three days and an half: Besides, this space of the three days and an half,
does then begin, when the term of the three years ^n^ an hal^ is about to
determine. For when the Witnesses have continued their prophecy almost three
years and an half, and are now drawing toward an end, then are they slain; and
after slain, they lic unb^ried three days and an half; so that this cannot be
the same space with the term of the Witnesses Prophecy.

Once more; Nor seems it to be understood in the letter, viz. Ribera.
for three days and an half properly, and in strictness so taken, it being
hard to conceive, that all that which is mentioned to be done, during this
space, should in so short a time as three days and an half be possibly
accomplished. Is it possible that tidings of the slaughter of these Witnesses
should be carried from one people to an other, in the space of three days and
an half; so that in that space also, they might congratulate with one another
for this so happy turn of the Witnesses slaughter? Or is the space of half a
day perceiveable, in a time of such public and universal solemnity, as that
is, when the Witnesses are killed? Which if so, If this three days and an half
be not on indet^r^inate time (as we saw before;) nor yet the same with the 1260
days, the term of the Witnesses Prophecy: nor yet three days and an half in
the letter (as we saw just now) what can it mean, but three days and an half
prophetical, that is, three years and an half? Thus long is the space while
the Witnesses lie unburied. So we understood the three years and an half of the
Witnesses Prophecy before; which resolving into one thousand two hundred and
threescore days, and then accounting a day, for a year (as is the manner of
the Prophets sometime to reckon) the whole came to one thousand two hundred and
threescore years; So these [three days and an half] take them (is sometimes
the Prophets do, and as we reckoned the former) and they make three years and
an half al^o.

The meaning of this Verse, and all the severalls thereof, being thus at large
opened; I shall not for this once, draw up the sum of all offering it to one
view, so (as has been my former manner) but studious of brevity, shall
forthwith proceed to the observations, which are these.

1. From the former Interpretation; Do the reformed people keep the Witnesses
from being thrown in to graves? Then if this should not be past, here is a
lesson for the reformed people, here is this hint for them: Though they may
suffer Antichrist to slay their Witnesses; yet when he goes about to throw them
into the grave, to the end they might never rise again, then does it behove the
reformed people, with all their united strength, resolvedly to oppose it.

Let the reformed people remember this, now they are told of it, if such a
thing were yet to be accomplished* That they do their parts, and not suffer
Antichrist, after he has slain their Witnesses, to the end they might never
rise again, to throw them into the grave also.

2. From the latter. 1. Do the Popish party look upon the dead Witnesses, and
will not suffer them to be buried, that they might still delight themselves in
the beholding of them? Oh the insinite spleen the Popish party do bear against
the Lords Witnesses! Is it not sufficient, they have slain them, but they must
have their dead bodies lie before them, to scorn and mock at? Is it not
sufficient, the Philistimes have put out Sampsons cyes, Jud. 16. 21* and 25.
but they must send for him in this condition, to make them sport also? Take
notice of the immortal hate these bear against Gods Witnesses, which does not
determine with their death; For after this, they must have their dead bodies to
make maygames of.

3. Observe the salvagenesse of Antichrist and his crew, who will not suffer
the dead Witnesses to have the honor of burial: When they have stopped the
Witnesses mouths, and so slain them, they cannot bear it, that any shall take a
silenced Witness into house, give him shelter, entertainment: Hence such
search, such enquiry made after these proscribed Witnesses heretofore, and
should this not be accomplished, it will be greater yet then ever, the
Antichristian party will not suffer the dead Witnesses to be put in graves.

4. Does this unburied state of these Witnesses last but three days and an
half, three years and an half, here is some comfort, Om^ia advers^, qu^ntu^^s
magn^, (...).
Though this time when ever it is, may be troublesome; yet it is not like to
last long. How long soever they be a slaying, when once slain, they lie dead
but three years an half, no longer are they left to be the scorn of the Popish
brood; no longer are the people of God deprived of them.

VERSE. 10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them
that dwelt upon the Earth.
IT now follows we see what is done the while these Witnesses lie dead, gazed
upon, and uninterred in the street of the great City. In these words, And they
that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice and make merry, and send presents one
to another, because these two Prophets tormented, etc.

In opining whereof, we shall observe such like method as in the former
enquiring.

1. What it is that is done, the while the Witnesses lie slain, and unburied,
laid down in these words, [They rejoice, and make merry, and send presents.]

2. The persons thus rejoicing, and making merry, And they are styled [The
Inhabitants of the earth, They that dwell upon the earth.]

3. The ground why they that dwell upon the earth are thus over joyed; In these
words, [Tis over these two Prophets, because they tormented them that dwell
upon the earth.] Of these briefly in this order.

In opening the former, whereof I mean [The rejoicing, and making merry, etc.]
here mentioned, I shall for this purpose refer to two, or three Scriptures;
which taken notice of, will contribute abundant light in this matter.

The first of these I refer to, is that ninth of Hester: where, the Jews
having got the day of their enemies, and procured Haman hanged, who in chief
contrived, and endeavored their ruin, for so great a deliverance, they set
apart days of solemn feasting, and in them, They rejoice, and make merry, and
send Hest. 9. 19, 18
portions one to another.

So likewise in that fifteenth of Luke, When the Prodigal ^^mes home, so glad
is the tender father, he has received his son safe again, that for joy, he
sends, and kills the fatted Calf, and they rejoice, and make merry also. Luke
15. 24.


And in the eight of N^h^miah, and the twelfth verse. The manner of keeping a
solemn feastivall, is thus described, The people went home every one to eat
the fat, and to drink the sweet, and to send portions on^ to another, and to
make great mirth.

From all which we gather, this much seems meant by the r^joy^ing, and making
m^rry, here mentioned: The Inhabitants of the earth shall so resent there
killing of, and conquest over these Witnesses, that they shall as greatly, and
solemnly rejoice, as those, who for some great deliverance, or else some
eminent good thing befalling, were wont to set a part, and celebrate a
^eastivall, wherein their menner was (as we heard before.) To Neh. 8. 12.
eat, and drink* and make m^rry, and send presents one to another.

This is the meaning. And here observe it, I stick not for the exact
performance of all this in the Letter: Namely that indeed, And in the letter
they should here send presents one to another (a custom among them of Elder
times in their solemn rejoycings, now antiquated,) out this they shall do; They
shall as greatly rejoice, now they are rid of these Witnesses, as they in their
solemn feastivals did, whose way of expressing their joy, was by making merry,
and sending presents one to another.

We have now the meaning of the first thing, viz. The rejoicing, and making
m^rry, here mentioned; next follows, the persons that rejoice, and they are
[The Inhabitants of the earth, They that dwell upon the earth.] These are they,
that rejoice, and make m^rry. And whom can we understand by these, but the
Popish Antichristian party? So we find them expressed, and pointed at, in the
thi^teenth Chapter of this Prophecy, and the eight verse. Likewise at the
seventeenth Chapter, and the fifth verse, besides many more places: yea so
commonly does the earth signify the Antichristian Church, and the Inhabitants
of the earth, the Popish Antichristian faction, that all this prophecy over,
they are almost terms convertible. The Inhabitants of the earth, are the
Antichristian faction; and the Antichristian faction, are the Inhabitants of
the earth. And when the members of the true Church are usually in this
Revelation Rev. 13. 6. Revel. 18. 20.
styled [Those that dwell in Heaven] which they are, how appositely are the
members of the Antichristian Church, their opposites styled [Those that dwell
upon the earth.]

And indeed, who else can be imagined to rejoice at the suppressing, and
killing of these Witnesses, but such as these? Who were tormented by the
Witnesses, but they? So the Text, The two Prophets torm^nted them, who dwelt
upon the earth. And then who can these possible be, but the Popish faction; who
because tormented by these Witnesses, help the beast to slay them, and now
having slain them, do out of measure rejoice, they are thus got rid of them?

It is evident then the Inhabitants of the earth, are the Popish party: So we
have dispatched the second thing, [The persons that do rejoice, and make
merry;] Now follows the third, [The reason why the Popish party do re^oyce:]
thus expressed, They rejoice over the Witnesses, because they tormented them
that dwell upon the earth.

And here we must not mistake, as though the reason lay thus, They rejoice,
because the two Witnesses tormented them; as the words at the first face, seem
to carry it: for doubtless, it is small joy to them to be tormented. But thus
rather, They rejoice over them, because these two Witnesses tormented them,
meaning, That because these two Witnesses tormented them, when alive; therefore
do they thus insult and triumph over them now, they are dead: or else thus;
They rejoice, because avenged, as also got rid of these Witnesses, and the
reason why they rejoice for this (as they conceive) so happy riddance, is,
because these two Witnesses, while they were alive, grievously tormented them.
This is then in short the meaning, The Popish faction rejoice, because got shut
of these Witnesses, fearing now no more to be tormented by them.



inward torment, torment of Chap. 14. 10, 11.
conscience, and would as well signify the same here also.

But we saw the Witnesses at the sixth verse of this Chapter, Turning ^^^ers
into blood, and smiting the earth with all plagues, by which is meant [The
pouring out of the Vials] as was then showed. This indeed is the [Tormenting
the Inhabitants of the earth] here mentioned. And sure if it be either
considered, what ^s in those Vials, which is powered forth, or their behavior,
on whom they are powered; with all, remembering what has been discovered in this
matter before. It will be undoubtedly concluded, The pouring forth of the
Vials, is, The tormenting of the Inhabit^nts of the earth, here intended. For
example. Observe, What it is these Vials are full of, and at the 16 Chapter and
seventh Cha 16. 1.
verse, you find them brim full with the wrath of God. All which being poured
forth upon the eart^, (verse first, of that 16 Chap.) can it be, but this
should torment them that dwell upon the earth. Again, Look upon the behavior
of them that dwell upon the earth, now there Vials are a pouring forth: and
several times in that 16 Cha you find, that when a Vial is pouring out, Chap.
16. ver. 9. and 11.
they gnaw their tongues for pain, and blaspheme the God of heaven.

The Witnesses pouring forth the Vials] is then the [tormenting of the
Inhabitants of the earth] here mentioned.

But before I wholly leave this same, give me leave by the wa^, to observe
something from the word here used. It is not [(...) to wrong,] but it is [(...)
to inflict a just torment:] when the Popish party medles with the Witness,
then [(...)] expresses it, as at the fifth verse, they do the Witnesses wrong;
but when the Witnesses plague them, then it is [(...)] they inflict upon them a
just torment; and accordingly when they come to destroy Babylon (for these very
Witnesses do destroy her) there you have the same word also. How much she has
glorified Cha. 18. 7. (...).
her self, so much just torment give her: Showing, that what they do to these
Witnesses, is wrong; what the Witnesses do to them, even when they come to
destroy them, is but just punishment.

But to let this pass, all the parts of this verse being now opened, put all
together, and it comes to thus much. The Popish party being grievously
tormented by the Witnesses pouring forth the Vials upon them, in revenge
hereof, they slay the Witnesses, and having slain them, do out of measure
rejoice, they are thus got rid of them. Thus you have at once the sum of the
verse; from which, next follow these few observations.

1. Are the dwellers on the earth the Popish crew? From hence then learn the
Character of the Popish Antichristian party, They are a generation that dwell
upon the earth, an earthly generation: So sometime the Prelaticall faction
their near kindred have been described: viz. A generation of the earth, earthly,
and Baines Dio. Try. Fr^f:
that savor not the things of God. And certainly not without cause are the
Popish party thus decifered, Their Religion is of the earth, their Ordinances
are earthly Ordinances, thence all came; and when they have all helped those
poor Papists that use them, what they can, will not carry them above that
earth, from whence they came.

2. Do the Antichristian brood rejoice at the slaughter of the Witn^sses? Oh
the desperate height of wickedness these unhappy wretches arive to. The Lord
does send his Witnesses, choice Instruments, to convince these of their
Idolatry, uncleanness, profaneness, and if it might be to bring them to
repentance: but they, are so far from being convinced, so far from being
won unto repentance, that instead hereof they slay the Witnesses; and when
they have this done (wonder of impiety) as if they had done some most
praiseworthy thing, they rejoice at it. Oh the desperate hardness that's come
upon the Antichristian faction!

3. Do the Witnesses torment the Popish party? You see then they do not so
carry their hard usuage of these Witnesses, that they themselves escape u^^et
withal: If they make the Witnesses prophecy in Sackcloth, the Witnesses
torment them as much by pouring upon them the Vials. And sure by that time all
casts are played, The Popish party will have no great cause to boast of their
winnings: by that time these Witnesses have rewarded Rev. 18. 6.
Babylon, as she has rewarded them, and in the cup wherein she has filled,
have filled to her double, (which is their Commission) which also I could
earnestly desire, were more looked upon, and considered, (for who knows but
some of us, that now live may be called forth to execute this Commission) I say
again, by that time the Reformed Churches have slain her Priests, as she has
slain their Witnesses, and dashed her bratts against the Psalm 137. 8, 9. Rev.
18. 6.
stones, as she has done their little ones: yea, and rewarded her double for
all the wrongs, and violence done unto them, then will the Antichristian
faction be enforced to acknowledge they were sufficiently matched, when they
meddled with these Witnesses.

VERSE. 11. And after three days and an half, the Spirit of Life from God
entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them
which saw them.
IN the words last handled, we saw how joy'd the Popish crew were at the
slaughter of the Witnesses, thinking they had made such a hand of them, as that
they should never hear of them any more: But now (which quashes all their
mirth, and makes them every whit as sad as did the slaying of these Witnesses
rejoice them before) Behold, After three days and an half, the Spirit of Life
enters into the Witnesses, and they stand upon their feet.

In which words, you have observable;

1. The witnesses Resurrection: [The Spirit of life from God ent^rs into them,
and they stand upon their feet.] 2. The time of their Resurrection; It Is [after
three days and an half. 3. The Consequent hereof; [Great fear fell on them
that saw them.
Of these I shall speak in this order, and thereof briefly also, as of the
former, beginning with their Resurrection first, in these words [The Spirit of
life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet.

The Spirit of life] that which the Hebrews call [breath of (...) Heb. (...)
Arab. (...)
life] this enters into them.

And they stand upon their feet:] After this Spirit of life, or Breath of life,
or as the Arabique renders it [Spirit from God] enters into them, they stand
upon their feet; that is, They rise up again into their former employment: A
posture quite different from what we ere while saw them in, when they lay dead
in the street, not able to move hand or foot, for the space of three ye^rs and
a half together. But now after that God has by some extraordinary hand of his,
restored them from their suspensions and silencings, and so life put into them,
then they stand upon their feet, as ready now anew to witness against
Antichrist, as ^ver they were before. So those dry bones* Ez^ch. 37, (...). 37.
1^.
(which also seem plainly here alluded to) after thet sinews and flesh had
covered them, (at the tenth verse,) Breath enters into them, and they stand
upon their feet.

And this perhaps will tell us what kind of Resurrection is this of these
Witnesses: For mark it, then is all this fulfilled; I mean, the dry bones have
sinews and flesh, and after breathed upon, do live, and stand upon their feet.]
When Israel in captivity, without hope, or likelihood of ever being delivered
(in which condition they are the dry bones) are yet by the hand of God brought
out of that hopeless Captivity; This is the living and rising again of the dry
bones there mentioned. According whereunto, when these Witnesses, formerly
slain their office, thrown out thence, are by the special hand of God restored
thereto again; what hinders but we say, This is the Spirit of life from God
entering into the Witnesses, and their standing upon their feet.

A Resurrection properly so called it cannot be; for of none such do we read,
till the 20 Chapter of this Prophecy (as was Cha. 20. 5.
intimated before) and if not a Resurrection real, and proper, what can it be,
but some special hand of God, in restoring these Witnesses to place, opening
their mouths which were stopped by their former slaughter? This appears the
Resurrection of the Witnesses here intended.

Which if so, we need not then that shift which some make use of, telling us
these Witnesses rise again in their successors, making this [the Resurrection
of the Witness^s] here mentioned: For if their rising again, mean their
restoring to their place of Witnesses, as we saw before, then nothing hinders
but the same that were slain may also rise again: nothing hinders, but the same
which had their mouths shut (which was their slaying) may have their mouths
again open, which is their Resurrection, I am sure the space wherein they lie
dead hinders not: Had that indeed been long, threescore or fourscore years,
then perhaps I should have sought it in their successors; but when betwixt the
last Witness that is slain, and the first that rises again, there intervenes
but the space of three years and an half, it is no very hard thing to believe,
That some who three years and an half since were silenced, and suspended, after
that space, have now their mouths open.

And doubtless it must be so, for mark it, The dead bodies of those that were
slain, those same dead bodies that lay in the street, were looked upon three
days and an half, and not suffer^^ to be put in graves, into these same (says
the Tex^) the Spirit of lite from God enters, and they stand upon their feet.

And I would fain know, what successors could be nourished to rise up in the
room of these Witnesses after this time; for either they are Witnesses
themselves, at what time these are slain, and then they are slain also (for
then are all the bold opposers of, and Witnesses against Antichrist, slain) or
else then they were not Witnesses, and then think what a time this three years
and a half was to hatch up a brood of young Witnesses in, when now all the
other being slain, they are hereby deprived of all means of public instruction.

But sufficient of this first thing, I mean the rising again of the Witnesses;
now follows the second, the time when they rise again; [After three days and
an half, that is, after three years and an half] which because it has already
in the foregoing words been handled, I shall pass from it to the third thing,
viz. [The consequent of this Resurrection] in these words; Great fear fell upon
them which saw them.

They that behold these Witnesses rising again, are afraid: Some like thing is
mentioned of them that were present at our Saviors Matthew. 28.
Resurrection. And indeed it is a common thing, when some eminent thing is
done, for the lookers on to be stricken with fear at the beholding. When
Anani^s and Saphira fall Act 5. 3. and 11.
dead at the Apostles feet, then do^s great fear fall upon the people, the
witnesses of it. And when the Exoreists Jews taking Act. 19. 16, 17.
upon them to adjure the evil Spirit to come forth, are by the man that had
the evil spirit overcome, escaping from him naked and wounded, then great fear
falls upon the people also.

But you will not blame the beholders here to be afraid at the rising again of
these Witnesses: For if these be the Popish party as was conceived they well
might be; did they ever dream they should see the Witnesses rise again; did not
they think they had made such sure work, as that they should never have been
troubled with them any more; but now after they had slain them, that besides
all expectation they should rise again, and this perhaps to torment them worse
then ever they did before, can you blame them they are afraid at it?

We have now examined all the severalls of this verse, all which drawn
together, are thus much in the result; The Witnesses being silenced, thrust
from their places, thus slain, after three years and an half are by a special
hand of God restored to liberty and office again; at which the Antichristian
faction become greatly afraid, not having the least thought, after they had
once slain the Witnesses, they should ever have been troubled, or tormented
with them any more.

Having thus opened the words, there are but two Collections I shall make from
them, and then pass on to what follows.

1. Do the Witnesses; after three days and an half rise again? sure then this
business of the slaying of the Witnesses cannote b a matter of so much
discouragement, as we usually conceive so it; as also, neither should we take
on for the slaying of the Witnesses, as men without hope; for but a little
while, and the Witnesses 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.
rise again. Nay, neither should this slaughter so much afflict the Witnesses
themselves, who even then, when it is a doing, may bid the Popish faction hold
their countenance, forbear rejoicing, for though they fall, they shall yet
within a little Mich. 7. 8.
time assuredly rise again: These lights may be by Antichrist suppressed for a
time, but afterward they break forth in greater luster and brightness then ever
they did before.

2. Do the Popish faction become greatly afraid, upon the Resurrection of the
Witnesses? then observe it, the rising of the Witnesses, is the fall of the
Spirits, of the Popish party: When the Witnesses fell before, then they
rejoice, and make merry, cannot contain themselves; but now they rise, their
hearts fall every whit as fast within them, just like the Scales of the
Balance, if one rise, the other falls, so inconsistent is the prosperous
condition of the one, with the content and satisfaction of the other.

VERSE. 12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither, and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld
them.
WE have done with the Resurrection of the Witnesses, in the words last
handled; now follows their Ascension to heaven, in these words; And they heard
a great voice from ^eaven, saying, Come up hither, etc.

In which for method sake I shall observe;

1. A voice calling Witnesses up to heaven; in these words; They heard a voice
from heaven, saying to them, Come up hither. 2. Their Ascension thereupon; They
ascended. 3. The manner of this Ascension; It is in a cloud. 4. The Adjuncts,
or Concomitants of this Ascension, first, [Their enemies behold them] mentioned
in this Verse. 2. [A great Earthquake at the same time] mentioned in the words
next following.
Of these severally in this order: But before I come to speak to every of them
in particular, give me leave to premise this much in the general concerning
all of them, (and it is nothing else, but what has several times, for the
substance, been already inculcated) viz.

This Ascension, and so the severalls thereto appertaining, are not to be
understood in the letter, as though the Witnesses after their Resurrection,
should now indeed, and in the letter ascend up to heaven; by no means, it seems
at no hand to be imagined.

But (as we showed) their death was a mystical death, their Resurrection a
mystical Resurrection; so now in like manner we say their Ascension must be a
mystical Ascension also. How can we conceive their death a mystical death, a
killing in office only; their Resurrection, a rising again into office; and
now conceive their ascending up to heaven, a real and proper Ascension? Not
but that these Witnesses are at last glorified in heaven, but so much is not
expressed by their ascending up to heaven here mentioned. This here is a
mystical Ascension, and so accordingly of the several above mentioned, [The
great voice, the heaven, the cloud,] we are to enquire a mystical
Interpretation.

This premised, We now proceed to take the severalls in their order: First,
[The voice from heaven calling them up thither.] And they heard a voice from
heaven, saying to them, come up hither.

Some read these words thus. [And I heard a voice from Arab: (...) (...).
heaven,] so the Arabique among others, but better me thinks as we read it,
[And they heard a voice,] the Witnesses now after they were risen from the
dead, they heard a voice from heaven.

But what voice is it then these Witnesses hear, calling them up to heaven. I
answer, If it must be a mystical voice (as we said before) what more likely
thing can it be, then some Act, some Decree of them in high place, calling
these Witnesses into some more free, and honorable condition, opposite to that
of Sackcloth, wherein the Antichristian faction made them prophecy before.

I say again, Some Act or Decree, this seems to be the voice.] And then such as
are in authority, appertaining to the Reformed Churches, which are often so
expressed, seem to be the [Heaven,] from whence this great voice comes. And
that this voice bidding them ascend up thither, may very well betoken an
invitation to some more ample and honorable condition, let but this be
considered, viz. That when these Witnesses rose up again, they rose up into
their prophetical office, by virtue of their resurrection, they had a liberty
to Prophecy again: and then after this, To be called up to Heaven, what can it
be, but some more liberal condition offered to them, then that wherein they
witnessed against Antichrist before? So that by this reckoning, by their
Resurrection they gain their mouths open to Prophecy again, by their Ascension
they gain it be not in Sackcloth.

Their Ascension it self, next follows, [They ascended up to Heaven.] And what
can this mean, answerable to the former, but this, viz. They had that honor
put upon them, which by the voice from Heaven they were called to? They have
now their Sackcloth taken from them, neither themselves, nor their Ministry,
either to be so contemned, or persecuted as before. I heir maintenance possibly
advanced to some honest, and competent allowance; which because so exceeding
small before, might be one reason, why it is said they Prophesied in Sackcloth.
In sum, what you can conceive, is properly opposite to Sackcloth, as clearing
them in the eye of the world, maintenance, esteem, and the like, This is the
Witnesses ascending up to heaven.

And so sometime [Ascending up to heaven] signifies: I mean a greater accession
of honor, and dignity. As when Nebucadnezzar is brought in thus vaunting, I
will ascend up to heaven, I will exalt my self above the clouds, It Is all one,
as if he had said; Is. 14 13. 14.
I will yet be greater, I will yet make my self a greater name then I have ever
gained hitherto.

Thus we have seen their ascension, the manner of their ascension next follows,
and it is [In a cloud] they ascend up to heaven in a cloud (says the Text) this
comes next to be enquired concerning.

In a cloub] This seems of necessity to be a mystical cloud, for such as their
ascension is, such must needs be the cloud, wherein they do ascend. Shall we
say therefore, it is a multitude of people? we read He^r^w. 12. 1. A multitude
of believers are called, A cloud of Witnesses. And is there not some al^usion
think you here intended? These Witnesses ascend up to Heaven in a cloud, they
are accompanied with a cloud of Witnesses, rejoicing, and congratulating with
them for this their so unexpected, and happy freedom, every one now helping,
and lifting them up what they can, to that honor which by the voice from
heaven they are called unto.

I do not find Interpreters go thus particularly to work, thinking perhaps (as
the saying is, Gold is not under every stone.) I mean, That every word shall
have something of moment in it; but perhaps it would not have given
satisfaction, had I passed this same without this particular examination: but
how likely this is the cloud wherein these Witnesses ascend up to heaven, I
shall leave every one to judge, and from it pass on to the Concomitants of
this ascension, the former whereof is laid down in these words. And their
enemies beheld them.

Their enemies.] Who can these be, but the Antichristian faction? Whom can we
imagine enemies to these Witnesses, but they?

These behold them.] And with how much terror, with how much inward torment,
and vexation? When they rose again in the former verse, you see what
impressions of fear it then made upon them, The Witnesses stand upon their feet
(say those words,) and great fedr fell on them which saw them: Even just so it
was with Herod, when he thought John the Baptist, Matthew. 13.
(whom he beheaded) was risen from the dead: And no marvel they are put into
this fright, upon the rising again of these Witnesses: For the Popish faction
to see them rise again whom they had slain once, they then conceiving they had
made such a hand with these Witnesses, as they should never be troubled with
them any more; can you blame them they are afraid at it?

But further, That after their rising again, they should now ascend up to
heaven also; what fear, what indignation, will this impresse upon them? What
fear? Had they, but only risen again, they might have hoped again to have slain
them; but now to ascend up to heaven also, so as they could not reach them, so
as they could not slay them any more: where they should sit secure, and out of
their danger, they thence a new tormenting them, as for their former wrongs, so
for their late killing of them; and this with much more grievous torment, their
little finger being now made heavier, then their whole loins were before; Can
we think, but this should much increase the terror formerly falling on them
upon the rising again of these Witnesses.

And as add to their fear, so beget in them much bitter indignation. To see
those whom they accounted not worthy to breath in the air while alive, nor
worthy the honor of a grave when dead; not only to rise again, but to ascend
up to heaven also, to be followed with shoutings, and acclamations, have their
Sackcloth taken off, and the Germent of gladness, and honor instead thereof
put upon them: How think we, is not this enough to make the Antichristian
party, even eat their hearts for spite and indignation, and wish their
eye balls sunk in their heads, rather then to behold it. The Witnesses ascend
up to heaven, and their enemies behold them.

Put all together now, and the sum of all these severalls is this much, After
that the Witnesses are by a special hand of God restored to office again, have
their mouths open, which is their Resurrection: Such as are then in authority,
in the Reformed Churches, do call them to some more ample condition, more free,
more honorable, the multitude with joint endeanour helping, while the
Antichristian faction are stricken with fear, and great indignation at the
beholding. This seems the meaning of the words, the observations now follow.

1. Are the Reformed Churches heaven.] And the Act of some in power there [A
voice from heaven.] See then the vast diff^rence betwixt these Churches, and
the Synagogue of Satan. This is earth, and the members thereof, The Inhabitants
of the earth (as we saw before;) but on the contrary, the Reformed Churches are
heaven, and those that appertain thereunto, are such who dwell in heaven. And
not without cause so called, for certainly if the presence of God, of Christ,
of the Spirit, will make heaven; Sure then the Churches of Christ are not
undeservedly so called. The policy these walk by, is a heavenly policy; Our
conversation, or as the original, our policy is in (...)
heaven, (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 20.) their graces are from heaven, the
Ordinances they attend upon, come from thence, and will in due time, as a
means, carry up the comers thereunto Heb. 10. 1.
also.

2. Does a voice from heaven call the Witnesses up thither? Why then however
the rising again of the Witnesses be by the special hand of God; yet their
ascension is, by the means and intervention of men. A voice from heaven calls
them up thither. Take notice of it, the hand of God raises up the Witnesses
from the lead, the hand of men does help them up to heaven; God will take order
the Witnesses once slain, shall again Prophecy* We must take order it be no
more in Sackcloth.

3. Do the Witnesses ascend up to heaven? It Is plain then, there is a time (a
time here I mean) when these Witnesses shall have their mourning Weeds their
Sackcloth, taken from them: There is a time, when they shall have honor,
esteem, and recompense for all the scorn, and injuries have been put upon them.
Yea, a time also, when they shall be above the enemies ^^^ch, and danger: Vex
and storm at them, they may, But when they once ascend up to heaven, they get
so far above them, a they shall be a^le to slay them no more.

4. Do the enemies of the Witnesses behold their ascending up to heaven? Oh
what indignation, what gnashing of teeth will this cause in such beholders! To
see these have their Sackcloth taken from them, ride in the second Chariot,
honor have and esteem put upon them; certainly Haman could not be more Estl^.
^.
sad at the preferment of Mordecai, then will these be grieved and vexed at the
Ascension of the Witnesses.

VERSE. 13. And the same hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth part
of the City fell; and in the earthquake were slain of men, seven thousand, and
the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.
NOw follows the other Concomitant of the Witnesses Resurrection, and ascending
up to heaven, together with the several Consequents thereon depending, in the
words last mentioned; The same hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the City fell, etc.

In the handling whereof, we shall observe;

1. The time of the Earthquake here mentioned, in these words; The same hour
there was a great earthquake. 2. The Earthquake it self. 3. The several
consequents of this earthquake, being in all three; all whereof we shall handle
as they fall in their own order.
But first of the time; [The same hour there was a great earthquake.]

The same hour.] Some copies read, [The same day.] But whether day or hour,
both seem to come to one; neither to be understood of either day or hour
properly so taken.

If you read, [The same hour] it is not to be taken properly, for the 24 part
of a natural day; no more then it is in the 14 Chapter of this Prophecy, and 7
verse; The hour of his Judgment is come: Or at the 17 Chapter, and 12 verse;
These receive power one hour with the Beast; besides many such like instances,
which might be fetched from other places.

If you read, [The same day,] it seems not to be understood either of a
natural or artificial day properly so called, no more then in many other
places. But whether one, or other, day, or hour, this appears the plain meaning
of the holy Ghost; About the time of the Resurrection and Ascension of the
Witnesses, about that time, there is a great earthquake.

The earthquake it self now follows, There was a great earthquake.

There is a natural carthquake, as I may call it, when some windy matter being
enclosed in the caverns of the earth, impat^ent of being imprisoned there long,
breaks forth at last, causing Aristo. 2. Me^co. 7.
great and violent concussions and motions of the earth. Such as this you read
of, the 1. of Amos 1: such a kind of earthquake as this was at our Saviors
Resurrection; but this Mat. 28. 2.
kind of earthquake we are not to understand here.

Besides this there is a mystical earthquake, when there are great stirs and
commotions in Kingdoms and States, and by these the Forms of Government
changed. Such earthquakes are those mentioned at the 8 Chapter of this
prophecy and 5 verse; and 16 Chapter, and 18 verse. And (if I mistake not)
where we find mention of an earthquake in all this book, we are to conceive it
to be a mystical earthquake. such is the great earthquake here mentioned, a
mystical earthquake, a State-quake, a Kingdom-quake; this seems the great
earthquake here intended: When therefore the holy Ghost tells us, The same hour
there was a great earthquake, it is this in effect; About the time of the rising
again, and Ascension of these Witnesses, there are great State and
Kingdom-shakings.

The Consequents of this earthquake next follow, in these words; The tenth part
of the City fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; And
the remnant were terrified, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

Which Consequents if you take them asunder, are three, as was before hinted.
1. The tenth part of the City falls. 2. Seven thousand men slain. 3. The
remnant are terrified, and give glory to the God of heaven. Of these in this
order; 1. The fall of the tenth part of the City, then of the other as they
follow.

The tenth part of the City fell; (...)] I find nothing in this Prophecy of
the Witnesses, with more variety and difference interpreted then this same; and
doubtless could we hit right here, it would contribute no little to our
satisfaction in the greatest intricacie of this business. Give me leave to
offer a taste of these different Interpretations, especially of them which seem
to carry most likelihood; which when I have done, I shall propound, and submit
my own thoughts in the business.

The great question is, What we should understand by the The Arabique without
consent of any, either Copy or Translation that I have met withal, reads, The
third part of, the City fell.
[Tenth part of the great City, (...).] In answ^r whereto, you have some will
tell you it is the Tenths of the City, meaning, That whereas the Popes have
Tenths paid them, which was the manner of the Romans formerly, as also of other
Princes of elder times, now upon the rising again of the Witnesses, and the
great earthquake thereupon attending, this Tribute of Tithes or Tenths, whereby
he was in great part maintained before, shall now at last be utterly withheld
from him. This is (...), that which we translate, [The tenth part of the City]
falling. But (as some well observe) to make this good, it must have been (...);
but it is (...), and therefore this cannot be the meaning.

Another therefore by this [(...)] which we translate [The tenth part of the
City] would understand, Those ten Kingdoms, which at the 17 Chapter of this
Prophecy, and 13 verse, give up all their strength and power to the Beast^;
And when those at last draw off from Antichrist, which they do, for these shall
hate the Whore, cat her flesh, and burn her with fire, Chap. 17. ver. 16. This
is the fall of the Decharchy of the City. Those ten Kingdoms that had formerly
supported Antichrist, now drawing off, and preparing for her destruction, this
is the fall of the tenth part of the great City. And sure if these ten Kingdoms
withdrawing themselves, hating the Whore, eating her flesh, and burning her
with fire, should not fall in with the time of the seventh Trumpet, and last
Vial, and be not that destruction which at that time is to be executed upon
her, I mean the Romish Babylon, I should think this interpretation did carry
much appearance of truth with it.

But then another by [the tenth part of the City] would understand, the City it
self, Rome it self falls, making this same all one with the fifth Vial, which
poured out upon the Throne of Chap. 16. 10.
the Beast, that is, upon Rome (says this Interpreter) Rome hereby comes to be
destroyed. And if any object, The holy Ghost does not say the whol^ City falls,
only the truth part of the City; to this it is answered, That when Rome comes
to be destroyed, it is but the Tenth part of what it was formerly. I^ was in
compass in former times near 42 miles within the walls, now about 15: And if
we measure, it will appear, That that whch is in compass 15 miles, will make
up but the tenth part of that which is in compass 42 miles. And so
accordingly, when the tenth part of the City falls, as is here said, the whole
City is meant; for now the whole, is but the tenth part of what it was formerly.

This, I confess, is a pretty Notion, but yet such as I durst in no wise
conclude is the meaning of the holy Ghost in this place: It carries with it too
much acuteness to be the meaning of the Spirit; and indeed it seems too much
forced also; That the tenth part of the City, should mean the whole City, the
words seem not in any reasonable congruity to admit of it.

Give me leave now in the last place, to add what has most taken upon me, in
all the variety of thoughts in this matter: and it is this;

The Antichristian Kingdom, as made up of those ten horns, ten Kingdoms, into
which the Roman Empire upon its fall was resolved, these ten at the same time
with one consent giving their power thereunto, seem here, as also in other
places, compared to a great City: Which City, answerably to the ten part of the
Antichristian Kingdom, has ten parts also; every one of those ten Kingdoms, by
submitting it self to the Government of this mystical City, I mean this
mystical Babylon* hereby making it self a part of it.

This stated, we say accordingly [the tenth part of the City] must mean, O^e of
those ten Kingdoms, which having su^mitted it self to the Government of this
mystical B^bylon, hereby became to a part of it: and then answerably is this
t^nth Kingdom, the tenth part of the great City said to fall, when that ^inde
of Government, which submitted to made this one part of that City, I mean of
Romish babylon, is now utter^ly dissolved and abolished in that Kingdom.

So then all this together is thus much. About the (...) Witnesses rise again,
and ascend up to heaven, there are great stirs and commotions, this is the
earthquake; and among these, that Antichristianism which in one of the ten
Kingdoms submitted to, made it one of the parts of the Romish Babylon, is
utterly quashed and dissolved in that Kingdom. This seems to be the fall of the
tenth part of the great City.

And here observe it, it is [(...)] with an Artiticle, which (I confess) I had
once let pass, but should by no means pass without notice; [That tenth part
of the great City] so we might render it, where the holy Ghost seems to tell us
which tenth part of the City, which of the ten Kingdoms he means, why [that
tenth part] that which seems easily discernable from all the rest, that tenth
part falls. But which this is* I shall hereafter speak my conjecture; let this
suffice at present, that in That tenth Kingdom, which seems easily differenced
from all the rest, Antichristianism is abolished, this is the fall of that
tenth part of the great City. This seems the meaning, and (I must confess) I
have nothing readily to object against it, but from this first consequent of
the earthquake, viz. The fall of the tenth part of the City, we may proceed to
the second, in these words; And in the earthquake were slain of men seven
thousand.

This follows, and this is not without its difficulties neither: Some read,
the heads of men that were slain were seven thousand; but if we reckon by the
pole, seven thousand men numbered by the pole were slain, and no more, it will
readily be objected; How can it be imagined the tenth part of the Antichristian
Kingdom should fall, and yet but seven thousand heads, or seven thousand men
reckoned by the Pole, slain and overwhelmed in so great a ruin? Seven
thousand, thus reckoned, seem not a number any whit proportionable. To which it
may be answered; This number of seven thousand, is a perfect number, and is
here put, as in other places, not to signify just so many, and no more, but
rather a certain number, for an uncertain, and may very well signify a great
many more then precisely that number.

But if this should not pass, there is another Interpretation (...), for (...).
besides, and this seems without all exception.

This therefore instead of reading [the names of men that were slain] which is
the Original, reads [the men of name that were slain were seven thousand.] And
this not rashly, this kind of speaking being not infrequent in the Scripture:
hence you read Silver of Talents, for Talents of Silver, and the like; so
here, names of men, for men of names: And if you would know what is meant by
this expression [men of name,] and what [name] imports in this construction
[men of name] consult that 6 of Genesis and 4 verse, and you find, those
Giant-like men whom the Original calls, men of name; our Translation calls,
men of r^nown; And so both the Originalls signifying [name] (...) Orae. O^^
(...) Beza Anno.
often translated; so here, There were slain seven thousand men of name, that
is, men of note, of quality: So many were slain, in the fall of the tenth part
of the City.

And if this should be so, it clearly takes off the former objection, viz. That
the number of bare seven thousand, were not proportional; for granting that so
many of quality, of name, are slain, besides these numbers of the common sort
that may be overwhelmed in those ruins, and sure seven thousand men of note
with those other, are a number answerable to the fall of the tenth part of the
City.

But before I pass further, I must tell you, this slaughter of these seven
thousand, seems not to mean a real and proper slaughter, no more then did the
slaughter of the Witnesses before mentioned: for if the earthquake were not
such properly so called, only signifying stirs and commotions in the tenth
part of the great City, and so a mystical earthquake, as we saw before; in
like manner, neither can this slaughter which is done by a mystical
earthquake, be any other then a mystical slaughter.

And if a mystical slaughter, what can it be, but the Antichristian faction,
the abettors and maintainers of Antichristianisme, in that tenth part of the
great City, have their place, their power, their maintenance taken from them,
they cease to be in office as before, they lose their Livings, this is to them
the losing of their lives, this seems the slaughter of the seven thousand
eminent men here intended.

I do not deny but in these stirs some of them may be slain indeed; somewhat
like whereto was formerly spoken concerning the slaying of the Witnesses, but
this is not the slaughter is here chiefly aimed at, it is especially a
mystical slaughter.

We have seen now the second Consequent, viz. Seven thousand men slain; the
third follows, in these words; The remnant were terrified, and gave glory to
the God of heaven.

And who is this remnant, but some of that party, I mean the Antichristian
faction; who seeing the just and apparent hand of God upon them, are stricken
with it, acknowledging their error, and thus give glory to the God of heaven.
Jos. 7. 19.


Or else the remnant were terrified, that is, the other sort of people, who
scaping the slaughter wherein the professed Antichristian faction were
especially concerned, they, seeing the hand of God upon them, are terrified,
and by confessing their former mistake in cleaving to them, do thus give glory
to the God of heaven.

Sum up all this verse now, and it is thus much: About the time these Witnesses
rise again, and ascend up to heaven, about this time there are great stirs and
commotions, in some of those ten Kingdoms, into which the Roman Empire, upon
its fall, became divided. By means whereof, Antichristianisme becomes utterly
abolished in one of those ten Kingdoms: upon the abolishing whereof, many of
note, and professedly of the Antichristian faction, are thrown from all
Authority and Place, as also that large maintenance which they had before;
which the other people, cleaving fast to them before, now beholding, and taking
notice of the finger of God in it, confess their former error, strike off
from them, never to cleave to them any more.

The Observations now follow:

1. Is one Kingdom but the tenth part of the great City? hence observe the
extent of the mystical Babylon. The Popish faction may well cry up Visibilty,
Universality, the Catholic Church, and the like, why one Kingdom is but the
tenth part Bell. de Not. Eccl.
of it.

2. Hence we have the reason, why that Call of God, viz. [Come out of her my
people] is not to be restrained to the City of Rev. 18. ^.
Rome properly, and in the letter so taken, but takes place in all the ten
Kingdoms, and in all the parts thereof, though never so far remote from Rome,
in regard of distance of space. The Government of this great Balylon takes in
several Kingdoms, and so far as her Government, and Worships are retained in
any of them, so far does God call such a people out of Babylon.

3. If any of the ten Kingdoms have withdrawn themselves utterly from
Antichrist, then is the tenth part of the City fallen. I need not trouble you
with the rehearfall of the ten Kingdoms, they are commonly known to be these;
1. There was the Alanes, the Almains, the Britains, the Burgundians, the
Frankes, the Greeks, the Ostrogoths, the Saxons, the Vandals, the Wisigoths: If
any of these have utterly withdrawn themselves from Antichrist, then is the
tenth part of the City fallen; If not, th^n is not the tenth part of the City
fallen. But if any be utterly withdrawing, then is the tenth part of the City
falling.

4. There is a time when the Antichristian faction shall be paid in their own
coin: Have they slain the Witnesses? why when the tenth part of the City falls,
they become slain also: Have they silenced and suspended the Witnesses? even so
shall it be measured to them also: And perhaps of this there has been a taste
given already. We have seen those brought to the Bar, who have used to sit in
Judgment, passing hard and unjust sentence upon others. Those suspended, and
their livings sequest^ed, who formerly have been active to do as much for
others. And no marvel; As Babylon falls, so the Popish faction also.

5. Do a remnant repent upon the fall of part of Babylon, and the slaughter
accompanying it? Observe then, there is some good to be expected from the fall
of Babylon: when the tenth part falls, then do the remnant repent, and give
glory to the God of heaven. How earnestly therefore should we pray for the
destruction of Babylon: It did no good standing, but unspeakable mischief; it
will do good fallen, for then will people hereby be brought unto Repentance.

VERSE. 14. The second Woe is past, and behold the the third Woe comes quickly.
NOw follows the Close of this Prophecy of the Witnesses, which also as a sure
direction, tells us where we are, especially while in hand with the latter part
of this Prophecy; In these words; The second Woe is past, and behold, the third
Woe comes quickly.

The meaning whereof (that I make not many words about it) seems in short this;
The second Wo] that is, The sixth Trump^t; For the three last Trumpets being
three Wo-Trumpets, as appears Chap. 8. verse 13, the second Woe must needs mean
the sixth Trumpet.

Is past] that is, Is past in mention. The third Wo] that is, The last Trumpet,
[Cometh quickly] that is, comes speedily to be mentioned: As if the holy Ghost
should say; Now after this Prophecy of the Witnesses is related, you have been
told all the (...), even all the business of the sixth Trumpet; after which, I
proceed speedily to acquaint you with the business of the seventh Trumpet.

Or else this may be the meaning, Then when all that which app^rtains to this
Prophecy of the Witnesses is come to pass, and the earthquake attending the
Resurrection and Ascension of these Witnesses is perfectly ended, then is the
strength of the Woe of the sixth Trumpet gone also. Which the seventh Trumpet,
and the Woe it brings along with it, speedily follow; which seventh Trumpet is
to close and shut up all this Mystery.

And now we have gone over this whole Prophecy of the Witnesses, having
carefully enquired the meaning of all the parts thereto appertaining. But
before we proceed to speak any thing in that great Question, Whether the
Witnesses are slain yea or no, reserved to be discussed, till we had gone over
with the Interpretation of the Prophecy, give me leave to draw together under
one view, the brief meaning of all the severalls already handled; which being
set so near, and as a Preface to the Work yet behind, will be as a To^ch held
at the entry, showing us where we should tread, in all that obscure way we are
yet to go; as also be a rule near at hand, whereby to examine what may be
propounded in the great disquisition following.

Verse 3. ANd I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy
a thousand two hundred, and threescore days, clothed in Sackcloth.

DUring the time that Antichristianisme shall continue to spread it self through
the world, God will raise up such all this time, who shall by their Sermons,
Writings, and Actions, testify against it, mourning to behold the spreadings
thereof; hereby also kept down, constrained to live in an obscure and mean
condition; this their testifying against it continuing 1260 years. Verse 4.
These are the two Olive trees, and the two Candlesticks, standing before the
God of the earth.

These Witnesses moreover, for their quality, are godly Magistrates, and
Ministers, such as were Zerubbabel and Jeshua formerly, who all the while of
Antichrist his prevailing, shall bestow themselves in maintaining whatsoever of
Church and Worship they have, reforming, repairing, restoring as there is need,
and regaing what has been lost by Antichristian encroachments. Verse 5. And if
any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and destroys
their enemies; and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.

And if any shall attempt to harm them, they, furnished as once Moses and Elias
were, by praying and denouncing J^dgements, procure certain destruction upon
them. Verse 6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days
of their Prophecy, and have power over w^^e^s to turn them to blood, and to
smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

And as Elias shut heaven, so that it rained not upon the Apostate Israelites,
while they clave to Baal; so while the Antichristian Gentiles continue such,
these Witnesses hold back all tidings of mercy, and forgiveness (that blessed
Train so refreshing weary souls) declaring them (while in that condition) a
people to whom no heaven, no forgiveness belongs; as also to render their
torment complete, do pour forth upon them all the Vialls. Verse 7. And when
they have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends out of the
bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and
kill them.

But when these Witnesses are about to close up their mourning testimony, and
having done much in reforming the Church, and regaining of the utter Court,
which Antichrist had gotten from them before, are now about to throw of their
Sackcloth; the Antichristian power collecting it self, by suspending,
silencing, and the like, shall thus overcome, and kill these Witnesses. Verse
8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

These Witnesses being slain in their office, continue in this state of civil
death, within the Dominion and Territory of Rome, which Rome is for her
filthynesse, Sodom, for her Idolatry, and cruel persecutions, Egypt, which
when heathen, puts our Savior to death, now Antichristian, puts to death his
Witnesses. Verse 9. And they of the kinreds, and people, and tongues, and
nations, shall look upon their dead bodies, three days and an half, and shall
not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.

While they thus lie dead, the Antichristian faction, with scorn and derision,
look upon them, not suffering any to afford shelter, honor, countenance, to
these silenced Witnesses. Verse 10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall
rejoice over them, and make merry, and send gifts ^^e to another, because these
two Prophets tormented them that dwelt upon the earth.

Who also in regard they were greatly tormented by these Witnesses when alive,
having then poured forth some of the Vials upon them. Now that they are slain,
do out of measure rejoice, they are thus got rid of them. Verse 11. And after
three days and an half, the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they
stood upon their feet, and great fe^r fell on them which saw th^^.

But when these Witnesses have continued for some space silenced, suspended,
after three years and an half, they are by a special hand of God restored to
liberty, and office again; at which the Antichristian faction become greatly
afraid, not having the least thought the Witnesses once slain, should by any
means be ever raised again. Verse 12. And they heard a great voice from heaven,
saying unto them, come up hither, and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud,
and th^i^ enemies beheld them.

But being now raised, and restored to former liberty, such as are then in
authority in the reformed Churches do call them to some more honorable and
ample condition, then was that of their Sackcloth, the people contributing all
their help thereunto, while the Ahtichristian faction with fear, and great
indignation behold it. Verse 13. And the same hour then was a great
Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City f^ll, and in the Earthquake were
slain of men, seven thousand, and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory
to the God of heaven

About this time of the Witnesses Resurrection, and ascending up to heaven,
there are great Commotions. By which Antichristianisme becomes utterly
abolished in one of the ten Kingdoms, made out of the ancient Roman Empire:
upon the abolishing whereof, many are quite outed of honor, power,
maintenance, they held before, which some of the people, cleeving formerly to
them now beholding, and taking notice of the just hand of God in it, strike off
from them, never to cleave to them any more. Verse 14. The second woe is past,
and behold, the third woe comes quickly.

Thus ends the mention of the business of the sixth Trumpet: or now when this
Earthquake ends with it, the strength of the sixth Trumpets woe ends also;
after which the seventh Trumpet bringing in the last woe, immediately begins.

I Have hitherto kept my self almost to a Grammatical exposition of this
Prophecy, scarce at all glancing at that question, so much longed for to be
answered, Whether the Witnesses are slain yea or no. But now the Prophecy
being gone over, and the reason why I forbore formerly to give my resolution,
(namely because we had not heard the whole Prophecy speak in the business;)
now no more taking place, I should pr^ve very injurious, if after keeping the
matter in suspense all this time, I should not now at last (as Samson once
pressed with Judge. 16. 16, 17.
importunity) tell all my whole heart, and discover whatsoever light I have
received in this business.

I shall therefore now cheerfully set upon it, in mannaging whereof, I shall
not dare to be peremptory in any thing, expecting that any should be concluded
by what is propounded, farther then drawn to it by the strength of reason
consonant to Scripture; and if I mistake, for who am I, but I should,
especially in a matter so intricate, and perplex as this is, such as are
candid, and Christian will pass it by being confident (which they may be) that
upon discovery, I shall most readily recide from it.

This premised, come we now a little nearer to our purpose, The great question
after all remains, Whether these Witnesses are slain, yea or no; which once
resolved, accordingly we shall be better able to answer that common question,
almost in every ones mouth. What will become of us? What do you think of these
times? The desire to answer which, was one main reason why we undertook this
Prophecy of the Witnesses.

And for our more orderly discussing of this question, we shall first take a
view of their several thoughts, that tell us this slaughter of the Witnesses
is past, and past a good while agone, and see if any of these will abide the
trial. If not, then further enquire, if any such thing has been done in these
latter times, which may appear to be the killing of these Witnesses, which if
we find not, the question is then clearly answered, the Witnesses are not
slain: If we can, then the Witnesses are slain, That which every one of us
would so fain have to be so.

The several opinions that bear us in hand the Witnesses are slain, and slain
a good while agone, are such as these: Some tell us this was done, when so many
thousands of those poor men of Lions (commonly so called) were destroyed by the
procurement of Pope Boniface the eighth, about the year 1300. Others there are,
that say, they were slain, when John Husse, and Jerome of Prague were burnt by
the Council of Constance, about the year 1418. Others making the two
Testaments, the two Witnesses, tell us this slaughter was then, when they of
the Council of Trent, took away the perfection and authority of the Scriptures
from them, about the year one thousand five hundred forty six; near which time
also, Charles the fifth, then the Popes most stout Champion, did overthrow, and
vanquish the strength of the godly party, at that time with all their might
contending against Antichrist.

Some refer this same to the Massacre of Paris, others to the troubles of
Germany.

And indeed what place of the Western world, but has had some thing done in
it, like a slaying of the Witnesses; which perhaps is the ground, why some
think this killing of the Witnesses must be done successively, in one Kingdom
after another, and no other certain, and determinate killing besides this, to
be expected; but of this perhaps more anon.

Among all these opinions, for the Witnesses being slain so long ago, I shall
single out that from all the others, which seems indeed the most likely of them
all: I mean that which ayms it upon the Counsel of Trent, bringing this to the
touch, which if it shall appear, is not the slaying of the Witnesses, and this
by any arguments, which shall as forceably come against the other also, (I mean
that which makes it the same with the destroying of the Waldenses, as also the
same with the burning of John Husse, and Jerome of Prague,) then this opinion
falls, and with it, those other also. And for the Massacre of Paris, the
troubles of Germany, they are not so contended for by any, that we should be at
the trouble particularly to examine them.

That this therefore cannot be the slaying of the Witnesses, I mean that which
was done against the Scriptures, and the godly, about the time of the Council
of Trent (besides the Arguments proving the Scriptures, are not the Witnesses)
seems evident thus:

1. Because the Resurrection of the Witnesses, together with the Earthquake
thereto appertaining, bring in the seventh Trumpet, which appears from the 13.
14. and 15 Verses of this Chapter, and the seventh Trumpet brings in the utter
destruction of Antichrist, as is evident from the 10 Chap. ver. 6, 7, where the
Angel swears, That when the seventh Trumpet shall begin to blow, there shall be
time no more, Antichrists time shall then be no more: But now we do not see
Antichrist destroyed, notwithstanding an hundred years past, and gone since
this pretended slaughter, and rising again of these Witnesses. I say once more,
the rising again of the Witnesses, brings in the seventh Trumpet, utterly
destroying Antichrist, and here is a hundred years past, since it is said these
Witnesses rose again, and yet Antichrist in strength undestroyed at this day.

2. If the Witnesses must pour forth at least two or three Vials before they be
slain, then could they not be slain, about the time of the Trent Counsel, when
it is confessed, That either none, or but one of the Vials, was then poured
forth. The consequent is clear; and that at least two, or three Vials must be
poured forth, before they can be slain; hence appears, otherwise, How are they
said, before they are slain, to torment them that dwell upon the earth, at the
tenth verse of this Chapter, and this (as we there showed) by pouring forth the
Vials.

If any shall say, the tormenting there mentioned may mean only the first
Vial, and this will be granted was poured forth before, mark the inconventences
by thus saying we run upon:

1. The term of the Beast his continuing, and of the Witnesses prophesying in
Sackeloth, beginning and ending at the same time (as is commonly believed) by
this reckoning we leave the Beast the space while six Vials are a pouring
forth, after that the term of the Witnesses Prophecy is past and ended.

2. If but one Vial be poured forth when they are slain, and the sixth and
seventh Vial fall near their Resurrection, which they do, what becomes of the
second, third, fourth, and fifth Vials, where find we any room for them? they
hereby become utterly excluded. To say they are poured forth in the three years
and an half, betwixt the slaying and Resurrection of the Witnesses; sure this
time is too scant for four Vials to be poured forth in: And besides, the
Witnesses (who as we have shown formerly, do pour forth all the Vials) do lie
dead during all that space, and therefore those Vials cannot then be poured
forth.

To gather up all this in brief. The Witnesses torment the earth, with four or
five Vials before they are slain (the sixth and seventh Vial falling in with
the time of their Resurrection) and therefore that time wherein either none, or
but one of the Vials was poured forth, as was the time of the Counsel of
Trent, cannot be the time of the slaying of the Witnesses.

3. If the slaying and rising again of the Witnesses was then, Whence is it
that since that time these Witnesses have been so grievously persecuted? how is
it that since that time so many have continued to prophecy in Sackcloth? yea,
so many have been silenced, and suspended in this Kingdom, in other places? Had
they been once slain, and risen again, afterward they prophecy in Sackcloth no
more, are slain no more: If they rose again then, how is it that for a hundred
years space since that time, we have found them still continuing to prophecy
in Sackcloth?

4. If it can be cleared, that the one thousand two hundred and threescore
years (the term of the Witnesses Prophecy) cannot begin so high as Constantine
the Great, so as to end about the time of the Council of Trent (as those that
favor this opinion contend) but must begin after Constantine, and so reach
over the Council of Trent, nearer to our times, then the business is at an
end, there will be no further question in this matter.

To clear this same therefore, and so I shall essay to show you when this one
thousand two hundred and threescore years of the Witnesses Prophecy does begin
(that which every one so greedily enquires after.) For this purpose, I must
remember you of what I formerly hinted, namely, That the time of the Gentiles
treading down the holy City; the time of the Beast his reigning, forty two
months; the time of the woman in the Wilderness, time, times, and half a
time; and the time of the Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, a thousand two
hundred and threescore days, seem all of them to be the same time; so that if
we can find where any of these either begin or end we shall find where every
of them begin, and end also. This stated (which none need question, proof being
so obvious Vid Mede. Clav. Apo. Napier Paraus.
to any that shall make enquiry, and which only for brevity sake, I do not
produce,) I say this granted. Let us essay to find when the beast begins his
forty two months, which seems easiest of the rest, and for our better
direction, in this work, we shall make these enquiries.

1. When that [(...), that Let] which the Apostle tells 2 These. ^. 6, 7.
the Thessalonians hindered Antichrist his coming) was removed out of the way:
For if we can find when that hinderance was removed, we shall certainly find
when Antichrist comes, whose coming is just upon the removal of the hinderance.

2. When the Beast had his deadly wound with the sword, Revel. 13. 4, 5.
and that healed up again; for from that time forward, the Beast has power to
continue forty and two months.

3. When the Beast became ten-horned; for however the Chap. 17.
horns in nature are somewhat after the Beast, and so here, yet not so long,
but that by this enquiry we may gain some light, and direction in this
business.

For the first of these, viz. When that Let that hindered Antichrist his
coming, was taken out of the way. Sure this could not be when Constantine came
to be Emperor, (which quashes the former opinion) for after him the Roman
Emperors (which were the Let the Apostle speaks of) continued a good space.

Pagan Emperors, were the [(...), the hinderance,] which determining in
Constantines time, then the hinderance became removed.

Emperors, whether Pagans, or Christians that were the hinderance: For both
these, making but the sixth head, I mean the sixth kind of Government the
Roman Empire was to be cast into, while these staid on, they hindered the
rising up of the seventh. It was the sixth head standing on, that hindered the
rising up, and appearance of the seventh: To make this more plain, conceive it
all thus; The Roman Empire is presented in this Prophecy as a Beast, with
Chap. 17. Verse 3.
seven heads; which seven heads, are seven kinds of Governments, one in order
succeeding an other. Five of these heads were gone, and the sixth, namely, That
of Emperors was in Verse 10.
being, then when John wrote this Revelation: Which kind of Government (I mean
of Emperors) being but heathenish at present, was afterward to become
Christian, yet still continuing the sixth head, notwithstanding all this
alteration, otherwise the Beast must have more heads then seven. Till this
head was wounded to death, as it was to be, there was no place for the seventh:
The Emperors, the sixth head, must be wounded to death, before the seventh,
viz. That of Popes could succeed in the room of it.

But then it will be asked, when had this sixth head the deadly wound, (The
second thing we were to enquire concerning.)

But before I speak directly to this query, give me leave to note these two
things. 1. This deadly wound of the sixth head was made by the sword; so you
read expressly at the fifteenth Chapter, 14 verse. 2. Upon this deadly wound,
this sixth head dies not, declines not, but by degrees, every step of its
declining, advancing the seventh head accordingly that was to succeed.

This premised, we say, Then seems this deadly wound of the sixth head, the
head of Emperors begun to be made, when in the year 365 or there about. Those
barbarous Nations, the Almains, Quades, Goths, with several other, broke in
upon the Roman Empire, burning and destroying where they came, from this time
seems laid the groundwork of the ruin of the Western Emperors.

Not long after this, about the year 412 (as Sl^idan reckons) Sleid^n, Sum:
Imper: lib. 2.
or 410 (as others) Alaricus the Goth sacks Rome it self; sure this was a
deadly blow to the Emperors indeed, when the Seat of the Empire it self
becomes conquered. It could not be ^ut at this time the sixth head should lie a
bleeding. And indeed it did so; for just this very year (as some observe)
several of the ten horns began to appear upon the seventh head (the third
thing we were to enquire) I say, several of those ten horns, those ten
Kingdoms into which the Roman Empire became divided, even this very year began
to rise up, upon the ruins of the now dissolved Empire. And sure the six^h
head at this time must be very low, when several of the horns of the seventh
head (which as was in nature, so here, are after the head) were now become
visible and conspicuous; sure much more the seventh head it self, upon which
these horns grow, was by this time in being, and visible also.

Yet by the way, not in being a hundred years at least before this time of the
first horns springing up, which yet they must say, who will begin the Beast his
42 months as high as Constantine: For though the horns are to be conceived
after the head, yet it is an unreasonable thing to imagine them a hundred years,
after, especially when we are told, That these receive power at one hour with
the Beast, Chap. 17. ver. 12. But this on the by: To our purpose therefore
again.

The Empire after this, had some struglings with the pangs of death for the
space of forty years, or there^bout; but when Genserious the Vand^l came, about
the year 455, and sacks Rome a^ain, and now burns it: at which time, all the
ten horns were grown out, the ten Kingdoms grown complete, then beca^e the
Roman Empire utterly extinct.

But now the question will be, From which of these periods must we begin to
reckon the Beast his forty and two months; whether from the first incursions of
the Goths upon the Roman Empire, in the year 365, or when they sacked Rome* in
the year 410, or else in 455, when the Empire of the West expired, or from any
point of time, between any of these.

I answer, To begin with it from this or that precise year I dare not; when the
fulfilling of this same is cleerer, then may we be more bold; only I should
aim it to begin sometime between the first Invasion of the Empire, 365, and the
sacking of Rom, 410. Sometime near Theodosius the Great his coming to the
Empire, which Historians will tell you, was about the year 380. And the rather
I should pitch it thereabout, because near this time the woman seems to fli^
into the Wilderness also: Rev. 12.
I say, the woman (taking the opportunity of this good Prince, and by him being
helped with the to Eagles wings) scapes into the Wilderness from the Dragon;
who in pursuing of her, had just before, when Valens was Emperor, cast forth
the Floods of Arrianisme after her, hoping (though in vain) she would have been
utterly overwhelmed by them. About this time, I mean some period between 370
and 380, I should begin to reckon the Beasts 42 months, as also make it the
common Epoch of all these several times. In which doing (besides the former
proof made hereof) I am not altogether destitute of Authority wherewith to back
it, but could produce Vid. Alsted. Chron. Napier.
others herein readily consenting also.

And if so, and we begin the Beast his forty and two months, also the Witnesses
one thousand two hundred and threescore years, near that time (I mean 380)
which in all likelihood we must do, then clearly they reach over Council of
Trent, and so much more the Council of Constance, and the time of the
Waldenses, and fall into the lap of these times we now are conversant in.

By this reckoning, I say, beginning this one thousand two hundred and
threescore years of the Witnesses Prophecy, about 380, (which I pitch upon,
because it is a full number, not thinking but this term may perhaps begin two
or three years before) At what time the Beast his forty and two months, and the
woman's time, times, and half a time in the Wilderness begin) and it not only
shows us the Witnesses could not be slain about the time of the Council of
Trent, (which was the thing in question) but also further acquaints us, That we
in these times must look for its fulfilling.

But then every one will ask me. Has there any such thing as the slaying and
rising again of these Witnesses been done in our days, yea or no?

I answer, There has, and face does not more answer face, then something done
in our times, does answer the slaying, and rising again of these Witnesses: And
sure I must say ingeniously (and so I shall shrive my self in the business) If
this be not the salying, and rising again of the Witnesses, I am now about to
offer, I cannot imagine any thing already come to pass that can be, but must
tell you, if this should not prove, for any thing hitherto done more likely
then this same, we are yet to look for it. But I keep you too long from sight
of this, that seems so like to be the killing, and rising again of the
Witnesses, you shall be delayed no longer, you shall have a full view of it;
and perhaps when you have, you may not a little be taken with it.

The Scene wherein these great things of the Witnesses slaying, Resurrection,
and Ascension have been acted, appears to be this Island of great Britain; and
the time, some years before the calling, and since the calling of this
Parliament.

In this Kingdom therefore (yet in this not excluding other places) for many
years last past there have been godly Ministers, and others, who by their
Preaching, Writing, and other ways testifying against Antichrist, and his
wickednesses, have hereby discovered themselves to be of these Witnesses: who
in regard they mourned to see Antichristianisme so far prevail; as also
because kept under without countenance, esteem, maintenance, Verse. 3.
by a Popish Prelaticall party (themselves the mean while living in all height
of honor and excess) might with good congruity be said to Prophecy in
Sackcloth: And sure he that had seen the condition of the godly Ministers in
this Kingdom not many years ago, especially such who were so bold as to meddle
with either Prelacie, or the Ceremonies, without the help of an Interpreter,
would have readily pronounced, There are no other then the Witnesses in
Sackcloth.

But forward; When the date of these Witnesses prophesying draws toward an end
(which excluding their three years and an half lying dead, will fall about five
or six years agone) Then the Antichristian power slayes the Witnesses,
silences, suspends, throws them from their places, thus slaying them. And has
not all this been fulfilled in our eyes? Were not all the bold opposers of
Prela^y, and the Ceremonies, the great remains of Verse. 7.
Popery in this Kingdom left undemolished, were they not all silenced, had
their mouths stopped, and so slain in this Kingdom? There wereindeed some godly
Ministers left; but was there left a Witness (I mean a bold and open opposer of
Prelacy and the C^remoni^s any emminent one that openly h^ld forth any such
thing in all this Kingdom?) And say freely, does this look like the slaying of
the Witnesses, yea or no? You have godly Ministers, and others, opposing what
of Antichrist remains in the Kingdom, silenced, suspended, thrown out of place,
thus killed: You have all done so to, all the bold opposers through the Kingdom
thus killed: You have it done by the Prelacy, no ^oubt an Antichristian power,
and this just about the time when by the li^^liest computation it should be
done: That every thing should with such consent, fall in: Witnesses slain, all
slain, slain by the beast, and this then when the course of times tells us they
should be slain. Can it be, but we must confess this is the slaying of the
Witnesses?

Further. After they are slain, they lie dead in the street, that Verse. 8.
is, They continue in that state of civil death, their killing brought them
into, they remain for some space suspended, their mouths s^aled up; whom in
this case, if any should attempt to give shelter, succor honor to; it must
not be, for they will Verse 9.
not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves: And has not all this come
to pass accordingly. And when all the Witnesses were thus silenced, and slain;
did they not for some good space so continue; was not the Pulpit shut against
them, yea the Press also; no breath of their former life of Witnesses now
coming from them? And then, did not the Prelaticall faction forbid any to
shelter, countenance, or succor these silenced Witnesses? You know what search
has been made for these same, what care that none should shelter then. Thus
not suffering their dead bodies to be put in graves.

When they have brought things to this pass, and slain all the Witnesses, then
they rejoice, and make merry: And did not Verse. 10.
that faction do so here? Did they not triumph they had made such a hand of the
Puritan Preachers through the Kingdom? Have I not heard some of them have
boasted, and hugged themselves in it, They had not left a Puritan Preacher in
their Diocese? This was the sad condition of the godly Ministers, and some
others well affected; for some three or four years before this Parliament. How
think you now, does this appear like a slaying of the Witnesses, yea or no. But
proceed.

After three years and an half, the Spirit of life from God, enters Verse. 11.
into the Witnesses, and they stand upon their feet: God by his special hand
restores the Witnesses to their liberty again, which the Antichristian faction
beholdi^^, thereupon become greatly afraid. And ha^h not all this been made
good among us also; does any question, when after the three years and an half
silencing and imprisonment of those who suffered more publicly, (for just so
long to a day these suffered.) They together with many other silenced, and dead
Witnesses, were again restored to liberty, the beginning of this Parliament. At
the beholding whereof, and to see such a sudden and unexpected tu^n of things.
I appeal to any man; did not the Popish Pr^laticall faction become no little
affrighted? How think you now, Was not this like a resurrection of the
Witnesses?

But yet further, being risen again, they are called up to Heaven, whither
ascending in a cloud, their enemies beheld them. Some act of them in place in
calling the Witnesses to some more ample condition, this is the voice, calling
the Witnesses up Verse. 12.
to heaven. The multitude of people congratulating with them for their freedom;
as also setting to their shoulders to help forward their advancement, This is
the cloud wherein they ascend thither. And was not this made good also, was it
not a great voice from heaven which fetch some of these Witnesses from the
uttermost parts of this Kingdom, where they were imprisoned to this place? And
did not thousands of people, a cloud of Witnesses, rejoicing, and with triumph
accompany them hither? where also has it not been consulted for the
enlargement of their maintenance and their better accommodation, that so they
might never more Prophecy in Sackcloth? Of all which also, were not their
enemies the Popish Prelaticall party, as the Text further adds, The no whit
over-joyed beholders? All which put together, seems it not to be the Witnesses
Ascension?

Once more. The same hour there is a great Earthquake: About Verse. 13.
the time of the rising of the Witnesses there are great stirs, and Commotions.
And since that time, have their not been such in this Kingdom, nay do they not
continue with us to this day. All which, what other thing are, they then the
great Earthquake accompanying the rising again of the Witnesses?

But further in this Earthquake, The tenth part of the great City falls,
Antichristianisme in one of the ten Kingdoms falls; Verse. 13.
And is not this a doing? Prelacy and the Ceremonies, the only remains of
Popery, have they not been falling ever since? They are gone in Scotland, and
are they not a going in this Kingdom also?

And then lastly, Seven thousand men of name slain in the Verse. 13.
Earthquake: That is many deprived of power, honor, maintenance which they had
before: And is not this a doing also, And when so many Prelates, Deans and
Chapters, with all their appurtenances, shall have their honor, place,
maintenance taken from them, which then is done when the bill is once passed,
drawn up for this purpose, Then is the slaughter of the seven thousand men of
name fully accomplished.

The sum of all this, that I may give it you at one view, is thus much. The
godly Ministers, or others opposing Antichristianisme, and being kept under
thereby, are the Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth. Their silencing,
suspending, This is their slaughter. Their restoring to liberty again is there
resurrection. The state calling them to more freedom, and honor, is the voice
from heaven, calling them thither: The multitude of people congratulating with
them, the cloud wherein they do ascend. The Commotions now in the Kingdom, are
the great Earthquake, Prelacy, and the Ceremonies taken away, this is the tenth
part of the City falling, and the Bishops, Deans and Chapters with all their
rabble being utterly deprived of Authority, honor, maintenance, are the Seven
thousand men slain in the Earthquake.

And now speak every one his thought, seems not this indeed the slaying and
rising again of the Witnesses, and do not things fall in, and answer beyond all
expectation? It cannot be denied but this same has likelynesse of event to
commend it, none more, and then for the time, where else would a man have
pitched, had he been to choose? And indeed what can be objected against it?

time and place: It seems a business more general then to be confined to this
Kingdom, or to those we aim at in it.

place, the holy Ghost seems clearly to limit it to the tenth part of the great
City, viz. to one of the ten Kingdoms; and if I say, England is this tenth
part, does not the Article tell me so, (...), that tenth part, That one of the
ten Kingdoms; which seems most discernable from the rest; and which is so
easily differenced from the rest, as is this Penitus toto divisi ab.
Island?

And let any say (which is well worthy our observing) where have the Witnesses
of latter times been persecuted, save only in this Kingdom? In France, in the
Low Countries, and so in other places, they have been quiet, only persecuted
here in these Kingdoms.

I should not deny but the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth, takes in other
places, and has been done either at once, or successively in most of these
Western Kingdoms, yet withal it seems to me evident, the close, and
Chatastrophe of this same, I mean the slaying and rising again of these
Witnesses, must be acted in one Kingdom only. Otherwise, why do not five, or
six parts or more, or all the parts of the City fall, and not only the tenth
part, if so be we say the Witnesses should be slain and rise again at once in
so many? But one part of the City falls, upon their rising which could not be
imagined, if the Witnesses were slain and rose again at once in all the parts.

Which same (if I may step so far aside) may help to answer that question,
which I perceive some make in this business, viz. Whether this slaughter of
the Witnesses may not be successive, and so acted in one Kingdom after another:
And this answer I should give to it: Granting the Witnesses may prophecy in
Sackcloth, in one Kingdom after another, in regard it is not limited to place;
as also is a business of long continuance, and so has time enough to move
from one place to another: but for their killing and resurrection, in regard
these are limited to a certain place, namely, To the Tenth part of the City (as
we saw before) as also farther, to a certain and fixed time, namely, To the end
and term of the Witnesses Prophecy in Sackcloth, and to the end of the sixth
Trumpet, as a full stop and period to both of them; unless we can conceive,
The thousand two hundred and threescore years of the Witnesses Prophecy may
end in one Kingdom after another, and the time of the sixth Trumpet, expire in
one Kingdom after another, and also the seventh Trumpet begin to sound in one
Kingdom after another, which we cannot: we may not conceive the slaying, and
rising again of the Witnesses, which are the exact periods of these certain,
and fixed times, can be accomplished in one Kingdom after another neither.

But enough of the former part of the objection, urging us, as too much
restraining the killing of the Witnesses, in regard of place, and for
restraining it to particular persons, which was the thing objected, I further
answer:

I should not restrain it to two or three men, I would be unwilling to put so
much envy upon any. Some indeed there were that suffered more publicly then
others, yet all the sufferers, Ministers and others, for there were others also
of quality were at an under before this Parliament, yea Parliaments themselves
rose up as from the dead, in this Parliament. All these together make the two
Witnesses.



the great Earthquake upon the Witnesses resurrection; It Is nothing but the
Popish Prelaticall faction, struggling for life, now overthrown in the fall of
the tenth part of the City. It is not any solemn Authoritative persecution,
such as was the former, it is the Earthquake only, and their strugglings for
life, all which ere long are like to end in their utter ruin.



Antichrist his time, from his full growth, but from his birth, so neither do
we end it with the utter ruin, and overthrow of Antichrist, but with that
great and visible declining of his, when he utterly looses a whole Kingdom,
this breaking the Ice, for all the other to follow after. In short, Then seems
the Beast his forty two months to end, when the tenth part of the City falls,
wherein is laid the groundwork of the ruin of all the other also.

You have now the conceived slaying and rising again of the Witnesses which
has fallen out in our times at large represented, you have seen it in all the
likelihood, and advantage I could hold it forth withal: Now let every one take
their liberty to speak their apprehension in the business; for my part, I
cannot but think this same is like to be the slaying, and rising again of the
Witnesses; only that I may not dissemble, where I am at a stand, give me leave
after all, to make these two or three queries.

1. When did they of the Kinreds, and people, and tongues, and nations, look
upon the silenced Ministers, and others of this Kingdom, who yet at the nineth
verse of this Chapter, are said to look upon the dead Witnesses?

2. If with the rising of the Witnesses, the second Woe passes, Verse 13. 14.
and this second Woe is the Turk, how is it we say the Witnesses are risen, and
yet the Turk still continuing, and like enough for some space yet to continue?

3. If with the rising of the Witnesses the second Woe passes, and the third Woe
(viz. The seventh Trumpet bringing in with the beginning of it, the utter
destruction of Antichrist, as also the glorious coming and Kingdom of Jesus
Christ) quickly follows after. Can our times be so near the accomplishment of
these, as is the end of the second Woe, which is the sixth Trumpet, to the
beginning of the third Woe, which is the seventh Trumpet?

Somewhat I could answer unto these, but not that which would quietare, (as the
Schoolmen speak) but these answered, I know little else material, and of
weight further to be excepted.

And now to draw toward a conclusion, and from all this to say somewhat to that
question, viz. What will become of us? which was indeed the occasion of it all.
Why if the Witnesses be yet to be slain, and slain in this Kingdom; Then yet a
little while expect and prepare for a suffering condition; I say, yet a while
expect the times should frown and look black upon us; yet being in no wise
discouraged; for be assured, either this killing will never come ancer us, or
if it do, being an unbloody killing, we need not carry our selves with so much
solicitousnesse in the business. And certainly for fear of this same, to think
to pack up, and be gone, while any work here remains, and while there is yet
hope concerning us, what were it but to desert the Cause, weaken the already
feeble hands, and run our selves upon a real danger, while we fly perhaps but
from an imaginary.

But if they be slain, and risen again, which you have seen how very likely,
then cheer up, strengthen those weak hands, certainly the bitterness of death
is already over, and from hence forward expect better days, then either our
eyes, or the eyes ou^ of forefathers ever saw.

If this which we saw ere while be indeed the slaying and rising again of the
Witnesses, expect this storm now over our heads should break up ere long, and
the latter part of it fall very foul on them who first raised it.

Expect, That Prelacy after a while, should be utterly disselved in this
Kingdom; Indeed it was so rooted here, that nothing less then an earthquake
could throw it up by the roots, and we may perhaps be shaken worse yet; but by
that time the earthquake is ended, then expect assuredly to be freed from root
and branch also.

Expect the tide of Idolatry, Superstition, and Tyranny turning here, should
back, not only to low water, but till utterly dried up in all these Western
Kingdoms.

Expect ere long much greater thing then I shall dare to speak of.

Exp^ct the little stone beginning to fall upon the toes of the Dan. 2. 34, 35
great image, and so dissolving all, should rise up upon their ruins a Kingdom
imcomparably more great, and glorious then they all. Expect that when the
Earthquake his ended her^, and has shaken the Nations on a row also, That then
the desire of all Hag. 27 Heb. 8, ^7.
the Nations should come; for then, but a litte while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry.

Appendix.
I Have already dispatched at least the sum of what I preached on this
Subject (I mean the Prophecy of the Witnesses.) In the carriage whereof, save
only in some few particulars I have not much varied from the beaten tract of
the latest* and most received Interpreters; so that however in point of
Computation there may be some difference, yet in matter of Interpretation, I
have adventured to stand or fall with them. But now because I would contribute
all that possibly I could in this business, and leave no mean unattempted for
this purpose; I should yet further crave leave to offer an other Int^pretation
of this Prophecy, which after I entered upon this work, I have met withal,
avowed also by some late Protestant Writers; That if so be any thing may be
made of it, it might be here near at hand, and those who should desire to see
as much at once, as they could in this matter, might hitherto have recourse,
where at least all the common, and likely apprehensions in this business are
presented.

This Interpretation is not the same with that gross Popish, which at the
beginning of this discourse was there propounded: nor upon the same ground*
contended for, yet withal, though not the same, yet near bordering upon, and
of near affinity to it. They indeed who first cried up that opinion which was
formerly mentioned as the Popish, did it upon mistake, the Papists that since
have propagated it, did it merely in design, neither whereof, this
Interpretation by and by to be named, may be challenged with all.

Upon mistake I say, they first did it, for as some well observe, Antichrist
being a Counter-Christ, and so the coming of Antichrist, a counter Resemblance
of the coming of Christ, it came to pass there were no less mistakings in the
coming of the one, then there were in the coming of the other: For example, The
Jews expected Christ to come when he did come* and yet because they fansied him
another, then indeed he was to be, and his coming to be in outward pomp, and
in the manner of some most potent temporal Monarch, they knew him not when he
was come. So the Christians expected Antichrist to come at that time when he
came indeed, but because they fansied him to be some strange barbarous Tyrant,
that by the sword and power of Arms should not only destroy the Church, but
conquer the world; therefore they knew him not when he was come: So that as
Christ came to his own, and his own received him not; So Antichrist came to
those that were not his own, and they eschued him not: So that mistakes begat
the forementioned opinion concerning Antichrist, and the severalls hereupon
depending.

And then it became afterward propogated in design; I say, indesign; for the
Popish faction, to the end they might draw off the eyes of men from looking
upon the Pope, as Antichrist have bid you not to look for Antichrist till the
end of the Word, at what time Enoch and Elias the two Witnesses, as the
immediate Harbingers of Christ's second coming must be expected also.

But this opinion is founded upon no such mistakes, nor yet drives any such
design; grants you that Antichrist is come, that the Pope is Antichrist. One
dividing the times of Antichrist into three several periods. 1. The time of
his rising, and growth, mentioned at the 13. Chapter of this Prophecy and the
first verse. 2. The time of his declining, at the third Verse. 3. The time of
his recovering again after his deadly wound, at the 4, 5* verses. Tells you,
that in this last Period, this time after the deadly wound healed, there shall
be some most cruel Savage-Monster that shall then be Pope, whose most
tyrannical reign shall continue 42 months, which precise time, that is, three
years and an half understood in the letter, shall be the time of the two
Witnesses extraordinary Prophecy also.

But to hold you no longer from this opinion concerning the Witness, Take it
thus.

About the time of the calling of the Jews, signified by the measuring of the
Temple in the two first verses of this Chapter. There are raised up two
extraordinary Witnesses, being two single persons, who shall testify unto the
Jews now misled by the impostures of the false Prophet, then first brought
forth are appearing in Judea, and as the Popes servant, and substitute, doing
all he possibly can in the behalf of him there: This their Prophesying in
Sackcloth, lasting just three years and an half; namely all the time of the
Beasts 42 months, all the time of that last and most bitter persecution, of
the last and worst Popish Antichrist.

These Witnesses further, the better to defend themselves and annoy and torment
their enemies, as also undeceive the Jews misled by the fained miracles of the
false Prophet, shall indeed as once Elias by fire, destroy their Enemies, shall
shut heaven that it rain not, and as formerly Moses, and Aaron; turn the Waters
into blood, and smite the earth withal plagues as often as they will.

But when the three years and an half of their Prophecy in Sackcloth is
expired, then the Beast, the false Prophet there resident slayes them, slayes
them indeed; after which, their dead bodies lie just three days and an half in
the street of Jerusalem. which is here meant by the great City Spiritually
called Sodom and Egypt, Where also our Lord was crucified; where for that
space, the several Nations at that time there meeting* shall look upon the
dead bodies of these two Witnesses: During which time, the misled inhabitants
shall rejoice, and make merry, and send presents, because now got rid of these
two Prophets that did in their life time miserably tormented them.

But after those three days and an half, they rise up from the dead, after
this, ascend up to heaven in a cloud; whereupon there being a great
earthquake, the tenth part of Jerusalem falls, seven thousand men slain, all
of it to be understood in the letter; and all this to be done toward the end of
the sixth Trumpet.

Thus you have the Interpretation: Now if any ask the reason why the letter is
so exactly kept to, and this whole Prophecy of the Witnesses understood to be
fulfilled in the letter; it is this in the general: This part of the Prophecy,
I mean all that which appertains to the Witnesses, is not shown the Prophet in
a Vision, but reported to him of the Angel, as an Interlocuter speaking all
this to him by word of mouth. For this is a Rule; Look what things are
presented to the sight, by similitudes, and images, those are all to be
understood mystically; But the things that are represented to the ear, whether
in proper or figurative terms, unless necessity enforce, are to be understood
historically, and in the letter.

This in the general: But now further, Why [the one thousand two hundred and
threescore days of the Witnesses Proph^sie in Sackeloth] are to be understood
in the letter; Why the [great City] means [Jerusalem] and the like: you these
have reasons in particular:

First, For the one thousand two hundred and threescore dayes] to be conceived
just three years and an half properly; There are these reasons offered: 1. This
time falls out toward the end of the sixth Trumpet; now to conceive one
thousand two hundred and threescore years to come in toward the end of the
sixth Trumpet, how absurd, how impossible. 2. This term is supposed to be the
same with the term of that last, and most cruel persecution, of the last and
worst Antichrist, the same also with that most unparalleled time of trouble
mentioned at the 12 Dan. 1. Such as never was since there was a Nation: which
if so, it cannot be so long as that which the mystical Interpretation contends
for, but must be only three years and an half properly and in the letter so
taken: according to which account, the two Witnesses may well be two single
persons also.

The reason why the turning waters into blood, and smiting the earth with all
plagues be to be understood in the letter also, besides that in the general
before mentioned, is because some such thing as this, is expected to be done
about the time of the Conversion of the Jews; so you find, Mich. 7. 15, 16.
According to the day^s of thy coming out of the Land of Egypt, will I show unto
him marvelious things: The Nations shall see and be confound^d, etc.

And then the reason, why these two Witnesses, who also are called two
Prophets, together with the false Prophet, have all of them reference to the
Jews, being all of them to reside there, is this, because wheresoever you find
mention of Prophets, whether true, or false, there is still a reference had
unto the Jews, to whom only it was peculiar, and their great privilege, to be
furnished with the Ministry of extraordinary Prophets.

And then lastly the reasons, why Jerusalem is here to be understood by the
great City, and not Rom (as is commonly conceived; are first, because these two
are expressly distinguished at the 16 Chapter of this Prophecy, and 18, 19,
verses, where you find the great City, that is, Jerusalem, is divided into
three parts, and great Babylon, that is, Rome comes into remembrance, being
there mentioned as two dinstinct places. Besides, Rome is no where in Scripture
called Sodom and Egypt, but Jerusalem is: Sodom it is called, Isai. 1. 10. and
Egypt it is called, Ezekiel. 23. 18, 19: And further, Rome was not the place where
our Lord was crucified, but Jerusalem, and therefore when it is here said, [The
Witness^s dead bodies lie in the street of the great Citie] Jerusalem is this
place where they lie dead, where also the false Prophet has his residence: and
when it is said [The tenth part of the City falls,] it means the tenth part of
Jeru^alem falls.

And now you have together with the Interpretation, the reasons (a^ I could
meet with them) which this Interpretation chiefly leans upon. If the Press
would have but respighted me a little, I had not only barely propounded this
Interpreta^ion, with the reasons, but had spoke my thoughts thereto also: But
since I can procure leave ^ut only to propound, the P^inter thinking long till
the discourse be gotten abroad; suffice it that I have proposed it, hereby
giving others an occasion to examine, and upon examination, either to receive,
or refuse, as it shall be a^le to abide the trial; I having the opportunity
only to bring it in Medie, where also I must leave it.

Errata.
Good reader amend these faults of the Press, which could I have tended upon,
might happily have been prevented.

Page 4. Line 7. for state read fate, p. 10. l. 6. for Church worships, read
Church, worships, p 13. l. 24. for come when: r. come: when, p. 22. l. 23 for
those r. these, p. 28. l. 21. for these r. those, l 37. for it however; r. it;
howeuer, p. 31. l. 23 for (...), p. 40. l. 8. for from r. for, p 49 l. 23. for
former, whereof r. former whereof. p. 63 l 3. for honor have, read have
honor, p. 68. l. 16. for these r. the, p. 71. l. 10. for (...), p. 73. l 2.
for Train r. Rain, p. 75. l. 11. for ends with it, r ends, with i^, p. 80 l.
31. for fifteenth r. thirteenth, p. 81. l. 14. for the r. that, p. 82. l. 10.
for to r. two, p. 88. l. 14. for thing r. second thing.

FINIS.

