A LETTER Intercepted (at SEA) by Captain Moulton, and sent by the Admiralls
to the Council of State. Written from Parson Wolby, Directed to Mr. Edward
Ball, the Princes Agent, with Prince Rupert at Kingsale in Ireland.

Wherein is discovered a most fearful and sad design against the City of
London, and such who have Estates in ENGLAND.

A New Platform of the Catholic Religion, intended for England. Several
transactions of the Princes Navy. And the Governor of the Island of Scilly.
And an account of the Governors Letter (who is fallen sick) to the Prince.

Parson VVOLBY his desires to Prince Rupert, and his transactions with Sir John
Moene, Sir John Beak, Doctor Wats, and Mr. Ball.

And some transactions at Sea, between 500 of the King of Spain his soldiers
at Sea, and the Princes Navy.

And several fights at Sea, with other considerable Passages of the Princes
NAVY.

May 7. 1649.
TO the end that all who are faithful to this Nation, may unanimously unite,
against the common Enemy: whose bitterness does appear against us, both in
words, and action, in this Letter. Therefore Imprimatur.

Theodore Jennings.



LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1649.

FOR My honored Friend Mr. John Ball at Kingsale in Irelamd, these.
SIR;
I Received your last by honest Captain Allen, who was as welcome to these
Jsles as possible we could make him, and I hope His Majesty's Navy will have
good cause to resort here often, and make themselves and us fortunate: and in a
short time make His Majesty rich and formidable, a small brother of Virginia
did yesterday fail near some outward rocks called the Bishop and his Clerks
(which often prove more fatal then the Popes Bull) and being discovered from
the top of the Castle; a signal was given and a Boat sent to the Roe Bucke;
who was as nimble as a Hawke, and presently drew up his Anchour and went to
fail: The Charles was in chase two hours before of another great ship, who
was passing 500 Soldiers for the King of Spain to Oastend, but that service
understood, Captain Allen dismissed her for the King of Spaines sake, and the
Charles and the Roe Bucke made toward the Virginia Merchant, who yielded
speedily without so much as one verily, or indeed, and now you see in a second
experience how considerable this eye of England is, which if tenderly regarded
may make London and all England weep, and command their wealth, who at first
fomented, and as yet maintained this black treason, murder and Rebellion. To
observe another blessing upon the Navy this day, by an increase upon Sir Hen.
Stredling, and another addition of fortune, who though he was carried Easterly
besides the Islands, yet has gained even his mistake of the Isles, and has
taken another brother of Virginia, who is laden with Tobacco, and some
Beaver-skins, thus God gives new additions of strength and victory daily for
His Majesty's service, and I hope His Majesty, will thrive to a very great
condition in short time, now as the Navy grows daily most happily, so do
these Islands, by Prince Ruperts great care and favor) thrive into a greater
security, and our noble Governor is more fortunate of nothing, then in his
highest thoughts of this place, not doubting but these Isles will prove another
treasure in short time by Gods blessing, and the mutual industry of the Prince
and our Governor. And at present the hot distempered luxury of some giddy
discontented Islanders and others (too apt to mutiny) is allaied by the
arrival of those Officers, and Soldiers; which his highness has so
carefully sent to the Isles, and now at last you will, ex confusione nascetur
ordo, that all things will march on together with order and power, yet there is
a present interruption to the Governors intendments, occasioned by a violent
f^av^r (accompanied with a double tertian) which has most miserably afflicted
the good Governor these 14 da^es together, which disease has been so sharp
and fierce, that it has much weakened him, yet even in this extremity with
great peril to his health; and in the intermission of his fit) he has this
hight adventured to sit up and write to the Princes highness and if the P*
discerve any now, a composure in his letter the Govern. is confident of his
pardon, who rather chooses to adventure the hazard of his health, then his
respect and civillity toward his Highness.

Among many other of the Governors friends, I am appointed by him to give you
special thanks for the particular care and solicitude (on al occasion for the
Isles, and the Gover. acknowledges freely how every exceeding much he is
obliged to you for your kindness and tokens, of Orrenges, Olives and other
rarities; and he bids me assure you, that he will watch all opportunities to
requite and gratify your love, now desiring your excuse that he cannot
return you at present some remembrance of his love suitable to his mind. Yet I
am to whisper into your care that Captain Allen has had a better, more easy,
and kind dispatch in his business, for your sake, and Sir John Moens, on whose
trinall friendship he has so great value and estimation, that he studieth all
ways and means how to serve persons of such honor and trust, and now. I am to
acquaint you with our condition concerning ammunition and provisions, which by
reason of the daily addition of Soldiers, and strangers cannot but wast; and
therefore you will do His Majesty very good service to put the Prince in mind
of sending of them on all opportunites to the Island, especially, Salt, Powder,
and Corn, (for whatsoever Captain Cornelius has befallen those things are in
an hourly consumption, and their supply so very necessary, that there is not
above three months provisions of Corn, and the way to the Market is very
dangerous, and therefore the Governor desires you to present to the Prince, that
His Highness will please to have such thoughts of the Magazeens and stores
here, as to advance them to a years provision at least, and I am bold to tell
you that the advantage will prove as considerable to the Navy as to the Island,
which on all occasions cannot reach other Islands, and therefore must sometime
be forced to seek them here (as most probable the surest and fittest place.)

I am to acquaint you that salt of all other commodities, and powder are to be
sent, salt for to season the fish that is taken round the Island, and in
particular, here is a good Ling caught as any in the Ocean, and if there were
an 100 Fishermen, and boats, and nets, here is work and wealth for them all,
and therefore the Governor very much desires a very great proportion of salt
and powder stores if possible. I must mind you likewise of Coal, Timber, hemp
to make Coards, Ropes, and Cables, here is a most excellent Roper, who has
skill for making twisted silk to make Cables for the Kings best ships. I must
again remember you of 500 pair of shoes and Stokins, and if you dare take a
Priests word and no Merchant, you shall have as the Governor assures you a
very good return, the Fleming with us, I doubt not, before this is adjudged a
prize, and there breaks out here a clearer light to that purpose, by reason the
Scrivenor is found out here to be but purser in a guise, and an Italian in
language, but a Fleming by birth, and doubtless the nephew of I^gnor
Vandermarch, who lives in London nere Cheap side, so that business, I hope
will prove of good consequence to His Majesty's service. And now from these
more public affairs, let me acquaint you that the Church of England is
practiced here according to the Pattern at the Kings Chapel as nere as
possible, and as established by Law, and the Governor is so careful of Gods
honor, that though Papists or Sectaries may Land or Trade, or live here, yet
none shall dare to defame or disturb the Catholic service of God, and desire
you and your fellow Commissioners on all fair occasions to supply this place
with books, if they come to be dispossessed, for we would if possible, have
learning here, and a public Library; to maintain Gods worship and service.

And if you can tune the Organs for any other place more propperly, in the name
of God use your discretion, yet if you can be an assistant to make Gods
service more solemn here, you will show your self a good son of the Church of
England.

I am bold to acquaint you that I have (with the Governors good leave)
prepared a little Cellar, which will hold some three Butts of Canary and some
lesser knacks as Anchovies, Olives and such collation stuff, and I hope you
will season it with three choice pipes of the purest Canary, that the Governor
may entertain you more pleasantly with an Island Bottle, and now I must desire
you to remember me most respectively to Sir John Moens, Sir John Beale, and
Doctor Wats, and to continue in your good opinion, the affection, and resolved
service of

Your assured loving friend and servant, EDWARD WOLBY.
Sorling April 15. 1649.
FINIS.

