WOMEN WILL Have their Will: OR, Give Christmas his Due.

In a Dialouge between Mris Custom, a Victuallers Wife near Cripplegate, and
Mris New-come, a Captains Wife, living in Reformation-Alley, near
Destruction-Street.

When Gillian Turn-tripe, Jack-an-apes his Trull,
And Cicely Sly-tricks, Gol-magogs great Gull,
Shall once begin to Rule and Sway this Land,
Oh, to those Subjects under their Command!


LONDON: Printed by E. P. for W. G. 1648.

Women will have their Will: Or, Give Christmas his Due.
Mistress New-come. HOw do you good Mistress Custom? I made hold to give you a
(...), to see how you do.


Mistress Custom, M. New-come, pray draw near and sit down; come, you are
heartily, heartily welcome.


M. New. I shall be a trouble to you, I see you are busy.


M. Cust. No, no, not so busy, but I can spare so much time as to discourse
with you a while; how does your husband do? what, is he at home? or where is
his Rendezvous?


M. New. I thank you Mistress Custom; he is not at home, nor is his Rendezvous
far from home, but what, have you a Feast here suddenly. that you are so
Decking, Adorning, and Trimming up your house with this fine Rosemary and
Bays? I believe there is some such doings, is there not?


M. Cust. No truly, here (...) no Feasting, but what does fall out according
to the Time.


M. New. Time; pray now what Time?


M. Cust. Why, Christmas, woman; have you forgot it? Indeed these Wars and Jars
would almost make one forget their Christen name, if they were not often called
on, to put one in remembrance.


M. New. Iudeed Christmas can hardly be boaten out of many folks heads, which
is a very strange thing.


M. Cust. Not so strange as true, woman; I should rather, and sooner forget my
mother that bare me, and the paps that gave me suck, then forget this merry
Time; nay, if thou had ever seen the Mirth and Jolitie that we have had at
those Times when I was young, thou would bless thy self to see it.


M. New. Nay, undoubtedly I might very well believe you without swearing; for
surely, there was then excessive Sports, Pastimes, and Revels, that it would
make a bodies hair stand an and to hear and see it.


M. Cust. Did thou never hear of my Grandfather? why, he was second cousin
to the Earl of Dum-belly, Cup Bearer to Bacchus, Knight of the Vapor, and
Esquire of the Pipe; he was a great Politician, Monopolist, and Project-monger;
it is very strange you never heard of him.


M. New. I have heard of the like, if not the same; but what of him?


M. Cust. What of him; nay, nothing of him, but I say my Grandfather was his
second cousin.


M. New. Well, and what of that?


M. Cust. What of that? Nay, by the mass, I forgot where I was; this it is to
have such a scurvy headpiece, by Lady I know not what I was going to say.


M. New. It was about your Grandfather at Christmas.


M. Cust. O me, O me, it is true, it is true; I seey on keep your brains warmer
then I do, which makes you so ripe-witted: but for fear I should forget
again, I Will tell thee; my Grandfather kept a brave house at Christmas, (it
makes ones teeth dance in ones head like Virginal-Jacks with the very conceit
on it) for according to his own Verses:)

Then Pell Mell murder in a purple hue,
In reeking blood, did slaughtering paws imbren;
Then Cocks Hens, Capons, Turkey, Goose and Widgeon,
Hares, Conyes, Phesants, Partridge; Plover, Pigeon.
All these were cast into the furious paws
Of break-neck Powlt'rers, t'undegoe their Laws:
The Butchers Axe (like great Achilles Bat)
Dings deadly down, ten thousand thousand flat;
Each Butcher by himself makes Martial Laws,
Cut throats and kills, then quarters, hangs, and drows.
When this is done, then to the Pot and Spit
It Is totally committed every bit.
This I say, the very conceit of this is enough to make one chew the Cud; for
my part, it makes me methinks look two years younger then I did before, every
time I think on it; indeed they were brave Times, pray God send us such again,
and we shall once more have a merry world.


M. New. This was in the times of old, when men were trunck-Hose.


M. Cust. Nay, by Lady (God forgive me for swearing) it is not so long since;
for my father kept a brave house to at that Time, though he pinched for it all
the year after; he had all the Varieties as the earth could afford, for
Boiled, Baked, and Roasted.


M. New. I have seen but a little of this Sport, yet of that little I have seen
too much; for it would make the stander by ashamed to see what the feeder
devoures, and what gods they make of their bellies, that one would think that
people did take in twelve months Provision into their panches, or that they
did ballast their bellies for a voyage to Constantinople, or to the East Indies.


M. Cust. Indeed all this as you speak is true; for I think verily, if it were
not for Dancing, Frisking, Playing, Toying, Christmas-Gamboles, and such kind
of jogging Exercises to shake it down, it were impossible they should devour
so much as they do. Then to see Cook hot and Cook cold, Cook young and Cook
old, Scullion and Scullions mate, all in a sweat, like so many Monarchs of the
Marrow-bones, Marquesses of the Mutton, Princes of the Pyes and Pasties, Lords,
High-Regents of the Spits and Kittles, Barons of the Griddiron, and so be
Commanders of the Frying-pannes during this Festival. I say, to see them Act
their Tragi-comicall Feasts, would make a man or woman's stomach elevate its
self into another temper.


M. New. And all this hurly-burly is for no other purpose but to stop the
greedy mouth of this Leviathan, or Land-whale, Christmas.


M. Cust. Well, it is true; but now forsooth Christmas must be cried down,
Reformation must be cried up; if they were weighed in a balance, then I know
Christmas would go down without crying: but there are some now adays, a Crew
of Tatter-demallians, amongst which the best could scarce ever attain to a
Calves-skin-Sute, or a piece of Neck-Beefe and Carrets to dinner on a Sunday,
or scarcely ever mounted (before these times) to any Office above the degree of
Scavenger or Tything-man at the farthest; and now forsooth these Reformado's,
upon pretense of Reformation, shall destroy and overthrow the most Famous and
Commendable Customs of this Land; especially for the observing and keeping of
this Great Day: what, are we forsooth wiser then our fathers, that brought us
up, and educated us in this Wisdom? It Is a strange thing to me; it cannot be
beaten into my brains, that this can be just and honest.


M. New. M. Custom, you were best to discourse with some of these which think
it not fitting to keep that Time in such a Revelling way, perhaps and no doubt
but they will give you reasons against it; and I partly know you to be a
rational ^^man, and that you will permit reason to bear the sway.


M. Cust. Reason, reason; as if any man could show a reason for not keeping of
Christmas, you spoke as bad as blasphemy: Christmas, that has been a Custom
ever since the world began, should now with a puff of reason, through the
Ramshorne of self-conceit, with the walls of Jericho, be laid flat to the
ground.


M. New. Nay, M. Custom, although it is a Custom very Ancient, yet it is not
so old as the world; there you are somewhat mistaken.


M. Cust. As for the world, I do not know its age; but for Christmas, I am
sure it was kept in my Grandfathers great Grandfathers time, in my
Grandfathers time, and in my fathers time, and none of these did over think it
Superstition or Idolatry; and for my part, I will keep it as long as I am able,
let all the powers on earth stand to oppose it.

And though the Fields dis-robed be
Of all their Herbs and Fruits,
And the merry chirping Birds
Are all turned tonguelesse mutes;
Yet we will sing and merry be,
Our time in Sport we will pass,
Not weighing how the time shall be,
Nor never how it was.

M. New. Then you are resolved.


M. Cust. I am for that matter, come what will come; ah how (me thinks) my
brains are where upon the conceit on it; I could wish now at this Time, that the
Valiantest Champion of all the Round-headed Disputants, to encounter with me in
this Argument: I tell thee, If I had the tongue of Hermes, who (as my Husband
says) was Prolocutor to the gods; or if I had as many fingers as Camaldus, who
was feigned to have an hundred hands. If ^urging Neptune, was converted into
Ink, or the rugged-ragged-face of our ancient mother Tellus, were Paper, yet
could not the verbal, volubilitie, or elocution of my voice, nor the agilitie,
dexterity, or faculty of my hands, nor the spacious, unmesurable
number-lesse, white innocent Paper; no, none of all these could either speak,
write, or by any other means declare the abundance of Arguments, comprehended
within the notion of my brain for this unlimited Subject.


M. New. For my part, your Eloquence is too harsh for me.


M. Cust. Oh, I have it by heart; I have heard my Husband, when Gentlemen have
been drinking here at my house, rabble out abundance of this Fustian-stuffe,
which gives them a great deal of content, especially when they have almost
seen the Devil in a Frize Jerkin, and every thing look with Janus faces.


M. New. Then I perceive by you that you cannot possibly be wrought on to leave
this Old Ceremony, your mind is so unchangeable.


M. Cust. Unchangeable, can the Black-moore change his skin, or the Sun alrer
his continued course? Yet sooner can these things be done then my mind changed,
for to keep old Christmas once again.


M. New. It is an old saying, and true, That which is bred in the bone, will
seldom or never out of the flesh.


M. Cust. Thou say true; My great Grandfather, my Grandfather, my father,
and now my self, these nine and forty years have kept this Festival Time,
and this year above all the rest ought to be kept, for it is the year of
Iubile, as the Bishop of Armagh said, when he preached before the King; and I
for my part am fourscore and one years old: So that here is Iubile upon
Iubile, year- Iubile for my birth, and the year Iubile for my keeping
Christmas: and therefore shall not we be merry mine own S. Nichol. a Cod?

We will be merry, let all say what they will,
As we have kept it, so we will keep it still.

M. New. What, will you keep it in spite of Authority?


M. Cust. What Authority? I am sure my father and mother had the greatest
authority over me ever since I was borne, and other authority I knew none
before I was married, and now it seems I am under a crabbed Husbands
authority, and besides him I will be subject to none, and I am sure he is as
strong for Christmas as the greatest of our Ancestors; and therefore that
Authority will not curb me.


M. New. Then it semes you know no other authority?


M. Cust. No by our Lady, not I: neither do I desire to know any, for he is
crabbed enough of any conscience; if I should tell you all, you would say so
too: therefore the Devil take all other Authority, if it be no better then a
dogged, crosse-graine Devilish Husband.


M. New. Why, then you count the Parliament no Authority?


M. Cust. I hope Gossip you are not come to pick quarrels with me in my own
house?


M. New. No truly M. Custom, not I, neither would I have you to entertain
such a hard conceit; for my part I was never so well read in such Principles,
nor ever took any degree at the University of Billingsgate.


M. Cust. Perhaps you are of your mothers tutor-age then, for I am sure she was
an Oyster-woman of that College for one and twenty years, to my own
knowledge; and had her tongue as nimble as an Italian Mountebanck.


M. New. What my mother was, is nothing to me.


M. Cust. But you are a Chip of the Old Block: for what do you mean, in
telling me of the Parliament?


M. New. I mean the two Houses of Parliament which have jumped together in one
Opinion, for the putting down and destroying of this Romish Beast Christmas;
for which, they are to be commended.


M. Cust. It is a strange thing; let the Devil never so cunningly hide his
head, we shall know him by his Cloven foot; nor let the Ass never so craftily
hide his feet, yet we may know him by his Ears: and howsoever covertly you
have carried your self, I know you, both by head and heels: I see you are one
of the New Faction, and a great Student in Spittle-Colledge; but that is
nothing to me: yet what do you mean by Calling Christmas a Romish Beast? pray
explain your self at large.


M. New. To leave all manner of Circumstance, which is not pertinent to our
Subject in hand --


M. Cust. By Lady neighbor, I think you are one of these New Teachers, you
handle your matter so excellent; but I trouble you, pray proceed.


M. New. The word (Christmas) if learnedly weighed in it we shall find matter
of dangerous Consequence: As, 1. If we consider what the word or name is,
Christ. 2. If we consider who gave him this name. 3. Where he was Christened, or
had the name given him. 4. By what authority they gave him this name.


Of which I shall proceed in order, according to my weak ability: And first
for the word; Christmas is a word which deciphers a Scorpion, which is a
venomous Beast, which carries a sting at his tail, and so does Christmas; for
the word Mass is a sting in the tail of that Romish Beast: Secondly, we must
consider who gave him this name, and that was his Godfathers and Godmothers
in Baptism; from whence arises this doubtful question? who they were, and
that was Pope Boniface, Pope Fireface, and Pope Joane; but by reason of their
non-residence hers in England, the Bishops took that (...) upon there and stood
as shitten Gossips: Thirdly, the place where, this is by the learned held in
great Dispute, but I believe in his infancy he was sickly; and therefore
according to the Church of Englands Tenets he was twice Christened, that is to
say, at home here in England, and afterward confirmed at Rome, the Mother
Church of all such Antichristian Heresies: but I shall be oder-tedious,
therefore I will come to the fourth Devision, and that is by what authority
they do these things: this will take up a great deal of time to open and
explain unto you, if I should do it to purpose; therefore I will omit it,
only certifying you thus much, that there is no power under the Sun that has
any authority to erect or build up, neither to destroy and pull down any
thing, save what is in the will of the two Houses of Parliament.


M. Cust. That word waked me, indeed I was almost asleep; what, you say that
the Parliament has power to pull down Christmas; I pray then what will they
put up in the room on it, Stage Plays, Dancing upon the Ropes, and Hocus Pocus.


M. New. No, it shall be like other Times, not one day higher or lower then
another; for it is not for us to stand upon Times and Seasons.


M. Cust. Fie upon it, fie upon it, away with it, away with it, I do not know this
Parliament, it is no kin to me; If this is the Authority you talked of, God
deliver me from such Authority; this is worser Authority then my Husbands,
for though my Husband beats me now and then, yet he gives my belly full, and
allows me money in my purse; which as I take it, the Parliament will not; for
I remember, men come for money, money, and if I ask them what it is, for they
still keep in one tune like the Cockoe, and tell me it is for the Parliament;
God deliver me from those that will neither let us eat our victuals and be
merry, though they don't pay for it; nor yet if they could help it, leave us
any money in our purses.


M. New. Then you do not regard these Powers, let them say or do what they
will.


M. Cust. No indeed, not I; is it not fitting I should do what I will with mine
own? Cannot I keep Christmas, ear good Cheer, and be Merry, without I go and
get a License from the Parliament? Marry gap, come up here, for my part I Will be
hanged by the neck first; must I be subject to them I never saw in my life? No,
no, neighbor, they are mistaken in me; though they set up Scare-Crowes to
scare sooles withal, they shall not fright me.


M. New. Truly neighbor, if these Powers and Authorities will not make you
leave off this Superstitious and Idolatrous Feasting, some other sharper and
more rigorous power must.


M. Cust. Must, do you say? How now, you said you did not come to Scold, but I
see you will Scold before you go: I see now by the Mass, there is no making
honey of a Dogs-turd; that which is bred in the bone will never out of the
flesh; your mother I faith has taught you your lerry, almost as perfect as she
has it her self: must make me?


M. New. Yes, must make you: I do not go to eats my words Gillian; what I have
spoken I Will speak again, I have those which shall maintain me in it, I care
not who knows it, and that is the honest godly party of the Army, of which
society my Husband is a member; therefore take heed what you say.


M. Cust. What have I to do with the Army, I have nothing to say to the Army.


M. New. But the Army has something to say to you then: for if no power will
tame you, they can and will tame you; were you as fierce as a Lion, they will
new-mould you into batter breeding, and make you leave off your Superstitious
Feasting, and turn to Fasting, if you do not mend your manners.


M. Cust. As for the Army, no doubt but there may be some honest men amongst
them, but all the world knows what thy Husband was a poor man which ran out
of his Country for debt, and afterward betook himself to be Master Percyes
Groom, to rub his Horses heels in Drury Lane; And now such as he is, must
come to tame those which are ten times better then themselves; this is a fine
world indeed.


M. New. Huswife, farewell; I have with silence heard things of a dangerous
Consequence against the Parliament and Army; therefore look to it, for you
shall surely suffer for it; these things cannot be let slip without severe
punishment, either with the deprivation of Life and Liberty, or at least the
loss of your Goods.


M. Cust. Devil, do thy worst; if they are honest men they will not do it:
Yet all this Chattring shall not put me off from keeping Christmas.

For as long as I do live,
And have a Joviall Crew,
I Will sit and Chat, Laugh, and be Fat,
And give Christmas his Due.

The EPILOGUE.
CHristmas is the welcommest time,
That does come through the year:
For It makes many joyful hearts,
and fills the world with Cheer.
And though a man a Mizer is,
all the whole year beside;
He now begins to hang up Care,
and let the world go slide.
Now Tom and Tib, and Lusty Jack,
the time in Mirth do pass;
And each in Kitchen or the Hall,
is towsing of his Less.
The Cards in every corner stirs,
the Dice do take no rest,
Likewise the frisking Dancers, they
are held in great request.
As long as there'there the flagrant fire
does spit out its fierce flames,
There is no ceasing of their Mirth,
nor period to their Games.
But now the Log of Logs is burnt,
The Hall-Chimney leaves smoking,
Good folks farewell, for I will stay
no longer in it poaking.
FINIS.

