As you were: OR A Posture of Peace: Presenting to your view the broken state
of the Kingdom, as it now stands, with a good way to rally it to its former
happiness. With some remarkable Passages of late Agitation.

Finis Belli Pax. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1647.

As you were; OR A Posture of Peace.
SOLONS Law against Neutrality, in a civil dissension, is most unreasonable,
because in some cases it must engage a man on dishonest or dishonorable action.
For in that civil broyl between Caesar and Pompey, which side should a man have
ranged himself unto, when both were so pernicious to the Commonwealth, that
put Cicero to a stand? Or in that tripartite division of Jerusalem that ushered
in its final desolation, where the best was so base that no honest man had the
face to own it?

We have had here in England a most unhappy and unnatural division, and for a
long time heard of no more but two parties under the names of Cavalier and
Roundhead; the first proper enough and rightly given, but the reason of the
latter let him render you that first imposed it. The flowers of that garland
that both sides strove for were the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land,
the Kings just rights, the Privileges of Parliament, and Liberty of the
Subject, each pretending they would flourish best in his own Garden; But what
ever pretenses were, or however in time quarrels may increase and one beget
another, yet sure at first the Helens both strove for was only Church policy,
wherein Episcopacy met with a Rival that carried her not with Courtship but
Rape. The Cavalier is dismounted, the Roundhead is fallen himself into a
subdivision of Presbytery and Independency; the latter in its full latitude is
like a Megallanica a vast unknown tract, no man can tell how far it reaches;
only coasting upon it such discovery is made as finds it a place of privilege
for all Sectaries in the world, and how many those are or may be no man can say
for certain, until the devil has done brooding. If the former be quite defunct
[as we heat her last Will is made) I doubt the latter will divide again and fall
into a thousandpieces; but now, I think on it, we never heard of any strife
among the Heathen about any point of Religion; their false gods were all good
fellows; and all false worships do commonly keep good fellowship; and that's the
reason now that all Sectaries tug so hard for Toleration. The Romans had their
Pantheon or Temple of all the gods; but the true God is a jealous God, Dagon
and the Ark cannot stand together.

And for Presbytery, it is but a new name to an old stuff, a common cheat in
the world, when men intend to make it worse. And if there were formerly a
Church-Tyranny that inslaved us, as some cried out, that think their very
Garters are Gyves; then now, as Philip of Macedon said of the Greeks, that left
his alliance to side with Titus Quintus, at the best we have but changed our
fetters. For what power is challenged by this Presbyterian policy, and what
Majesty by this new Hierarchy, you shall hear by their words and see in their
practice. For the Church is never governed aright according to their mode,
until Kings and Queens do subject themselves unto the Church, and submit their
Scepters and throw down their Crowns before the Church and lick up the dust of
the feet of the Church (as good kiss the Popes toe) and willingly abide the
censure of the Church. The civil Magistrate is no officer at all in the Church;
The Presbytery or Eldership is the Church, and every Congregation or Church
must have a Presbytery; and all Kings and Princes must be of some Parish and
under some Presbytery. And the Gentry must yet expect less then the King; be
enslaved in their own Lordships by a new way of Parochial Tyranny; for if they
conform not then they must expect in a short time to see the meanest of their
tenants become their masters in judicature, and so this prime mystery will
produce that great vanity that Solomon speaks of; The servant shall ride and the
master go a foot. Their practice has been accordingly, as in Scotland, where
the heat of Presbytery has prvoed such a Hectique in the body politic
thereof, that the substance of Kingly power is utterly consumed, and nothing
left now but the bare bones and very skeleton of a Monarchy.

Now next let us look upon the Independent and see what we may hope for from
them. The Sectaries teach, that the state universal, the body of the Compeople,
is the earthly Sovereign, Lord, King, and creator. If the King, Parliament, all
officers and resides in the state universal, and the King, Parliament etc. are
their own mere creatures, to be accountable to them, and disposed of by them at
their pleasure; the people may recall and reassume their power, question them.
and set others in their place. That the Lords and Peers of the Land, are but
painted puppets, and Dagons, that our superstition and ignorance, their own
craft and impudence have erected, no natural issue of Laws, but the Mushromes
of Prerogative, the wens of Just Government sons of conquest and usurpation,
not of choice and election; intruded upon us by power, not constituted by
consent, not made by the people from whom all power place and office that is
just in this Kingdom ought only to arise. That they are a clog to public
proceedings obstructing good, promoting evil things; their pestilent Pamphlets
are full of such railings, whereby ye may see their endeavors to alter and
overthrow the very fundamentals of the Government of this Kingdom. Nay they
ascend higher and are not afraid to utter desperate speeches against sacred
Majesty it self, not fit to be repeated. And then for the Church what outcries
there are to down with all Government, Maintenance and Ministry, and then the
freer up with that great Diana of Toleration; they boldly assert, It is the will
and command of God, that, since the coming of his son the Lord Jesus, a
permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish or Antichristian Consciences
and worships be granted to all men in all Countries and Nations.

And now what hopes can we conceive of these two, to set King or Kingdom in a
lasting peace, that are so opposite not only one to another, standing upon
punctilios not considerable with the loss of the meanest man, but also to
monarchy and true liberty, Whereunto, Anarchy and Tyranny are enemies alike.
But stay: who are yonder so serious in discourse? One of them is the noble
Irenaeus: I Will draw as near as I can unperceaved, and listen if I can hear any
comfortable hopes of a good accommodation.

Irenaeus. Gentlemen, I cannot without a bleeding heart consider, that after
all these miseries of so redious a war, there should be so little relenting and
so much bitterness amongst us, as I perceive by your discourses there is. The
abuses in the state, were hope are well reformed; and that gracious grant of a
trienniall Parliament, is an impregnable rampire against all future assaults of
your public Rights and Liberties. Troubles in the Commonwealth do commonly
arise from dissensions in the Church; and dissensions in the Church do commonly
arise from the pride and covetousness of Churchmen. Who, if they could be as
lowly and meek as their great master was, may quickly end this Controversy of
Church Government; that now is like to blow up a new flame: The being or purity
of Religion is no way concerned in it. It was once in the hands of Bishops,
many of them, men of admirable piety and learning; and (if that gross mixture
of Ceremonies were laid aside, and that sweeping tail cut off, that unnecessary
and pernicious rabble that followed their heels) there it might happyly have
continued. Now it is in the hands of the Presbytery, of men, for their pious
and indefatigable labors, as well deserving of the Church as any; and if men
would but rightly conceive it as it is, nothing but the old Government and
discipline in new hands, that perhaps endeavor to give a better account of it.
I see no reason why any but loose livers need to except against it; their rigid
censures, so commonly accounted, being nothing, but what our own Church in the
old Liturgy enjoined, and every Minister ought to have practiced. A third
party, whom they call Independent, do refuse to admit any external policy or
power at all in the Church, but indeed would pluck it from others, to take it
to themselves: the strif is for nothing but rule. The only remedy will be to
command every man to his own place again; the Commonwealth being newly racked
and every member out of joint. And as in the body natural, the insolence of
some humors encroaching on the bounds of the rest cause great distempers: so
in this body politic, pride, and covetousness of men, not content with their
own places or portions, is the only cause of these distractions.

Let every Member then do his proper office, the Magistrate with the sword, the
Minister in the word, the Merchant in his trade; every man mind his own
business: And because the people dote still so much upon the old form of Church
Government, and discipline; if it were restored again to the first hands and
pristine state, with such cautions and limitations as may consist with public
safety, it may prove an excellent Cement to close all again. But above all, if
his sacred Majesty the head of this great body were seated again with his great
Council of Parliament, by whose influence we all receive our civil life and
motion; then, though we are many Members, yet we should all move as one man
again, and all mind the same thing, even peace and love.

And then if we mean in peace to live
Let all strive who shall most forgive.
That by so doing all may move
Each other to a mutual love.
Which if we do, our foes will be
Our friends, and both be safe and free
From what is feared, and live together
A mutual strength to one another.
Whose factions if they long endure
Will prove a plague without a cure.
FINIS.

