THE Saints Entrance into Peace and Rest BY DEATH: As it was held forth in a
SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Honorable Statesman, and ever to be
valued Father and Lover of his Country, Sir WILLIAM ARMYNE Baronet One of the
Members of the High Court of PARLIAMENT.

In the day when he was buried with his Fathers, being honorably but
mournfully attended from LONDON where he dyed, to Lenton in Lincolnshire, where
he was interred, in the Ancient Sepulcher of his Ancestors, May 10. 1651.

By SETH WOOD preacher of the Gospel at Lenton

REVEL. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors, and their works follow them. LONDON Printed for Robert Ibbitson.
1651.

Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryl:
3 June 1651.
TO THE Honorable my very Noble Friend and Patron. Sr. WILLIAM ARMYNE Baronet,
one of the Members of the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
I Never thought my self worthy to be the Author of any thing fit for the
Press, and but that your request, with some others of your Family has the
force of an absolute command, with me, I should rather have suppressed this,
then Published it; for I must confess, if ever I was unfit to bring forth any
thing for all the world to look on, it was at this time, when I was so
overwhelmed with astonishment, and grief for the Death of your dear Father,
that I was not likely to come at any thing fit for so great a Service, in the
midst of such a deal of lumber and confusion of thoughts as then was with me.
I never thought jingling wit proper for a Sermon, especially a Funeral Sermon;
lightcoulored silken wit is not suitable to line mourning with; I desire no
more trimming for a Sermon then that beauty of speech which Solomon mentions
Prove. 25. 11. Words fitly spoken, and in due season, at which I doubt this
discourse has not arrived, yet because it came at your call, and was
calculated for your service, and the service of your Noble Family and Kindred,
be pleased to own and patronize both it, and the Author, who is

Sir, Your very humble Servant. SETH WOOD.

The Saints entrance into Peace and Rest by DEATH. A Sermon Preached at the
Funeral of Sir WILLIAM ARMYNE Baronet.
ISAIAH 57. 2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each
one walking in his Uprightness.
THE Prophet Isaiah the Author of this Prophecy is styled by some the Prince of
Prophets, or the Princely Prophet, and not unworthily, if we consider these
three particulars.

1 His Princely Parentage, 2 His Princely Employment. 3 His Princely Style.
1 His Princely Parentage, For all the Ancients conclude, that he was of royal
extraction, his father Amos being the brother of Azariah King of Judah, and
this gave the more credit and advantage to his Embassies, which were many and
honorable. For

2 His Employment was Princely, being Prophet to five Kings, Vzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, Hezekiah, Manasseth: The holy Writ mentions four of them, Isaiah 1. 1.
and it may be counted the last not worth the mentioning, because as Historians
say the Prophets suffered Martyrdom under him. He lived sixty four years a
Prophet, it was a long time for a Prophet to live under five Kings of such
different tempers, especially being so zealous a Prophet as he was, who lift up
his voice like a Trumpet; yet he lived to be Gods Trumpeter sixty four years,
to a perverse people; and alarmed the Nations sharply in the name of the Lord,
till at last he fell under Manasses Whip-saw, for under that Tyrant was he
sawne in sunder as the Jewish Rabbys tell us.

3 His Style, and matter of his Embassage was Princely, none of the Prophets
had so clear, and so much discovery of the Gospel of Christ as he; some of his
Chapters are all pure Gospel: John among the Evangelists, and Isaiah among the
Prophets, breath most, and sweetest of Christ; if you observe through his
Prophecy, you shall find such lovely Metaphors; such welcouched phrase, such
spicy breathings of the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, as will speak his
Style Heroyicke. So that all the Prophets, were Gods Heralds, and Isaiah the
Prince of Heralds.

The words I have mentioned seem to be his sorrowful contemplations, upon the
death of some good man, or some number of good men, which were at that time
taken away; for though he be observed to be the most consolatory Prophet of all
the rest, yet Isaiah himself will write lamentations upon the departure of the
righteous, as we must do this day.

It is not very improbable, that these were the Prophets meditations upon the
death of that good King Hezekiah; for he lived to mourn twice for the death of
that good man: Once, when he brought him the sad message of death, and knew no
reversement; and again, when the renewed lease of his life for fifteen years
was determined; or whether many other good men fell with Hezekiah, for
ordinarily such good fruit ripen and fall together: And it may be God was
Arking the Noah's of that age, that he might bring the Flood of his wrath upon
that ungodly generation, for so the Prophet plainly hints in the verse before
my Text, verse. I:

Now the time when the Prophet declares this message to the people, was when
they were grown very wicked, both people and their guides, spiritual and
temporal; as appears in the latter end of the 56 chap. verse. 9. At which
verse best Textuaries will have this 57 chapter begin, and so make it one
entire Section with the words of my Text.

Where you shall find the people grown very lewd and profane, and all upon
the frolic humor of eating, and drinking, and making merry, verse 12. of 56.
chapter: and surely they thought the Prophet an unwelcome, if not an uncivil
Messenger, to come in with his Deaths-Head, as if he meant to garnish their
well-furnished dishes with dead men's bones and grave-wormes, when they were in
no disposition to hear such Lectures: but for all their mirth, it is very sad
news he tells them, and he must tell it them, the Righteous are taken away,
and the omen is worst; evil is to come; God has housed his children in his
heavenly Goshen and let them look for a storm; the pillars of the house are
taken away, and the handwriting upon the wall is, that their joviall Kingdom
is departing from them, Evil is to come; and though they will not consider it,
nor the death of the Righteous, yet God will, and provides rest and peace for
them; when they shall have anguish and disquietnesse: the Saints mourning shall
be turned into peace, when their laughter shall be turned into mourning.

He shall enter into peace, etc. Interpreters vary much in the version of these
words, having much ado to deliver the original of its genuine meaning in any
other language; for the Hebrew words are often found to put on their sense so
curiously and subtly, that it is much ado to strippe them to their naked
signification in another tongue: but all agree in the substance, that peace and
rest are the issues of death to the Righteous.

The first part of the verse is very near the original in our English
rendering, as you read, He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their
beds, or couches; for the latter part I should rather incline to Marlerate and
Oecolampadius, who render it, each one walking before God, than to Junius who
renders it, each one walking in their uprightnes, as in the Text, and they may
be easily reconciled, for he that walks before God, walks in uprightnes for
ever.

The strength of these words is a very full description of the blessed estate
of the Righteous after death, and because it might be an abundant cordial to
meet with all those discouragements and contempts they found from wicked men,
as supposing them to perish and be taken away, and so cut off from all joy and
comfort for soul and body: therefore the comfort is proportioned to both, here
is peace for their souls, and rest for their bodies. He shall enter into
peace, viz. the righteous man; and they shall rest in their beds, viz. the
merciful men, as in verse. 1.

Now the peace must needs be something above the rest, because the fruit of it
is walking before God, which is the beatificall conversation of Believer before
God for ever.

There are many small branches in my Text which might be found bearing here and
there an apple worth your tasting, but the principal bearers that are heavy
laden with fruit are these two.

1. Death lets the Saints into soule-peace. 2. Death puts the Saints outward
man to rest.
I Will begin with the first of these observations.

1. That Death lets the Saints into soule-peace.

Death is a dark entry, but it leads the Saints into glorious rooms; Death is
a black cloud, but the Sun of Righteousness is behind it, and will shine
through it, and conquer it.

I shall take leave, that I may make the best improvement of this truth for
your advantage, to propound three particulars for further consideration.

1 I shall show the Nature of this Peace. 2 I will lead you to the Fountain of
this Peace. 3 I shall give you the Sweet of it in some application.
First, for the Nature of it, and because a cluster of Canaans grapes, is the
best demonstration of the fruitfulness of the land; and that Scripture phrase
best sets forth Scripture things; I will give you two or three expressions of
Scripture as a taste of the fruit and peace of that good land.

This estate of peace to the souls of Saints is termed in Scripture.

1 Abraham's bosom, 2 Paradise. 3 New Jerusalem. 4 The Lords Joy.
1 It is termed Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. The Angels carried Lazarus into
Abraham's bosom. I will not contend whether this were a parable, or a real
story; though it be but a parable, it helps us to thus much; That the Saints
are hereby designed after death to a blessed lodging: for the bosom is the
place where love lodges her children; and heaven is called Abraham's bosom,
because he was the father of the faithful on earth; and as all the gathering
of the faithful was to his bosom on earth, so it shall be to him in heaven,
and so to Christ: and that which is most observable is, that the Angels are
the Masters of Ceremonies to this blessed entertainment, and do wait on the
Saints souls to their lodgings of peace.

2 This Peace is termed Paradise; This night shall thou be with me in Paradise,
says Christ; not that there is any such thing in heaven as a carnal Paradise,
and pleasure, but that God would have us judge of our future happy estate, by
the things we are aptest to understand, Now Paradise on earth, was al created
glory in its virginity, before sin had committed a rape upon it; much more
undefiled peace and glory, shall we have with Christ; for in that paradise
Christ will be the tree of life, and there the serpent shall never enter.
Paradise was the garden of God, where his desire was to the works of his
hands; and heaven is such, where he delights and walks with his children for
ever, with me in Paradise, says Christ.

3 This estate of peace is called the new Jerusalem, Revel. 21, and 22
chapters. The old Jerusalem was a goodly pleasant place, the desire of the
Nations was toward it, but this is Jerusalem made new, come from heaven, verse.
2. The Tabernacle of God with men, every foundation stone precious, and every
gate a pearl, and at every gate an Angel; and the Lord Almighty, and the
Lamb, are the Sun, Moon and Temple therein; there shall be no curse in it,
Mount Gerizeim, shall swallow up mount Eball; all tears shall there be wiped
away; and no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, nor night, nor
shutting of gates, but will al keep open house for the righteous, to go in and
out and walk before him; such dwelling have all his Saints, as you may read,
(and much more) in those two forementioned chapters.

4 This peaceful condition is termed, the Lords Joy, in Mat. 25. 21. Enter
into the Lords joy; The Saints joy after their pilgrimage and warfare is
accomplished is all of a piece which the Lords; I will father, that they be
where I am, and the glory thou have given me, I have given them; that they may
be one as we are one, Joh. 17. 21. Christ does by his children and favorites,
as Ahashuerus did by Mordecay, calls for the best robe, yea, his own signet and
glory, and puts on them; he strips himself to cloth them, and thus shall it
be done to the Saints whom Christ will honor. The Lords joy, me thinks is such
an emphasis, if it were but the filings of his gold, or but the Lords leavings,
or any part of the skirts of his glory, it were fare; but Christ takes his by
the hand, and says, come children go with me, ye shall fare as I fare, and
wear as I wear, and sit where I sit, and be as welcome as I am: David, in his
humility, begged but a Porters place, that he might be a Doorkeeper; but he
shall be a Throne-holder in that glorious day: Thus when Christ shall appear,
we also shall appear with him in glory.

I will multiply no more of those expressions, whereby the Scripture does
abundantly set forth the nature of this peace to us, but yet that I may put
you to a full persuasion of the excellency of it, and so make it more desirable
to you, I will speak a little to three particulars only, concerning the nature
of this peace.

1 It is unparalled peace. 2 It is uninterrupted peace. 3 It is everlasting
peace.
1 It is unparalled peace; exceeding all other peace, the Saints have their
share of peace in this world, which is rich and sweet, but nothing to this;
that is peace in the earnest, this peace in full payment; that is joy in the
Lord, this is the Lords joy; that is peace in the Porch, this in the
Bedchamber; that is the joy of the friend of the Bridegroom, in hearing his
voice, this the joy of the Bride, in the Bride-groomes embraces; that is a taste
of the rich wine of the Kingdom, this is the Conduits running wine in the
Kingdom; that is peace a bottlefull as we need it, this is peace a River full,
Revel. 22. that is peace in the valley of Mulberry trees, where the Saints dig
wells, and God fills them with rain water to keep them alive, this peace in
mount Zion in full strength, and without any more travel for it; that is peace
past understanding, this is peace fully felt, and understood.

2 It is uninterrupted peace, all peace here is full of disturbances, and one
bad creature or other breaks our sweetest rest, and peace; one malignant party
or other will be violating our public and peculiar peace, so that we must
fight for it, and struggle for it if we will preserve it; nay, some are forced
to procure others to make their very lives a defense for their peace: in heaven
there is no interruption; all our peace here, is but peace in the garrison of
peace, that we must fight for, by the good fight of faith, as in Phil. 4. 7.
The peace of God shall garrison your hearts, for so the word (keep) signifies
in the original. Now though we count our selves safest in the Garrison in time
of War, yet it is subject to a thousand fears and alarmes, and must be
watched and kept with great trouble; but this is peace in the palace, where all
curses, and cursed ones are banished for ever; without shall be dogs, Revel.
22. not a dog wags his tongue to disturb thy rest there; not a Shimei comes to
curse at David there.

3 It is everlasting peace, peace without end, which is not to be had here,
when we have the dearest friends and relations in our bosoms, this breaks the
joy, that we must part each one to their home, far distant from each other, and
at last each one to their long home; but heaven is such a happy place where all
shall dwell together, and the Country is big enough for all, Lot and Abraham
shall not need to contend for field room, Lot shall lie in Abraham's bosom,
and desire no further compass: To this purpose in 1 These. 4. 17. then shall we
ever be with the Lord, the good company shall never part, father and children
shall keep house together, and dwell together to eternity, and enjoy pleasure at
his right hand for evermore, Psa. 16. ult.

So we come to the second general head propounded, viz. To lead you to the
Fountain of this Peace: For it may well be asked by a 2. Genesis
stranger, how comes the Saints to such glorious apparel, and who made them so
fine? they carried no such out of the world with them, for there the men of the
world kept them poor and bare enough; nor could they find any such with death
and destruction in the grave: surely, it is the Lords doing, and the answer can
no otherwise be made, but that it was the Lords pleasure thus to bestow them
for Christ's sake.

The fountain of this peace is the Prince of peace, it is peace of the Maker,
peace, from him that made peace for us by the blood of the cross, he made a
bloody way for himself by his death, that he might make the Saints a milky
path to heaven: Christ was our Sampson, who slew the Lion for his Bride, and
brought her a honey comb, to suck out of his bosom; he, undertook to be the
death of death for us, and made good his undertaking, and led Death and Devils
captive after his triumphant Chariot, he made show of them openly and sings
triumph over them in 1 Cor. 15. 55. yea, it behoved him by suffering death to
enter into glory, and so to bring many sons to glory, or else we must have
wrastled our selves with those principallities and powers which would surely
have ruined us; but Christ made himself our shield and interposed betwixt us
and all the heat of the battle with sin and death, and when he had conquered
all, he brings his Spouse to view the carnage and to look upon those terrible
ones that would have slain her, and thus he cheares her, be of good comfort, I
have overcome the World.

O kiss this love dear Saints as it passes by, for it was infinite! Thus I have
showed you the fountain out of which springs your peace, view it well and
admire it; it is not unlikely Sampsons Enhakkor the well of him that groaned,
that was a well in Jawbone, and this a well in Deaths-head.

Now to press out a little the sweet of this point to you by ^. Genesis
some application, which was the third General premised.

First, then here is abundant of conviction that death is not the

Death to believers is like entering first into the water of him that swims, it
is very chilling and cold at first entering, but afterward pleasant and
refreshing; so to believers at the first apprehension of Death a shrugging
fear seizes upon nature, and death looks like an Executioner, and his bag of
tools to mow and make a Grave, which seem exceeding terrible; but after a
sober recollection of faith, and reading his Commission and seeing how he is
bound in with instructions by Christ that sent him, the Saints can bid him
welcome and sit down and do his office, and are carried as quietly in his bony
arms to Heaven, as in an Jvory-Chariot: Indeed Death to sinners is justly
called the King of Terrors, and he rules tyrannically and makes wast in all
their joys when he enters with his sith and mowes down their flesh like
grass, and brings the devil to rake after him, and throw them into the Oven of
Gods Wrath; but the Lord Jesus for Believers, has deposed this King of
Terror, and checked his tyranny, as we may read in that most excellent place,
Heb. 2. 14, 15. The Lord Christ enters the list with Satan in our flesh, and
though the devil brings his kill-all with him, yet he destroys them and bids
the Children draw near and touch it, and handle it, for there is not that
danger in it they are afraid of; it was ever indeed an abhorrency to them
before they believed, and they were in bondage all their lives for fear of it,
as Children are of an often repeated scare; but Christ has bound the binder, and
led him that led into captivity captive; Death and the Devil spent themselves
so much in that last combat they had with our dear Savior when for the last
farewell of their power and malice they fetched such a mighty blow that they
broke both arm and sword, and indeed it put our valiant Champion so far to it,
that he fell with Death, but got up again and left Death dead for ever, so
that now Death has no more dominion over him nor us, through him, as in Romans
6. 9. so that believe it Saints, the King of Terrour's dead, and shall play Rex
no more amongst you.

Then secondly, under covert of this persuasion, I Will stand and

Over Death, and Over the Dead. First, it is rich and strong comfort over
Death, the thing, that thou fear so much will prove advantage to thee,
Christ is thy convey through all thine enemies quarters with a considerable
body, and will secure thee and bring thee off with honor; rebuke thy weak
fears. Oh thou say if I were but past the borders of death I should do
well! sure we are of little faith, that we cannot take Christ's word for our
security, the Saints gone before have slighted, contemned, wished for death,
nay rejoiced in it like a Wedding day: Old Jacob dies with such composure of
spirit, calls for his Children, blesses and kisses them, and gathers up his
feet into the bed and dies, and no more: Moses, that morning the messenger of
death comes, goes and views the Land of Canaan, and envies not them that should
enter into it, for he was provided of a better, and so walks up the hill and
dies, and not a word of fear or discontent; and as Christ, the deliverer drew
nearer it was counted nothing, nay best of all to dye, and therefore in the
New Testament, Death is termed

1. Flitting to a better house. 2. Sowing for a Crop. 3. Gaining and advantage.
First, Death is termed flitting, as in that excellent place of 2 Cor. 5. 1.
when Death turns the Saints out of doors they are not to seek of a better
house, a house built and prepared and furnished at the cost of Christ for us,
as you may read in the 14. of John 2. I go to prepare a place for you, and in
my fathers house are many mansions, if not I would have told you, that you
might have made your terms with your old Landlord the world, but I have
provided for you: now who would be troubled to flit from a smoaky Cottage to a
stately Palace.

Secondly, Death is termed sowing, as you may read John 12. 24. Except a Corn
of Wheat fall into the ground and dye, it abides alone, etc. Now sowing is all
our hope for a Harvest, the Countryman is not afraid to cast his very bread
upon the waters, because it will come up after many days, so shall the Saints
after falling into the ground by death, arise to everlasting glory.

Thirdly, Death is termed gain, in Phil: 1. 21. For me to dye is gain; many
fear to live by the loss, but me thinks none should fear to dye for gain,
especially such considerable gain as an incomprehensible weight of glory.

But take but the point and me thinks none should be afraid to enter into
peace, how sweet is peace to all men, and what hurt will Christ's peace do you?
are you afraid of Abraham's bosom or of paradise? or what danger is there in
this new Jerusalem, or the Lords joy? Christ once said to Peter in his
fainting, fear not, it is I, so he stands upon the shore of death and says to
believers, fear not Children, it is I your Savior, and nothing shall hurt you
whilst I am here, then Saints lift up your heads when death draws nigh, for
then your redemption draws near.

Here is also comfort in the next place over the dead, though heaviness must
needs be at parting with such dear relations, and such precious pieces for use
and service as these now we mourn for; yet here shines out a bright beam
through our cloud of mourning, He is entered into peace, and such peace as if
thou saw as perfectly as thou do earthly things, and as we shall
hereafter do heavenly, I dare say thou could not find in thy heart to wish
him here again; when your Children go from you to Wed or Trade, though you
love their company well, yet you will not hinder their preferment but let them
depart; so when Father, Child, or Friend, goes to glory, though our lives be
lapt up in theirs, yet it were but harsh, nay absolute unkindnesse to wish them
here again in this wretched world, when our Savior wakened out of his sleep
of death, and got him ready for the resurrection, he left the linnens in the
grave to wipe his Disciples eyes and sent them this Message, that he was risen
to glory, and here is linen for your eyes that weep over the grave of this
indeed worthily to be lamented lover of you all, that He is entered into peace.

And now pass we to the second good turn that Death does for the Saints, viz.
brings rest to the outward man.

2. That Death gets the Saints to bed -- they shall rest in their beds.

Nature thinks Death none of the handsomest undressers, but no matter if love
makes the bed who gets thee unready, quiet rest is the issue; now that which
commends this rest to us, are these five particulars.

1. It is superlative rest. 2. It is universal rest. 3. It is Childrens rest.
4. It is sweet rest. 5. It is rest in hope.
First, It is superlative rest, it is nonesuch; exceeding all earthly rest, the
Kings of the Earth take no such; Job therefore speaking of the desirablenesse
of death for rest says, Job 3. 13, 14, 15. There had I been at rest with Kings
and Counselors of the earth, which build desolate places for themselves, or
with Princes that had gold and filled their houses with silver. I had then had
as good a house to sleep in, as they that have so many that they let them lie
desolate for want of time and leisure to live in them, a Saint shall rest like
an Emperor in the grave, Gold and Silver cannot purchase such rest.

2 It is universal rest,
1. From Vanity. 2. From Vexation. 3. From Oppression.
Frist, It is rest from Vanity, there shall neither be hunger nor cold nor
nakedness, there we shall struggle no more with those difficulties,
alterations, vicissitudes, which will make a great King even Solomon, cry all is
vanity.

2 It is rest from vexation, all our Comforts, here do not only fail us, but
fool us, and baffle even our chiefest masterpeeces, to deliver our selves from
those encumbrances, which attend our fairest hopes; but in death there shall be
no more pain, nor crying, O my bones, or my bowels, there shall be no more
gout, nor stone, feavors, nor headache; death will be a perfect cure of all
diseases; therefore Job on this account seeks and hunts for the grave, as you
read, Job 3. 20, 21. why is life given to the bitter in soul, which long for
death and dig for it, as for hid treasure.

3 It is rest from oppression, there is no tyranny in the grave, nor arbitrary
power, no prerogative Court kept there, but all at rest; therefore Job in the
3. chap. verse. 17. of his book commends the state of rest in the grave. There
the wicked cease from troubling, there the prisoners rest together, and hear
not the voice of the oppressor; there the Egyptian Taskemasters shall call Gods
Israel to work no more; there will be no plundering, killing, nor destroying:
the Italians have a Proverb of the dead man, That he is gone where the Tyrant
cannot send a Pursevant for him, and it was a very savory speech of that good
old man Mr. Dod, in the beginning of these hurling times of war, when those
first born sons of prey began to plunder, spoil and destroy the good of this
land; Well, (says he) I will go home and dye, being so worn down with age, and
travel, that he continually waited for his change; and then he thought he
should be out of their reach.

3 The third particular, which commends this rest, is, that it is childrens
rest, and this is indeed the best that's at the bottom of all, that the Saints
are got to rest as Gods children, he gives them rest, as he gives his beloved
rest; Psa. 127. death, gets sinners to bed also, but wrath frights them with
the visions of their eternal night, and they wake in hell at the resurrection;
but the righteous rest in Gods love, and in his lap; and then it is also rest
to the children all together, and that is comfort; to you who were troubled,
rest with us, says the Apostle Paul: it is rest with the Apostles and Fathers,
and all the Family together, the word which the Latins express the Hebrew
word in my Text by, is cubile, which signifies, a Bee-hive, as well as a Couch,
or Bed; so in that sense the Saints rest in their Bee-hives, altogether in
their hony-houses.

4 Fourthly, It is sweet rest because it is after labor: all their work is
done, and they go to bed, Job speaking of the grave chap. 3, says, There the
weary be at rest, and as Solomon says of the laboring man, his sleep is
sweet, eat he little or eat he much, so says the Scripture of the Saints,
Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, from henceforth they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them; they are written up for
blessed in this regard, even with special observation (yea, says the spirit)
that they may rest from their labors from henceforth, that is, they shall
never labor more, when a laboring man's rest is sweetest, yet he must rise at
break of day and go to it again; but the Saints shall labor no more, thou
shall throw away thy workaday clothes for ever, and put on thy garments of
gladness, thy glorious apparel, for there shall be no more soyling work after
death; yet though they rest from their labor, they shall not loose their
labor, nor their labors them, for their works follow them: Christ will bring
thy works after thee, and perfume them with his odours: not that they shall be
saved by their works; but as Mothers keep their childrens Samplers to show
hereafter their ingenuity, and willingness to be doing something at their
Parents command, so Christ hereafter will delight to show to his father the
garments that his Dorc^'s mad^. And this brings us to the last commendation of
this rest. For,

5 Fifthly, It is rest in hope, yea, in assurance, or else says the Apostle we
were of all men most miserable; but death to the Saints is but a nap till
resurrection.

They shall rest in their Couches. A Travelers rest is to refresh him for his
journey, who will not make his Inn his standing quarters; so the grave, though
it be a believers long-home, yet it is not his last home. It were well indeed
for sinners if they might sleep on in death, and ^^se no more, for their waking
is their woe, because in their ^^^ning the reckoning is brought up: They must
look to be alarmed, and called up by the dreadful Trumpeters to execution; but
then begins a Saint to make his rich returns of all his faith, and patience.
When he shall rise to meet his venture come home; when the old acquaintance of
soul and body, shall meet and kiss each other, and become together an
everlasting bride to the Lamb. This was that which comforted Christ in his
dark lodging of the grave, and David as his type, as you read in Acts 2. 25,
26, 27. My flesh shall rest in hope, that thou will not leave my soul in hell,
nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption; where, by hell is meant the grave:
And he enjoyed the fruit of this hope, and was quickly brought forth of that
prison, and rose the first fruits from the dead for his children, and carries
us all with him; for Christ is our primum mobile, and we are all rapt after the
motion of him our first sphere.

This truth thus opened, first takes you fitly by the hand and it is he! it is he
has don it.

The Angel of God said for comfort in one sense he is risen, he is not here;
but if he had not been there, before he had risen, viz in the grave, the bed
had never been so soft and sweet for us, but Christ took all the hard clots and
stones out of the grave for us, he took the cold off it by first lodging
there, yea he stuffed the grave with feathers and strowed it with roses, by his
three nights lodging there, and then rise to be our Usher, and Assuring Master
for a good voyage at the resurrection.

Then secondly, in the strength and sense of this love be comforted against the
fear of death, to the Saints it is but getting Lazarus that he was dead, and
yet that it was not death but sleeping, Thomas the twin (for so Dydimus
signifies) says let us go dye with him, Joh. 11. Many vary in their thoughts
of the meaning of this place; but in my apprehension it is clear, that Thomas
the timorous, for of all the rest he was most fearful, having heard our
savior weaken the strength and terror of death, and call it but sleep, Thomas
was content to dye also; It is easily applied to our purpose, that Saints
should no more fear to dye then rest in beds and sleep, for though death do
but somewhat ruggedly rock as to sleep, yet if the rocking shake and be
uneasy, the rest is sweet and quiet, as this our dear and noble friend finds,
who now sleeps with his fathers, and enjoyes the precious things of the
everlasting hills, while poor we, must walk in the valley of the shadow of
death for a season.

And now turn we from Death to the Dead. And surely, but that we must
perfectly submit to say every hard word after God, it were a very hard word
indeed, to say that he is dead.

Methinks this honorable, but mournful company looks like that goodly train,
which came up with old Jacob out of Egypt, in the day when they brought his
body from Goshen to Machpelah the Sepulcher of his Fathers to be buried; and me
thinks this place looks like the Floor of Arnon, where they mourned with a
very sore lamentation, as you may read in the last Chapter of Genesis, so that
the Country people called it Abell Mizraim verse. 11. which place as it properly
suits with our posture, so it justifies great mourning for persons signally
useful to their people and serviceable to God, and it also shows that it is
not besides the rule to set up memorialls of their worth and service: a
stepping-stone might serve at the head of such a mean grave as mine, but sure
a pillar would be built upon such a grave as his, as Jacob did on his beloved
Rachells; and though all the book pass with blankes in the margin, yet such a
sentence, as his life, must needs have a marginall note.

And here if I should put off the Divine, and take up the Orator, alas his
worth would be above my Oratory! it were a task fitter for some of those old
hony-mouth'd Romans, but yet he would be super rostra, above their standing
stools, for he must be Christian as well as Orator who understands or tells
his worth, for his Christianity were his best parts, which a Heathen Orator
would leave behind.

If I should adventure to make a rough draught of him, I should never do it as
the life; yet seeing that Providence has put the Pensill in my hand, I Will draw,
and though it be nothing so beautiful as the life, yet you shall say 'twas he,
and the limbner meant well.

I will here enter one caution, that for the particular passages and speeches
which I have observed to pass from him, though I may not light upon so proper
phrase, as he did and could cloth them in, yet I shall give you the substance
of them, as a draught of his spirit.

And now that I may put the stones of this pillar over his Grave into some
form and order, I will observe this rule, in speaking to four particulars,
viz. to show what he was.

1. In his natural capacity, as a man. 2. In his spiritual capacity, as a
Christian. 3. In his civil capacity, as a Statesman. 4. In his private
capacity, as Ruler of his Family.
First, For his natural capacity, as a man.

I need say nothing to his Stirpe and Extraction, though very ancient and
honorable, for that were to enter into the province of another faculty of
Herauldry, which attends this service in the professor of it.

Neither need I say much to Natures workmanship in him, you all know and will
long remember, that his person was lovely, his body being a goodly Mansion for
a gallant soul, and he always kept it as became a Temple of the Holy Ghost.

As for his Intellectualls, they were above the ordinary size of men, his
apprehension quick, and his judgment fixed; it is the defect of many a great
wit, to have a better appetite then concoction; but he was able with a sure
judgment to digest all he took in, he gave very great testimony of his
ability this way, both at home and abroad, and they that knew him best, will
say that he had an able and a nimble soul, being by his sollid wisdom, the
constant Master of a clear and smooth Fancy.

As to his conversation amongst men, as a man, it was on every side and among
all men desirable and delightful: It is said of Titus the Roman, that for his
excellency this way, he was styled, deliciae humani generis, the delight of
mankind, and it is no vain boast to say of the goodly comportment of this
noble gentleman, that he was apleasancy to all that knew him; his carriage was
so justly contemper'd betwixt a kind of severe bravery, and an humble
courtesy, that he was contentfull to all, grievous to none; in his very
countenance and presence was both a check to the presumptuous, and an
encouragement to the meanest of wisdoms children to draw near.

Thus I have said a little to his natural capacity, as a man, and I am
confident, take him but thus far, had he been a Roman, and lived in those days
when they knew how to value gallantry to its worth, they would have counted him
worth his weight in Gold.

But we will pass unto his better parts, this is but chaulke and charcoale to
the lively colors his Christianity laid upon this ground; we come therefore.

Secondly, To his spiritual capacity, as a Christian.

And as a fair foundation for a notable structure in this kind, he had a
father eminently virtuous and religious (as they that knew him very well report
him) whose study was to make his son good as well as great, and there was
nothing wanting which so good a parents care, and love, could prompt to
accomplish this end, and the son quickly gave fair proof that his soul was
no barren ground to such good seed; for what principles his parent taught him
in the trade of his youth, he quickly grew master of, and set up for himself;
that which made great part of the world know less of his worth then was really
in him was, that it was his principle, rather to do three good deeds then talk
of one; he was like a piece well and deeply charged, you should have seen his
fire before you had heard his report: I have observed that there was no such
piece of unhandsomenesse in eye, as that of hearing himself praised; as
knowing the rule of our Savior, When thou prayest, and give alms, shut thy
door, and cover thy hand; Supposing therefore that he did more good duties
then we can know of, we will only represent him in those thing, wherein as a
Christian he acted a large and standing part upon the Stage of the World, and
that under these two heads.

First, In the good that appeared to be in himself. Secondly, In what it
appeared he did good to others.
In the general for both these, he was very eminent, his very presence was a
School of Virtue, his Discourse a Lecture of Wisdom, and his well-chosen
silence proportionably useful, he would give counsel like a Divine, and take
it like a Christian; as he could not endure any vice should be master over him,
so he loved not that any vicious person should be servant under him, I have
heard him rebuke Vice with great gravitie and severitie; but these are but
generals.

That which will hold forth clearly the good that was in himself, were four
particular qualifications wherewith God enriched him.

1. His Knowledge. 2. His Faith. 3. His Humility. 4. His Constancy.
First, For his Knowledge, which was both great, and growing; the first
appeared by the fair choice of his principles in Religion, and in the Worship
of God, which were always to the most spiritual; when all the world almost
had swallowed down those pretty bawbling fooleries wherewith the Bishops had
baited Religion, he counted them too poor a bait to nible at, he ever thought
a Cappe and a Congy a sorry thing to please Almighty God with, and his house
and countenance was ever a Sanctuary and protection to those, on whom the foot
of Pride would have trod, if some who durst, as well as desired, had not
succored them.

Then his Knowledge was growing, for as God made new discoveries of truth, he
still entertained those blessed s^rangers, as knowing that so some have
entertained Angels of light, and therefore he did expressly disallow that
ordinary frump of new light, which men cast upon growing truth, for says he,
we need and we must all see more, and though the light be old in it self, yet
it is new to us: A man might very easily perceive that his spirit was much
taken with the glory of these latter times, for very many precious discoveries,
though he knew how to bewail the disadvantage that the Devil has cast in by
many foul errors and sophistications.

The second peculiar gift of God wherewith he was enriched, was his Faith and
that both of

Adherence and Confidence. For Faith of Adherence which advances Christ alone
in point of Justification, it is the fairest flower in a Christians Garden; and
truly of him who is now gone to receive the fruits of his Faith I must needs
say, that though he had as fair a stock of outward righteousness as most, to
have made a cratch to lean on, yet I never observed him to trust in the works
of the Flesh, or of the Law, but in the alone mediation of Christ Jesus, and on
this account I have heard him to disallow of the Romish Profession, because it
obtrudes a thousand vanities into the Mediatorship of Christ, and it is very
ordinary to find too much of the mystery of this iniquity every where, for men
love naturally to set up their poenates petty Saviors, and household Saviors,
which is the great stumbling block to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

As for his faith of confidence, and trust in Gods Providence, Power and love;
it was very remarkable, it was his ordinary answer to them, who through
weakness and dispondency of spirit, would charge a good way sometimes with the
fault of a bad success. What man, be not afraid, God will own his own cause
in due time, and bring it off with credit, and in the mean time he would say,
let us do our duty, and leave the rest to God; So well doing will thrive, and
have a reward, when ill doing will speed thereafter, or words to this purpose,
his confidence of this nature made him of a cheerful spirit, even when the ship
he was both stears-man, and passenger in, was in very weak condition, So that
like a cheerful Pilot, he has often revived a half dead Passenger, when many
an unbeleeving lumpish Christian puts down a side.

The third excellent gift of God wherewith he was accomplished, was his
humility: None readier to give God the glory of those Victories and Successes
which faith had obtained; his spirit was very full of sweetness this way: his
thankful heart being a faithful recorder to God of old and bypast mercies
which others have left behind them for a nine days wonder; and he was very
modest and humble in judging of other men's spirits, and apprehensions in things
wherein they differed from a common establishment, if he spied peace and
godliness in the main: He would ever say that a jostling spirit of domination
was of Antichrist, and on this account he always disapproved of the power and
pretenses of the Prelates, who would take the wall of every man's conscience;
and the less desire he found in any who administer the things of Christ, to
graspe after power and rule over men's faith and consciences the better he loved
them, and on this score also he was very indulgent to a real tender conscience,
though as great an enemy as any to those wild exorbitancies too rife in the
world at this day, yet his expression was in writing to a friend, that he so
well loved a tender conscience, that he would not incommodate it in the least.

4 His constancy was eminent, the principles he according to judgment received
and entertained, he stood by; and tasted all waters, and run all hazzards to
stand by that which he apprehended to be nearest the rule of the word: He was
one of the Calebs and Joshuaes of our age, who fulfilled after God, and when
some thought the Anakims, and the sons of the mighty too heavy adversaries to
be dealt withal, and thought rather politickly to compound for a quiet
habitation on this side Jordan, then to venture over for a perfect liberty; and
sought rather to part stakes with Prerogative then venture all; he was not
discouraged, but ever trusted in that mighty and everlasting arm that had ever
been too strong for all the powerful children of violence.

The second general we propounded, to speak to him as a Christian, was the
good it appeared he did to others, which argues that goodness was active and
spiritfull in him, and desired to walk abroad for the use of others -- and
this was to be seen both to soul and bodies of others.

For the first, an ample testimony is before the world, in that wherever he
had power and interest, he was very careful to provide such helps and guides
for the souls as might be most useful, to the faith and salvation of the
people, it is very well known, that in all those places in his dispose, he
planted men of very good reputation, and abilities to preach the Gospel, and
gave proportionable encouragement both for countenance and maintenance; and the
assurance that the people had of his severity to any known evil, was as good
as an use of reproof to them, at least a very good advantage in the hand of
the Minister, to drive home such a nail of the Sanctuary, he was to such good
men as lived under his wing and protection, a shadow from the heat, and a
refuge from the storm of that persecution, which scorched others very sore;
for though the times knew he was not too great to crush, yet he was too well
beloved to provoke.

For the good he did to the outward man for others, I need not tell, his works
will praise him in the gate; and tell how good a Landlord, and benefactor he
was, every Tennant, and every poor body will be his Orator, to set forth his
goodness of this kind.

The third General which I shall say something of him in, is his civil
capacity, as a Statesman.

For he had the honor to be much and often entrusted in public employment for
his Country, and honored the employment by his dexterity and integrity in it:
It has always been a character of honor to his whole family, that they have
been singular good Common-wealths-men in their generations, and they have been
always accepted accordingly in their Country. This Gentleman whilst he lived
was his Countries darling, and always in her lap, they ever thought that
Parliament would not be happy for them, whereof an Armyne was not a Member, and
surely, he was a most accomplished Senator.

His Politiques were so justly mixed with his integrity, that he was neither
Machivell nor Dolobella, but an Aristides; his uprightness and plainness of
heart, made him abhor the corrupt principles of that florentine; and his wisdom
and activity, made him above that dull Roman; but he was an Aristides, just,
and discreet, and diligent. There were three particular excellencies in him,
which made him a most complete Statesman.

1 His wisdom. 2 His public spirit. 3 His love to his Country.
First his wisdom, this made him fit to be both surveyor and advocate for his
Countries liberty, for on the one hand he well knew the Bounders, and
Meere-stones betwixt rule and liberty, and how to lead and lay the line, and
state the case.

And on the other side he was fit to plead his Countries cause against the
intrusions and subtilties of her most potent and cuning enemies, as well
appears by those great Commissions, and transactions, he was almost always one
at, both for England, and Scotland, in which he ever brought off the Cause with
honor.

He would so cooly and discreetly plead the Cause he was engaged in, that I
have known some who were highly dis-satisfied through ignorance or prejudice
with present affairs, yet after discourse with him they have said, that if
they had sooner met with Sir Will. Armyne they had been sooner satisfied, and I
believe his usefulnes in this kind will quickly appear, by that great gap which
his absence will make amongst our Senators and their Councels.

Secondly, His public spirit, rendered him very fit for a Statesman, he was
always of too brave a spirit to endure vassalage, or to see his Countries
liberty bound to the chain for a Gally-slave, while he could do any thing to
relieve it; and this made him often so really seek the advancement of his
Countries interest, that he neglected his own.

He was not unlike that brave old Senator Fabius Maximus, who when he heard
(that morning that Rome was to triumph for a great Victory) that his two sons
were dead, no matter (says he) let Rome sing, though I suffer; so when the
common enemy prevailed with a very high hand, and made waste of all his lands
and goods that were in their power, if you had seen how patiently and
cheerfully he bore it for the common good, as I have seen by Letters under his
hand, you would say his spirit was very public, and self-denying, for though
now the Commonwealth has made a handsome farewell of her bargain, yet the time
was when all men thought she could never make a drawn match of it to save her
self: yet when the sea was most tempestuous, and many of the Pilots called for
the Cock-boat to save themselves in, he lanched into the deep, in the ship
called the Commonwealth, and returned home in her with honor and safety, and
brought off his own and his Countries Venture.

Thirdly, His love to his Country, highly furnished him for serving of it; by
this he was above the corruption of Court-flattery, who would by all, or any
means have made him theirs; and when some others of principal note for their
forwardness in the same cause, fell back and took the scent of the Court
perfume, and followed it, even then he hunted all one scent of his Countries
welfare, and never forsook it: He gave check to Prerogative when we never
dreampt of such a game as Paune-mate, yea, even when liberty was an Orphane,
and none durst own it, yet then he, with some other brave Worthies appeared for
his Country, and became a prisoner for public liberty as you all know. So
that in my judgment, Liberty her self deserves to spare him one of her
triumphant Banners, wherewith to adorn his Sepulcher, for he was one of her
dear children, who was bound body, for body for her, and all that he had, or
she had, gone to Prison, without bail or main prise.

I think all England, may take up the latter part of Elisha's lamentation for
Elijah, and say, a horseman, and a chariot of Israel is taken from us: but
Lincolnshire must take up the first part and say, my father, my father.

I shall say but one word more to his public capacity, as a Statesman, and I
think it may be said without vanity, that in this respect, he was the
improvement of the past, and praise to the present, and a pattern to the future
generations.

The last General I shall speak to is, a word as to his private capacity, as
Master and Ruler of his Family, for he was all of a piece, good at home as well
as abroad.

He had bin in his time the husband of two wives, both of them Ladys of very
great mark for honor, and virtue; The one, is long since with Christ; the
other, he has now left a desolate and disconsolate Widow, who will early and
sorely miss the indulgent arm of him to lean on, who was always ready with
great prudence, and tender care to support and cherish her while she traveled
long through a wilderness of grief and sorrow for the loss of an only son,
til now (poor Lady) one terrible wave of grief has overtaken another, that if
God prevent not, she is like to be swallowed up of sorrow. I dare say, her
tears will plentifully tell that he was a loving husband.

I might say much how dear and discreet a Father he was to his Children, but
it may be it will be more proper to lay my finger on the orifice of this sore,
least I make those wounds of sorrow bleed a fresh, which have bled too much
already; I will only say thus much, that I shall ever hope the World shall see
that the fruits of virtue which the branches of his Posterity shall bear, will
make it appear to the world, that the dew of Heaven watered the root, and that
he was careful as well to maintain a hopeful nursery of virtue in his
Children, as an abundant fruit-yard in his own conversation.

Lastly, how ingenuously faithful he was to his friend, I will leave them to
tell, who will hereafter more sensibly feel the blow that death has given
them, on the heart side by his loss, then now at present; he was incomparably
courteous, discreet, and useful, so that they who did not arrive at his
friendship, could by no means count him an enemy.

Now I had best draw the curtain here, for the further we go, we do but
increase the number of our losses, and Deaths spoils.

I have said a little, and it may be many of you will say, you could have said
more, and so could I, and he deserved it; but time would fail, and I intend
this only as an inscription to his memory, not as an hystory of his life,

It now remains only, that we turn our lamentations into prayer, that God
would make his worth and virtue golden spurs to us, to walk in the same path,
that when we have sought our good fight of faith, and finished our course, we
may as

He enter into peace and rest in our beds, each one walking in his uprightness.

FINIS.

