THE LORDS TABLE.

Whether it is to be spread like A Table in an Inn for all comers?

That it ought not so be done is here maintained.

Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, Matthew: 7. 6. And he set the
Porters at the Gates of the house of the Lord, that none which was unclean in
any thing should enter-in, 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. Suppose him to be the greatest
person in the world, and would receive the blessed Cup from my hand, signing to
all, and sealing to every beleiver the Blood of That God-Man, I would rather
give him my heart blood, than I would give that Cup unto him, whilst he
declares himself to be no Disciple. Chrysostom: in Math: 26. Hom: 83. w. They,
that give The bread and wine to unworthy ones, are as guilty of Sacrilege
every whit, as he would be, who could give the Sacred Body of Christ to be
torn in pieces and eaten by dogs, or trampled-on by Swine. Calv: 4. book of
Institutions. Chap: 12. 5. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body. 1 Cor. 11. 29.
LONDON; Printed by M. S. for Henry Cripps in Popeshead-Alley. 1656.

THE SECOND TREATISE, Relating to The Lords Supper, And second Query thereupon.
Whether all are to be admitted to the Lords Table, upon account only of their
Infant Baptism, though aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, well set and settling, and without
God in the world? Ephesians. 2. 12.
The Negative here also is under our maintenance.

Here are four things premised first. Then is set down what the contrary
minded have to say for the holding forth the Affirmative.

In the next place we Argue the Negative.

CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
THis being a matter of such high concernment to be cleare-in, we will premise
a few things here also to clear our way into it, and first;

1. That we little thought, any Godly Minister would have put this to Question,
Whether all persons, pell, mell, tag rag, as we commonly say, how ignorant, how
profane, how notorious soever for their Deboiserie, are to have admittance to
the Lord's Table by privilege of Infant Baptism; Surely this Question, de
Juro, would have been exploded, when our times were at worst; Archbishops and
Bishops at their Zenith or hight, what ever their Vicars, Curats and Parsons
did, de facto, some of them, as very varlets, as were those, they did admit;
But de jure, this should not have been so as may be collected by him, that is
ordinarily versed in the old Service-Booke: Specialle that place, which relates
to the order should be observed in the administration of the Lords Supper,
together with other Constitutions and Canon's, as to that sacred
administration, printed sixty years ago, and reprinted a few years bypast.
We will quote two places only, one out of the Canons of our Church; the other
out of the Book of Common Prayer. The 26 Canon straightly charge every
Minister, That he shall not in any wise admit to the Communion any of his
flock, which be openly known to live in sin notorious without repentance. And
the Common prayer book, in the Rubric before the Communion, commands, That
if any be an open and notorious evill-liver, or have don any wrong to his
Neighbor in word or deed, so that the Congregation by him is offended, the
Minister shall call him and advertise him in any wise not to presume to the
Lords-Table, till he has openly declared himself to have truly repented etc.
Therefore we do not doubt, but the Ministers of the Presbyterall way (whose
Plat-formes for Church Discipline one of us have read) will rise up in their
might against Mr Hs: and the men of his way and judgment, who not only admit,
but plead for admittance of any body how scandalous soever, (it is a wonder, if
those they admit, are worse then themselves,) for their two pence, leave so
much behind them, and take damnation with them; did Judas do worse, that
betrayed his Lord and Master? This may mind some body of what he may have
read, was spoken of an Arian Heretic, I shall account him a Mihi non alius
quam diabolus, quam diu Arianus.
Devil as long as he is an Arian; and perhaps he may apply it to this
Gentleman, the leader of that drove or herd of Ministers, who are of the same
persuasion with him; For it may be doubted, That he with his followers, have,
to their power, don more mischief to the Church of Christ, than the most
pernicious Heretic now a days has don. What! A Minister of Christ, speak Qui
non vivit ut ipse docuit certum id documentum est non esse Christianum.
and act so, so contrary to all men, who walk by the Rule prescribed them in
Gods Word? You know his practice, and you shall hear by a little, how much he
speaks anon against our Lord and Master, that you may know how well you have
spoken in justification of him. He may preach Christ, but doing things most
contrary to the mind of Christ, he makes full proof he is no Christian;
Christianity being nothing else but as fair and full a Christianismus est
similitudo Dei quantum possib^ie est hamanae naturae. Just. Ma^t. orat. ad
Anti. Ratio naturalis potest altecari ubi deficis lex.
drought of God upon the Soul, as the Soul is capable off in this body of
death; But see how justly Sin is called darkness, it has darkened, we fear,
the very light of nature in him, or natural reason, which, say the Lawyers,
may speak where the Law is silent, so natural reason where the word of God is
silent; but where the word of God speaks, reason must be dumb. Sin has
darkened that common light in the man, as may be feared; And now read him in his
writings, how Cross he stands, and acts to the word of Christ; His Blessed
practice among His Disciples, and Commission given them to the worlds end;
Therefore

SECT. II.
2. WE are, Sir, heartily sorry this should grate so hard upon you, but we
cannot possibly help-it, while you hold so fast to your foreman, and his
tenent, as to free admission of all (notorious for their obstinate and affected
ignorance, as some must be where all have free admission) unto the Lords Table;
It will fare the worse for you, because he is so bad; ye agree so well here,
that we want skill to make difference betwixt you and him, therefore ye will
pardon us, if, discerning no difference betwixt you, we make none, though full
loath we are to Couple you together. But since you will have it so, so it must
be, and possible with some men, it may be for your honor; but however we
cannot help you at all, nor, we suppose, can you help your self, by that
proviso you speak of, which the man of your persuasion gives you,
excommunication. If a person, man or woman, so notoriously vile and debauched,
that he is more like a Devil, than a Disciple, then admit him not, but
excommunicate him, Cast him out. We cannot thank the man for his remedy, It is
not worth so much (if he had been serious therein, which we think he was not,
being against his own principles) for whether shall we cast him? unles into the
same place M^ Hs. deserves to be himself cast (and it is his lightest
punishment; for indeed he has offended the Lords little ones every Math. 18. 6.
one of them we thought till we thought of you) into the Sea with a millstone
about his neck, for all the dry Land is a Church, as you so well know, and can
make full proof. In the next place

SECT. III.
3. WE would say in Allusion to excellent Calvin's words, Si dimidio Christi
convuti effemus.
if we could be content with half a Christ, our work would quickly be at an
end, and we should agree; So if we could be content with an half Reformation
(which will content the Godly party, as the half of her dear Child the dear
mother) ye do not bid us the half; no, nor the least part or piece of
Reformation; for, making no separation from the world at the Lords Table, where
or when will ye separate? All one at the Lords Table, and every where one. The
world and you cannot be two, while professedly one at the Lords Table. We will
take leave to set down excellent Buroughs his words, we have read or heard
upon this subject. Whenever you receive the Communion with any Company, Read
Master Palmer, p. 100.
you do Confess your self to be of the same body with that Company. I must
profess that I do believe my self to be of the same Body that this drunkard
is off; this Idolater, this covetous person is off; this whore-master, this
swearer is off; joining with them to eat Bread at the Lords Table, (where
these unclean ones must needs be where all are admitted to be) professing
nothing against them, nor taking any Course at all with them, for the exclusion
of them, or purging of them-out: Allowance of a thing done, is as good, as a
Commission for the doing of it. Therefore it concerns us very much to look
unto it, That it be an holy Communion we receive the bread and wine-in. In the
last place

SECT. IV.
4. WE would add this; That we are as unable to keep silence Inveniar sane
superbus avarus, omnium vitiorum reus modo impij silen^ij non arguar dum
dominus ^atitur.
as we are to speak, as the Learned do, observing, the ordinance of our
dearest Lord and Savior, so profaned; His own order, in His own house,
whereof He is so tender, so blasphemed; and by those, who should be most
observant thereof; His stewards there. We profess we wish our eyes fountains
of tears, and that our hearts could melt like wax, and our Luth: ep: ad
Staupitium.
bowels yearne upon these stewards in Gods house, who admit all to his Table,
come who will all are welcome; Surely if they repent not of these horrid
doings, the Master of the house and Lord of the Table, will rise-up against
these stewards, as once He did in Mount Perazim, He will be wroth with them as
in Mount Gibeon; for by their means it is that a brutish, sottish people,
admitted by them to eat and drink at the Lords Table, do eat and drink
their own damnation; increasing their guilt there, and hardening themselves to
their utter ruin, and everlasting destruction. And is this nothing? Nothing
says Mr Hs: for which some other will deal with him assuredly, and bray him
in a mortar, that his folly may depart from him, who says in effect, though
not in terminis; It is nothing to eat and drink damnation to our selves, as
all must do who eat and drink unworthily, upon account only of Infant
Baptism: For by Coming, or, rashly, like natural brute beasts, rushing to
the Lords Table, before the word of life, has brought life to their souls,
they eat and drink judgment to themselves, and have put themselves into an
utter incapacity or impossibility ever to be wrought upon thereby, we mean as
to the strength and power of ordinary means, That work on other men for their
Conversion, who have not wilfully perverted the holy order of the Lord, which
He has prescribed, nor presumptuously passed over the ordinary means of
Conversion: They have hard hearts, that do not melt into tears, beholding a
poor sottish people, increasing their guilt every day, and more and more
hardening themselves to their eternal ruin. Therefore for our dear Lords and
Christ's sake, whose Body and Blood we cannot see with patience thus prostituted
to dogs and swine; for His Churches and Truths sake, the only two dearly
beloved and regarded in the whole world, for Souls sake, purchased at so dear
a rate, (which argues the pretiousnesse of them) for your own sakes, whose
foot stands fixed in Mr H^: way ( his own) a way of sin and death; have we
spoken hitherto, and shall speak in these matters before us, as we have
believed, And as the Church of Christ has practiced in all times, and ages,
though not with that freedom and blessed liberty, as by the abundant riches
of Gods goodness now they can do, for which liberty they bless God night and
day, who has so changed the times; Time was, and it was a sad time, with all
the godly Ministers and people all over the Land, when there was no bar to
keep any from the Lords Table, but one, which superstition made; And was it a
just Grief (to borrow Mr Sanders words) then, that there was no bar; And is
it your work now to remove the Bars, yea the Lords and his Churches ancient
Land-markes, and lay all Common? The Lord God of gods looks upon this, and
will require it. Therefore in our tenderest respects unto you, we would Caution
you in our entrance to this Treatise, for with that or the like unto it we
mean to end this; of all murder take heed of Souls De Eccles: lib. 2.
murder, your own or others, It is Salvians Caution. It is true your people
will be very wroth with you, if you will not murder them, let them eat and
drink damnation to themselves. The most cruel and bloody murder (though Mr
Hs: will not believe it) to suffer persons one or more to poison themselves
with the Sacrament, which works strongly, and kills presently, as poison mixed
with the strongest wine will do. Vinegar, you have read, it is filius vini, and
the sweetest wine degenerates into the sharpest Gospel Co^dials to a foul
heart are the deadliest p^yson. Mr. Fo^d. Sp. Ad. 470.
vinegar; As there are more liberal doles of Grace in time of the Gospel, and
specially given forth at the Lords Table to the worthy receivers; So are there
the largest violls of wrath there also, given forth to eat and drink down by
the unworthy receivers: very likely your people will not apply their heart to
this, no not to this; But if they may not have the Lords Supper, as formerly
they have had, once a year at least (which now will not serve their turn) or
thrice, or, since they are used to it, once a month; they will crie-out
against you all the year long, and Curse too; (to whom God has not made it
manifest, that they themselves are beasts) These ignorant, unreasonable and
wicked persons will so do, if you will not suffer them to drink down a
Curse, and destroy themselves for ever, if you will not take the readiest way,
to destroy them by admitting them so unworthy to the Lords Table, They will
destroy you; at least they will do, what they can. Why but, as the Counsel is
to the Parent Correcting his Child, Let not thy soul spare for his crying: So
regard not their Cry, nor their Curse neither. But, though they Curse, Bless
them, which you cannot do; but in bidding them attend diligently upon the
Converting ordinance, and forbear coming to the Lords Table, till the Word
preached has done its work, Then come and welcome. -- But we shall
contribute more to this, at the end of this Treatise. And now before we come to
argue the Negative; That Children in understanding wilfully such* Children of
Belial always, are not to be admitted to the Lords Table. We will with your
leave hear you make out the Affimative first, That Children in understanding
are to be admitted to the Lords Table. We have heard you (we shall allege
nothing from what we have read) and those in your way with you, make it out
thus* and so this is your first proof.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I.
SU^ely all our forefathers were not all mistaken, but they gave it forth to
all, all along, till within these very few years, which they had not done, if
they had not thought it lawful to be done.

It is hard to prove this, nay we think it is impossible; Though we grant that
many the excellent of the earth, did give forth these It is hard even for good
men not to be c^r^ied dow^e the stream, when at once they go with the wind of
example and tide of Nature. Read Mr. Phil. ^ Evang. (...) page 227, 228. etc.
seals to as many as came for them, and that was just, as you say, to all; And
truly much might be said to excuse these excellent of the Earth, a tanto, if
not a toto. The tyranny of Custom, as a tide or torrent impetuously running
all one way, and carrying all with it; The Tyranny of Bishops also, as fast
friends to Christ, many of them, as were these excellent of the Earth then, and
now fast friends to Antichrist. Indeed Issachars -- we had almost said, curse
(but to all His God turned it into a blessing) was upon the good Ministers, and
people, they lay couching under burdens; and this dispirits both Ministers and
people, so that with him in Tacitus, if we may alude to it, gemens, sequitur
tamen, they sighed, and they groaned, yet they followed the Commandment. And
surely we may add this, how did they breath after Reformation in these
matters? And when they saw no amendment, we know whether some of them went, for
it is known in all the Earth; and how did they there, And the faithful here
wrestle with their God about these things? And what thanks can they Render to
God for what He has done in way of Answer to their prayers? Time was when
another Girded these faithful men, and carried them whether they would not;
but now, blessed be God, they have a blessed liberty, to Gird themselves in the
All-might of their God, according to His Glorious power, to walk whether they
would in all pleasing.

This we desire to leave upon your serious thoughts, what use and improvement
is made of this liberty? or whether not abused as an occasion to the flesh, by
men of Mr Hs: persuasion?

And yet Sir* we must make bold to tell you, your proof is naught, and proves
nothing, Qu^d (...) n^n (...) haeresis est etiam v^^us consuciu^^o. Je^^^
Christ is ^^y Antiquity, That He did, and that He ^pake, said Igna^ius (...).
T^ll not me it was ^^stoma^ily so done, but tell me what ought to be done.
(...), etc. so an old Philosopher reproved his friend A. Ge^. lib. 10. c. 19.
What have we to do with the examples and wants of our Fathers? they are no
rules of our faith, or for our walking; It is not what was done, but what ought
to be done If such a proof may be warranted, what evil may not be approved
good and be justified? Here the Heretic Eutiches sic a progenitoribus
accipiens credidi etc. "This faith have I received from my Ancestors, in this
faith I was borne, and Baptized, and in the same I desire to dye: and yet the
same faith was an error, and no faith. Full-up to the same words said another
as very an Heretic as the former; Quemadmodum ab insantia edoctus sum, it^
Credidi and Credo; As I have been taught from my Childhood, so I have believed,
and so I believe still. And the Idolatrous Jews say much the same; So we have
done, and our Fathers before us, our Kings and our Princes, and so we will do.
But Sir, we speak to you in our Jewels words; We sit not in Judgment to
Condemn our Fathers, God only is their Judge, and He knows how to deliver
His own; He was able to preserve the Bush in the midst of the flame; and
Daniell in the Cave, in the mids of the Lions; And the three Chrildren in the
midst of the furnace of flaming fire; and His people Israel in the midst of
the red Sea: even so was He able to preserve His own in the midst of that
deadly time of darkness. Ignosci potuit simpliciter erranti, post
inspirationem very etc. He that erreth of simplicity (as our Fathers did) may
be pardoned; The times of that ignorance God might wink at. But after that
once God has inspired the heart, and revealed His truth, whosoever continues
in his error, offends without pardon of ignorance, for he is over-borne with
presumption and wilfulness: These, we have heard, are the words of Cyprian;
and this shall serve for Answer to what our Fathers did: their doeings are no
prescriptions for us. The word of our God is the Rule of our practice in all
things; And we humbly conceive, it lies open before us as to this particular,
as our Cynosure or Star to direct us; whereof anon.

SECT. II.
WE have heard it said, to bear you out in your doings; That lear^ed and Godly
men, do as you do, at this day in point of admission to the Lords Table.

We oppose not here, nor gainsay what is said of their Learning and
Godliness. But this we say, That your proof is naught still, and proves
nothing. There were learned and Godly men sure among those thousands of Israel
called together by King David for the removing of the Arc, and yet they put it
in a 2 Samuel ^. 1 Chronicles. 13. Exodus 25. 14. Numb. 4. 15. and 7. 19.
Cart, against the express Command of their God, which was that the Levites
should bear it on their shoulders. Godliness, we see, does not privilege us
from erring, no not in the Highest matters, the Concernments of the Lord and
His Christ. And for learning, the Lord prosper it, and sanctify it, that it
may be of use to His Sanctuary; for this we find by daily experience (we will
borrow the words of that excellent Expositor upon Job) Chap. 4 12.
It is Satan's work to solicit the Learning of men (even as an adulterer
sollicites the beauty of women) that he may commit folly with it, and beget
some monstrous birth of mischief and villainy. We proceed to that you say in
the third place.

SECT. III.
THat Charity commands you to account all that are borne and Baptized in
England, Beleivers, Disciples, and Saints, and upon that score, as their
Children are to be admitted to Baptism, so the Parents to the Lords Table.

As Charitable as Mr Hs: is, who hopes the Best of all, so he says; and, say
we if of all, then he hopes the Best of the worst of all; what hope has he of
the Devil? Why, If he be a Devil incarnate, and baptized, he shall be
admitted to the Lords Table, though truly we know not well what to say more,
having hinted so much to it before; yet this we will add, That Charity does
R^ad Mr. P^lme^. page 70, 71
both hear and see, and has a rule, whereby to judge righteous Judgment, as
of a tree by the fruits; of M H: his walk in the street, by his practice at
the Lords Table; for if naught there, it is our fear, he is good no where;
Thus we judge of a man by ^ Man. 16. 1^.
his works. And to the thing in hand, of a beleiver by his faith; of a
Disciple, by his discipline; his schollar-like submitting himself to the
teaching of Christ; of a Saint by his holiness. But when none of all this is
visible, but the Contrary to all this, They account themselves Saints, are
dealt with as Saints, yet they revile the Saints, hate and persecute holiness:
then we see not why Charity should make her mantle so large, as thereby to
Cover that, which is so apparent, that it cannot be hid. When the abundance in
the heart, the Treasure there venteth or broachethit self, by the eye, tongue,
or hand, then it is easy to judge, Salva Charitate, That the Treasure within
is evil, for it brings Matthew. ^2.
forth evil things. The Physician judges of the sick man's stomach by his
tongue, that is foul, the stomach is much fowler, being the Cause of the
tongues foulness; When we observe the smoke breaking-out of the doors and
windows, and from under the tyles, we conclude, there is much smoke within
and some fire also, which, if Care be not taken, will breake-out anon. I see
thy heart, said one through thy hand, which acts thy heart, bringing it forth
to light. We judge the tree by the fruit, which is not rash, because it is not
ours, but the judgment of the word of God. We have heard it often said to
Godly Ministers and people; Ye must not judge. They might as well say, you must
not hear or see. We may judge and judge the heart too. What an hell above
ground that is, where we see what an hellish life there is. We may judge the
thoughts of a man not yet turned from sin to God, that those are only evil
continually (for so Genesis 6. 5.
we are taught to know our selves, that we may loath our selves). But now, when
these evil thoughts have minted or moulded-out themselves, by words and deeds,
then thoughts become visible. We know the Mint in the heart, and what stamp it
bears, for we find it upon men's words and deeds, which are, as we may say,
the money that is coined there: It is probable this last said remembers you of
Salvian's words; I can tell you anon (speaking Si^^lt quispiam s^i^e quid in
templo homin^s C^gitave^u^t vid^^ quid se qu^tu^. ^. 3. p. (...)
to his hearers) what your thoughts are now, you are hearing; when I observe
you, so soon as you are out of Gods house, running every man after his profits
and pleasures; I kn^w full well your thoughts were upon them, while you were
within: What the heart thinks, the hand and tongue minteth, was the Proverb
with him; and much the same with ours; Words and works make a clear
Commentary upon the heart: these are the hearts Heralds, proclaiming the
fools foolishness. Yet indeed some of your beleivers, Pro. 12. ^3.
Disciples and Saints, are so evil, that we need not (but that we must)
observe either their words or works, for the show of their I^a 3.
C^^ntenance does witness against them, and they declare their sin. as
Sodom, they hide it not. To put a close to this; de ^ccultis judicat Deus, God
judges of things which appear not, The face of the heart being as visible to
Him, as is the face to us, and the darkest room lightsome; But we may judge of
things that do appear: As the Church judges not of hidden Crimes, so neither
the faithful, judge of the Churches by their hidden Hypocrisy, but by their
open scandalls in doctrine and life, said that excellently learned man Mr
Cotton. When ye see men wallowing in the pollutions of the world like swine in
the mire, ye have warrant enough to call them swine, and account them loathsome
creatures, and to excommunicate them the Lords Table, as ye will swine from
yours. We charge too deeply, if so deep as the heart, before the heart has
opened its own sink, and discovered its own filthiness; but when it
proclaims its foolishness, as we read, then may we hear it and believe it.

SECT. IV.
4. YOu say you know not why there should not be now as free admission to
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, as in those primitive times, there was to
Circumcision, and the Passover.

To this we might only, say as before, when you mention to us that National
Church, we should mention to you that National Deuteronomy. 33. 18.
discipline. As thus; If so be the hire of a whore must not be brought into the
house of the Lord, why should the Child borne of a whore, be brought in
thither. But indeed there was provision against this, for the whore, if the
daughter of a Priest, was to be burnt with fire; if the daughter of a more
ordinary man, then Levit. 20. 9. Deuteronomy. 22. 21.
she was to be stoned with stones, And the Adulterer with the Adulteress were
both to dye. So Sir, your Argument holds not, nor Can it bear out, as we
think, this Custom amongst you, admitting such Infants now (for they are
admitted in their Parents right) to Baptism, begotten, as is notoriously
known, in Vid: Ames: de Constable. cap. 27. l. 7.
adultery, and the Parents not so much as professing repentance for the sin;
And so giving some satisfaction to the Congregation thereby. Sir, The Lord will
require this at these Parents hands (for so we may call them) so also at his
hands who so presumptuously baptizeth their Infants. Nor shall it help him or
them; That though the Child was begot in Adultery, yet it was borne in
wedlock; So have they plaistered over that horrible sin, for which the
Minister must be as responsible, we mean for marrying them, as he shall be for
Baptizing their Infant, before an acknowledgement was made openly before the
Congregation, for so openly had they sinned. But the Lord looks upon this and
tells us with a voice as loud as thunder, that since man does not, He Himself
will be the avenger of these things. And if the people Levit. 20. 4.
of the Land -- etc. for we would leave it upon your thoughts, that if you, or
any brother in office with you, have been or are faulty in this matter, ye may
hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously; In the shutting up of this we
humbly remind you, of your own Principles, every head of a family (being by
our ^nf. Bap. 61.
principles) an Abraham to his family. But how if he be an Ishmaell, worse than
an Infidel to his family, how then in point of admission of his Children to
Baptism, or himself to the Lords Table? must he, having blasphemed the one
Sacrament, be privileged thereby to blaspheme the other? or having denied and
renounced his Baptism, as the manner of some is, by his works, making full
proof he has very ill husbanded that precious Talent, must he be privileged
thereby to deal so with the other? Yes say you, and accordingly you deale-out
unto him. But did your Lord Christ deal so with His Talents? Math. 25. 28. --
But we refer it to the sixth Treatise.

2. Now as to admission to the Passover, which you are pleased to say, was
free to all, which pleads for the like free admission to the Lords Table. That
spoken before might serve here, But, to let that pass, we verily believe there
was not such free admission to the Passover, as you would seem to hold-out,
or take for granted; And this our belief we ground on the Scriptures of God
as we ought, and you expect we should, and indeed Commanded us; which needed
not, for God commands us so to do; We humbly conceive there is much in this
Scripture we read; When your Children shall say unto you, what mean Exodus 12.
26, 27.
you by this service? That ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Lords
Passover; We Collect from hence; That the persons were to be knowing and
understanding persons in the matters of their God, the great Concernments of
their souls, and so knowing and understanding, as that they must be able to
instruct and Catechize their Children in those High points. Now if you find
the Parents such knowing and understanding persons; you may find reason and
warrant enough to admit them to the Lords Table; But if very ignorant, yea
Brutishly ignorant, for such they are, whom you have admitted, then seek your
warrant elsewhere for your admission to the Lords Table; for we are verily
persuaded you will not find it from the Passover; The free admission they had
to that, Sir, be well aware what you say, and as well aware what you do; Take
heed of admitting (we advise you in worthy Hildersam's word^) such as are
known to the Congregation, to be ignorant, malicious, unclean, unjust
persons, drunkards, Blasphemers; Make not the house of God as a Common Inn,
that receives Guests of all sorts, and entertaines all alike. The Gates of Gods
house are called the Gates Psalm. 118. 19, 20.
of Righteousness; None should presume to enter into them (at least you should
suffer none) but such as (in profession and endeavor) are righteous men.

But to your Alligation from their free admission to the Passover; To our
seeming it was not so free as yours is to the Lords Table For first, some were
to be Cut Off, as we read, Numb: 15. 30, 31. The soul that does ought
presumptuously, whether he be borne in the Land, or a stranger, the same
reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall be Cut Off from among his people,
because he has despised the word of the Lord, and has broken His
Commandment, that soul shall be Cut Off, his iniquity shall be upon him; Add
to this, how deep the Lord Charge His Priests, Ezekiel. 44. 7, 8. Ye have not
kept the Charge of mine holy things; In that ye have brought into my Sanctuary
Children of a Stanger, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh. Then
at the 9th verse: Thus says the Lord God, No Stranger uncircumcised in heart,
nor uncircumcised in flesh* shall enter into my Sanctuary; which was a type or
figure of the Spiritual Sanctuary, the Church of the living God in Gospel
times; Whence it may be cleared we think, That, if some were to be Cut Off for
their wickedness, and others to be kept off from the Sanctuary, as well for
legal, and rather for moral uncleanness, scandalous sins, then also were
they kept off from the Passover; Yet we think the example of Good Rulers, as
to this m^tter, cleares this further; They had under the Law by Gods
appointment, at the time of their solemn assemblyes, certain Levites, that
were porters, set by the Gates 2 Chro. ^3. ^5.
of the house of the Lord, that none that was unclean in any thing should
enter-in. And it Commands our mark what diligence was enjoined them in their
office; The porters waited at every Gate, 2 Ch^. 5 15.
and might not depart from their service. And has the Lord Christ less Care
of His service under the Gospel, than He had under the Law? Judge you: And
take this also along with you, if please you, that you may make righteous
Judgment; None that had any legal uncleanness upon them might eat the
Passover, Numb. 9. 6. And may they be admitted to eat at the Lords Table, who
have real uncleanness upon them? Give your judgment here also, but look up
to God, and into His Scriptures before you judge. And if it please you, let the
Scriptures be, 2 Chronicles: 30. 5. 7. They had not done it a long time in such sort
as it was written. They had not done it as their first fathers did it; who had
the pure truth Committed to them, and so worshipped the Lord God purely. But
they had done it as their immediateforefathers, who were corrupt in their
worship, and so in their practice, as these had done it so did they. Be you
not like your Fathers, and like your Brethren, which trespassed against the
Lord God of their Fathers, who therefore Gave them up to desolation, as you see
verse. 7. This was good Counsel, if it had been taken well; But it was very ill
taken, for when Hezekiah sent the posts from City to City through the
Country of Ephraim, and Manasseh, with this Message, That he would have a
reformation, according to the first institution or pattern, and would not have
them do as their immediate forefathers had done; It is said verse 10th; That
they laughed the Messengers to scorn and mocked them: What! may we not do as
our Fathers have done? must we now be wiser than they? Yes, says he, you must
be wiser than they, and you must do better than they, else you will show your
selves arrand fools, and utterly undo your selves; for your fathers were
stiff-necked, and did not yield themselves to the Lord to serve Him, and to do
as He bad them; But they would do as pleased them, and was good in their own
eyes, and so brought all this evil upon themselves: You must not do as they
did, for then you must suffer as they did; whom God gave up to desolation as
you see. Now read how these words wrought with some of them; not a few, the
Lord by His Spirit setting them home, verse. 11. There was a Reformation in
those matters, and things must be done according to their first institution. We
hope it will teach you very much in point of admission to the Lords Table. And
yet to set home your lesson, and to help you in your choice of fit Guests for
the Lords Table. Take, in the last place, an example from Ezra, Who would have
none to join with him in the Passover, But such only as had separated
themselves from the filthiness of the Heathen, and joined themselves to Gods
people, to seek the Lord God of Israel, Ezra 6. 21. So much to your fourth
objection. You have yet more to say to justify your Doings.

SECT. V.
THat you see not why you should exclude any from the Lords Table, because how
know you whether they may God is the only ^^wg^ver, and we must receive the
Law from His mouth. He that will please God, must shut all his own Imaginations
out of doo^es, and have nothing to do with them. We never dishonor God more
than when we take upon u^ ^o serve Him o^r own way; and leaving His rule make a
rule for our selves. Mr. C: on Job 23. p. 405. Ab extra ordinario ad ordinarium
non valet argumentum.
not be converted there? It is you know Mr Hs: conceit, and we know you have
said no less.

To this we say, That you give us but your word for this, but give us one word
from your God, and we will give you one of our eyes; Then search again for
another word to prove that this sealing ordinance is converting, and give it
us, and we will give you the other eye, so for two Scriptures you shall have
two eyes, dear though they are to us, yet not so dear as the truth, the least
jota whereof is of more account with our God, and so with His good people, than
are the visible heavens and the earth. Therefore, Sir, Mr Hs: (we would rather
mention his name than yours, so much we favor you) shall not put out our eyes
with his conceits, now that he has put out his own by his sensuality. He
shall not abuse us as he does the Scripture shamefully after his manner,
touching the Centurions Conversion by seeing Christ only upon the Cross: It
was as mi^aculous and extraordinary, as was the Renting of the veil and
rocks, and opening of the Graves. And he is as well able to prove, That when
he last administered this ordinance, he raised dead bodies out of the Graves, as
that he raised dead souls, by his administering to them the Bread and the Wine,
which yet is the thing he is to prove, That Conversion, which is the raising of
the soul from its grave, is wrought in this way, we mean by giving out this
ordinance; It is true, The people will speak Highly of it, That they never
found the Word (of Gods grace) so prevailing with them, as was that, they heard
delivered to them at the graves mouth, and at the Lords Table; But he that
cannot see, that this is a mere delusion, and devise of Satan, and our own
heart, which is blind and cannot see a farre-off, and will make us believe a
lie, That God will step out of His way and work extraordinarily for us, while
we neglect and turn our backs upon the ordinary means, He has appointed for
the turning the heart unto Him; We shall speak more to this in another place;
for the present we say only thus; That this tenet, That Sacraments do
convert, senteth strongly of Popery, and is most unsavory, and loathsome to
every good man's heart, being assured, That

That the lord preached is the great Appointment of God, to bring Christ and
the soul together, never to be parted again. Preaching is the Chariot, that
Carries Christ up and down the world, here is Christ for you, who sanctifies
Himself for your sakes, That He might do for you, and in you all that was to
be done, and to suffer all that was to be suffered, for the satisfying of His
Fathers justice, and the Completing of an everlasting Righteousness, That ye
might be Complete in Him, and wholly sanctified through the Truth, and
thoroughly furnished to every good work: Then preaching Christ Crucified is the
Appointment of God for the salvation of souls; so many Scriptures give-in
their evidence, that we know not how many: The dead shall hear John 5. ^5.
the voice of the Son of God (in the preaching of the Gospel) and they that
hear (that is, believe and obey) shall live. Other sheep I have (He means us
Gentiles) them also I must bring (belonging J^hn 10. 16. Ephesians. 5. 14. John 17.
^0. 2 Timothy: 1. 10. 1 Co^. 18. 21. 23. and 2. 14.
to the Election of Grace) but how will thou bring them Lord? Thou art in
Heaven and they on Earth, they shall hear my voice. The preaching which Christ
bids His Ministers preach, is no other but Christ's voice, which bids the
sleeper awake, and arise from the dead. It is that whereby the Spirit works
faith in the soul: it is that whereby life and immortality is brought to
light, through the Gospel. All the Angels in Heaven cannot convert one
sinner, (it is not their office or appointment from God) But the word preached
(which the wisdom of the world counts foolishness), converteth all that are
converted, being that great Appointment of God for that end. It is just so with
us now, dry bones, when Conversion is wrought as once it was; And as I
prophesied there was a noise, and behold a shaking Ezekiel. 37. 7. 10
breath came into them, and they lived and stood up upon their feet, an
exceeding great Army: As then so now, and to the end of the world, life and
immortality is brought to light, into our souls by the Gospel; It is the
Chariot of Christ, of the Spirit of Christ, The saving knowledge, faith in
Christ, and this by the preaching of the Gospel, Thereby the Spirit flows
into the Heart, and all with Him: Faith the mother Grace with all her daughters
all at once, and all together; While Peter yet spoke, the Holy Ghost fell on
them all, which heard the Word, Acts 10. 44. 11. 15. The Case is Clear; The
word preached is the Appointment of Christ to quicken the dead; The Sacrament
of His body and blood is His Appointment together with His Word to maintain
and quicken that life, when to sense and feeling it is in a swound and fainting
away.

This being a point of high concernment to be clear in, we crave leave to
proceed farther in it in way of Answer to that may be gathered from the holy
Scriptures, against what has been last said; That the word of God where it is
preached, is the only means in the Spirits hand of Conversion. And indeed (to
mention it only in passage here) some Godly Ministers, as is meet for us to
judge, do ascribe conversion, not to the act of receiving, as the man of your
persuasion does; (and truly, we think not one godly Minister in the world is
of the same mind with you) but to the exhortations and prayers in use at that
time before and after the Sacrament is administered. To this we shall speak
hereafter in its proper place, where we shall tell our persuasion as to that
matter. So we come to that we intend here.

1. It is said, Rahab the Harlot had faith, and it saved her from perishing,
yet living out of the Church she could not hear the Heb. 11. 31.
Word.

To this it is answered by our Perkins of sweet and precious memory, That where
ordinary means fails, God can work extraordinarily, by reports and rumors,
Josuah 2. 9, 10, 11.

2. It is said Paul's conversion was without the Word; True; it was very
extraordinary, immediate by the Lords own Hand, yet He would put an honor
upon the word of His grace, which He has appointed for conversion. He sent
Ananias unto him, verse. 11. though the great work was don; for behold he
prays. And in the next Chapter, Cornelius now converted, must send for Peter.

3. It is said, 1 Pet. 3. 1. That the husband without the Word may be won;
True; Without the word, he may be gained to come to the word, to hear it by
the entreaties and persuasions of the wife frequenting the meeting place, and
by her good example, and Christian carriage, adorning the word, which she had
heard, she might by the blessing of God, win upon him to go along with her to
the place of hearing; his body was drawn within the Church-doores without the
word: but his heart could not be drawn up to God without the word, the Spirit
of God and of Glory accompanying the same, which is learned Bezaes
interpretation there, the sum of it. And we conceive that we read 1 Cor. 7.
16. falls under the same construction.

4. Before we can put a close to this, we would put a Question here, and then
put it to the holy Scriptures for resolution thereunto; The Question is,
Whether an holy Discipline in private houses, we mean, a godly education
there, be not sufficient to turn the hearts of the Children to God, and to
work in them a true actual faith?

Before we enquire farther for resolution hereunto, we would say this first;
That this ruling well his own house, having his children in subjection, with
all gravity, works marveilously upon them, making such impressions upon the
out^ard man, as that they look not as if they had been born dead in trespasses
and sins, Children under wrath as well as others. We will proceed a little
here to witness the honor we give to this Despised Discipline in families;
surely a family well Trained, disciplined or Catechized, is a very beautiful
sight; as is an Army well ordered, all and every one keeping their ranks, and
doing their Duty; A rulers walk before the ruled, if according to the rule,
together with his exhorting, comforting and charging every one of them, as a
Father does his children, is very winning, and gaining upon the whole family,
to do as the Ruler in chief does; he being truly and indeed religious, his
very example is a command G^n. 18 19.
, yea a compulsion Gal 2. 14.
to the ruled, so as his whole family become religious too; they give good
hopes that way, at least they seem J^h. 24. 15. (...).
so; at the worst they oppose not, for then they know they must be no longer
there; for a Ruler sits as in a Throne within his own house, and scatters
away all evil with his eyes -- For the proof hereof we entreat the Reader to
consult with the Scriptures in the Margent; We will note but one example of a
Ruler, whose carriage was so gracious in his family, that he made not only his
family, but his whole Court to be a Nurcery of Religion; which may mind us
what Philo Jud: speaks of Joseph, he made the Prison, where he was, a little
Temple for the Spirit of God to dwell in. And indeed it must be so; He that
knows how to rule his own house well, is in a good posture of spirit for
public rule. The same wisdom, and justice, and holiness for kind, only
more enlarged and extensive, acts in either sphere, and will regularly move in
the little and the greater house. The sum is, A good Ruler, who is norma
publica, is marvelously commanding for good, as an evil example is marvelously
compelling to evil. Whence the complaints of our Godly Ministers in all ages,
which commands our mark and our mourning.

We will set down here our excellent Buroughs his words upon Hosea 4. 25. Woe
to such parents, whose children, if ever they come to themselves, shall wish
rather they had been of the generation of Dragons, and offspring of Vipers,
than begotten of such parents. Add hereunto worthy Mr Burges his words; It is
a woeful curse to be borne of wicked parents, from whom the Children learn
only to curse, swear, lie and rob, profane opposers of God and Godliness.
We will read M Baxters words also, I know none on earth, that play the Rest. 3.
305.
part of the Devil himself more truly than these men do; And if any thing
that walks in flesh may be called a Devil, I think it is a parent that
hinders his child from salvation, being careless of his education; He goes
on speaking terrible words to careless and negligent parents, as the most are,
but our ears are sealed, and our consciences s^ared, we will not hear.

And so much to assure us, that a pious education, and holy discipline does
much where ever it is, and the want of it does much mischief; but holy
Doctrine does all, thereby the New Nature is wrought in young and old by God;
whereas by holy discipline, our old nature is but painted and varnished over,
which comes now to be proved when we have set down Mr Baxters Page 129. 133.
words, which seem to us to speak contrary, we will note but one passage
amongst many in his book of Baptism.

The Assembly, I told you before, that gave in their experiences about the time
and manner of Gods working grace in their hearts did most give-in that it began
as they thought in youth or childhood, and in very few by the Ministerial
teaching. And for my own part, I think that if ever I had true actual faith,
it was by the benefit of education before ever I heard a Sermon.

We would speak three words to this (1) by way of Caution. (2) By way of
supposition (3) positively or Concludingly, as we have been taught by our
learned Godly Ministers.

1. By way of caution, we would wish no man to trust that Conversion, whereof
he can give no other Certificate, but that he was virticiously educated.

2. Suppose that a parent by his holy Discipline and pious education had
converted his child by the good hand of God with him; we would ask, has he
done this without the Word? It could not then be called holy Discipline, or
pious education.

3. But to speak positively, and so to conclude this point, that the word of
the Lord may have in all things the pre-eminence; Education or the bringing up
of a child in the Nurture and admonition of the Lord, is but the external
moulding of a man, not the internal Renovation of his heart: Education
fashions and frames the outside only; Conversion, if true, the inside;
Education changes the actions only; Conversion not the actions only, but the
Nature also; for the effecting whereof there must be put forth an exceeding
greatness of Power together with the Word; once more, and to do our Utmost to
drive it home, we are borne every mothers child, like a wild Asses Colt, we
love to be free or rather dissolute; we cannot endure to be subdued to order,
we would know no Law but our own lusts; nor rule but our own desire; nor be
servant to any but our own will: Yet the Law of a virtuous education passing
upon us we may be brought into some good order and under subjection; we may be
canded over and seem more than Civil: And yet there is as vast a difference
betwixt what Education does, and the word preached does, as there is betwixt
Nature and Grace, and that is greater than between a man's Nature and a beast.
Education may pollish and beautify, yea and rectify Nature, put it into a
pretty frame for a time; But the word preached is appointed for this very
thing, to change Nature, to put it into a right frame, and to set it right for
ever; To change a sinner into a Saint; To make a Believer of an Infidel.
Therefore holy Cowper taking this very thing into Consideration, That the word
preached is the only means of Conversion, would always as he went to Church
send up this ejaculation or short prayer, Lord bow my ear that I may hear thy
word, Amen. He it is, who has an Almighty Arm, and reaches it forth by His
Spirit with his Word, and so makes it a Converting word, that He in all things
may be Glorified through Jesus Christ, To whom be Glory Praise and Dominion for
ever and ever, Amen.

SECT. VI.
IN the sixth place we have heard you say, that you have done your duty, when
you have told your people theirs, and the danger of unworthy receiving,
according to the tenor of those dreadful words they find written, 1 Cor. 11.
27, 28, 29, etc.

THIS is well, but not the whole of your duty, no; nor the least part. They
will not believe that there is any danger in receiving, at least, such you
speak of unto them, being in your account, and upon the same score admitted to
the Table, Beleivers, Disciples and Saints; why should they Question that,
which you do not question? Let Turks and Pagans question those matters, and
not Disciples and Saints, we mean Baptized-ones, for eo nomine etc.

But Sir* it is good to be serious in these matters; as to be s^rvent in a cold
matter is no sign of Wisdom; So to b^ c^ld in an hot and fervent Buisinesse
be vrayes folly W^ mak^ bold ^o put three questions to you; The one relating to
a g^^^t Lo^d on Earth, supposing, you to be a steward in his house ^^d le^ve
you to make answer to this Lord. The other rela^ing to the Lord of Heaven and
Earth, whose servant you prof^sse your self ^o be, and a steward in His house.
The third shall be put to your own soul, and as to the other so to this make
you your answer, Calling God to record upon your soul. The first

1. Supposing you to be a steward to a great Lord on Earth; would he take it
well at your hands? That you counseled yea threatened a rude and rascal
Company, nasty wretches, and not worthy to enter your Lords house, much less
to approach His Table, notwithstanding in they would Come, which yet they Could
not without your Connivance, and more, and sit down with Him at his Lord^hips
Table. Answer this matter to your Great Lord, and so we leave it.

2. You are a servant to your great Master in Heaven, and you say, He has made
you a steward in His house. Make your Answer to Him, Questioning you at this
great point; why have you been so careless what manner of persons you have
admitted to my: Table? make Answer to Him, we leave this upon your thoughts
also.

3. Put it to your own Soul, Is it enough to warn Men? we cannot doubt but
you have been warning proud men and covetous and hypocritical mockers, and you
know whom, and yet they have Come. Doubtless, Sir, you should have restrained
them from drinking a Cup of poison, and from Rushing upon their own damnation.
Answer this to your own Soul, and when you are about it, Call God to record
therein. Then perhaps you may tremble at Elies doom; I will judge thy house
for ever, for the iniquity thou know, because thy Sons made themselves
vile, and thou Restrainedst them not, thou did not bend thy brow, nor frown
upon them. A good man scatters the wicked with his eye, they shall not partake
of holy things, of bread ordained for Children. This shall suffice for that. --
If a Lord on Earth will not take these doings at your hand, will your Master in
Heaven? And if your Conscience, which is as we may say the Center of the soul,
placed betwixt the understanding and the will, taking in the Result from both:
If this your Conscience acquit you not, God is Greater than your Conscience,
how will you Answer Him? It commands your serious thoughts in debateing these
matters, and then to give in your Answer thereunto.

We would remind you of this last said, thereby to Render you the more serious,
That as a steward is not to do any thing, but according to the mind and will
of his Lord: so nor are you in Gods House, but according to the mind and will
of Christ, receiving, whom He receives; refusing, whom He refuses;
Casting-out, whom He Casts out: whence Paul exhorted the Romans to receive
unto them the weak in faith upon this ground, Because the Lord has received
him, Rom: 14. 1, 2, 3. If it be said as a Learned man does say; That the
Economy of a Princes house is no rule for the Government of Gods house, he is
well answered, That surely it is a disgrace and dishonor to Gods house to be
more loosely and dissolutely ordered, than is the house of any Earthly King or
Lord. And though the Economy of Princes houses, be no rule for the ordering of
Gods house, yet, methinks, the ordering of Gods house (the King of Kings) might
be a rule or pattern (in some proportion) for the Economy of Princes houses;
and should not Stewards of Gods house blush? That these stewards should be more
Careful about their Lords house, which is but Earth upon Earth, than Gods
stewards are of His house, which is Heaven upon Earth. Rejoice ye Heavens.

SECT. VII.
IN the 7th place, you have this to argue for the free admission to the Lords
Table: You Cannot Restrain: It is not in your power to keep them away: we,
say you, and they of your way, look for orders from our Rulers: if they give
us power, we shall see it executed, according as they shall prescribe.

So then without a Civil Sanction, we may not expect Church-Reformation. Our
excellent Jewel, speaks, we think, fully and not impertinently to this, as
Is generally known to all the Learned in his Epistle concerning the Council
of Trent; we will abstract To segni^ur S^^pi^, a Gentleman in Venice p. 859,
860.
a few of his lines, though all are worthy to be heard and read of all men.
Then belike, it is not lawful for any of us to believe in Christ, to profess
the Gospel, to serve God aright, to fly Superstition, and Idolatry, except
they (our Rulers) will give us leave: In humane Counsels it is the part of a
wise man to expect the Judgment and Consent of men, But in matters divine Gods
word is all in all; The which so soon as a Godly man has received, he
presently yields and submits Himself; He is not wavering nor expecting
others: He understands that he is not bound to give ear to (the dictates of
men) the Pope or Counsel, but to the will of God, whose voice is to be obe^ed,
though all men say nay. If, at the first, Christ and His Apostles had staid for
a (Civil Sanction) or Council, when had their sound gone out unto all Lands?
-- This is to our seeming very applicable to our purpose and may answer this
your plea for a Civil Sanction from the Ruler, thereby to empower you, to keep
off the grossly, obstinately affectedly ignorant persons, those sons and
daughters of Beliall (that cast-off Christ's yoke) from approaching the Lords
Table. If the Rulers would give you power, you would do it. Possibly he may be
such an one, that is afraid to hedge-in the Sacrament, and to make it
inaccessible to the scandalous and profane; or to settle a faithful and
searching Minister in the place he lives in, who will, if he will approve
himself faithful, make a difference, between the precious and the vile; for
then he knows, he shall but make thereby a rod (of Discipline) for himself to
drive himself forth from that sacred Assembly. Therefore a Godly Minister is
not to wait the Rulers pleasure, or a Civil Sanction, as we suppose.

But we crave leave to ask: do not you derogate much from Alas that a duty
should be to be don, but none found to do it; a power but non to act it; keys
but no hand to hold them, Mr. S^nders, p. 83.
the power your Lord Christ has given you, and entrusted you with? and from
the Authority of His word? Is not that sufficient to bear you out in the
ordering matters in Gods house as Stewards there? All power is given to Me in
heaven and in earth, go ye therefore etc. If the Ruler will do his uttermost
for your help in these matters, moveing orderly, and in his sphere; And
having the Interest of Christ full in his eye, he shall do well, and his work
shall be accepted; But if he forbear, be it at his peril. You know your duty,
Blessed are you if you do it: You serve a Good Master able to bear you out,
if so be you order thing; according to His mind and rule of His word. All power
is His originally, and all yours is His derivatively, lay out all for Him which
you have received from Him, and fear not the face of the Magistrate, supposed
setting himself against you, you have power over him as a Steward in Gods
house; he none over you in reference to these sacred administrations, as the
Churches records, rather the sacred Scripture tells you. And you may be pleased
to remember this for your great Comfort; If through grace, you endeavor to
order matters by the rule of Gods word: God will not be mastered by His own
gifts, nor make derivative power, too strong for original power: But blessed
be God, ye have no excuse here, the powers on Earth, at present, are for you,
give encouragement to you. Yet that there may be no mistake here about these
two great hands, through which the great God conveyeth so much good to his
people, Magistrates and Ministers, we crave leave to add a little more; The
Donatists did ask, as we have heard, what had the Emperor to do with the
Church? To whom it was answered, That the Emperor could not rule the
Commonwealth, except he governed the Church, for the Church is a
Commonwealth. So then, The ordering the matters of Religion belongs to the
Care of the Civil Ruler: But then we must note There are two things in
Religion; first intrinsecall within the Church, as to preach, Administer the
Sacraments, and to ordain Ministers, these he ought not to do. But for those
things, which are without, those belong unto him; He is to see others do their
duty, and Correct them that do it not: He ought to set all ag^eing, and to
reform abuses, but not to meddle with things within the Church aforesaid, as
to execute the same, but Read Dr Ow^n his Sermon upon Dan: p. 30. and 49, 51,
52, 53.
to over-see and govern their executions; and those persons, whose proper
office it is to execute them. O it is a stately sight to behold that excellent
and sweet harmon^ in state, where the Magistrate and Minister meet amiably,
conspireing together, who shall do most at the setting up of the Kingdom of
Christ, and carrying on His interest through the Nation. The truth is, The Lord
Christ has been little beholding, to most Rulers; that have lived upon Earth,
and He has taken as little care of them, as they took little care of His
honor. Yet in those seirce and perilous times, when the Rulers set themselves
against the Lords Christ: There were those and not a few, who in the power of
His might set themselves in the Gap for Him, beareing up against all the power
of the Adversary, despising it and laughing it to scorn. And Luther was one
of these in former times (not to mention any more, nor the Worthies of the Lord
in our late perilous times,) In regard of my person, said he, I Will fall down
before any: But in regard of the Truths of Christ, which I administer, I look
on the Kings of the Earth as Nitts or Crumbles of dust, (so he wrote to our
Henry the 8th) For a Minister that is faithful in the execution of his office
(as said our holy Shepherd) what ever humane weakness there is in him, what
ever power there is in others yet he is therein above Churches, Kings or
Angels. But Blessed be God, at this day, the powers on Farth are for you, ye
may be as holy as ye will, as to the performing the whole service of your
Ministry: Your Lord has given you power all-sufficient; And He instruct you
to sound discretion how to make a Blessed advant^ge thereof to His Glory and
His Churches good: Amen.

Yet we cannot come off from this common plea which is pleaded by all the herd
that have M Hs: for their Leader; We have no power to keep any how wicked
soever, from the Lords Table, say they; we would entreat these men to call to
remembrance, what the Lord says touching the sanctifying Himself upon
horri^le sinners, in case the Rulers did not We apply it to this in hand,
Levit. 20. 4.
If men to whom the Lord has given Authority to reprove, censure, and
excommunicate wicked men (from communicating at His Table at the least) either
dare not, or will not do it; I Will take the matter into My own Hand, I Will do it
says the Lord. And has not He, with whom is terrible Majesty, has He not don
it? has He not executed terrible wrath upon these unworthy Receivers at His
Table? One falls from an house, breaks his bones, perhap; his neck; A second
from a tree, or horse; A third is hurled into the Waters; A fourth is suffered
to run his own way, and so to cut off himself in the midst of his days; A
sift is his own executioner; A sixth, and he is many, these are la^d in the lap
of their own lusts, and now being past feeling give themselves over to
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness; joined to their
Idols, and let alone; And has the Lord dealt less severely with the Stewards
of His house, who have dealt so unbecoming stewards there? Some He has
thrust-out. And those that, through favor hold-in for a time, Is not a visible
sword upon their arm, (their power is broken) and upon their right eye their
understanding is darkend. The unfaithfu^l Steward, the Idol-Shepheard shall be
like an Idol, having eyes but se^ing not; He was before a blind S^er sinfully;
and ^ow he is a blind Se^r judicially. O the dreadful ways the Lord takes in
the exercise of excommunication! He that inwardly excommunicates His own dear
children, as their sins may deserve, and casts them out of His presence (to use
the words of that excellent Divine Dr Goodwin) Child of Light p. 137.
will He spare these, who dare outface him at His own Table (prepared for His
own people, followers of Him as dear Children) rushing-in thither to receive
that with their hands, which they blaspheme with their tongues, and trample
under with their feet; and would deal as despightfully with His blessed
person now in Glory, as once their forefathers did deal with Him, when He
^abernacled in our flesh, and was on earth amongst them: will He spare these or
those Ministers, Stewards in His house, that suffer a brutish sottish people so
to do, alleging for themselves (but will their allegation be accepted) their
Lord put a key into their hands, but they found neither hand nor heart to use
it; because the Ruler, forsooth, did not Commission them so to do: Commission
them! A Ruler, as we suppose, exceeds the bounds of his Commission, for which
he will have no thanks from his God, if he shall Commission the Stewards in
Gods house, how to manage Gods matters there; We are taught from the
Scriptures of God, and from them, that hold thetherto; That in these cases,
which relate to Gods house, and those sacred administrations there; The
Minister rather prescribes the Magistrate, than he the Minister; He, the
Minister of Christ, rather gives orders to him, than receives orders from him.
Therefore to proceed to a close of this; Will the Lord spare these Stewards in
the day when they must give an account of their Stewardship, who knew not the
extent of their power, and therefore cannot know their duty to do it; their
power and their duty being of equal length? We will conclude in David's words,
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

SECT. VIII.
IN the next place, we have heard that much if not most of all the evils of
these times, is Charged upon the non-admission to the sealing ordinance; And
your self have not been silent this way.

This Charge is most unworthy a Minister of Christ; for the contrary thereunto
is most true; God is disquieting of us now; He is visiting upon us the horrid
Contempts offered to His word; The horrible prophanations of His day; The
abominations He has found committed in His house, as to those sacred
administrations there. And these are, as we have just cause to fear, but the
beginning of our sorrows, The first drops of wrath coming; The Lord God will
be prodigal of our blood, because we have been so prodigal of His Son's
blood, giving it to, or rather casting it away upon those, who cannot but, like
swine, trample it under-foot. Prove: 27. 7. These, you know, are Calvin's words.
Son of man, See thou what abominations are Committed in My house? I have
sworn by the excellency of Jacob (by Himself) says the Lord -- for you read
it every where. Indeed that Bellua multorum capitum, we beast-like people, we
say as much with those rebellious and stubborn ones, or much after their
manner, Jer: 44. 17. It was never better with us, then when we had our
Service-booke, our Easter Communions etc. But should not you answer us even as
Jeremy did; Did not the Lord remember these things, and Came they not into His
mind? So that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of their
doings, and because of the abominations, which they had Committed.

But with your patience, Sir, Give us leave to ask you Concerning the place
where you were borne, and whereunto you wish so well, and the Good of those
souls is the Travel of yours; how find you the people there? If they be as
bad, as who are worst, then it is not because they are barred from the Font, or
the Lords Table; for there you know the veriest varlet in the Town, (if there
be any such which perhaps you question) may have admittance with his Children
to Baptism; and, if he please may come at the day appointed to the Lords
Table, as freely as you may come to an Inn, and set up your beast in the
stable; And if you were questioned about your own Town, where you give
freedom enough to these forementioned places, the Font, and the Table, for
you are of M^ Hs: persuasion; We believe you could speak little of the good
you have wrought among them, by indulging that liberty to bring their Infants
to Baptism, and anon after themselves to the Lords Table, ignorant though they
are some of them, whom ye so freely admit, as is ignorance it self. Nay, Sir,
to tell you our faith in these matters, we verily believe, That Ministers
generally all over the Nation, having mightily obstructed their Gospell-worke
in the Conversion of Sinners, by suffering them to Come to the Table of the
Lord, there to receive Christ in the bread and wine, before they could give any
evidence they had received Him by the word of hearing; we mean, by the
preaching of the Gospel: You suffer them to step-over the Converting
ordinance, and admit them to the sealeing ordinance, and now you may preach
till your lungs are spent, and do no good among them. Indeed this is our
faith, and which relating to such things, that are the highest concernments of
Gods Glory, and good of His people, we may not keep in to our selves. The
great work and buisinesse of preaching is, you know, to bring Christ and the
soul together; To call them in, who are without; then to confirm and
strengthen them being brought in. Now you should, (it is our faith) wait Gods
time till this be done; till He has, by His Word and Spirit gathered a Church
out of a Church (we know this sounds harshly in your ears, but why should it
so) till He has gathered His Church out of your Church (since you make it as
wide as the little world in England) till He has taken them out of the world,
and added them to His Church, set them in a safe Act ^. 4^. (...).
sure and immovable state, fa^t upon their Rock Christ, as Mount Zion, fast
for evermore. Do you go on now to do your work, preach the Gospel, and
leave the Rest to God, patiently waiting His time. But in the mean time, you
shall never make us believe, had you the tongue of an Angel, That wicked and
unreasonable men (for they have no faith, which is the reason of the soul) are
the worse, because they are denied, the Seals of the Covenant; But much worse
(which may be) because they are admitted to partake of those before their time;
for as once it was, so it is now, together with the bread and wine, John 13. 2.
and 29. 30.
the Devil enters them too, and now see them in their walk, and you see
Devils incarnate; no difference in their walk, for as they see him do, so
do they, only they have flesh and bones, so has not he.

SECT. IX
IN the 9th place, and so to tell you all that has been, to our best
remembrance, told us, thereby to justify your doings in Gods house, as to the
handing forth those sacred things there, If the people may not be suffered to
come to the Lord's Table to receive there, as they express it, They will not
come to the place of hearing to receive the word there, drive them from the one
place, and they le drive you from the other; or, if that they cannot do, they
will not come at you; or, if they do come, they will cast your pearls,
whereof you are dispensers, the word of God, or Counsels thereof, behind their
backs, they will not hearken to you. Mat. 7. 6.


To this we would reply these four things, and first by way of Question.

1. How would this have sounded in the Apostles ears, Commissioned by their
Lord to preach unto the Heathen, should these Heathen have said to the
Apostles, If ye will not Baptize us first, we will hear none of your
preaching; We say, how would this have been taken by the Apostles, supposed
those Heathen had spoken unto them these words? Verily, for so it seems to u^
the Heathen people now adays, speaking after the rate of those words, before
suggested, speak the very same thing; And how u^reasonable and wicked they
show themselves to be in so speaking, is left upon your thoughts, with this
earrest request, that your thoughts may be serious.

2 We think it will be granted, That the Gospel is the greatest Treasure or
Talent of price, that can be entrusted with the Children of men, It is that,
which lists up a people, (whether ye speak of a Nation, or a man only, we
allude to that in Job) as High as heaven. It is the rod of His power, the
^c^pt^r of His ^ob 34. ^^
Kingdom, the grand Instrument (we will borrow that excellently Learned man's
words) whereby He accomplisheth all His (...)
designs in the world, whether they be for life or for death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. He
has given that a right to take possession in His Name, and authority of all
that He will own in any Nation under heaven. Now if this be rejected by us, we
will have none of it, unless upon our own terms, and order of our own
appointment, give us the Body and Blood of Christ first; As if we would say,
give us the seals of the Covenant, but for the Covenant it self (opned unto
us in the Gospel) we will have none of that. We were saying, If the Gospel of
the Grace of God be put away, Acts 20. 24. Acts 1^ 26. (...). Ma^h. 21. 41.
and driven with all our might from us, as that, which is most loathed by us,
or hateful to us, we shall be miserably destroyed anon, as those Despizers,
for we are pointed at there --.

But vestra res agitur You know your Lords order, how tender He is of it, and
the judgment that is written shall be their portion, who will remove the
bounds, that you may not do like them. Ye can take it into your
Consideration, and put it upon ours, That if This Rich Talent, we called the
Gospel, so laded with pearls, be not used and improved first; no other Talent
can; nor can we expect any other Talent given to us (in mercy) no more than we
can another Gospel.

For the Lord does not say as we foolishly may dream, and do according as we
have dreamed; The man has not improved his Talent, nay he has abused it: What
though, give him another Talent; No, Take therefore the Talent from him, and
give Math 25. 28.
it unto him which has ten Talents. The only wise God will not do as His
unwise Stewards do (if He will own them for His) as to Gospel
Administrations: The man has denied renounced his Baptism, being abominable
and to every good work reprobate; What though, Admit him to the Lords Table
notwithstanding. We will close with this, and so come to the next. Till the
Word has prevailed with us, nothing can, till that has done us good, nothing
shall. While the word of Christ is trod under-foote in the hearing place, so is
the sacred Blood, represented at His Table: We cannot reject Him at one place,
and receive Him at another; our souls are as full here as there; and therefore
cannot but loath, trample-upon Christ that honey-combe Prove. 27. 7.
there, as here, as at the one place of hearing, so at the other of Receiving.
Therefore

3. Be not you careful about this, whether we will hear or whether we will
forbear; Preach the word, be instant, in season, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
out of season, reprove, rebu^e, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine;
This is your Charge from the Lord, And be you assured you shall never make us
attend with the ear, giving all Diligence, till you have bored the ear; And
to bore the ear you have no other means for it but to preach the word,
thereby to make us obedient in word and in deed. Do not Entertain such a
thought as this, but show your selves men. (1) That we can be brought into Love
with the Gospel, or to receive the Gospel in love, by giving us admittance to
receive at the Lords Table; What can we receive there more than at our own
Table, unless it be a Curse, having not received Christ in the Gospel first?
(2) That we can be brought over to Christ by any other ways or means, but
what are of His own appointing, for His blessing accompanies those means, as
does His Curse those presumers, who think to compass their Ends by means
they have shaped, without the least shape of reason, according to their own
understanding, most contrary to Gods word, and an abhorring to His Spirit:
Therefore if you have the least hope to prevail with men, prevail with God
first by prayer, That you may take the way He Himself, has by His Word and
Spirit paved forth before you; for be you well assured, He will not go out of
His own rode way to meet with you or your people in your by-pathes. In the
last place,

4. And to reply a word from the Lord to those stout words mentioned at the
beginning, They will drive away the Word from them, and the Preachers of the
Word, if they will not suffer them to receive at the Lords Table.

Hear we what the Lord says to these, I will cast them away as Rubbish,
filth, and dirt is cast away: So He says by His Prophet, My God will cast them
away, because they did not hearken Hosea 9. 17.
unto Him; such as will not hearken to the word of God, God Read Mr. Ca^yl upon
Job 8. 20. p. 124. Psalm. 50. 16.
will cast away; why? They cast God away, when they cast the word of God away.
They cast the Covenant behind their backs, while they hate Instruction; No
wonder God casts them behind His back (a dreadful place for our persons,
but a glorious place for our sins) For the wickedness of their Doings, I will
drive them out of My house. They that drive, shall be driven with the Tempest
of the Lord, as the Thistle-downe, dried stubble, parched leaves or chafe
before the whirlwind. God will drive them out of doors, when they drive His
Truth out of their hearts, for they would drive it out of His house, And the
God of Truth out of the world. What they cannot possibly do, they will
endeavor what possibly they can to do. A good Minister will drive these from
the Lords Table too, they shall not come near that, till it can be made to
appear, The word of Gods Grace has come near to them, and set them in their
right mind. So we have Concluded from Scripture premises, and so proceed.

SECT. X.
10 IN the last place, we crave leave to tell you our Jelousie as to these
matters, and we entreat you to account it a godly jealousy, which is this,
That there is somewhat more prevails with you to give such, free Admission, as
aforesaid, than all those nine Reasons, you have given us before, and this is
it (to tell you our Jealousy) when it pleased God to reveal His Son in you
(such is our hope) that you might preach Him among the (...)
Heathen (truly we mean, for we must be plain in these matters, we call a
spade a spade) your Beleivers, Disciples, and Saints (heathen they are as you
heard and worse, till your preaching is come unto them in power) have not you
with your Brethren, conferred at least with flesh and blood, what way you are
to take with your people in point of Admission to the Font and Lords Table? You
must Answer this to God, since you are Stewards in His house, and should know
how to behave your selves there (with regard enough to that holy guile which is
allowed you) for certainly to Him you must make Answer. We humbly in the fear
of our Lord tell you our Jealousy; For this we know (we are flesh and blood
too) persecution is a very sore thing to the flesh, and therefore all its care,
desire, and endeavor is how to Escape it; Now there is no way for a man, that
will live godly in 2 Timothy 3. 12.
Christ Jesus to escape it, if he will avoid it, he must as to that particular
Cease to be Godly, and so he Conferres with flesh and blood; and taking that
for the man of his Counsel, he must choose ^ob 26. 21
iniquity rather than affliction. It is our Godly Jealousy, that you and your.
Godly Brethren in the same way with you, have Conferred too much with flesh and
blood about those sacred administrations, and so to avoid persecution, have
done as ye do, given free admission as aforesaid; If you did not as you do,
you should anger the best men in your Parish, as they are in account among us
now adays: and so you should have their purses shut, and their mouths wide
open against you, like Cannons mounted; This is sore to flesh and blood, and
therefore Consulting with it; it will direct you another way, to save it self
from persecution; give their Children Baptism, and themselves the Lords
Supper; and all shall ^e well, their purses shall be opened and their mouths
shutt, unless open to bless and pray for you, dealing so kindly with them;
but take heed of their blessing you, and your blessing your self in such a way
with them: and you may remember this with it, That some men's Cursing are as
good as their blessings, and you shall prosper better under them; To put a
close to this, This is our persuasion from what we see and hear; should the
Gospel come to us like an Angel, with a sword in his hand, and with fire in
its mouth to kill our lusts and consume them utterly, yet we should never be
troubled about it, no nor regard it in the least, If our Minister would give us
the Lords Supper, before this killing work were done; what he did in the
Pulpit, he would undo all at the Table; If he would preach hell to us from
the one place, we would take heaven to us at the other; he shall never make us
believe, That we are heathen and worse; not, that we are all Children of wrath,
and are every day and hour of the day damneing our souls, while we are
treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath; he shall never make us believe
this, while he puts a Cup of Blessing into our hands. And yet if he does not
thus, he shall be the white and mark for wrath and envy to shoot all their
arrows against you, which flesh and blood cannot endure; yet do not Confer
with it (it is our Jealousy, ^e do) ye shall never please God then, nor your
people for their good to Edification. It is the greatest enemy we have in the
world, the Devil and Satan himself not excepted; ye are no debtours to the
flesh, and owe it nothing but mortification, as ye tell your people we hope.
Well thus we judge of the Holy way, and blessed are they that walk in it;
flesh and blood must never be Consulted with about it, it is an adversary, yea
a torment to it, as the holy way is an adversary to the flesh, and a Torment to
the same.

Thus we have heard you argueing, the affirmative for free admission to the
Lords Table, you will allow us the same patience while we argue the Negative,
That this free admission to the Lords Table so ordinary amongst us is not
according to the mind of God, and prescript of His word, holding forth our Rule
before us, and thus we Argue it.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
THey are not to be admitted to feast at the Lords Table, who turn their
backs upon the feast of the Gospel: we mean thus; They must not be suffered
to Come to T^^t feast to which sinners are invited, is one^^ the declaration of
the Word and mind of God in the Gospel; The word of grace i^ the greatest
feast which God makes his people, Mr Ca^yl upon Job 23. p. 411.
the Lords Table, there to receive Christ Jesus the Lord in the bread and wine,
who reject Him and make light of Him in the tenders and offers of the Gospel;
We ground this upon those known Scriptures, whereon we shall dwell a little,
Math: 22. 2.

Luk: 14. 16. where we have the Lord of Heaven and Earth, the King of Glory
intending to His Church and people the highest preferment, that is imaginable.
He will give His Son, the Heir of the Kingdom to be His Bridegroom. Now
because there is a marveilous disproportion, as her present Case is, betwixt
this Bridegroom and the Bride, as vast a disproportion as is betwixt Heaven
and Earth, yea we may say Heaven and hell: and at as huge a distance they stand
too, This Bridegroom and this intended Bride, as heaven and hell do, and such
a gulf betwixt them. Beside all this, This intended Bride is a very
ill-favored and froward piece, and as proud as she is uncomely, and as
wilful also as will it self; and, as sure as death, she will refuse life,
she will have none of the match; He shall not be her Bridegroom; who then? Any
but He; and the truth is (but nullum tempus occurrit Regi) The Lord of time
may take His own time, and when He pleases) she has made her own choice and
is married already, and wonderously she is satisfied in her match: But now
here is much to do, first to break this match, and make it null, then to make
it an abhorring to her soul, that she was so hasty, carried-on so headlong in
the buisinesse of so high Concernment, and then to make her fit and prepared
for her Bridegroom; then to give her free and full and hearty consent to Come
together, never to be parted more. Now to effect all this God the Father makes
a sumptuous and glorious feast like Himself, the Lord of glory, wherein He
holds forth to the world the abundant riches of grace and of glory by His Son
Jesus Christ. And this we doubt not to call the feast of the Gospel, whereby
this Bridegroom makes love to His Bride, That shall be; and, because He is
too high and stately, yea and too glorious too, to woe in His own person,
besides that His terror would make her afraid, Prove. 9. 3.
He has His Para-nymphs and spokes-men for Him, who are His Maidens,
Ministers, and Preachers of His Gospel. And this we take to be the scope of
this Parable, which you know, Nihil probat ratione circumferentiae, sed tantum
ratione Centri, we must observe whereat it drives, and wherein it Centers: And
we take in two rules here first: for the sensing of parables and similitudes;
and then one thing, which is spoken against the arguing therefrom.

1. We observe their true scope and intendment, and not to In il^is quae
metaphori^e dicuntur, non oportet accipere similitudine ^^ secundum omnia.
wrench and tenter it beyond that; which, were against the Rule, we not
angariari parabolam, in Compelling it to go farther then it would.

2. What things are spoken of God (...) after the manner of men, are to be
understood (...) in a sense becomeing God; now in the third place.

3. We would take off an objection here before we proceed to our Argument
drawn from this Parable, That there is no argueing Theologia Symbolica non est
argumentativa. Dr. Owen. p. 440.
from Parables, Similitudes are not argumentative; True; says that excellent
man, Similitudes argue not, beyond the extent of that particular wherein their
nature, as such, does consist. The intendment of Christ in every parable is
warily to be observed; Therefore, though a Learned man, Aquinas himself, as we
have heard, has said as aforesaid, and better Divines than he; yet by his
leave and their favor, we think the speech is neither Logical, nor
Theological, that is, as we are told neither good Logic, nor good Divinity:
Not good Logic, for Comparata etiam ficta arguunt, and if they do argue,
then they are argumentative and prove something, as sure as operating is
working; Nor Good Divinity for if all Scripture be profitable (...), 2 Samuel 12.
1, 2
(...), for doctrine and reproof, then Symbolica also arguing by parables: If
not, why would Christ and some Prophets 2 Timothy 3. 16.
before Him, and John the Apostle after Him, delight so much in Symboles and
parables, if they were not doctrinall, and argumentative; These things we
thought necessary to premise before we could argue from the Scriptures; first
to clear the sense of them, and what their scope is, and that we have good
warrant to argue from them; and secondly, to make it clear that Mr Hs: is
clear beside the scope; when he will have the feast there to be solemnized at
the Lords Table, belike because Luke calls it a Supper, so wise a man he is,
and so rational a scholar in divine matters: for he will have the invitation
be as general, come ye all to the Lords Table. But now he will contradict
himself, and speak against his own experience. He invites all, and admits
all to the Lords Table, and who refuses to Come? But there the bulk of the
Jews mane light of the feast, and their invitation to it, and went their way,
they all with one Consent (says Luke) made their excuse, they had matters of
more Concernment, as they thought, than that feast We read also how
despitefully they used the servant sent to Call them in; It is certainly the
feast of the Gospel, that meets with such opposition; and as certain it is
That none of us Gentiles will Come-in to This feast neither, to receive Christ
there, till we see need of Him; and that He has no need of us; for we are in
our own eye^, being Convinced thereof by the Word and Spirit, poor, maimed,
halt and blind; or if Luke 14. 21. Revel. 3. 17.
you please, wretched, miserable and naked; being Convinced that such we are,
In we come then, and not till then, before thus Convinced. Thus we stand out
contradicting and Blaspheming, and dealing as despitefully with the Lords
Messengers now as once they did: But you find it not to be so with the Guests
you invite to the Lords Table who refuses to Come? or who deals despitefully
with you, inviting them to Come? we can name hundreds of those, we think,
thousands, who deal despitefully with the Lords Messengers, that will not
suffer them to Come to the Lords Table; while they Contradict and blaspheme
Christ offered them in the Gospel. And so having cleared our way, the sense
and scope of this Parable, we argue from it against this free admission to the
Lords Table.

That they who turn their backs upon Christ offered to them in the Ministry
of the Gospel must not be admitted to Communion at the Lords Table. We take
this to be so clear to every one that has not put out his own eyes, nor is
blinded with light, that to argue it further were to hold a Candle before the
Sun. Yet this more we will say; They that tread His most precious blood
underfoote tendered unto them in the Gospel, will deal with Him as swine like
offered unto them at His Table; not possible they should reject Him at one
place and receive Him at another, They go from the place of hearing full of
themselves, they go as full to the place of receiving; Then it must needs
follow, that they loath the Honeycomb, they trample it under-foote, Prove. 27.
as in the one place so in the other.

You will say, how do we know that? we are to hope well of all men; they come
to the place of heareing.

We answer you to that in another words, to one that said he kept his Church,
so may your dog too: Yea but we hear, so may your dog too, a sound. Truly
Sir, this is not our English, though yet we allow it, knowing it to be a truth;
Alas, Sir, you know they were in the hearing place, and they were hearing,
while they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulders, and stopped their
ears, that they should not hear; Yea they made etc. Zach. 7 11. 12
They did not shutt the ear against audience, but they did shutt the heart
against Obedience; hearing in Scripture account is obeying, is beleiving, if we
obey not what we hear, we are not said to hear, as you know it is clearly
made out to us from John 5. 37. and 8. 47. by our Lords own testimony; And
truly, Sir, you must, (if there be a must) to do your duty, examine your
people at this point, whether they have, through their ears, received Christ
into their hearts, before you admit them to the Lords Table? But we may
Contribute more to this hereafter, only this we have cleared in the (1) place
against this your free admission to the Lords Table, That they, (and they are
the Greatest number) must not have admittance thither, that have refused
Christ, yea rejected Him in the Ministry of the Gospel; for why should those
tremenda mysteria be so profaned? why should those be be dealt with swine-like
by swinish men? worse than if trampled under-foote in the face of the
Congregation.

SECT. II.
WE argue from the Covenant of Grace and mercy by Jesus Christ, that He will be
a God and a Father unto us, very gracious for His Son's sake. And that we may
argue it more Clearly, we should give our minds to Consider, That there is an
height and depth, and length and breadth of grace, love and mercy in this
Covenant of God with us. It is that, which the Saints have laid up (to use
excellent Preston's words, whereby he yet speaks) for the foundation of all
their Comforts: It has been the Corner Stone, upon which the Saints have been
built from the beginning of the world to this day. There is no ground we have
to believe we shall be saved; no ground to believe any promise of God shall be
made good unto us; that we shall have the price of the high Calling of God in
Jesus Christ, and those Glorious riches of the inheritance prepared for us in
Him; we say there is do ground at all but on this Covenant. All that our
Ministers teach us from day to day are but Conclusions of this Covenant, they
are built upon this, God has made a Covenant, with us in Christ, and we are in
Covenant with Him. He is our God in Christ, and we His people through Him, and
have access to Him by one Spirit. Now hence we argue, THEY THAT ARE who^y
ignorant of all this, and will be so, turning their backs upon the means of
Gods appointment, whereby to make known this Covenant to the Children of Men,
and say in their heart (the language whereof the Scripture speaks) We have
made a Covenant with Hell, and with death are we at an agreement; these manner
of persons thus sottish and brutish as we have heard, have nothing to do with
the Seals thereof. But thus sottish and brutishly ignorant are they, for whom
no other plea can be made for their admission to the Lords Table, but that they
were borne in England, and Baptized there; This therefore is our faith, as to
this point of admission, That it is the duty of every faithful Minister of
Christ well and thoroughly to examine their people what knowledge they have of
this Covenant, at least what breathings they have after it, and to make out
their interest to it in the conscionable use of the means appointed by God for
that Glorious end before they Give, admission to the Lords Table, or Bring
their Children to Baptism. In our Earthly matters, as Conveyances of Land,
houses, and the like, we know how bootlesse it were for us to have nothing to
show for our rights and just title to them, but a Seal without a writing, or a
Covenant without a Seal; And whereas it is said, we open the Covenant to the
people, and so we discharge our duty, and leave them to examine themselves at
that point, for so they are Commanded; But let a man, i. e. every man examine
himself, and so let him eat. 1 C^^ 11. 28.
This presupposes that, which is most false, says Learned Beza; That all are
able, diligent and willing to examine themselves, and so upon that supposition
to be admitted to the Lords Table. We will defer this to another place, where
we shall find this very Scripture assured us, That ignorant persons are no
(...) Bez.
more to be admitted to the Lords Table, than are Children or madmen. So we
leave this, taking it fully proved, that they who are wholly ignorant what the
Covenant is, or what it means, are not to have admission to receive the
signs and seals thereof; or as our little Catechism has it, They that have
no inward Grace, cannot tell what to make of the outward sign.

SECT. III.
THey are not to be admitted to the Lords Table, who cannot possibly receive
any thing there but bare Elements bread and wine, they cannot receive profit by
it, not having faith to mingle with it; faith is a necessary ingredient in
every Service we do perform to God, or to our own Souls; The word spoken to
us profits not unless we mingle it with faith. The word Heb 4. 2.
spoken out from us, The word of prayer prevails not without faith, It is like
a Gun discharged without a Bullet, which makes a noise, and does no execution.
So in receiving at the Lords Table, if we do not put out the hand of faith, we
receive no more there than at our own Table; faith is to the soul, what the
eye, ear, mouth, hands, feet are to the body; No Spiritual good comes into
our souls till Faith by the Word and Spirit comes in and fetches it in; And
no good can come forth, till faith putts it forth, be it word or deed; If faith
be not wrought in us, the Spirit and Word has had no work upon us; for that is
the first grace in the order of time, and to our apprehension faith comes in
first, and draws all other graces after it, it enliveneth and quickneth the
soul, it is the Spring of spiritual life in us; it is the first grace of all;
it is set down in stead of all, and indeed so it is. If we have faith, if we
can believe nothing is impossible to us, to do or to suffer, when God calls us
thereunto; It was a Sad time with the Thessalonians, and Paul was sadded at it,
and feign would he know how the case stood with them, specially how it fared
with their faith, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith, 1
These: 3.
and when good tideings were brought us of your faith, we were exceedingly
comforted: for I know full well so long as you stand fast in the faith, ye
shall stand like Mount Zion in the world, an everlasting foundation mauger all
the powers and policies of Hell-Gates wide open against you. To open this a
little and to proceed in it, Because indeed it is the very hinge upon which all
shall turn; When the holy Spirit comes in to the soul, conveyed in thither by
the word (the Spirit the Hand of God and Christ. His Vicar or Agent here on
Earth, does nothing in an ordinary way without the word, The word can do
nothing without the Spirit, it brings all at once along with Him; All
Spiritual things needful to Salvation; And that the soul may take fast hold
on them, and appropriate them to Himself, saying, all these are mine. The
Spirit with the Word (for He will not work alone as the Word cannot) works
faith there, and faith works up the soul to Christ, for it is the Spirits
working.) Its chief and maine object. And now draws or suckes from that
Breast of Consolation all that is desirable, suitable, satisfactory, and most
pleasant to her. But this is the thing. Faith looks first to Christ, the
person of Christ, the fountain, the Springhead, the Treasury, the mine of
Gold. Faith looks to the person of Christ first, it knitts the soul to Him,
then it looks to all the good things we have by Him, a world of good things in
Him, a world of good things from Him, All that tends to Grace and Glory: Yet it
is the person of Christ, that the soul of a Christian principally looks to.
The whole word of God, all the divine truths therein revealed, are the object
of faith to direct, order and sway our lives; But yet these are not the object
of faith, when we look for peace, for Consolation, for forgiveness of sins,
and reconciliation with God; Then faith looks to Christ fixedly, wholely,
solely.

These things being premised we return to our Argument.

First, They that have not received faith (the Gift of God Faith is the Mother
Grace, where that is in Truth, there is true knowledge, unfaigned live, and
Gospel Repentance, The graces required in every true Communicant. John 20.
sent unto us by the hand of the Spirit with the word) can perform nothing
pleasing to God, nor can they receive any thing from God, but a Cup of wrath;
if they continue faithless and unbeleiving, They have not received Faith, no
not by all those means appointed by God as Conduit-pipes to convey faith and
every Grace unto them; they have not received faith, true saving faith, they
cannot receive Christ, a true and saving Christ, a King and Prophet to Rule,
govern, and teach them, and a Priest to save and Redeem them (a false Christ
and he is many, they may Receive by a false faith) they must have a true faith,
before they can receive a true Christ, with all the benefits of His bloodshed
for them; a true faith leads them unto this storehouse or Treasury; brings
them up to this fountain opnod for sin and uncleanness; lays the soul in
that Jordan, cleanses and washes it there, bids it wash and be clean, bids
it drink and be drunken Cant. 5. 1. Ephesians. 5. 18.
with wine, whereof is no excess, i. e. be abundantly satisfied. But without
faith none of this can be, It being the very bucket, the mouth of the soul. So
that a man comeing without faith to the Lords Table, is like a vessel cast
into an Ocean of waters, that has no mouth to let any-in: So then without
faith, without Christ, and then Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, and
Strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope (well set and settling)
and without God in the world. Now are these to be admitted to the Lords Table,
persons without faith, and then without any saving grace, for faith is first in
order of nature? Answer this to God, see if He will accept of your reply,
which we may hear anon. We proceed,

Secondly, They that have no faith are not to be admitted to the Lords Table,
not only because they receive nothing there, but because they fearfully
profane the Holy things there; They have no knowledge of those things, none at
all; and none they look after, their soul is not good, it is stark naught,
as dark Prove. 19. 2.
as a Dungeon, for what should enlighten it; as noisome and loathsome as an
open Sepulcher, or a vessel wherein is no pleasure, Prove. 13. 5.
for what should discover this their filthiness to them, that they may appear
such in their own eyes? that do not believe, Rom 15. 31. (...).
are disobedient, rebellious, imperswadable ones, unreasonable and wicked men,
that is the Apostles Character of them; and he makes clear proof of it in
these words they have no faith. Are 2 These. 3. 2. (...).
they at the Lords Table? they are out of place sure, as a swine is when he is
in the Parlour; absurd men, so Erasmus Englisheth it, though Beza likes it
not: Quod mihi quidem absurdum videtur. But our Learned Reinolds likes it
well. The Apostle says he calls men without Faith Absurd men, because it is
an unreasonable and sottish thing for a workman to be without his chiefest
Instrument, and that is universally requisite to every one of his works; a
husbandman without a plow, or a builder without a rule, preacher without a
Bible, or a Christian without faith, are things equally absurd and
unreasonable. What reason have we to plead for those unreasonable men to be
admitted to the Lords Table, more than we have for the admitting of swine into
our Parlour? unclean ones will make all things like themselves, as unclean
too, to themselves we mean.

Thirdly, Persons that have no faith are not to be admitted to the Lords Table,
because they cannot show the Lords death there. 1 Cor. 11. 26. (...) This
Scripture Mr. H^: has corrupted after his manner with his gloss.
It is a grave and a weighty word that we English show, and we would rather
leave it to you to unfold to your people, which may require one hou^es work
But in a word, a worthy receiver, that brings faith with him, he does with all
thankesgiving and praise show forth the excellencies of Christ, and the
Glorious benefits of His bloodshed upon the Cross, the Bounties of His
Goodness, and Beauties of His Holiness, making an ostentation of them unto
the world, preaching to every one as he can; This this is it wherein every true
Christian is to glory, and he orders his life accordingly; The import of that
word as we suppose. Now they that Come to the Lords Table, and have no faith,
are no more able to show the Lords death there, than a man of Clouts stuffed
with Straw is able to gain the victory in the day of war.

Fourthly, And to run over these Grave matters, he that comes thither and
brings no faith with him, must needs receive unworthily, that is, other ^ise
than is meet such mysteries should Neh. 27.
be received. And therefore shall be held as guilty before God as Judas was,
who betrayed the body of our Savior, or as the Jews were, who so villanously
abused Him, Binding His hands, spitting in His sacred face* and crowning Him
with thorns, and as the Soldiers were; who peirced His sides, and spilt His
blood, He shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Fifthly, Free admission is not to be given those, who cannot examine
themselves about their faith, that is, search, digg, go down into the
fouldings of their souls, to enquire what their estate is; what it is to be
out of Christ, or what it is to be in Him; Infantes furiosos, and in verbo Dei
minime inst^uctos. Bez.
they cannot examine themselves about these matters, no more than Children can
for they are Children in understanding; no more than mad men can; for these are
mad upon their Idol, roprobates, disallowed of God, in a state of reprobation.
We will commend you to Beza's Annotations, or rather those to you, which we
thought to have been large upon, being so full to our purpose.

Sixthly, Why should faithless men, worse than Infidells, because borne and
bred in England, a land of visions, be suffered to come to the Lords Table?
They cannot discern the Lords Body; they can put no difference between that
bread, which represents the body of Christ Crucified, and Common bread at their
own Tables; nor between the wine there Sealeing to a worthy receiver, a full
discharge from all his sins in the blood of Jesus Christ: No difference can he
make betwixt this wine and common wine: And now being suffered to come to the
Lords Table, he there drinks down a Cup of damnation in stead of salvation; a
cup of cursing, in stead of a cup of blessing; and seals the Stone upon his
graves mouth, where he lies rotting in sin, as dead bodies in their graves,
He eats and drinks damnation to himself, not Verse 29.
discerning the Lords body.

1. As you have received mercy and now would show mercy unto everlasting
souls, admit not these faithless, these unreasoble and wicked ones, that
cannot show forth the Lords death, cannot examine themselves, have no
discernining of the Lords body, admit them not to the Lords Table. They have no
faith, then they must be full of themselves, as a vessel being full, and
running over, they cannot Eat and drink there any other thing but damnation
to themselves. This Scripture also Mr Hs: the patron of fornicators and
profane persons, as was Esau, fearfully abuses, plucking out as he can, the
sting of it, so as the most bruitelike person may come to the Lords Table, and
not be stung by it; oh profane man and past shame! he and his book stinketh
in the nostrills of the Lord and of his people, as the worst excrements of the
Dragon does.

2. And now Sir, we will spare you the labor, if please you, in making a reply
to this; and ours in making Answer thereunto. This we hear is ordinarily said;
They were borne and Baptized in a Church, and therefore beleivers: we like not
to make an Answer to such a foppery; why! but they say they believe the same
with the former, they say it with their tongues, what say they with their
hands; such are their words, what are their works? They may say so and
Blaspheme in so saying, as was hinted more than once. Rev. 2. 9.
I pray you observe it, and let this mocke-faith go, unless you will whip it
like a vagrant, and send it back to the Devil whence it came; We have been
speaking of that faith, which gives real union, and communion with Jesus
Christ, and of necessity brings forth good works, as a good tree, good fruit,
he bears upon a good root, or rather the root him, he is planted in Him, he
bears upon Him; Come; when all is said this must stand, Let a man believe
truly, and truth of belief will bring forth truth of holiness; A true faith,
a true hope; true love, true obedience, all in Truth; when faith is in Truth,
that is, truly set, and fixed upon its chief and proper object Christ Jesus
the Lord. O how does man boast himself to be some body, when he is nothing,
nay worse than nothing, but knows it not: A Beleiver, when he is worse than an
Infidel; And how secure does he lie, (he is many) under the shadow of a false
faith, more secure (such is his presumption, he is very Confident) than a true
beleiver, such is his infirmity, lies under the shadow of a true faith. You may
hear these speak like Saints, and see them, if you narrowly mark them, live
like Devils; so that if their word^ do not bewray them, their works quickly
will; outside Christians, i^side Heathens; O it is good, and but your duty,
Sir, to observe men and search them narrowly, before you admit them to the
Lords Table, for all men have not faith, no not they, many of them, that 1
These. 3. 2.
make a profession, and a show of it; You may meet with not a few sottish, and
brutishly ignorant, and then not so meet to sit at the Lords Table as a swine
properly so called is to sit ^t yours: You may meet with some also, that have
a pearl (of knowledge) in their heads, and their hearts as full of poison, and
deadly hatred against the Gospel of the Kingdom, and true heirs thereof in
Christ, true Gospellers, as the most venomous Serpents are. Protestants in
doctrine, Recusants in lives, having a tongue professing for the Truth, and a
life professing against it; fair outsides, but within as noisome as a
dunghill, or an open Sepulcher* which yet savoureth with them as a Garden of
Spices, or bed of Roses; something resembling an Heaven in show, when they have
an Hell with-in, the heart we mean; so you may say, have the excellent of the
Earth too; but to them it is an Hell, as their dunghill smells like a dunghill;
but to those their hell is their heaven here, as their dunghill smells with
them as aforesaid, a most certain Character of a polluted wretch.

We would not be mistaken here, we censure no man, we judge him not, we dwell
at home, and our selves must we judge. But upon due search thus you will find it
to be, even as we have said, and ye may have found it so by experience; we may
put down this for a Conclusion; If faith bring Christ the fountain of Grace
into the heart of a man, he can no more walk in darkness (of sin and
ignorance, there is a darkness of Spirit of sorrow, wherein a Child of light
may walk, and you have an excellent book of it, but) no more walk in
darkness than he can do, that could Isaiah 50.
carry the Sun in his hand; and he may as well carry fire in his bosom, and
not feel it burn, as carry true Grace in his heart, and not cleanse his life;
But Counterfeits in Grace, and contented to continue such, and to hold sin, the
least sin-fast, shall become Saints, when an Ape comes to be a man, and Copper
becomes Gold, which is never rejected, but when it would look like Gold.
Believe it you do, a beleiver can no more be without Holiness, than can a
godly man be without godliness, or a true Christian without Christ; or than
can the Sun be dark, or the fire Cold. We shall crave leave to speak
further to you about these three grave matters; The feast of the Gospel, The
Covenant, And Faith; but we shall defer it till the Last, and therewith
close-up this Treatise. We proceed now in our argueing against this free
admission to the Lords Supper. In the fourth place.

SECT. IV.
IT is not according to the practice of Christ, He gave it to Disciples only,
(it is not possible, we conceive, to make it out, That He gave it to Judas, yet
if it could be made out, we have enough to say, were this a place for it) He
gave it to Disciples only ( Judas himself, if there, looked like a Disciple,
being very like one) and by so doing, he prescribes his Ministers what they are
to do (so we conceive) as to those administrations to Ea quae perspi^ua sunt,
difficilia sunt ^^^^ticis Mark. 14. 23.
the worlds end. And here we are not bold to say, that Mr Hs: your Champion,
does fearfully pervert Scripture, wrest and Crook His blessed Lords practice,
to the Countenancing of his own cursed and crooked doings, and they all drank
of it; Well, what then? his inference now (hold your Nose if you cannot endure
the deadly stink of the Dragons excrements) Therefore let all Come that will
Come to the Lords Table.

Good, Sir, Give us leave to pause a little, while we take these things into
our thoughts; is there not a Cause we should so do? When we hear this
Reasonable Creature, we call a man, a scholar, and a Minister too, as he calls
himself and would be called, speak thus unreasonably, as if he was as much
wanting of Reason as he is of Grace; unreasonably said we? Is it not too
slight a word, does not he speak blasphemy? does he not blaspheme the Blessed
practice of our Lord and Savior, which He has set as a pattern for all His
people to practice after? And they all drank of it. So may ye, all ye
drunkards; and ye, all ye unclean persons; and you, all you worse than
Infidells; and you all, despisers of the Gospel; and ye all, that never
thought of any other Covenant, but that which ye have made with sin, death, and
hell; And ye all, that have faith, though it have no more life, than a polished
Stone, hewn timber, or a doore-naile, no-matter how dead it be, it is a faith,
that will serve the turn to entitle them to these holy things, drink ye all
of this, as we read those Disciples did, and they all drank of it. But Sir, is
not this Blasphemy? We are willing to make you Judge here, because you judge
so well of the man; Come in here all ye of the world, for whom that sacred
person John 17. 9.
never opned His mouth and prayed; Come in hither ye known enemies of the
Cross of Christ, ye belly-servers, ye that mind Earthly things, drink ye all
of this; ye that Crucify to your selves the Son of God afresh, and put Him (as
they do by their Heb. 6.
vile usage, and abominable Conversation) to an open shame, drink ye all of
this; and ye all, who have trodden under-foote, as they can, The Son of God,
and have counted the blood of the Covenant, (wherewith they professed
themselves sanctified) an unholy Heb. 10.
thing; and have done little less than despite to the Spirit of Grace: All ye
drink of this: And to make a round number, and full, and so to fill the Table,
that as there is no want of room, (for a national Church is wide enough, and
rich for supply,) so there may be no want of Guests, Come ye all ye
stiffenecked and uncircumcised in heart, and ears, ye do allway resist the
Holy Ghost, as your fathers did so do ye. What though? ye see what provisions
are made for you notwithstanding; All ye drink all of this, for the bread ye
have taken already.

Sir, we have proceeded hitherto with some regret, yea with some indignation to
our souls; yet for the Close hereof, we beseech you Consider, That by the
gracious allowance of their Lord and Master, they His Disciples all drank of
it. The Lord Himself putting the Cup into their hand, but these all
aforementioned have drunk and daily do drink of it by Man's Allowance.
Drink ye all of this, said Christ Jesus the Lord, and what He bad them do
they did it, and they all drank of it. Drink ye all of this, says This-man,
without any the least warrant from God, and how readily is he obeyed? what he
bad them do they did, and they all drank of it; Though he that bad them, and
they that did as they were bad, have done and still do as Cross and Contrary
to the mind of Christ, as He Himself is to Beliall, or to Antichrist, which
is to be argued in the fifth place, so soon as we have put down this for a
conclusion, That God has not only given us His Word for a secondary rule of
Righteousness to walke-by, but Himself, and His Son, the Highest pattern,
the primative or Original prototype, the clearest Copy without blot, the
fairest example of Holiness. Whence we conclude, That Christ Jesus our Lord is
both the principle and pattern of Holiness, The principle within His people;
the pattern of Holiness, without or before them. Therefore will all His
servants, who in desire and endeavor approve themselves Faithful, do as He
did, following-on in his steps. He that says, He abides in Him, ought
himself also to walk even as He walked, 1 John 2. 6.

SECT. V.
AS this free and Common admission is contrary to the practice of Christ, so it
is as it must needs be, contrary to the mind of Christ; we are forced, as we
conceive, to argue distinctly from these, the practice and mind of Christ;
though His practice Clears His mind, as His mind His practice; But yet we
shall argue differently from it, and we shall be breife in it It is clean
Cross and Contrary to the mind of Christ; why? Because it is so pleasing, and
well agreeing, and full-up to the mind of the world, free admission to the
Lords Table is. The mind of Christ and the mind of the world, commonly called
the Church there, do stand as Cross and Contrary each to other, as do heaven
and hell, the greatest opposites; or remotest extremes; What is the mind of
Christ, cannot be the mind of the world, and what is the mind of the world,
cannot be the mind of Christ, but most Contrary thereunto; And to make full
proof of it, let a Minister that has the mind of Christ, as every Godly
person has, and then liveth-up to it, as it is revealed to Him in His Word,
and acts thereafter, in giving out, or withholding those sacred signs and
seals of His body Crucified, and His blood powered forth, he shall find, that
he tormenteth the dwellers on the Earth, the Common people commonly called the
Church there, who have no other plea for their Church-ship, but that they were
once washed. The mind of Christ, no other than the Spirit of Christ in His
word, is unto sensual men, not having the Spirit, as the morning is to the
evil doer, even as the shadow of death. But let a man do Contrary to the
mind of Christ, and give out to these ignorant Brutish ones, and will be such,
the forementioned, water to their Babes, bread and wine to themselves, and he
gratifies them in the highest way of Gratification; he gives them their hearts
desire, and now from that day forward, they will put on high account upon
themselves, they will not think of themselves below the thoughts their
Minister rates them at, they will account themselves, since he has accounted
them such first, Beleivers, Disciples, and Saints. You remember who he was,
that, when he would do a man a mischeife, he would Give him a suit of
apparel, as rich as silver and gold could make it, and now the man (a proud
creature, and the worse he is the better he thinks of Himself) values
himself, his inside we mean, according to the Rate of his outside, and so as
the Beasts you read of, ingentes rollunt animis; he was proud by nature, more
proud by accident, now that he is put into such a dress. The application is
plain, Take heed Sir, of dressing up the people at the Lords Table, (though
they delight as much to be dressed, as ever a child in years did, in new and
fine Clothes) in a Saints dress, because he was borne and Baptized in England,
whereas they cannot make it out they ever heard a word from Christ, yet that
only is prevailing to make Saints, being obeyed and believed. You understand
the purpose of this, and therefrom how contrary your doings are to the mind of
Christ; for can that have any agreement with the mind of Christ, which has so
full an agreement, with the mind of His enemies and adversaries all over the
Nation? We proceed.

SECT VI.
ALL are not to be admitted to the Lords Table, because all are not visible
Saints: But none but visible Saints were to be admitted to Communion at the
Lords Table, as you so well know, that know so well the Church Stories, And
those primitive practices: And truly we are loath to mind you in those things
Ne accedant nisi examinati. Calv. Ep. 278. E^it in examine ratio arcea^tur,
donec profectum ostenderint.
you are or should be able to instruct us, however your practice be Contrary;
But this is the thing we cannot reach-to, that you understand these things so
well, and your practice be not so well, because commonly intellectus currit cum
praxi and praxis cum intellectu; Therefore we doubt there is some failing in
your understanding, because you have not given it-up to God, If so you should
know they were trained up and Catechized first, and yet they staid a while
before admittance, till they could make proof, that they were taught, and so
they had gained some Competent knowledge of those things they were there to
receive, together with their repentance toward God, and their faith toward the
Lord Jesus Christ. And you can tell us moreover, for we are in Comparison with
you but Children, and as yesterday in these things, That huge personages,
Emperors and the like, have thrust as presumptuously unto that Table as did
Vzziah the King, to burn 2 Chronicles. 26.
Incense before the Lord; or as men and women of the world or Church there,
Children of Disobed^ence, do now adays; but have been withstood, as he was,
and as these should be, we think, by the Ministers of the Lord, and thrust
away with the breath of tthose words spoken to Vzziah; It belongs not to you,
Sir, how great soever you are at your own Table, to thrust into this, before
you have given satisfaction to the Church of Christ, for your abominable
doeings against Him. So they thrust him and them away, and so they were
reproved, as you should thrust away your nominall Beleivers, Disciples, and
Saints, members of the world the Church there, whose Christian Name does adorn
them, as a Jewel does a swine in his snout. But thus it was once, visible Du^^
promiscue qu^slibet admittunt porcis and canibus etc. Calv. Ep: 278.
Saints were to be admitted, (and surely if there be a Communion of Saints on
Earth) there they should be seen at the Lords Table, and why now visible
Devils?

SECT. VII.
IN the 7th place, we would mind you of what the Lord God of hosts says to
them, that will contend with Him; Remember the Battle, do no more. If you will
contend for this free admission, you contend with God, to whom you must answer
this with other matters. He says and so say His faithful Servants with Him;
Ye shall not prostitute these sacred things to swine and dogs. But what shall
we more say, time would fail us, to tell what Chrysostom had rather suffer,
even the spilling of his own heart blood, rather than give out the Seal of the
same to non-Disciples, prophaners of it, how high and great soever. We
purposely pass over what Cyprian, Martyr, Musculus, Marlorate, Ambrose, See
Marlor: on Revel. 11. 1, 2.
and those forementioned, about free admission to Baptism, what these said
and did, as to these matters, very much to our purpose; We will only hear
what Zanchi speaks to this, and Calvin after him, because it is urged very
much, That you do your Potitur a me cura, in Curatio.
duty when you bid your people beware; No says Zanchi, ye do not your duty,
you neglect the best part of it, and so you partake of their sins, suffering
unworthy ones to partake at the Lords Table; ye draw upon your selves Eli's
vengeance, by giving such an allowance, When you do not frown upon these,
scattering them with your eye; you violate Charity and are guilty of
iniquity, your own and their's, when you suffer men to damn themselves with
a Sacrament, when you might restrain; yea ye are guilty of their damnation,
as we are of that man's death, whom we suffer with his sword to stabb
himself, out of whose hands we could have kept that Instrument of death; so
far Zanchi. And give us leave to add a word more thereunto, because we know
it is the Ministers common plea, we warn all our people, mention unto them the
fiery indignation of the Lord against unworthy receivers; This will not do;
you admit them under the notion of Saints, why should they think themselves
Devils? You may threaten hell to them, but they will take heaven, Read Mr.
Coll. p. 14.
and think they have good right so to do, while you bid them take and eat,
take and drink -- you know what follows; They never swallowed wine so sweetly
at the Tavern, as they do now damnation at the Lords Table; But they think
not so, because you have brought them into such a fools Paradise, by making
them believe they are what they are not, no more than an Ape is a man;
Beleivers, Disciples in name only are Saints indeed. O Sir, what ever others
do, be you aware here, what you suffer the people to do: give them scope
here, we mean full liberty, or free admission, like a rope long enough to a
wicked man, and you may tell your self what he would do, by what you have
seen him do so often; You know no creatures almost, but man, loves that,
which will be its own bane; indeed we have heard say that sheep catch at that
grass most greedily, which soonest rotts them; we are sure it may be said of
us men, what the Greek Father said of some in his time; Give us that which is
sweet, though it choke us; wine at the Lords Table; Why? because of the sweet
words which follow; but how mistaken! only wretched man seeks a blessing in a
direct way to a Curse; happiness, in the way to misery; life in the way to
death; heaven in the way to hell. If you consider all this, you will do more
than give your people warning against the next Communion day. You will tell
them and assure them, you have Scripture warrant for so doing; That they must
show more for their Admission to the Lords Table, than this, That they were
borne and Baptized in a Church, or else they shall be dealt with as dogs and
swine, And droven from the Lords Table, as we drive swine from ours, And you
cannot do them a greater real favor, than so to deal with them; And to
press you and your brethren of the same persuasion with you unto this, we will
remember you of Calvin's Cal^: lib. 4. cap. 12. sect 5.
words; That a Minister, who admits unworthy persons to Communicate at the
Lords Table, is altogether as guilty of Sacrilege, as if he should prostitute
to dogs the Blessed Body of the Lord Sacramentally in the Bread.

And to prevent this horrid usage, and Contempt done to that blessed thing, he
thus prescribes and expects it to be done: Epi^l. 302. Gaspa^i oleviano.
Let no person be admitted to the Lords Table, till he has professed his
faith; and put it not off to the day before the Supper be administered; But go
to the man's house, if he has one, and look over his family, let him give you
an account what order he observes in his own house, and at his own Table,
before he be admitted to the Table of the Lord; and how peaceable and helpful
he is among his neighbors, and note well how well he rules his Children and
Servants, whether he has these in subjection with all gravity; observe also
this with it, or else you observe nothing to purpose, whether there are not
some sloathfull and wicked persons in his house, who would run to the Lords
Table, but are very slack and more than slugges when they should go to the
place of hearing: We see now how truly it was spoken of him, he would choose
an hundred deaths, rather than suffer the profanation of the Lords Supper.
This is so full to our purpose, that we think fit to make a full point here;
and Come in the next place.

CHAP. IV.
TO tell you Mr Baxter's judgment as to this point of free admission, Surely
he is point blanke against it, as far from M^ Hs: judgment, as Mr H: is from
the Bap: 96.
Truth. Thus says M Baxter, Though I admit many hundred to the Sacrament, yet
I administer it to none that I know to be unbeleivers; nay, nor that I judge
not probably, or hopefully beleivers. In another book thus he says; for my
Aph. App. 108.
self I do administer the Sacrament to none that do not solemnly profess
their assent to every fundamental Article of faith expressly mentioned to
them, and their Consent; that Christ shall their Lord and Savior, and that
they will faithfully and syncerely obey His Scripture Laws. Can a man speak
more fully to the point against free admission? Truly he might be numbered
among the men of the Congregationall way, but that it would not be for his
honor. And yet he may thank himself for that; for he indeed has numbered
those holy ones amongst the uncircumcised ones, those sons and daughters of
Belial; And dealt little less unmercifully with them, than did the persecutors
in old time deal with the faithful witnesses of Christ, they put them into
beasts skins, that so the dogs might hurry them to death. But let that pass,
which, we hope, he will not pass without Repentance, not making a difference;
he speaks well for the way, we wish he walks with a right foot in it: though
it is as much above us to reconcile him to himself, as a Mountain^ is above a
Molehill, and possible so others may find it also. Hea^e ^im what he says in
a third book; You remember when you called R: 4. 52.
me to be your Teacher, You promised me under your hands, that you would
faithfully and conscientiously endeavor the receiving every truth, and obeying
every command, which I should, from the word of God, manifest unto you; I now
Charge your promise upon you; he goes on bending to his highest end everlasting
rest. We borrow his words, doing him or them no wrong, we hope* bending to our
scope; There is not a more apparent Truth, than that the Table of the Lord
should not be polluted, nor a more apparent duty, that the Stewards in Gods
house should look to it, that dogs and swine be not admitted to Come thither.
The sacred Scripture speaks clearly out to this; And we think* if a Child
should show us Scriptures, and speak to us the word of God, we should not dare
to disobey it. We might go on in his words; But we pass them, taking this
only from them to justify the Ministers in the Congregationall way for
proposing a Covenant to their people. So it seems Mr B. did do. We mention it
not, as if the Ministers of Christ have no better ^arrant, than his example;
they take their warrant, as we hope he does, from the Scriptures of God, and
example of all the Godly, who can make out their interest in the Covenant of
Gods grace with them by Jesus Christ, and now enter into Covenant one with
another, to walk together as fellow-helpers of the truth in the fellowship of
the Gospel according to the rule thereof, with full consent of mind and heart
to promote the prosperity of the same, and the Interest of Christ in their
souls, and through the Nation; And they that stick at this, and are strangers
to it, and will be so, do, as is to be feared stick as much at the Covenant
of God to give up themselves in full obedience to it and to Him who is the
Mediator of it. We have seen Mr Bs. manner with his people, and surely it is
Commendable, and he has a sure word for it; That Minister and people, They,
that own him for their Minister, should walk together in a Gospell-way by a
Gospel rule, full-up, in desire, and endeavor, to That Covenant Jehojada made
between him and all the people, that they should be 2 Chronicles. 28.
the Lords people. O it is good to be the same we profess to be, the Lords,
and to make clear proof that we are His by our circumspect walking, watching
over each other in our way; rendering an account of our way, when required so to
do, ^eareing each others burden, supplying each others wants, pertaking of
each others graces, doing all things as becomes a Communion of Saints; always
doing or receiving good. O it is good to stand bound with these Cords, bonds
and engagements of God upon our Spirits, we are the Lords people, He has taken
us into Covenant with Himself; In desire and endeavor we will walk as
becomes a people in Covenant with their God, and one with another. Certainly
nothing is done decently and in order, where this Covenant is not, or, where it
is, and is not stood unto, there is a Confusion, and every evil work: The way
of the world right, of a National Church there; whose way is as broad as the
Nation is, and puts them, that walk in it, to no Cost, none at all: therein
they may walk with all their uncleanness upon them, only they must put
themselves into a Comely dress against the next Communion day, as is becoming
Beleivers, Disciples, and Saints, who say they are such, and their word must be
taken having no other testimony of their goodness but from themselves and
others like themselves or from the mistaken Charity of the Godly, if it be
possible for Charity it self to be mistaken in those, who have no other plea
for their Christianity, but that they were baptized.

But now the way of Christ with His people in Covenant with Him, and in
fellowship one with another, is a straight and narrow way, it pincheth the
flesh still, yea it is still storming of it: And the orders therein prescribed,
His followers are so selfe-denying, so holy and so heavenly, as few, that hold
for a National Church will arise to the obedience of them; which made some
profane Men profess (they were of a National Church sure enough) when the
reformation began in Luther's time; That they would rather live under the
government of the Turk, than where all things should be ordered according to
the word of God. We thought fit to add this, thereby to justify the Brethren
of the Congregationall way in Gospel fellowship one with another, and in
desire and endeavor keeping close to the Covenant of their God, taking the
hint of it from Mr Bs manner with his people.

To the close of this Chapter we crave leave to add, a very good man's
jealousy, Godly we believe it to be, as he himself is; We think our brethren
go beyond their warrant, while they take Saints of the first magnitude only
into fellowship; God has a people of all sizes, there is the same holiness,
but not the same degree of true holiness in all Beleivers.

We make bold to tell our persuasion, as to this godly jealousy in this matter
(which may pass as far as his hearsay, whereupon he grounds, we think,
what he says, which we, in favor of his piety and goodness, do call His
jealousy, and allow it to be godly) That the Brethren of the Congregationall
way, who walk with a right foot therein, are, as dear Children ought to be,
followers of their dear Lord in this particular; so far from refusing the
weak in faith, as that they do invite and encourage such. The least Breathing
after Christ, the enjoying of Him, how desirable a sight is it? how acceptable
with them? how encouraged, promoted, countenanced by them? how pleasing and
welcome to them? even as the bruised reed was, and the smoking flax to their
Lord and Master. Not the weak but the dead, To use that good man's words; not
Children, but Bastards; not comers toward Christ, but resisters of Him in the
means of drawing to Him; do these Brethren purposely refuse, where they see
any measure of true godly fear, any degree of graciousnesse, they gladly
admit: God forbid they should refuse the meanest, as to the world, or in Grace;
no they Covet the purest, and take the weakest.

CHAP. V.
WE should now in the next place, set down the Charge of the Lord to all those
that have the Charge of the Sanctuary, of those holy things there, that they
make a separation betwixt the precious and the vile. But this is so legible
every where all along the Scripture, that we might save our selves and you the
trouble; And indeed this second part of our work exceeding its proportion, we
will defer what we should have said here to the Last Treatise. And so we come
to that we promised, therewith to close the result of this second debate, as we
did the former, and so to close up this part. We have made bold to give you a
word of exhortation once already, we are bold again to give you another word,
and to proceed in it, we know the manner of an humble person, he takes that
pearl thankfully as given him from God, though brought unto him, as the good
Prophets meat was, by a Raven: A reproof to him is welcome for what he has
done amiss, much more an exhortation that he may not so do, being taken from
the mouth of God, as you shall find, we hope, this to be; withal we are every
one taxed to pay a Contribution toward the good of souls, and welfare of
That Body, whereof the Lord Christ is the head and the Savior, and this we can
do no other way but this.

Sir, we can clearly speak this unto you, we wish you Gaius his prosperity;
that you may prosper as your soul prospers; They you, with your people, they
with you may walk in the Truth by Gospel rule; we do Consider with you, That
you, being a Minister of note, and we hope a Godly Man, The same may be said of
you, as you read was said of a Godly Nobleman, You are norma publica, a
public Standard unto your people, who indeed, for the most part, are very
Apes, taken by imitation by what they hear you say or see you do, Non ad
rationem sed ad similitudinem vivimus, was the old Complaint; we take words
upon trust, our Minister says it, and there is an end: Those brave discreet
and generous Bereans did not so, They heard Paul and Silas with all readiness
of mind, yet they did not receive the word upon their word as spoken from them
(though they might have been believed before any) but they searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, therefore many of them believed.

This is out of use in these days, whence it is there are so many beleivers in
name, and Infidells indeed. You are, we hope, the more careful what you say
before them, for we question not your doings out of Gods house, and so to make
way to what we farther intend.

First, We humbly entreat you, you would forbear to do what we know others
do, gather-up all the filths once visible now legible in the Church of Corinth
and Creete, to beare-out the filthiness of their own: To allege their want
of order and good discipline, thereby to justify their own disorders, and no
discipline at all: To make their defects and faileings, to plaisterover their
own more than faileings, their abominable doeings in God's House; Remember we
should they had but the dawnings of the day of the Gospel, we have the
noonetide thereof; And that we are to walk not by the dark side of the
Cloud. And let us tremble to justify sin by sin, as we should at that
judgment, which the Lord God makes- up of sin, punishing sin with sin. Bid
your people follow holiness; study to be quiet, and to be pure, a course
clean contrary to the world, or commonly called, the Church there, they follow
unholinesse, and study impiety.

Secondly, Tremble (oh that you could) to be found in the number of the Corrupt
Ministers all over the Nation; these always did, now do, and always will
oppose Reformation, the Discipline of Christ in His Church, the breathings of
all His Saints in the world, That all things may be done according to pattern;
as visibly held out now before them, as was that in the Mount, as to all
Church-administrations.

Thirdly, And Sir, If you look after this way, look for persecution in it,
and from your Brethren. As sure as it is an holy Isa. 66. 5. Jer. 40. 7. John
16. ^. Acts 26. 9.
way, so sure it is a persecuted way, contradicted and Blasphemed, and this
specially by Brethren. But can this discourage you? It was ever so; The Lord
Christ was opposed Cheifely by the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees; And Luther
professed that he ^^k 6. 26.
found more enemies in the Cl^ysters, and Monasteries, than he did out of
profane and wicked places; persecution is as the hand that points you, there
is the way of holiness, walk in it: If o^ find no persecution then ye are
out of the way, for so persecuted they the true Prophets, pointing them to this
way; but for the false Teachers that had bid the people runne-on in their own
way of sin and death pleasing in their own eyes, all spoke well of Act. 7. 52.
2 ^^m. 3. 11, 12.
them. You will find it to be so; and forewarned, fore-armed. And the Nominall
Beleivers, titular Disciples and Saints, so accustomed to their own way, a
loose and evil way, the way of the world, of a National Church there, these
will deal most despitefully with you. A just judgment, shall we say, or
rather a fatherly Correction, (if the Father of mercies make it so to you) That
so they should return your kindness to them, in admitting them, when time
was, to the Lords Table, upon this score only, They were borne in England and
Baptized there.

CHAP. VI.
WE come now to that we mainely intended, and you know we chiefly insisted upon
to prove: That your free admission to the Lords Table is Cross to the holy
rule, we should walk by; to the practice and mind of the Lord and dear
Savior, and as contrary to the mind and manner of all those, that are
followers of Christ, and cannot stint themselves with any degree of holiness,
1 John 3. 3.
their Lords own purity being their Copy. And here we more than touched upon
three things, specially the Word preached, how they pressed to that place, and
listened to it when they came thither. Secondly, the Covenant of Gods free grace
by Jesus Christ blessed for ever. Thirdly, Faith; upon that we were the more
large, all beareing upon that, being the hinge of all.

Now Sir, this is our earnest desire, That you with your Brethren would look
over this again, and lay your doctrines, manner and practice before your
people, to that Standard; for we choose to speak in that number. And

1. Do ye press upon your people the necessity of heareing? and before you
admit them to the Lords Table, do ye take time and place to search them to the
bottom, what they have profitted by heareing? You know hereby they are hewn,
and made polished Stones, and so fitted to be laid in the Lords building; we
trust you do not do as the Master of your Lord does, Polish your people at
the Lords Table. Surely they are to be made ready, as those Stones were,
before they should have your admittance to 1 Kings 6. 7.
Come thither. And, to proceed, do you ask what is that grace they must have
before they can profit? In our zeal for the Lords Christ* yours and your
peoples precious souls, we shall question you in these grave points, and so
return in all thankfulness your godly jealousies touching us and our way, by
putting it upon your thoughts what your way is with your people, and how with
them, They with you walk therein. You know, but have you as you can, made your
people know it, That preaching is the Chariot, that carries Christ all about
the National Church, we had almost said the world; And the only Appointment
of God in the Spirits Hand to pluck them out thence, as Lot out of Sodom. It
is the Ordinance sanctified of God for the begetting of faith in the beginning
or Alpha of it; so in the encreasings of it to the Omega or perfecting of the
same: It is that, ^hereby that, which is begun is perfected, and that
maintained which is begun; It is that, whereby the abundant riches of Grace
through Jesus Christ are Conveyed unto us by Covenant (we have said all) 2 Timothy:
1.
by Covenant; life and immortality is brought to light by the Gospel preached,
the Ministry thereof; there is not only an unfolding of the gloriously
excellent things of Christ, but there is grace given by the Spirit to believe
them. Thereby the understanding (that everlasting door) is opned to Jesus
Christ, Him that is true, the true God and eternal life; Now the understanding
closes with 1 John 5. 20.
Him, or rather He by His Spirit with the understanding. He is Truth: The will
and affections are drawn-out to Him also, Oh how good is He to the Soul! what
a lovely object, altogether desires. By preaching all this is done; it is the
Chariot of the Cant. 5.
Spirit, it is the means that works faith; which is the marriage of the
Soul to Christ* uniteth the soul to Him, planteth it in Him, makes it one
with Him: And now she begins to know the abundant riches, and glorious
excellencies of Her Husband; and the way of Conveyance of all these unto her by
Covenant; but still the first door that is opned to all this is the ear, and
it is opned by heareing; by heareing the ear is made able to hear, we mean
by the word; the Spirit boreth it, and now faith comesin and fetches all-in,
the soul stands in need of, Christ and all, and all as sure as a Covenant of
God, with His people in Christ can make it. Hold you to this still, we mean
hold your people to it; faith comes by heareing, it has the stamp and
institution John 10. 17.
of God upon it; and heareing by the word of God; This was the ground of the
Apostles faith (not all the miracles they had seen,) John 2. 22.
They Believed the Scriptures, and the word which Jesus had said. Ephesians. 1. 13.
The ground of the Ephesians faith also, In whom ye also trusted after that ye
HEARD the word of truth, the Gospel of our Salvation. The very end of all that
is written touching Christ, John 20. 31.
and is preached of Him, that ye might believe etc. Change this point home, so
your Lord Charge you, and examine your people about their faith in God. They
will say, they bele^ve, Numb. 22. 18.
They will say as Balaam did, My God, and so will they say, our God, Hosea 8. 2
we know Thee. Tit. 1. 16.
Hear them now how they can make out what they say; Do they know Him, whom
they call theirs? here you are like to find your people as grossly ignorant,
as were their forefathers, of whom ye say, says our Blessed Lord, That He is
your God: Joh. 8. 54, 55.
yet, ye have not known Him; We, that have accustomed our tongues to lying
ever since we were borne, must not be credited in what we say, till you have
heard us making out what we say; by giving a reason of the hope that is in us,
for truly thus it is with us for the most part: We understand neither what we
say, nor what we affirm in God's matters. Yea we commonly say, we know the
Father and the Son, when we oppose the means appointed by God to convey this
knowledge to us; Now you shall do well to tell us, rebus sic stantibus; That
we are as well qualified to have Communion with Christ at His Table, as a Wadd
of dried stubble, is to have Communion with a Consuming fire, and do no more
enjoy Him there, than midnight enjoyes the Sun. And that we do indeed and in
truth no more desire Communion with Christ, the King at His Table, or in any
other place, than darkness can desire Communion with light, or Beliall with
Christ. We are grossly ignorant of what we do, when we approach, by your
allowance, the Lords Table. It is not possible Fruimur Cognitis. Igno^i multa
Cupido.
we can enjoy that we have no knowledge off or acquaintance with; nor can our
desires move toward an unknown object. Good Sir, speak these things out to
us (your people we mean:) We are somewhat the larger here, a point of so high
concernment, being Confident also of this very thing, That you find your people
clean cross to their Rule, as your Brethren do every where, slow to hear,
and swift to speak for the Lords Supper: We conceive the reason thereof to be
this, In a heareing place they cannot hear one word, if it be the true word of
God, which is pleasing to flesh and blood, it speaks death to their lusts, if
ever it speaks life to their souls. Therefore they hate the word (a killing
word) deadly, because they love their lusts dearly. They will have none of
that meat which endures to everlasting life, none of the wine of the Gospel,
but as much bread and wine as you will, and as often as you will at the Lords
Table; and the reason of this is, because thereby their lusts are fattened and
cherished.

2. Therefore Sir, press upon your people the necessity of heareing; and
observe them well, at their coming to That place, and as narrowly their sitting
and attending there. And having done this, do not think you have done all
your duty, or more than the least part of it: They may give you the ear, while
they give the flesh, the world, and the Devil their heart; You know, and you
must teach them to know it: It is easier to hear an hundred Sermons, than to
practice one. Therefore let them know, you will deal with them apart and
alone, you will single them out of the throng of the world, or National Church,
and out of the crowd of the Common hearers, before you admit them to eat and
drink at the Lords Table; They shall give you a particular account of what
they have gained by all their heareing.

This was the practice of the Lord Christ, when He was upon the Earth, He spoke
alone and apart with His Disciples. And indeed the Lords people love to be so
dealt withal alone and apart from the throng and tumult of the world, or a
National Church there. The Spouse of Christ is modest, and will not come to
Thee in the throng of worldly Company and employment, says Bernard. Come my
Beloved, says the Spouse, let us go forth Cant. 7. 11.
into the fields, and lodge in the Villages. Let us get from the Tumult of the
world. The Bridegroom of His Church, loves to find His Spouse alone, retired
into a Chamber; And so must His Paranymphs too, give the Church a meeting in
some retired place.

3. Now because this lies under so much -- obloquy, we crave leave to speak a
little to it, in passage only in this place, we are not ignorant how this
Assembling together of Gods people is reproached, if not blasphemed thus; At
your private meetings, errors and haeresies, what not, have been fomented,
brooded upon and hatched. Truly this cannot be denied, it is so clear and
evident; The Father of lies with his Children must have their meeting places
too, wherein to lay their heads together, plotting and contriving (we are not
ignorant of his devises) how they may mischief if not ruin (for they level
to shoot so high) the Church of Christ, and build up their own Babel; But here
is your Comfort, they are Masters neither of the means nor of the end: their
endeavors are above their performances, as their malice is above their wit,
which (for that is it is doom) drinkes-up the greatest part of its own poison,
or like Gunpowder consumes it self in the flame it has caused. But should
not this teach us to assemble our selves together as often as we can, there to
lay our heads together, and contrive the most Compendious way of building-up
the Church of Christ, and our selves therein, the most contemptible parcells
thereof? O it is good to be plotting for the Church and for the Truth, for this
is to be plotting for eternity. O that all would meet together, here and there
and every where, there to plott how to avoid Satan's plotts; Let it be our
awakening that Satan is plotting; And that our time is short; opportunity, the
flower of time, shorter; our talents are many, our accounts strict; our Judge
Impartial. O let us not forsake the Assembling our selves together, as the
manner of some is.

Having taken off, as we could, (we intend more hereafter) that reproach
wherewith the enemies of the Lord have reproached the foote-steps of His
annointed-ones, we proceed to put it upon your thoughts, whether it be not your
duty to give a meeting to your people in a private place, there and then to
learn from them what they have gained by all their heareings? what a work is
wrought in them or upon them by the word of His grace with power? It is not
what show they make in words, what do they, that you may believe them? or how
humbly do they speak, so as you may conceive hope there is sincerity at the
bottom? a spark of fire, for there is smoke: a little strength, though but
as much as a reed has; it is in the gaineing hand. O how would he, and
desireous is he, in the use of means, to gain more? Indeed it will be worth
your labor to take time and place for the searching out of this: You must
find-out their desire after the sincere milk of the Word, by their growth
thereby. 1 Pet. 2.
It is a Common saying amongst us, show me not the meat but the man; So says
the great Shepherd to His sheep, and shows what His under-Shepheards should
say to them too, Not show me the hay that I have given you, but the wool and
the milk, that is, show me the fruits and effects of all your heareing; What
supernatural work can you tell us off? Is the life of Grace put into the
heart, by the Spirits working together with the means thereof, the word of His
grace? Is there a through change, not of the actions only, but of the Nature
wrought in them? The Spirit with the Word changes the inward man with the
outward, it changes the whole frame of the soul, it is no halfe-change, for
that is to be half a Christian, or almost, which is to be an Infidel indeed.
It is no light alteration, but as the old stamp (these are excellent Preston's
words, one of the usefullest Preachers in His time that was in the world) must
be obliterate, before the new can be imprinted; and as the old building must be
pulled down, before you can set up a new; So this old nature of ours must be
broken to pieces, and new cast and molded, ( for we are bell-mettle) before a
man can be made a living man, which is done by the infusion of Supernatural
qualities of Grace and holiness, supernatural he says; for even as the earth
may bring forth grass, and common flowers of it self, but it must be plowed
and sown before any choice herbs and plants can grow there; even so those
common natures, which we all have, may bring out things that are morally good;
but before they can bring forth fruits of true righteousness we must be plowed
and sown; plowed, that is, man must be broken in heart for all his animosities
and indignities put forth, when time was, against Christ, and the Gospel of
His Glory; for all those slightings of Spirit he found in himself of those
glories tendered to him in the Covenant of Gods grace, when he was full of
himsele, and wanting nothing, and knew not his own beggary and nothingnesse,
and want of all things; broken in heart for all this.

Upon those heads, Sir, your examination must pass, if you do according to
the manner of Gods people; and a set time and place must be appointed for it:
If you cannot go from house to house, as Paul's manner was, and Calvin's also,
as you heard, then must they come to yours. Could our Voice be heard all over
the National Church, all the world over, this is it we would say and press
upon the Ministers there; You must give your people a meeting time and place
for it, there to take an account of them what they have profitted; And you must
not take their bare, say so, their profession only, they are Beleivers,
Disciples, and Saints, believe them not, not their own word, bring their words
and lives both to the test, or touchstone of the Word, for they expect
admittance to the Lords Table. This must be done first, diligent search must be
made, and evidence given-in, how fit they are and prepared guests for That
Table; what kind of faith they have? whether it be active or dead? They are
Cunning enough, yet perhaps not enough to deceive you, unless you are willing
to be deceived; you can ask them how it was wrought in them? and by what
means in the Spirits hand? But still remember them how they and their faith
must be tried; And let this come often into your mind, what self-seekers and
self-pleasers we are; and that selfpleasing and self-seeking is the first stone
that is laid in the Hypocrite's building; Therefore if he be let alone he will
flatter himself to his deathbed, yea to Hell, persuading himself still that
he is an heir of Heaven, being borne in England and Baptized there. And indeed
this will serve the turn to make him a member of a National Church, or as you
know who said it, a C^tizen of the world; But if he make clear proof that he
is a member of the True Church, you must take some pains with him in point of
examination of him in these matters. And your hardest work will be to remove
that stone you have helped to lay, beareing him up with this conceit, that he
is a Beleiver, Disciple, a Saint, because borne and baptized in a Church,
remove but this stone, and down falls the building. The hardest work, we
believe, you have to do, is to pluck down, what ye have built-up; That
Castle in the Air raised-up, as high as Heaven by a false hope or presumption
rather; but now there is a possibility they may be built-up as true Beleivers,
Disciples, and Saints are, in whose building the first stone that is laid, is
self-denial, and flesh-crucifying.

These are the points you, we hope, will treat about with them, and search
them in; and do not be put off, which was hinted before, with their bare
profession; you know we may make a bare profession, and deny Him in our works,
whom we do profess in words; and declare our selves abominable and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. We can Tit. 1. 16.
lie as fast as we can go, it is so natural to us, for ever since we could
go, we have gone astray; and ever since we could speak, Psalm. 58. ^.
we have spoken lies. What mighty reason is there, and what enforcement unto
you from hence to do this, If you will do your duty? give the people a
meeting, we mean, those that you intend to meet at the Lords Table; and hope
anon to meet them in heaven; Give them a meeting that you may try upon
Scripture Grounds, what alteration is made in them, what change? They were
estranged from the womb, they were gone astray out of the way, are they yet
reclaimed? can they show for it, that they are returned? have repented unto
life, and do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ? Above all, put them from their
vain boasts, and out of their fools paradise, that they were borne in England
and Baptized. Indeed it is a glorious outward privilege to be borne where the
Gospel Sun shines, but if we gain no inward glory by it, we are made
twofold thereby more the Children of Hell than the Pagans are (which was said
before, but we are dull of heareing) O bid them beware therefore, it is for
their life, which shall last as long as the long day or night of Eternity.

You remember Cecil, Lord Burt: Counseled his Son not to build his house upon
any impropriation; well knowing it would be built upon a sandy foundation: Yet
it did but endanger a house, which, built-up never so strong, and settle it
never so sure, though upon a rock, yet as sure as it was builded-up, it must
fall down. But to build the house of our Confidence, and for a Minister to
make us bold in it, upon this; That we are to be accounted Beleivers,
Disciples, and Saints, and to be admitted to the Table of the Lord, because we
were borne in England, this is to build upon a quicksand. If a fox go up, Neh.
4.
which was scornefully spoken of Jerusalems wall, it shall even break down
the wall of this their Confidence. It shall not need, though yet they shall
meet with it, a stormy wind to rent it, ^zr: 14.
To put a close to our good Counsel, and this second part of our undertaking.

The Ermine, they say, is so neat a Creature, that if a puddle be on the one
side, and dogs on the other, it will rather run into the dogs mouth there
to be devoured, than into the puddle, so much it hates filthiness. And you
know, who said it, and as they said they did, If fire were on the one hand, and
sin on the other, they would rather be consumed than defiled. Certainly it is
so with the people of God; do you in these matters what you will, they will
do as God Commands them, they will separate the precious and the vile. And
they will advise, Counsel, and pray, you and your brethren, while they have an
hand to move, or a tongue to speak, that you would Consider what you do, and
what you ought to do in Gods house, as to those sacred administrations there,
least upon your neglect therein, you become the greatest sinners in the World:
The sins of the whole Nation, the Church, theirs become yours.

O Consider, Qui peccata non corrigit aliena, facit sua, He that does not
correct, or hinder the doing of a Crime, the polluteing of the Lords Table,
when he can, and it is in his hands to do it, he is no less guilty of the
Crime, than is the offender himself. There is a person presumes to come in his
filthiness, The Minister, such as he is, consents to it, says in effect
come, and welcome; This Consenter is as deeply guilty as is the presumer, you
know who said it. Why but this Minister is as full of Charity and hope too, as
Mr H^: is, he hopes well of all: Yea but whereon does he ground his hope? no
other ground but this, That person was borne in a Church and baptized there. So
was the veriest Rebel your self have known, or heard off, made longer by the
neck, or shorter by the head, therefore this hope is like the house of a
Spider, the beesome of destruction will sweep it away, the man dies and his
hope with him both together, and at one instant, which may make us more
observant of the words that follow, which we borrow of our Learned Reinolds.

Was a beast slain for touching the Mount, and shall not a man of vile and
beastly affections be punished for touching the Table where our Lord is
present? No; we would say, The vile and beastly Minister deserves rather of
the two to be punished, who admitts, allows, yea invites men of Beastly and
vile affections to come to That Table where the Lord is present; The allowance
of a thing done (which was said before and cannot be too often said) is as good
as the Commission for the doing of it, said our excellent Jewel. We would add
to this the prayer of a good man. Lord deliver me from mine other men's sins,
which I may have made mine, if not by Command, Council or Consent, yet by
Connivance, give me Repentance for them good Lord, and forgive them. It is a
known saying, and bids you beware, for qui in conspectu populi male vivit,
quantum in se est, omnes se videntes interficit: He that sins in the open
view of the people, does as much as in him lies, to murder all that look upon
him, and behold him sinning.

The application is easy, and summed up in this, the Presumers and the
Consenters shall be punished together, and which shall receive the sorest
punishment is not hard to determine: The actions of the Rulers being the Rules
for the Ruled; We beseech you all by the mercies of Christ, we would peswade
you by the terror of the Lord, whose Stewards you are, and by the blessing ye
expect, from, in, and upon the Ministry of the Gospel, that ye would
Consider these things, and greater things than these, as the Spirit called
upon, in the reading His word may suggest unto you, and fully resolve you at
this point, That your great Lord and Master, to Whom ye are shortly to give
an account of your Stewardship, will not endure to have holy things profaned,
as if Common and unclean.

Therefore this is our persuasion grounded upon the word of God, and practice
of His people, Ye must appoint time and place, where and when your people may
give you the meeting, there to know the state of your flock, which ye can
never Phil. 2. 19. Col. 4. 8.
know at such a distance in the public place. You cannot there in that
public place, do as Paul did, and as you ought to do: You know how we
exhorted and comforted, and charged every one of you, as a father does his
Children, (every one of you) he had them alone and apart, sure, there is a
necessity of it, a Must for this; yea though it were according to that offer
or desire rather of your Learned Brother and Neighbor, which is, That all
persons in a Christian Commonwealth, should give an account of their Faith,
before they marry and become parents (and why not before they are admitted to
the Lords Table?) We profess heartily, this were a notable expedient, and
would help much for the removeing of that Bar, which has let and will
let, till it be removed, the admission of their Infants to Baptism by Godly
Ministers; But we may desire, rather than hope, that this Course will be
taken, That all before they marry and become Parents, shall give an account of
their Faith: Though we conceive this Course ought to be taken with those, who
for nine Months have lived in uncleanness, That these should not be married
the tenth month, before they had made their Repentance as public as their
offense was; For Certainly this ought not to be, That a Couple be married to
day, and be made Parents tomorrow, Surely They did not give an account of their
faith. This was done in the world, the National Church there in a Parochial
Church, very few miles off from you, for the part has the same name, with the
whole, and a part in this huge, we had almost said, monstrous Church, is too
great for such small things as these to be looked after

Indeed Sirs, ye must Contract and Epitomize your Church, for if this Course
were taken, your Godly Brother prescribes here; Notwithstanding you must have
your private meetings with your people.

Surely after a serious debate betwixt your selves, about these matters, you
will find it (we humbly conceive) your only way to Abridge and Contract your
huge large volume of Beleivers, (who can show no more for their faith but their
Infant Baptism) into a little little volume (they must and they will go close
together, they will never be looked over else, though every one of you had an
hundred eyes) taking one of an hundred, and ten of a thousand, and this may
Comfort you in this troublesome and vexatious work, (so flesh and blood will
find it yours and theirs) That one believer indeed, who can give a reason of
the hope that is in him, is more excellent, than are an hundred of those, who
can allege no more for the Cleansing of their hands, and purifying their
hearts, but that, when time was, their faces were sprinkled with water. Now
when ye shall set upon this work, ye must, we conceive, appoint a set time and
place to meet at.

Now because there is a spewing Cast upon these meetings, in use only as we
conceive amongst the Brethren of the Congregationall way, we mean all those
that separate from the world at the Lords Table (for the word, Independent, is
very unbecomeing Churches or Creatures, it was Cast-in by the enemy and
adversary of all righteousness) we were saying because this way, and these
meetings lie open to much Obloquie, from that wicked one, the Father of lies,
and all His Children; as that these meetings are the Nurse, or vis plastica,
the very fomenting Cause of errors and heresies; besides it Charge the Holy
Brethren with separation, or making a schism or Rent from their Brethren, and
so in a manner excommunicates them from their Company.

We intend, with Gods help, to speak something to this, but because this
part of our work has exceeded its proportion, the gravity and weight of the
matters here under debate and maintenance so requiring, we think it fit to
defer it to the Last, and to close with it, and our Spirits, if the Lord be
pleased, altogether, and all in one; for we intend to turne-in unto you after
our manner at the end of our work.

Now in the Close of this Chapter we would speak to the Christian Reader
(whose eternal good is full in our eye, which makes us to bend after it night
and day) in our Reinolds words; Though we may have our Minister's leave and
free admission to the Lords Table, yet let us not venture to receive such sacred
things with unwashed hands, as matters of mere Custom, fashion, or
formalitie; But let us look unto that High Authority, That ordained them; on
that holy Mouth That Blessed them; on That Arm of Mercy, That exhibits them,
being ever assured, That as Christ has one hand of Bounty and Redemption,
which reaches forth life to the worthy Receivers, So has He another of
Justice and power ready to avenge the injuries and Contempt that shall be done
to His own holy Institution.

A little after he speaks to Ministers and people; to Ministers; Let not your
hands again play the Judas by delivering Him again unto Jewish and sinful
souls, which will Crucify again unto themselves the Lord of glory. To us the
people, Let not us take His precious blood into our hands, rather to shed it
than to drink it; and by Receiving the body of Christ unworthily, make it as
the sop was to Judas, even an Harbenger to provide room for Satan.

Who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know
them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the Just shall walk in them,
but the transgressors shall fall therein. That ye may be such, we Commend you
all to God; and the word of His Grace, which is able to build-you: up, and to
give you an inheritance among all that are sanctified. The Lord Jesus Christ be
with your Spirits. Grace be with you, AMEN.



FINIS.

