THE METHOD OF GRACE in the JUSTIFICATION OF Sinners.

Being a REPLY to a Book written by Mr. William Air of Salisbury: Entitled,
Vindiciae Justificationis Gratuitae, Or the Free Justification of a SINNER
justified.

Wherein the Doctrine contained in the said Book, is proved to be Subversive
both of Law and Gospel, contrary to the consent of Protestants. And
inconsistent with it self.

And the Ancient Apostolic Protestant Doctrine of Justification by Faith
asserted.

By Benjamin Woodbridge Minister of Newbery.

Romans ^. 16 Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace.

Exodus 24. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Edmund Paxton in Paul's Chain, right
over against the Castle Tavern, near Doctors Commons, 1656.

THE EPISTLE to the Reader.
Reader,
BEfore thou enter upon the ensuing Discourse, it is necessary that I premise
something for thy information, 1. Concerning my Sermon. 2. Concerning Mr. Eyres
answer. 3. Concerning this Reply.

1. For the first, Mr. Air having already acquainted thee with the time when
it was preached, I shall only give thee a more faithful account of the occasion
of preaching it, and of some passages in it. The Providence of God, which
rules all our ways and motions, directed me to the City of New Sarum at such
a time, when it fell to Mr. Thomas Warrens turn to preach the weekly Lecture
there; whose Sermon, (as it well deserves) is since printed; and in it thou
may read those certain, necessary and important truths which he then
insisted on. Mr Air withstood him vehemently, not without the great
disturbance and grief of many, to whom the Word of Truth is precious and
amiable. I had formerly been a Preacher in that ^ity, for some time together;
but was at that time detained there full ^ore against my will, by the surprizal
of a Chronical distemper, which gave time and occasion to many of my
acquaintance to visit me, and to desire me, (as I then could) to set my seal
publicly to the truth of the Gospel, which accordingly I did in that Sermon,
which is here vindicated against Mr Air I was earnestly importuned by many
worthy Ministers and Christians to print my Sermon; whose desires
nevertheless, I refused to gratify; partly, because I could not be wrought to
esteem of it, as they did: principally, out of respect to Mr. Air himself
whose weaknesses I was unwilling should be made so public by my means. One
Copy indeed I promised for the private use of some Christians, which
accordingly, when I was returned home, I wrote hastily, and sent to them,
reserving no Transcript of it in my own hands. After some weeks, (how many, I
cannot now justly tell) I was informed, that they, who had the perusal of that
Copy, were resolved to send it up to London; and if it found the like
Approbation there, as in the Country, to commit it to the Press: When I heard
this, considering how many judicious Ministers had solicited me to print it,
and how many more might pass judgment upon it before it should be printed; I
was resolved to meddle nor make no more in the business, but leave it wholly
to the judgment of others; which I speak for the vindication of Reverend Mr.
Cranford, (who was pleased to give himself the trouble of prefixing an Epistle
to my Sermon; for which respect to me, then altogether a stranger to him (as I
yet also am, having never seen his face, nor he mine, as I know of) I do hereby
return him that acknowledgement which I owe him) when he tells the Reader, that
it was not by my means that my Sermon was printed. And whosoever he was that
assured * Mr Air of In his book p. 38.
any other hand that I had in the printing of the said Sermon, then as I have
here related, spoke without book.

Soon after the printing of mine, Mr. Air published a Sermon of his own
preached at the following Assizes. In his Epistle to the Reader he complains
much of my unchristian language, especially that I should say he was
obstreperous; and produces a Certificate under six witnesses hands, living (as
I am informed, for I know not all the men) in the County of Dorset, the County
of Wilts, and the City of Sarum, of his saire deportment in that opposition
which he made against me in the public meeting place, after Sermon was ended.
I acknowledge the word to be somewhat homely, and such as if I had printed
against Mr. Air, I should have forborne; and seeing it gives him such offense,
do publicly recant it; (for, it is not only there, but, as I remember, thrice
in his book that he takes notice of it, with a most sufficient Talio,)
Nevertheless, if he will give it another term, I shall own the accusation,
and be content that it be tried by number of witnesses too. I do therefore
assure thee (Reader) that many Christians in that City, (whom Mr. Air would
heretofore have accounted worthy of belief, though now I think he will allow
them no better testimony then that they go for Professors) having considered
in what formalitie Mr. Air proceeded against me, took themselves bound in
conscience to testify what they had seen and known, and sent me of their own
accord a large letter, subscribed with all their hands, (which were very many
more then those which Mr. Air procured to certify for him* a^^esting fully
and particularly the thing I charged him with; assuring me also, that if need
had been, they could quickly have doubled their numbers in the same testimony.
This letter I also showed to some of my neighboring Ministers, that they might
be my witnesses, (if called thereto) that I report the truth. Yet, though I
acknowledge my self beholding to them that sent me the letter, for their love
and respects to me, I will by no means make use of their testimony; as not
esteeming my credit worthy to be redeemed with the least damage that may befall
them, by the evil eye of others on the weather-side of them.

But out of my own mouth will Mr. Air condemn me; because when he brake off
the conference, I used those words of the Apostle, Gal. 4. 12. Be ye as I am,
for I am as you are; you have not wronged me at all; which words I understood,
when I spoke them in no other sense then Dr. Presto^ somewhere gives of them,
as not reckoning of his opposition against me, or his unfair dealing therein,
so as to entertain any enmity in my heart against him. Forgive me this wrong.

2. Yet if I in this word have been uncivil with Mr. Air, he has made himself
a sufficient recompense in his Answer to me: having drawn the lines of his
grave censures quite through me, and round about me, characterizing, (as he
sees fit) my Page 165. sect. 8
heart, Page 100. sect. 11.
intentions, soul and body, my very Page 165.
face, and Epist ^^ the Reader, page 1, 2. and ^^bi p^ssion.
statur^ not excepted. All which things trouble me the less, because I have
such companions in these reproaches, as I do not dare to compare my self with
the meanest of them. As not only Mr. Cranford, Mr. Baxter, my brother, but all
that stand in his way, that is, the maine body of Protestants, who have wrote
upon this subject, ever since the name of Protestant was known upon the earth.
But it is somewhat strange to me, to observe what measure Mr. Air meteth to
all that cannot veil to his judgment. If Mr Baxter lay down principles
inconsistent with his, he must be represented as an Arminian, a Papist, a
Socinian, and what not? If a faithful Christian, (and that in Mr. Eyres own
judgment, though none of the meanest rank of Christians neither) do but ask
him a question, and that with all due respect, he must be bid to Page 9, 10.
-- I will not english the words for very shame. The Profession there following
will never be believed after such premises; nor will they be any salve for such
a public putting to shame, and spitting in the face of a member of Christ. If
my brother declare himself against his notions, he must be Page 84.
printed as a desertor of his Church in New England, for the love of a better
Parsonage in old. Durus Sermo I could name many Ministers, that since these
times have returned from thence hither, and have gained ten times more by their
return then my brother has, or is ever like to do; were they all desertors of
their Churches for fatter morsels? If a man should print of Mr. Air, that he
is of late grown an enemy to Epist dedic. the Council of War before his Sermon.
Tithes, that (if they be sold) he might add some of them to his former
Purchases: or if they be put into a public treasury, he might take of them
more liberally, in the more reformed way of a State maintenance; or because he
envies bread to every Minister that cannot hold pace with him in the way he
goes, and would have them all at his mercy: If (I say) a man should print these
things of Mr. Air, I should verily account him a slanderer, unless he were
able to prove it better, then (I am sure) Mr. Air can prove his charge against
my brother. He finds fault with my brothers argument, because de occultis non
judicat Ecclesia: and yet is his own practice faultlesse, in judging of that
which the Church may not judge of, I mean the intentions of a man's heart? It
concerns not me to praise my brother; his own innocence in many years
Profession of Christ, is a sufficient defense to him against a thousand such
calumniations; nor is he mindful to take so much notice of Mr. Eyres language,
as to give him an answer; but content, without envying Mr. Air his great
yearly revenews, to serve God with cheerfulness in his poverty; only for his
arguments, Mr. Air has taken them up upon trust, (which was not fair
dealing) and his informer has misrepresented them. I had them, and a
Vindication of them under my brothers hand, and was intended to have printed
them, as not fearing what Mr. Air or any man else could rationally have
excepted against them: but finding my book to be of it self grown beyond that
proportion which I intended, I have omitted it.

In his answer to me, (to leave these personal matters, which can be neither
grateful nor profitable to the Reader,) how often be dasheth himself against
himself; and in the whole scope of his Discourse, opposes himself against the
body of Protestant Divines, the Reader may in some measure see in this Reply.
So little cause has he to charge the doctrine, which my self or others
maintain against him, with a compliance with Popery. If I delighted in
recriminations, I could tell him, that his doctrine of eternal reconciliation
is Socinianisme: that his denial of the elect to be at any time punished for
their sin is Calv. instr. advers. Lib ^ti^ cap ^4 page (mihi) 181.
Libertinisme: as also that God is well pleased with some men in the midst of
all their ungodliness. That his denying of the Chap 1 1. p. ^10. compared
with. 7.
Law, any power to hold the transgressors of it under an obligation to the
punishment which it threateneth, is Antinomianisme. Page 152.. 6.
That the death of Christ tends not to the procuring of our Justification. Page
62.
That sins are pardoned in nature and time before Christ's satisfaction. Page
122.
That sinners have no more right to salvation after their believing then
before: with many other Paradoxes of like complexion, are Anti-Gospelism, and
may (for ought I know) outvie the most pernicious doctrines amongst the
Romanists. As for his other charge of Arminianisme, the Lord knows, and my own
soul knows, to my daily shame and sorrow, I have as little reason as any man to
expect Justification in a Popish or Arminian way. Nevertheless, I am
altogether proselyted to renowned Bp. Davenants judgment, concerning the
extent and effects of the death of Christ, (if that be Arminianisme) especially
since I read Daylee's late Vindication of Amyrald against Spanhemius. And the
chief reason that enclines me to it, besides the evidence of truth, is the
advantage I have thereby to give a clear and smooth answer to all the
Scriptures, which the Arminians are wont to use in defense of their cause.

It is true, Mr. Air alleges the testimonies of some Divines, as speaking
seemingly for him. But that the same Divines do elsewhere more plainly speak
against him, has been so fully evidenced by Mr. Baxter, Mr. Warren, and
blessed Mr. Graile, that I cannot account it worth while to take a particular
view of his testimonies. Only I intended to take some special notice of two of
his Authors, viz. Robert Parker, (my Reverend Grandfather,) and renowned Dr.
Twisse. As to that passage which Mr. Air has picked out of my Grandfathers
book, De descensu Christi ad inferos, it has been already so cleared both by
Mr. Warren and Mr. Baxter, that I am persuaded if Mr. Air were to write his
book again, he would quit the hold he takes on those words. Much less would he
have declared so tragically against me, as if I had no less then justified my
Grandfathers persecutors in all their injurious and unworthy dealings against
him, in writing for that truth which he never denied. But if I do anything
unworthy of the name and memory of that Reverend man, (who yet was never
persecuted for his book De descensu; much less for being supposed to be an
abettor of the Justification of impenitent and unbelieving sinners,) Mr. Air
might have thought it no greater fault in me, then in his own and only son,
my Reverend and much honored Uncle Mr. Thomas Parker, (vir omni exceptione
major) who has taught me long since, that De traduct. peccat. ad vitam. these.
5. 6.
Conditio (reconciliationis) a part nostra, est Christi receptio, the
condition of reconciliation on our part, is our receiving of Christ, which must
first be done, -- Cum ex ea tanquam medio praerequisito reconciliatio ineatur,
because it is a means praerequisite to our reconciliation. As for Dr. Twisse,
if he were capable of receiving any addition of honor by my testimony, I
should be more ambitious to perform it then Mr. Air could be desirous of the
favor of his Ep. dedic.
most noble Senators. I may not deny that I had bestowed some pains in
comparing the Doctors expressions in several places: but it pleased God to
stir up a far better hand, In his Preface to Mr. G^ayles book.
Mr. Constant Jessop, a learned, faithful, suffering servant and Minister of
Jesus Christ, to do the Doctor the honor of vindicating his judgment and
doctrine, from those general misreports and misapprehensions that went abroad
of him.

Something I should alsospeak concerning Mr. Eyres marginal quotations, which
are many of them false, as I was once intended to have showed the Reader in a
List. But considering that the difference of Volumes or Editions, in which his
Authors are extant, may breed a mistake of some; and that the Printer tells us,
Mr. Air was not able to overlook the Press; and so through the error of
that, others might be mistaken, I have thought fit to forbear.

3. As for this my Reply, though the Authors above mentioned, and Mr. Eedes
besides, (who yet has misrepresented me, in reporting that I deny faith to be
an evidence of our Justification) coming all out so long before me, may seem to
make my undertaking needless; yet I was loath to deceive the expectations of so
many, as had so long waited for my Reply. The truth is, I had soon drawn up the
sum of my answer, so far as I was sure that I understood Mr. Air aright.
That I made no more haste to the Press, the Reasons were, 1. The incessant
emploiments I have had, both at home and abroad, which have made me incapable
of following works of this nature so close as they should be. 2. The frequent
and long-continuing bodily infirmities, which have kept me from writing many
weeks together. 3. While the controversy was hot, I was willing to see whether
any thing would come out pro or con, that might occasion any new enquiries. I
hear of none but Mr. Robertson, (who threateneth us with a few pedantick
Scoticismes) and Mr. Crandon against Mr. Baxter, whom (for the report I had
heard of the man) I greedily desired to read. But lighting by accident upon
his discourse, about the afflictions which befall the godly in this life. I
found him vox and praeterea nihil, and so leave him to those Readers, who can
be edified by his melody.

Mr. Eyres Comment upon the title page of my Sermon I pass over. His
digression in chap. 2. about public disputes with the Ministers, will have
some more cautions before it pass for canonical, if ever it be his lot to be
exercised in that way, as much as some worthy Ministers have been, in some
Churches which I have known. In my Reply to his Arguments I have faithfully set
down the strength of his argument, though not every word in every place. And so
(Reader) I commend thee, and this my writing, unto the blessing of him, who
will one day own it for his truth, and thee for a child of truth, if thou
walk in it.

BENJAMIN WOODBRIDGE.

THE METHOD OF GRACE IN THE JUSTIFICATION OF SINNERS.
CHAP. I.
An Answer to M. Eyres 6. chap. The Question stated. Justification what.
Justification by Faith what. The consent of Protestants in making Faith the
condition of Justification. Or an instrumental cause thereof. Proved also by
the confessions of several Churches.

SECT. I.
IN our entrance upon the discussion of the present Question, namely, whether a
sinner be justified in. 1.
the sight of God before he believe, or not till he believe, I must crave leave
to digress a little from Master Eyres method: who first gives his answer to
those Texts produced in my Sermon, for proof of our Justification by Faith, in
his fifth Chapter: and then states the Question in his sixth and seventh. I
shall therefore first examine those two Chapters (beginning here with the
former) and so proceed to the entire Vindication of my Sermon by it self.

In the stating of the Question, these three things are to be dispatched, 1.
What Justification is? 2. What it is to be justified by Faith: or what is the
office of Faith in Justification? 3. What is meant by the phrase In the sight
of God, or before God, when we enquire concerning the Justification of a sinner
before God, or in Gods sight?

For the first, when we enquire what Justification is, it is supposed. 2.
that the word Justification is taken properly, and in sensu formali, not in a
diminutive, comparative or tropical sense, Analogum per se positum stat pro
famosiori significato. The Reason why I observe this, is, because Master Air
pretends to his Reader, that I have no less then yielded the cause, when I
grant a Justification purposed of God, and merited by Christ before Faith: So
then (says he, page 147.) by his own confession, Justification in a Scripture
sense goes before Faith: which is that horrid opinion he has all this while so
eagerly opposed, and page 101. challenges some one text of Scripture to prove
that Justification does in no sense precede the act of Faith.

Whereas I doubt not but the world may be said to be from eternity in some
sense, namely in reference to the counsel and purpose of God. And he that is
never justified at all, simply, may yet notwithstanding be said to be justified
in some sense, that is, comparatively, as being less unjust then another, Jer.
3. 11. And many of those who are now alive, and never yet tasted of death, may
nevertheless be said to be already risen from the dead in some sense, to wit,
in Christ, the first fruits of them that slept. And Justification it self may
be called condemnation in some sense for the Scots say a man is justified when
he is hanged: and the word seems to be used in a sense not much unlike, Romans
6. 7. He that is dead, is justified from sin. If Master Air do indeed think
(which I am persuaded he does not) that the Question between him and me is,
whether the wit of man cannot invent some sense wherein Justification may be
said to go before Faith: he should have acquainted his Reader with it here, in
the ^stating of the Question: and not have kept him ignorant of any such
controversy between us, till he is come toward the later end of his book.

Wherein the particular nature and formality of this glorious blessing. 3.
of Justification does consist, is more particularly debated in the following
discourse. Yet that the Reader may know what Justification it is which we speak
of, I shall here speak something briefly for explication of it: leaving
whatsoever is controverted, to be proved in its proper place. Justification
then by our late Reverend Larger Catech. page 94. in 12.
Assembly is thus defined. An act of Gods free grace unto sinners, in which he
pardons all their sins, accepts and accounts their persons righteous in
his sight, not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, but only for the
perfect obedience and full satisfaction of Christ, by God imputed to them, and
received by Faith alone. This for substance, is the Justification which the
Question speaks of: if thou would have it (Reader) more particularly, take
it as follows.

The efficient ( ut quod) of our Justification is God himself that justifies:.
4.
and his grace the efficient ut quo, for he justifies us freely of his grace,
Romans 3. 24. Jesus Christ also as King and Lord of life, is joined by special
commission with the Father in his great Act of justifying sinners, John 5. 22.
26, 27. Acts 5. 31. Matthew. 28. 18, 19. with Mark 16. 15, 16. and Luke 24. 47.
The righteousness and obedience of Jesus Christ is the only meritorious cause
of our Justification; but whether his active or passive obedience, either, or
both, I do not dispute, nor do I account it needful: because all the active
obedience of Christ was passive (for it was part of his humiliation, that being
See Bp. Usher. Imman. page 10, at the end of his Body of Divinity.
a Son, he would subject himself to the payment of that tribute of obedience
which was due only from servants) and all his passive obedience was active:
for he laid down his life of himself, John 10. 18. The formality of
Justification consists (as I take it) in a legal discharge of a sinner from his
obligation to punishment, and a donation of right and title to eternal life:
which discharge and gift, because it was merited by the obedience of Christ,
without any contribution of merit from the sinner himself, is truly called the
Christi justitia in justificatione fidelibus imputatur, quatenus ejus merito
justi coram Deo reputamur. Ames. Medul. Theol. l. 1. c. 27. th. 12.
imputation of Christ's righteousness: and this is the sense of that phrase in
the use of our Divines. And these things I here take for granted, reserving the
proof of what is disputable in them to its proper place.

SECT. II.
THe second and more material labor is to explain, in what sense. 5.
we are said to be justified by Faith. Mr. Air gives us five senses of the
phrase; first, of those that take Faith in a tropical and figurative sense, as
thus: We are justified by Faith, i. e. by the obedience and righteousness of
Jesus Christ, in whom we believe, and upon whom we rest for life and
righteousness. Secondly, of those which say we are justified by Faith
instrumentally and relatively. Thirdly, Of the Papists, who ascribe a
meritoriousnesse to Faith, and do also make our Justification to be by inherent
righteousness, or doing of righteous actions. Foutthly, of the Arminians who
explode the word Merit, and deliver their opinion to this effect. That God in
the legal Covenant required the exact obedience of all his Commandments: but
now in the Covenant of Grace he requires Faith; which in his gracious
acceptance stands instead of that obedience to the Moral Law, which we ought
to perform. Fifthly, of those that say that Faith does justify as a condition
or Antecedent qualification, by which we are made capable of being justified
according to the order and constitution of God.

The last of these is that which I contend for, according to the explication
given of it in my Sermon, page 9. and 10. which why Master Air should account
a new opinion, and charge it here upon Master Baxter, and elsewhere upon Doctor
Hammond as the first parents and patrons of it, I know not; much less, why he
should so very often accuse it as a piece of Arminianisme and Popery, seeing it
is a thing so well known, that the Synod of Dort, and almost all our
Protestants do very frequently call Faith the condition of our Justification. (
De reconcil. pecc. par 1. l. 2. cap. 18. page 99. 100.
) Mr. Wotton does purposely dispute for it: and has saved me the labor of
transcribing the testimonies of many famous Protestants, who say the same:
either in express terms; as Fox, Perkins, Paraeus, Trelcatius, G. Downham, J.
Downham, Scha^pius, Tho. Mathewes: or equivalent, as Calvin, Aretius Sadeel,
Olevia^, M^lancthon, Beza, to whom I might add, ( Disser. de morte Christi.
page 63. Est autem hic ordo stabilit^s, haec conditio express posita in
^vangelio, quod reconciliationis gratia and beneficium vitae aeternae ad
peccatores ex morte Ch^isti redundaret, si crederent. Idem in praelect. de
Just. Habit. and act. page 395 and 396.
) Davenant, ( Collat. cum Til page 6^7. ^taque in vocatione aliam habet fides
rationem quam in Justificatione: nam in Justificatione conditio est
praerequisita (ut ita dicam) in vocatione gignitur: and fusius, in Disput. de
satisfact. page 365.
) Cameron, ( Praelect. Controv. 2. de not. Eccles. Q. 5. page 331. in 4. Cum
primum credo, tum justus sum: and cum justus sum, tum credo: veluti si malefico
cuiquam veniz cum hac condition proponatur, si eam amplecti velit, etc. and
Praelect. de Sacram. cap. 4. Promissio gratiae conditionalis est, requirit enim
fidem, etc.
) Whitaker, ( De vocat page 16, 17. Reliquum est, ut videamus foederis gratuiti
conditionem, ea au^em sola est sides. Deus promittit justificationem and vitam
sub condition fidei: and passim.
) Rollock, ( Syntag. Theol. l. 4. c. 10. de Evang. page 1106. Promissiones
Evangelii de remissione peccatorum and vita aeterna pertinen: quidem ad omnes
homines, non tamen ab^olute, sed sub condition apprehensionis per fidem: and
infra ibid. verum absolutae tamen non sunt, sed hac condition circumscriptae,
ut credant in Christum.
) Grotius, ( De Evang Decad. 4 ^. 1. page 238, Proposuit enim Deus Christum
propitiationem, nimirum ut is esset r^conciliatio nostra, propter quem placatus
nos adoptat in filios Dei. Verum non alia ratione quam per fidem in ejus
sanguinem, id est, si credamus, etc.
) Bullinger, ( De remi^s. peccat. cap. 6. page (mihi) 621. Discernendum inter
eam gratiam Dei quae nullas haber adjectas conditiones, qualis est, quod s^lem
suum producit super bones and malos, pluitque super gratos and ingratos: and
eam quae conditionaliter confertur, ad quem modum peccatorum nobis remissio
contingit and cap. 4. Quibus condition bus peccata remittantur, per tot. and
passim.
) Musculus, ( System. Theol. tom. 2. page 247. ad obj. 5. Promissiones
Evangelii semper requirere Conditionem fidei, d^mus.
) Brochmand, ( These Salmur. part. prior. de Justif. These. 37. fide igitur
justificamur, non tanquam part aliqua Justitiae. etc. -- sed tanquam
Condition foederis gratiae, quam a nobis Deus exigit loco conditionis foederis
legalis.
) the Professors of Summers in France, ( S^hol. in Luc. cap 11. Deus promisit
nobis remissionem cum hac Condition, si nos prius remiserimus proximo, etc.
) Piscator, ( Open. Tom. 1 page 420. and 4^3. vide loca.
) Wallaeus, ( In Thoms. Diat^ib. page 148. Promissiones de fine sunt
conditiona^ae, etc. vide locum and passim.
) Abbot, ( Christ. Theol. lib. 1. cap 22. ad These 2 Promissio remissioni^
peccatorum and vitae aete^^ae sub condition fid^i, etc.
) Wendeline, ( Of the Covenant, page 66. and elsewhere frequently, only
mislikes the term in some respect, because it seems to take away all
causality from Faith in the matter of Justification, and therefore chooses
rather to call it an Instrument then a Condition.
) Ball, ( Treatise of Justif. S^ct. 2. cap. 1.
) Pemble, ( In Ephesians. 2. page 250.
) Bayne, ( Vo^st. loc. com. ^x cap. 3. ad Romans page 23 Tit. 6. Mr. Blake of the
Covenant cap. 6. page 26. Mr. Bulkley of the Covenan^, part. 4. cap. 1.
) and many others.

All which being considered, I shall neither account it Popery nor Arminianisme
to maintain, that Faith is the condition of our Justification before God: till
Master Air has proved, that it cannot be made a condition, but it must withal
be made a meritorious cause: or that to make it the condition of the imputation
of Christ's righteousness to a sinner, be to deny that Christ's righteousness
is at all imputed to a sinner: or to affirm, that God of his grace does accept
of Faith as our legal righteousness (which is a palpable contradiction.) None
of which he has performed in his book, nor ever will do.

When he distinguishes those that take Faith objectively, from those that make
it an instrument in Justification, it is a distinction without. 6.
a difference, on purpose to impose upon the Reader, as if they were two sorts
of Authors, whereas the very same men that take Faith objectively, for Christ
believed on, do yet universally make Faith an Instrument in our Justification.
Our Protestants do indeed maintain against the Papists (and that most truly)
that the righteousness of Christ is the meritorious cause of our Justification;
or the righteousness for which we are justified: but the same Authors do as
unanimously affirm: that Faith is the instrumental cause thereof, (though
otherwhile they call it a condition, and most use the words promiscuously.)
Thus ( Instit. l. 3. c. 14.. 17.
) Calvin, ( Epist. 45. p. 210.
) Beza, ( Loc. com. clas. 3. cap. 4.. 47, 48.
) Peter Martyr, ( Explic. cat. par. 2. q. 61. 3. page 399.
) Vrsine, ( These. Theol. cap. 35. 11.
) Junius, ( Synt. Theol. l. 6. c. 36. p 456.
) Polaenus, ( De Justif. per. fid. cap. 4.. 64. and Sect. 6.. 153.
) Gerhard, ( Enchyr. Theol. p. 134.
) Hemmingius, ( Synops. pur. Theol. disp. 33. 27.
) the four Leyden Professors, ( In Heb. page 486.
) Hyperius, ( Meth. Theol. p. 227.
) Sohnius, ( Harm. Evang. p. 279. and Exam. Conc. Trid. ses. 6.
) Kemnitius, ( Loc. Com. 31. 33.
) Bucanus, and all the rest that ever I read, both Lutherans and Calvinists:
voting concurrently for Faiths antecedency to Justification.

At last Mr. Air gives us his own sense of Justification by Faith, in. 7.
these words.

My sense of this Proposition ( we are justified by Faith) is no other then
what has been given by all our ancient Protestant Divines, who take Faith
herein objectively, not properly, and explain themselves to this effect. We are
justified from all sin and death by the satisfaction and obedience of Jesus
Christ, who is the sole object or foundation of our faith: or, whose
righteousness we receive and apply to our selves by Faith. Yet I say, it does
not follow that it was not applied to us by God, or that God did not impute
righteousness to us before we had Faith.

If Mr. Air had concluded as he began, leaving out the exception which brings
up the rear, and understanding our ancient Protestants in their known sense:
this one sentence had confuted all his book, and saved me the pains of such an
undertaking. It is most true, that our Protestants maintain that we are
justified by the obedience of Christ as the meritorious cause of our
Justification: and it is as true, that they maintain a sinner to be justified
by Faith as the instrument or condition of his justification. Nor can I find
one amongst the ancient Protestants, that did ever dream of a Justification by
the righteousness of Christ without Faith: no, though for the most part they
place Faith in a particular assurance. To the single testimonies already
mentioned, let us add a few more out of the Confessions, that the difference
between our Protestants and Master Air may the better appear.

We begin with the ( O^thodox. Tig. eccles. Minist. confess. Tract. 2. fol. 43,
44.
) Tigurine Confession. Nullis humanis vel operibus 8.
vel meritis, sed per solam Dei gratiam, id est, per sanctam illam crucifixi
filii Dei passionem, and innocentem mortem, homines justitiam consequi, and
peccatis mundari docemus: and quod mortis Christi innocentiae and meriti
participes tunc reddamur, cum Dei filium nostrum esse, and propter peccata
nostra, ut nos nimirum justos and beatos redderet, mortem subiisse, vera and
constanti fide credimus. To the same purpose the ( Corp. and Synt. Confess. fid.
p. 45.
) Helvetian Confession, Proprie ergo loquendo, etc. To speak properly, God
alone does justify us, and justifies us only for Christ's sake, not imputing
to us our sins, but imputing to us his righteousness. But because we receive
this justification, not by any works, but by faith in Gods mercy, and in
Christ; therefore we teach and believe with the Apostle, that a sinner is
justified by Faith alone in Christ, not by the Law or any works. -- Therefore
because Faith receives Christ our righteousness, and attributes all to the
grace of God in Christ, therefore Justification is ascribed to Faith,
principally because of Christ, and not because it is our work: to the same
purpose, page 89.. 13. The ( Gallic. confess. ibid. p. 105,. 20.
) French Confession agrees, Credimus nos, etc. We believe that by Faith alone
we are made partakers of this righteousness: as it is written, that he
suffered to obtain salvation for us, that whosoever believes on him should
not perish. The ( Ibid. p. 128. ^. 11.
) English consent. Tantum propter, etc. Only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, not for our works and merits, are we reputed
just before God. So ( Ib. p. 157. 25.
) Scotland, Sed qui cord, etc. They that do in heart sincerely believe, and
with their mouth confess Jesus Christ, do most certainly receive those
blessings: First in this life remission of sins, and that by Faith alone in
the blood of Christ. The ( Ib. p. 173, 22,
) Belgic Confession in like manner, Merito igitur jureque dicimus, etc. We do
therefore well and rightly say with Paul, that we are justified only by Faith:
or by Faith without the works of the Law. But to speak properly, we do by no
means understand Faith it self, by it self, or of it self to justify us: as
which is only, as it were, an Instrument by which we apprehend Christ our
righteousness. Christ then himself is our righteousness, who imputes to us
all his merits: but Faith is the Instrument by which we are coupled unto him in
the society and communion of all his good things, and are continued therein. Of
the same Faith are all the other ( Argent p. 223 c. 3. Part. 2. August. p. 22,
c. 1. Sax^n. p. 79, 80, 81. Wi^^emberg. p. 14^ c de justif. Palate p. 210. si
^emissionem.
) Churches whose Confessions follow. Thus ( Just. lib. 3 c. 11.. 10.
) Calvin, Fateor hoc tam incomparabili beno nos privari, donec Christus noster
fiat. -- Non ergo eum extra nos procul speculamur, ut nobis imputetur ejus jus^
itia: sed quia ipsum induimus and insiti sumus in ejus corpus, unum denique nos
secum efficere dignatus est, ideo justitiae societatem nobis cum to esse
gloriamur. Thus Ubi supra, Epist. 45.
Beza. Quae obedientia (Christi, viz.) nobis per fidem Christo unitis datur,
nostraque fit per imputationem. Loc. com. clas. 3. c. 4.. 65.
Thus Peter Martyr. Si quid Deus condonat vel remittit, id facit hominibus jam
regeneratis, non autem a se alienis and filiis irae, quales necesse est eos
esse qui nondum sunt justificati. Istis (inquam) nihil remittitur. Quare
obligati sunt ad ^mnia. And thus all our more ancient Protestants, that I can
read: but it is a tedious thing to me to transcribe so much of humane
testimony: and what is written is sufficient to demonstrate that Mr. Air
differs from our ancient Protestants (notwithstanding his pretended agreement)
almost as far on the one hand, as the Papists do on the other, in the very
foundations of his discourse.

For first, it is manifest by the testimonies produced, that our Protestants,
when they plead for Justification by the righteousness of Christ, intend the
very first act of Justification: which Mr. Air rejects, and ascribes no more
to the righteousness of Christ, then that it obtaines the effects of our
justification, but not the Act, page 62.. 4. 2. Our Protestants do so plead for
Justification by the righteousness of Christ, as that they require and assert
the necessary existence of Faith in us, as the instrument, or condition or
antecedent of our Justification. Mr. Air contends for a Justification by the
righteousness of Christ, without Faith at present coexisting. 3. They plead
for a Justification which begins upon believing, and therefore must needs be a
transient, not an immanent act of God. He, for a Justification which is an
Augustan. Confess. de fide. p. 21. Non est hic opus disputationibus de
praedestinatione aut similibus.
immanent act, and included in the decree of election as part of it, page 65..
5. 4. They when they speak of Justification by Faith, mean Justification
before God: He, the manifestation and declaration thereof only to the
conscience. So that Mr. Eyres opinion, and that of the ancient Protestants look
so little like Contrymen, that it may not expect to be owned by them, though
it challenge kindred of them.

CHAP. II.
An Answer to Mr. Eyres seventh Chapter. What is meant by Gods sight. Two parts
or degrees thereof. Mr. Eyres Exposition contradicts it self and the Truth.
Gods Will or Purpose never called by the name of Justification in Scripture.
The consequences which Mr. Air denies to follow, upon his doctrine, necessary
and unavoidable. A large enquiry, whether Justification consist in Gods Purpose
not to punish. Imputation and non-imputation, what in the use of Scripture.
Gods electing love no Justification, Romans 8. 33. answered. Several Arguments,
proving, that Justification is not Gods purpose of not punishing. The four
objections which Mr. Air makes against himself, not answered by him. Not the
first. Nor the second. Nor the third. Nor the fourth of Mr. Eyres second and
third Proposition.

SECT. I.
NExt we shall enquire, what it is to be justified before God, or in Gods
sight. (...). Gal. 3. 11. or (...), Romans 3. 20. by which the Septuagint render
the Hebrew, (...) Psalm. 143. 2. a word that has many faces and significations
in Drus observat. cap. 17.
Scripture: But in the matter of Justification, (which is a forensical term,
unless the whole body of our Protestants be mistaken) it signifies as much as
Gods judgment. As to be justified in man's sight, or before men, is to be
justified in man's judgment, or for man to justify, and to be righteous in a
man's own eyes, is to be righteous in a man's own judgment, or to justify a
man's self: In like manner, to be justified in Gods sight, is to be justified
in Gods judgment, or for God to justify. Compare 1 Cor. 4. 4. Luke 16. 15.
Numb. 32. 22. and many other places. Now this judgment of God, is either a
judgment of justice, by which no flesh living shall be justified, Psalm. 143.
2. or a judgment of mercy and grace, 2 Samuel 22. 25, 26. Col. 1. 22. Heb. 13.
21. by which only a sinner can be justified; or stand in the sight, presence
and judgment of God.

In this judgment of God, we consider these two degrees or parts.. 2.
The first is that (...), as the Apostle calls it, Romans 1. 32. Jus b Vid Joh.
Dri^d. de capt. and Redempt. c. 2. mem. 3. and de Reg. and dogmat. Sac. Script
l. 3. p. 96, 97.
Dei, that Rule, Law, or Constitution of God, determining of rewards and
penalties, (whence Gods Precepts, Statutes, Threatenings and Promises, are so
often called in Scripture his judgments) The second is the sentence, which God
the righteous Judge shall pass upon all men, according to this Law, (...), in
the day of judgment. Accordingly, my opinion is, that a sinner is justified in
Gods sight, either ipso jure, by the Law or Constitution of grace, the
immediate effect whereof is to give the sinner a right to impunity, and to the
heavenly inheritance; or by the sentence of the Judge at the last day, by which
he is adjudged unto the immediate, full and perfect possession of all those
immunities and blessings, which were given him in right by that grand Promise
of the Gospel, John. 3. 16. He that believes on me, shall not perish; but
shall have everlasting life. Even as amongst men, an Act of grace and pardon
gives imprisoned rebels a right to deliverance from their present, and legally
future punishments: though the effects of this right he do not possess (any
otherwise then in hope) till his cause be tried, and himself absolved in Court,
by the sentence of the Judge. In reference to the former, a sinner is justified
presently upon believing: in reference to the latter, he is not justified till
the day of judgment. Therefore Peter exhorts the Jews to repentance, that
their sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
Presence of God, And he shall send Jesus Christ, Acts 3. 19, 20. And Paul prays
for Onesiphorus, that God would grant him, that he may find mercy of the Lord
in that day, 2 Timothy 1. 18. which (questionless) is meant of the day of
judgment: of which himself also speaks a little before, ver. 12. I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against
that day. And in the name of all Christians he tells us, Gal. 5. 5. That we by
the Spirit do wait for the hope of righteousness by faith: that is,
Justification through faith, as it stands in opposition to Justification by
works, ver. 4. and throughout the whole Epistle. So does the Lord Jesus promise
to him that overcomes, a white stone, Rev. 2. 17. Vid. Paraeum Aretium.
Brightman. D^od Eng. Annot. in loc.
which having allusion to the custom of the Romans in judgment, condemning
by a black stone, and absolving by a white, does therefore signify that
eminent, eternal and universal absolution from all guilt, which shall be given
to the Saints that overcome, and continue faithful to the end. So Romans 2, 13,
16. Not the hearers of the Law, but the doers of the Law shall be justified, --
In the day when God shall judge the secrets of me^ by Jesus Christ (the 14. and
15. verses are to be read in a parenthesis.)

This is my opinion in this matter: which I have therefore set down the more
distinctly, that Mr. Air may understand, how ignorant or impudent his Informer
was, that told him, I maintained, that we were not justified till the day of
judgment, page 19.

Now to Mr. Air, he gives us a threefold sense of the sight of. ^.
God in the Question.

1. As it signifies Gods knowledge. 2. As it signifies his legal justice. 3. As
it signifies his making of us to see.
To which, I shall need to give no other answer then his own words, in the same
paragraph: of the last thus he speaks. This phrase must have some other meaning
in this debate: for else that distinctiction of Justification in foro Dei, and
in foro Conscientiae, would be a mere tautology. Of the first thus. Although in
articulo Providentiae, in the doctrine of divine Providence, seeing and knowing
are all one: yet in articulo Justificationis, in the doctrine of Justification,
they are constantly distinguished throughout the Scripture, and never
promiscuously used, the one for the other. Thus of three senses of the phrase,
himself rejects two, as impertinent to the matter in hand, and yet states his
answer thus. If we take Gods sight in the last construction, ( viz. for his
making us to see) then we are not justified in Gods sight before we believe. 2.
If we refer it to the justice of God, we were justified in the sight of God,
when Christ exhibited, and God accepted the full satisfaction in his blood. 3.
If we refer it to the knowledge of God, we were justified in his sight, when
he willed or determined in himself, not to impute to us our sins, etc.

As who should say, If you take Gods sight in such a sense, in which it is
never taken in all the Scripture, by Mr. Eyres own confession (such is the
first sense, which is here the last) then thus. But if you take it in such a
sense, in which it may not be taken in the present question (such is the last
of the three, which is here put first) then so. If some other senses of the
sight of God, (as when it signifies his favor, his assistance, his approbation
and witnessing, etc.) had been set down, that we might have known when we are
justified in Gods sight, in those senses; it had been every whit as conducible
to the clearing of the Question. As first, to tell us, that Gods sight does
never signify his knowledge in the matter of Justification; and then to add
in the same breath, that to be justified in Gods sight, is to be justified in
his knowledge. 2. Nor is it a lawful distinction, because the members thereof
do interferre, for Justification in the death of Christ; and in our own
consciences, is Justification in Gods knowledge: for surely he knows both these
no less then his Purpose and Determination within himself. 3. We shall see by
and by, that Mr. Air maintains, that the righteousness of Christ is imputed
to sinners, by the eternal Act of Gods Will: I ask then, whether that
imputation be Justification in Gods legal justice? if it be; then there is a
farther implication in the members of the distinction: if it be not, I would
know how God does justify us in his legal justice, and yet not by imputing the
righteousness of Christ to us. 4. God knows us not to be justified till we be
justified, for it is impossible that the same thing should be and not be.
Indeed he may well know, that he intends to justify us; but if he know that,
then he knows we are not yet justified: for he knows that what he intends to do
is not yet done.

But because Mr. Air refers us to his following discourse; for the better
understanding of these mysteries, I attend his motion, that I may spare
tautologies as much as I can.

SECT. II.
He therefore delivers his judgment in three Propositions. The first is this,
Justification is taken variously in Scripture.. 4.


1. For the Will of God, not to punish or impute sin unto his people.

2. For the effect of Gods Will, to wit, his not punishing, or his setting of
them free from the curse of the Law. That Justification is put for this latter
act, he supposes none will question. The only scruple is concerning the
former, which he confesses he has been sparing to call by the name of
Justification, because some gross mistakes have sought for shelter under the
wings of that expression. As

1. That absurd conceit, that Christ came not to satisfy the justice, but only
to manifest the love of God: whereas (says he) we say, that notwithstanding
the Will of God, not to punish his Elect, the Law must needs be satisfied for
their sins, no less then for the sins of others. And

2. Their notion, who upon this ground have asserted the eternal being of the
creature, etc.

Answ. Here is the foundation of all the following obscure discourse: which I
perceive Mr. Air had rather we should take for granted, then he be put to
prove. I do therefore deny

1. That Justification does any where in Scripture signify Gods eternal Will
or Purpose not to punish: of which more, presently.

2. That it is any where in Scripture put pro re volita, for the thing willed,
formally, and under that habitude or relation. Justification is the discharge
of a sinner from his obligation to punishment: whether it were willed or not
willed from eternity, is but extrinsecal and accidental to the Act it self.

3. That Justification is any where used in Scripture for the effects of
Justification: though I deny no man the liberty of making use sometimes of such
a trope: but we are now enquiring de nomine, concerning the use of the Word.
The Apostle makes that one Act of Election the cause of all spiritual
blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. of which our Justification is one, ver. 6, 7. no less
then Adoption, ver. 5. which is an Act of the same common nature with
Justification, and by some eminent See Dr. Reignolds Life of Christ page 402.
Divines made a part of it: and that suitably enough to Scripture phrase, even
when it is made consequent to our faith, John 1. 12. Gal. 3. 25. with 4. 5, 6.

4. Our discharge from the curse is, either our discharge from an obligation to
it, or from our actual suffering it. In this latter sense it is indeed an
effect of Justification, but in the former sense it is the very life, being and
form of it, unless it be understood passively, and so that also may be called
an effect of Justification: because the immediate effect of a discharge active,
is a person discharged. These observations ( Reader) thou will find useful, in
the following debate.

That absurd conceit (as he calls it) that some have inferred upon. 5.
an eternal Justification, ( viz. that then Christ came not to satisfy the
justice, but only to manifest the love of God) is so natural a consequence of
his doctrine, that it will never be put off with a cold Negatur. And I presume
Mr. Air is not ignorant, that it is a maine principle, upon which the
Socinians deny the satisfaction of Christ. And if he will own what himself
has wrote in this book, he must join with them. He affirms, that Gods
eternal Will not to punish, is the very essence of Justification, page 64. 2.
That by this Will men are secured from wrath, and discharged and acquitted from
their sins, that it is a real discharge from condemnation, an actual and
complete non-imputation of sin, page 67., 6. upon which premises, I demand,
Whose debt did Christ pay? his own? That Is little less then blasphemy. Ours?
why, our bond was cancelled long before, and our selves discharged and
acquitted from all sin and death, really, actually, completely, if Mr. Eyres
doctrine be true. And where then is any place left for satisfaction? De
satisfact. p. 119.
Grotius has well observed. Obligationis destruction liberatio dicitur. Hanc
praecedere potest solutio, sequi non potest: quia actus nullus versari potest
circa id quod non existit amplius. To the same purpose In tert. Tho. tom. 1.
disp 4. sect. 8. p. 58. edit. Venet.
Suarez, Proprie non dicitur satisfactio quae post remissionem debiti sit: sed
quae fit ad debiti remissionem. Est enim remissio debiti terminus
satisfactionis, non principium, ut communi sensu omnium hominum constat. Nec
dici potest eandem peccati remissionem quae facta fuit gratis ante
satisfactionem, postea etiam fieri per satisfactionem: quia repugnat idem
debitum gratis remitti and per justam solutionem. But what need we the
testimony of man? the testimony of God is greater. The text is plain, Heb. 10.
18. where remission of sin is, there is no more offering for sin; Ergo, if
sin were remitted from eternity, Christ neither did nor could make any
satisfaction. If it be said, that God did discharge us upon the foresight of
Christ's satisfaction: I believe it to be most true of all the godly that lived
before Christ: but Mr. Air, that makes this discharge to be an immanent (not a
transient) act in God, will not, may not endure, that it should be caused by
the foresight of Christ's satisfaction.

The next gross mistake which Mr. Air tells us some have fastened. 6.
upon the doctrine of eternal Justification is theirs, who upon this ground
have asserted the eternal being of the creature, thus. If men are justified
from eternity, they are from eternity. And I confess Mr. Air has well
removed this consequence, if his principle be good, that esse justificatum is a
term of diminution. But verily, if the Scriptures have rightly informed us in
the nature of Justification, I do not see how the consequence can be avoided,
for Justification is one of the most eminent blessings contained in that
Promise, I will be their God. So Paul, Romans 3. 29, 30. Is he the God of the
Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also? yea, of the Gentiles also: seeing it
is one God, who shall justify the circumcision by faith, and the
uncircumcision through faith. Now God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living, Matthew. 22. 32. And if not the God of the dead (who yet live as to their
souls) then much less is he the God of them that are not, nor never were.
Ergo he does not justify them that are not. Again, He that is justified is
blessed, Romans 4. And he that is blessed from eternity, is from eternity: for he
that is not, is neither blessed nor miserable. To say, he is blessed from
eternity in Gods intention, is no more, then that there was a preparation of
blessedness for him in Gods intention: which I readily grant, and it profits
Mr. Air nothing. But it little concerns me to make good the foresaid
consequence: something more of it the Reader shall find a little below; in the
mean time we come to the great Question, whether Justification consist formally
in the Will or Purpose of God, not to punish?

SECT. III.
THe Will of God, as Divines are wont to distinguish, is either. 7.
voluntas beneplaciti, or voluntas signi. The former is the Intention, Decree
or Purpose of God, concerning some Act of his own, to be done by himself in
his due time. The latter (to confine it to our present use) is his signal,
legislative, revealed, royal Will, by which he determines as supreme Governor
of the world, what shall be our duty to do or not to do, and what shall be due
to us, according to our doing or not doing of this Will. Hence the Word and
Laws of God are called in Scripture his Will, in hundreds of places. By this
Will of God does he give Believers a right to impunity, which is their proper
Justification: whereof his not punishing them de facto is the effect. This I
shall prove (God willing) when I come to the vindication of my first Argument
against Mr. Air. In the mean time, the thing which he undertakes to prove is,
That the very essence and quiddity of a sinners Justification, is Gods Decree
or Purpose from eternity not to punish him. I deny it, and shall subjoyne some
reasons against it by and by, besides those which Mr. Air takes notice of in
his book. But first, let us see what he has to say for it. Thus then he begins.

Justification is Gods non-imputing of sin, and imputing of righteousness to a
person, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Romans 4. 6, 8. but Gods Will not to punish a person, is
his non-imputing sin to him. Ergo.

Answ. I grant the major, but I do very much long to see what. 8.
definition Mr. Air will give of Justification, that may include Justification
in Gods knowledge, and in his legal justice, and in our consciences, that I
might know whether these three be three several sorts, or only three degrees of
one and the same Justification, but let that pass. I deny the minor.

For proof of it Mr. Air appeals to the Original words, both Greek and
Hebrew, both which (says he) does signify an act of the mind or will.

Mr. Air is to prove, that they signify the purpose or resolution of the
will: in which sense they appear, not so much as once, neither in the Hebrew,
nor in the Greek Interpreters: nor do our Translators render them at any time
in such a sense: and therefore that observation might have been spared. 2. An
act of the understanding they signify often: but it is such an act as will not
endure to be called by the name of imputation, but thinking, devising,
esteeming, or the like: for example, Isa. 10. 7. (...) the LXX. (...). We
render it. Neither does his heart think so. Nor does common sense permit that
it be rendered. Neither does his heart impute se. In like manner, Psalm. 41. 7.
Against me do they devise my hurt: where the words are the same, both in the
Hebrew and the Septuagint. And cannot be rendered, Against me do they impute my
hurt. So Isa. 53. 3. He was despised, and we esteemed him not, (where the words
are still the same.) It would be worthy sense, to render them, He was despised,
and we imputed him not. Multitudes of like instances might be given. But when
the words will bear to be grammatically rendered by the name of Imputation,
they then signify, not an immanent act of the understanding or will, but a
transient act, containing an objectum Quod, or something that is imputed; and
an objectum cui, some person to whom it is imputed: who also is thereby changed
physically or morally. And thus the word imputation is used in Scripture. 1.
When by Law one thing passes in stead of another, Numb. 18. 27, 30. This your
heave offering shall be reckoned (or imputed) to you, as though it were the
corn of the threshing slo^re, and ver. 30. When you have heaved the best
thereof from it, then it shall be counted, (or imputed) to the Levites, as the
increase of the threshing floor, etc. Not that the said heave offering was
esteemed or thought to be the corn of the threshing floor: (for that had been
a fiction, or an error and imperfection of the understanding) but because by
the determination of the Law, it was made equivalent thereunto, or equally
available to all effects and purposes. This is a transient act. 2. When a man
is charged as the Author of such or such a fact, 2 Samuel 3. 8. Imputas mihi
iniquitatem hujus mulieris. Junius. This also is a transient act. 3. The giving
of a reward to a man, whether the reward be of debt or of grace, is Imputation,
Romans 4. 4. and to punish sin is to impute sin, 2 Samuel 19. 19. because
punishment is the wages of sin, and not to punish sin when punishment is due by
Law, is the non-imputing of sin, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. and when the Law denies a man
that benefit of an action, which otherwise he might have expected, that action
is said to be non-imputed to him, Lev. 7. 18. It shall not be accepted, neither
shall it be imputed to him. This also is a transient act. In the same sense is
the word used in the New Testament. Righteousness shall be imputed to us if we
believe, Romans 4. 24. (...). Quibus futurum est ut imputetur. Beza. (Mr. Eyres
gloss upon that text we shall meet with in due place) and Paul prays for them
that deserted him in his troubles, that their sin may not be imputed to them, 2 Timothy 4. 12. in both which places imputation expresses a future act, and
therefore cannot be understood of an immanent eternal act of God. See also Romans
5. 13. of which more hereafter. So that I may very well retort Mr. Eyres
Argument upon himself. If Justification be a non-imputation of sin, then it is
a transient act (and not an immanent act of Gods Will.) But the first is true,
ex concessis. Ergo so is the last. And I wonder Mr Air should nor foresee the
weakness of his proof. The original words note an immanent act, when they
signify some other thing then imputation: Ergo imputation is an immanent act.
So much for the first Argument.

The second is this: that which does secure men from wrath, and whereby they
are discharged and acquitted from their sins, is Justification. But by this
immanent act of God, all the Elect are discharged and acquitted from their
sins, and secured from wrath and destruction. Ergo.

Answ. The Proposition I readily grant: the Assumption I deny. 9. ^
and detest. For 1. It makes void the death of Christ: for what says the
Apostle? Gal. 2. 21. If righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in
vain. The case is altogether the same, as to any other way, by which men may be
said to be justified: for if they be made righteous in any other way then by
the death of Christ, then was it a vain, needless thing, that he should die
for our Justification. 2. Nor was there any need, as to our Justification, that
he should rise again from the dead: whereas the Scripture says, Arose from the
dead for our Justification, Romans 4. 25. And therefore, says Paul, 1 Cor. 15.
17. If Christ be not risen, ye are yet in your sins: he speaks to those that
did confess his death: but he was out when he told them, If Christ were not
ris^n, they were yet in their sins, seeing they were discharged and acquitted
from them so long before. 3. His intercession is also vain, for he lives to
intercede for us, to save us from wrath, Romans 5. 9, 10. Heb. 2. 17. and 7. 25.
We are secured from wrath before, says Mr. Air. 4. Our preaching is vain: for
we are to preach to every creature under Heaven, That except they believe, they
shall be damned, Mark 16. 15, 16. and multitudes (even all the Elect) are
secured from wrath before. 5. It does also imply a contradiction, that a man
should be acquitted from sin, who was never a sinner: or discharged from
condemnation, who was never condemned. If it be said, the Elect were sinners,
and condemned in Gods foreknowledge: Mr. Air is better read in Dr. Twisse,
then to be ignorant of what inextricable inconveniences that answer is liable
to. But let us hear Mr. Eyres proofs of his Assumption: God (says he) loved
the Elect from everlasting, and his love is velle dare bonum, etc.

Answ. Which (as was observed before) is one of the Vid. Croll. Cont. Grot. cap
5. par. 6. and 7. and cap. 1 p. 1.
Socinians weapons, by which they attempt the ruin of Christ's satisfaction:
against which our Divines have provided sufficient armor. A love of
benevolence or good will, moving God to seek out a way of satisfaction to his
own Justice, and of Justification of a sinner, we readily grant. Vid Joh.
Cameron oper. p. 361. f.
But his love of friendship, and wellpleasednesse with a sinner, was not from
everlasting, but in time: as being a consequent of the death of Christ, in whom
he has made us accepted, Ephesians. 1. 6. as Mr. Air does not only yield, but
contend below, from Mat. 3. 17. and so says the Apostle, Romans 9. 25. I will
call her beloved, who was not beloved: out of the Prophet, Hos. 2. 23. and as
for the text which Mr. Air quotes, Ezekiel. 16. 6. I cannot divine to what end it
is, unless it be to find me work: seeing the love there spoken of is
manifestly temporal, ver. 8. and the life mentioned, ver. 6. in the latter, is
the flourishing and honorable condition unto which God had raised Israel, both
in respect of their Politic and Church State, who were originally the fewest
and meanest of all people: and in a spiritual sense, is the life which he
breaths into sinful souls. But what Mr. Air would infer from hence,
himself best knows. In short, I readily grant that Gods eternal love does
concur, ut causa universalis prima, as the first universal cause, not only to
our Justification in time, but to all other our spiritual blessings: but an
universal cause produces nothing without particulars: and the quality of the
effect is not to be ascribed to the universal, but to the particular cause. 2.
Mr. Air is proving, that Gods velle non punire, is that act, by which we are
discharged and acquitted from sin, and secured from wrath. I wish he had showed
me how this Conclusion issues from these premises. His Argument in form must
run thus. Gods eternal love discharges the Elect from sin, and secures them
from wrath. Gods velle non punire, is his eternal love. Ergo. The major is
already disproved. The minor, if understood of the love of God in whole,
confounds Election and Justification, (which yet Mr. Air is careful to
distinguish a little below) for what is Gods Election, but his Love, or his
velle dare bonum? If of the Love of God in part, the Argument will run thus.
That which is part of Gods eternal love, is a sinners discharge from sin. Gods
velle non punire, is part of his eternal love. Ergo. If the major be true, Gods
purpose of giving Christ, of calling sinners, of sanctifying them, yea, of
afflicting them, and of administering any Providence toward them, which in the
issue proves for their good, may as well be called their Justification, as his
velle non punire. 3. Mr. Air has already granted (at least verbo tenus) that,
notwithstanding the Will of God, not to punish the Elect, the Law must needs be
satisfied for their sins, no less then for the sins of others. If this be
true, then the eternal act of Gods Election in it self considered, gives the
Elect themselves no more security from wrath, then if they had not been
elected. Surely, that concession will never be reconciled with the doctrine
here delivered.

But we come on to Mr. Eyres second proof, and that is from. 10.
Scripture, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
The Proposition is either an universal Negative, No Elect person can be justly
charged with sin: or an universal affirmative, All elect persons are free from
the charge of sin.

Answ. Mr. Air should have put in the Apostles answer to the Question, and
then he had prevented mine. The words are these, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies. Hence it follows, either
negatively, that no elect person being justified, can be effectually charged
with sin: or affirmatively, that all the elect that are justified, are free
from such a charge: free (I say) not because elect, but because justified: for
the charging of sin is manifestly opposed, not to their Election, but to their
Justification: but that their Justification is their Election, or any part of
it, or contemporary with it (as I may so speak) is an inference, without any
foundation in the text. 2. Yea, it cannot be inferred according to Mr. Eyres
principles, though we should grant the Election here spoken of, to be that
which is from eternity, (of which presently) for the Justification here spoken
of, is that which is grounded in the death of Jesus Christ: Who shall condemn?
it is Christ that died. But the eternal Justification, which Mr. Air is
pleading for from the text, is not grounded in the death of Christ, (for it is
an Act in God from eternity.) Now observe ( Reader) that Mr. Air denies Christ
to have merited the Act of Justification, but only the effects. I would know
then, whether the Apostle speak of the Act or effects of Justification in those
words, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? if of the Act, then
the Elect were from eternity unchargeable: and whose charge then did Christ
bear? and why does Mr. Air all along tell us, that our discharge from the
curse is the fruit of Christ's merits? yea, and what more (as to the t^rminus a
quo of our salvation) I say, what more could Christ merit possibly, then that
we should not be chargeable with sin? And if that were done before by an
eternal act, there will be no effects of Justification left for Christ to
merit, as to our deliverance from sin. But if the Justification here spoken of
be meant, not of the act, but of the effects, Mr. Air will grant me, without
farther disputing, that this place is insufficient to prove, that Gods eternal
purpose of not punishing is our Justification. 3. But I am out of doubt, that
the Elect here, are not so called in reference to Election from eternity, but
rather in reference to election temporal, (as our Dr Twisse. in ^orv. defens.
Arm. Cont. Til. page 202.
Divines distinguish:) namely, in respect of their effectual separation unto
God, and forsaking the conversation of the world, and their admittance through
faith, into a state of favor, and precious esteem with God: as election does
sometimes signify in Scripture. See 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28. James 2. 5. 1 Pet.
2. 4, 6. The reason is plain: because such Elect are here meant, who were the
present objects of the worlds reproaches, injurious sentences, false
accusations and slanders, etc. for whose comfort, in this their suffering
condition, the Apostle speaks these words: to assure them, that all the malice
and abuses of the world should do them no harm, so long as God justified them,
and approved of them* Compare ver. 21, 35, 37. And this also is the intent of
the words in the Prophet, who speaks them as in the Person of Christ, when he
was delivered up into the hands of wicked men, Isa. 50. 8, 9. Now the Elect
themselves before Conversion, have their conversation according to the course
of the world, and are not the objects of persecution from the world, Ephesians. 2. 23.

SECT. IV.
WE have heard what Mr. Air can say for himself. Before I. 11.
go any farther, I shall set down a few Arguments to prove, that the essence of
Justification does not consist in Gods eternal Will or Purpose of not
punishing. And first, from the efficient cause. Justification is such an act,
whereof Jesus Christ our Mediator, as Lord and King, is the efficient cause
with God the Father. (He is also the meriting cause as Priest, by the offering
or sacrifice of himself: But of this we speak not now) Acts 5. 31. John 5. 19,
22, 26, 27. Luke 24. 47. and other places before quoted. But Jesus Christ our
Mediator, as Lord and King, does not will or purpose with God from eternity
not to punish sinners. The reason is plain: because himself from all eternity
was purposed of God to be Lord and King. Ergo Justification does not consist
essentially in the Will or Purpose of God not to punish. 2. Justification is an
act of God purposed. Ergo it cannot consist in his purpose. The reason is,
because else God must purpose to purpose, which is inconvenient. The Antecedent
is almost the words of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that
God would justify the Gentiles through faith, preached before, the Gospel to
Abraham We have scarce more evidence of any truth, upon which we lay the weight
of our salvation, then this text affords us of the point in hand, saying, that
God would justify, in the future tense: making Justification the object of
divine foresight: affirming the Gospel to have been preached to Abraham, many
years before it. 3. If there be no such act in God (at least that we may
conceive of) as velle non punire, precisely and formally, then our
Justification cannot consist in that act: the reason is plain, because then
our Justification were precisely nothing. But there is no such act in God that
we may conceive of, as velle non punire precisely Ergo. For proof of the
Assumption. ( Reader) thou must remember that the foregoing Argument proves,
that there was in God from eternity a will to justify believers in time: that
is; 1. To discharge them from the obligation of the Law: by which that
punishment becomes legally undue, which before was legally due: and hence it
follows, 2. That they are not punished de facto, so that impunity simply is no
part nor effect of Justification: but as following upon a legal disobligation:
otherwise every sinner in the world that were not presently punished, were
justified. The impunity of a sinner therefore, that it may be an effect or part
of Justification, must be considered with its modus, as the impunity of a
person discharged from the obligation of the Law: for God does so free us from
punishment, as may be without the least prejudice to the truth, or justice or
authority of his Law. Accordingly I affirm, that God never purposed not to
punish; precisely, praescindendo a modo, as impunity is severed from the manner
in which it is given: but he purposed not to punish modo congruo, in a
congruous way: by disobliging, first from the threatening of the Law, and
thereby giving them a legal right not to be punished: and not to let them go
unpunished, while the Law stands in full force against them. 1. That which was
never executed, was never purposed. But never sinner went unpunished, while the
Law stood in full force against him. Ergo. The Proposition is unquestionable.
In the Assumption Mr. Air will agree with me, for he contends that all the
Elect were discharged from the Law, and had a right given them to impunity in
the death of Christ, and no elect person ever had, or shall have impunity in
any other way. Ergo, it was never purposed that they should have it in any
other way: that is, that it was never purposed precisely that they should not
be punished. 2. Gods Purpose and his Laws will else be at enmity one with
another: for if he purpose not to punish precisely ( praescindendo a modo) and
yet do punish; then he crosses his purpose: and if he do, not punish, the Law
being supposed to remain in full force, he is unfaithful, if not also unjust,
as some Dr. O^en. ^^atr. de Just. vind
learned men think. 3. If non-punition Vid. T^oiss. ^ind. d^ pr^dest. lib. 1.
par. 1. digr. 9. c. 1, 2, 3. 4.
precisely tend not to the glory of Gods grace, then did he not will precisely
not to punish (for such a will were neither of the end, nor of the means,) but
non-punition precisely, is no congruous means to glorify Gods grace. Ergo.
For if a man had continued obedient, and had never broken Gods Laws in the
least tittle, his impunity had not been of grace, but of debt, Romans 4. 4. as it
is with the holy Angels at this day. Therefore we cannot conceive of any act in
God, purposing precisely not to punish, in which yet Mr. Air places the very
formality of our Justification.

4. If Justification be velle n^n punire, then condemnati^n is v^ll^. ^^.
punire: for oppositorum eadem ^st ratio. But condemnation is not velle punire.
Shall I need to prove this? who ever said that Gods eeternal purpose of
punishing men for sin was condemnation? It Is an expression that neither God nor
man will own, so far as I can find. Dr. Twisse is known to reject it often,
not without some passion and detestation. Condemnation is every where in
Scripture made an act of justice, Romans 3. 8. and 2. 2. Matthew. 23. 33. 2 Pet. 2.
3. and multitudes of other places. But Gods purpose of punishing is no act of
Justice. Both these Propositions does Dr. Twisse prove. Vind. lib. 1. par. 1.
digr. 10. cap. 1, 2, 3.

5. That which destroys not a sinners obligation to punishment, is not his
Justification. The reason is, because Justification is causa c^rrumpens
obligationis ad poenam: a discharge and acquittance from sin and condemnation,
says Mr. Air, see Romans 8. 1, 33, 34. and 5. 8, 9. But Gods velle non punire
destroys not a sinners obligation to punishment, which I thus prove. The
obligation which this Will of God destroys, either is that which lies upon them
from eternity, by some immanent act of God: (I speak now in Mr. Eyres Dialect:
for to me it is very absurd, to talk of an actual obligation upon a person not
existing) but this will never be endured, that Gods immanent acts should
destroy one another, or else it is the temporal obligation which comes upon
them by the Law: other obligation in time there is none. Now the foresaid Will
of God destroys this legal obligation, either from eternity, or in time. How
it should do it from eternity I cannot imagine: because neither the Law, nor
the sinner* nor the obligation do exist from eternity: and what it is to
destroy an obligation that is not, nor never was; upon a person that is not,
nor never was; by a Law that is not, nor never was; is a mystery beyond humane
comprehension. If in time, I would know when? either as soon as the Law is
made, or as soon as it is broken, or in some period of time after? Not as soon
as the Law is made, for a sinner is not obliged to punishment by the Law, till
he has broken the Law: and where there is no obligation, there can be no
destruction thereof. If as soon as the Law is broken, I would know how? for if
notwithstanding the foresaid Will and Purpose of God, the Law have power to
oblige the sinner to punishment; it has power also to hold him under the same
obligation; notwithstanding the same purpose. If it can oblige him for a
minute, then for two, then for ten, then for an hour, then for a year, then
for ever, unless there be some other act besides the bare purpose of God, to
abrogate or relaxe the Law. Causa eadem semper facit idem. Gods purposes make
no changes immediately upon his Laws, or any other external objects.

6. If there may be a will or purpose not to punish, where yet there. 13.
is no Justification or pardon, (for these two words are of the same importance
in this debate) then Justification does not consist essentially in a purpose
not to punish. But there may be a will not to punish, where there is no pardon.
Ergo. The Assumption is manifest. There may be hundreds of men at an Assizes:
suppose they all resolve, not to punish the Malefactors that are then and there
to be tried. Are the said malefactors therefore pardoned? No. Then there may be
a will not to punish, which is no pardon. Ergo. Pardon is not essentially a
will not to punish. Definitio reciprocatur cum definito. If it be said, that
pardon is not an act of the will, as a natural power or faculty, but as the
will of a man under some other moral condition or qualification, namely, as
having jus ad poenam exequendam, a right to inflict punishment: which because
it is peculiar to the Judge, therefore his will not to punish is pardon, but
not the will of the rest that may be present in the Court: this is as much as I
expect: for hence it follows (if the case be applied to God) that the name of
Justification cannot be given to his eternal Will or Purpose. I will not meddle
with the Question, An Deus possit creaturam immerentem affligere? But jus
puniendi, a right of punishing accrews to none, whether God or man, but upon
supposition of some offense committed. But from eternity there was no sin.
Ergo, the will or purpose of not punishing, was not voluntas habentis jus ad
poenam infligendam. Ergo, it may not be called by the name of Justification.
When I speak of a right of punishing, which results from an offense committed,
understand it not de jure potestatis, as if the said offense gave any authority
to God or man, which they had not before; but de jure exercitii: inasmuch as
that authority cannot be justly exercised in the punishment of a person, but
upon such offense committed by him. 7. If notwithstanding this velle non
punire, God be bound in justice to punish the Elect for their sins, unless his
justice be satisfied some other way, then his velle non punire is not their
Justification. The reason is, 1. Because Gods justice does not bind him to
punish those whom he has justified: but rather not to punish them. 2. Because
his justice does not bind him to punish another for their sins, whom he
already has justified, (supposing their Justification to be as well in order
of nature as of time, before the others punishment) But Gods justice binds him
to punish the elect for their sin, unless his justice be satisfied in some
other way: as namely, by the death of Christ. This appears, because de facto
Christ bare that punishment which in justice was due to sinners. Erg^, this
velle non punire was not their Justification. One thing more I long to know,
Whether velle non punire do define Justification in general, as it contains
these two notable species, Justification by works, and Justification by faith
or grace? or whether it define Justification by grace only, particularly, and
in specie? If the former show us that special form, by which Justification by
works, and by grace, are immediately differenced and opposed; If the latter
show us the genus, or common nature wherein they agree; If neither of these can
be done, (as it is impossible either should) then we have here a definition
without genus and forma, that is, a thing defined without a definition, or a
definition that defines nothing.

SECT. V.
BEsides these Arguments, there be found more, which Mr. Air. 14.
objecteth against himself, as disproving his position, that Justification is
the Will or Purpose of God not to punish: which though they be not of my
making, yet because they are all very material for support of the truth, I
shall here undertake their defense.

The first objection then, which Mr. Air proposes against his own doctrine
of eternal Justification is this, viz. That it confounds Justification and
Election.

His answer is. That Election includes the end, and all the means: but Gods
Will, not to punish precisely and formally, only some part of the means.

Reply. 1. Then the act of Justification is precisely nothing* as we have above
demonstrated. 2. And the effects of this act are like it self, just nothing;
for never man was, nor ever shall be the better for this supposed Will of God
precisely, of not punishing; for if it produce us any good, it is either from
eternity, or in time. Surely from eternity we are never the better for it: if
in time, what is that good? I suppose, it will be said, freedom from
punishment. Well* But, does it effect this freedom mediately, or immediately?
mediately it can do nothing: for it is determined precisely to a non-punition,
and contains not a preparation of any subordinate cause, for the effecting of
our deliverance: Election indeed may very well concur to our discharge,
wrought by the death of Christ: because it is a pre-ordination of Christ
himself, and of all other more immediate causes, that work in their several
orders and dependances for our d^scharge. If immediately, then the death of
Christ interposeth no cau^ality for the effecting of the said freedom: of
which notwithstanding Mr. Air asserts it to be the adequate and immediate
cause in his next Proposition. 3. To give a peculiar name to the volition of
one part of the means, as distinct from the volition of all the rest, unless
there be some special reason of such denomination, is but to impose upon our
understandings: for why may not Gods Will of sending Christ, of publishing the
Gospel, of renewing our natures, of raising our bodies, of glorifying our whole
man, each of them deserve a more proper and significant name, then Election, as
well as his Will not to punish? for as to the act of this Will, e^dem m^do se
habet circa omnia objecta volita, it respects all the means willed equally
and in the same manner: the persons to whom this impunity is willed, lay under
no other consideration as the objects of this will, then as they are the
objects of the will of calling, sanctifying, glorifying: so that neither from
the act nor the object is there any reason of such denomination. Indeed the
objects (I mean, the media volita) of election and reprobation, being
contraries in the utmost degree, and irreconcilable in the same person, our
weak understandings do therefore conceive of those acts, as differing specie,
and accordingly we diversifie their names. But the objects of Election being
amongst themselves consentanies, and subordinate in their execution one to the
other, and having no other entity or modality before their own existence in
time, then precisely ut volita; it is altogether beyond the reach of my
understanding, to imagine any reason, why the volition of one means should
have a name proper to it self, incommunicable to the volition of any other
means, willed by the same act, and to the same end. 4, But the answer yields as
much as the objection seeks: for it grants Justification to be part of
election, namely, Electio ad impunitatem. Whereas, 1. Scripture-Justification
is a forensical act, say all our Protestants against the Papists. I spare
quotations, because the thing is too well known to be denied. This cannot be
affirmed of Election. 2. The object of Election is neither a sinner nor a
righteous person precisely, but one that is not: for we are chosen before the
foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. before we have done good or evil, Romans 9.
11. but the object of Scripture-Justification is a sinner, Romans 4. 5. whether
believing or unbelieving, we dispute below. 3. Election is not properly an act
of mercy, but of absolute dominion and liberty: Scripture-Justification is
every where reported as an act of mercy, Psalm. 51. 1. Luke 1. 78, 79. Matthew.
18. 33. Luke 18. 13, 14. Heb. 8. 12. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. Ergo, Justification is not
Election, nor any part of it. If it be said, that the name of pardon and
Justification in these and other places, signifies not the act, but the
effects; I shall refer to my vindication of the next objection, which is as
follows.

SECT. VI.
THe second objection therefore is this: Justification imports a change in a
persons state ab injusto ad justum. Which cannot be. 15
attributed to the decrees of God. I shall divide Mr. Eyres answer into two
parts.

First, (says he) if Justification be taken for the thing willed, viz. the
delivery of a sinner from the curse of the Law, then there is a great change
made thereby: he that was a child of wrath by nature, has peace and
reconciliation with God But if we take it for the Will of God not to punish,
then we say Justification does not suppose any such change: as if God had first
a Will to punish his Elect, but afterward he altered his Will, to a Will not
to punish them.

Rep. Plain dealing is best in a good cause. If Mr. Air had told me roundly,
that the effects of Justification make a change in a persons state, but the act
does not; I had then known what I had to do. But I know not very well what to
make of these lines. 1. The objection in form is this. Justification imports a
change in a persons state ab injusto ad justum. But velle nen punire, or any
other eternal purpose of God, makes no such change of a persons state. Ergo, To
say now, that the Will of God not to punish supposes no such change, is to
yield the Conclusion, that therefore it is not Justification. 2. What means he
by a sinners delivery from the curse of the Law? either it. supposes that a
sinner does actually suffer the curse of the Law, or some part of it, till
Justification deliver him: but this he denies of such persons for whom Christ
has satisfied (namely the Elect) page 60. 61.. 2. or it supposes an
obligation of such persons by Law unto future punishment, till they be
justified. But this he denies too of the same persons, page 110. 111.. 2, 3,
5. and what it is to deliver a s^nner from the curse, which he neither suffers
at present, nor is obliged to suffer for future, I want an Interpreter to tell
me. 3. Nor can I tell in Mr. Eyres sense, what it is to have peace and
reconciliation with God. If he mean it of peace of conscience, through the
sense of reconciliation, himself will deny that that is the immediate effect
of our delivery from the curse: for faith apprehending reconciliation does
intervene, and that as a true proper cause of such a peace. If he mean it of a
state of peace and reconciliation before God, he should not need to ascribe
that to the thing willed: seeing the erernal Will of God is most sufficient
unto that (according to him) as being a real discharge from condemnation: an
actual and complete non-imputation of sin; and he lays it down for an
undeniable truth, That the Elect were in Covenant with God before the
foundations of the world, page 170, 171. 4. The great change which he speaks
of, made by this delivery from the curse of the Law, viz. That he that was a
child of wrath by nature, has peace and reconciliation with God, this great
change, I say, is a huge nothing: for (says he a little below) to be just and
unjust is not properly a different state before God, but a different
consideration of one and the same person. The Elect themselves then, even when
believers, are children of wrath by nature, yea, of the Saints in glory,
considered according to what they are by nature, it may be said, that they are
children of wrath. And is not that a great change, from wrath to
reconciliation, which leaves a man every whit as much a child of wrath as he
was before? 5. I believe (with Mr. Air) that the Will or Purpose of God makes
no change in a persons state: but I wonder what he means by the reason added.
As if (says he) God had first a Will to punish his Elect, but afterward he
altered his Will to a Will not to punish them.] As if God could not will a
mutation in the creature, without a mutation in his own Will. He made the world
by his Will, and he also wills the dissolution of it, after such a period of
time: this is a mutation in the world, but none in God. In like manner, he may
will that the elect for a time shall stand obliged by Law, to the suffering of
condemnation: and yet also will, that after a time this obligation shall cease,
and all this without any change in his will. But we shall prove hereafter, that
is not the Will of Gods purpose, but his declared Laws by which a sinner is
constituted just or unjust.

But let us come to a more close encounter. Justification (says the. 16.
objection) imports a change of a persons state ab injusto ad justum. And if
Scriptures be intelligible by the sons of men, it cannot be denied, Romans 5. 8,
9. While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: much more then, being now
justified in his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. Whether we
are justified by the blood of Christ without faith, or through faith, we
reserve to be debated in its proper place; for the present it suffices us to
observe from hence, that Justification makes a change in a persons state ab
injusto ad justum in sensu forensi. And what can man's reason require more for
proof of it, then these words afford? Had the Apostle said, You were sometimes
cold, but now you are hot: you were sometimes servants, but now you are free:
you were sometimes enemies, but now you are friends: he would scarcely be
accounted a reasonable creature, that should deny such expressions, to import a
mutation from one term to another. And must not then the like change be
signified, when he says, You were sometime sinners, but now you are justified?
especially if we consider (which I perceiv^ all men do not observe) that the
word sinners, by which the Apostle expresses their state before Justification,
does not signify precisely transgressors of the Law: for even they that are
justified are in that regard sinners, 1 John 1. 8, 10. Nor yet only and
precisely such as are under the reigning power of sin: though it be true, that
all the unjustified are so, because their sinful condition is here opposed, not
to Sanctification formally, but unto Justification. And they of all men that
maintain Justification to be perfect in the death of Christ, may not so
understand the word sinners in this place. For these Romans (for example) were
not sinners after their Justification, in that sense, in which the Apostle
tells them, they were sinners before their Justification: for the time of their
being sinners is directly opposed to the time of their Justification. But if
they were justified immediately in the death of Christ; it is beyond dispute,
that sin might and did reign in them after this Justification, even until the
time of their Conversion unto the faith. By sinners therefore in this place,
are meant such sinners as were by Law bound over to condemnation, and had not
at present any right to deliverance from wrath: for that right was given them
in their Justification, as appears by the Apostles arguing a majori ad minus,
being now justified, (...) how much more shall we be saved from wrath. Nor is
it unfrequent in Scripture, by the word sinner, to signify a man obliged to
punishment, see 1 Kings 1. 21. Genesis 43. 9. Romans 5. 15 Gal. 3. 22. especially
(as ( In^i^. l. 3. c. 11. ^. 3.
) Calvin well observes,) according t^ the Hebrew Dialect, Vbi etiam scelesti
vocantur, non modo qui sibi conscii sunt sceleris, sed qui judicium damnationis
subeunt. Neque enim Bersabe (1 Reg. 1, 21.) dum se and Sol^monem dicit fore
scelestos, crimen agnoscit; sed probro se and filium expositum iri conqueritur,
ut numerentur inter reprobos and damnatos. Hence the Hebrew ( Vid. Jo^. Mer^er.
and H^u. A^n w. i^ G^r. 43 9.
) (...) sin, does sometimes signify precisely an obligation, yea, when it
results from a fact which is not sinful. As the Nazarite that was defiled
against his will by the touch of a dead body, is yet commanded to offer a
sin-offering (the LXX. (...)) and the reason is added, because he sinned by the
dead, Numb. 6. 11. that is, Reus est tacti cadaveris. And what was offered for
the cleansing of leapers, and of men and women for natural and unavoidable
defilements, is called an offering (...), Lev. 14. 19. and 15. 15, 30.

If now Mr. Air shall say, that when the Apostle says, much more. 17.
being now justified; etc. he speaks not of the act, but of the effects of
Justification; I reply, 1. It is not lawful for man to teach the Holy Ghost to
speak. The Apostle tells us, that God commends his love toward us, in giving
Christ to die for us while we were sinners, that we might be justified in his
blood, ver. 8, 9. therefore that which in God is the cause of our
Justification, in the blood of Christ, is his love, and so to be called. 2. If
yet it shall be said, that that love of God is our Justification; then whereas
it is said, God so loved us, as to justify us in the blood of his Son; it
must be said henceforward, God so justified us, as to justify us in the blood
of his Son, which is ridiculous. 3. If temporal Justification in the blood of
Christ, be but the effect of a former Justification which was from eternity;
what an empty noise has the Apostle made, in amplifying the love of God, in
giving Christ to die for the Justification of sinners and enemies? whosoever is
justified is not a sinner, (in the Apostles sense of that word) but righteous:
not an enemy, but reconciled. 4. The Apostle (if his judgment may be taken)
does thus distinguish the act and the effects of Justification: that the act is
that, by which of sinners we are made just: the effect which follows upon it
is; that we shall therefore be saved from wrath. It seems, the distinction
between the velle and the res volita in the matter of Justification was unknown
to him. 5. And his discourse supposes, that the love and grace of God is
nothing so much commended by giving the effects, as by putting forth the act of
Justification: for herein God commends his love toward us, that while we were
yet sinners, he gave his Son to death for our Justification: and then (as a
lesser matter) he infers, much more being now justified we shall be saved from
wrath. So also, ver. 10. Now if by Justification in Christ's blood be meant the
effects, and not the act of Justification; then the love and grace of God is
nothing near so great in justifying us through the blood of Christ, as in
justifying us before without his blood. But this is most notoriously false; as
is manifest, not from this text only, but from all the Scriptures, which
proclaim that temporal Justification, which we have through the blood of
Christ, to be an act of greatest love, and richest grace, Romans 3. 24, 25. and
5. 20, 21. Ephesians. 1. 6; 7. and 2. 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 1. 14. Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7,
6. The effects of Justification follow upon the act by moral necessity, and
without impediment. Ergo; the Justification here spoken of, is not the effect
precisely, but the act. The reason of the consequence is, because the
Justification mentioned in the text, follows not upon any simple precedent act
of Justification, but is set forth as an act of such moral difficulty, that it
required no less then the precious blood of the Son of God, to remove the
obstructions and hindrances of its existence, and to make it to exist. The
Antecedent is proved from his manner of arguing a majori ad minus: being now
justified, much more shall we be saved: implying that salvation follows, as it
were, necessarily, upon the position of the act of Justification. Yea, and I
appeal to Mr. Air himself, or any man else, whether that act be not unworthy
of the many glorious titles and epithets, which are every where in Scripture
put upon Justification, and consequently unworthy of that name: which being put
in actu completo, can yet produce no good effect to a sinner, nor set him one
degree farther from wrath then he was before, unless some other more
sufficient cause do interpose to midwise out its effects. This minds me of
another Argument, and that is this. 7. Justification is not an act of grace
simply, but of powerful grace, or of grace prevailing against the power of sin:
for this is that which creates the difficulty, and so commends the excellency
of the grace of Justification, that it is the Justification of sinners. Were it
the Justification of such as had never sinned, but had been perfectly
righteous, there were no such difficulty in that. And therefore in the
following part of the Chapter, the Apostle expressly declares the quality of
this grace in justifying us, in that it abounds, and is powerful to justify,
above the ability of sin to condemn, ver. 15, 17, 20, Ergo the Justification
here spoken of, is the very act of Justification, or there is no such thing at
all: for if we place it in a simple eternal volition, there could be no moral
difficulty in that, (no more then in the will of creating the world,) because
from eternity there could be no opposition or hindrance, for an act of grace to
overcome. 8. The Justification merited by Christ, is not the effect, but the
act. The reason we shall show anon, because it is absurd to make Christ the
meritour of the effects, when the act is in being before his merit. But the
Justification here spoken of is that which is merited by Christ. Ergo, I might
also argue out of the following part of the Chapter, from the opposition
between Justification, and the act of condemnation, which passes upon all men,
by virtue of the first transgression: (and therefore sure cannot consist in any
eternal act of Gods will) and from the method there used in comparing Adam and
Christ, and of our partaking first in the image of the first Adam, in sin and
the effects thereof, before we be conformed to the image of the second Adam, in
Justification and the effects thereof: but these Arguments out of the text it
self shall suffice.

Other Scriptures also there are in abundance which testify, that
Justification. 18.
does make a change in a persons state, ab injusto ad justum. As Col. 2. 13.
You being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he
quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. To be dead in
sins in this place, is clearly to be dead in Law, that is, to be obliged by Law
to the suffering of death for sin; for it is opposed to that life which
consists in remission of sin or Justification; so 1 Cor. 6. 11. such were some
of you, but ye are justified: of which place more hereafter. See also Romans 3.
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. and 5. 18, 19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And
indeed all the places of Scripture which speak of Gods justifying sinners. If
there be found out a new Justification which the Scriptures are not acquainted
with, may they have joy of it that have discovered it. But I hasten to the
second part of Mr. Eyres answer.

The change of a persons state ab injusto ad justum, arises from the Law, and
the consideration of man in reference thereunto: by whose sentence the
transgressour is unjust: but being considered at the Tribunal of grace, and
clothed with the righteousness of Christ, he is just and righteous: which is
not properly a different state before God, but a different consideration of one
and the same person. God may be said at the same time to look upon a person,
both as sinful and as righteous: as sinful in reference to his state by nature,
and as righteous in reference to his state by grace. Now this change being but
imputed, not inherent, it supposes not the being of the creature, much less
any inherent difference, etc.

Answ. These words are mysteries to me, and I confess have occasioned. 19.
me more perplexity and vexation of thoughts, then all the book besides. Before
I can give any answer to them, I must make some enquiry into the meaning of
them. And for avoiding of confusion in the words just and unjust, their
importance in this place is no more, then to have or be without a right to
salvation and life. Now to be unjust by nature, or in our selves, may be
understood in a threefold sense. 1. Positively, and then the meaning is, that
for the sin of nature, or for men's sinfulness in themselves, they stand
obliged before God, to the suffering of eternal punishment. This is so far from
being Mr. Eyres meaning, that I suppose it is the very thing which he intends
to deny by these obscure expressions: as he also often does in other parts of
this book: for it is impossible that a man should stand before God, obliged to
punishment, and disobliged at the same time. 2. Or purely negatively, as
denying nature to be the cause of our Justification. But neither do I think
this to be Mr. Eyres meaning, because the sense will be so pitifully jejune:
for thus to be just by grace, and unjust by nature is no more, then that it is
grace and not nature which justifies us: and he that says a man is justified
by grace, and not by a piece of bread and butter, or by the flying of the
clouds over his head, speaks every whit as much to purpose. 3. Diminutively, in
sensu diviso and secundum quid: that if we suppose there were no act of grace
to hinder, men must needs be condemned: there being in themselves sufficient
cause of condemnation, and in the Law sufficient power to oblige them to it:
but the grace of God does hinder both the one and the other from coming forth
into act, so that they never stand actually obliged to the suffering of
punishment, notwithstanding their own sinfulness, and the Laws rigor. This
if any thing, must be our Authors meaning, as best suiting with what he says
here and elsewhere, as page 111.. 5. By nature or in reference to their state
in the first Adam, the Elect were children of wrath, they could expect nothing
but wrath from God. And again, believers considered in themselves, and as they
come from the loins of Adam, are sinful and cursed creatures. And again, page
113.. 7. The Law shows not who are condemned of God, but who are guilty and
damnable in themselves, if God should deal with them by the Law. Let us see
then what Mr. Air would have: this I think it is. That there is in all men,
even the Elect themselves, sufficient cause of condemnation: that is,
sufficient cause on their part, why they should lose all right to salvation and
life; and be actually damned: and also that there is nothing wanting in the
nature and constitution of the Law, which is required in a Law, to make it able
to bind or oblige men (even the Elect themselves) unto punishment. And all
this is true questionless. But it is withal affirmed, that the Elect, by the
gracious and eternal act of Gods Will, are absolutely just before God: and by
the same Will is the Law (though broken by them) disabled from binding them
actually unto punishment. So that they are said to be unjust by the Law, or in
themselves, or by nature, not that they are at any time absolutely unjust, or
without all right to life (for they are supposed to be absolutely just from
eternity) but as it were materially, because if the foresaid act of Gods Will
had not prevented, they had been unjust simply and absolutely.

Against which doctrine I have several things to oppose. 1. In. 20.
general, whereas the intent of it is to prove that a sinner may be justified
and unjustified both at once, it is manifest that these words are used in some
other sense, then what the Scriptures are wont to take them in: because to be a
sinner and to be righteous, to be justified and to be condemned, to have ones
sins retained and remitted according to Scripture are contraries, and never
agree to the same person at the same time, John 3. 17, 18. Romans 8. 1, 33, 34.
and 5. 8, 9. John 20. 23. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 11. and many other places. 2. If an
elect sinner be never unjust, but in this respective, diminutive sense, then it
is impossible for the act or effects of Justification, to make any change upon
him: because it is impossible but that he who is justified merely of grace,
should be unjust in himself: even glorified Saints are to all eternity unjust
by nature, or of themselves, or in reference to their state in the first Adam.
3. If this be the whole of a sinners unrighteousness, then by the Law of
nature sinners are not unjust simply and universally, so as to have no right at
all to life: but only in some respect, so as to have no right by that Law which
they have transgressed. But all sinners are universally unjust by the Law of
nature, which I thus prove. 1. If Adam, while he continued obedient, had by his
obedience a right to life, and had no right at all, but by his obedience
according to the Law, then upon his disobedience he became universally unjust
by the same Law. The reason's plain, because if there be but one rule of
righteousness in being, then he that is not righteous by that rule, is not
righteous at all. Sublat a causa totali, tollitur effectus totaliter. But Adam
whiles he continued obedient, had by his obedience and by the Law a right to
life, and had no right at all, but by his obedience. Ergo. The Assumption is
thus confirmed. If Adam had any other right then by the Law, then it must be by
some grace of God. But this cannot be according to Scripture: because to have a
right by grace and works too, is inconsistent according to Scripture, Romans 11.
6. If by grace, then not of works, otherwise grace is no more grace. If by
works, then not of grace, otherwise work is no more work. How long Adam
continued innocent, I cannot tell. If but half a day; if but half an hour, it
is all one to my purpose: it being concluded by Divines, that Adam and Eve, one
or both, were saved, and therefore were elect: and Adams case was then the case
of all men, one as well as another, he being as it were the epitome of all
mankind in what he did, and in what befell him. 2. The Apostle also
witnesses, that the Gentiles, whiles they continued in their Gentilisme, were
all of them equally alienated from God, Col. 1. 21. (...) separate from Christ,
strangers from the Covenant of Promise, and without hope, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. till
by the faith of that Gospel which the Apostles preached, ver. 20. they ceased
to be any more strangers and foreigners, and became fellow-Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, ver. 19. Had the Apostle spoke these words
concerning reprobate Gentiles, I am persuaded it would never have come into any
man's mind, (no, not Mr. Eyres himself) to deny, but that they did signify
those Gentiles, to be without all right to life and salvation, and other
privileges, immunities and dignities, given by the great Charter of the
Gospel, to the City and Family of God. But the Apostle does here describe the
miseries of a Gentile state, and therefore of every one that was a Gentile: for
their condition is equally the same, till they turn Christians. Ergo, these
Gentiles that now believed, were yet sometimes without all right to life, that
is, they were universally unrighteous or unjust: and that by the Law of nature,
Romans 2. 12, 14, 15.

4. If the Elect were never simply and absolutely unjust, then Christ is not
their Savior. But Christ is most surely the Savior of the Elect. Ergo. The
reason of the Proposition is, because if Christ be properly a Savior, then he
saves either from that wrath which they do actually suffer, (which neither Mr.
Air will grant, nor my self without limitation) or from an actual obligation
to the suffering of wrath when the time is come: and this Mr. Air denies. But
tell me then how is Christ called a Savior? seeing none can be properly saved,
but such as are subject to perishing, either de jure, or de facto. If Adam had
continued righteous, he might well have propagated life to his children, but
not salvation, because they had never been in danger of death. And he that is
simply and absolutely just, though in some respect unjust, is not in danger of
perishing, and therefore not capable of being saved. If it be said that Christ
saves us from wrath, because we should have been obliged to wrath, if some act
of grace in God had not prevented, there being matter enough in us, for which
we should have forfeited our right to life. The answer is, 1. Let that act then
which prevents our obligation, be called our Savior, and not Christ. 2. And
let the thing it self be proved, viz. That supposing the Elect do now at no
time stand obliged before God to punishment, for any or all their sins: that
yet they should have been so obliged, if Gods purpose had not hindered, that is,
supposing the Law has now no effect upon their persons, as to the binding of
them under wrath for sin, that yet it should have had, if the foresaid purpose
had not prevented. I deny it: and if it be true, yet I conceive it impossible
for man to prove it. But we must of necessity speak something more of these
matters in another place, and therefore here I supersede any farther arguings.

Let us therefore a little farther demurre upon Mr. Eyres words, as 21.
he here presents them to us, and I pass on to the next Argument. 1. Whereas
he says, that the change ab injusto ad justum arises from the different
consideration of a person, he may be pleased to consider, that considerations
make no changes. Things are to be considered as they are, and not by
consideration made what they are not. Our understanding will conceive of a man
as clothed with, or abstracted from all moral qualifications: and so consider
him sometimes as just and not unjust: sometimes as unjust, and not just:
sometimes as neither just nor unjust. But to consider an unjust man as he is
just, or a just man as he is unjust, is to consider a man as he is a horse.
Obj. A man is not a horse, therefore I cannot so consider him. Answ. No more is
a justified man unjust, nor an unjustified man just before God. Obj. Yes that
he is, for he may be unjust by nature, and yet justified of grace at the same
time. Answ. True. But then observe ( Reader) that to be unjust by nature in
this sense, is terminus diminuens: and so to consider a man as unjust by
nature, is not to consider him as unjust simply; because to be unjust by
nature, is not to be unjust simply (for a man is supposed to be just by grace
at the same time) therefore when it is argued, a man may be unjust by nature,
and just by grace at the same time; Ergo, he may be just and unjust at the same
time: I deny the consequence. He that has nothing else to do, may (if he will)
consider the same man as just before God, and unjust before man: and according
to the variety of humane Law, multiply the notions of injustice, and say he is
unjust by the English Law, but not by the Roman Law: or by the Roman Law, but
not by the Grecian Law, etc. and when all this is done, he may say he has
proved, that a man is just and unjust at the same time before God: but I will
not believe him. 2. And as it is contrary to reason, so to the manner of speech
in Scripture (as was noted before) Romans 5. 8, 9. we were sinners, but now we
are justified. He does not say, we are sinners, but are or were justified, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 11. You were unrighteous, but now you are justified. Must we read it
thus, you are unrighteous, but you were or are justified? Ephesians. 2. 3. you were
the children of wrath. He does not say you are the children of wrath, Col. 1.
21. You were alienated, but now are reconciled. In all which places we find a
state of righteousness, succeeding a state of unrighteousness: but of being
righteous and unrighteous at the same time, we have no mention. 3. And what is
it to consider a man as just or unjust? either it is a mere speculative
consideration, apprehending in a man rationem justi, without apprehending
rationem injusti, or e contra: but how unreasonably is it said, that the change
of a persons state ab injusto ad justum, arises from such a consideration as
this is, which is as compatible to man as unto God, and altogether extrinsecal
and accidental to a man's being just or unjust: or else it is a practical,
judicial consideration, in order to Gods dealing with a man as just and unjust:
but surely Mr. Air will abhor (as well he may) that God should intend to
deal with his Elect as unjust. 4. And to what he speaks of an imputed change,
it is an expression I never heard before. I have read of an imputed
righteousness, which makes a real change (real I mean, not as opposed to moral
or relative, but to mental or notional) but an imputed change is a mere
fiction, and good for nothing as I know, but to give just ground to the
Papists, to reproach us with a putative righteousness, as they call it in a
jeer. But there be no fictions in God at all: and by how much the more they are
found in men, by so much the more fantastical we account them, (unless they
be rhetorical fictions used for doctrine, or illustration, or the like.) 5. And
much like all the rest it is, that he says to be just and unjust is not a
different state: whereas himself so calls it but just before; and immediately
after tells us, that men are accounted just in reference to their state by
grace, and unjust in reference to their state by nature. Is a state of nature
then, and a state of grace different states? if they be not, why does Mr. Air
call them so? if they be, then a state of nature is a state of
unrighteousness, and a state of grace is a state of righteousness: and so to
be righteous and unrighteous is a different state: or else there is no man in
the world unrighteous before God, or the unrighteous are in as good a state as
the righteous. But I will puzzle my self no longer with these ambiguous
Oracles.

SECT. VII.
THe third objection succeeds, and that is this. If justification be. 22.
an immanent act in God, it is antecedent, not only to faith, but to the merits
of Christ: which is contrary to many Scriptures, that do ascribe our
Justification unto his blood, as the meritorious cause.

Mr. Air answers, That although Gods Will not to punish, be antecedent to the
death of Christ, yet for all we may be said to be justified in him, because the
whole effect of that Will, is by and for the sake of Christ. As though electing
love precede the consideration of Christ, John 3. 16. yet are we said to be
chosen in him, Ephesians. 1. 4. because all the effects of that love, are given by,
and through, and for him.

Reply. Here again I must complain of Mr. Eyres mincing. Had he said, the Act
of Justification goes before the death of Christ, but the effects follow, he
had spoken plainly. But when we are disputing, that Gods Will is not our
Justification, because our Justification according to Scripture is a fruit of
Christ's merit, which an immanent act of Gods Will cannot be: to tell us now,
that indeed Gods Will is antecedent to Christ's merits, is to yield the
Argument, that therefore it is not our Justification: for nothing more certain
from Scripture, then that our Justification is the fruit of the merits and
blood of Christ; Romans 3. 24, 25. and 5. 8, 9. and 4. 25. and 8. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 5.
19, 21. Gal. 3. 13, 14. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 2. 13, 14. Heb. 9. 12, 22. and 10. 14,
18. and sundry other places. 2. It is also unworthy of the precious blood of
the Son of God, to ascribe no more to it, then that it merits the effects of
our Justification: seeing it is a far less matter to purchase the effects,
then to purchase the act which is the cause of them: as I have before observed
from the Apostles manner of arguing, Romans 5. If while we were sinners Christ
died for us, much more then being now justified, shall we be saved from wrath.
3. It is also no little undervaluing of the glorious blessing of Justification,
to suppose it so impotent, as that it cannot produce its own effects, nor do
the sinner any good at all unless the Son of God interpose by his death to
make it effectual. I desire to speak of spiritual things with fear and
trembling: But I am not afraid to say, such a Justification as this is not
worth grammercy. If it be objected, that I may say as much of Gods electing
love, for neither does that produce its effects without the death of Christ: I
answer, no such matter, for the death of Christ it self, and all other
particular causes of our salvation, are the effects of election, which it self
produces in their respective subordinations. But Justification is a particular
cause, determined precisely to a non-punition, which yet it cannot effect. Nor
does Mr. Air himself make the death of Christ an effect of Justification, and
if he did, he must read the Scriptures backward, but of this more by and by.
4. I deny, that the effects of Justification can be merited without the act;
for this eternal Justification (according to Mr. Eyres theology) is an actual
and real discharge from all sin and condemnation: a complete nonimputation of
sin and imputation of righteousness. Therefore it is impossible, but that by
this act the Elect must have a right given them to deliverance from wrath:
which is so evident, that himself contendeth, that the Elect (even whiles they
are in actual rebellion against God) have a right to salvation, grounded in the
Purpose of God, page 122. And what then did Christ merit for them? Not a right
to deliverance from wrath, for that they have already: and Vid. Aqui^ 1. q. 62.
4. ^. and 12. q. 1 ^4. 5. ^, and 3. q. 19. 3. ^.
Nullus meretur quod jam habet, what one has already, that cannot be
afterward merited. Christ is dead in vain, as to the purchasing of this right,
if they had it before. Upon this ground do our Jun. Animad. in Bell. l. 5. c.
10.
Divines deny that Christ merited any thing for himself, because there was no
advancement of soul or body, but was due to him upon an antecedent title. Nor
yet does Christ merit the continuance of this right: for it is impossible it
should be forfeited, for a man can forfeit nothing with God but by sin: and
sin, if it be pardoned, (as here it is supposed to be, even all sins, and that
from eternity) has no strength to work such a forfeiture, no more then if it
never had been committed. Nor does he merit the possession of that which they
have a right to, for the effect of merit is properly acquisitio juris, the
acquiring or obtaining of the right it self. Duran^. ^ 2. did. 5 q 3. 8.
Nullus meretur id quod est suum: sed per meritum facit quilibet, ut aliquid
efficiatur ei debitum, and per consequens suum, quod ei prius non erat debitum,
nec suum. Indeed men may by violence be kept out of the possession of that
which is their own. But God is not wont to deny possession where himself has
given a right; and if sinners have from eternity a firm and valid right to
life and salvation, Christ should not need to have put himself to the expense
of his blood to have purchased possession. Wherefore, the effects of
Justification, being inseparable from the act, Christ merited the act as well
as the effect, or else he merited neither.

The comparison brought in for illustration makes the matter worse. 23.
then it was before. For, 1. It is utterly false, that all the effects of Gods
electing love, are given for the merits of Christ: for the giving of Christ to
death is an effect of Gods electing love; and yet Christ did not merit his own
sending into the world. 2. That the parallel may consist, it must be first
supposed that the intention of particular means have particular names, as so
many particular acts or causes, and then determined that Christ merited not
those acts, but their effects; As for example, That Gods intention to make us
his children, is our* Adoption, and Christ merited not our Adoption, but the
effects thereof. His intention to sanctify us is our sanctification; and
Christ merited not our sanctification, but the effects of it. His intention to
glorify us is our glorification, and Christ merits its effects: even as his
intent to pardon us is our Justification: and Christ does afterward merit the
effects, but not the act. Thus must the comparison run, or it leaves the matter
darker then it found it. If Mr. Air will not allow of this, let him
acknowledge his doctrine to be without parallel. 3. The effects of Christ's
merits are also the effects of Gods electing love: because the merits of Christ
themselves, are the effects of the same love: and the cause of the cause is
also the cause of the thing caused. But if our Lords death had been only from
his own will, not pre-ordained of God in the decree of election; all the
benefits purchased by it, must have been ascribed to it as the first cause; and
Gods Will of bestowing them had not been causal, but merely concomitant or
consequent. Now his will not to punish, contains not a preparation of any
subordinate cause, for the effecting of this impunity. Ergo, if Christ merited
it, it must be ascribed to him as the principal and only cause, and not to Gods
Will of not punishing, because that Will of God is not the cause of the merits
of Christ, as being determined precisely to a non-punition. And so there will
be the effects of Justification without an act: or the act of Justification
produces its own effects but by accident; or rather does not produce them at
all, but stands by without efficacy, whiles another cause does the work.
Therefore herein also the comparison halts.

The fourth and last objection which Mr. Air makes against himself,. 24.
is this: We may as well call Gods Will to create, Creation; and his Will to
call, Calling; and to glorify, Glorification; as his Will to justify,
Justification.

His answer is, Creating, calling, and glorifying import an inherent change in
the person created, called, glorified, which forgiveness does not, it being
perfect and complete in the mind of God.

Rep. 1. The answer contradicts it self; for it yields it to be a proper
speech, to say, that God does will or purpose to justify: (even as proper, as
to say, he does will or purpose to create, to call, to glorify) and yet bears
us in hand, that Justification is perfect and complete in the mind of God.
Whatsoever is purposed is future. If it have already an actual existence, it is
not capable of being purposed to exist. But the immanent acts of Gods mind are
not future, but from eternity. 2. Though Justification do not make an inherent
change, yet it makes an adherent change, (as was largely proved from Scripture
but now) even as if a Malefactor be condemned, and afterward pardoned: his
condemnation and pardon make an adherent change, that is, a relative: though he
remain the same man that he was, and be not changed inherently and really. And
I wonder, why the purpose of an act which makes an adherent, relative change,
should be called by the name of that act: rather then the purpose of such an
act, which makes an inherent real change, should be called by its name. Ars
posterior utitur prioris oper^. Morality supposes nature. 3. It is true, that
Creation, etc. do make an inherent change. But the question is, whether we have
not as much ground from Scripture to understand those words, as signifying not
the act, but the effect of Creation, etc. as Mr. Air has to interpret the
word Justification in Scripture, for the effects, not for the act. Suppose a
man should be so void of sobriety, as to say, the words, Creation, Vocation,
Glorification, and what of like nature, signify not those several acts, but
their effects; what could Mr. Air say against it? To say, Creation, etc. makes
an inherent change, is to say nothing: for it will quickly be answered, that
the effects of Creation, Vocation, etc. do make an inherent change, not the
acts. If he tell me, the words are never used in Scripture, but as importing
such a change; I answer still as he does of Justification, that the words,
wherever they are to be found in Scripture, are to be understood of the
effects, not of the act. If he yet say, that it is contrary to all our
Protestant Divines, I say so too. Et nomine mutato narratur fabula de te. Thus
much for the vindication of the four objections, which Mr. Air proposes
against himself. He concludes this discourse thus.

SECT. VIII.
HOwever, were it granted, that there was in God from everlasting,. 25.
an absolute, fixed, and immutable will, never to deal with his people
according to their sins, but to deal with them as righteous persons, this
controversy were ended.

Answ. Such a purpose I acknowledge in God, to justify his Elect, when they
should believe, and being justified, not to deal with them as sinners but as
with righteous persons; yet so, as that they are equally with others obliged by
the Law to punishment, till they do believe, and subject actually to the
bearing of the temporal penalties of sin. If this will satisfy Mr. Air, let
him make his most of it. But let us see how it ends the controversy.

First, (says he) Gods non-imputation of sin to his Elect, is not purely
negative, but privative, being the non-imputation of sin realiter futuri in
esse: as the imputation of righteousness is Justitiae realiter futurae in
existentia. 2. This non-imputation of sin is actual, though the ^^n not to be
imputed be not in actual being. So is the imputation of righteousness. 3. This
act of justifying is complete in it self.

Answ. If the begging of the question be the ending of a controversy, we have
done. It is here supposed, that the aforesaid Purpose of God is the imputation
of righteousness, and the non-imputation of sin: which should have been
proved, and not begged. And therefore the foundation failing, there needs no
more to be done to demolish the superstructure; yet a word or two of that also:
2. I say therefore, that an eternal, actual, privative non-imputation of future
sin, is either nonsense, or a contradiction, (let Mr. Air take his choice,
and consider withal, what he is like to make of Justification at last) for that
which is only future, can be deprived of nothing but its futurity: and if it be
ab aeter^o deprived of its futurity, then it is ab aeterno non futurum: and if
ab aeterno non futurum, then it is ab aeterno undepriveable of its futurity:
for that which is never future, is never capable of being made non-future,
unless we could in eternity conc^^e one moment wherein it is made future, and
another moment wherein it is made non-future: which cannot be, because in
eternity there is neither prius nor posterius. Now this privative nonimputation
of future sin, what does it privare? Not the futurity of sin: for then there
never was nor shall be any such thing as sin in the world: for nothing exists
in time, which before its existence was not future. That then which this
non-imputation is privative of, must be the imputation of sin to a person, cui
debitum est imputari. (for that is the habit which only is contrary to it): for
as the privative nonimputation of sin present, and in actual being is privative
only imputationis nunc debitae; so the like non-imputation of sin future, is
privative only imputationis futurae debitae. The Argument therefore returns:
for if this imputation be ab aeterno non-futura, then is it ab aeterno
undeprivable of its futurity: for nothing but that which is future can be
deprived of its futurity: and if it be future ab aeterno, then it cannot be
made ab aeterno non-future: for to be future and non-future ab aeterno is a
contradiction. 3. But if Mr. Air, by his privative non-imputation, mean no
more then a positive act, by which that punishment is kept off, which is, or
will become due to a sinner, I answer farther. That the very essence of the
pardon of sin, consists in making that punishment undue which before was due,
and consequently, in freeing the sinner from all actual suffering for sin, (for
the remission of sin is opposed to the retaining of it, John 20. 23.) or else
in preventing, that that punishment shall never become due, which otherwise
would be due. If in the former sense sin be pardoned from eternity, (for
non-imputation and pardon are all one, both in Mr. Eyres sense, and of the
Scriptures, Romans 4. 7, 8.) then cannot punishment become due in time: but it is
from eternity, non futurum debitum, even as the pardon of sin present and
actually committed, makes that punishment remains no longer due to a person,
which till then was due. And if it be from eternity a nonfuturum debitum* then
neither can it be pardoned from eternity, (pardon being essentially a discharge
from punishment, due actually, or in futurition) nor if it could, can that
pardon be an act of grace: because it is no grace to pardon him, who neither
is, nor never will or can be punishable. Yet here, Reader, distinguish of the
duenesse of punishment: which may arise, either from the nature of sin in it
self: and in this sense it is impossible that sin should be pardoned, either
from eternity or in time; because it is impossible, but that sin should be in
it self punishable, or worthy of punishment: even as on the contrary, virtue
is in it self essentially laudable or rewardable: Or it may be the act of God
by his Law, making punishment due to the sinner, or obliging the sinner unto
punishment for his sin, and in this sense only is it pardonable: and if it be
actually pardoned from eternity, then is punishment made from eternity non
debita, which, as I said before, destroys both the substance and grace of
pardon: let us see if we can clear it by Mr. Eyres comparison. This Will of God
(says he) is like the will of a man, not to require that debt, that shall, or
is about to be contracted. Come on then. Titius knows, that Caius will be
indebted to him: and his purpose is beforehand not to require this debt. I
ask, Is this purpose the pardon of the debt or no? if not, the cause is
yielded; if it be, we will suppose that Titius makes this purpose within
himself in the moment A: the debt will be contracted in the moment C. All the
space of time that is between A and C, the debt is not actually a debt, but
only future. If then this future debt be forgiven in the moment A, then from
thenceforth it cease to be future, and so cannot exist in the moment C,
because for a debt to be forgiven, is to be made no debt: if it be forgiven at
present, it is none at present; if it be forgiven for the future, it is not in
futurition to be a debt. 4. I will only add this. That according to Mr. Eyres
own principles, punishment does never become due to the Elect, so as that they
stand obliged before God, to suffer for any of their sins: for that which in
the protas^s of the similitude, is a debt between man and man, is a sinners
obligation to punishment in the reddition. Now Mr. Air denies, that an elect
sinner is at any time unjust simply and absolutely, but only in a diminutive
sense: that is unjust by nature, or of himself (but positively just by grace at
the same time) which is but the carcass of unrighteousness, making the sinner
unrighteous, no otherwise then as it were materially, he doing that which on
his part is sufficient to oblige him to condemnation: but he is never formally
unjust, because the grace of his Judge prevents his actual obligation. Erg^, he
does never stand actually obliged to the suffering of punishment, nor is ever
actually and formally indebted. And whose debt then it was that Christ paid, or
what debts they are which we are to pray for forgiveness of, Matthew. 6. 12. I
must confess I cannot tell; which is all I shall need to speak of that second
sense, in which some may take the pardon of sin. Nor will I add any more
animadversions upon these passages (though I had once intended it) because some
have been mentioned already before, and others we must make use of in that
which follows

SECT. IX.
SO much for Mr. Eyres first Proposition: upon which I have been. 26.
necessitated to dwell the longer, because his discourse is so perplexed and
intricate. In that which follows I shall be more brief. His next Proposition is
this.

If Justification be taken not for the Will of God, but for the thing willed,
to wit, our discharge from the Law, and deliverance from Punishment; so it has
for its adequate cause and principle, the death and satisfaction of Jesus
Christ.

Answ. The substance of this Proposition I could gladly close with* but
something is first necessary to be animadverted. 1. Whereas Mr. Air here makes
the satisfaction of Christ the adequate, and (as in his Explication he tells us
often) the immediate cause of our Justification: if by adequate and immediate
he mean only in genere causae meritoriae, I consent, because there is no other
meritorious cause that comes between the death of Christ and our Justification.
But if he mean, that the death of Christ is simply the adequate and immediate
cause, then I deny it: because the act of God as Justifier, comes between the
death of Christ and our Justification, Romans 3. 25. 26* Whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, -- that he might be just, and
the Justifier of him that believes on Jesus. And the Lord Jesus himself also,
as Lord of souls, and having all judgment committed to him by the Father,
joins in putting forth the same act of Justification, which was merited in his
blood, as we before observed. 2. Mr. Air has been disputing hitherto, that
Gods Will not to punish is our Justification: That by which we are secured from
wrath, discharged and acquitted from all sin and wrath: yea, that it was a real
discharge from condemnation: an actual and complete non-imputation of sin. But
now he tells us, that the death of Christ is the adequate and immediate cause
of our discharge from the Law, and freedom from punishment. I think (for my
part) it is beyond man's ability to invent or utter more palpable
contradictions. To be secured from wrath, and not secured: acquitted, and not
acquitted: discharged and not discharged: what can be more contradictorious? or
who can conceive what is that security, discharge and acquittance from all sin,
wrath, punishment, condemnation, which yet leaves a man under the power of a
condemning Law, and without freedom from punishment, till Christ buy it with
the price of his blood? 3. Our discharge from the Law, and freedom from
punishment may be understood, either de jure, in taking off our obligation unto
punishment; (and this cannot be the effect of the death of Christ; for Mr. Air
does over and over deny that the Elect did ever stand obliged by the judgment
of God, to the suffering of punishment, as the Reader shall largely see below
in the debate of John 3. 18. and Ephesians. 2. 3.) or it may be understood de facto,
in the real and actual removal of all kinds and degrees of punishment: but
neither can this be the effect of the death of Christ, by it self, or with the
former. The Purpose of Gods Will (says Mr. Air, chap. 10.. 10. page 108.)
secures the person sufficiently, and makes the Law of condemnation to be of no
force, in regard of the real execution of it. So that what is left for the
death of Christ to do, I must profess I cannot imagine; seeing the act of our
Justification, and our disobligation from wrath, and our real impunity do all
exist by virtue of another cause. But for further confirmation of this
Proposition, Mr. Air refers us to chap. 14. where we shall wait upon him, and
say no more to it till we come thither: His third Proposition is this.

Justification is taken for the declared sentence of absolution and. 27.
forgiveness: and thus God is said to justify men, when he reveals and makes
known to them his grace and kindness within himself.

Answ. Understand ( Reader) that when we say, Justification is a declared
sentence of absolution, it is not meant of a private manifestation made to a
particular person that himself is justified or pardoned: but of that public
declared Law of faith, namely, the Gospel it self, which is to be preached to
every creature under heaven, He that believes shall not perish, but shall have
everlasting life. By which Promise, whosoever believes, shall receive
remission of sin. 2. I wonder Mr. Air will not give us throughout his whole
book, so much as one text, wherein Justification must signify a manifestation
or declaration made to a person that he is justified: and yet tell us here that
Justification is so taken. If he mean, it is so taken in Gods language, let him
show where: if in man's, I will not dispute with him how men take it. And as to
that text, Genesis 41. 13. me he restored, but him he hanged, (which Mr. Air does
here instance in, to prove that things in Scripture are said to be, when they
are only manifested) if he had consulted Junius, he would have told him, that
the word ( He) relates not to Joseph, but to Pharaoh. Me Pharaoh restored, but
him (that is, the Baker) he hanged.

The following part of this Chapter is spent in a discourse concerning. 28.
the several times and ways in which God has manifested his Will of
non-imputing sin to his people. In which there is nothing of distinct
controversy, but what has its proper place in the following debate, some
where or other. And most of what he says may be granted, without any advantage
to his cause, or prejudice to the truth; there being no act of grace which God
puts forth in time, but declares something of his gracious purpose, as every
effect declares and argues its cause. And so our Justi^^cation it self
declares, that there was a purpose in God to justify, because he acts
nothing, but according to his purpose. I shall not therefore make any
particular examination of this remnant of the chapter (though there be many
things therein, which I can by no means consent to) but set down in the
following Propositions, how far I consent to each of his. 1. I consent, that
God has declared his immutable Will* not to impute sin to believers* in his
Word: and particularly in the Promise given to our first Parents. The seed of
the woman shall break the S^rpents head. 2. That Gods giving of Christ to the
death for our sins, and his raising of him up for our Justification, does
manifest yet more of the same purpose* 3. That baptism, sealing to a believer,
(in act or habit) the remission of sins past, and entering him into a state of
remission for the future, does also further declare something of the same
purpose. 4. That the same purpose of God is sometime or other in some measure
manifested, to most true Christians by the work of the Spirit. But whether
every true Christian has a full assurance of this purpose of God toward
himself: or any, immediately upon their first believing (at least in these
days) I am in doubt. 5. And that our Justification in the great day of
judgment, does most fully, perfectly and finally declare the same purpose, as
being the most perfect, complete and formal justification of all. And so much
for a discovery of the genius and issues of Mr. Eyres doctrine: I come next to
a vindicaiton of my own.

CHAP. III.
My Reply to Mr. Eyres fifth Chapter. His exceptions against the beginning and
ending of my Sermon answered, Romans 5. 1. vindicated. And the Antecedency of
faith to Justification proved, from Gal. 2. 16. and Romans 8. 30. and Romans 4. 24.
and other places of Scripture.

SECT. I.
FOr proof of our Justification by faith, (the doctrine. 1.
insisted on in my Sermon) I advanced several places of Scripture: to which Mr.
Air shapes some answer in his fifth Chapter: which we shall here take a view
of, that the Reader may yet better understand how unlike
Scripture-Justification is to that eternal Justification which Mr. Air pleads
for. But before he gives his answer to particular places, he thinks fit to
inform the Reader, that I began my Sermon, and concluded it with a great
mistake. The mistake in the beginning is, that I said the Apostles scope in the
Epistle to the Romans was to prove, That we are justified by faith, i. e. that
we are not justified in the sight of God before we believe; and that faith is
the condition on our part, to qualify us for Justification: which is a mistake
I intend to live and die in by the grace of God. The Apostle tells us himself,
that his scope is to prove, that both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin,
Romans 3. 9. and that by the deeds of the Law, neither Jew nor Gentile shall be
justified in Gods sight, ver. 20. that so he may conclude Justification by
faith, ver. 28. and if this be not to prove that men are unjustified but by
faith, I know not what is. And that faith here is to be taken properly, we
prove at large below. If this be not the Apostles scope, what is? Why (says
Mr. Air) to show that we are justified, not by works or righteousness in us,
but by the righteousness of Christ freely imputed to us: which we apprehend
and apply by faith. Very good: and this is as much as I stand for: namely, that
we are justified by the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith. But know
( Reader) that when we speak of apprehending Christ's righteousness, we mean
not an intellectual apprehension, when a man comes to discern and know that he
is justified, (as Mr. Air does) but the right and interest which is given us
by the Promise in the righteousness of Christ, when we believe. And in this
sense are our Protestants to be understood, when they say, the righteousness
of Christ is apprehended by faith. Therefore when De instit. lib. 1. cap. 16.
page 992. in 80.
Bellarmine denies, that it is the office or property of faith to apprehend:
our Protestants reject him as a Quibler. Ames Bill. ener. page 314. in 12^.
Non enim ignoravit Bellarminus long aliud intelligere per apprehensionem,
quam speculationem intellectus. Recte Contarenus. Accipimus Justificationem per
fidem, Gal. 3. 14. Hanc acceptionem Thomas appellat applicationem. Protestants
appellant apprehensionem: non ea significatione quae pertinet ad cognitionem
intellectus; sed qua illud dicimur apprehender quo pervenimus, and quod post
motum nostrum attingimus. This I thought good here to observe once for all,
that the Reader may not be deceived with the ambignity of the word apprehend,
but might know the different use of it in our Protestants writings, and Mr.
Eyres.

The mistake in my Conclusion was, that I told unbelievers, that. 2.
Christ was not a High Priest or Advocate to them, and that they had no Court
of Mercy to appeal unto: which Mr. Air denies to be true. If he mean, they may
appeal by faith, I consent; but that is nothing to his purpose. If, that they
may appeal without faith, or that Christ intercedes that their sins may be
forgiven, who yet live in impenitency and unbelief, let him prove it. Of this
also I shall speak more, when I come to debate how far we are reconciled in
the death of Christ. In the mean time, I wonder why Mr. Air should quarrel
with Mr. Baxter, for asserting universal Redemption in the sense of Davenant,
Cameron, Testardus, Crocius, Amyraldus and others, when in the words following
he yields the main foundations of their judgments in this point; namely, when
he says, Our duty is to exhort all men every where to believe in Christ: we
were as good bid the devils to believe, as those for whom Christ is not a
High Priest. I infer, Ergo, Christ died for all men, (though I say not for
all equally) or else we were as good preach the Gospel to devils as to men. But
let that pass. After Mr. Air has leaped from one end of my Sermon to the
other, he comes to the middle, which indeed does most concern him. And whether
he has convinced me of error in that also, is our next enquiry.

And first, he considers that place, (which was then my text) Romans 5. 1.
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ. His answer is double.

First, (says he) we may, without any violence to the text, place the comma
after justified: as thus, Being justified, by faith we have peace with God.

Reply. And yet gives us no intelligence of any one copy, former or. 3.
latter, printed or manuscript, to warrant such a punctation. As to the
division of the sentence, the Syriack, the Ancients, Lib. 5. advers. Marcion.
c. 13. Si in eum competit pax cum quo suit belsum ei and justificabimur: and
ejus e^i^ Christus, ex cujus fide justificabimur.
Tertullian, Trans. lat. cdit. Loud. 1636. Justificati ergo ex side, pacem
habeamus Et Ex^os. (...) etc.
Theophylact, Edit. Henr. Savill. and Fronto. Duc. Paris. (...) etc.
Chrysostom, In loc.
Origin, and our Protestant Commentatours, both Lutherans and Calvinists, agree
with our Translation. And if Mr. Air will be just, and allow the same liberty
to others, which he takes himself, as small a matter as a comma is, the
mis-placing it may unravel a whole texture of Scripture. The Psycopanycists and
some Papists, when they are urged with the words of the Lord Jesus, To day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, elude the place, by putting the comma after
day; and so read the words thus, Vid. Hag. Grot. Annot. in Luc. 23 43.
Verily I say unto thee this day, Thou shall be with me in Paradise. 2. I
accept of Mr. Eyres observation, that the illative particle therefore, shows,
that this place is a corollary or deduction from the words foregoing; and that
the Apostles scope in the whole chapter foregoing, is to prove, that we are
justified by faith, is more plain then to need proof. So that these words are
the Conclusion of the former dispute, issuing into this doctrine, That we are
justified by faith. The uses whereof the Apostle immediately subjoynes. But
this way not taking, Mr. Air is provided of another, which is this.

If (says he) we take the words, as commonly they are read; the sense comes
all to one, s^il. That being justified by Christ, we have peace with God: who
by the faith he creates in us, causes us to enjoy this reconciliation.

Rep. This is somewhat worse then the former. The Apostle says, Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Mr.
Air, to turn out faith from its office in Justification, will have the words
read by transposition, Being justified by our Lord Jesus Christ we have peace
with God through faith: Or the word faith in the beginning of the verse, must
signify our Lord Jesus Christ; and the Lord Jesus Christ in the latter part of
the verse must be put for faith: which, as it is an intolerable liberty of
interpreting Scriptures, so is it without all precedent in Scripture, which is
neither wont to put faith for Christ, nor Christ for faith, (though both are
often included, where but one is mentioned). Some (I know) do fasten such a
sense on a text or two, but without any necessity or compulsory reason.

SECT. II.
THe next place is Gal. 2. 16. We have believed in Jesus Christ,. 4.
that we may be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
Law.

Mr. Air answers, 1. That this does no more infer that we are not justified
before we believe, then that of our Savior, Matthew. 5. 44, 45. Love your
enemies, etc. -- that you may be the children of your Father in Heaven, infers,
That works do go before Adoption. Things in Scripture are then said to be, when
they are known, manifested, and declared to be, Romans 3. 26. That he might be
just, i. e. that he might be known and acknowledged to be just. So John 15. 8.
and 13. 35, etc. So here, That we might be justified, is, that we might know
that we are justified. Not the being of our Justification, but the knowledge
and feeling of it is a consequent of faith.

Rep. 1. I would never desire that any Argument of mine should conclude more
firmly, then that text, Mat. 5. will infer, that none are the children of God
in the sense there meant, before they love their enemies, and perform the
other duties there enjoined: for it is manifest the Lord there speaks of
becoming the children of God, not by adoption, but by similitude of manners.
Reader, see ver. 46, 47, 48. and give judgment impartially. Now in this way it
is impossible to be a child of God, till these things be done, and therefore
that part of the answer strengthens my Argument. 2. To Romans 3. 26. where God is
said to have set forth his Son, etc. -- that he might be just; I answer, that
there is no necessity of understanding the word just, of being known and
acknowledged to be just: for it will be a kind of tautologie. To declare, I
say, at this time his righteousness, That he may be declared to be righteous.
Nor yet will it follow, that God was not just before; but that he had not been
just now, if Christ had not suffered for sinners. But if by the word just, be
meant, declared to be just, it will not reach our case. We seek such a sense of
the word Justification, when God is the justifier, and man the object, (which
throughout all Mr. Eyres book is a non-inventus;) when man is the justifier,
and God the object, such a sense is necessary: because God is capable of no
other Justification from man, as man is from God. 3. As to the thing it self, I
acknowledge it readily, That things are many times said to be in Scripture,
when they are only manifested and declared to be; but such an interpretation is
seldom warrantable, unless the subject matter invite to it, as in John 15. and
13. where the Lord speaking to those that were already disciples, that if they
brought forth much fruit, they should be his disciples; it is most natural to
understand it of being manifested, or of continuing his disciples. But we may
not therefore interpret Justification by faith, of a manifestation or
declaration that we are justified: not only because the texts wherein that
phrase is used, suppose no Justification before it; but also, 1. Because other
Scriptures deny them that believe not, to be justified, John 3. 18. Romans 3. 19,
22, 23, 24. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 11. Ephesians. 2. 3. and other places. And 2. Because when
to be in Scripture, signifies to be manifested or declared, it is understood
perpetually of an external public manifestation or declaration to many; not of
an internal, spiritual, private discovery to the soul or conscience of a
particular person: for proof of which, I desire no other witness then these
very texts, which Mr. Air has here mentioned, supposing them all to be
understood as he would have them. Our love to our enemies declares us to be the
children of God: our bringing forth much fruit, declares us to be the disciples
of Christ, both publicly and in the sight of many witnesses: God is declared
to be just, still publicly, and in the judgment of many: yea, of all, good or
bad, men or devils. But this sense will by no means fit Mr. Eyres turn, for
he contends for no more then, that Justification is manifested upon faith, to
the believers own conscience: nor do I think he will so much as pretend, that
he that believes, is by his faith publicly declared to the world to be a
justified person. So that neither can Justification by faith be allowed, to be
understood of a declarative Justification; nor if it might, could it yet at all
gratify his design.

Of all places it cannot have that sense in this text. 1. Because. 5.
Justification by faith is expressly opposed to Justification by works.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ: even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we may be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law: for by the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. But it is most certain, and Mr.
Air confesses it roundly, that works do manifest and declare our
Justification, page 79, 80. Ergo, by Justification here, is not meant the
declaration or manifestation that a person is justified. 2. Justification in
regard of its common nature is the same, whether it be by faith or works:
namely, as it signifies a constituting of us just before God; for Christians
attain that righteousness by faith, which the Jews sought after by works: as
the Apostle does more largely express it, Romans 9. 31, 32. Israel which
followed after the Law of righteousness, have not attained to the Law of
righteousness: Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law. Ergo, Justification, when ascribed to faith, must be
taken in the same sense, as when it is denied to works. But the Jews by their
works sought to be justified before God, and not simply, that it should be
manifested to them, that they were justified before their works were wrought:
for they sought to be justified by works, as the matter for which they should
be justified. And therefore when the Apostle opposes himself directly to their
principle, it is in these words. By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh living
be justified; that is, in the sight of God: as it is expressed by the Psalmist,
Psalm. 143. 2. and by this Apostle in this Argument, Romans 3. 20, 21. Gal. 3. 11.
Ergo, to be justified by faith in this place, is not simply to be assured of a
man's Justification, but to be justified before God. 3. And because Mr. Air
does use to oppose Justification by faith, to Justification by Christ; I desire
him to consider, that Justification by faith, is here the very same with
Justification by Christ; for after he had said, ver. 16. We have believed in
Christ, that we may be justified by the faith of Christ, he adds, ver. 17. but
if while we seek to be justified by Christ. But to be justified by Christ, is
not merely to have it by Christ declared that we are justified. This is not
only a concession, but a main principle of Mr. Eyres. Ergo, to be justified by
faith here, is not simply to have the knowledge of our Justification.

But Mr. Air has another answer, a very strange one, and that. 6.
is this. In the text it is, We have believed, that we might be justified by
faith: so that from hence it can be inferred only, that we are not justified by
faith before believing.

Rep. As if the question between the Jews and the Apostle were not, whether a
man be justified simply by faith, or works? But whether a man were justified by
faith, by faith or works? and the Apostles answer is to this effect; That
indeed if you speak of Justification by faith, we are justified by faith, and
not by works. He that has nothing else to do, may exercise his wits farther
upon this acumen, if he please. If Mr. Air mean no more, then that we are not
justified in conscience before we believe, (as the latter words of his answer
seem to import) then is this second answer a mere tautologie, as being the very
same with the former.

SECT. III.
THe next Scripture alleged is, Romans 8. 30. Wh^m he predestined,. 7.
them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. From whence it is manifest, that as glory
follows Justification, so does Justification follow vocation unto faith.

Mr. Air answers, 1. That the order of words in Scripture, does not show the
order and dependence of the things themselves, 1 Samuel 6. 14, 15. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
2. The Apostles scope here, is not to show in what order these benefits are
bestowed upon us; but how inseparably they are linked to our predestination. 3.
The Apostle here speaks of Justification, as it is declared and terminated in
our consciences.

Rep. Mr. Air is the first of all Authors, that ever I met with, or heard of,
ancient or modern, Papist or Protestant, Remonstrant or Contra-Remonstrant,
that ever denied the Apostles scope in this place, to be principally to show
the order in which the benefits mentioned are bestowed upon us. And though I
will not build my faith on humane authority; yet neither do I account it
^ngenuous to desert the sense of all men gratis, without pretending at least
some reason for my singularity: but to the matter. I acknowledge, that the
Scriptures in relating matters of fact, do frequently use a Hysteron pr^teron,
reporting those things first, which it may be were acted last, or e c^ntra, as
in 1 Samuel 6. 14, 15. Also that in a copulate axiom, where many things are
attributed to one subject, the order many times is not attended, but the
connection only: as if I should say of God, (as the Apostle does of the Law)
that he is holy, and just and good: or the latter is exegetical of the former:
as in that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 9. He has saved us, and called us. But 2.
I do utterly deny, that such manner of speech as is here used (Rhetoricians
call it climax or a gradation) where several Propositions are linked together,
the predicate of each former being the subject of the latter, is any where else
to be found, but where the Speakers Purpose is to declare, not only the
connection, but specially the order of the things themselves. Vid. V^ss^um.
instit. orat. lib. 5 cap. 8. and And. Tal^um. Rhetor. ^x P. R. cap. ^1.
Examples hereof, out of Poets, Orators, (Greek and Latin) and Ecclesiastical
Writers; the Reader may see in almost every Rhetorician. Ovid. Mars videt hanc,
visamque cupit, potiturque cupita. Cicero. In urbe luxuries creatur: ex luxuri^
existat avaritia necesse est: ex avaritia ^rumpat audscia, etc. But let the
Scriptures determine it, Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. Affliction works patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed: that is,
(for the words are a Meiosis) gives boldness and joy, which is the thing the
Apostle is proving; ver. 3. so Romans 10. 14, 15. (where the order is retrograde)
How can they call on him, on whom they have not believed? how can they believe
on him, of whom they have not heard? how can they hear without a Preacher? how
can they preach, unless they be sent? The wit of man cannot digest words more
methodically, to show the orderly dependence of things one upon another. As in
the former example, of patience on affliction: experience on patience: hope on
experience: joy on hope. And in the second example, of invocation on faith,
faith on hearing, hearing on preaching, preach(...)

3. In the present text, the matter is yet more clear, because Predestination,.
8.
Vocation, Justification and Glorification, are all of them actions of one and
the same efficient, tending unto one and the same end: and every second action
cumulative to the former, as the partitle also does evidence. Whom he
predestined, them he also called: whom he called, them he also justified:
whom he justified, them he also glorified. And though one and the same person
be the object of all these acts; yet from the termination of each former act
upon him, he becomes the more immediate object of the succeeding: as appears by
the relative particles (...) and (...): Whom, Them. So that the object of
vocation is a person predestined: of Justification a person called: of
glorification a person justified: or else those particles are utterly
superfluous, and the whole sentence ridiculous. 4. Mr. Air will also
acknowledge, that in two of these Propositions, not only connection, but order
is observed: namely, in the first; whom he predestined, them he called: and
the last; whom he justified, them he glorified. Yet has he as much reason to
deny both these, as the middlemost. And if Arminians, who acknowledge no
absolute election before faith, should deny the first; and a Sadducee, who
confesses no resurrection but what is past already, should deny the last: he
could not vindicate the text against either, but by the same Arguments, which
will convince himself of error in denying the second.

5. But what does Mr. Air mean to make us believe, when he. 9.
tells us, he can see no inconvenience at all, in saying the Apostle here
speaks of Justification, as declared in conscience; whereas one would think it
had been easy to see, that he is liable to a double shrewd inconvenience in so
saying: the one is of contradicting himself; the other, of abusing the text. 1.
The Apostles scope here (says he) is not, to show in what order these benefits
are bestowed upon us. I wonder in which of them he breaks order. In the first
and last Proposition (as was but now observed) it will surely be granted, that
he keeps order punctually: and when he says in the second Proposition, whom he
called, them he justified; I am sure Mr. Air himself will acknowledge, that he
has hit the order as right as can be, if by Justification be meant that which
is terminated in conscience (as he speaks.) And why then does he deny, that the
Apostle intends to declare the order of these benefits? belike, though his
scope were not to do it; yet he had the good hap to stumble upon it, quite
besides his purpose and intention. 2. But neither can it be understood of
Justification in conscience; for the Justification here spoken of, is only and
entirely Gods act: no less then Predestination, Vocation, and Glorification:
But Justification in conscience is the act of conscience, reasoning and
concluding a man's self to be just: and as for the expression of Justification
terminated in conscience, let me here once for all declare against it; not only
as not being Scriptural, but as not being very rational. For that upon which
Justification is terminated, is that which is justified. But it is the man, and
not his conscience, which is justified. Erge, it is the person, and not the
conscience properly, upon which Justification is terminated. Passio as well as
Actio is proprie suppositi.

SECT. IV.
ANother text which does manifestly hold forth Justification to. 10.
be consequent to faith is, Romans 4. 24. Now it was not written for his sake
alone, that righteousness was imputed to him, but for our sakes also, to whom
it shall be imputed, if we believe.

Mr. Air answers, that the particle ( if) is used sometimes declaratively, to
describe the person to whom the benefit does belong: as 2 Timothy 2. 21. If a man
purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor. And Heb. 3. 6.
Whose house are we, if we holdfast our confidence, and the rejoicing of hope,
etc.

Rep. Which observation is here misplaced: for I am not yet disputing the
conditionality, but merely the antecedency of faith to Justification. Now
suppose the particle ( if) be used sometimes declaratively, yet is it always
antecedent to the thing which it declares, or rather to the declaration of that
thing. As suppose (which yet I do wholly deny) that a man's purging himself, do
only manifest and declare that he is a vessel of honor; yet surely his purging
of himself is antecedent to that declaration or manifestation. As the holding
fast our confidence is also antecedent to our being declared to be the house of
God. Yea, and Mr. Air himself interprets the imputation of righteousness in
the text, of our knowing righteousness to be imputed to us: of which
knowledge, himself will not deny faith to be the antecedent, yea, and more then
an antecedent, even the proper effecting cause. And therefore to tell us
beforehand, that the particle ( if) does not always propound the cause, when
by his own interpretation it must signify the cause (which is a great deal
more then a mere condition or antecedent) was a very impertinent observation.
His sense of the text he thus delivers.

His righteousness is imputed to us if we believe, q. d. Hereby we may know
and be assured, that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us, if God has drawn
our hearts to believe.

Rep. To whom righteousness shall be imputed, if we believe, says. 11.
the Apostle. We shall know that righteousness was imputed to us before we
believed, says Mr. Air, (for that is his sense, though I do a little vary the
words) This is an admirable gloss. Whereas, 1. Our knowledge, that
righteousness is imputed to us is our own act: but the imputation of
righteousness in the text is Gods act, not ours, ver. 6. Yea, (says Mr. Air
himself, page 87.. 13.) it is the act of God alone, and that in opposition to
all other causes whatsoever, whether Ministers of the Gospel, or a man's own
conscience, or faith. But it is like when he wrote that, he had forgotten what
he had said before in this place. 2. Nor does the text say, righteousness is
imputed to us if we believe (as Mr. Air renders the words) but (...). Quibus
futurum est ut imputetur. To whom it shall come to pass that it shall be
imputed, if we believe. 3. And that this imputation of righteousness cannot
signify our knowing it to be imputed, should (methinks) be out of question
with Mr. Air. He disputes against me a little below, that when the Apostle
pleads for Justification by faith, the word faith must be taken objectively,
for Christ: because otherwise faith could not be opposed to works, forasmuch as
faith it self is a work of ours. And (says the Apostle) in this chapter, ver.
4. To him that works, the reward is not imputed of grace, but of debt. Hence
it follows, that that imputation is here meant, which has no work of ours for
its cause. But faith is clearly the cause of our knowing righteousness to be
imputed: and that as it is a work of ours. Ergo, the imputation of
righteousness here spoken of, is not our knowing or being assured that it is
imputed.

4. To impute righteousness in this verse, must have the same * 12.
sense, as it has ten or eleven times besides in the chapter; and
particularly, when it is said, that Abraham's faith was imputed to him (not for
righteousness, as we render it) but (...), unto righteousness, ver. 3. 9, 22,
23. and unto every son of Abraham's faith, ver. 5. 11, 24 Now what is it to
impute faith unto righteousness? I know, that learned and godly men give
different Expositions. I may be the more excusable if I am mistaken. I conceive
therefore that to impute faith unto righteousness is an Hebraisme, and
signifies properly, to reward the believer with righteousness, or more
plainly, Vid. R Sol. Jarchi in Genesis 15. 6^ and Maymon. more Nevoch. 3. 53. and
O^cum. in Romans 4. 5. (...). Et Tertull advers. Marcion. lib. 5. 3. Abraham Deo
credidi^ and deputatum est justitiae: a^que exi^de Pater multarum Nationum
meruit nuncupa^i. Nos autem credendo Deo magis proinde justificamur sicut
Abraham, and vitam proinde consequimur.
to give the believer a right to blessedness, as his reward: the word Reward
being taken in that more laxe and metaphorical sense, in which the Scriptures
use it, when they call Heaven by glory, and eternal life by that name. And as
the whole salvation of believers is expressed by its two terms, to wit, They
shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life, John 3. 16. so in
Justification there is a right given to deliverance from punishment, (which is
the terminus a quo,) in which respect it is called the pardon and
non-imputation of sin: of which the Apostle gives an instance out of David,
ver. 6. 7, 8. and a right to the more positive blessings of heavenly and
eternal life by the Promise, (which is the terminus ad quem) in which respect
it is called Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. of which also he gives us an
instance in Abraham, ver. 13. for the Promise, that he should be heir of the
world, etc. In reference to which part or term of Justification, it is in
special manner, that Abraham's faith is said to be imputed to him unto
righteousness: for though those Promises were things, which in the letter were
carnal; yet in substance and signification they were spiritual, and so did he
understand them, Heb. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15. and 11. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Now that
this is the true notion of the phrase, ( imputing faith unto righteousness)
namely, a rewarding of the believer with a right to blessedness, I gather from
ver. 4, 5. To him that works, the reward is not imputed of grace, but of
debt: but to him that works not, but believes, his faith is imputed to him
unto righteousness. Where the imputing of faith unto righteousness, is
directly opposed to the imputing a reward according to works. Ergo, as the
imputing works unto righteousness, were to give a right to blessedness
according to works, sub ratione mercedis: so on the contrary, to impute faith
unto righteousness, is to give the believer a right and title to blessedness,
sub ratione mercedis. The difference only is this: the former is of debt, the
latter of grace, as we shall further show anon. 2. Thus also we find the
Apostle interpreting the phrase; for after he had said, that Abraham was made
the father of all them that believe, that righteousness might be imputed unto
them also, ver. 11. he explains himself, ver. 13. for the Promise was not to
Abraham or his seed by the Law, but by the righteousness of faith. The reason
whereof he renders, ver. 16. That it might be by grace, that the Promise might
be sure to all the seed. So that the establishing of the Promise to Abraham,
and all that walk in the steps of his faith, (by which a right to life is given
both to him and them) is the imputation Vid. Dav Paraeum Dub. ex^lic. in Romans
4. Dub. 3.
of righteousness to them. 3. The same phrase is used of Phineas, Psalm. 106.
30, 31. Then stood up Phineas, and executed judgment, -- And it was imputed to
him unto righteousness, unto all generations for evermore. The meaning of
which words is easy to be learned from the story it self, Numb. 25. 12, 13.
Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my Covenant of Peace. And he shall have
it, and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood. The
Promise of the continuance of the Priesthood in his line, from one generation
to another, as the reward of his zeal, is that which the Psalmist calls, the
imputing it to him unto righteousness to all generations. Indeed the phrase
there is not altogether so comprehensive as it is here, because the Promise
made him was but of one particular blessing, and so could not constitute him
righteous universally, but only in part, and as to that particular blessing
which the Promise gave him right to. Yet it shows the Scripture-sense of the
phrase as sufficiently, as when the same phrase is used with reference unto
faith, to show, that thereby we obtain the reward of an universal
righteousness. 4. The imputation of righteousness, in respect of the terminus
a quo, is all one with the non-imputation of sin, ver. 6, 8. and what is it to
non-impute sin, but not to render the wages of sin, by destroying the guilt and
punishment of it? 2 Samuel 19. 19. 2 Timothy 4. 16. Ergo, to impute faith unto
righteousness, is to reward it with a right to impunity and blessedness:
though this reward be not of debt, but of grace. This therefore being the sense
of the phrase throughout the whole Chapter, we leave Mr. Eyres gloss to go
seek entertainment where it can find it.

SECT. V.
THere remain three texts more, which I mentioned in my Sermon;. 13.
to prove, that Justification follows faith: namely, Acts 10. 43. Through his
Name, whosoever believes on him shall receive remission of sin. And 26. 18. --
To turn them from darkness to light, and from the Power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sin, and an inheritance amongst all them
that are sanctified through faith. And 13. 39. By him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the Law of
Moses.

To the two former Mr. Air answers. That the giving of remission, and
receiving it, are two things. The former is Gods act, and the latter is ours. A
Prince may pardon a Malefactor, and he thereby is secured from punishment,
though it come not to his hands for a good whiles after.

Rep. The word receive in Scripture is taken sometimes actively; as when we are
said to receive God and Christ, and his Word, Matthew. 10. 40. John 13. 20. Acts
2. 41. namely, by believing. Sometimes it is taken passively, in which sense,
giving and receiving are not two acts, but one and the same; as when we are
said to receive the reward of inheritance, Col. 3. 24. to receive eternal life,
Luke 18. 30. to receive a hundred fold, Matthew. 19. 29. In all which (and the
like) places, our receiving is all one with Gods giving the reward of
inheritance, eternal life, a hundred fold. And thus to receive remission of
sin, is all one with Gods giving remission, or to have our sins remitted and
pardoned. In this sense do our Protestants understand Receiving remission
through faith, as was before observed out of Contarenus. So do the Scriptures
also, Gal. 3. 22. All are concluded under sin, That the Promise (to wit, of
Justification) by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.
In which place, Gods giving righteousness by the Promise, and our receiving
it, are one and the same act: compare ver. 14. 18. So Romans 5. 17. They that
receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in
life, etc. Whence also it is manifest, that Gods giving, and our receiving, are
both one act. Therefore this giving or receiving of righteousness, is called,
the coming of grace or righteousness upon us, ver. 18. As by the offense of
one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the righteousness
of one, the free gift came upon all men unto Justification. 2. The receiving of
remission must be understood in the same sense, as the receiving of the
inheritance: for they are joined both together in the text, Acts 26. 18. That
they may receive forgiveness of sin, and an inheritance. But for us to receive
the inheritance, is no more, then to be made partakers of the inheritance: not
by any act of ours, but by the free and effectual gift of God. 3. To receive
remission, what act of ours is it? Mr. Air does not tell me plainly, but by
his answers to former texts, and his instance here of a Malefactor pardoned
before he knows it. I presume he means, that it is our knowledge of our sins
being remitted. But such a knowledge is not wont to follow so presently and
immediately upon believing, as pardon of sin is every where in Scripture
supposed to do: (unless it be in those who have the perfect knowledge of the
moment and minute of their first Conversion unto God.) But most Christians
attain not to such a knowledge, till after long searchings and experience: and
it is very improper to say, a man receives such an act of his own, which
himself works out with much labor and travel of mind: if our knowledge of
remission were by immediate revelation, or enthusiastical inspiration, the
expression were much more tolerable. 4. To the instance of a Malefactor that
may be pardoned, though he do not know it till a great while after; I answer in
the words of Christ set forth p. 26, ^7.
Reverend Dr. Godwin. Gods Promises of forgiveness are not as the pardons of a
Prince, which merely contain an expression of his royal word for pardoning; --
But as if a Prince should offer to pardon a Traitor, upon marriage with his
child, whom in and with that pardon he offers in such a relation. So as all
that would have pardon, must first seek out for his child: and thus it is in
the matter of believing. -- The Promises hang all upon Christ: and without him
there is no interest to be had in them. He that has the Son, has life. 1
John 5. 12. Thus the Doctor.

To Acts 13. 39. Mr. Air answers. That the Apostle shows. 14.
the excellency of the Gospel above the Law, in that 1. The Law did not cleanse
from all sin. 2. And but in an external, typical manner. 3. And that by
sacrifice after sacrifice, etc.

Rep. All which things I readily grant. Yet, 1. Some kind of pardon there was
under the Law, which did necessarily suppose a coming unto those sacrifices,
Heb. 10. 1. The people were not first pardoned, and then came to the offering
of sacrifice, or to the Priest. So does also the more perfect pardon under the
Gospel, necessarily presuppose a coming by faith to the true High Priest, the
Lord Jesus, that sinners may partake therein. 2. When the Scriptures do so
constantly require faith unto Justification, and faith only: (for proof of
which, Mr. Air confesses, my Concordance would furnish me with many more
places then I have taken notice of) I will never be brought to believe, that it
is required as a consequent of Justification: for all Christian graces and
duties are required as consequents, as well as faith, (even by Mr. Eyres
grant.) Nor yet that by Justification is meant our knowledge and assurance,
that we are justified: because unto that also many other things may be
required, and not faith only. As for example, self-examination, and proving of
our selves, 2 Cor. 13. 5. diligence, in adding one grace to another, 2 Pet. 1.
5, 6, 7, 10. a good conscience toward God and man, and a keeping of the
Commandments of Christ, 1 John 3. 20, 21. John 14. 23. love of the brethren, 1
John 3. 18, 19, 14. and the like.

And thus much for the Vindication of the Texts, proving Faith's antecedency to
Justification. By all which the Reader may see, that when I said, the only
answer made to these Texts was, That Justification is to be understood of that
which is evidenced in conscience; this account is true and perfect, though Mr.
Air tell him it be very imperfect; there being not one of all the places
mentioned, but what he answers to by such a temperament of the word
Justification. It was therefore necessary that I should prove, that when the
Apostle pleads for Justification by faith, he is to be understood of
Justification before God, and not of that which is in the Court of Conscience.
To which end I advanced four Arguments in my Sermon: the asserting of which
against Mr. Eyres exceptions, is my next undertaking.

CHAP. IV.
An Answer to Mr. Eyres eighth Chapter, and part of the Ninth. His saying and
unsaying. Many Arguments proving, that when we are said to be justified by
faith, faith is to be taken proving, that when we are said to be justified by
faith, faith is be taken properly, for the faith in us, and not for Christ.
Faith and works, how opposed in the matter of Justification. That we cannot be
said to be justified by faith in reference to faiths evidencing our
Justification virtually, or axiomatically, or syllogistically. Sinners,
according to Mr. Air, the causes of their own Justification. Nor is
Justification taken properly in all the Scriptures, as he expounds it.

SECT. I.
THe first Argument proving, that when the Apostle. 1.
pleads for Justification by faith, he is to be understood of Justification
before God, or in the sight of God: and not in the Court of Conscience, is
this. The Question between him and the Jews was not, whether we were declared
to be justified by faith or works, but whether we were justified by faith or
works in the sight of God. And he concludes, that it is by faith, and not by
works, Romans 3. 20, 21. Gal. 3. 11. All this Mr. Air grants; but will have the
Apostle by the word faith to understand, not the act or habit of faith, but the
object; scil. Christ's righteousness, or righteousness imputed. His reason is,
because else there were no opposition between faith and works: seeing faith or
the act of believing is a work of ours no less then love. Yet when the Apostle
disputes for Justification by faith, Gal. 2. 16. and that in a direct
opposition to works, and for the imputation of faith unto righteousness, Romans
4. still as opposed to works, ver. 4, 5. we were told that justifying and
imputing were the manifestation of Justification and Imputation: But now we
have another answer, which overthrows the former; namely, that faith is to be
taken for Christ and his righteousness? What aileth thee, O Jordan, that thou
art turned backward? Yea, he will not allow, that the Apostle has any question
with them about the time when, or the con^tion upon which we are justified. Yet
I think all men besides himself will grant, that his design is to show the way
and means, by which a sinner may come to be justified. Though I confess I see
not how Mr. Air can grant this. For if the Justification of all that are
justified, be absolute and perfect in the death of Christ, (as he supposes)
then from that time there can no way be prescribed to a sinner, no counsel
given him, what course to take, that he may be justified. Only he may be told,
that if he be justified, the way to know it, is to believe. And when the Jews
say, We must be justified by works, and the Apostle, By faith: they are both
out, for we are justified by neither. And the Gentiles were in an error, in
seeking to be justified by faith, as well as the Jews in seeking it by works:
if they seek any thing more then to know that they are justified.

But because Mr. Air does so often take Sanctuary at this notion,. 2.
that says is put for its object, Christ and his righteousness, (though he
give us not one text that may convince us of it) we must of necessity examine
the truth of it. And yet when I consider, how presumptuous and irrational the
conceit is in it self: and how solidly already confuted by Mr. De re^ on^ p^c
par. 2. l 1. c. 15.
Wotton: who also has set down the testimonies of no less then forty
Authors, Fathers and Protestants, besides Papists, all co^senting with him: I
confess, I can hardly think it worth my labor; yet something must be done,
this only being premised, (which has also been before observed) That when our
Protestants sometimes say, the word faith, (in this Proposition, we are
justified by faith) is to be taken objectively: they intend not to exclude
faith it self from its concurrence to our Justification: (as Mr. Air does)
for we have showed in the first Chapter, their unanimous consent, in making
faith the instrument or condition of our Justification. But only to deny it to
be the matter or meritorious cause of our Justification: which they truly say
is only the righteousness of Jesus Christ, who is the object of our faith. So
that we are justified by Christ as the meritorious cause of our Justification:
and yet by faith as the instrument or condition, upon which the righteousness
of Christ has effect upon us, to our Justification. And so I come to prove,
that faith is to be taken subjectively, for the grace or act of faith, not
objectively for Christ, throughtout the Apostles discourse for Justification by
faith.

SECT. II.
1. SUch an Interpretation of the words, as makes nonsense of most. 3.
of the Scriptures, which speak of Justification by faith, is not to be
admitted. But to put faith for Christ believed on, makes nonsense of most of
those texts, which speak of Justification by faith. Ergo. For proof of the
minor, we shall begin, where the Apostle begins to dispute for Justification by
faith, Romans 3. 21, 22. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested, even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ:
put faith for Christ believed or, and the words run thus, Even the
righteousness of God, which is by Christ of Jesus Christ: or put it for the
righteousness of Christ, and they run thus, Even the righteousness of God,
which is by righteousness of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that
believe. Almost the very same words does this Apostle use, Phil. 3. 9. That I
may be found in him, not having my own righteousness, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.
Where, in like manner, if faith be put for righteousness, we must read the
words thus, Not having my own righteousness, but that which is through the
righteousness of Christ, the righteousness which is of God through
righteousness. I hope the Reader does not expect, that I should spend time in
confuting these absurd paraphrases: I count that sufficiently done in
mentioning them. In the same Chapter to the Romans, ver. 25. Whom God h^^h set
forth, to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. According to Mr. Air
we must read it, Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Christ
in his blood; or at best, through righteousness in his blood. But his blood
being here set forth, as the object of the faith mentioned in the text: the
blood of Christ must be made the object of his righteousness, if by faith be
meant righteousness: which will resolve the words into a pretty piece of
sense. Again, ver. 26. God through the death of Christ, is said to be the
Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. What Is that? of him that christeth in
Jesus? or what is it? It is an easy matter to say, that faith is put for
Christ or his righteousness: but the mischief is, the substantive cannot be
varied into a verb or participle, to make an intelligible Proposition; for
example, We are justified by faith: that is, (will Mr. Air say) by Christ, or
his righteousness. But then change the substantive into a verb or participle,
and give me the sense of it. As, He that believes in Christ is justified. If
faith be put for Christ, what is it to believe in Christ? or what do we mean,
when we say, We are justified by faith in Jesus Christ? We are justified by
Christ in Jesus Christ? or by righteousness in Jesus Christ? This latter, I
confess, has a more tolerable sound, but not a grain more of sense. For when
we say, We are justified by faith in Christ, Christ in that Proposition is the
object of faith, and we the subject. But if faith signify righteousness, then
Christ is the object of his own righteousness. Of the nonsense of this
Interpretation, the Reader shall see more in that which follows. 2.
Justification by Christ or his righteousness was finished in his death,
(according to Mr. Air) Ergo, if faith signify Christ or his righteousness,
we were justified by faith, as soon as Christ was dead. But many years after
Christ's death, there were many who were to be justified by faith, Romans 3. 30.
It is one God (...) (in the future tense) which shall justify the circumcision
and uncircumcision, (that is, Jews and Gentiles) by faith, which is the
application of the general Conclusion, ver. 28. We conclude, That a man is
justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law. Ergo, they were not justified
by faith as soon as Christ was dead.

3. But because Mr. Air, by his marginal Annotation, referres us. 4.
to Romans 4. let us make some enquiry into that Chapter. And if we prove, that
faith in that Chapter, is meant of the act, not of the object, this
controversy is ended. We begin with the third verse, Abraham believed God, and
it was imputed to him unto righteousness. What can be more plain, then that it
was Abraham's believing which was imputed to him, (of the sense of that phrase
we have spoke already) even as when it is said of Phineas, Psalm. 106. 30, 31.
Then stood up Phineas, and executed judgment. -- And it was imputed to him
unto righteousness. I appeal to common sense, whether his executing of
judgment were not the thing that was imputed to him unto righteousness? or if
something be to be understood which is not expressed: let every man's fancy be
left to its liberty, to supply what he sees sit, and we shall be much the
better for the Scriptures. 2. The same is also delivered more generally of all
believers, ver. 5. To him that works not, but believes, his faith is imputed
to him unto righteousness. If there had been no more spoken in all the
chapter, this had been enough to prove, that by faith here is meant the act,
not the object. For 1. It is the express letter of the text, To him that
works not, but believes. 2. That faith is here meant, which is a man's own,
before it be imputed. His faith is imputed to him unto righteousness. But the
righteousness of Christ is no man's before it be imputed. If it be, let us know
what act that is, distinct from imputation, and antecedent to it, by which
Christ's righteousness is made ours. 3. That faith is here meant, which is so a
man's own, as that in individuo it is no bodies else. But Christ's
righteousness is not so any one man's, as to be no bodies else: for then should
be but one man in the world, to whom the righteousness of Christ were imputed.
The Proposition is manifest: because the faith here spoken of, is determined to
the person of the believer. To him that believes, (...) HIS faith is imputed.
And it is called the faith which Abraham HAD in his uncircumcision, ver. 11.
And the truth is, that otherwise (I mean, if His faith be His Christ) Abraham's
faith, or David's faith, or any other Christians faith may be said to be imputed
unto us, with the very same propriety of speech, as it is said to be imputed to
him or them. 4. If faith be here put for Christ or his righteousness, the words
are nonsense. Put faith for righteousness, and the words run thus. But unto
him that believes, his righteousness is imputed to him for righteousness. What
sense is that? or put it for Christ, and they run thus, But unto him that
believes, his Christ is impured to him unto righteousness. But what is it to
impute Christ unto righteousness? I know he is said to be made unto us
righteousness; 1 Cor. 1. even as he is made unto us Wisdom and Sancti^ication,
that is, the Author of both: but to impute him unto righteousness is a
barbarism. To say nothing of the insolency of that phrase ( His Christ) in
Scripture; and of making Christ, as distinct from his righteousness, the
object of justifying faith.

3. We have already proved, that to impute faith unto righteousness,. 5.
is to reward the believer with a right to life. If then faith be put for
Christ; to impute faith unto righteousness, is to reward Christ with
righteousness. And if for righteousness, it is to reward righteousness with
righteousness: both which are absurd. 4. The faith which was imputed to
Abraham unto righteousness, was the faith which he had, being yet
uncircumcised, ver. 10, 11. If faith do here signify Christ's righteousness,
the words sound thus, The righteousness of Christ, which he had in his
uncircumcision, was imputed to him unto righteousness. And because he could
not have it but by imputation, therefore the full sense will be this. The
righteousness of Christ, which was imputed to him in his uncircumcision, was
imputed to him unto righteousness. Spectatum admissi, etc.

5. Consider we also what is said, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. from whence. 6.
we advance three Arguments more. 1. The faith from which Abraham was
denominated faithful, and the father of the faithful, was the habit or grace of
faith, not the object. A conjugatis. Even as it is the habit of wisdom,
goodness, temperance, etc. from whence a man is denominated wise, good,
temperate, etc. but the faith which was imputed to him, was that from whence he
was denominated faithful, and the father of the faithful; for faith was imputed
to him unto righteousness, says the Apostle, ver. 9. and that in his
uncircumcision, ver. 10. (...), that he might become the father of all the
faithful, that are in uncircumcision, that righteousness might be imputed to
them also, ver. 11. (for so stands the connection of the sentences: and the
beginning of this, ver. 11. And he received Circumcision, etc. is answered
immediately by ver. 12. And the father of circumcision, etc.) The like Argument
does this Apostle use elsewhere, Gal. 3. 9. They which be of the faith, be
blessed with faithful Abraham. 2. If we become children of the faith of Abraham
by believing, then Abraham's faith signifies his believing, and not Christ's
righteousness. The reason is, because to be a child of Abraham's faith, is to
follow or imitate him, in that which is called his faith (as when Mr. Air
calls me a son of Mr. Baxters faith). And if we are like him by believing,
then believing is the quality wherein the similitude consists, between him the
Father, and us the children. But we become the children of Abraham's faith,
(even that very faith which was imputed to him unto righteousness) by
believing, ver. 10. The father of all them that believe, ver. 11. That walk in
the steps of father Abraham's faith, Who are also called the seed of the faith
of Abraham, ver. 16. 3. And I would, that Mr. Air or some body else, would
make sense of the Apostles words, if faith be put for Christ's righteousness,
ver. 12. Abraham became the father of Circumcision, to them that walk in the
steps of his faith. What is that? Why to them that walk in his Christ's
righteousness. I am even sick of this nonsense: let me add one word more,
that I may rid my self of this naus^ous work.

6. The faith spoken of throughout this chapter, is that which is. 7.
described at large from ver. 18. to the end, where it is said, that Abraham
against hope, believed in hope. And being not weak in faith, he considered not
his own nor Sarahs age, ver. 19. That he staggered not at the Promise of God
through unbelief, but was strong in faith, ver. 20. And was fully persuaded,
that what God had promised, he was able also to perform, ver. 21. And that this
was the faith which was imputed to him unto righteousness, is manifest from
the very next verse, ver. 22. And therefore it ^as imputed to him unto
righteousness. To make this the description of Christ's righteousness, would
render the sense so beyond measure ridiculous, that I profess (Reader) I am
afraid to represent it to thee in a paraphrase, lest some profane wits should
take occasion to make this blessed Word of God the object of their derision and
contempt.

I might add, that by the same reason that Mr. Air interprets faith for the
Righteousness of Christ, another may make as bold to interpret it, of the
Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Faithfulness, or any other Attribute of God, (for
these also are the objects of faith) and so to be justified by faith, is to be
justified by the Wisdom of God, or by his Goodness, etc. every line in
Scripture that speaks of Justification by faith, will be as good sense thus
expounded, as if faith be put for Christ's righteousness, unless it be in those
places, where faith is particularly and expressly determined to Christ as its
object, and in all such places Mr. Air himself will surely interpret faith for
the act, not for the object.

SECT. III.
NOw to the great Argument which Mr. Air opposes, to. 8.
prove, that faith must be put for its object, the righteousness of Christ.
Else (says he) the Apostle contradicts himself, in opposing Justification by
faith, to Justification by works: because faith it self is a work of ours.

Answ. But by his favor, I will rather believe that he contradicts the
Apostle, (and that as perfectly, as if he had studied to do it on purpose) then
that the Apostle contradicts himself. For it is as manifest as light can make
it, that it is the act of believing which the Apostle opposes to works, Romans
4. 4, 5. To him that works, the reward is imputed of debt. But to him that
works not, but believes, etc. Not working is opposed to works. Believing is
not working (with the Apostle) Ergo, believing is opposed to works. Judge then
who will (for I am indifferent in so just a cause) whether the Apostle
contradict himself, or Mr. Air him. 2. The opposition between faith and works
in the matter of Justification, stands thus according to Scripture, That he
that works, does himself effect that righteousness for which he is
justified: personal and perfect obedience being that which the Law requires of
every man, to make him just before God. And hence righteousness by works, or
by the Law, is called our own righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. Romans 10. 3. But he
that believes, does by the gift of God partake in the righteousness of
another, even of the Lord Jesus Christ, for which only he is justified. And
hence righteousness by faith is opposed to our own righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.
Not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. So
that he that is justified by works, is justified for his own sake: but he that
is justified by faith, is justified for another sake.. 9.


But because this is the total sum of all Mr. Air has to say, for the abuse
of the word Faith, from its own native sense, to a tropical; I shall set down
my answer more fully. I distinguish therefore, 1. Of works. 2. Of the particle
By. 1. Works are taken largely for any humane action; and so no doubt but faith
is a work; so is laughing, crying, speaking, reasoning and the like. 2.
Strictly, for that obedience by which the righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled, (really, or in conceit) and so they are incapable of an ordinability
to, or of being made the conditions of our Justification, by the righteousness
of another. In this sense does the Apostle take works, when he opposes them to
faith, Vid, Conra^. Vorst. Schol. in loc.
Romans 4. 4. To him that works, the reward is imputed of debt; and ver. 2. If
Abraham were j^stified by works, he has whereof to glory. Both which
Propositions were false, if works were any thing less then perfect legal
righteousness: for he had said before, that there is no glorying for a sinner
before God, Vid. Joh. Piscat. Schol. in loc. ex Olev. Calvin.
Romans 3. 23. (Not that I think the Jews themselves, (who sought righteousness
by works) did conceive they were able so to keep the Law* as not at all to sin:
but rather thought (such was their blindness) that the Law was sufficiently
kept to Justification, if they forbore the outward acts of sin, and performed
the outward act of duty, Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 12. c. 13. and Joh. Reynol.
Co^f. with Heart. chapter 7. D. 4. p. 264.
neglecting the inward purity* of heart:) Sic M^rmon. in (...) Te(...).
or if their good works were more then their evil works: or finally, if they
did perform those ceremonial observances, which were required in the Law for
the expiation of sin, Mat^h. 19. 18, 19. and 23. 25, 26, 27, 28. Luke 18. 11,
12. Phil. 3. 6. Against which conceit of theirs, the grand Argument which the
Apostle opposes is this, That all had sinned against the Law. Romans 3. 19, 20,
23. and therefore none could be justified by the Law; for it is written, Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law, to do them, Gal. 3. 10, 11.) Now works being taken in this strict
sense, it is manifest, that faith is not works: no Fidem non es^e opus* Vi^.
C^m^ron* pr^lect. in M^^. 16. ^7. op^r p. 47, 48.
nor a work, as being no part of that obedience which the Law requires to make
a man righteous: as the Apostle expressly witnesses, Gal. 2. 12. The Law is
not of faith (that is, requires not faith in order to Justification) but the
man that does them, shall live in them.

2. When we speak of Justification by works, and of Justification. 10.
by faith, the particle ( By) has not the same sense in both Propositions. But
in the former it denotes works to be that very righteousness for which a
person is justified: in the latter, it denotes faith to be the means or
condition, upon which we receive the gift of Christ's righteousness. Of the use
of that particle in such a sense, the Reader shall find many instances in
answer to Mr. Eyres ninth Chapter. When then he disputes, that if we are
justified by faith in a proper sense, we are justified by works, because faith
is a work; I deny the consequence with the proof of it. The former, because to
be justified by faith, is to be justified by the righteousness of another
through faith, as the condition of the application and donation of it unto us:
but to be justified by works, is to be justified by and for a righteousness
wrought by our selves. The latter, because faith is not a work, as the Apostle
uses works: that is, no part of that righteousness for which we are
justified. What can be objected against this, the Reader will meet with in the
following discourse. In the mean time, I desire him to have recourse hither for
answer to this Argument, in all the following places (which are very many)
wherein it is objected against me: that I may not be forced to multiply
tautologies, even unto nauseousnesse.

SECT. IV.
THe second general Argument proving, that Justification by. 11.
faith, is not meant of the evidence or knowledge of our Justification, is
this. It cannot be imagined how faith should evidence to us our Justification
but one of these three ways. Either as an Argument affected to prove it, or
axiomatically, or syllogistically, (which terms, because Mr. Air reproacheth
me with their obscurity, we shall endeavor to explain as we come to them). But
we cannot be said to be justified by faith, in reference to faiths evidencing
our Justification in any of these three ways. Ergo, we cannot be said to be
justified by faith, because of faiths evidencing our Justification. This
(Reader) is the sum and scope of my second Argument: which I have here set
down distinctly, that thou may not be lead into a mistake, common to Mr.
Air, with some of my own friends (as themselves have told me) as if I had
denied all use of faith, in evidencing Justification: which is as far from my
judgment, as the East is from the West. I confess I have little cause to
blame Mr. Air or others for being thus mistaken: because there is an ellipfis
in my words, which might give some occasion of such a misapprehension; for
whereas it is said (in my Sermon, page 3.) It is a most unsound Assertion, that
faith does evidence our Justification before faith. The full sentence should
have been this. It is an unsound Assertion, that we are said to be justified by
faith, because that faith does evidence our Justification before faith. The
proof of this is the manifest tendency of every branch of this Argument, and of
each Argument under each branch. And I am apt to think Mr. Air himself so
understood me, when he comes to particulars; for he does not once charge them
with impertinency, (which he might have done with advantage enough, if it had
not been clear, that they were all levelled at another scope, then simply to
prove, that faith is of no use to evidence Justification.) As to the thing it
self, I am so far from denying faith to evidence our Justification, that I do
assert as follows. 1. As the word evidence signifies, that which is affected
to argue another thing, so faith does ^vidence our Justification, yea, and is
the first thing that does evidence it. 2. Faith does also evidence
Justification axiomatically to all those that have a particular testimony from
God, that they are justified. As those whom Christ tells in the Gospel, that
their sins were forgiven them, Matthew. 9. 2, 5. Luke 5. 20, 23. and 7. 47, 48.
If any man now living has the like testimony from God, that his sins are
forgiven, he has no better way to evidence it to himself, then without any
more ado, to believe that they are forgiven. 3. Faith does also concur to the
evidencing of Justification syllogistically, but then the whole evidence is not
of faith, as we shall show by and by. I do therefore acknowledge the use of
faith in evidencing Justification, in all those ways by which it may be
evidenced; though not of faith only in the last, nor at all in the second;
unless there be any man that has heard God saying to him, Thy sins are
forgiven thee.

Come we on then to the proof of particulars. And first, that we. 12.
cannot be said to be justified by faith, in respect of faiths evidencing our
Justification as an Argument, or particularly as an effect thereof. To evidence
Justification as an Argument, is no more then for faith to have such a relation
unto Justification, as that where the one is, the other must needs be also: and
he that knows the relation they have to each other, cannot but know that where
faith is, there Justification must needs also be. Even as laughing and crying
may be said to evidence reason in a child (though it may not evidence it to
the child himself, because he knows not the dependence of these actions upon
his reason) so we say, where there is smoke there is some fire. Groanings argue
some ill affection in the body, and generally every effect does argue and
evidence its cause, to them that know the connection between the cause and
effect. Mr. Air disclaims faiths evidencing in this way: though in answer to
Romans 4. 24. above debated (of his Book, page 44.. 6.) he has as plainly
yielded it as can be, in these words, Hereby we may know and be assured, that
Christ's righteousness is imputed to us, that we, whether Jews or Gentiles,
are the persons to whom this grace belongs; if God has drawn our hearts to
believe and obey the Gospel: in regard that none do or can believe, but such as
are ordained to life, and to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. What is this,
but that faith does evidence our Justification as an Argument: seeing that
where one is, the other is also: where there is faith there is Justification.
It seems the same thing is good Divinity out of Mr. Eyres mouth: but out of
mine, an error. Yet though Mr. Air will not own, that faith does evidence
Justification in this way, he thinks fit to give his Reader, his sense of my
Reasons.

There are therefore three Reasons in my Sermon, why we cannot be said to be
justified by faith, in respect of faiths evidencing our Justification as an
Argument. The first is this. Because then Justification by faith, is not
necessarily so much as Justification in conscience. A Christian may have faith,
and yet not have the evidence that he is justified. As a child may laugh and
cry, and yet not have the evidence or clear knowledge, that himself has
reason, etc.

Mr. Air answers, 1. By intimating, that this agrees not with what I allege
out of the Apostle, 1 John 3. 20. to prove, that if our hearts condemn us, God
does much more condemn us. 2. If faith did evidence only as a sign, it would
be a dark and unsatisfying evidence. 3. Nothing that precedes faith, does prove
a man justified: nothing that follows it, is so apt to prove it as faith it
self. 4. Wheresoever there is faith, there is some evidence of this grace. In
the least spark of fire, and the least twinkling star, there is some light.

Rep. To the first I say, that it never came into my mind to prove, that God
condemns every one, whom his own conscience condemns: but that if conscience
condemns truly, then the judgment thereof is according to the judgment of
God, and so God condemns as well as conscience. But if a believers heart shall
tell him that he is not justified, and his sins not pardoned; his conscience is
erroneous and judges otherwise then God judges. 2. The two next answers are
like chips in pottage, that do neither good nor hurt, as I see. When I can
understand, whether they make with me or against me; I shall consider them
farther. 3. The fourth answer, that whosoever has faith, has some evidence of
his Justification, (for that he means by grace, or else its nothing to the
purpose) I deny utte^ly: if by evidence he mean, not that which would prove it,
if it were rightly understood: but a man's actual knowledge that he is
justified. And how does Mr. Air prove it? why, the least spark of fire has
some light, and the least twinkling star. True. So the least degree of true
faith has that in it, which if it were rightly apprehended would make some
discovery that a man were justified. But these sparks of fire give no light at
all, when they lie buried under heaps of ashes: and such black and d^smal
clouds may cover the face of the Heavens, that we cannot see, not only the
lesser stars, but not those of greatest magnitude. And the Scripture
testifies, not only positively, that a gracious soul may walk in darkness;
but to express the greatness of this darkness, adds an universal negative.
And may see no light, that is, (as Child of light. page 5. 6, 8, 9, 10.
Dr. Godwin has excellently proved) he may be without all evidence of his
Justification, of which the said Doctor gives several instances, in David, Job,
Heman, and Christ himself; and proposes largely the causes and cure of such
darkness: in all which, he has bestowed a great deal of excellent and
acceptable pains to no purpose, if Mr. Eyres doctrine here be true. How many
souls have I known, and See Mr. Tho. Brooks, Heaven upon earth. page 65, 66.
heard of in such a condition? If it be said, we may be mistaken in men; I
acknowledge it. But withal, I am not bound to believe impossibilities and
contradictions. If I must believe that it is possible for them to have true
faith, even whiles they have not the least spark or twinkling evidence of Gods
justifying pardoning love: then I cannot believe Mr. Eyres affirmation to be
universally true; That wheresoever there is faith, there is some evidence of
Justification. And (me thinks) he should not have expected, that we should take
his word against Scripture and experience both. 2. Yet if all this were
granted, it comes not up to our case, when the Scriptures say, He that believes
shall be justified: it surely speaks of a Justification, which is the same
equally unto all that believe. And for Mr. Air to say, every one that believes
has some evidence of Justification, though it may be not so much as another,
is to say, one believer may be more justified then another, which we desire him
to prove, the Scriptures imply the contrary, Romans 3. 29, 30. and 4. 23, 24.
and 10. 12.

The second Argument, to prove that we are not said to be justified. 13.
by faith, in respect of faiths evidencing our Justificarion as an effect, was,
because faith is not the effect of Justification: for if it be, then we may as
truly be said to be faithed by our Justification, as to be justified by our
faith: and in stead of saying, Believe and thou shall be justified; we must say
hence-forward, Thou art justified, therefore believe.

Mr. Air answers, That he sees no absurdity at all, in saying, That faith is
from Justification causally. That grace which justifies us, is the cause and
fountain of all good things, and more especially of faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Phil.
1. 29.

Rep. Is it then no absurdity, to set the Scriptures upon their heads? we are
said in Scripture to believe unto righteousness or Justification, Romans 10. 10.
and were it no absurdity to say, we are made righteous, or justified unto
believing? when the Apostle says, Heb. 10. 39. we are not of them who draw
back unto perdition: but of them that believe unto the saving of the soul.
Surely the particle unto does in both sentences denote the issue and
consequence: in the former, perdition of drawing back: in the latter, salvation
of believing. 2. Faith cannot be the effect of Justification: if Justification
be what Mr. Air says it is, namely, the eternal Will of God, not to punish,
precisely; for a Will determined precisely to a nonpunition is not the cause of
faith, unless Gods not punishing be our believing. 3. And what an Argument
have we to prove faith to be the effect of Justification? That grace which
justifies us is the cause of all good things, and particularly of faith. Ergo,
Justification is the cause of faith. This is Logic of the game. The grace that
justifies us, is also the grace that glorifies us: shall I therefore infer that
glorification is the cause of faith?

I did therefore truly say, that according to this doctrine, we must. 14.
not say, Believe, and thou shall be justified; but rather, thou art justified;
Ergo believe.

No (says Mr. Air.) because 1. It is not the privilege of all men. 2. We
know not who are justified, no more then who are elected. Though faith be an
effect of Election, yet we may not say, Thou art elected, therefore believe. 3.
When the cause is not noti^r effectu, we must ascend from the effect to the
cause.

Rep. Indeed to be justified is not the privilege of all men: yet
Justification is to be preached as a privilege attainable by all men, if they
will believe: which yet it cannnt be, if Justification be the cause of faith,
and not the consequent. 2. It is also true, that we cannot say, Thou art
elected, therefore believe; neither may we say, Believe, and thou shall be
elected. But we may and must say, Believe and thou shall be justified;
therefore the case of Election and Justification is not the same. The third
answer I understand not, nor I think no man else; at least, how it should be
applied to the present case: and therefore I say nothing to it.

My last, and indeed the main Argument for proof of the position,. 15.
namely, that we cannot be said to be justified by faith, in respect of faiths
evidencing our Justification as an Argument, or particularly as an effect, is
this; because then it will unavoidably follow, that we are justified by works
as well as faith: works being an effect evidencing Justi^ication as well as
faith.

Mr. Air answers, 1. By retortion. That this follows from my opinion; for if
we be justified by the act of believing, we are justified by a work of our own.
For answer to which, I refer the Reader, to the second and third Sections of
this chapter. If works be taken largely, for any humane action, faith is a
work; but it is (as I may so call it) an unworking work; for to believe and not
to work, are all one with the Apostle, as we have showed before out of Romans 4.
4, 5. His second answer is a large grant, that works do declare and evidence
Justification; and therefore I take notice only of the last line of it, wherein
he quotes Romans 1. 17. and Gal. 2. 16. as proving faith to declare and evidence
Justification to conscience. Of Gal. 2 16. I have already spoken largely: and
have proved, that the Apostles words, We have believed that we may be
justified, cannot have this sense, we have believed that we may know our selves
to be justified. And I wonder Mr. Air does not see how he stumbles again, at
the common rock of contradicting himself, in alleging that text. He here
acknowledges, that works do evidence our Justification: but the Apostle there
does altogether remove works from having any hand in the Justification there
spoken of. Ergo, The Justification there spoken of, is not the evidencing of
Justification. The words in Romans 1. 17. are these. Therein (namely in the
Gospel) is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith. That is, (as
the Apostle expounds himself, chap. 3. 21, 22.) In the Gospel is manifested the
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon
all that believe: from believing Jews to believing Gentiles; for that
questionless is the meaning of those words, from faith to faith; as is
manifest, by comparing them with the foregoing, ver. 16. The Gospel is the
Power of God to salvation, to every one that bel^eveth; to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek. But how this proves, that to be justified by faith, is to
have the evidence of Justification in our consciences, I cannot divine.

At last, Mr. Air gives us his direct answer, or rather something. 16.
like an answer, and denies that works do evidence Justification as well as
faith: where note (Reader) that the words ( as well) are not a note of parity
(as Mr. Air mistakes them, I doubt, not unwillingly) but of similitude: for I
do not mean, that works do evidence with an equal degree of clearness or
certainty; but in the same way or manner, or that they are an evidence of the
same kind and nature as faith is, if faith evidence barely as an effect. And
so we may be said to be justified by works, by the very same reason as we are
said to be justified by faith; if to be justified by faith be no more, then by
faith as an effect, to know that we are justified: which is that which Mr. Air
will never be able to answer while he lives. But let us see what he says for
his denial of works to evidence as well as faith.

First (says he) they do not evidence so clearly and certainly as faith does:
because works may proceed from principles of natural ingenuity and morality. 2.
Works do evidence in the judgment of charity and before men: but not in the
judgment of infallibility, or with that clearness and demonstrative certainty
which the conscience requires.

Rep. All this is nothing. Majus and minus non variant speciem. If works
evidence Justification in the same way and manner as faith does, though not
with such a perfect degree of evidence as faith does; then are we justified by
works as well as by faith: if to be justified be to know that we are justified.
2. The Scriptures tell us that works (Christian and spiritual works) are a very
clear and certain evidence, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we are passed from death
to life, because we love the brethren. So 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. with ver. 10, 11.
It is true, there may be works like good works, which are not so in truth; and
there may be faith like true faith, which yet is not faith unfeigned: but when
works are brought to the light, and manifested that they are wrought in God,
they are a very sure evidence: as sure (for ought I know) as faith it self,
though I will not dispute it, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good sight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith: hencef^rth there is laid up for
me a Crown of righteousness, etc. 3. What he says in the second place, that
works do evidence before men, but not with that clearness and certainty which
the conscience requires, is point blank against the Scriptures, 1 John 3. 18,
19. My little children, let us not l^ve in w^rd, neither in tongue, but in deed
and in truth: And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. 4. Observe also (Reader) that Mr. Air does here, (as also
in other places) distinguish between faith and works: and yet, to oppose me,
will not allow that we are justified by faith, because faith is a work.

Before I pass to the next branch of this Argument, I must acquaint. 17.
thee ( Reader) that in the close of this, I added these words: Whether works
be the first effect (namely of Justification) or the second, and by consequence
the first evidence or the second, is not at all material in this case: because
the Apostle, when he denies Justification by works, excludes works altogether,
Romans 3. 28. and 4. 5. The Reason why I added, this, was, Because when Mr.
Warren proposed this Argument against Mr. Air, all the answer he could get was
this Question; Whether Works were the first evidence, or the second? The
impertinency of this Question I thought fit to discover, by observing that the
Apostle denies to works any influence at all, into that Justification which he
speaks of: and therefore he speaks not of Justification by way of evidence,
whether first or second. But the principal intent of the Argument, was to prove
the main Conclusion, That the Apostle, when he disputes for Justification by
faith, cannot be understood of Justification declared in couscience, for works
have an efficiency in producing that Justification. But the Apostle rejects
works from having any hand at all in that Justification which he disputes for.
Therefore he means not Justification in conscience. To this Mr. Air has held
it his wisest course to say nothing. If he should have distinguished of works
(as that he must do, if he do any thing) he knows well enough what advantage he
had put into my hands against himself. Whether this be an Argument of a mind
desirous to advance the truth, the day will make manifest.

SECT. V.
I Come now to the second branch of my Argument, and that is,. 18.
That we cannot be said to be justified by faith, in reference to faiths
evidencing our Justification, immediately or axiomatically; which before I
prove, I must speak something by way of Explication. By an axiom we mean a
sentence or Proposition, manifest by its own light, and worthy to be believed
for its own sake: so that it is no sooner proposed, but the mind ( In
intellectione perfecta reperiuntur tria. Primum est conformitas actus cum
objecto: secundum, necessitas assentiendi tertium, impotentia ad falsita^em.
P^imum vocatur veritas. Secundum evidentia. Tertium certitudo. P. H^rt. de
Me^doz. de Anim. d. 8. sect. 1.. ^.
) assents to it presently, that it is true. As (in natural things) that every
whole is more then its part. That man is a reasonable creature. That two make
four, or the like. These things are evident to our reason at first view,
without any farther proof. And there is a double evidence in all such assent.
The one is the evidence of the object, or the truth assented to, which must be
clearly represented in the Axiom or Proposition. The other of the subject,
which is the light of reason within us, by which we assent to a Proposition of
evident truth, and have the clear knowledge thereof. Even as unto our seeing of
any thing, there must concur an external light to make the object visible;
and internal sight in the eye, to evidence the same object to each man in
particular; for though the light shine never so clearly, a blind man can see
nothing: nor the most quick-sighted, without outward light. The case is the
same in supernatural verities: as, That Jesus Christ is the Son of God; that
he is come into the world to save sinn^rs; that whosoever believes on him
shall be saved, and the like. Which things, because they are above the reach
and comprehension of natural reason, therefore our minds assent not to them,
nor have the evidence of them, till they be informed with a more supernatural
light and principle, namely faith, which is the eye and sight of the soul,
Heb. 11. 26, 27. Hence the Apostle in that chapter, ver. 1. describes faith to
be the evidence of things not seen; and says, ver. 3. By faith we know the
world was made by the Word of God. That God made the world is evidenced
objectively by the Word, which says; that God made the Heavens and the earth,
Genesis 1. 1. but it is not evidenced unto us, unless we believe that Word. And
so in the present case, if any person (suppose Peter) have by faith the
evidence of his Justification, immediately or axiomatically, it must be by
assenting to some Axiom or Proposition of divine revelation. Thou Peter art
justified.

These things being premised, we come now to prove, that we. 19.
cannot be said to be justified by faith, because of faiths evidencing our
Justification axiomatically. Two reasons I gave of it. 1. Because such an
immediate evidence of a particular man's Justification cannot be had without a
particular testimony from God, Thou Paul, or Peter, or Thomas art justified.
But there is no such thing written in Scripture, Ergo, no such evidence can be
had.

Mr. Air says, I mistake the nature of justifying faith, conceiving it to be
a bare intellectual assent to a Proposition: which yet is quite against my
judgment, and that which I do purposely oppose in my next argument. I consent
to Mr. Air, in placing faith, partly in the understanding, and partly in the
will. But our question is now concerning that faith which is in the
understanding, how Peter (for example) comes to know, or to be assured by faith
immediately that he is justified? And this (say I) must be by the assent of
faith to some such Axiom, Proposition, or Word of God, as was but now
mentioned, Thou Peter art justified. Even as Paul was assured, that neither
himself, nor any that were in the ship with him should perish, by believing the
testimony of God sent him by an Angel, Acts 27 25. And because there is now a
days no such testimony of a particular man's Justification, therefore there is
no evidence thereof to be had this way, (at least ordinarily) and if there
were, yet I would not call that faith justifying faith, but rather evidencing
faith.

His Answer to the Argument is large, and (to me) very confused. He excepts
against my term of an axiomatical evidence (I would change it, if I could
devise any term more significant) but at last, yields it me; yet thinks it
fitter to say, faith evidenceth organically as it is the organ or instrument
whereby we do apprehend and adhere to Christ. But we shall show fully, that
this organical evidence, must be reduced to one of those three by me mentioned,
and cannot make a fourth way of evidence, distinct from them. The sum of his
answer is,

That faith is such an assent to the truth of the Gospel, as that withal the
soul tastes an ineffable sweetness in the same: and he that tastes the
sweetness of Gospel-Promises and grace, knows his interest and propriety
therein: for all manner of sweetness is a consequent and effect of some
propriety which we have in that good thing which causes it. -- And so faith
does evidence our Justification axiomatically, by assenting to, and withal
tasting and relishing those indefinite and general Propositions, Invitations
and Promises that are held forth to us in the Gospel, which by a secret and
unscrutable work of the Spirit, are applied and made particular to the soul of
a true believer: for otherwise he could never taste any sweetness in them.

Rep. How truly did I say, that Mr. Eyres doctrine would at last, 20.
leave the poor doubting Christian without all evidence of his Justification? I
need no other confirmation of it then these words: wherein are many things
delivered, not only without any other authority then Mr. Eyres bare word; but
directly against experience, reason and Scripture. 1. I deny that faith is
always accompanied with such a taste of sweetness in the Promises of the
Gospel, as will give an evidence to the soul of his Justification: The reasons
are set down already in this chapter,. 12. I remember what holy ( Neither the
letters nor pages are numbered, and therefore I cannot direct the Reader to the
particular place.
) Bayne says of himself in one of his letters. I thank God, in Christ
sustentation I have, and some little strength: suavities spiritual I taste not
any. But indeed I often tell my self, Physic purgative and restorative are
not to be taken at the same time, etc. Neither do I dare to deny, but that it
may be the case of one that is saved, to die in as much darkness as Spira
himself: if any man can prove the contrary, let him. Yea, so separable is
sweetness from faith, that sometimes on the contrary, excess of sweetness
has hindered and overcome faith: as it was in the disciples, who for very joy
believed not, Luke 24. 41. and with old Jacob in a like case, Genesis 45. 26. 2. I
also deny, that there can be no manner of sweetness tasted in the Gospel, but
by such as have interest and propriety in the grace thereof. A propriety in
conceit, though not in truth, or an interest possible and attainable, though
not actually obtained, may make the Gospel taste not a little sweet. The
Scriptures tell us, that some may be enlightened, and taste of the heavenly
gift, and of the good Word of God, Heb. 6. 4, 5. and receive the Word with joy,
Matthew. 13. 20. who yet were not justified nor pardoned. 3. A taste of
sweetness in the Gospel, does evidence to the soul sensibly and
experimentally, that God and his Word are good: which may be an Argument to
prove that he is justified. But it neither does nor can actually evidence it to
him, unless there intervene another act of the mind, concluding himself to be
justified, according to the Promise made to such a faith. Sugar will evidence
its sweetness to my taste: but my tasting will not evidence to me actually
that I am a living creature, unless I conclude it by the discourse of my
mind: because according to the rules of Philosophy, None can taste but a
living creature. Beasts can taste as well as men, yet-they do not know that
they are living creatures: because they cannot compare their act with the rule
according to which they act: which ability in the reasonable soul, is usually
called a power of reflecting upon its own act. The case is much the same in
Infants. Therefore Mr. Eyres organical evidence is the very same with that
which I call faiths evidencing as an Argument: or if he understand it of that
which is not only affected to prove, but does actually prove, then it is the
same with that which I below call syllogistical: as being an act of the soul,
concluding its own Justification, from the sweetness it tastes in the
Promises. 4. But the truth is, it is a most preposterous course, to send the
soul for its evidence of right and interest in the Promises, to a taste of
sweetness in them: which will quickly appear, if Mr. Eyres metaphorical
expressions be made more grammatical. Wherefore, to taste sweetness in the
Promises, is either an act of the understanding, judging of the Promise sub
ratione b^ni convenientis, as a most suitable good: and thus, it is a knowledge
antecedent to faith, or at most but the beginning of faith it self, Gal. 2. 16.
Knowing that a man is not justified, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, we have
believed, Or it is an act of the Will, embracing, delighting, and taking
complacency in the Promise, as his best good: and then it follows immediately,
not upon our right and interest in the Promise, but upon our knowledge of that
right: for as we desire not that which we do not know; so neither can we
rejoice in a right which we know not. The Question then returns, viz. how the
soul comes to know its right and interest in the Promise? To say, it knows it
by taking complacency in it, is to say it delights in it knows not what; for
the will follows the judgment: and to take complacency in a good, which we do
not know we have a right in, is naturally impossible. Mr. Air therefore may
speak truly, when he says, He that tastes the sweetness of Gospel Grace knows
his interest therein (such the taste may be); but we are never the wiser in the
understanding of the main question: viz. How the soul comes to the knowledge
of his interest in that Promise, in which he tastes so much sweetness? from
answer to this, Mr. Air makes an escape under the darkness of his
metaphorical expressions. 5. I desire also to know, whether it be the Promise
of pardon and Justification, in which the soul tastes such sweetness, as
thereby to have the evidence of his Justification, or some other? If some
other, how is it possible that faith should evidence to me my pardon and
Justification, by tasting sweetness in that truth which promises no pardon or
Justification at all? If it be the Promise of pardon, let Mr. Air see that he
consist with himself. Promises are essentially boni futuri, of a future good.
Therefore according to Mr. Air, there can be now no Promise of pardon or
Justification. Not of the Act, for that is past from all eternity: not of the
Effect, for that is past as long as since the death of Christ: and therefore
neither the one nor the other can be the object or matter of a Promise. It
remains then, that it is the Promise of manifesting and declaring
Justification. But then behold the sense. My faith does evidence to me that I
am justified, by relishing the Promise which God has made of manifesting and
declaring Justification. Hence it follows, that I have the evidence of my
Justification by believing that I shall have it. And then either my faith must
be false, or the Promise must be false; for if I do already know that I am
justified, that knowledge cannot be future: else the same thing might be and
not be at the same time. But there can be no falsehood either in a divine faith,
or in a divine testimony. And I desire also Mr. Air to reconcile what here he
speaks of faiths evidencing, with the Interpretations given before of those
sayings in Scripture, whosoever believes shall receive remission of sins, Acts
10. 43. and 26. 18. That receiving (says he) is our act, not Gods; namely, our
knowing our selves to be justified. Here he makes it intrinsecal to faith to
beget assurance, as it is a taste of sweetness in the Promise, that is, in the
Promise of manifesting Justification: for no other Justification is capable of
being promised. Lay all this together, and one or both these two things must be
the result, either that I know I am justified, before God manifest it to me
(for I believe, and thereby know that I am justified: and the Promise which I
believe is, that God will manifest my Justification to me. Ergo, he has not
yet manifested it,) or else the great Promise of justifying them that believe
must be resolved into this ridiculous piece of nonsense. He that has the
evidence of his Justification, shall have the evidence of his Justification;
for in that he believes he has this evidence: and the thing that is promised
is, that he shall have this evidence.

Therefore Mr. Air does not limit the evidence of faith, to its relishing. 21.
the sweetness of indefinite and general Promises: but there must concur
withal a secret and inscrutable work of the Spirit, to make these general
Promises particular. It is not the first time I have been acquainted, both at
home and elsewhere, with Pretenders to assurance in such a way; whose lives and
ends I have known so well, that I shall (for their sakes) esteem it no other
whilst I live, then a carnal, groundless, enthusiastical presumption. Two
Authors Mr. Air quotes in his margin, as countenancing his doctrine, namely (
Of faith. sect. 1 cap 9 ^. 4.
) Dr. Jackson, and ( Sound Bell. page 220, 221.
) Mr. Shepherd. But the former has not a word of making the general Promise
particular, but says only, That the particular manner of the Spirits working
this alteration in our souls, (namely, that now we relish spiritual things,
which naturally we taste no sweetness in) is a mystery inscrutable, to which I
consent. The latter (whose memory is very honorable and precious to me) was
the most violent opposer of this doctrine of any man on earth, that ever I knew
or heard of: his works show something of it; but they that knew him can
testify more. I heartily consent to him, that in vocation the Spirit makes the
general call particular, according to the sense in which he explaines himself
in the place quoted. The soul (says he) at this instant, feels such a
special stirring of the Spirit upon it, which it feels now, and never felt
before: as also its particular case so spoken to, and its particular objections
so answered, and the grievousnesse of its sin, in refusing grace so
particularly applied, as if God spoke only unto it. All this I believe to be
true, but it is nothing in the world to our purpose. To make the common motives
and invitations unto faith, to become in this manner particular in their
operation, upon particular persons, does neither affirm nor deny any thing
concerning the state and condition of those persons. But to evidence to a man
immediately that he is justified, must be by a particular testimony: and that
as distinct from the testimony of Scripture (which says only that believers
are justified) as a proper or particular Proposition from a general.

I say therefore, 1. That the Spirit evidenceth to no man that he is. 22.
justified, who has not at the same time the evidence of his faith: and so is
this evidence of the Spirit always, (at least) implicitly syllogistical. And
the soul can have no settled comfort in it, but by analyzing the crypsis, and
resolving the whole evidence into its parts, after the manner below specified.
He that believes is justified. But I believe, Ergo I am justified. The case is
so plain to me, that I appeal to Mr. Air himself for judgment. If a man shall
come to him and say, Sir, I am assured by the Spirit of God that I am
justified, and that all my sins are pardoned, but whether I believe or no, or
ever did, that I cannot tell: Would he allow this persuasion to be of God? If
not, then does not the Spirit testify to any man immediately that he is
justified: but the evidence of the Spirit (as I said before) is, if not
expressly, yet implicitly syllogistical. If so, I would thus convince the
Pretender from Mr. Eyres principles. He that does not believe, cannot be
assured that he is justified. But thou do not believe, Ergo thou can not
have assurance (from the Spirit) that thou art justified. What will be here
denied? Not the major, for that is an undoubted truth, grounded in Mr. Eyres
interpretation. Not the minor: for the man whom we are now convincing. of his
error, in pretending to assurance by the Spirit, is supposed not to know
whether he have faith or no. Ergo, he cannot truly say he has faith, though he
have it: because to affirm that for truth, which we do not know to be true, is
a lie, though the thing should be so as we say. Ergo he must yield to the
Conclusion, that his assurance is not from the Spirit: else the testimony of
the Spirit is contradictory to that of Scripture.

Secondly, Mr. Eyres words do also contradict themselves notoriously.. 23.
First, he tells us, that faith evidenceth our Justification, by assenting to,
and tasting the general Propositions of the Gospel: then he tells us that those
general Propositions are made particular by the Spirit to a believer: otherwise
he could taste no sweetness in them. To tell us, that faith evidenceth by
tasting general Propositions, and then to say in the same breath, that it can
taste no sweetness in general Propositions, but they must be first made
particular by the Spirit, is to say and unsay. 3. Accordingly the general
Propositions in the Gospel, must first be made particular by the Spirit, before
the soul can taste any sweetness in them, for which I confess there is all
the reason in the world: for the object apprehended must be before the act
apprehending: the Proposition assented to and tasted, must be before the act
assenting and tasting. But then hence it will follow, that a man before he
believes has a particular testimony from the Spirit, that he is justified. For
this Proposition, thus made particular by the Spirit, is the object of his
assent and taste, that is, of his faith, Ergo, it exists before his faith; even
as the general Promises in the Word exist before we can believe them. But to
say, it is evidenced to any man before he believes, that he is justified, is
that which Mr. Air hitherto disowned, as well he may.

A man's faith (suppose Peter's) can evidence no more to him subjectively,. 21.
then the Word does evidence to him objectively; even as the eye can see no
other thing then what the light makes manifest. But this Proposition, He that
believes is justified, does not evidence objectively immediately that Peter is
justified; for the former is general, and the latter is proper. And otherwise,
every one in the world that believes that Proposition, might thereby have the
evidence of Peter's Justification, as well as of his own. Even as we know by
faith, that they to whom the Lord said, Your sins are forgiven you, were
justified as well as themselves. And all believers (one as well as another)
know by faith, that the world was made by the Word of God, Heb. 11. 3. because
the Scriptures say so. Object. But the Spirit makes this general Proposition to
be particular unto Peter* Answ. I ask, whether the Scriptures be not equally
the rule of all men's faith? If not, then neither of their obedience: which will
introduce Antinomianisme with a vengeance. If so, (as most undoubtedly so) then
this particular testimony of the Spirit, is no object of Peter's faith: which I
farther argue thus. It is no object of Paul's faith, that Peter is justified.
Ergo, it is no object of Peter's faith. The reason is, because the rule of all
men's faith, is one and the same equally. Therefore the faith of Christians is
called a common faith, Tit. 1. 4. the faith of Gods elect, ibid. ver. 1. which
is but one, Ephesians. 4. 5. But if Peter believe upon the testimony of the Spirit,
that which Paul cannot, or has no ground to believe upon the testimony of
Scripture, then Peter's faith does not act by the same rule that Paul's does: but
there will be as many rules of faith, as there be persons in the world, that
pretend to this particular testimony of the Spirit.

5. To conclude, to make a general Proposition particular, is to. 25.
change the substance and nature of it: for it cannot be general and particular
too, (though I readily grant, as before, that a truth proposed in common may be
made particular, in respect of its effectual operation upon one, and not upon
another: but the Proposition it self remains general still.) Ergo, this
particular testimony of the Spirit, must be some other then that of Scripture
(unless by being made particular be meant no more, then that a particular is
inferred out of a general, which is a syllogistical evidence, not axiomatical,
which Mr. Air now disputes for). But I do wholly deny any such particular
testimony of the Spirit, for which there is not so muth as (...) in Scripture:
and Mr. Air, I think, is of the same mind, for he produces not one text for
it. That which seems most to favor it, is Romans 8. 16. The Spirit bears
witness with our spirits that we are the children of God, (which text Mr. Air
does not mention, and therefore I answer it, for the sake of some others.)
Compare this verse with the foregoing, and with a parallel place to the
Galatians, and it will not be difficult to give the right sense of it, Gal. 4.
6. Because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, crying Abba Father. So Romans 8. 15. Ye have received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. Then it follows, ver. 16. (...), That
very same Spirit (so I render the words,) bears witness, etc. Hence I
gather, that this witness of the Spirit, is not any secret revelation of a
Proposition (as this, Thou Peter or Paul art justified) made by the Spirit to
the soul. But the Spirits working in us liberty in our accesses unto God to
call him Father, is the thing that evidenceth to us as an infallible Argument,
that we are the children of God. And because Arguments by themselves do not
Argument^ non arguunt extra dispositionem.
evidence actually, but virtually, therefore the Spirit by this work, helping
us to conclude our selves the children of God, does thereby witness that we
are Gods children.

SECT. VI.
MY second Argument, to prove that faith does not evidence Justification. 26.
axiomatically, was this. The faith which justifies, is that which is to be
preached and pressed upon the whole world. But we cannot press it upon every
man in the world to believe that he is justified, and that if he does not
believe this, he shall be damned.

Understand ( Reader) that the direct tendency of this Argument is to prove,
that justifying faith is not a man's assurance that he is justified: which I
presumed was Mr. Eyres judgment: because that Justification which is in
Scripture made an immediate consequent of believing, is (with him) a knowledge
that we are justified. I thought therefore that he had held faith to be an
assurance: because otherwise a man might believe, and yet not be justified by
faith. And so the proving that faith was not an assurance, would withal have
proved, that it does not evidence Justification axiomatically or immediately.
But now I perceive, that he does not place the formality of faith in an
assurance: but rather makes this an essential property and effect of that (if I
understand him.) And so I confess this Argument is not directly against him.
Nevertheless, it will not be amiss to examine his answer: for (if I mistake
not) either he must make faith to be an assurance tantamount: or else he
contradicts himself. His answer therefore is this. We do not press every man
to believe that he is justified; but to believe, 1. Assensu intellectus, to
acknowledge that there is a sufficiency of merit in Christ for the
Justification of sinners. 2. Amplexu voluntatis: to accept, embrace, and cleave
unto Jesus Christ.

Rep. I acknowledge this to be the very truth: but Mr. Air cannot. 2^.
own it, if he will be true to his own principles. 1. He has told us before,
that faith is essentially assensus cum gustu, an assent, with a taste of
sweetness in the Promise assented to. But this circumstance must concur, to
make the Promise an object of my faith, namely, that I have right and interest
therein; otherwise I can taste no sweetness in it: that is, otherwise I could
not truly believe it; for to taste sweetness is essential to faith: Wherefore,
when we press all men to believe, and all men equally, and that with a true
faith, it is supposed that all men have equally a right in the Promise; or else
they are commanded to believe, without an object to be believed: for the object
of faith is the Promise, in which I have right and interest, according to Mr.
Air. And this is that which I say is tantamount, to a persuading of all men to
believe that they are justified. To argue it a little farther. The right which
I have in the Promise, is either antecedent to my faith, or consequent to it.
If antecedent, I have what I would; for then, when in the preaching of the
Gospel, the Promise is proposed as an object of that faith, which we persuade
all men to, the right of all men equally in that Promise must be presupposed;
it being not the Promise simply, but the Promise in which men have right, that
is the object of faith. If consequent, then the first act of faith cannot be a
taste of sweetness in the Promise; because till I believe, I have no right in
the Promise, and therefore can taste no sweetness in it, according to Mr. Air.

To what he here says, that we press all men to believe, there is. 28.
a sufficiency of merit in Christ, for the Justification of sinners: because it
is the sum of that which the soul assenteth to, and tastes sweetness in,
and thereby immediately comes to know its own Justification, we must endeavor
to understand more particularly. 1. By sinners, he means all, or some only. 2.
The sufficiency of the merits of Christ must be understood, either as
distinguished from their efficiency, and then the meaning is, That Christ
merited Justification for men sufficiently, yet they are not thereby actually
justified; or as including their efficiency: and then the meaning is, that men
were actually, and most sufficiently justified in the meritorious death of
Christ. 3. The same sufficiency of Christ's merits may be considered either
absolutely and in themselves, in respect of their own intrinsecal worth and
value; or relatively and ordinatively, in reference to the ordination and
intention of God in giving up his Son to death; and of Christ, in giving up
himself: which distinctions being premised, it were an easy matter to ring the
changes upon the foresaid Proposition, and vary it into innumerable forms: but
I shall mention no more then I must needs. When then it is said, that every man
is to believe, that there is a sufficiency of merit in Christ for the
Justification of sinners; the meaning must be either, 1. That the merits of
Christ were of themselves sufficient to have purchased Justification for all
sinners, (though they did not purchase it de facto for any.) This is false. Or,
2. That Christ's merits are indeed sufficient for the Justification of all
sinners; but the effect (which is the actual Justification of sinners,) is
suspended till we believe. Nor can this be proposed to be believed by all men
equally: for it is false in respect of the Elect, who (according to Mr. Air)
were justified actually sixteen hundred years ago in the death of Christ Or,
3. That the merits of Christ were sufficient for the Justification of all
sinners: but were never ordained to be effectual to the Justification of all,
upon any terms or conditions whatsoever. Nor can this be the Promise or
Proposition, which is the object of our justifying faith, according to Mr.
Air; The reason is, because supposing that every man in the world should
believe this, (which is no contradiction, and therefore may be supposed as
possible) yet they should not be justified notwithstanding: seeing Christ never
intended that every man should be justified by his blood, upon any terms. Or,
4. That the merits of Christ were ordained of God and Christ, to the obtaining
of Justification for every sinner most sufficiently, if they should or would
believe. This is most true, but Mr. Air rejects it, as too much gratifying
those that are for Universal Redemption in the grossest sense, which is a
needless fear: and the two Arguments which he here proposes against it, he
might have seen long since answered by Reverend and Learned Bishop Davenant,
(of famous memory) in his Dissertation De Morte Christi, cap. 3. page 22, 23,
30, 31. In short, let Mr. Air state his Proposition how he will: To say, the
merits of Christ are sufficient, and but sufficient (before faith) to
Justification, is that which the Elect cannot believe without error. To say
they are sufficient in reference to their own value, and intrinseca^
greatness, Vid. Job Raynoll Apolog. these parag. 14.
can neither be a motive to an unbeliever to come to Christ for righteousness:
nor can the believing it, ever evidence any man's Justification. I am persuaded
the devils believe it: and it cannot be denied, but that the merits of Christ
were a price of themselves sufficient to have purchased salvation for them,
(yea, and to have turned all the stones in the streets into men, and to have
glorified them in Heaven.) And it is very strange, that a soul should be drawn
to Christ, upon a ground common to devils with himself; or have the evidence of
his Justification by believing such a truth, in which the devils have as much
interest as himself.

SECT. VII.
THe third branch of my Argument succeeds. Namely, that we. 29.
cannot be said to be justified by faith, in reference to faiths evidencing our
Justification syllogistically. Two Reasons I gave of this. The first is,
because there cannot be found out a medium before faith it self, etc. The
farther Explication the Reader may see in my Sermon.

Mr. Air answers, That it is not needful. It is sufficient that faith it self
is the medium, as thus. He that believes, was justified before faith. But I
believe. Ergo.

Rep. The Argument remains good for the purpose, for which I advanced it. For
I not knowing certainly in what sense Mr. Air would maintain that faith did
evidence, could conjecture at none more probable, then that he placed the
nature and being of justifying faith in the evidence, knowledge or assurance of
our Justification. Upon which presumption, as I had before proved, that it was
not assensus axiomaticus, an axiomatical and immediate assent to this
Proposition, I am justified; so in this Argument my intent was to prove, that
neither was it assensus syllogisticus, an assent to the same Proposition,
deduced by way of Conclusion out of premises. And this the Argument proves
invincibly. Let us set Mr. Eyres syllogism before us, and the matter will be
plain. He that believes, was justified before faith. But I believe. Ergo, I was
justified before faith. Hence it is manifest, that the faith which I affirm of
my self in the minor, cannot consist essentially in my assent to the
Conclusion: for then the Syllogism would consist but of two Propositions. This
is the manifest scope of the Argument, which now I know Mr. Eyres mind better,
I see well enough, does him but little hurt, and therefore I insist not on the
vindication of it. Nor yet may the Reader charge me for arguing impertinently;
seeing it was necessary I should suppose and confute what might be said, when I
did not know what would be said. I know no other way I had to get out of Mr.
Air his sense of faiths evidencing. Yet because I did easily foresee he might
give that answer, which here he does, I added the next Argument, which meets
with it to the full.

If we are said to be justified by faith, because faith does evidence. 30.
Justification syllogistically, then may we be said as well to be justified by
sense and reason, as by faith: because sense and reason concur with faith in
a syllogistical evidence. As thus. He that believes is justified. But I
believe, Ergo, I am justified. The Proposition only is the assent or act of
faith. The Assumption an act of sense or spiritual experience. The Conclusion
an act of Reason.

Mr. Air answers, That the Conclusion is of faith. As in this Syllogism. All
men shall rise from the dead. I am a man. Ergo, I shall rise from the dead.

Rep. That the Conclusion is de fide, is said, not proved (and I would that way
of disputing were less frequent with Mr. Air). I acknowledge the Conclusion
to be partly of faith, and partly of reason and experience, as Mr. ( Vindi^.
great. p^g 41. fol.
) Pemble determines it. And that the Schools determine otherwise, I will
believe when I see. That it is not purely of faith, I thus prove. The assent of
faith is grounded in the verity of divine testimony. But the assent to a
Conclusion is grounded in the necessity of its ( Vid. Fr^^. B^ur. Meneriz. d^f.
P. R^dial. l. 2. c. 9. disquis. 1 and 2.
) consequence upon such and such premises, which forces the understanding to
assent to it: whether of it self it be of necessary or contingent truth: or in
what matter soever it be, whether grammatical, physical, theological, or the
like. So that a Conclusion is said to be de fide, because it depends upon some
principle of says, in regard of its supernaturality: but formally, Et qu^tenus
attingitur per actum Conclusionis: Reason is principium assentiendi proximum,
the nearest ( De Mend^z. loq. disp 1^. de demonstr. sect. 3. ^. 47.
) principle and cause of my assent, otherwise we must have some other
definition of a syllogism, then our Universities have hitherto been acquainted
with. 2. In the present case, the matter is clearer then Mr. Air is aware of.
We will suppose Peter to be the man that makes the Syllogism. He that
believes, is justified. But I believe. Ergo, I am justified. When he faith in
the minor, I believe; he is supposed to speak, not only of that faith, which
sin the Will, accepting and embracing a promised good: but of that ialso, which
is in the understanding assenting, omni credibili, to all truths proposed to be
believed. But (according to Mr. Air) it is a truth proposed to Peter's faith,
that himself is justified. Let it be expressed then in the Syllogism, and it
runs thus. He that believes all the objects of his faith, and particularly that
himself is justified, he is justified. But (says Peter) I believe all the
objects of my faith, and particularly that my self am justified. Ergo, I am
justified. If the Conclusion be here de side, then Peter believes he is
justified, because he believes he is justified: which Conclusion (I confess)
is no act of reason. Nevertheless, if Reason be yielded, to be principium
assentiendi, the principle of assenting to the Conclusion, there will be better
sense in his Argumentation: namely, that Peter knows that he is justified, or
is persuaded thereof with a certainty of Reason, because he believes it with a
divine Faith: and that he could not do, if he were not justified.

As to the Syllogism which Mr. Air proposes for Illustration,. 31.
All men shall rise again. I am a man. Ergo, I shall rise again. The Conclusion
is partly of faith, and partly of reason. Of reason formaliter and elicitive:
of faith fundamentaliter and imperative, (as I may so speak) it being a
particular knowledge grounded in a principle of faith: for I could not have
this knowledge, unless I did by faith assent to the Proposition. But that it
is not purely of faith, I thus prove. If a man be sound in the faith of the
Resurrection, that believes all men shall rise, though he do not believe that
himself shall rise; then to assent that himself shall rise, is not purely an
act of faith. Because a man cannot at the same time be sound and unsound in the
faith of the same article. But he is sound in the faith of the Resurrection
that believes all men shall rise, though he do not believe that himself shall
rise; for he believes as much as the Scripture reports. If it be said, that a
man cannot assent to the one, but he must assent to the other. I think so too.
But the ground of it is, because it is against reason, not because it is
against faith: and therefore the Conclusion is partly of reason, not purely of
faith: which was that I was to demonstrate.

The Conclusion is; there can be no way imagined, in which faith may be said to
evidence our Justification, but one of those three mentioned, (Mr. Air
proposes a fourth: but we have showed, that it must be reduced to one of these
three, and so differs in name only, not in thing). But we cannot be said to be
justified by faith, in reference to its evidencing our Justification either of
these ways. Therefore faith must be said to justify in some other respect,
then that it does evidence Justification: or else we cannot be said to be
justified by faith at all.

SECT. VIII.
MY third Argument comes next in place. That Interpretation. 32.
of the phrase, which makes us, at least concurrent causes with God in the
formal act of our own Justification, is not true. The Reason is, because our
Justification by faith, in regard of the formal act of pronouncing us just, is
in Scripture attributed wholly unto God, Romans 8. 33. and 4. 6, 8. But to
interpret our Justification by faith, merely for a Justification in our own
consciences, is to make us at least concurrent causes with God, in the formal
act of our own Justification. Ergo, it is not to be admitted.

Mr. Air, before he answers the Argument, reformes my expressions, and says,
That he does not say that Justification by faith is merely a Justification in
conscience: faith is sometimes put objectively for Christ, etc.

Rep. Whether merely or not merely, is an impertinent quarrel: he does it too
frequently; and to those most eminent texts mentioned before in my third
Chapter, which speak of Gods justifying sinners by faith in Jesus Christ, he
answers merely so. And as for his putting of faith objectively for Christ, we
have already showed at large what injury it offers to the plain and pure Word
of God. But I must tell him, it is most intolerable dealing, to build so large
a discourse, as is the greatest part of his book, upon two Supporters which
have no place in Scripture to set their feet on. The one is, when he pleases
to interpret Justification for the manifestation thereof. The other, when he
pleases to put faith for its object, Christ. When such a weight is laid upon
these foundations, had it not been necessary to show us the places, to clear
and vindicate them, where these words must have this sense and no other? But to
the answer: (for this is nothing but a delay.) This it is.

The pronouncing of us just, is not the formal act of our Justification: but
the imputing of righteousness, which is the Act of God alone: Ministers may
pronounce us just, without robbery done to God. So does faith declare to our
consciences the sentence of absolution, etc.

Rep. The Argument is wholly yielded, and the sinner thereby. 33.
made his own Justifier. 1. Let the formal act of Justification consist in what
it will, it matters not much in the present case. The Justification, which in
Scripture is said to be by faith, is wholly and only ascribed unto God as the
Justifier, Romans 3. 30. and 4. 6, 8. and 1. 17. and 3. 22, 24, 25. and 8. 33.
Gal. 3. 8. and all the places that speak of Justification by faith: which all
suppose it to be Gods peculiar Royalty, to justify us through faith; therefore
cannot be interpreted of Justification in our own consciences, that is, of our
justifying our selves, without setting up our selves in the Throne of God. Is
this the man that reproacheth me in the face of the world, as a friend to
Papists, for maintaining faith to be the condition of Justification, because he
thinks it will follow thence, that men may be said to justify themselves? But
I see, one may better steal a horse, then another look over the hedge. 2. My
expression of Gods pronouncing us just, I acknowledge to be a little too
narrow, as most properly denoting that Justification which is by sentence at
the day of judgment: but I do therein also include Justificationem juris, the
act of God by the Law of grace, that is, the Promise of the Gospel, giving us
right to impunity and eternal life for the sake of Christ. And this is
formalissime, the imputation of Christ's righteousness. The righteousness of
Christ is imputed to believers in their Justification, inasmuch as that for his
merits they are reputed just before God, says Medul theol. l. 1. c. 27 these 12.
Dr. Ames. Now that Justification, which is in Scriptures said to be by faith,
is formally an imputation of righteousnesses and a non-imputation of sin, Romans
4. 2, 5. compared with ver. 6. 11, 24. Ergo, by Mr. Eyres concession, it is
only Gods act, and no creature can be joined with him therein, without robbery
done to him. But we do join with him by faith, in imputing righteousness to
our selves, if imputing righteousness to believers, be their knowing by faith,
that righteousness is imputed to them, as we heard Mr. Air interpreting it
before, in answer to Romans 4. 24.

3. If there be any sense wherein Ministers may be said to justify. 34.
sinners, yet it cannot be in that sense wherein God is said to justify them
that believe, for that is an act proper to himself. I acknowledge the Apostles
are said to remit and retain sins, John 20. 23. namely Vid. Calv. in loc. and
Altham. council. loc. pugn. cap. 194. and Dr. Reynolds Conference with Heart. Chapter
2. Divis. 3. page 65.
because it comes to pass upon every one according to the Word which they
preached. He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned. As the Prophet in a like sense is said to be set over Nations and
Kingdoms, to root out and to pull down, to build and to plant, Jer. 1. 10. Yet
was it not they, but the Word which they preached, which did justify or
condemn: and that also received all its efficacy immediately from God. So that
remission of sins is ascribed to the Apostles, but as moral instruments. Such
as they also were in raising the dead, healing the sick, converting of sinners,
and the like. All which works were wrought immediately by God himself,
immediatione virtutis, without any contribution of virtue or efficacy from man.
But when we are said to be justified by faith, if the meaning be, that by faith
we know our selves to be justified: in this case, faith has a true, proper,
immediate and real efficiency in our Justification. And it is every whit as
proper, yea, and more proper, to say we know by faith that we are justified,
then to say, we know by God that we are justified: the former expressing the
effect from its relation to its particular cause; the latter, to the universal.
I cannot see, unless God give me an eye, and concur with it in the act of
seeing, yet is it more proper to say I see, then that God sees; so neither can
I know that I am justified, unless God give me faith, and concur with the
act of it, to discover it to me; yet am I more properly said to justify my
self, then God to justify me, if by my Justification be meant my knowledge,
that I am justified.

And whereas Mr. Air grants faith to be the instrumental cause. 35.
of our knowing our selves to be justified, I see not how it can consist with
his Divinity. It is a principle with him, (as we shall see anon) that no act of
Gods can be an act of free grace, which has any cause in the creature. But to
manifest to me that I am justified is an act of free grace. Ergo, my faith
cannot be the cause of it, no, not instrumentally. The Assumption is proved
from all the places mentioned in Chap. 3. to prove that we are justified by
faith. All which speak of Justification by free grace: and Mr. Air interprets
every one of them of the manifestation of Justification. And now we should
dispute the great Question, Whether faith be the condition of Justification?
But because there is one, and but one Argument more, proving that Justification
by faith cannot be understood of the manifestation or knowledge thereof, I
shall first make good my ground there, and then try out the other by it self.

SECT, IX.
MY last Argument therefore was this. If Justification by faith. 36.
must be understood of Justification in our consciences, then is not the word
Justification taken properly, for Justification before God in all the
Scriptures; for the Scriptures speak of no Justification, but by faith or
works; the latter of which is Justification before men, and the former in our
consciences, according to Mr. Air.

To this Mr. Air answers, chap. 9.. 10, 11, 12. and his answer is, 1. That
Justification in conscience, is Justification before God. Yet himself told us
Page 61.
before, that the sight of God, in this Question, may not be understood of Gods
making it, as it were, evident to our sight, that we are justified: for then
the distinction of Justification, in foro Dei and in foro conscientiae, would
be a mere tautologie.

Secondly, says he, If faith be taken metonymically, then Justification by
faith is Justification before God: for it is a Justification by the merits of
Christ, to whom alone, without works or conditions performed by us, the Holy
Ghost ascribes our Justification in the sight of God, Romans 3. 24. Ephesians. 1. 7.

Rep. I deny, that faith is any where in Scripture put for Christ, in the
Argument of Justification, though it include him as its object, whether his
name be mentioned or no. In universalibus latet dolus. Give us some particular
place or places, where the word must be necessarily so understood, and we will
believe it. 2. Romans 3. 24. speaks not of any Justification by Christ without
faith: but most expressly and syllabically of Justification by Christ through
faith, ver. 25. whom God has set forth to* be a propitiation through faith in
his blood. And that faith here cannot be taken objectively, is already proved.
Yet if it had not been mentioned, it will by no means follow that it must be
excluded: seeing there are multitudes of places besides where it is mentioned.
The same I say to Ephesians. 1. 7. That the remission of sins there spoken of is by
faith; for the Apostle having said, that we have remission of sins, through the
blood of Christ, according to the riches of the grace of God, he shows the way
in which grace communicates this blessing both to Jew and Gentile; namely, by
the efficacy of the blessed Gospel, calling them both to one and the same
faith, and thereby to a common interest in the same blessings, ver. 8, 9, 10.
though these blessings be given to the Jew first, and afterward to the Gentile,
ver. 12, 13. and therefore Paul Bayne observes from ver. 8. That God gives
pardon of sins to none, to whom he has not first given wisdom and
understanding, that is, whom he has not taught to know and believe on his
Christ. Howbeit, if faith had not been here mentioned, it must yet needs have
been supposed: because the Apostle writes to those Ephesians, as unto Saints
and faithful in Christ Jesus, ver. 1. To whom as such do all spiritual
blessings belong, ver. 3. according to the purpose of Gods Election, ver. 4. So
that hitherto we have no intelligence of any Justification before God mentioned
in Scripture, but by faith.

His third answer is by way of retortion upon that expression of. 37.
mine, That the Antinomians may read their eyes out before they produce us one
text for it (namely, where there is any mention of Justification before God but
by faith) He retorts, That I acknowledge a threefold Justification, and yet
neither of them by faith, in my Sermon, page 23.

Rep. But I do not acknowledge, that either of them is properly and formally
the Justification of a sinner before God. Nor yet that either of them is called
by the name of Justification in Scripture: but only that our Justification may
be considered as purposed of God, merited by the death of Christ, and
exemplified in his Resurrection.

2. He tells us, That we have no plain text for many of our dictates: As, 1.
That justification does in no sense precede the act of faith. Answ. Mr. Air
knows well enough, that this is a dictate of his own, and that it is no part of
the quarrel between him and me; as I observed, page 1. and in his very last
words mentions three senses, in which I yield Justification may be before
faith. But we seek a text of Scripture, wherein the true, proper, formal
Justification of a sinner is made antecedent to faith. If there be any such
text, why is it not produced? if there be none, why is it not yielded? Our
second dictate is, That Christ purchased only a conditional, not an absolute
Justification for his Elect.

But where is this said? or by whom? it is by virtue of the Purchase of Christ
that we are justified, when we have performed the condition of believing.

The third, that our Evangelical Righteousness by which we are justified, is
in our selves. Answ. This refers to Mr. Baxter, whose judgment Mr. Air
represents as odiously as he can. But he knows Mr. Baxter has produced many
Scriptures and reasons for proof of it: which Mr. Air should have answered,
before he had complained for want of a text.

The fourth, that the tenor of the New Covenant is, If thou believe, etc.
Answ. I am sure, he knows, that many famous Protestants assert this as well as
I, and we shall see proof sufficient of it in due place: and of the last also,
that none were to have any benefit by the death of Christ, till they believe.

But Mr. Air takes special notice of one passage in this Argument,. 38.
wherein I say, that neither Justification in conscience, nor before men, are
of much worth in the Apostles judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 3. To this he gives a large
answer,. 11. which I am apt to think, he would have taken no notice of, but to
acquaint the world with his good wishes concerning me. He refers me to some
texts of Scripture, to learn what account the Apostle had of Justification
before men, and in conscience (though I cannot learn what account he had of the
former, from any of the texts mentioned.) But be it what it will be, I give him
this brief reply, That in comparison of Justification before God, neither the
one nor the other are much worth, (though they may be of some worth in these
inferior Judicatories) Not only children, but grown persons (for ought I know)
may be saved, without being justified of men, or of their own consciences. And
I will never believe, that that Justification is worthy of those many glorious
commendations which are every where in Scripture given to Justification by
faith, which one may live and die without, and yet be saved. Who will prove to
me convincingly, that a Christian may not live many years, and die at last in
melancholy or madness (under which distempers the judgment of men, or of
conscience, is not much valued) and yet be saved? or that a soul may not, for
some grievous sin, go with sorrow and darkness to the grave, and never see
light, till it be carried up to him that dwells in light.

CHAP. V.
An Answer to Mr. Eyres ninth Chapter, whether faith be the condition of
Justification? The Affirmative proved from Scripture. Mr. Eyres Arguments to
the contrary all invalid.

SECT. I.
TO Mr. Eyres Argument, That if we were justified by. 1.
faith, we were not purely passive in our Justification, I gave this answer;
That to believe is a formal vital act of thesoul in genere physico: but the use
of it in Justification is to qualify us passively, that we may be morally and
orderly capable of being justified by God: or though physically it be an act,
yet morally it is but a passive condition, by which we are made capable of
being justified, according to the order and constitution of God. As the reading
of the book, or acceptance of a pardon amongst men, is a condition without
which an offender is not pardoned. Hereupon Mr. Air disputes largely, that
faith is not the condition of Justification: wherein I do the more gladly join
issue with him. because upon this assertion of ours does he take occasion to
asperse the received doctrine of Protestants, with the reproachful names of
Popery and Arminianisme. Here therefore I shall show three things. 1. What a
condition is? 2. That faith according to Scripture is the condition of
Justification. 3. That all Mr. Eyres Arguments. 2.
to the contrary are most miserably inconclusive.

A condition then is diversely described by diverse Authors. Some describe it
thus. Navar. En^h^r. page ^8,.
Conditi^ est suspensio ali cujus dispositioni^, tantisper dum aliquid futurum
fiat. Others thus, Baldus apud Joh. Baptist. in verb
Conditio est adjectio quaedam per quam disp^situm habet in sui esse pendentium
existentiam vel defectum. Others thus, Pet. de Perus. ibid.
Est verb^rum adjectio in futurum suspendentium, secundum quam d^^ponens vult
dispositum regulari. In L. 1. F. de ^oud and demonstr.
Bartolus thus, Conditio est quidam futurus eventus, in quem dispositio
suspenditur. Any of these will serve my turn, these things being agreed. 1.
That it pertaines to him that disposes of any thing, to propound upon what
condition his will is that it be disposed of, or not disposed of. 2. That the
nature of a condition consists mainly in suspending the actual obligation of
the disposer, until the condition be performed. 3. That it is the will of him
that makes the condition, which is the cause of the obligation that comes upon
him when the condition is performed: of which we shall see more anon.

Now that faith is the condition upon which God has suspended. 3.
his actual donation of righteousness to a sinner, is so plain and evident to
me, that I confess, I cannot but wonder that men acquainted with the
Scriptures, should so much as question it. Several expressions there are, taken
notice of by Vide Bartelum. late in L. 1. F. de cond. and Demonstr. and Azor.
Inst. Moral. par. 3. l. 4. c. 24.
Civilians and Moralists, as signs or notes of a condition: and scarcely one
can I find, which the Scripture does not use somewhere or other, in describing
the order and habitude of faith to our Justification. But I shall instance but
in one or two. I begin with that Romans 10. 6, 9. The righteousness which is of
faith speaks on this wise, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved. That salvation here includes Justification, appears
from the very next words, ver. 10. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness. And I appeal to common sense, whether the particle If in this
place be not a manifest sign of a condition upon which Justification is
suspended, or whether it be possible for mortal men to invent any words, that
can more plainly express the matter of a condition. Try it by comparison with
other Scriptures, Genesis 43. 4, 5. If thou will send our brother with us, we will
go down; but if thou will not send him, we will not go down; and Genesis 34. 22.
Only herein will the men consent to us. -- If every male amongst us be
circumcised. Herein will they consent (...), that is, upon this condition will
they consent: as we render that word, 1 Samuel 11. 2. on this condition will I
make a Covenant with you. See Genesis 18. 26. 28, 30. Exodus 4. 23. Prove. 2. 1, 4.
Jor. 18. 8, 10. and hundreds of other places. In all which the particle If is
manifestly conditional: nor upon the strictest observation, which I have made
in reading the Scriptures, am I able to espy so much as one place, wherein the
said particle has any other use, when it supposes to any thing that is
future, by virtue of a Promise. Indeed Mr. Air did Chap. 5.. 6.
before mention two places, wherein he will have the particle If, not to
propound the condition by which a benefit is obtained, but only to describe the
person to whom it belongs, viz. 2 Timothy 2. 21. If a man purge himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, and Heb. 3. 6. whose house are we, if
we hold fast our confidence unto the end. As to the former place, it should
have been proved, and not said only, that the particle If is not a note of a
condition; if to be a vessel of honor be, to be glorified in heaven. Or if to
be a vessel of honor do signify a man specially and eminently serviceable
unto God, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good
work (as the Apostle in the same verse expounds it) then the particle If is a
note of more then a condition, even of a true proper cause, of an effect that
follows naturally, and not by Promise: for the more a man purges himself from
spiritual defilements and defilers, the more prepared and disposed he must
needs be to every spiritual employment. The next place, Heb. 3. 6. is nothing
to the purpose, if the particle If be there granted to be merely a description
of the person; because the consequent part of the Proposition is not
promissory, but simply affirmative. The text says not, whose house we shall be
if we hold fast, but whose we are if we hold fast. Nevertheless Parall. l. 3.
in loc.
Junius upon ver. 14. (which in sense is much the same with this) doubts not to
affirm the holding fast of our confidence to be a condition. A nobis vero
conditionem unicam desiderat (scil. Christus) nempe ut maneamus in ipso --
atque hanc conditionem n^tat Apostolus his verbis: siquidem principium illius
subsistentiae, etc. which testimony I quote the rather, that Mr. Air may know
that Junius was no enemy to faiths being a condition, as he does somewhere
represent him: yea, and on this verse he is express, that continuance in the
faith, is the condition of our continuing to be Gods house.. 4.


And that the words, Romans 10. 9. If thou believe with thine heart, etc. cannot
be a description of the person merely, I prove largely below, in a particular
debate of that place. I have here only one word to speak against it. Either it
describes the person from his faith, to signify that as such (that is, as a
believer) he is the subject of Justification, and then faith must needs be
antecedent to Justification: and if it be antecedent as an act required of us
in point of-duty, to a blessing consequent by virtue of a promise, then is it
antecedent as a condition. Or it is a mere description of the person, showing,
that that is the man that shall be justified: though his faith have no order
nor tendency to his Justification, but may as well follow after it as go before
it. But 1. This cannot be current sense, if Justification be either from
eternity, or immediately in the death of Christ, or at any time before this
description be made: for example, Is it sense to say, If thou be the man that
do, or at any time shall believe, thou shall be elected, or Christ shall die
for thee; when both election and the death of Christ are long since past? or if
a man should say, If thou shall be glorified, thou shall be justified, would
not such a speech suppose, that the person to whom those words are spoken, was
as yet not justified? though the Scripture is not wont to speak after this
manner in any place. 2. Let us take some parallel place, and see how it will
accord with it. As the words of Christ, to the father of the child that was
possessed, Mark 9. 23. If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that
believes. Or the same words to his disciples, Matthew. 17. 20. If you have faith
as a grain of mustard seed, nothing shall be unpossible unto you. If faith do
here only describe the person, and not propound the condition, then whether the
father had at present believed or no, his child must have been presently
healed notwithstanding; supposing him to be a person that at any time should
believe: and whether the disciples believe or no at present, all things are
possible to them presently, they being the persons whose property it is to
believe some time or other. But more of this hereafter.

Another note of a condition is the particle if not, or except: which. 5.
we find also used in Scripture in this matter: for men are threatened, that
they shall not be justified except they believe, John 8. 24. If you believe
not, or except you believe, you shall die in your sins: when men are threatened
with damnation except they believe, are they threatened absolutely, or
conditionally? if the first, then all the men of the world shall be damned: for
this is to be preached to all men, that if they believe not, they shall be
damned. If conditionally, then faith is the condition of deliverance from
damnation. And is not God to be thus understood in all his speeches of like
nature? Genesis 44. 23. Except your youngest Brother come down with you, you shall
see my face no more. Josh. 7. 12. Neither will I be with you any more, except
you destroy the accursed from amongst you. Can the Sun shine more bright in the
firmament, then it is clear from hence, that their destroying the accursed from
amongst them, was a necessary condition of their enjoyment of Gods Presence?
Acts 27. 31. Except these abide in the ship, you cannot be saved. See also Luke
13. 3, 5. Rev. 2. 5, 22. and multitudes of other places. In all which the same
particle is a note of a condition, unless we shall have the modesty, to think
that the Scriptures were penned on purpose to puzzle and confound our
understandings.

All those texts of Scripture which promise remission of sins to. 6.
them that believe, prove the same thing particularly, Mark 16. 15, 16. Go
preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believes, and is baptized, shall
be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned, John 3. 16. God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes on
him should not perish, but have everlasting life; and 6. 40. This is the Will
of him that sent me, that whosoever sees the Son, and believes on him, may
have everlasting life, with many places of like nature. To all which I guess
what Mr. Eyres answer will be, by what he says of the last of these, chap.
13.. 14. page 135. This text (says he) and others like it, do only show who
have the fruition and enjoyment of the benefits of Christ, to wit, They that
believe.

Many such cathedral determinations we have from him, without. 7.
so much as a pretense to proof: especially in his answers to Scriptures
alleged against him; yet might he very well think that we would expect some
solid reason for this his perpetual wresting and abuse of words from their
obvious and common sense. 1. It cannot indeed be denied, but that the same
words which propose the condition upon which a benefit is obtained, may also
consequenter declare the persons to whom the said benefit does belong, but that
such manner of speech as is used in these texts, does only show the persons
who, and not the condition or means by which a benefit is obtained, is
contrary to the perpetual sense of Scripture. Let us transcribe a few texts of
many, Numb. 21. 8. And it shall come to pass, that overy one (or whosoever) is
bitten, when he looks upon it, (namely upon the brazen Serpent) shall live. I
do the rather instance in these words, because the Lord illustrateth the method
of Redemption by them, John 3. 14, 15. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes
on him, should not perish, etc. If the protasis had been full, it had run thus.
As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, that whosoever looked on him
might be healed: even so, etc. And do those words ( that whosoever looked on
him) only describe the person that was healed, but not propound the condition
or means of healing? common sense cannot endure it. Their looking up to the
brazen Serpent was antecedent to their healing: and a means ordained for them
to use, that they might be healed: and their healing followed by virtue of Gods
power and faithfulness. Ergo, it was a condition of their healing. And the
distributive particle whosoever, does sufficiently show, that it was every one
promiscuously, one as well as another, for whose healing the Serpent was lifted
up, through their looking on it; and not a note of distinction to difference
one from another. So Mark 11. 23. Whosoever shall say unto this mountain
(believingly) Be thou removed, he shall have whatsoever he says. Is this also
a description of the person, but not a propounding of the means by which those
works may be obtained to be wrought? see the like expressions, Matthew. 13. 12.
and 16. 25. and 18. 4. Mark 9. 41. Rev. 22. 17. and other places without
number. To all which, if Mr. Air can oppose but one that will admit such a
sense, as here he puts upon the texts under debate, he shall do more then any
Author else that I can yet meet with. 2. If these and the like places do only
describe the persons that shall be saved, then do they ascribe no more to faith
in reference to salvation, then unto works. Works of righteousness being as
proper and peculiar to them that shall be saved; as faith it self: and
therefore the description of the person might as well be taken from them, as
from faith. 3. That which serves only to describe a person in specie, cannot be
proposed to another person as a means by which he may enjoy a like benefit, no
more then if the said person had been described in individuo; for example,
suppose the Lord had described them that shall be saved, not from faith, (their
specific quality) but by their proper names, and had said, God gave his Son to
death, that Peter, and Paul, and James, and John, etc. might be saved: were it
not against all sense and sobriety to go to Geofry, Roger and Anthony, and tell
them if they will be Peter and Paul they shall be saved? or suppose the
description had been from the species, and the words had run thus, God gave his
Son, that whosoever is borne of Jewish Parents should be saved: were it not
ridiculous, with all seriousness, earnestness and tenderness of compassion,
to exhort and beseech, and charge the Gentiles to be borne of Jewish Parents,
that they might be saved? yea, suppose they had been described from their
Election, (as they might have been more properly then from their faith) had it
not been absurd to exhort men that they would be elected, that so they might be
saved? I conclude therefore* that the texts before us are not a description of
the person, but a proposing of a condition, upon which only salvation is
attainable, words that are merely descriptory, can never be resolved into a
command or exhortation.

SECT. II.
LEt us now see whether Mr. Air has done any thing toward. 8.
a proof, that faith is not the condition of Justification.

His first Reason is this, That interpretation of the phrase, which gives no
more to faith in the business of Justification, then to other works of
sanctification, cannot be true. But to interpret Justification by faith merely
thus, that faith is a condition to qualify us for Justification, gives no more
to faith, then to other works of Sanctification; as to repentance, charity, new
obedience, etc.

Answ. 1. If the Proposition be true, (as I believe it to be most true) Mr.
Air has hitherto deluded us grossly in interpreting Justification by faith,
for a knowledge or evidence that we are justified: seeing works concur to such
an evidence, (and that by his own concession) as was above demonstrated. 2. The
Assumption also (I presume) proceeds upon the supposed principles of those whom
he opposes, and not according to his own sense: for I think, he will not say,
that any works of Sanctification do qualify us for Justification. 3. I deny
the Assumption. And how does Mr. Air prove it? Why Mr. Baxter and Dr. Hammond
say so. Yet are neither of these Authors of such authority with Mr. Air in
other cases, as that their word should pass for a proof. And yet has he not
fairly represented them neither. Dr. Hammond, I confess, is to me less plain
and intelligible: but if Mr. Air will undertake that his notion is the same
with Mr. Baxters, he might have seen in very many places of Mr. Baxters
writings, that he makes works but the secondary less principal conditions at
most, and denies them to be any conditions at all, in reference to our first
entrance into a state of Justification. And must we yet believe against an
Authors own words, that he ascribes no more to faith then unto other works of
sanctification, in the matter of Justification? 4. I also do make repentance a
necessary condition of remission of sins, because the Scripture does so, Luke
24. 47. And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name, Acts 2. 38. Repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, and 3. 19.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc. But I conceive
withal, that the one is included in the other, and that their difference is
rather respective then real, if we speak of faith as it is in the will; partly,
as to the object, faith respecting Christ immediately, and repentance God, Acts
20. 21. partly, as to the terms: the same motion of the soul, in respect of
the terminus a quo, (namely, dead works) being called repentance: and in
respect of the terminus ad quem, (namely God in Christ) more peculiarly faith,
Heb. 6. 1. Repentance also in its formal notion, includes shame, and sorrow,
and selfabhorrency, etc. which faith precisely does not. As to the Conclusion
of this paragraph, which concerns my subscription to the testimony to the
truth of Jesus Christ, (a book so called) I do not remember that ever I
subscribed it in this or any other County.

The second Argument is this. To interpret Justification by faith,. 9.
that faith is a necessary antecedent condition of Justification, gives no more
to faith then to works of nature, as to sight of sin, legal sorrow, etc. for if
these be conditions disposing us to faith, and faith a condition, disposing us
to Justification, then are they also conditions disposing us to Justification;
for causa causae est causa causati.

Answ. This Argument at the long run overthrows all humane contracts: at least,
it fights as strongly against them as against us. Titius gives a hundred pounds
per annum to Sempronius, upon conditon he give two pence a week to Maevius.
This two pence cannot be paid, unless the silver be dug out of the mines,
and melted, and stamp't, and delivered out of the Coyners hand, etc. Ergo*
S^mpronius his giving two pence a week to Maevius, is not the condition of his
holding his 100. li. per annum: at least no more then the mine or bank is. Is
not this gallant Logic? 2. I deny that legal sorrows, and the sight of sin,
etc. are necessary conditions disposing to faith: because God has not promised
to give faith, if we be convicted or legally sorry. These Preparations are
necessary physically, not morally: because the soul cannot seek out for life
and salvation in another, while it has confidence of sufficiency in its self.
If any man believe without these, he shall be saved notwithstanding. 3. The
answer therefore is, that the things which are necessary naturally, are not the
conditions of gift, but those only which are made necessary by the will of the
Donour; L. conditiones eztrinsec. F. de cond. and demonstr.
and so does the Civil Law determine. Caius gives Seius all the fruits that
grow upon his farm the next year: it is necessary that fruits grow upon the
farm, or else Seius cannot have them: yet Caius his gift is not conditional,
but absolute. 4. As to that logical axiom. Causa causae est causa causati. Mr.
Air knows it must have more limitations then one, or else it is dangerously
false. But in the present case it is altogether impertinent; for neither are
legal preparations the cause of faith, nor faith the cause of Justification,
but the condition only, and so the causa and causatum may go whistle.

The third Argument is this, that by which we are justified is the. 10.
proper, efficient, meritorious cause of our Justification. Faith as a
condition is not so. Ergo.

Answ. I deny the major. Mr. Air proves it by a threefold Argument. 1. By the
use of these Propositions (particles he would have said) by and through in
ordinary speech, which note a meritorious or instrumental cause. As when we
say, A soldier was raised by his valor; a tradesman lives by his trade. 2.
From the contrary phrase: as when the Apostle denies that a man is justified by
works, and by the Law, he excludes works from any causal influxe into our
Justification. Now that which he denies to works, he ascribes to faith. 3. From
other parallel phrases in Scripture, where we are said to be redeemed,
justified and saved. Per Christum, per sanguinem, per mortem, per vulnera.

Answ. These are De Justif. l. 1. c. 17.
Bellarmines wise Arguments, to prove that faith does justify per modum
causae, dignitatis aut meriti; by way of causality, worth or merit; which it
seems Mr. Air accounts unanswerable, otherwise he would not have brought them
again upon the stage in an English dress, when our Protestants have beat them
off so often in Latin. 1. To the first, I deny that the particles By or
Through are always the notes of a cause meritorious or instrumental. How many
times do we find them in one Chapter, where they are not capable of any such
signification? Heb. 11. 5. By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death, and ver. 11. Through faith Sarah received strength to conceive seed,
ver. 30. By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, ver. 33. By faith they
stopped the mouths of Lions, ver. 35. Women by faith received their dead
raised to life again, with many other passages in that Chapter. That it is the
grace of faith which is here spoken of* appears from the description of it,
ver. 1. will Mr. Air grant the Papists, that faith was the meritorious cause
of these effects? I hope then he will no more reproach me as popishly affected.
It may be he will say it was the instrumental cause: But let him show how. What
instrumental efficacy did faith put forth in Enochs Translation? did it either
subtilize or immortallize his body? or how was faith an instrument in throwing
down the walls of Jericho? It is naturally impossible agere in distans, to act
upon an object which the Agent touches not, formally or virtually: or what
efficiency did faith put forth upon dead bodies, to raise them to life again?
These effects are no otherwise ascribed to faith, then as the condition upon
which they were wrought, and without which they could not have been wrought,
according to Gods ordination. As it is said concerning the Lord Jesus, That he
could not do many mighty works in his own country, because of their unbelief,
Mark 6. 5, 6. with Matthew. 13. 58. Not that their faith had contributed any
thing to his ability: but that their unbelief, by virtue of Gods ordination,
made them incapable of being the subjects, for and amongst whom those works
were to be wrought.

To the second, I deny that Justification is ascribed to faith in the. 11.
same sense, in which it is denied to works, though it be the same
Justification, as to its common nature, which is ascribed to that, and denied
to these: and therefore cannot be meant of a Justification manifested to
conscience, as Mr. Air interprets it, when he comes to particular places. It Is
confessed, that when the Apostle denies that a man is justified by works, he
excludes works from any causal influx into our Justification. But it will by no
means follow, that when he ascribes it to faith, he does therefore acknowledge
faith to be a cause. No more then the like opposition in Scripture does denote
the same kind of cause on both sides, R^m. 9. 8. Not the children of the
flesh, but the children of the Promise are counted for the seed, and ver. 11.
Not of works, but of him that calls, and ver. 16. Not of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy, and Romans 11. 6. Not of works, but of grace.
Estne inter Pontisicios quisquam tam excors, ^t audeat affirmare, in istis
opp^sitioni^us idem plane genus causae utrinque notari? Is any man amongst the
Papists so sottish (says Bell ene^v. Tom 4. c. 4. p. 3^6. dued.
Dr. Ames) as that he will dare to affirm. that in these oppositions, the same
kind of cause is signified on both sides? The like I say to the third, when we
are said to be justi^^ed by Christ, by his death, by his blood, etc. the
particle By does denote the proper meritorious cause of our Justification. But
that it may not in other sentences signify some other Argument, as well as a
cause, must remain to be proved, till the time when we are to expect Mr. Eyres
Rejoinder.

SECT. III.
THe fourth Argument succeeds. To make faith a condition morally. 12.
disposing us to Justification, makes us at least concurrent causes with God
and Christ in our Justification.

Answ. I deny it utterly.

A double Argument Mr. Air presents us with for proof. 1. We should not be
Justified freely by his grace, if any condition were required of us in order to
our Justification: for a condition, whenever it is performed, makes the thing
covenanted a due debt, which the Promiser is bound to give: and then
Justification should not be of grace, but of debt.

Answ. Gladly am I come to this objection: and I shall give it a large answer,
not for any strength there is in it; but because Mr. Air pretends in his
title page, and the inscription of his book throughout, to oppose the ancient
Protestant doctrine of Justification by faith, upon the quarrel of free grace.
And it is upon the point the total sum of all he has to say for his
neoterick notion: but they may be taken with words that will.

The place which he alludes to in the objection is, Romans 3 24. Being justified
freely by his grace. But which of these two words is it that excludes
conditions? (...) or (...)? grace or freely? (...) Vide ^rist. Rhet. l 2. c 7.
Grace as it is a virtue or affection in man, is that which enclines us to
bestow of what we have to them that are indigent and necessitous: not for any
thing we have received, nor for any profit and advantage we expect by what we
give from him to whom we give, but that he may be bene^^ted by us. Accordingly
it is accounted great (and the Scriptures amplisie the grace of God from the
same Arguments either in respect of the persons that receive our gratuities, if
they be extreme Ezekiel 16. pertot. Romans 5. 6.
indigent and impotent: or in respect of the things given, if they be Ephesians* 7.
Romans 5. 7, 8. and v 6. 0 1 John 4. 19. John 3. ^6*
great, difficult, or seasonable: or in respect of the giver, if ^e be the
first, or only, or principal. But surely this grace does not exclude all manner
of conditions. Jacob sent a present to Es^u, that he might sinde grace (^^) in
his sight, Genesis 32. 5, 21. and 33. 8. the LXX, (...). and Prove. 3. 3, 4, Let
not mercy and truth forsake thee. -- So shall thou find (...) grace in the
sight of God. And the Apostle exhorts that we come to the throne of grace, that
we may find grace, Heb. 4. 16. Is grace any whit the less gracious, because
we are required to seek it, that we may find it? Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is
of faith, that it may be by grace. And more places which we shall mention below.

The Adverb (...) is but a qualification of the former: and expresses. 13.
the freeness of grace, by removal of worth and sufficiency in the person, who
of grace receives a benefit. Thus Mat. 10. 8. Freely you have received, freely
give. (...) As their power cost them nothing, but was freely given them; so
should they do good with it freely, without payment or recompense. So the
Hebrew, (...) expresses an act which is only from the will and inclination of
the Agent, without any sufficient, external, meritorious cause, Psalm. 35. 7.
Without cause have they hid for me their net, Psalm. 69. 4. They hate me without
a cause, and 119. 161. Princes have persecuted me without a cause. David says,
He will not offer to God gratis, or of that which cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24.
24. Thus servants went out freely, when they did not purchase their liberty,
but it was given them without price, Exodus 21. 2, 11. as also the L. mandatum
F. mand. and contra C. L. 6. 7.. Non est ignotum.
Civil Law determines. And what in Isa. 55. 1. is called a buying without
money, is expounded, Rev. 22. 17. A taking of the water of life freely. So that
unless it can be proved (of which more presently) that all conditions
whatsoever are meritorious causes, proportionable in value to the benefit a man
obtains upon performance of the condition, the name of free grace will prove
but an empty noise, and a cloak of error.

We must therefore with our Protestants distinguish of conditions.. 14.
Thus In disp. de satisfact. p. 365.
Cameron. Si multae conditiones requiruntur in justificandis, quae habent
proportionem cum justitia Dei, concedo: Sed si conditiones quae requiruntur in
justificandis, nullam habent proportionem cum justitia Dei, nego inde effici
justificationem non esse ex mera gratia: nam non excluduntur conditiones omnes,
sed eae quae possunt habere rationem meriti. The sense of which words is given
us by Comment. in Ep 250.
Paul Bayne. There are some conditions whereon, they only interceding, we
promise and undertake to do a matter, or bestow a kindness on any. As, Go with
me to such a place, and I will give thee hidden treasure: or, come to me to
morrow, and I will give thee a hundred pounds. There are other conditions which
have the reason of a cause meritorious: such do not only intercede, but deserve
upon contract as much as we promise. As, Do my work well, and I will pay you
truly, etc. Thus he, Gerhard de Evang. cap. 3.. 26. Quando Evangelicas
promissiones conditionales esse negamus, non quamvis conditionem, sed in
specie, conditionem nostrorum meritorum excludimus -- Alia igitur est conditio
fidei a condition operum: illa non opponitur gratuito dono, haec vero
opponitur. In eundem se^sum Rolloc. de vocat. p. 16.
and others to the same purpose. A distinction which we are necessitated to
make use of, though it distinguish rather the matter of a condition, then the
formal nature of it; for if any condition be proportionable to the reward
promised, that is not because it is a condition, but because it is Aliae sunt
conditiones praeter causas efficientes. Ames. contra Bellarm. de neces. oper.
ad salut. c. 6. circa princip.
a cause, which is also made the condition.

Moreover, we must also distinguish of that which Mr. Air calls a. 15.
due debt; for Hug. Grot. de jure Belli. l. 2. c. 7. 4. Covarr^ v. 2 ae. part.
relect.. quartus. n. 5 p. 288.
Debitum vel stricte sumitur, etc. A debt is either taken strictly, for such an
obligation as arises from commutative justice: or largely, for that which is
due in point of honesty and faithfulness, though it be not due in justice: so
that if it be not done there is no injustice to any other person; but he that
does it not is defective, as what is due by virtue of a free Promise. And such
an obligation as this God himself refuses not, 1 John 1. 9. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6.
10. and 10. 23. Nor is that which is given by virtue of such an obligation any
whit less free, or less of grace, then if it were given without it. Lessius
de just. and jur. L. 2. c 40 d. 8. p. 548.
Si obligatio orta sit ex liberali promissione; quod ex ea datur, etiam gratis
datur: non enim obligatio quae nascitur ex promissione liberali repugnat
liberalitati, sed est ejus effectus. What is given by virtue of a free Promise,
is also freely given: because an obligation arising from such a Promise, is not
repugnant to grace or liberality, but is the effect thereof. And that
conditional promises may be such, not only all (I say all thar ever I could get
sight of) our Protestants stand for, but the Papists themselves yield it.
Snarez. opus. relect. delib. divin. d 2 n. 44. and A Sanct. Clara. de Not.
Great. p. 135. 136. Durand. in 2. d. 27. q. 2. n. 12. 13, 14.
Promissio beneficii sub condition alicujus operis requisiti solummodo ex
quadam decentia vel dispositione, and non quia in eo invenitur valor respectu
mercedis, non impedit quin collatio boni promissi sit simpliciter liberalis,
etiam tali condition praestita, ita ut donum sit gratuitum: quia tale opus non
est sufficiens ad fundandam justitiam ac proinde non excludit gratiam. The
Promise of a benefit, on condition of a work required, only as of decency, or
as a disposition, and not because of its worthiness in reference to the
reward, does not hinder, but that the giving of the promised benefit is simply
free, even when the condition is performed: because such a work is not
sufficient to ground an obligation of justice, and so does not exclude grace.

These things being thus premised, we shall now cast Mr. Eyres Argument. 16.
into form, and turn it going.

If faith be the condition of our Justification, then upon our believing we are
justified of debt, not of grace. The reason is, because what is promised upon
condition, the condition being performed becomes a due debt. But the
consequence is false, Ergo, so is the antecedent.

Answ. To the Proposition I answer, 1. In general, that Mr. Air himself denies
it, when he thought it might be for his advantage, page 190. No man (says he)
will say, that the condition required of Adam, was meritorious of eternal life
in a strict and proper sense: And yet urges here, that if faith be the
condition, Justification must needs be of debt. 2. I distinguish, if the
meaning of the Proposition be, that Justification becomes due in that larger
sense, which we spoke of but now, if faith be the condition of it, then I grant
it. But if the meaning be (as I believe Mr. Air intends, by quoting Romans 4.
4.) that it becomes due in justice, then I deny it. And what is the proof? why,
a condition performed makes the thing promised a due debt. The substance of
this axiom I meet with, I think, not less then twenty times in Mr. Eyres
book, but no where else in all the books I have, Civilians or Canonists. And as
often as it is used, he does not once attempt to prove it, but leaves it naked
to the world to shift for it self. Conditions are either causal, such as have
proportion of worth to the benefit promised: and these being performed, make
the thing promised a due debt. As when I promise my servant five pounds, if he
will serve me for such a term of time. Some be merely illative or dispositive:
as when I promise a man to give him twenty pounds, if he will come and fetch
it. And these conditions (of which kind is faith,) do not make the reward due
in justice: which I thus prove.

Where there is not aequalitas dati and accepti, an equality between. 17.
the thing received and promised, there can be no obligation of justice. But it
is supposed, that between these conditions and the things promised there is no
equality. Ergo. I suppose it will be said, that though the things of themselves
be not equal, yet they are made equal by the promise or contract, the condition
being performed. To which I answer, that it is impossible. Indeed I think the
Civil Law allows an action upon such promises, when the condition is performed
( Vide Vigel. de Dreys. Jnst. Jur. l. 3. c. 8. and Wessemb. paratit. D l. 50.
tit. 12.
and so it does also in some cases, upon the most absolute promise) but we
enquire not what is just justitia civili, but what is just justitia naturali.
And I say again, that a work, which has of it self no proportion to such or
such a reward, receives no increase of worth by the Promise, that settles such
a reward upon it, or by being made the condition of such a Promise. If it does,
then the value of the work is to be measured by the reward that is promised to
it, and so the mercy and liberality of the Promiser excludes his mercy and
grace in fulfilling his Promise. For if the Promise make the condition equal to
the reward, then in fulfilling his Promise, he does but aequalia aequalibus
rependere, proportion the reward to the worth of the action, and so cannot
exercise grace and liberality in performing his Promise; for example, A King
promises a condemned Traitor, that if he will but acknowledge his offense,
and accept of his royal favor, he will not only give him his life, but advance
him to such honor, wealth and power, as shall make him the second man in the
Kingdom, yea, and leave him his successor in the Throne: That such a Promise
is of special grace and favor, he is not a reasonable creature that shall
deny; but if the Traitors acknowledgement and acceptance of the Kings favor,
by being made the condition of his deliverance and advancement, become
forthwith proportionable thereunto, then is it no mercy nor grace in the King,
to bestow these favors upon him. Yea, the same work will be of more and less
value. Suppose another Traitor upon the same condition be promised his life,
and no more. In the former, it is of a great deal more worth and value then in
this, because proportionable to a greater reward. Yea, and it will be
impossible that there should be any cheating in buying and selling, or any
other contract, if things of themselves unequal become forthwith equal, by
virtue of a contract. Suppose a man give a great price for a Jewel, and the
Jewel prove counterfeit: yet by virtue of the contract, it becomes equal to the
price he gave for it, and the buyer may not complain of the injustice of the
couzenage. Several other Arguments may the Reader see to this purpose in
learned De Just. Act. c. 63. and Voss. The s^de bon. oper merit. p. 72.
Davenant.

Here it may be demanded, whether works in the first Covenant,. 18.
were proportionable to the reward promised? which, with some limitations, I
shall answer affirmatively. But because Mr. Air gives me here no occasion to
speak to it, but urges it strongly in another place, the Reader must have
patience till he come thither. In the mean time let us see whether it cannot be
proved, that a gift may be given of grace, and yet upon condition. 1. I put
this case, Philemon promises Onesimus, upon condition he will acknowledge,
that he neither has, nor can merit any good of him, but rather that for his
thievery and several other injuries which he has done him, he has deserved to
be quite cast out of his favor, that he will forgive former injuries, and
moreover make him heir of all he has. That he may give it upon such a
condition is unquestionable, for a man may make what he will the condition of
his owu gift. Voluntas regit conditiones, says the L. in conditionib. F. de
Cond and domonstr.
Law. Onesimus accepts and performs the condition. I do ask, whether he do
thereby merit his Masters favor and estate, or no? If not, the question is
yielded: if so, then contradictions and impossibilities may be true. For he
confesses, that he neither has nor can merit any thing of his Master: and yet
in so saying, he does merit, even all his Master is worth. Now faith is a
condition of like nature: as being an act of self-dereliction, a kind of holy
despair, a renouncing of all worthiness in our selves, as Mr. Air expresses
it, page 76. and this does the Lord require as the condition of our partaking
in his pardoning mercy, Jer. 3. 12, 13. I am merciful says the Lord, and I
will not keep anger for ever: only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have
transgressed against the Lord thy God.

But let us search the Scriptures. Jer. 18. 7, 8. At what instant I. 19.
shall speak, concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and
to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation, against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil; I will repent of the evil which I thought to
do unto them. A famous instance we have of it in Nineveh, against which Jonah
cries, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. Jonah 3. 4. In the
former place, God gives us a general rule to understand his threatenings, as
having a tacit condition of repentance, by which the evil threatened may be
escaped. Otherwise Janas had spoken false in the Name of the Lord, in
threatening destruction to Nineveh within forty days: for the city was not
then destroyed; but upon their repentance, what the Lord promised in Jeremy, he
performed upon them, Jon. 3. 10. God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto
them, and he did it not. Vide Krakevitz. in loc. p. 341.
Repentance then (if God be a God of truth, and cannot lie) is the condition of
our deliverance from threatened evils: suitable to that of our Lord, Luke 13.
3. Except you repent, you shall all likewise perish. Yet Gods saving men (
Nineveh in particular) upon their repentance, is an act of his grace, not of
their merit: and unto that grace of God does Jonah ascribe it, Jon. 4. 2. I
knew that thou art a gracious God and merciful. In like manner is Isreal's
deliverance from the judgments threatened, ascribed to the free grace and
mercy of God, as the only cause: though not without their own repentance and
returning unto God as the condition thereof, Joel 2. 12, 13, 14. So 2 Chronicles.
30. 19. For if you turn again unto the Lord, (there is the condition) your
brethren and your children shall find compassion before them that lead them
captive, so that they shall come again into this land: for the Lord your God is
gracious and merciful, (there is the cause) and will not turn away his face
from you, if you return to him, Deuteronomy. 4. 30, 31. When all these things are come
upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and
shall be obedient to his voice: for the Lord thy God is a merciful God, he will
not destroy thee, neither forsake thee, etc. So chap. 30. 2, 3. Indeed the word
grace or gracious, is not expressly mentioned in this text; but mercy is,
which is tantamount to it: and likely they go both together, as before, Jonah
4. 2. Joel 2. 13, 14. 2 Chronicles. 30. 9. Exodus 34. 6. And if their returning unto
God, be here denied to be the condition of their deliverance from destruction,
of which notwithstanding the mercy and grace of God is asserted to be the only
cause: I must profess for my own part I shall think it a hard matter to prove,
that there is one intelligible sentence in all the Scripture: yea, and let me
speak my judgment freely; though I detest the Papists doctrine of merits, yet
if Mr. Air will make good his position, Donationi potest apponi conditio; nec
ideo minus pura and vera dona^io dicitur, dummodo ex illa commodum non accedat
donanti. Greg. Tholos. Syntag juris. l 28 c. 7. 7. ^x C. L. 8. tit. 55
that every condition is a meritorious cause, it must of necessity be granted,
that they have done more for the proof of merits, then all the protestants on
earth will ever be able to answer: for I do not know one Protestant, but
yields, that there are many Promises of grace, which yet are conditional. And
thus much for the first Argument, by which Mr. Air endeavors to prove, that
we are concurrent causes with God in the formal act of our own Justification,
if faith be made the condition thereof.

The second succeeds, and that is this. If faith be a condition,. 20.
morally disposing us for justification, we should then be concurrent causes
with the merits of Christ in procuring our Justification; for the merits of
Christ are not a physical, but a moral cause. Now by ascribing to faith a moral
causal influxe in our Justification, we do clearly put it in eodem genere
causae with the blood of Christ.

Answ. 1. The merits of Christ do not concur in our Justification, as any part
of that formal act by which we are justified. It is God as Supreme Lawgiver,
and Judge, and Christ as King under him who is our Justifier. The merits of
Christ are a cause of themselves, moving God to put forth that act. 2. I would
ask Mr. Air, whether the death of Christ be no more then a condition without
which we are not justified? if it be, he does ill to talk of my putting faith
in the same kind of cause with Christ's death: for I ascribe no more to faith,
then that it is a condition, without which not. If it be not, Mr. Air, I
doubt, will be found guilty of degrading the blood of Christ, more then I of
advancing faith beyond its due place. 3. By faith we concur to our own
Justification, not causally, but objectively, and terminative; as the earth
concurs to my going, as the thing I walk upon: a visible object to my sight, as
the thing seen: and other objects to the acts that are conversant about them.
4. And the Argument at last begs the question: for it supposes that we ascribe
to faith a causal influxe into our Justification, which is the thing I dispute
against.

SECT. IV.
THe fifth Argument succeeds. That interpretation of this. 21.
phrase, which makes works going before Justification, not only not sinsul, but
acceptable to God, and preparatory to the grace of Justification, is not
according to the mind of the Holy Ghost. But to interpret Justification by
faith, that faith is a condition qualifying us for Justification, does so.
Ergo. The tree must be good, or else the fruit cannot be good, Luke 6. 43, 44.
Mat. 12. 33. John 15. 5. So Augustine, Parisiensis, the Articles of the Church
of England, etc.

Answ. The substance of this is answered already, chapt. 5. works are taken
largely or strictly: in the former sense faith is a work; in the latter it is
opposed to works. The Authors whom Mr. Air mentions, as Aug. Sermon. 96. de
Temp. Nemo bono operatur nisi fides praecesserit. and de Spirit and lit. c. 8.
opus non fit nisi a Justificato. Justificatio autem ex fide impetratur.
Augustine, etc. Take works as they are opposed to faith, whereof the words
quoted are an uncontrollable evidence. If Mr. Air had showed us, that his
legion of Orthodox Writers did as much oppose the antecedency of faith as of
works to Justification, he had spoken to purpose. The tree indeed must be good
before the fruit can be good. But the tree is made good by faith, and the
Spirit of Sanctification, which is the good treasure of the heart, which
brings forth good works, Luke 6. 45. John 15. 5. I never heard before, that
Justification (which is a grace without us) was the root and inward principle,
of good actions.

The sixth and last Argument is this, To say that faith is a passive. 22.
condition, that does morally qualify us for Justification, implies a
contradiction.

Answ. I deny it.

Mr. Air proves it thus. To be both active and passive in reference to the
same effect, is a flat contradiction (and yet this also should be delivered
with a little more caution: a Christian is both active and passive in all the
good works he does, but I stand not on it.) A condition is a moral efficient
cause of that which is promised upon condition, in the use of the Jurists:
though in the logical notion of it, it has not the least efficiency.

Answ. And why may not we be permitted to use it in its logical notion? the
most logical sense is the most rational. And seeing Mr. Air confesses, that
in its logical notion, a condition has not the least efficiency; he must give
me leave to account his Argument illogical, that is, irrational, that proceeds
upon supposition of the contrary. 2. It is also notoriously false, that a
condition is a cause in the use of the Jurists; for they do perpetually
distinguish a cause from a condition: as appears by the very title of the
thirty f^fth book of the Digests. De Conditionibus and Demonstrationibus, and
Causis, and Modis eorum quae in Testamento scribuntur. Which the Dyon. Gotho*
^red Not. in hunc tit. W^semb. paratit in eund. Cujac. l. 2. observe. c 39. G.
Tholos. Sy^t. juris. l. 42. c. 32.
Jurists thus distinguish, Causa exprimit rationem quae nos movet ut alteri
legemus. Demonstratio rem ipsam legatam notat, designat. 51, 52, 53. Azor.
Instit. mor. par. 3. l 4. c. 24.
ao d^pingit. Conditio suspendit transmissionem legati, etc. Which differences
they fetch out of the Law it self. 3. If all conditions be causes, then such
as the Law calls C. de caduc. tollend.. Sin autem.
contingent and casual are causes also: as having as much of the nature and use
of a condition, as that which they call arbitrary or potestative. But that a
condition merely casual should be the cause of a gi^t, is that which the ( Vide
P. Nic. Moz. de contract. c. 2. de do not. p. 141. Ratio est: quia cum con^itio
dependet a ca^u fortuito, non censetur dona^s moveri ad donandum contemplatione
illius casus, sed ex sua liberalitate: non tamen donare vult nisi casus
eveniat. De quo etiam Riminal. Instit de donat. in princip. n. 59.
) Jurists will never endure. As if Titius promise Seius five hundred, if the
ship called Castor and Pollux come into the river of Thames by July next. Or if
he give him the same sum with a Proviso, that if he die before the age of
twenty one, then it shall come to Caius his younger brother. That an accidental
effect should be a meritorious cause is not imaginable. 4. The case is the same
again in all arbitrary or voluntary conditions, (If they be merely such, and
have nothing beyond the nature of a condition added or concurring) for the
distribution of conditions, in casuales and potestativas, is not generis in
species, but subjecti in adjuncta: for a condition is one and the same in its
nature and use, whether the act or event which is made the condition, be merely
casual or voluntary. And therefore when Mr. Air says, that if a man do any
thing for obtaining a benefit, he is active in procuring it, if he mean
physically, I grant it; if morally, I deny it: because a voluntary act, when it
is a condition, contributes no more to the obtaining of a benefit, then a
contingent act, being also a condition: and yet by such a casual condition does
a man obtain a benefit, and yet acts nothing toward it.

Let us, for clearing and concluding this dispute, again resume the. 23.
instance given before. Philemon promises Onesimus, that if he will confess
his fault, he will pardon him, and give him his whole estate: which condition
Onesimus performs. I ask now, whether his performance of this condition be the
cause of his pardon, and of the gift promised him. If not, then Mr. Air must
confess this Argument to be nothing: if so, then let us know plainly what
cause it is: (for Mr. Air holds me altogether in generals, and determines
without one syllable of proof, that it is a cause, but tells me not what cause
it is, nor what its causality). Is it a meritorious cause? That cannot be:
because there is nothing in his confession, that can countervaile the
greatness of the injury, or hold proportion with the reward; or does it move
merely objectively? as we say poverty moves a liberal man, and misery a
merciful man? But this is very improperly called a motive cause, being indeed
no cause at all, but the exiigency or moral capacity of a person, to be the
object of an act of mercy or liberality: otherwise, by how much the greater
man's misery is, by so much the less praiseworthy is Gods mercy in relieving
us: because, by how many the more causes concur to an effect, by so much the
less praise is due to each. That faith moves in this manner, I will not deny,
but this will not make it a cause, at least no other then a causa sine qua non:
and how a mere condition (such as in the instance given should be any other) I
cannot conceive. Briefly, if the condition aforesaid, performed by Onesimus, be
the cause of his Masters gift, then either of the Promise, or of the execution
of it. But the said condition is neither the cause of the Promise, nor of
fulfilling it. Ergo. Not of the Promise; for Philemons will is the cause of the
condition: Ergo, the condition is not the cause of Philemons will signified in
his Promise: for the effect cannot be the cause of its cause. A condition as
such, cannot move the Donour to promise, because it is his will, and nothing
else, that makes it a condition, (though I deny not, but there may be something
in the condition, which may move the will quoad specificationem, that is,
incline it to pitch upon this rather then that: or to make this the condition
rather then that) Not of the performance of the Promise, for the same reason:
for it is most absurd, that the will should make its own motive causes. As if
we should suppose Philemon saying thus, I will make his confession the
condition of my gift, and then I will be moved by it to bestow it upon him. If
there be not attractive virtue enough, (as I may so call it) in the condition,
till the will resolve to be moved by it, then surely the motion of the will is
from it self, not from it. Wherefore the cause, both of the Promise and
Performance, is Philemons good will, who of his own accord obliges himself to
give such a gift, such a condition being performed, and will not be obliged
without it: if he would, he might give it presently without any condition: but
as it is his will, that the Donee shall be incapable of receiving any benefit
by him, unless such a thing be done; so is it his will which makes him capable
of receiving it when it is done.

SECT. V.
THis I did illustrate in my Sermon by a double comparison: of. 24.
an offender pardoned by reading the book, or upon condition that he accept of
the pardon: by neither of which can he yet be said to pardon himself. To the
latter instance, I do not find that Mr. Air speaks a word; but invades the
former resolutely, and says,

That an offender saved by his Clergy, is not passive, but active in saving his
life, he may properly be said to save himself. Yea, he does more in saving his
life: then either the Law or the Judge: as the welsh man that cried, God bless
her father and mother that taught her to read.

Rep. Supposing that the reading of the book be a mere condition (such as is
the acceptance of the pardon in the second instance) abstracted from all
considerations of the worth and benefit of learning; I answer, 1. That whereas
Mr. Air says, He that reads may be properly said to save himself; I would
have granted it, if he had left out the word properly. Because he may be said
to save himself, who does that without which he should not be saved, though
his doing do not cause it, and therefore the speech is improper. Nor does the
Scripture abhor from the like manner of speech: for thus says the Lord, Luke
7. 50. Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace: which salvation is before called
forgiveness of sin, ver. 48. and Mark 5. 34. Thy faith has made thee whole,
go in peace. So Luke 18. 42. which though it were a bodily cure, yet was it a
representation and assurance of spiritual blessings: and the faith by which she
received it, the very same by which we obtain remission of sins, as our ( A^^s.
B^ll. enerv. tom. 4. l. 5. p. 319. 12o, Miracula istiusmodi fuerunt singularia
D^i beneficia, quibus Justificationis b^nedictio fuit adumbra^a. Luke 4. 18. 3.
Beneficia ista saepe conjunct^ fuerunt cum Justificatione. Gerh. de. Justis.
per sid.. 158 p. 956. Marc. 5 36. Luc. 8. 50. Quamvis ve^o ibi^. non agatur
proprie de side Justificante, mani^estum tamen est fidem st^tui unicum illud
medium per quod divino^um beneficiorum, ac p^oinde and ^e^issio^i peccato^um
and just^tiae reddamur participes, credenti enim omnia possibilia. Mark 9. 23.
S^e also Down. of Justif. l. 6. c 15 ^. 11, 1^.
) Protestants prove against the Papists. And yet no question but the speech is
improper: for in propriety of speech, it was the power and grace of God, that
healed the one, and saved the other. In the same phrase of speech are the Jews
exhorted to save themselves, Acts 2. 40. and Timothy to save himself, 1 Timothy
4. 16. And the Patriarchs by faith, to have done such things as are quite above
all created power, as was hefore observed out of Heb. 11. 2. And whereas the
welsh man blesses his father and mother that taught him to read: A Christian
may with seriousness bless God in like manner, and give thanks unto the
father, for making of him meet, ((...)) to be one of the Partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. That we perform the condition
is from the grace of God, no less then the blessings we partake in upon
performance of it: and therefore the praise of all is due to him only. Yet the
grace is greater in giving the latter then the former, by how much the end is
better then the means. And if the welsh man did indeed think, that he was more
beholding to his reading, then to the courtesy of his Prince, for his life:
his Logic was as ridiculous as his language; for though the Law would not have
saved him without his reading, (and much less would his reading have saved him
without that favorable Law) yet his life is a thousand fold more worth then
his reading of two or three lines: and therefore he owes a thousand times more
thanks to his Prince, for giving him his life upon such a condition, then to
himself for reading, supposing his reading to have been the purchase of his
life. If a man sell a farm to his friend for five hundred, for which another
would have given him a thousand: what more common then to say, He has given
his friend five hundred in the buying?

3. But in sober sadness, does Mr. Air think the welsh man speaks. 25.
properly, in his God bless her father, etc? That were a jest indeed. How
comes it then to be a ridiculous object, if there be not some ( h) pleasing
deformity in it, that flatters the fancy, and surprizeth k See Sie r^de la
C^ambre. Charact. of the Passions, chapter 4. of laughter. p. 210.
the soul, so moving laughter? And what can that deformity be (except the
welsh idiome) but the fallacy of non causa pro causa, putting that for the
cause which is not the cause: as we are wont (out of Cicero) when we see a
little man girt with a great sword, to transplace the Subject and the Adjunct,
and say, who tied that man to that sword? Had the welsh man cried as he was
bid, God bless the King and the Judge; the propriety of the speech had spoiled
the jest, and deprived it of that facetiousnesse and lepidity, which now
causes us to make merry with it. A certain discovery that the speech is not
proper, nor the condition of reading the cause of his pardon, the speech
becoming ridiculous upon no other account but because it would insinuate that
to be the cause, which was no more then a condition. But the serious judgment
of all offenders, who escape death by this means, and the wisdom of our stat^
determining it to be an act of royal grace and favor to pardon a man on this
condition, might (one would think) be of as much authority, as one welsh man's
word. It is true indeed, the Law, nor the Judge could save him, unless he
read: nor will God save us unle^^^ we believe, Heb. 3. 19. They could not enter
in because of un^eli^f. Not through defect of power or mercy in God (which are
both in^in^te) but because he has confined himself in the dispensation of
pardon and salvation, that he will bestow it upon none but them that believe.
Is it therefore not of grace, because not without faith? Whereas the Apostle
says, It is of faith that it might be of grace, Romans 4. 16.

In that which follows I find nothing which is not answered already,. 26.
or must not be answered in due place: for whereas Mr. Air says, that the
performance of the condition makes the conditional grant to become absolute;
the words are ambiguous. If he mean, it makes it absolute, as that without
which it had never been absolute, I grant it: if he mean, it makes it absolute
by contributing any direct causality, I deny it; for upon performance of the
condition, the conditional grant does indeed become absolute, not by the worth
or efficacy of the condition, but by the will of the Promiser, that upon the
existence of such a thing or action, will be obliged, and not without it. We
have already given several instances of conditions, which have nothing of worth
in them to engage the Donour, and therefore cannot be the cause of the gift:
for nothing can produce an effect more noble and excellent then it self. Nor
does it receive any addition of intrinsecal worth, by being made the condition:
otherwise we might work as rare feats by the influence of our wills, as Magnet.
cure of wounds.
Van Helmont thinks may be wrought by the magic of the fancy. It Is but
willing a pin to be worth a pound, and it shall be done.

And when he adds in the next place, that if faith be the condition of the New
Covenant in such a sense, as perfect obedience was the condition of the old,
man must needs be his own Justifier: if he mean such in the matter and
particular nature of the condition. It is true, if he mean such in the common
nature of a condition, it is false: for we have showed before, both from Reason
and Scripture, Divines and Lawyers, that some kind of conditions are so far
from being inconsistent with grace, as that they advance it rather. As suppose
some benefit of very great value be bestowed on a worthless person, upon
condition that he acknowledge the rich, superlative grace and love of the
Donour to be the only cause of it.

Finally, thus he speaks. As in the old Covenant, it was not Gods threat that
brought death upon the world, just so in the New (if it be a conditional
Promise,) it is not the Promise that justifies a believer, but the believer
himself.

The answer is ready. Death came into the world by sin, as the culpable
meritorious cause, but sin could not have slain us but by the Law, 1 Cor. 15.
56. Romans 5. 13, 14. Ergo. It is not warily said, that Gods threat did not bring
death upon the world. 2. And when Mr. Air has proved that our performance of
the Gospel-conditions has the same proportion to our salvation, as sin has to
our destruction, the Papists shall thank him, Romans 6. last. The wages of sin is
death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Men's
not-accepting of the grace of God, may make that grace without effect as to
themselves, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Romans 3. 3. But that therefore their acceptance is the
cause of Gods being gracious to them, is wild reasoning. And as to worthy Dr.
Kendal, (out of whom Mr. Air quotes these passages,) he has publicly enough,
(and in Mr. Eyres hearing for one) declared himself to be no enemy against
conditions of Justification or salvation.

That he that is pardoned upon his reading, does not pardon himself,. 27.
I proved thus: because then he must concur either to the making of the Law,
which gives pardon upon such a condition; or to the pronouncing of the sentence
of absolution upon himself according to that Law.

This (Mr. Air says) is an impertinent answer; because the question is not,
whether a man did concur in making the Law and Rule of his Justification, but
whether he had any causal influxe in producing the effect thereof.

Rep. My answer (if he will call it so) was very pertinent as to the case of an
offender saved by his Clergy, whose pardon is perfected by a Law (which gives
the remote right) and sentence passed according to that Law (which produces
his immunity it self.) If then the said offender cause his own pardon; it must
be by concurring some way or other to the production of one of these. The case
is altogether the same in our justification before God; which consists in a Law
of grace, and in sentence passed according to that Law: which because we must
purposely prove by and by, I shall here supersede for a while.

One thing more I added for illustration in these words. It is God. 28.
that glorifies us, and not we our selves; yet surely God does not glorify us
before we believe.

Mr. Eyres answer consists of two parts: the one is a concession of what I say,
with an explanation how glory is called a reward: and says, That a reward is
for a work two ways: 1. When a work is proportionable to the wages. 2. When it
is not answerable to the wages, yet is due by Promise; as when a poor man has
twenty shillings for an hours labor: though the work be not worth it, yet it
is a due debt, and he may challenge it as such.

Rep. Against which I have not much to oppose: yet if the hours work, neither
in respect to its self, nor any circumstance that attends it, as the Art,
Danger, Detriment of the Labourer, or the necessity, pleasure, profit, etc. of
him for whom he labors (all which corn into the Less. de just. and jured. 2
c. 18. d. 3.
value of the work) deserve the said twenty shillings, then is the reward,
though partly of debt, quia and operanti aliquid abest, because the workman
puts himself to expense of time and strength; and he for whom he works has
the benefit and advantage thereof: yet is it also of grace, Azor. Insiit. Mor.
p 3. l. 11. c. 3.
quatenus excedit meritum, inasmuch as it exceeds the value of the work. And
that the Labourer may challenge it, arises from civil, not from natural
justice. But I readily grant, that glory is not our reward in this sense. But
how then is it a reward?

Because it comes after, and in the place of the work, says Mr. Air.

Rep. Of which I shall speak more hereafter: for the present, what is said
suffices me, viz. That the reward follows the act, whereof it is the reward:
for hence it follows, that if Justification be given as the reward of faith,
then must it needs follow faith. But we have proved before, that Justification
(even the imputation of righteousness) is the gracious reward of faith. Ergo,
it must needs be consequent to it.

His second answer is this, Though the blessings of the Covenant be given us
freely, and not upon conditions performed by us, yet God has his order in
bestowing them: first, he gives grace imputed, and then inherent.

Rep. My Argument is a pari, we are not glorified unless we believe;. 29.
yet by believing we cannot be said properly to glorify our selves: so though
we believe that we may be justified, yet will it not follow, that we may be
therefore said to justify our selves properly: the reason is the same on both
sides. Now whereas Mr. Air will have us when believers, yet to be passive in
our glorification, merely because God does first give faith, and then
afterward give glory: I wonder he sees not the insufficiency of such answers,
and how the Arminians get ground by them. Say plainly. Does God require and
charge us to believe and repent, that we may be saved, or does he not? If he
does, then does he require a condition to be performed on our parts, in order
to our Justification, though he give it us; for (as ( o) Dr. Twisse observes
often) Medium ad aliquid obtinendum o Vindic. Great. de crrat. p. 163.
ex contractu vel foedere, illud demum est conditio. A means ordained to obtain
any thing by Contract or Covenant, is a Condition. If he does not, what shall
become of those many places, wherein God exhorts and commands men to repent and
believe, that they may be saved? Then unbelief and impenitency are no sins: nor
are men thereby the causes of their own ruin and destruction, contrary to
Scriptures, John 3. 19, and 8. 24. and passim. The reason is plain, because
man's not being the object of a gift of God precisely, cannot be meritorious of
his damnation. Indeed Mr. Air told us before, that he that does the least work
toward the procuring of a benefit, is not only physically, but morally active
in obtaining it. I wonder at my heart then, why we pray for grace and
salvation: or why we do or suffer any thing for obtaining a Crown and Kingdom.
Authors elus primi fuere Sadoc (unde Sadducaei) and Baythos. de quibus videsis
Joh. Drus. de trib. sect. Judaeor. l. 3. c. 3. and 4. and Joh. Cameron. Myroth.
in Mat. 22. 23.
This very conceit was that which drew many in former ages to deny any
resurrection, other then what was past already: and by some improvement, may
bid fair for a resurrection of that and like consequences. The very substance
of Religion, and the vital act of faith, consists in looking to the reward
promised in Heaven, Heb. 11. 6, 26. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 18. And had I not known some
Christians fallen and falling off from prayer and ordinances, and other
spiritual duties, upon this very ground, that they are passive altogether in
their salvation, and that they neither can nor must do any thing toward it, I
would not have lost so much time as to have taken notice of it.

CHAP. VI.
A Reply to Mr. Eyres tenth Chapter. My first Argument against Justification
before faith, vindicated from all Mr. Eyres exceptions.

SECT. I.
HAving now asserted the antecedency of faith to Justification,. 1.
from many express testimonies of Scripture, and discovered the fruitlesnesse
of all Mr. Eyres attempts against them; We proceed to the Vindication of the
Reasons added in my Sermon, for proof of the same point. These Mr. Air
undertakes in his tenth Chapter. They are five in number: and the first is this.

If there be no act of grace declared and published in the Word, which may be a
legal discharge of the sinner while he is in unbelief, then no unbelieving
sinner is justified. But there is no act of grace declared and published in the
Word that may be a legal discharge of the sinner while he remains in unbelief.
Ergo.

Mr. Air first denies the Assumption; For the Gospel declares that God has
transacted all the sins of the Elect on Jesus Christ: and that he by his
offering has made a full and perfect atonement for them, whereby they are
really made clean from all their sins in the sight of God as of old, carnal
Israel were typically clean upon the atonement made by the High Priest, Lev.
16. 30.

Rep. 1. Supposing the tenor of the Gospel or New Covenant to be such a
declaration as this: yet I deny, that this declaration has the form or force
of a Law, to absolve the sinner from the sentence of a former Law. The Reason's
plain, because it is but narratio rei gestae, a mere historical narration of
what has been transacted between God and Christ. And does not Mr. Air see,
that if he yield it to have the nature and operation of a Law in discharging
sinners, he contradicts himself in his next answer? wherein he denies, that
Justification is the discharge of a sinner by a declared act, that is, by a
Law. Indeed, such a Gospel as he here speaks of, may declare the sinner to be
discharged by some former act: but it self cannot be his discharge, and
therefore the answer is nothing to the purpose. 2. The atonement made by
Christ, may be said to be perfect two ways. 1. In respect of it self, and so
it was most perfect, as wanting nothing that was requisite to constitute or
make it a complete cause of our peace. 2. In reference to its effects, and so
it is yet imperfect, and shall continue so till the Saints be glorified,
because till then they shall not have the full effect, or perfection of peace,
purchased in the death of Christ. If Mr Air mean this latter sense, when he
says the Gospel declares a full and perfect atonement made by Christ: he begs
the question. In the former I grant it. 3. And so that the Elect were cleansed
from their sins in the death of Christ quoad impetrationem, because he obtained
eternal redemption and cleansing for them; but not quoad applicationem, till
they do believe, because the remission purchased in the death of Christ, is not
applied or given to us till we believe. 4. Though the Priest made an atonement
for all the sins of Israel upon the day of expiation, Lev. 16. 30. yet did God
require the concurrence of their afflicting themselves, and humbling their
souls on that day, ver. 23. otherwise they should have no benefit by that
atonement, Lev. 23. 29. Whatsoever soul shall not be afflicted on that same
day, he shall be cut off from among his people. Is not this to teach us, that
without faith and repentance, we shall not have remission by the death of
Christ?

Secondly, Mr. Air denies the Proposition; which stands upon. 2.
this ground, That Justification is the discharge of a sinner, by a published
declared act.

Where note (Reader) that by a declared act, I mean, not an act of God,
declaring and manifesting to a sinner that he is justified (as Mr. Air does
willingly mistake me, and thereupon patcheth a nonsequitur upon me, which I
intend not to unstitch) but such a declaration of his will, as is essential to
make it a Law; for the very essence of a Law consists in this, that it is the
declared will of the Lawgiver, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. and 30. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
etc. which is the only rule that determines, both de debito officii, of what
shall be our duty to do, and de debito poenae and praemii, of what rewards or
penalties shall become due to us. Accordingly, the thing I maintain is, that
our discharge from punishment due by Law, must be by the revealed will, that
is, by some contrary Law or Constitution of God. And I very well remember, that
in private conference with Mr. Air, about nine or ten years since, I told him
my judgment was so then: and that our Divines were generally dark, in opening
the nature of Justification, for want of taking notice of it: to which he then
consented. But Tempora mutantur, etc. the thing it self I thus proved.

Sin is not imputed where there is no Law, Romans 5. 13. Ergo, neither is
righteousness imputed without Law.

Mr. Air answers, 1. Though men will not impute or charge sin upon themselves,
where there is not a Law to convince them of it, yet God may: for his hating of
a person, is his imputing of sin. The scope of Romans 5. 13. is not to show when
God begins to impute sin to a person, but that sin in being supposes a Law:
and consequently, that there was a Law before the Law of Moses.

Rep. Does Mr. Air indeed think, that when it is said, Sin is not imputed
where there is no Law, the meaning should be, men will not impute sin to
themselves where there is no Law? To impute sin has but two senses in
Scripture. 1. To punish it, 2 Samuel 19. 19. 2 Timothy 4. 16. and then the meaning
is, that men will not punish themselves where there is no Law; and because the
punishment which the Apostle does here instance in, is death: therefore the
full sense will be this, that men will not kill themselves where there is no
Law: a very probable gloss. Or 2. To accuse or charge the guilt of sin upon a
person. But the use of the Word will not allow us to understand it of a man's
imputing or charging sin upon himself. Vid Guil. Esthi. in loc.
For it is never used in all the Scriptures to signify the act of a man upon
himself, but perpetually the act of another, as Paul to Philemon, ver. 18. If
he owe thee any thing, impute it to me: especially when it is put passively, as
here it is, sin is not imputed. See Romans 4. throughout. 3. And I do heartily
wish Mr. Air would have given us a short paraphrase upon the thirteenth and
fourteenth verses, that we might have seen what tolerable sense could have been
made of them according to his Exposition: and whether the Apostle do affirm or
deny that men did impute sin to themselves before the Law; especially if the
Apostles scope be what Mr. Air says it is, namely, to show that sin in being,
supposes a Law: how can it be conducible to that scope, to speak of men's not
imputing sin to themselves without a Law? 4. The grand design of the Apostle
is plainly to illustrate our salvation by Christ, by comparison of contraries:
and the similitude in its full explication stands thus. As by the disobedience
of Adam, sin and death entered upon all his children: so by the obedience of
Christ, life and righteousness betides all his. The Proposition is set down,
ver. 12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and so death passed upon all men for that all have sinned. This is proved, ver,
13, 14. and the sum of the proof (as I take it) is this. Sin was imputed, and
that unto death, from the beginning of the world. Ergo, there must be some Law
in being, according to which sin was imputed: for it cannot be imputed where
there is no Law, ver. 13. This Law must be either the Law of Moses, or the Law
given to Adam. The former it cannot be, for sin and death were in the world
long before that Law was given, even as long as from Adam to Moses, ver. 14.
Ergo, it must be the Law given to Adam. And so has the Apostle his purpose,
That it was by the disobedience of one (namely Adam) that sin entered into the
world, and death by sin. From whence it is manifest, that God does never impute
sin without a Law: that is, does neither charge persons as guilty of sin, nor
punish them for it (other sense the phrase of imputing sin has none in all the
Scripture) for from the imputation of sin unto death, the Apostle infers the
necessity of a Law, according to which sin was imputed in the long tract of
time between Adam and Moses.

2. Gods hatred of reprobation is not his imputing of sin, as being. 3.
antecedent to any act of the creature, whether good or evil, Romans 9. 13. If
Mr. Air think otherwise, why have we not one syllable of proof, neither from
Scripture nor reason, to warrant us to call the acts of God by such new names
as they were never known by before since the world was made? The Apostle
prays, that the sin of those that deserted him, be not laid to their charge,
or imputed to them, 2 Timothy 4. 16. and the same sense has the prayer of Stephen
for his murderers, Acts 7. 60. Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, both
which suppose the imputation or non-imputation of sin to be a consequent to it,
not antecedent. And against the constant language of Scripture, and of all men,
must we be forced, upon no other Authority then Mr. Eyres bare word, to believe
the imputation of sin to be from eternity; and when the Apostle says, sin is
not imputed where there is no Law; we must believe, (for Mr. Air says it)
that the meaning is, There is no sin where there is no Law. Briefly, if sin be
imputed from eternity, men are miserable from eternity, which is impossible;
for he that is not, is not miserable, Mat. 26. 24.

Therefore Mr. Air has a second answer, and that is, That. 4.
there is not the same reason of our being sinners, and being righteous: seeing
that sin is our act, but righteousness is the gift of God.

Rep. What then? yet there may be, and is the same reason of imputing sin, and
imputing righteousness, which are both Gods acts. It is but changing the
term, and the matter will be clear. To impute righteousness, and not to
impute sin, are terms much of the same signification with the Apostle, Romans 4.
6, 8. Now to impute sin, and to non-impute sin, are contraries, (though the
latter be expressed by a negative term) Ergo, they are both of them actions of
the same kind and common nature. Contraria sunt opposita sub eodem genere
proximo. Ergo, there is the same reason for the one and the other, that if sin
cannot be imputed without Law, then neither non-imputed.

More particularly thus I argued, that as condemnation is no secret act or
resolution of God to condemn, but the very voice and sentence of the Law,
Cursed is he that sins: so on the contrary, our Justification must be some
declared sentence or act of God, which may discharge the sinner from
condemnation.

Mr. Air answers, That as condemnation comes upon men by virtue of that Law or
Covenant which was made with the first Adam: so our Justification descends to
us by virtue of that Law or Covenant which was made with the second Adam: which
New Covenant, and not the Conditional Promise, (as Mr. W. would have it) is
called the Law of faith, Romans 3. 27. and the Law of righteousness, Romans 9. 31.

Rep. The reason then is acknowledged to be the same on both, 5.
sides. Ergo, as condemnation is by a Law, so must Justification be, which was
before denied. To what is here said for explication I reply, 1. That the former
part of it supposes that which I will never grant, nor Mr. Air ever prove:
and that is, That there is no condemnation which comes upon sinners for moral
transgressions, but by the Law given to Adam. Indeed that Law condemned him as
the head of mankind for his first disobedience: and so condemns all his
posterity for original sin. But his posterity are not concerned in those
personal sins which he committed after his first transgression; nor in the
condemnation which became due to him for them: no more then they are subject to
condemnation for one another sins. But that Law which was given to him at
first as the common head of mankind, and had effect upon him as such; became
afterward of mere personal obligation, both upon him and all men else, for
personal, actual sins. So that no man now is, or ever was, since the first
transgression subject to condemnation by that Law, quatenus it was given to
Adam as a public person, for any personal sins of their own: but as it was
obliging immediately upon each man in his own person. And therefore the Law of
M^ses speaks more personally. Cursed is every man that continues not in every
thing which is written in the Law to do it, Gal. 3. 9, 10. And by this Law is
every transgressour condemned, not with a derivative condemnation, (such I
mean, as is derived, and as it were propagated from another) but such whereof
every sinner in his own person is the first and immediate subject. And unto
this condemnation is our Justification most frequently opposed in Scripture.
The Argument therefore has yet no answer, nor nothing like it. The
condemnation of a sinner for his own personal sins, is an act of God,
condemning by a Law: Ergo, the Justification which is opposed thereto, is an
act of God by a Law in like manner. 2. I deny that condemnation comes upon any
man, by virtue of the Law given to Adam, till himself be borne a child of
Adam. Ergo, from the acknowledged pnrity of reason it must follow, that no man
is justified by the Covenant made with Christ, till himself be borne of Christ,
that is, by faith, Gal. 3. 26. John 1. 12. 13. and 3. 5. so that in this
respect the Argument is yielded. For clearing of the antecedent, note: That
when it is wont to be said, we were condemned in Adam, it is not to be
understood properly, but with an (...), an As I may so say, to use the Apostles
expression, in a case not much unlike, Heb. 7. 9, 10. As I may so say, Levi
also paid tithes in Abraham, for he was yet in the loins of his father. Not as
if we were then actually condemned, who then had no existence: for he that is
not, can be no more under Law, then he that is dead and free from Law, Romans 6.
7. and 7. 3. and condemnation by Law, being a transient act, requires an object
existent upon which it may pass. But because the very same sentence which
condemned him then, takes hold without any renovation of all his posterity
successively unto the same condemnation. Even as when it is said, in Adam all
di^. 1 Cor. 15. 22. Not as if men could die before they are borne, but because
it was appointed and determined by the foresaid Law, that all borne of Adam
should die, Heb. 9 27. And in this respect our spiritual being in the second
Adam, is as necessary to our partaking in his righteousness, as our natural
being in the first Adam, to our partaking in his condemnation.

Yea. 3. It is a great deal more necessary: and therefore I deny. 6
Mr. Eyres consequence; for though it were yielded, that condemnation comes on
men only by the Law of Adam: yet will it by no means follow, that Justification
descends to us from Christ, as the immediate effect of that Law or Covenant by
which himself was justified. The reason is plain, because Adam represented all
mankind, as virtually in the same obligation with himself: ( Vide Paul. Ferrium
scholast. Orthod. spe c. 20. 3.
) and his offense was the act of the whole humane nature, though it be not
imputed to particular persons, till they begin to exist: and his condemnation
was so far forth the condemnation of all mankind, it being the very same
sentence that condemns both him and us. But Christ Jesus represented no man
as in the same obligation with himself, either in his obedience or
Justification: otherwise we are justified by works, or he by grace: for we must
be acknowledged to have satisfied Gods justice in him, and to have merited
eternal life in him, in the very same propriety of speech, as we are said to
have sinned and dyed in Adam: which I will never believe while I live: because
it excludes grace altogether from having any hand in the justification of a
sinner. The grace of our justification is usually placed in these ( See the
Assemb. confess. cap. 11.. 3.
) two things. 1. In that Christ was given freely of the Father for us. 2. And
his obedience and ^^tisfaction accepted in our stead. But in neither of these
is there any grace at all, if we have merited and satisfied in him, as we are
said to sin and die or be condemned in Adam. For the Law it self will allow us
to make satisfaction if we are able (for it inflicts the penalty but in ord^r
to satisfaction: and the punishment of sinners is not eternal, but because
they cannot satisfy by bearing it). But if we have satisfied in Christ, it
seems we were able to do it. ^b esse ad posse valet consequentia. And justice
it self will accept of satisfaction being performed. And as God deals not more
rigorously with us in condemning us, then he did with Adam in condemning him:
so neither does he deal any whit more mercifully with us in justifying us,
then he did with Christ in justifying him, if his satisfaction and
justification be ours in the same sense, in which Adams sin and condemnation
is ours. How much safer is it to say with the Scripture, He is the propitiation
for our sins, 1 John 2. 2. and that he has obtained eternal redemption for
us, Heb. 9. 12. then to talk of our being in him a propitiation for our own
sins: or of purchasing in him redemption for our selves? The conclusion is;
the Law that justified Christ cannot justify us, though the law that condemned
Adam, were yielded to be the only law that condemns us: (which yet I have
already denied) Erg^, there must be some other Law according to which sinners
are justified: and that is, that Law of grace preached in the Gospel, whosoever
believes shall be saved: called the law of faith, Romans 3 27. and the Law of
righteousness, Romans 9. 31.

4. No (says Mr. Air) those places are to be understood of the. 7.
new covenant made with Christ: not of the conditional promise, as I would
have it.

Rep. Which is spoken after the old rate of Mr. Eyres disputing, that is
dictating. I acknowledge my self unworthy to be compared with him in any
respect: yet the truth (if he think himself in the truth) is worthy of a more
laborious defense then a frigid so it is or it is not so, though I may not be
worthy of a better answer. I am persuaded himself will acknowledge that the
propriety of the phrases favors me: and he does not so much as pretend to any
Argument hat may compel me to understand them improperly. 1. For the law of
faith, it is expressly opposed to the law of works. Where is boasting then? it
is excluded. By what law? of works? nay, but by the law of faith. The law of
works is the law that requires us to perform works that we may be justified.
Ergo, the law of faith is the law which requires faith unto justification; even
that doctrine which manifests the righteousness of God which is by faith of
Jesus Christ, without the works of the law; as he had before described it, v.
21, 22. Thus Beza, Evangelium vocat legem fidei, id est, doctrinum quae salutem
prop^nit sub condition, si credideris -- oppos^tam doctrinae quae justitiam
and salutem proponit cum condition, si omnia feceris. To the same purpose
Paraeus, Aretius, Hemmingius, etc. And therefore the Apostle having said, that
the law of faith excludes boasting, he adds immediately, v. 28. we conclude
therefore that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law. To put
faith for Christ is such a piece of boldness as I dare not adventure upon, as
much as Mr. Air challength me for my forehead. The reasons are mentioned
before. 2. And as for the law of righteousness. Romans 9. 31. it is called the
righteousness which is of faith in the very next foregoing verse, v. 30. And I
would Mr. Air would tell us how we may otherwise make sense of the Apostle,
when he says the Gentiles attained it by faith, v. 30. and the Jews fell short
of it by stumbling at Christ through unbelief, v. 31. And a few verses below
chap. 10. 6. the Apostle calls it the righteousness which is of faith, and v.
8. The word of faith which we preach: the voice and tenor of which he
describes, v. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus and shall
believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved: and all this in opposition to the righteousness of the law which the
Jews sought after: the sum of which is comprehended in these words. The man
that does them shall live by them, v. 5. Hence it is manifest, that the law of
righteousness, is that by which only righteousness is attainable: and that is
the Gospel-promise of justifying them that believe in Jesus, though they be not
able to fulfill the Law of Moses.

SECT. II.
IN the next place Mr. Air offers us some Arguments to prove. 8.
that justification is not the discharge of a sinner by that signal
conditional promise of the Gospel, he that believes shall be saved. Let us try
then (for whereas he censures that saying of mine, every man is then condemned
when the Law condemns him, I stay not to answer him: he might have seen, if he
would, that I intended no more then, that whosoever is condemned, is condemned
by a Law.)

What then are the Arguments? The first is crambe bis (shall I say, or) decies
cocta, that it will infer justification by works: for answer to which I
refer the reader to chap. 4. and 5. having proved in the former, that it is
the Act or grace of faith which the Apostle perpetually opposes to works: and
in the latter, that benefits may be given of grace, which yet are given upon
condition.

His second Argument therefore is this. If justification be by that signal
promise, he that believes shall be saved, then none were justified before that
gracious sentence was published. But the Fathers of the old Testament were
justified before the publishing of that gracious sentence, or any like it, Ergo.

Rep. A particular explicit faith in Christ was not absolutely necessary. 9.
to salvation, till the times of the Gospel, and the doctrine of faith and
remission was in former times very sparingly and darkly revealed: especially in
the time between Adam and Moses. Yet was the faith of the ancients the same for
substance with the faith of Christians, and of a like necessity to
justification and salvation. For Abel was justified by faith, Heb. 11. 4. and
Enoc^, v. 5. and N^ah, v. 7. and Abraham, Romans 4. and sic de caeteris: and
surely they could not believe without a Preacher, by whom they might hear of
him on whom they believed. But supposing the promise of remission to be
suitable to those times of darker dispensation, and the condition of that faith
which was then required as sufficient to salvation, I pass the proposition. 2.
I deny the assumption (which has here no other proof then the old Argument,
so it is) namely that there was not a promise of forgiveness preached unto the
world upon condition of repentance and returning unto God (which is the
substance of faith) before the incarnation of our Lord. There were many
Preachers of righteousness in the old world. Noah See Dr Golls Sermon before
the Astrologers. p. 28, 29. and Manasse Ben. Israel. Council. in Genesis 4. 26. 3.
is reckoned the eighth, 2 Pet. 2. 5. beginning at Enos, Genesis 4. 26. And he (no
question) preached faith and repentance to the world; that they might escape
the destruction of soul and body at once: who notwithstanding his preaching
perished by their disobedience or unbelief (the Greek word signifies either) 1
Pet. 3. 20. and he by his faith is said (in a comparative sense) to have
condemned them, Heb. 11. 7. And in the book of Job (who lived before the law)
we find the world had notice of such a conditional promise; though not from
any written word, but by tradition, or by Preachers immediately raised up, Job.
8. 4, 5, 6. If thy children have sinned against him -- If thou would seek
unto God betime, and make thy supplication to the Almighty; if thou be pure,
and upright, surely now he would awake for thee, etc. and this he tells us was
the faith of the Fathers many generations before, v. 8, 9. compare, v. 20, 21.
So chap, 33. 27, 28. he looks upon men, and if any say I have sinned, he will
deliver his soul from going down into the pit. So chap. 22. 21, 22, 23.
Acquaint thy self with God -- lay up his words in thy heart. If thou return to
the Almighty, thou shall be built up, etc. see also chap. 11. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19. And what less does the Lord say to Cain? Genesis 4. 7. If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? namely, if thou do well as Abel did, shall
thou not be accepted as well as he? And wherein Abel's well doing consisted,
the Apostle tells us, Heb. 11. 4. By says Abel offered unto God a more
excellent sacrifice then Cain. So that from Adam to Noah, and from Noah to
Moses, the world was not altogether without notice of the promise of salvation
upon condition of faith and repentance. Vide Mos. ^myr^ ^. Spec. anima l^er.
special. p^r. 3 and anima i. General. par 3. and. 4.


In Moses's time the matter is clearer then to need proof, Heb. 4. 1, 2. Let
us therefore fear, least a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any
of you should seem to come short of it: for unto us was the Gospel preached as
well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, being not mixed
with faith in them that heard it. Hence 1. it is manifest, that salvation was
promised Israel under the type of rest in Canaan. 2. That it was not promised
them absolutely, but upon condition (whether the condition were expressed, or
understood) otherwise their non-entrance into Rest must have been imputed
wholly to Gods unfaithfulness, and not to their unbelief: whereas the text
says expressly, it was their unbelief which made the promise of no effect to
them; and they could not enter in because of unbelief, chap. 3, 19. 3. That the
Gospel is preached to us as it was to them: and therefore the same condition is
required of us, as was required of them, namely faith: otherwise we also shall
fall short of the promised rest, as they did, v. 1.

The third Argument is this. If justification be only by a declared. 10.
discharge, then elect infants that die in their infancy have no justification.

Rep. I deny the consequence, where is the proof? I can find no other but this,
that infants are insensible of this declaration, and unable to plead their
discharge from any such promise: which is nothing in the world to the purpose.
Cannot infants have right to a benefit by law, or the declared act of a Rector
or Lawgiver, because they are unsensible of it, and cannot plead it? They are
condemned by law whiles infants, Romans 5. 14. They may be servants or free by
law. Do not our laws provide for the rights of Minors, Pupils and Orphans, even
in their infancy? 2. It does also ruin the maine pillars of Mr. Eyres
discourse. All the places which I before alleged to prove justification by
faith, according to him, are to be understood of the manifestation of
justification to the conscience. Give me leave then to retort his own
Argument. The justification spoken of in the places aforesaid, Gal. 2. 16. Romans
8. 30. and 4. 24. Act. 10. 43. and 13. 39. etc. is, that without which no man
can be saved. But some may be saved without justification manifested and
declared to the conscience: as infants. Ergo the justification mentioned in
those places is not justification in conscience, or manifested unto conscience.

The fourth Argument succeeds. The making justification a. 11.
declared discharge, detracts from the majesty and sovereignty of God, for it
ascribes to him but the office of a notary or subordinate Minister (whose work
it is to declare and publish the sentence of the Court) rather then of a Judge
or supreme Magistrate.

Rep. If this Argument be cast into form, it runs thus. He that forgives sin
by a declared Act, is but a notary or subordinate Minister (for their work it
is to declare and publish the sentence of the Court.) But God (according to me)
pardons sin by a declared Act. Ergo (according to me) God in justifying or
pardoning sin is but as a notary or subordinate Minister. I can scarcely
believe that there is any reader will need my help, to answer such arguings as
these. I deny the proposition. The proof of it is, a baculo ad angulum. It is
the office of a notary to declare the sentence of the Court. Ergo, he that
pardons offenses by a public Act or Law, is a notary. 2. And yet if God
publish his own Laws, he does nothing unbecoming his Majesty and Sovereignty.
He published his Law to Adam himself; and will publish the final sentence
which shall pass upon all men at judgment: and our Lord Jesus published the
Gospel with his own mouth, Joh. 7. 37. and Rev. 22. 16, 17.

The fifth Argument is all one with the first, and so is answered already.

The sixth and last Argument is a pari. Forgiveness amongst men is not
necessarily by a declared discharge; Ergo, Gods is not, for we are bid to
forgive one another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4. 32.

Ans. Supposing that the Antecedent speak of private men only. 12.
forgiving personal injuries one to another, I deny the consequence. And one
reason of my denial follows presently. Ephesians. 4. 32. proves well that Gods
forgiving us should be a motive to us to forgive one another: but it does by no
means prove that our forgiveness one of another, is an act of the same kind
and nature with Gods forgiveness of us. 1 John 4. 11. If God has so loved us,
we ought also to love one another: though our love one to another be not
univocally the same with Gods love to us. And yet, as our love, so our
forgiveness may in some respects resemble his: as in the freeness, fullness
and dureablenesse of it, and in the effects which it produces on the persons
forgiven: but every way like it, it neither can nor ought to be. 1. God
forgives none without satisfaction: we must. 2. No private man is Governor and
Judge of his brother: Ergo, his forgiveness cannot be such as Gods is, who
forgiveth as supreme Judge and lawgiver, Jam. 4. 12. 3. Nor can Gods
forgiveness be like man's, if it consist in the act of his mind or will: for
if we will speak properly; a man's will not to prosecute one that has injured
him, is not called pardon and forgiveness simply, because it is an act of the
will: but because it is such an act as supposes on his part that is pardoned,
some injury done; and on his part that pardons, some right to require or
demand satisfaction: neither of which can be supposed to be the will of God,
which was from eternity. 4. Private forgiveness is no justification of the
person forgiven. A man may forgive his murderers (as Stephen did) yet neither
the laws of God or man will permit them to go unpunished. But Gods act of
remission is withal the justification of a sinner. Ergo, is not such an act as
private men's remission of personal injuries. Other differences it were easy
to add: but I shall insist only on that which follows.

The forgiveness of a Magistrate being an act of authority must. 13.
be by some formal act of oblivion. And so Gods forgiveness being in like
manner an act of authority must be also by some formal act of pardon that
shall make the Law of condemnation to be of no force, etc.

Mr. Air answers. 1. That he sees no reason why God should not have as much
power to forgive without a promulged Act, as man; and charge me with
boldness for limiting God to such a way of forgiveness: because Gods
forgiveness is no less an act of charity, then man's, Romans 5. 8. Ephesians. 2. 4.
And though God in the act of forgiveness may be looked upon as a Judge, yet is
he such a Judge as proceeds by no other Law then his own will.

Rep. The first part of the answer is ridiculous: as if a private man had more
power then the supreme Magistrate, because he forgives an injury without a
promulged Act: or as if it were through defect of power in the Magistrate that
he forgives by a Law or Act of grace. A private man remits an injury, as it is
an injury and hurt to himself: but as it is a breach of the Law of God or man,
he neither does nor can remit it: as in the case beforementioned of a man
forgiving his murderers. Therefore it is but a very imperfect pardon which a
private man can give. But it argues eminency and perfection of power to pardon
by an Act of grace: because no Law can contradict it, but it disannulls and
invalidates them all: according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 17. The
Covenant which was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law cannot disannul
to make the promise of no effect. The confirming of the Covenant (according to
the significancy of the Greek ( f) words (...) and (...)) is an authoritative
and authentic ratification of it: as humane testaments before, v. Budaeus,
Com^ent. Grac ling. 1058. and Bea in 2 Cor. 2. 8
15. are then ratified or confirmed, when they want nothing which the Law of
nature or particular Nations requires to make them valid. Therefore to argue
for a power in God, to forgive as private men forgive, is to plead for a power
in God to become weak, and to act imperfectly and unlike himself. 2. When Mr.
Air talks of my boldness in limiting God, I suppose it is for want of a
better answer. I never heard before that it was a limiting of God, to determine
his actions according to the relations which they flow from as their immediate
principle. Thus do we distinguish the actions of God, as a Maker, a Sovereign,
a Father, a Lawgiver and Judge, as just, as merciful, etc. Belike if I should
say God cannot condemn men as a Father, I limit God: or that he cannot save
sinners as just, (opposing justice to mercy), or that he cannot act as the
Governor and Judge of mankind in condemning and justifying, without a Law. 3,
When he determines Gods forgiveness to be an act of charity, if he mean of
charity as opposed to authority (as he must do, if he speak any thing to
purpose) he overthrows wholly the necessity and use of Christ's satisfaction.
For if Gods forgiveness of us, be merely an act of charity (such as private
men's forgiveness one of another) then satisfaction is no more necessary to
Gods forgiving us then to our forgiveness one of another. Nor can it be of any
use: for it can neither put the beginning nor increase of love in God, which is
in him without beginning or addition: nor does it remove that which hinders the
effects of his love from being communicated unto us: for that forgiveness
which is purely an act of charity is cedendo de jure suo, by bearing an injury,
and parting with that right which a man has to require satisfaction: and if
God forgive after this manner, the case is too plain to need proof, that the
satisfaction of Christ is of no use at all to make way for the forgiveness of
sin, but rather a hindrance and contradiction thereunto. Mr. Air cannot be
ignorant that the whole weight of the cause between the Socinians and us,
depends upon the truth of that which he here denies, namely, that condemnation
and justification are the Acts of God as Rector, and supreme Judge of men. If
he will but review Cameron, Gerhard, Crotius, Suarez, or any other, Papist or
Protestant, who is accounted to have wrote judiciously and orthodoxly upon that
point, he will see that they fetch the foundation of their defense from this
very principle.. 14.


4. Romans 5. 8. and Ephesians. 2. 4. The texts alleged to prove that Gods
forgiveness is no less an act of charity then man's, prove it not. They show
indeed that our justification in actu exercito is an effect of the love of God;
it being his love only which moved him to send Jesus Christ to purchase
justification for us, and thereupon to bestow it on us, (but with the
preservation of the honor and authority of his Law). Nevertheless the same
justification is an Act complete in its kind, nature, definition and essential
constitution, without that love of God. Even as a King out of special affection
to a malefactor condemned (suppose it be his own son) may find out. a way
to satisfy for his offense, and consequently to discharge him: here the
discharge does not exist but by virtue of the Kings love and good affection:
yet the pardon it self, in actu signato, for its kind and nature, is a
rectoral judicial act; not of private charity.

5. Mr. Air yields at last, that God in the act of forgiveness. 15.
may be looked upon as a Judge: yet as such a judge as proceeds by no other Law
then his own will. Where, either the former part contradicts all that has
been hitherto said about Gods forgiving men, as private men forgive personal
injuries; for as no man in the very same Act can be looked upon as a Judge, and
a private person (for there cannot be two formal principles of the very same
action) so neither can God: or the latter part contradicts the former: for he
that has no other rule but his own will, is neither a Judge, who proceeds L. A
divo Pio. ff. de re judic. and L. 7. ff. ad leg Jul. R^p^t^nd.
exformula according to the prescription of Law; nor an Arbitratour who
determines ex aequo and bono, according to the equity of the cause depending.
2. When he says, God proceeds by no other Law then his own will: if he mean by
no other Law then what is of his own making* it is true; but if he mean by his
own will as distinguished from a Law properly so called, the Apostle
contradicts him. Jam. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver who is able to save and to
destroy. And hereby does the Lord justify the equity of his own dispensations
in punishing and pardoning, because he does neither pro libitu, but according
to his own declared Laws. Ezekiel. 18. 18, 23, 25, 29, 30. He does not punish
merely to satisfy his own will, as if he delighted in punishment. ibid. v. 23,
32. Lam. 3. 33, 34, 35. but according to the exigency of men's demerits: so has
he declared that he will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. Which yet
by his absolute liberty and sovereignty he is free to do, if he had not
confined himself to a Law.

M. Air answers secondly, The promulgation of an act of. 16.
grace is for the direction and limitation of Judges and Ministers of State.
But in the justification of a sinner God has no need of such an act, because
he is the sole Judge and justifier himself: and therefore the purpose of his
will secures the person sufficiently, and makes the Law of condemnation of no
force in regard of the real execution of it.

Rep. If we can have no better answers then these, yet we must be content, for
ought I see. 1. Does Mr. Air mean that the only end of promulgation is the
direction of inferior officers? If so, why does he mention another in his very
next answer? If not, why does he pretend that a Magistrate cannot pardon his
subjects involved in common guilt, by a promulged Act, because one end of
promulgation is the direction of inferior Ministers of State? 2. Vid. Greg.
Sayr. Clav. Reg. li^. 3. cap. 1.. 12. and Azor. Instit. moral. par. 1. l. 5.
cap. 3.
Some degree of promulgation is essential to a Law. Will unrevealed, is will,
not Law. It cannot rationally be imagined that Magistrates should intend to
oblige their subjects by that will which they never intend to reveal: and
surely will without obligation, is no Law. And the first and immediate effect
of this Law (if it be a Law of grace) is to give offenders a right to
impunity, any Act or Law to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. The
direction of inferior Judges is but the secondary use of it (and in the case
between God and us, of no use at all, because himself is both Lawgiver and
Judge; reserving each man's cause to his own peculiar cognizance) for if it be
for their direction, what does it direct them in? surely in the administration
of justice: which consists in giving every man his due. But impunity is not due
to offenders but by virtue of some Act of grace. Ergo, the first effect of
such an Act is to constitute such a right. 3. It is necessary that such a
general pardon as is the Act of the supreme Judge and Lawgiver, should be by a
Law of grace: not that God needs it (as Mr. Air insinuates) but because the
nature of the thing requires it. If God forgives by the purpose of his will,
then he does not forgive as a Rector. Mr. Air has before granted that his
purpose not to punish is included in the decree of election as part of it: but
election is neither an Act of justice nor of mercy, but of absolute dominion
and liberty. So that the sum of these sayings is this. Though God forgive as
supreme Judge, yet it is not necessary that he should forgive as other Judges
do, because he may forgive as he is not a Judge, viz. by the secret purpose of
his will. And yet as God may (very improperly) be said to need that which is
most conducible to the glory of his Government, so is it needful in respect of
himself, that his judgment, whether of justification or condemnation, proceed
according to his revealed promulged Laws. Himself does hereby vindicate the
equity of his dealings and Government over men, as was before observed out of
Ezekiel. 18. throughout, add D^ut. 30 from v. 11. to the end of the chapter.. 17.


4. And whereas Mr. Air tells us again, that the Purpose of Gods Will does
sufficiently secure the sinner, and make the Law of condemnation to be of no
force, as to the real execution of it: we have before showed at large the
mischievous consequences of this doctrine. If this be so, to what purpose
imaginable did Christ die? at least, there was no need he should die to redeem
us from the curse of an abrogated Law, which by an eternal Act was made of no
force at all to condemn. Before, when the satisfaction and merits of Christ
lay at stake for the credit of an eternal Justification, Mr. Air was content
to yield them this honor, that they purchased the effects, (though not the
act) of Justification, which effect he told us was our non-punition. But here
he tells us, that the purpose of Gods Will does sufficiently secure us from
punishment: which though (I confess) it be more rationally spoken, because
that act is most unworthy to be called the cause of our non-punition, or
noncondemnation, which is not able to effect it, without the help of another
more sufficient cause; yet is it most perniciously spoken, as not leaving so
much as the effects of our Justification, and by consequence excluding both act
and effects from any dependence upon the merits of Christ for their existence.
2. Were Adam and Eve, either or both, obliged by the Law to punishment upon
their disobedience, or no? If not, their sin did them no harm, nor was there
any truth in that severe commination, In the day you eat thereof, you shall
surely die: and it is past dispute; they died by force of that Law, and all
their posterity to this day. Romans 5. 12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 15. 22, 56. And if so,
then was not that Law made of no force by the eternal purpose of God: for if
that Purpose of God do not hinder, but that men are legally obliged to
condemnation upon breach of the Law; neither will Gods Justice and
Faithfulness permit that they go unpunished, unless his Law be satisfied some
other way, Numb. 23. 19. God is not a man that he should lie, neither the Son
of man that he should repent: has he said, and shall he not do it? or has he
speken, and shall he not make it good? Therefore it is, that we have before
denied, that there is in God any purpose precisely of not punishing. 3. The
Supreme Magistrate may neglect the execution of Laws with impunity to himself;
because if he be Supreme, he is not accountable to any other humane authority:
but not without such a Prostitution of the authority of his Laws, and the
honor of his own Government to contempt and obloq^y, as God will never endure
to be cast upon Himself or his Law, by men or devils. His Honor and his Laws
are dearer to him then a thousand worlds.

M. Air answers thirdly, the publishing of an act of grace, is for the, 17.
comfort of an offender, rather then for any need the Magistrate has thereof:
as the act of Oblivion was a real pardon, when it passed the House. So the
publication of the New Covenant was for the comfort of Gods Elect, and not for
their security in foro Dei.

Rep. Our question is not precisely what is the end of promulgation, but what
is the effect of the Law promulged: which (say I) is to give offenders a right
to impunity, which Mr. Air cannot deny: though it be very true, that such a
Law be also for the comfort of an offender, namely secondarily and
consequenter; for it comforts him, in that it gives him a right to deliverance
from deserved punishment. His right and his comfort are not opposites, but both
the effects of the same Law, and the latter subordinate to the former: so that
hitherto there is nothing that contradicts me. 2. It is also true, that it is
not the Magistrate who needs an act of grace, but offenders need it: for if the
same authority which bound them under punishment, do not also discharge them
from it, they cannot legally escape it. 3. When it is said the Act of Oblivion
was a real pardon when it passed the House, it has reference to what I said in
my Sermon, That a Vote in the House, or a Declaration that an Act of Pardon
shall come out, is no legal security to a Delinquent: by which I intended to
declare, that neither the Purpose of God within himself, but the Law of grace,
which in time he established, according to his eternal purpose, was that act
which pardoned the sinner: which if Mr. Air would have contradicted, he should
have affirmed, that the mere purpose or resolution of the House to make such an
Act, is that very pardon which discharges Delinquents. The Act it self being
once passed, may be yielded to be a Law, as being the declared will of the
Lawgivers constituting a right to impunity, though by printing, writing or
proclamation it be afterward made more public. Nevertheless, I expected some
proof, that it is a complete Law before publishing: if after the p^s^ng it had
been Nic. vig. de Dr^is. Just. Jur. c. 1. p. 8. etc. 2 p. 1^.
ordered not to be published, till some months or a year after, I much
question whether in that interim it had been Law or no: though I am not so well
acquainted with the customs of our own Nation, as to determine peremptorily?
The Senatus-Consulta amongst the Romans had not the force of a Law before
publishing. But it is quite besides our question, to debate what promulgation
is necessary to the completing of a Law? It cannot be denied, but that when
subjects are involved in common guilt, (as all the world is before God) their
pardon must be by Law: which is as much as I needed or intended for
illustration of the way and manner of Gods forgiving us, by the Gospel or Law
of grace. He that believes shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life:
which because Mr. Air denies, (not disproves, for that's impossible, it being a
truth of God) we shall yet farther evince by the following Arguments.

SECT. III.
ANd first, from Mat. 28. 18, 19. compared with Mark 16.. 18.
15, 16. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given to me
in heaven and in earth, -- Go ye therefore into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but
he that believes not shall be damned; from hence I infer, 1. That God has
given unto Christ the Kingdom and Government over all men. 2. That this
Government contains a power of remitting sins. 3. That this power is exercised
in enacting that gracious Law, He that believes shall be saved, for so does the
Lord speak, Go ye therefore into all the world, etc. (which particle therefore
I have borrowed from Matthew; ver. 19. and put it into the words of Mark)
arguing manifestly from the right and authority which he had received, to the
lawful exercise of it in making and ordering to be published that Law or Act of
Pardon, whereof he does then and there appoint his disciples to be
Ambassadors. I confess I cannot imagine what can here be said, unless it be
one of these two things. Either, 1. That remission of sin is not contained in
that salvation which is here promised to them that believe. But this (me
thinks) should be too harsh for any Christians ears to endure: seeing it must
contain all that good which is opposed to condemnation; and therefore primarily
remission of sins: which is also expressly mentioned by the other Evangelists,
Luke 24. 47. John 20. 23. and by the Apostles, in the execution of this their
commission, as a prime part of that salvation which they preached in the Name
of Christ, Acts 2. 38. and 3. 19, etc. Or 2. That those words, He that believes
shall be saved, are a mere description of the persons that shall be saved
(which I think is the sense that Mr. Air somewhere does put upon them) but
this to me is more intolerable then the former: partly for the reasons
mentioned before, chap. 5. and to be mentioned hereafter: partly, because
according to such an interpretation, the words will be no more then a simple
affirmation or relation of what shall come to pass: whereas by their
dependence upon the foregoing, All power is given to me in heaven and in earth,
it is manifest, that they are an authoritative Sanction of the Lord Christ's,
an act of that jurisdiction and legislative power, which he has received from
the Father, and so the standing rule of remission of sins.

2. If it be by the Promise of the Gospel, He that believes shall not perish,.
19.
but shall have everlasting life; If (I say) it be by this Promise, that God
gives sinners a right to impunity and eternal life, then by this Promise he
justifies them. But by the foresaid promise does God give sinners a right to
impunity and eternal life. Ergo. The Proposition I pass as manifest by its own
light. The Assumption is delivered in several Scriptures. Thus Paul, Gal. 3.
18. God gave the inheritance to Abraham by Promise. Ergo, it is by Promise
also, that a right to life is given to all that have it. This Promise is either
particular or general. The former it is not, for God does not now make any
particular Promises to particular men, such as was his Promise to believing
Abraham: Ergo, it must be the general Promise, wherein the same blessings as
were given to Abraham, are proposed to all men to be obtained by the same faith
that Abraham had, and by the same Promise given them when they believe: which
Promise is that before mentioned, of life and salvation by faith in Jesus
Christ, the Apostle himself being Interpreter, ver. 22. But the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the Promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be
given to them that believe. The same does he assert at large, Romans 4. 13, 14,
16, 23; 24.

3. The Lord Jesus says expressly, John 12. 48. That the. 20.
Word which he spoke, shall judge unbelievers at the last day. If a judgment of
condemnation be ascribed to the Word, in reference to unbelievers, how can it
be denied a judgment of Justification, in reference to believers? Non potuit
magis splendido elogio extolli Evangelii authoritas, quam dum illi judici^
potestas defertur. Conscendet quidem ipse Christus Tribunal, sed sententiam ex
verbo quod nunc praedicatur laturum se asserit, (says Calvin upon the place.)
Yea, the Lord ascribes to the same Word a judgment of Justification, ver. 50.
And I know that his Commandment is life everlasting; that is, the cause of it,
as Moses also speaks, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. See also Deu^. ^^. v 15* ^ ^.
It is your life; though God be the principal cause, and the Word but the Vid.
Synops. p^r theol. disp. ^3.. 10 and Down. of J^stif c. ^. ^. 5. and ^libi
passim
instrumental: and therefore the power which it has of judgment, it has from
hence, that it is the Word of God, ver. 49. For I have not spoken of my self,
but the Father which sent me, he gave me a Commandment what I should say: as
the instrumental cause works not, but in the virtue of the principal. To this
plain testimony let me add an Argument, as plainly deduced from it.

If judgment shall pass at the last day according to the Word, then the Word
is that Law which is the rule of judgment, (and by consequence, to one is
given by the Word a right to life, and another is obliged to condemnation by
the same Word.) But the antecedent is most true. Ergo, so is the consequent. It
is the work of judgment to give unto every one according to what is due to him
by Law: if then a judgment of Justification pass upon any, some Law of grace
must be supposed, according to which it becomes due, for such a gracious
sentence to pass upon him.

4. And this is that which the Apostle James says, chap. 4. 12.. 21.
There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy. Beza observes,
that in four ancient Greek Copies, As also in the Kings MS. See D^. Hammond.
Annot. in loc.
as also in the Syriack and the Latin Interpreter, the word Judge is extant.
There is one Lawgiver and Judge who is able to save and destroy: that is, to
whom pertaines the sovereign right and power of saving and destroying. But
whether the word be expressed or no, it is surely implied: for the Apostles
scope is to dissuade us from judging one another, ver. 11. because there is one
Lawgiver, to whom the power of judgment, and so of absolving and condemning, of
saving and destroying does appertain. Now he that saves as a Lawgiver, saves by
absolution; and he that absolves as a Lawgiver, absolves by Law. Ergo, God
absolves men, that is, pardons and justifies them by Law. And when he shall
judge all men at the last day; his judgment, whether of salvation or
destruction, shall proceed according to Law.

5. Add to this, that the Apostle commends the excellency and glory. 22.
of the Gospel, that God does thereby justify, 2 Cor 3. 9. For if the
ministration of condemnation he glory, much more does the ministration of
righteousness exceed in glory. The ministration of condemnation is that which
ver. 7. he calls the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones. His
scope is* to show the excellency of that Gospel, which himself and other
Apostles did preach and publish to the world; above the ministration of the Law
committed to Moses. As then the ministration of death and condemnation was the
ministration of that Law, which did condemn unto death, (the effect being put
for the cause) so the ministration of righteousness is the ministration of
that Law or Word that justifies, the effect being put for the cause in like
manner. Ergo, Justification is by Law.

6. To this purpose speaks the same Apostle, Romans 1. 16, 17. I. 23.
am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, ^o the Jew first, and also to the Greek;
for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith. That
which I observe is, 1. That the Gospel is here called the Power of God to
salvation: that is, a mighty and effectual instrument of salvation (as
Expositors agree.) 2. That the power for which the Apostle here extolls it is,
in that it saves them that believe. 3. That Justification is here included
(yea, and primarily intended) in salvation: in which large sense the word
salvation is often taken elsewhere, Romans 10. 9, 10. Ephesians. 2. 8. Tit. 3. 5. Luke
7. 48, 50. for the reason why he calls it the Power of God to salvation, is,
because it reveals the righteousness of God upon all that believe. Hence 4.
The Gospel is the Power of God unto Justification, as it is the revealed
declared Will of God, concerning the Justification of them that believe. Vid
Calv. Com. in loc.
Quia nos per Ev^ng lium justificat Deus, because God justifies us by the
Gospel. I cannot better express my mind, then in the words of Beza. Hoc ita
intelligo, etc. This (says he) I so understand not as if Paul did therefore
only commend the Gospel, because therein is revealed and proposed to view, that
which the Gentiles before were ignorant of, (namely, that by faith in Christ we
are to seek that righteousness, by virtue of which we obtain salvation of God)
and the Jews beheld afar off, and under shadows: but also because it does so
propose this way of Justification, as that it does also really exhibit it: that
in this way it may appear, that the Gospel is truly the Power of God to
salvation, that is* a mighty and effectual instrument which God uses for the
saving of men by faith. Thus he; simply and historically, to declare that some
men are justified, is not enough to denominate the Gospel the Power of God to
salvation: but it is required withal, that it have authority to give right to
salvation to them that believe it. Therefore the Gospel, wherein is manifested
the righteousn^sse of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, is called the Law
of faith, Romans 3. ver. 21. 22, 27. compared.

7. Justification by works should have been by that Law, Do this. 24.
and thou shall live: and if those words cannot be denied to have authority, to
give a right to life to them that fulfilled the Law; upon what pretense of
reason is the same authority denied to the word of faith; Believe, and thou
shall be saved, Romans 10. 5, 8, 9. To conclude, Therefore is the Gospel called
Heb. ^. 8.
a Scepter of Righteousness, 2 Cor 5. 19.
a Word of reconciliation, Ephesians. 1. ^3.
a Gospel of salvation, Romans 8. 2, 3. and Dav Par. ibid.
a Law of the Spirit of life, that makes free from the Law of sin and death,
Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3.
an opening of Prisons, See the Reverend and most incomparable Dr Reynolds in
Ps. 110. p. 140.
and a proclaiming of liberty to Captives, because God does thereby justify
sinners.

I had also drawn up four Reasons from the nature of Justification, proving
that it must be by Law* but because I since find the substance of them in Mr.
Baxter, (Red. Digr. page 141. 142, 143.) I shall therefore desire the Reader,
to have recourse to him for his farther satisfaction herein: and shall excuse
my self from the pains of transcribing my own Arg^ments.

CHAP. VII.
A Reply to Mr. Eyres eleventh Chapter, John 3, 18. and Ephesians. 2, 3. vindicated.
All unbelievers under condemnation. Ergo, none justified in unbelief.

SECT. I.
MY second Argument, by which I proved that men are not justified before faith,
was this.

They that are under condemnation, cannot at the, 1.
same time be justified. But all the world are under condemnation before faith.
Ergo, none of the world are justified before faith.

Mr. Air first enters a caution against the major: which I had briefly, and
(as I thought, and yet think) sufficiently proved in my Sermon in these words.
Justification and Condemnation are contraries: and contraries cannot be
verified of the same subject at the same time. Justification is a moral life,
and condemnation a moral death: a man can be no more in a justified state, and
a state of condemnation both at once, then he can be alive and dead both at
once; or a blessed man and a cursed man both at once. What? that the Apostle
describes Justification by non-condemnation, Romans 8. 1. and opposes it to
condemnation as inconsistent with it, on the same person at the same time, ver.
33, 34. and are at as moral enmity one with another, as good and evil, light
and darkness.

Upon these grounds I said, that the Proposition must needs be true. This (as
if I had not so much as pretended any reason for it) Mr. Air tells his Reader
is my confident assertion: but in the mean time, never goes about to remove the
grounds upon which it stands. This is a sad case: but who can help it?

Yet he will grant the Proposition with this Proviso, That these seeming
contraries do refer ad idem, i. e. to the same Court and Judicatory, not
otherwise: for he that is condemned, and has a judgment on record against him
in one Court, may be justified and absolved in another. He that is cast at
common Law, may be quitted in a Court of equity. He that is condemned in the
Court of the Law, may be justified in the Court of the Gospel.

Rep. Which is very true: otherwise our Justification were no pardon. But I
would ask. Are these two Courts coordinate, and of equal power? or is the one
in power subordinate to the other? If the former, how shall a man know whether
he be cast or absolved? as in our own case, If the Law be of as much power to
condemn, as the Gospel is to justify, how shall a man know whether he be
condemned or justified? or what sentence shall a poor soul expect, when he is
going to appear before Gods Tribunal? if of absolution, why the Law condemns
him? if of condemnation, the Gospel justifies him? and which of these two shall
take place? But if the one be subordinate to the other, then the sentence of
the superior Court rescindes the judgment of the inferior, and makes it of
no force, and so the man is not absolved and condemned both at once. This is
the very ground of L. 1 ss. de Appell^^. and L. Si* q^is (...)
appeals from any inferior Judicatory to a higher; otherwise there were no
use of them, nor any possibility by appealing to bring controversies to an
issue. Therefore it is impossible, that the same person at the same time, and
in reference to the same sins, should stand condemned and justified before God.
2. Nevertheless, I also think that a man may be condemned (I mean ipso jure,
under an actual obligation to punishment) and yet be in a state of
Justification, at the same time: which because it is necessary, I should
explain, for the better understanding of the opposition between Justification
and Condemnation, I shall here once for all set down my opinion. A state of
Justification I call it, not simply, because all sins are actually pardoned
(for multitudes may not be yet committed) but because all past sins are
pardoned, and a Promise given to the sinner, by which all future sins shall be
pardoned: mercy prevailing against justice, Mount Sion against Mount Sinai,
Mount Gerizim against Mount Ebal, even as a man is then in a state of grace and
regeneration, not because he has no sin in him, but because he has a spirit
of life within him, prevailing more and more against the lusts and rebellions
of his flesh, till at last sin be perfectly destroyed out of the soul. And so
my opinion is, 1. That as soon as a man believes, all his sins past are
forgiven him. 2. As often as he falls into new sins, he contracts upon himself
a new guilt, or obligation to punishment by virtue of the Law: so as it were
just with God to destroy him, notwithstanding his former sins be pardoned. 3.
The Lord Jesus, our Advocate with the father, does continually represent and
plead the Promise of remission made in his blood, on the behalf of sinners: by
virtue of which, not only the present and speedy execution of punishment is
suspended, but the sinners right to salvation continued and renewed,
notwithstanding his new contracted guilt ( Justificatio toties si^, quoties
homo vere Poenitentiam agit and side ad Christum mediatorem confugit. Solin.
Meth. theol. de Justif.
) (supposing the renewed acts of faith and repentance on the sinners part; of
implicit repentance for s^ns less known, and unobserved; and of explicit
repentance for grosser sins, unless want of time may alter the case.) Even as
when God complains, that Israel had broken his Covenant, and were t^rned out
of the way that he commanded them, and he would therefore presently have
consumed them: Moses opposes the Covenant of their fathers, Remember Abraham,
Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, etc.
Exodus 32. 8, 10, 13. And thus far I grant, that in these vicissitudes,
Justification and Condemnation may consist in the same person: but by no means
can I yield, that a man can at the same time stand condemned for those very
sins, from which the Gospel justifies him: or that he can be in a state of
Justification and a state of Condemnation both at once.

What follows about the different estates of grace and nature, we shall
consider below in the debate of Ephesians. 2. 3. only the last words of this
paragraph deserve farther consideration.

The Law (says Mr. Air) condemns all men living, for that all have sinned.
The Law does not consider men as El^ct or Reprobates, or as believers or
unbelievers, but as righteous or sinners. The Law will not cease to threaten
and condemn believers as long as they live.

Ans. It seems then that the elect and believers are as much under the. 2.
condemnation of the Law, as reprobates and unbelievers: the Law (if I
understand these words) condemning no man effectually, that is, holding no man
guilty, so that he shall need to fear condemnation by the Law, unless there be
some other more effectual cause of his condemnation: though the Law condemn
him for as much as in it lies, or to the utmost of its power, or in some respect
only, but not simply and universally. This (I think) is the meaning of these
words: but because there may be some other mystery under them, which I am not
able to reach, I shall set down my answer by way of question. 1. Whether the
elect and believers be not in as much danger of hell fire, as the reprobate and
unbelievers? If it be said (as I suppose it must) that the danger of both is
equal by the Law, (though some other act of God put a difference betwixt them)
I would ask, 2. What is that curse of the Law, which Christ has redeemed us
from? for if the Law condemn only for its own part, or forasmuch as in it lies,
but never had power to hold the sinner under an obligation to wrath, neither
was there any need that Christ should die to redeem us from the curse of that
Law: nor can we be redeemed, because the Law has the very same power over us
after his death, yea, and after our faith, as it had before, even by Mr. Eyres
concession: for it condemns all men equally without distinction. 3. Whether
the Law do condemn any man at all? yes (will it be said) so far as its power
reaches, which is thus far: that he that transgresses the Law, can expect no
benefit by the Law, or he forseits his right to life and blessedness, by that
Law which he has transgressed. Nevertheless he may at the same time have
right to life by some other act of God: But 1. Is that saying true or false,
Cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in the Law to
do them? I will not so much as suspect that any man that is called a Christian,
will say there was no truth in that threatening: and if there be truth in it,
then he that transgresses the Law is in a cursed estate (till at last he be
delivered from it, through faith in the blood of Christ): and if he be cursed,
then surely the Law has more power over him, then to deprive him of his right
to life, as to any help it self can afford him. He is cursed who has no right
at all to life: if he has no right by the Law, yet is he never a whit the more
miserable for that, as long as he has right by any other act of God. 2. And if
he has no right by any other act, yet is he not condemned. The Law indeed does
its part toward his condemnation: but it seems, it condemns him no farther,
then that as if there be no other act that condemns him more effectually, the
sinner remains uncondemned notwithstanding: for to be condemned by the Law, is
not to be condemned simply in Mr. Eyres sense; for believers themselves
(according to him) are condemned by the Law, who yet are not simply condemned;
something more of this notion we must speak by and by.

But the Assumption is that against which Mr. Air makes the most. 3.
professed opposition, namely, that all the world is under condemnation before
faith. This Mr. Air denies. And why?

Because it was the Will of God that none of the elect should perish or be
condemned.

Answ. True: not executively. But Mr. Air knows, we put a difference between
perishing and condemnation in this debate: and that by condemnation we mean,
not the execution of punishment or wrath, but a legal obligation to the
suffering of it. And though God did purpose that the elect should not perish,
or be condemned executively, and quoad eventum: yet should Mr. Air prove, that
he purposed that the elect should not stand obliged equally with other sinners,
for some time, to the suffering of wrath. This if he prove, I will yield the
cause. The purpose of God in it self makes no difference between men, whose
cause is the same before the just and impartial Judge. Do we not know that a
Prince may purpose to save the life of a Malefactor, against whom
notwithstanding the Law is in force, and judgment proceeds, and sentence
passes, and the man thereby as much obnoxious to death, as any other
Melefactours, till some other act of the Prince, besides his mere purpose,
interpose and prevent his death? But of this we have spoken largely already.

The Assumption, namely, that all the world is under condemnation. 4.
before faith; I proved from the express testimony of the Lord Jesus, John 3.
18. He that believes not, is condemned already. That is (says Mr. Air) He
that never believes, as chap. 8. 24. If you believe not ( i. e. not at all)
you shall die in your sins. Our Savior had no intent at all to show the state
of the elect before believing: but the certain and inevitable misery of them
that believe not, by reason of the sentence of the Law that had passed upon
them. All the rest of the answer consents well enough with that Explication of
the text which I gave in my Sermon.

Rep. First, for that which is pretended to be our Lords intent in these words,
let me entreat thee (Reader) to peruse and ponder the text; for I think thou
shall hardly meet with the like abuse of the Oracles of God, in any Author
that acknowledges the Divinity of Scriptures, ver. 14. As Moses lift up the
Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, ver. 15. That
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but should have everlasting life,
ver. 16. for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but should have everlasting
life, ver. 17. for God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world,
but that the world through him might be saved, ver. 18. He that believes, is
not condemned: he that believes not, is condemned already, etc. Thou see
(Reader) that the words contain a most serious and faithful testimony to a
sinful world, that though they had brought upon themselves eternal miseries,
yet God had sent his Son into the world, not to condemn the world, but to
save them: and if any man perish, it is not for want of a sufficient remedy
provided in the death of Christ, but for their own wilful refusal to embrace
and make use of it: as himself tells us, ver. 19. And this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men have loved darkness
rather then light. Now what says Mr. Air? why he will have us believe, that
the Lords intention is quite against his expression, and that he is come to
testify to the world, that their misery is certain and inevitable, by reason
of the sentence of the Law that had passed upon them. It is time to burn our
Bibles, if such glosses as these must be received for truth. 2. If the misery
of those that believe not be inevitable, by reason of the sentence of the Law,
how is this to be understood? either that the Law passed sentence upon them as
unbelievers: (but this I suppose is too unreasonable to be affirmed:) or that
the same men, who afterward prove unbelievers, were before sentenced by the
Law to certain and unavoidable misery. But then their unbelief contributed
nothing to make their misery unavoidable: whereas our Lord charge the
unavoidablenesse of misery upon wilful unbelief, ver. 19. This is the
condemnation, (not that men are in darkness) but that light is come into the
world, and men have loved darkness rather then light. Were it not for this,
men might do well enough, notwithstanding all that the Law had done against
them. Ergo, misery is not made certain and inevitable to any by the Law, before
unbelief be added. 3. Mr. Air told us but now, that the Law condemned all men
equally (that is the sense of his words, if there be any sense in them.) The Law
(says he) does not consider men as elect or reprobate (I know not how it
should: for the Law is neither God, nor man, nor Angel) as believers or
unbelievers, etc. how comes it then to pass that misery should be made
unavoidable to one, and not to another by the same Law?

Next, we shall enquire into Mr. Eyres Exposition of ver. 18.. 5.
He that believes not is condemned already; that is, (says he) he that never
believes, which is not only gratis dictum, spoken without so much as a
pretense of Reason, but is manifestly inconsistent with the text. Indeed
condemnation is executed upon none, but final unbelievers: but unbelievers in
the text are to be understood generally of all unbelievers whatsoever, and not
to be confined to final unbelievers. 1. Such unbelievers are here meant, who
are part of that world into which Christ is sent: for after the Lord had said,
ver. 17. God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that
the world by him might be saved; He distributes this world into two parts,
Believers and Unbeleevers, ver. 18. He that believes, is not condemned: he
that believes not, is condemned already. But final unbeleevers as such, are no
part of that world into which Christ is sent: for a final unbeleever is he that
dies in unbelief: if he believe but one minute before his death, he is not a
final unbeleever. And Christ is not sent to the dead, but to the living. 2.
Such unbelievers are here meant whom Christ was sent to save, ver. 16, 17. But
Christ was not sent to save final unbelievers as such. Ergo, such unbelievers
are not here meant. 3. We have also mention of a double condemnation in the
text: one which Christ finds men under when he comes into the world, and which
he comes to deliver them from, ver. 17, 18. The other which men are left under
for final unbelief, and rejecting of Christ the light of life, ver. 19. This is
the condemnation, etc. for Christ could not find men condemned for a final
rejecting of him, till he had been preached and tendered to them. Ergo, they
that believe not, ver. 18. are unbeleevers in general. 4. The condemnation here
spoken of, is that which is avoidable (and is actually avoided) by believing.
Ergo, it is not the condemnation of final unbeleevers. The Antecedent I proved
in my Sermon, from ver. 36. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on
him; implying, that the wrath of God by the Law is upon every sinner (for he is
condemned already) yet not so necessarily and remedilesly, but that by
believing he may escape it: but if he believes not, then it abides on him. To
this Mr. Air tells me, That to say the place hints, there is a wrath of God
which is done away by believing, is but an attempt to suborne the Spirit to
serve our turn. A short way of answering Arguments. Contra Crell. p. 452, 453.
This very interpretation does Essenius vindicate at large against Mr. Eyres
friends (in the point of eternal reconciliation) the Socinians: and urges the
significancy of the Greek word (...) abides, according to its constant use in
Scripture: though I stand not so much upon the bare word. The same
interpretation does Tract. 14. in Joan. Non dicit, Ira dei venit ad eum, sed
manet super eum etc.
Augustine give of it, and many others, Protestants and Papists. Chemnitius,
Analys. in loc.
Piscator, Aretius, Beza, Dyke, Jansenius, Tolet, Ferus, etc. Who being such
professed enemies in religion, cannot be rationally suspected of a confederacy
against the Spirit. I had thought a Minister might have said, not only to each
man distributively, but to the whole world collectively (if he were able to
speak to their hearing) believe in the Lord Jesus and you shall be saved,
without being guilty of suborning the Spirit to serve his own turn. And yet
surely in so saying he does more then hint, that the wrath of God may be
escaped by believing.

5. And that I do not err in the meaning of the holy Ghost, I am yet farther
convinced, because the Lord came not into the world to. 6.
give life simply, but to give salvation, v. 17. that is, to give life to them
that were dead. Ergo, they whom he saves were dead, de jure or de facto: as the
Apostle argues, 2 Cor. 5. 14. If one died for all, then were all dead. And to
be dead in Law, is to be under condemnation. Now whom does Christ save? not
final unbeleevers, but such as are unbeleevers for a time only: Ergo, they who
are now believers, were sometime under condemnation, or else Christ never saved
them. If they are only condemned in themselves, or by the Law (in that
diminutive respective sense in which Mr. Air uses that phrase) they are never
a whit the more in danger of perishing for that, and therefore not capable of
being saved properly. 6. The comparison which our Lord proposes, v. 14, 15.
and upon which this whole discourse depends, puts it yet farther out of
doubt. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes on him should not perish,
but have eternal life. Concerning which words we deba^e more particularly under
the third general Argument following: and therefore here I shall only make
some brief observations upon the comparison, and pass on. 1. As then the
people for whom the serpent was lifted up, were all mortally stung of the fiery
serpents (see the story it self, Numb. 21. 6, 7, 8, 9.) So is all the world
become subject to condemnation through sin, (for the people that were stung in
the type, are the world in the Antitype: and their mortal wound there, is
condemnation here, by our Lords own exposition, v. 16, 17, 19.) 2. That as the
serpent was by Gods appointment lifted up in the wilderness, that whosoever
looked on him might be healed of the mortal bites of the fiery serpent and
live: so is the Son of man lifted up, that whosoever believes on him should
not perish, but should have everlasting life, by Gods appointment in like
manner, v. 15, 16. 3. That as the serpent was not lifted up to destroy any of
the people (for they were mortally wounded before) but to heal them: so Christ
was not sent into the world to condemn the world (for they are condemned
already) but to save them. v. 17. 4. Yet they that looked not on the serpent so
lifted up, did thereby procure unto themselves a certain death (because it was
to be absolutely unavoydable by any other means whatsoever:) so they that
believe not on the Son of God, but love darkness rather then light, do
thereby procure to themselves certain and remediless condemnation, v. 18, 19.
There remaining no more sacrifice for sin, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10. 29.
Hence I deduce these four Corollaries. 1. That condemnation lies upon all men,
(without difference) for sin. 2. Yet there is a remedy and way of escape from
this condemnation revealed in the Gospel. 3. That the way to escape
condemnation, is to believe on Jesus Christ. 4. The contempt of Christ by
positive unbelief, makes condemnation unavoidable. Ergo, every man in the
world, whiles an unbeleever, or so long as he continues in unbelief, is under
condemnation.

And as to the Text which Mr. Air brings in for illustration,. 7.
Joh 8. 24. If you believe not, you shall die in your sins: I consent to Mr.
Eyres interpretation, that the meaning is; if you believe not at all, or if you
never believe, you shall die in your sins. And it informs us in the truth of
those two things, which I have been hitherto contending for. 1. That because of
their sins, they became liable to eternal death. 2. That yet their
condemnation was not peremptory and irrevocable, unless to all their other
sins they added unbelief final; for if at any time they did believe, they
should escape that wrath which was due to them for sin. As when Paul says,
Act. 27. 31. Except these men abide in the ship, you cannot be saved. He shows
them that they were in eminent danger of perishing in the waters: and yet that
they might be safe enough if the men aforesaid continued in the ship. That
place therefore makes against Mr. Air altogether.

SECT. II.
BEfore we speak any further of this place, we must attend M.. 8.
Air, who interposeth another Text which I mentioned (not under this, but)
under the former Argument, to the same purpose, and that is Ephesians. 2. 3. Where
the Apostle tells the Ephesians (whom God had chosen to eternal life, chap. 1.
4.) that they were by nature children of wrath as well as others.

Mr. Air answers. 1. That the Text does not say that God did condemn them, or
that they were under condemnation before conversion.

Rep. This might have been spared, if this text had been answered in the place
where I produced it: and so it may yet, for wrath and condemnation often
signify one and the same thing in Scripture, Joh. 3. 19, 36. 1 These. 1. 10.
Romans 1. 17, 18. and 2. 5. with Romans 8. 1, 34. And to the same sense does Mr.
Air himself expound it in his maine answer, which is this.

By nature, or in reference to their state in the first Adam they were children
of wrath, they could expect nothing but wrath and fiery indignation from God.
Yet this hindered not, but that by grace they might be the children of his love:
for so all the elect are while they are in their blood and pollution, Ezekiel. 16.
4, 8. The Lord calls them his sons and children before conversion. Isa. 43.
6. and 53. 11. and 8. 18. Heb. 2. 9. For it is not any inherent qualification,
but the good pleasure of God that makes them his children. Ephesians. 1. 5. Romans 8.
29. Joh. 17. 6. Elect children have the righteousness of Christ imputed to
them, though they know it not: and I know no reason (says he) why it should
not be imputed to the rest of the elect before conversion.

Rep. Two things I have here to do. 1. To show what the Apostles. 9.
sense is in these words. 2. What is Mr. Eyres sense, and how inconsistent with
the Apostles. 1. When the Apostle says we were by nature children of wrath: by
(...) nature, I understand their whole natural condition, from their very
first original, wherein they began to be the children of Adam, unto the time
of their conversion unto Christ. And so his meaning is, that during the whole
time of their natural unregenerate estate, they were under an obligation to
eternal punishment, for the sinfulness of their nature and ( per (...), hoc in
loco intelligi (...) ait Suidas in verbo (...) ad finem
) lives. That this is his meaning is manifest, not only from this verse,
[Amongst whom we all had our conversatiou in times past, in the lusts of our
flesh fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature
the children of wrath, even as others]: and from the words following, v. 4, 5.
[But God, when we were dead in sins has quickened us together with Christ:]
but also from that other place, altogether parallel to this. Colos. 2. 13. [And
you being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he
quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.] ( Vide
Esthium, Davenan^, B^zam, D^odat. Hemming. alios.
) Expositors are agreed, that by the uncircumcis^on of the flesh is meant the
sinfulness and corruption of nature: and therefore by comparing the places
together it is manifest, that for the sinfulness of their nature and
conversation (the two parts of the natural man) the Apostle pronounces these
Ephesians to have been in times past children of wrath and damnation, no less
then any other.

Now for Mr. Air, we must a little enquire what is his meaning,. 10.
when he says that believers were children of wrath, namely by nature or in
reference to their state in the first Adam: and again, that considered in
themselves, and as they come from the loins of Adam they are sinful and cursed
creatures. Which being to be understood in a diminutive sense only, and
secundum quid (for Mr. Air will not allow us to infer, that because they are
under wrath by nature, Ergo, they are under wrath simply: nor because they are
cursed in themselves, Ergo, they are cursed simply) must therefore be extended
no farther, then may consist with a state of blessedness and freedom from
wrath, which the same persons are in at the same time. And so the meaning is,
that there is in every man (even the elect themselves) naturally, and as they
are the children of Adam, sufficient ground and matter of condemnation: though
they never stand actually condemned (either in respect of their obligation to,
or the execution of punishment) because of the grace of God preventing and
hindering it. Even as he said before, that the Law condemned the elect (whom yet
he denies to be ever condemned simply) by the word condemns (a verb of
active signification) expressing, not the effect which the Law produces (for
it is impossible men should be condemned and not condemned both at once) but
the faculty, power and virtue that is in the Law to condemn sinners, if the
Act of it were not hindered and bound up by grace. Thus do we often speak in
ordinary discourse, as when we say Rhubarbe purges Choler: not relating to the
actual operation of it (though the verb be of active signification) but to the
virtue of it for such an operation: and light makes all things manifest:
relating still to the faculty and property of it, not to the Act or exercise:
for the words may be spoken at midnight. And as in these and the like
expressions, the verb active signifies, not the Act or present influx of the
cause, but the power and virtue of it: so when it is said, that a man is
accursed, condemned in himself, or by nature, or the like; the verbs passive do
not note the effect wrought and existing, but the moral capacity of a person
to be the object of condemnation: nothing on his part hindering it, but rather
preparing and disposing him for it.

This (if any thing) being Mr. Eyres sense, we are next to show. 11.
that it is altogether inconsistent with the Apostles meaning in this text. And
that appears. 1. From that the Apostle does not say, we are the children of
wrath by nature: but, we were the children of wrath by nature, namely in times
past, as he does twice express himself, v. 2, 3. plainly opposing the time
present to the time past, wherein they were children of wrath, but now were
ceased to be so. Whereas, according to the sense which Mr. Air puts upon the
words, it is impossible that a sinner should be delivered from being a child of
wrath, either in this world or in the world to come. Even glorified Saints,
considered according to what they are by nature, or in themselves, or in
reference to their state in the first Adam, are children of wrath, and so they
remain to all eternity. 2. The phrase here used (as Beza well observes)
children of wrath, is borrowed from the Hebrews; who are wont to call him (...)
a son of death, who is designed or adjudged to die, or has contracted upon
himself an obligation unto death, without any present actual reversion: as he
that is found guilty of stripes, and adjudged to be beaten, is called a son
of stripes. Deuteronomy. 25. 2. see also 1 Samuel 20. 31. and 2 Samuel 12. 5. Psalm. 102.
20. Therefore the same phrase applied here to the elect in their unbelief,
notes, that they were then under such an ordination to death, as did exclude
their present ( C ram Deo damnati. Calvin
) pardon and absolution: They that were pardoned, were children of life, not of
death. 3. We were also children of wrath (says the Apostle) even as others.
Will it be said that all the world are children of wrath by nature; but by
grace justified, and children of life at the same time? If not, it must be
yielded that the elect and reprobate are both equally under the same
condemnation, both equally obnoxious to eternal punishment, so long as they
continue equally in a natural unregenerate condition. 4. The parallel place
beforementioned, Col^s. 2. 13. confirms all I have said. And you being dead
in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together
with him, having forgiven you all your trespasses. Believers then themselves
were sometimes dead, that is, under condemnation, and so under it, as that they
were then without remission of sins, for their quickening is by remission: and
nothing is quickened except it be dead.

That the elect, though children of wrath by nature, may yet at the. 12.
same time be the objects of love, is nothing to the purpose, till that love be
proved to be their justification: which we have before disproved. 2. That the
elect are called the children of God before conversion; I cannot conceive how
it is proved from any or all the texts mentioned: if Mr. Air had formed any
Argument from them, it should have had an answer. Nevertheless, I acknowledge
that elsewhere in Scripture they are so called, but metonymically: not because
they are children properly (for the relation of father and children, supposes
the existence of the terms on both sides related: take away one, and the other
also is taken away); but because they were designed and predestined to be
children: according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 5. Having predestined us
to the Adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself. Even as the Lord tells
Paul, Act. 18. 10. That he had much people in Corinth: that is, many who were
to be made his people by Paul's ministry, though before they were not his
people, 1 Pet. 2. 10. And as God calls Cyrus his shepherd, Isa. 44. 28. Two
hundred years before he was borne: because he was designed to such an
employment: and so he is called, not from what he was, but from what he was to
be: as on the contrary, others sometimes are named, not from what they are, but
from what they had been in times past. Matthew. 21. 31. Publicans and harlots
enter into the Kingdom of God before you: that is, such as had been so. 3. That
it is the good pleasure of God, and not any inherent quali^^cation in us, which
makes us his children; if it be meant of children by Adoption, and of that good
pleasure of God, which is a temporal transient Act, is true. But it should have
been proved, that the said good pleasure of God makes us his children without
any inherent qualifications in us. The Scriptures tell us that we are the
children of God by faith. Joh. 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26. and 4. 5. etc. 4. I also
yield that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to infants though they know
it not: and that so it is also to multitudes of grown Christians. But it should
be proved that such infants are incapable of the habit of faith: or that their
parents faith does not supply their incapacity, as to their justification: of
which more hereafter.

SECT. III.
IN the next place Mr. Air gives us an account in what sense the elect, though
freed from wrath and condemnation, may yet. 13.
be said to be under it: namely, in regard the Law does terrify and affright
their consciences, Romans 4. 15. In which respect it is called a ministration of
wrath and death, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 9.

Answ. Whether Mr. Eyres intent in this undertaking be to give another
exposition of the elects being children of wrath, I cannot tell. If it be, he
must quit the former: for this will not consist with that. There he told us the
elect were children of wrath, that is, by nature, or in themselves, or in
reference to their state in the first Adam: abstracting or rather prescinding
from any effect of wrath that ever was, or was to be upon them. But here they
are children of wrath in reference to the effects of wrath in their
consciences. 2. When he says, the Law is called a ministration of death and
condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 9. because it did terrify and affright the
conscience: if he mean that this is the only reason why it is so called, as if
it did not condemn persons as well as their consciences, I deny it altogether.
Death and condemnation, when they expound one another (as there they do)
signify that of the person, and not of the conscience only, Romans 5. 16, 17. 3.
In like manner when the Law is said to work wrath, Romans 4. 15. I deny it to be
meant merely of horror of conscience: but principally of that wrath which
excludes them from a right to the heavenly inheritance, which right is given by
the promise, v. 14. Gal. 3. 10. As many as are of the w^rkes of the Law are
under the curse.

Mr. Air proceeds. The wrath of God ha^h a threesold acception. 14.
in Scripture. 1. It signifies the most just and immutable will of God, to
inflict upon men the punishment which their sins shall deserve. 2. It notes the
threatenings of the Law, Romans 1. 18. Psalm. 6. 1. Hos. 11. 9. Jon. 3. 9. 3. The
execution of those threatenings, Ephesians. 5. 6. Luke 21. 23. Matthew. 3. 7. The elect
are under wrath in the second sense only.

Answ. If the first sense be a Scripture-sense, why have we not one word of
Scripture to justify it? The reason's ready, because that will of God, which
we are wont to call Reprobation, is neither wrath, nor an Act of wrath in
Scripture language. 2. When Mr. Air grants that the elect are subject to the
threatenings and comminations of the Law, he explaines himself thus. The
threatenings of the Law do seize upon and arrest their consciences as well as
others: the Law as a rigid Schoolmasters, does never leave to whip and lash
them until they fly unto Christ.

I asked then. 1. Whether that pain and anguish of Spirit which the elect
(whiles unbeleevers) feel, be any part of the evil threatened in the Law? If it
be (as most undoubtedly it is) then Mr. Air contradicts himself in saying the
elect are under the threatenings of the Law, but not under the execution of
them. If it be not, he contradicts himself again, in saying the Law does whip
and lash them. It is not the Law that torments them, but somewhat else (what it
is I cannot tell) if their torment be none of that evil which the Law
threatens. 2. I would ask also, what power there is in these arrests of the
Law to make them fly to Christ? If by representing to them that they are under
condemnation till they lay hold on Christ by faith, then they are under
condemnation till they believe: which Mr. Air will not hear of. If only that
they are damnable in themselves (as he does afterward express himself) they
are as liable to such an arrest of the Law, after they believe, as before, even
by Mr. Eyres concession. And that word is not like to move a sinner very
hastily to seek a change of his condition, which will pursue him as much after
his condition is changed as before.

When it is said that the elect are never under the execution of the. 15.
threatenings of the Law, that is, that the punishments threatened in the Law,
are never executed upon them; if it be meant of the punishments reserved to the
world to come, it is true: but if it be meant of those which are proper to this
life, it is utterly false, Isa. 57. 17. and 47. 6. and 54. 7, 8. Job 36. 7, 11,
12. Romans 5. 12. and 8. 10, 20, 21, 23. 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32. and 15. 22, 26.
Jam. 5. 15, 16. 1 John 5. 16. and hundreds of other places.

And this section I have written to follow Mr. Air: what is his intent in all
this himself best knows. His conclusion is, that the consciences of the elect
before faith are under wrath, not their persons, (though it be a rule in
Logic, that ( e) omnis actio and passio est proprie totius compositi: and
therefore to say the conscience is under wrath, e Vid. Ames. These. Log. the 76
in distinction from the person, is none of the neatest expressions) and then
tells his reader, that against this I have several exceptions. Whereas I never
excepted against it at all in the general, but only as not being suitable to
that particular text in John 3. 18. Which I had urged to prove, that all
unbelievers are in a state of condemnation. Nor does Mr. Air answer this text
by this distinction (though I think I was informed that he was wont so to do:
which was the reason that I laid in the following Arguments against it) and
therefore Mr. Air might have spared his pains of attempting to answer the
said Arguments, as not prejudicing that interpretation which he gives of the
text. Nevertheless it may be useful to examine his answers.

SECT. IV.
THe first Argument then proving that the condemnation mentioned,. 16.
Joh. 3. 18. cannot be meant of condemnation in conscience merely, was this.
The condemnation which the unbelievers there spoken of are under, is the
condemnation of the Law: which pronounces all men guilty, not only in their
own conscience, but before God. Romans 3. 19.

Mr. Air answers, that the voice or sentence of the Law, shows not who are
condemned of God, but who are guilty and damnable in themselves, if God should
deal with them by the Law. But the elect are discharged from this rigorous
Court, their cause is judged at another Bar.

Rep. The words of the text are these. Whatsoever the Law says, it says to
them that are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world
may become guilty before God. The thing which I infer from this Text compared
with Joh. 3. 18. (for illustration of which I mentioned it) is this. That every
unbeliever (elect, or not elect) stands guilty, that is obliged to punishment
in the sight or judgment of God, and not only of his own conscience. Which to
be the true sense of the place, is manifest from the importance of the Greek
word (...) which we render guilty: not only as being the same with the Hebrew
(...) which properly signifies a debt or f Vid. Eli. Thisb. in verb. (...). and
Joh. S^lden. do Jure Na^. and Gent l. 1. cap. ^ p. 46.
obligation: but also, as being constantly used in the same sense in Greek
Authors. Therefore Comment. Graec. Ling p. 166.
Budaeus expounds it, as of the same significancy with (...), Qui est obnoxious
e re judicata: (...). A man condemned or adjudged to punishment, though he have
not yet suffered it. Accordingly Beza upon the place notes well. (...) in (...)
non tantum declarat judicium quo vel ^bsolvi vel damnari possit aliquis (hac
enim significatione ipsi etiam filii Dei sunt (...), in quibus tamen nulla est
condemnatio) sed (...) i. e. condemnationem declarat, sicut (...) in (...).

Now to what Mr. Air says, that the Law does only declare who. 17.
are damnable in themselves, not who are condemned of God, it is contrary, 1.
To himself. 2. To sense. 3. To reason.

1. To himself: for remember (Reader) that I brought in this place as an
explication of that in Joh. 3. 18. He that believes not, is condemned already.
Which condemnation Mr. Air has already acknowledged to be by the Law, (and
makes it the condemnation of final unbelievers only) I did rightly infer; if
the condemnation there spoken of be that which is by the Law, then is it
condemnation before God, Romans 3. 19. (and not in conscience only: which was the
thing I was there proving.) To this Mr. Air tells me, the Law shows not who
are condemned of God, but who are damnable in themselves. How? has it already
condemned, and that remedilesly, the greatest part of the world, and yet does
it no more then show who are damnable in themselves; not, who are condemned of
God? me thinks he should at last suspect the truth of that cause, which does so
often dash him upon contradictions. 2. To sense: for I appeal to the
experience of all Christians, who have felt the work of the Law driving them
out of themselves to fly unto Christ, whether it have not convinced them, not
only that they are damnable in themselves (for that it will do after they are
in Christ as well as before) but that they are (while out of Christ) condemned;
that is, under an obligation and tendency to the suffering of wrath, and out of
a state of salvation. That it does, so is manifest from the first question,
which a soul, upon whom the Law comes with power, will ask, What shall I do to
be saved? Act. 2, 37. and 16. 30. A question which supposes him to be
convinced by the Law that he is a condemned creature: needing, not only
comfort, but salvation, that is, deliverance from condemnation, in which only
he can be comforted. Now if this be the work of the Law, when brought home by
the power of God; then must it needs be most true that such a soul is indeed in
the state of condemnation, till by faith he be passed from death to life: and
accordingly the Law must be acknowledged to declare not only who are damnable
in themselves, but who are condemned of God.

It is also against reason: for demonstration of which we must enquire,. 18.
what it is for a man to be damnable in himself? It implies that there is on
his part, sufficient cause of condemnation, though he be not actually
condemned, for want of the concurrence of some other cause; but what that
actual condemnation is, which is hereby intended to be excluded, we must
farther enquire. Condemnation (which we are forced often to observe) signifies
either the sinners obligation to punishment, or the execution of punishment: in
the former sense he is condemned, who by the Law is guilty of death: in the
latter sense, he who is actually damned, and suffers the punishment threatened.
In distinction from one or both of these it is, that a man is said to be
damnable in himself: If from the former, the meaning is this: That all the
world (the elect and all) have wrought that evil which were most sufficient to
work the forfeiture of their right to life, and make them liable to eternal
death, if there were any Law in force against them. If this be the sense Mr.
Air will have the Apostle speak in, when he says all the world is become
guilty before God, mark what follows. 1. Then the Law neither does, nor ever
did condemn any man living: for men are supposed to be damnable, and but
damnable, not actually condemned, for want of a Law in sorce to condemn them,
that is, to hold them under an obligation to punishment. The Law does but show
its teeth (pardon the expression reader) but it neither does, nor ever did bite
any man, no not the most presumptuous transgressors of it: though
transgressors be as fit objects as can be for the Law to take hold of, if it
had power so to do. Hence, secondly, I would ask whether ever God did condemn
any man: If he did, by what Act? not by the Law: that shows indeed who are
damnable in themselves* not who are condemned of God. I suppose it will be
said, that some are condemned by the eternal Act of Reprobation. ^ut I leave
it to Mr. Air to prove, that the name or nature of condemnation can agree to
that Act according to Scripture: which if he cannot prove, (as sure enough he
cannot, nor all the men on earth) it must needs follow, that there is no such
thing as the condemnation of any man, according to Scripture. Against this
sense of the text I could add much more, if I could persuade my self to think
that it were needful, for the help of any man.

But it may be this damnability is opposed to damnation executed;. 19.
and then the meaning is, That the Law does not show whom God damneth, (that
is, punishes with damnation) but who are damnable or punishable in themselves,
if God should try and judge them according to the Law. But 1. This is nothing
to the purpose. It is no part of my undertaking, to prove, that every one who
at present is an unbeliever, is damned, as that word notes the execution of
damnation, or wrath actually inflicted: but that he is condemned, that is,
under a legal obligation to punishment, till some gracious act of God discharge
him. When therefore Mr. Air opposes, that men are not condemned by the Law,
but damnable; he fights with a shadow: for he that is damnable (executively) is
condemned (legally) which is that I am proving: for it is the work of judgment
to execute Laws, and to give to every man according to what is due to him by
Law: if then, upon supposition that men were to be tried and judged by the Law
of works, they would be found damnable: it must be also supposed, that they
were before obliged by Law to the suffering of damnation. 2. Otherwise the Law
is but the carcass of a Law, and called a Law equivocally, as we call a dead
man a man: for example. There was a Law in Israel, that whosoever should not
humble himself upon the day of expiation, should be cut off Lev. 16. which Law
is now abrogated. Nevertheless, it may be truly said, that if a Jew, who now
keeps not that day, were to be tried and judged by that Law, he would be found
punishable. If it be said, that Law is now abrogated, and so no man incurres
the penalty, upon the non-observance of it; It is most true, yet may he be said
to be punishable by it in sensu diviso, in the very same sense in which Mr.
Air allows sinners to be damnable by the Law of works, namely, upon
supposition it were in force to make the penalty due, and sinners were to be
tried and judged by it. 3. And was it not worth the while, for the Lord Jesus
to come down from heaven to redeem sinners from the curse of the Law, and that
at no easier a rate, then by being made a curse for them, when the Law never
cursed or condemned any man, but only shows who are damnable in themselves, if
they should be judged by the Law? From which way of judgment, the Elect are
supposed to be secured by an antecedent act of God.

SECT. V.
MY second Argument to prove, that the condemnation mentioned,. 19.
John 3. 18. cannot be meant merely of condemnation in conscience; was this.
The condemnation of an unbelievers conscience, is either true, or false If
true, then it is according to the judgment of God, and speaks as the thing is,
and so God condemns as well as the conscience. If false, etc.

Mr. Air answers, There is a threefold act of conscience about sin. 1. When it
witnesses to us about the desert of sin. 2. When it witnesses to us
concerning the act of sin. 3. When it witnesses to us concerning our final
state and condition before God. Now if conscience bear witness to a man
concerning what he has done, and what is his desert in so doing, it does but
its duty. But if it tell a man, that for the sins which he has done he is a
damned creature, and must perish everlastingly; such a conscience is both
penally and sinfully evil.

Rep. The Argument is wholly untouched. For the question is not, whether an
unbelievers conscience condemn him truly in reference to his final estate: but
whether it condemn him truly in reference to his present state? If it tell him,
that at present he is in a state of condemnation, does it speak true, or false?
Herein Mr. Air will not answer me, but says only, that if it tell him his
case is desperate, and without hope, it speaks false. I need not tell Mr. Air
that his answer is impertinent: I am persuaded he knows it well enough,
conscience may tell an unbeliever that he is condemned (and herein it speaks
true) though it do not tell him that there is no way of coming out of this
state of condemnation, (which were false.) 2. The two former answers also are
not much to purpose: for to witness concerning the act and desert of sin, is
as proper to the conscience of a believer as of an unbeliever: whereas our
question is only concerning the unbelievers conscience. And if this be the
whole of what conscience can justly charge upon an unbeliever, then is the
believer as much subject to condemnation of conscience, as the unbeliever.

Upon the second branch of the Argument, there is nothing I shall. 20.
need reply to, saving only that passage of Mr. Eyres, That Christ's merits will
not save those whom God does condemn. To which I say, that though none other
can justify those whom God condemns: yet God himself may, and does justify
those whom he had before condemned; or else no son of Adam ever was or shall
be justified, Romans 5. 18. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men
to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto Justification of life.

A third Argument, proving, that the condemnation mentioned, ^. 21.
John 3. 18. was not to be meant of condemnation in conscience only, was,
because it is called the wrath which shall abide on unbelievers, ver. 36.

Mr. Air answers, Therefore we say, no elect unbeliever is condemned of God,
because the wrath of God does not abide upon him.

Rep. It is yielded then, that the condemnation about which we dispute, is not
merely condemnation in conscience, which is as much as I ever sought from the
place: and that Mr. Air knows well enough. 2. We have showed before that the
wrath of God is upon every one that is an unbeliever at present, though it do
not abide upon any but final unbelievers.

Lastly, thus I argued. The condemnation here spoken of, is opposed. 22.
to salvation, v. 17. Ergo, it is more then condemnation in conscience.

Mr. Air answers, That the condemnation opposed to salvation, is damnation:
and then, by Mr. Eyres Argument, the Elect, because they are sometimes
unbelievers, must all be damned.

Rep. Sure, Mr. Air believes not our English Proverb. As good never a whit as
never the better. Salvation is sometimes taken strictly for an executive
deliverance from wrath, Romans 5. 9. And so none are saved in this life.
Sometimes more largely, and so it contains both that complete salvation, and
the beginnings of it in this life, viz. that right which is given us to it in
our Justification, Luke 19. 9. Romans 1. 16, 17. and 10. 9, 10. He that believes
not, is under condemnation, as it is opposed to salvation in the latter sense.
The second answer is replied to already.

CHAP. VIII.
A Reply to Mr. Eyres twelfth Chapter. My third, fourth and fifth Argument, for
the Antecedent of faith to Justification vindicated.

SECT. I.
A Third Argument by which I proved Justification to. 1.
be consequent to faith, was taken from the several similitudes by which
Justification by faith is illustrated. I instanced particularly in two. The
first was that of the brazen Serpent, John 3. 14, 15. As Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the wilderness (supply, that whosoever looked on him, might recover
of the sting of the fiery Serpent. See the story it self, Numb. 21. 8, 9.) so
must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes on him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. And John 6. 40. It is the Will of God, that
whosoever sees and believes the Son, should be justified.

Mr. Air does utterly deny, that it was the intent of the Holy Ghost, to show
by these comparisons, in what order or method we are justified in the sight of
God.

Wherein he fights, not only against me, but against Comparamus fidem cum
intuitu serpentis aen. i. Intuitus ille vim medicam in se non habuit: sed ut
instrumentum and conditio est a Deo ad san^tatem impetr^ndam ordinata Anton.
Wallaeus. oper. Tom. 1. p. 423.
all men that I can read upon the place, and against common sense: which upon
the reading of the words, cannot but apprehend the order and method of our
spiritual healing, represented by that bodily cure, wrought upon those that
looked up to the brazen Serpent. But it may be he intends to deny Justification
to be included in the Promise of not perishing, but having eternal life. Let us
try it.

His second answer therefore is, The stinging of the fiery Serpents, did
plainly shadow forth the effects of the Law in conscience. Now as the
Israelites when they were stung by those fiery Serpents, found no ease till
they looked up unto the brazen Serpent: so the soul that is smitten and
wounded by the Ministry of the Law, will never find rest, till it look unto
him, in whose wounds and stripes is the healing of sinners.

Rep. The effects of the Law in conscience might very well be shadowed. 2.
forth by the stinging of the fiery Serpents, as part of that punishment which
is due to sinners: but that it should represent no more is spoken gratis. Sin
stings, because it kills the person, as well as because it disquiets the
conscience, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. and a fiery sting it is, because it makes the
sinner obnoxious to the displeasure of God, who is a consuming fire, and whose
wrath burns to the very bottom of hell: not in the conscience only* but upon
the whole person, unless it be prevented by faith and repentance. 2. Observe
also (Reader) how Mr. Air is constrained to mince the matter, that he may make
his Interpretation the more current. The Israelites (says he) being stung of
the fiery Serpents, could find no ease till they* looked up to the brazen
Serpent. As if their wound had been only painful, but not mortal. And as if
they had looked up to the brazen Serpent, not for life, but only for ease;
whereas they were all mortally stung; many died actually, all had received
their deaths wound, death was begun upon them all, and would unavoidably have
grown on to the last and utmost degree, if it had not been prevented by the
brazen Serpent. To teach us, (though Mr. Air will not learn it) that every
unbeliever is in a state of death and condemnation, nor can escape the last and
sorest part of this death, but by looking up to Jesus Christ. 3. The reddition
of the comparison is this, in our Lords words. So must the Son of man be
lifted up, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life: which according to Mr. Eyres sense is this, That whosoever
believes on him, should not be disquieted in conscience, but should have rest
and ease in his Spirit. This indeed, for the most part, does in some measure
follow upon our Justification, (as no doubt, but the Israelites recovered life
and ease together). But to be delivered from perishing, and to have everlasting
life, (in right or possession) is surely more then to have ease from present
anguish of spirit. Should I take this liberty of interpreting Scripture, Mr.
Air might justly have been angry with my forehead.

In the third place, Mr. Air tells his Reader, that this very comparison. 3.
makes against me (I had need look to that). But how does it make against me?

As (says he) the Israelites were alive when they looked upon the brazen
Serpent (else they could not have seen it): so they that look upon Jesus
Christ, i, e. believe in him, are spiritually alive, or else they could not put
forth such a vital act.

Rep. But wherein does this make against me? The most that follows from hence
is, either that the habit of faith is before the act, as the faculty of sight
before the operation of it (which is no part of the Question between Mr. Air
and me) or that a man is quickened internally by faith, before he is quickened
morally by Justification and pardon; even as they put forth the vital act of
seeing, before they received that healing which prevented their approaching
death: which is the very thing I am proving. 2. But in every similitude there
is some dissimilitude: and if Mr. Air will instance in things that do not come
into the comparison, he may as well infer that faith is an act of natural
power; because their looking to the brazen Serpent (which represented faith)
was so. I say therefore, that they that were stung with the fiery Serpents,
though they were not dead, as to the utmost and last act of death, which
consists in the separation of the soul from the body: yet they were dead in
effect, and as much as the nature of the type, and the scope of the comparison
requires; as having received their deaths wound: which would soon have
prevailed over the remainders of their life, if it had not been prevented by
looking up to the brazen Serpent. And therefore of him that looked on the
Serpent of brass, it is said that he lived, Numb. 21. 9.

That is, (says Mr. Air) he had ease from his anguish. And. 4.
so by looking up to Christ by faith, we find ease and rest to our wearied
souls. A man is said to live when he lives comfortably and happily.

Rep. Which is neither true in the Proposition, nor Reddition of the
comparison. Not in the first: for in the type, the opposition is not between
ease and pain. but between life and death, Numb. 21. 6. The fiery Serpents bit
the people, and much people of Israel died, and ver. 9. It came to pass, that
if a Serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the Serpent of brass he lived;
as Hezekiah is said to live, Isa. 38. 21. when he recovered of a mortal
disease: not only from the pain and anguish of it, but principally from the
mortality of it. Nor in the second: for though life in Scripture may sometimes
signify a happy, prosperous and comfortable life; yet in our Saviors use of
it, it has not that sense precisely (though that may very well be included
consequently) partly, because the life obtained by looking up to Christ is
opposed (not to pain and sickness precisely, but) to the death and destruction
of the whole person, John 3. 15. The Son of man must be lifted up, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life;
partly, because the same life is called salvation, ver. 17. God sent not his
Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him
should be saved. Now though a man may be said to live, when he lives
comfortably, yet he is never said to be saved in Scripture precisely, because
he lives comfortably. When Paul says, Now we live, if ye stand fast, 1 These.
3. 8. I think he is to be understood of a joyful comfortable life. But it had
been very uncouth to express the same life thus. Now we are saved, if ye stand
fast.

But Mr. Air has a sad quarrel against me for reading that. 5.
text, John 6. 40. thus. It is the Will of God, that he that sees and
believes the Son shall be justified; whereas the words are, That whosoever
sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life. Herein he
says, I have corrupted and falsified the text.

Rep. What you please Sir: provided you take in all manner of Commentators as
well as my self; for I know no man but you, that excludes Justification from
being there contained in eternal life. As when the Law says, Do this, and thou
shall live; the life promised includes Justification primarily: so when it is
said, He that believes shall have eternal life; life includes Justification in
like manner. And though there be many more blessings included, then that single
one of Justification: yet that only being to my purpose, I thought I might
mention it only, without being guilty o^ corrupting or falsifying the text. I
had thought also, the believer may be said to have eternal life in right, as
well as in possession; as the Lord speaks a little below, ver. 47. He that
believes on me, has everlasting life. And to have right to life, or life in
right, is to be justified: and therefore is our Justification called
Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. And grace reigns through reghteousnesse
unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord, ver. 21.

SECT. II.
THe next comparison I made use of for illustration and proof. 6.
of this matter, was out of John 6. 51, 52, 53, 54. where faith is compared to
eating, and Justification to the nourishment we receive by our meat. As then we
are not first nourished, and then eat the meat that nourishes us, but we eat
our meat that we may be nourished by it: so neither are we first justified, and
then believe on Christ that has justified us, but we believe in Christ that we
may be justified.

Mr. Air answers, That this is a mistake like the former: for it is Christ
himself, who throughout that Chapter is compared to bread and food: whom by
faith we receive for our refreshment, consolation and spiritual nourishment.

Rep. As if Justification were none of that nourishment which we receive by
faith, because Christ himself is the meat on whom we feed! This answer is a
plain yielding of the Argument, unless Mr. Air intend, that it is only
comfort and refreshment, and not Justification and pardon, which is the
nourishment we receive by feeding on Christ; which if he does intend, we oppose
from the text. 1. That Christ invites us to eat of his flesh that we may live;
not simply that we may be refreshed and comforted; its in vain to talk of
refreshing and comforting him that is dead, ver. 33. The bread of God gives
life to the world, the very substance and being of life, not only the
well-being, which consists in refreshment and consolation. And though life may
now and then, (though very rarely) signify precisely a comfortable life, yet
here surely it signifies more; as being opposed to eternal death, under which
the world is supposed to be till Christ give them life, ver. 50. (to be, I
mean, in respect of guilt) and that very life, in the loss of which consists
the whole misery of unbelievers, ver. 53. Except you eat the flesh of the Son
of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. 2. And that Justification
or pardon of sin, is so far from being excluded, as that indeed it is the
principal blessing included in the life here promised, is manifest from the
Lords own words (almost the very same with those used throughout this chapter)
in administration of his Supper. This is my body which is broken for you, (as
Paul has it, 1 Cor. 11. 24.) This is my blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins, Matthew. 26. 28. Ergo, remission of sins
is that life which the flesh and blood of Christ gives to the world. 3. The
life mentioned throughout the chapter, contains all the blessings which Christ
has purchased for believers. Ergo, it contains Justification and pardon of
sins, or else Christ never purchased that for them. If it be said, that Christ
purchased not the act of pardon, but that consolation and refreshment which is
the effect of it: we have already showed, that neither is that act worthy the
name of pardon, which cannot of it self produce the effects of pardon: nor was
it needful, that where pardon is, so great a price should be paid for the
effects of it. What can hinder good things from us but sin? and sin, if it be
pardoned, can no more hinder then if it never had been committed: that there
would be no need for Christ to die, to purchase any good things for us, if he
do not purchase the very act of pardon. 4. The life which the flesh and blood
of Christ gives to the world, is not life simply, but salvation from perishing;
as appears, by comparing ver. 40. with John 3. 16, 17. therefore surely
contains more then a life of comfort and refreshment precisely, as was before
observed. 5. And I leave it with Mr. Air to consider, whether there be not
some greater malignity against the grace of God, and salvation by Christ in his
opinion, then in the doctrine of those whom he opposes (pretendedly as enemies
to grace,) when for the maintaining of it, he is forced to bear us in hand,
that God sent not Christ, nor did Christ come to quicken a dead world, but to
give ease to a sick world, or healing to a wounded world: not to give life to
them that were dead, but comfort and refreshment to them that were alive; or
not to restore them unto life, but to continue and perfect them in the life
they had before, Ephesians. 2. 5. You that were dead in sins has he quickened;
namely, by remission, Col. 2. 13. If one died for all, then were all dead, 2
Cor. 5. 15. Ergo, a lesser matter then the death of Christ wo^ld have served
turn for our Redemption, if our death had been any thing less then a total
privation of life: and the flesh and blood of Christ, which so often in the
Chapter is said to give life to the world, is Christ dying, or Christ crucified.

SECT. III.
MY fourth general Argument, proving faith to go before Justification,. 7.
was this: What place and order works had to Justification in the Covenant of
works, the same place and order faith has to our Justification in the Covenant
of grace. But works were to go before Justification in the Covenant of works.
Ergo, faith is to go before our Justification in the Covenant of grace.

Mr. Air declames most tragically against the Proposition, as no less
unsound, then the worst point in Popery or Arminianisme. Thus do wise men's
passions sometimes outrun the Constable: and so they may overtake their
adversary, care not how many innocent persons they overrun in the way. This
very Proposition which Mr. Air disclaims as a piece of Popery and Arminianism,
have I received from as worthy opposers of both, as the world has any.
Bellarmine arguing against Justification by faith only, says, That it did not
please God to give Justification upon the condition of faith alone. Bell enerv.
l. 5. c 4. p. 3^3. in 12.
Dr. Ames answers, Vel maxim hoc placuit Deo. It pleased him altogether: and
adds, Apostolus e^iam, Gal. 3. 11, 12. clare testatur, sidem in Evangelio ita
se habere, ut fac hoc in lege; which I cannot better English, then in the words
of my Proposition denied. Thus Com. i^ Ephesians. p. 243. 244.
Bayne. Look as in the Covenant of the Law, Do this and live; no deed, no life:
so in this Covenant of the Gospel, wherein the Lord promises for Christ to
pardon sin, to justify, to accept to eternal life; here it may be said, No
says, no portion in the Pr^mises of God, in the grace of God in Christ Jesus:
for look, as plasters unapplied so is Christ unbelieved. Nay more, have thou
not says? whiles thus thou art, God will not justify thee, nor accept thee to
life; for to pronounce thee just that do not believe on Christ, were to
pronounce the guilty innocent, which is an abomination with God. For hence it
is, that Gods mercy and justice kiss (offering no violence to each other)
because God does so of grace save us, (sinners in our selves) that first he
makes through Christ applied, righteous, etc. Thus De reco^cil. ^ar. 1. l. 2
c. 1^. p 101.
Wotton, Fides igitur est conditio: and quidem talis conditio ad
Justificationem per Christum in foedere grat^it^, qualis ^rant opera ad
Justificationem, ex operibus legis. The sense of which is altogether the same
with Dr. Ames. Thus Calvin, In Romans 10. 8
there quoted. Colligimus, sicut lex opera exigit, Evangelium nihil aliud
postulare nisi ut fidem afferant homines ad recipiendam Dei gratiam. Thus Of
the Covenant part* ^. chapter 6. p. 360.
Mr. Bulkley, almost verbatim (though I did not know so much, till a Minister
that had read the book told me of it); and were it worth the while, to
transcribe testimonies in so known a case; I could confirm the same from the
testimonies of Dr. Twisse, Pemble, Downham, Ball, Beza, and I think all the
Protestant Authors I have (most of whose names are mentioned, chap. 1.) and
that according to the constant language of the Vid Gasp. Laurent. Conse^s
Ortho^. v^t Art. 5. ^. ^. per ^^^.
Ancients. And because I foresaw that an adversary might be ready to
misrepresent me, as if I had compared faith and works in every respect, as the
same for use and effect in their respective Covenants; I therefore said, not
that they had the same place merely in the two Covenants, but the same place
and order, putting in the latter word purposely as an Explication of the
former, for preventing that very mistake which Mr. Air is here run into: of
which latter word notwithstanding Mr. Air takes no notice in all he says
against me. My meaning therefore in the Proposition is this. That as by the
Covenant of works it was required that men should fulfill the Law, that they
might be justified; so by the Gospel it is required, that men believe, that
they may be justified: faith goes before Justification here, as works before it
there. And this was plainly enough expressed in the Argument, to any one but
Mr. Air. As to all the Arguments he has against it; they are such gross
non-sequitur's, that I know not whether it will be worth while to answer them;
yet out of civility, I will take some notice of them.

First, (says Mr. Air) works were meritorious of eternal life:. 8.
faith is not.

Rep. Very true, (though the former part about the meritoriousnesse of works,
Mr. Air himself contradicts in terminis, page 190. but that is common) and
therefore we compare not faith and works in point of worth and value, but only
in point of place and order; or we compare them in the general nature of a
condition, (wherein they agree) not in the special nature, or in what is
accessory to either, wherein they differ as much as buying with money, Romans 4.
4. and buying without money, Isa. 55. 1. If a commodity may be had for taking
or buying, he that takes it has as sure a title as he that buys it; yet
taking is not buying. A genere ad speciem non valet Argumentum affirmative.

Mr. Air. 2. Works in the first Covenant are the matter of our. 9.
Justification: faith is not.

Answ. This is all one with the former. If it were not, it would only show
another difference between faith and works, notwithstanding their agreement in
point of place and order, and in the geneneral nature of a condition in their
respective Covenants. Works were such a condition, as that withal they were
that very righteousness for which a person was justified: but faith is the
condition of our being justified by the righteousness of a Mediator.

Mr. Air. 3. If faith has the same place in the second Covenant, as works in
the first, then must God account says to be perfect righteousness, which is
contrary to his truth and justice.

Ans. I deny the consequence. What manner of Readers did Mr. Air promise
himself, when he puts down such sayings as these, without one word or pretense
of proof? that which made works man's perfect righteousness, was not the place
and order which they had by the Covenant to his Justification: but their own
essential natural perfection, as being a punctual and exact conformity to the
rule of his Creation: the (...) of that rule of Divinity, which by Creation was
implanted in the frame of man's nature. That it was the condition of his
Justification, was ex accidenti; by virtue of the Covenant, promising a reward
of life upon the doing of such works. May not therefore faith have the same
place and order, that is, be in like manner the condition of the Justification
of a sinner, because it is not man's natural perfect righteousness? Titius will
let Sempronius have a farm, if he will give him to the worth of it: He lets
Maeveus have another, if he will ask him for it. Here, asking is the condition:
there, the payment of the full price: both have the same place and order to the
obtaining of the farm: yet surely begging is not the payment of the full price.

Mr. Air. 4. Then is the second Covenant a Covenant of works:. 10.
seeing faith is a work of ours.

Answ. 1. We have already showed at large, that the grace or act of faith, is
perpetually opposed to works in Scripture Language. 2. However this Argument is
inconsequent; for it will by no means follow, that if faith have the same place
and order in the New Covenant, as works in the old, then the New Covenant is a
Covenant of works. Suppose God had made the world a promise of pardon, upon the
condition of the existence of some contingent event, v. g. That if Paul be
converted within seven years after Christ's Ascension, all the world shall be
justified. Paul's conversion in this case, would have the very same place and
order to the Justification of the world, as works had in the old Covenant
(though it be not a condition of the same nature and quality) yet surely this
latter promise could not therefore be proved to be a Covenant of works.

M. Air. 5. This assertion makes faith to be not of grace, because not from
the Covenant of grace, seeing the Covenant it self depends on it.

Ans. 1. This assertion supposes that nothing can be of grace, which is not by
the Covenant of grace, Was not the Covenant it self of grace? 2. Of the
dependence of faith upon the Covenant, and of the Covenant upon faith, we
dispute purposely below. Here we speak only of one blessing of the Covenant,
namely justification. And as soon as ever Mr. Air has proved that faith
cannot be given us of grace, if it be the condition of justification; I will
write a book of retractations as long as Augustines, if I live to it. In the
mean time he deals not like a disputant to charge such a consequence upon us,
and never go about to prove it.

And whereas he suggests to his reader that my proposition is contrary to all
Protestants, it is a vain and empty flourish (to speak the best of it.) He that
has any acquaintance in their writings, cannot but know it to be so. Of all
Protestants Mr. Air quotes two in his margin, Calvin and Pemble, of which the
former in that very Instit. l. 3 c. ^. sect. 2.
place which Mr. Air refers to, speaks as plainly to the overthrow of what he
is brought to prove, as can be. Nam quum dicit Apostolus, etc. For when the
Apostle says, with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation: he shows that it is not enough, if a
man believe implicitly what he understands not, nor makes any search into: sed
explicitam requirit divinae b^nitatis agnitionem, in qua consistit nostra
justitia: but he requires an explicit ackn^wl^^gement of the divine goodness,
in which consists our righteousness^. This is somewhat more then is any where
said in my Sermon. P^mbl^ also is as expressly against him, as (I think) is
possible: and that very frequently. I shall transcribe but Of just^^. sect. 4.
c. 1. p: 1. 7 ^.
one place of multitudes. From hence (says he) we conclude firmly, that the
difference between the Law and the Gospel, assigned by our Divines is most
certain and agreeable to Scriptures. viz. That the Law gives life unto the
just upon condition of perfect obedience in all things: the Gospel gives life
unto s^nners, upon condition they repent and believe in Christ Jesus. Mr. Eyr^
the* is out, or Mr. Pemble, when the one says this is the judgment of our
Divines: and the other says it treads Antipodes to the current of all our
Protestant writers.

SECT. IV.
THe proposition, namely that faith has the same place, and order. 10.
to justification in the covenant of grace, as works, in the covenant of
works, was proved in my Sermon in these words. If the tenor of the first
Covenant, do this and live by the consent of all people and Nations, Jews and
Gentiles, will undeniably evince that works were necessary Antecedents of
justification in that covenant: why then should not, Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved, (which is the tenor of the New Covenant, Romans 10. 6,
9.) plead as strongly for the like necessity of the Antecedency of faith to
justification in this Covenant.

Mr. Air answers. That Believe and thou shall be saved, is not the tenor of
the new Covenant, for. 1. It Is no where called so. 2. In Jer. 31. and Heb. 8.
The new Covenant runs quite in another strain. That Text, Romans 10. 6, 9. is
not the tenor of the new Covenant, for that requires confession as well as
faith. The Apostle there describes the persons that shall be saved, they are
such as do believe and profess the truth. His scope is to resolve that
question, how a man may know that he shall be saved? etc.

Rep. The stresse of the Argument lies not at all on this, that Believe and
thou shall be saved, is the tenor of the new Covenant, as Mr. Air supposes,
(I think) that he may the more colourably wave an answer. If I had left out the
word Covenant in the Argument and proof of it, yet had the Argument been the
same as to its principal intent. Do this and live, by the consent of all the
world proves undeniably, that works were to go before justification, according
to the purport of that saying. Ergo, Believe and thou shall be saved, will as
necessarily infer that faith is to go before justification: though we do not
at all dispute, whether that were the tenor of the Covenant of works, or this
of the Covenant of grace. Now judge (Reader) what weight there is in Mr. Eyre's
answer. The tenor of the new Covenant (says he) is not, Believe and thou shall
be saved. Suppose it: yet is it that which the Apostles preached. v. 8. and one
would think should be as plain to prove the antecedency of faith, as the other
of works to justi^^cation.

2. And that this is the tenor of the Covenant of grace appears, 1. That which
the Apostle calls the righteousness which is of the Law. v. 5. is the tenor
of the Covenant of works. Erg^, that which he calls the righteousness which
is of faith. v. 6. is the tenor of the Covenant of grace, and that is this: If
thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy
heart, that God has raised him from the dead; thou shall be saved. v. 9. 2.
The doctrine whereof the Apostles were the special Ministers, is the tenor of
the new Covenant. 2 Cor. 3. 6. But, B^leeve in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall
be saved, is the doctrine whereof the Apostles were special Ministers. etc.
Romans 10. 8, 9. The word of faith which we preach, that if thou shall believe
and confess. etc. This it seems is the sum of what the Apostles preached:
and that according to the commission and call they had received from God. v.
14. And that faith and repentance and salvation thereupon, was the sum of the
Apostles Ministry, appears also from other Texts of Scripture, Act. 20. 21.
Luke 24. 47. Heb. 6. 1. etc. 3. The Gospel and the Covenant of grace is all
one. But this is the sum of the Gospel, Believe and thou shall be saved,
Mark. 16. 15, 16. Go preach the Gospel to every creature, He that believes and
is baptized shall be saved. 4. Believe and thou shall be saved, are words that
have the form of a Covenant. Ergo, they are either the Covenant of the Law, or
of grace, or some third Covenant. Not the Covenant of the Law: for the Apostle
expressly opposes them against that Covenant, Romans 10. 5, 6. a third Covenant
they cannot be. Ergo, they are the Covenant of grace.

Let us now see upon what grounds Mr. Air denies these words,. 11.
to be the tenor of the new Covenant. 1. Says he, they are no where called so.

Ans. Nor does the name of the Covenant of works appear in Scripture (nor of
the Covenant of grace neither) is it therefore a sufficient ground to deny that
do this and live is the tenor of the Covenant of works? 2. If it be not called
by the name of the Covenant, yet is it called by names of equipollent
signification: as when it is called the Gospel, the word of faith, the
righteousness of faith, the Law of faith, Romans 3. 27. the Law of
righteousness, 9. 31. the promise, Heb. 4. 1. Gal. 3. 22. 3. But neither is
the name wanting. Gal. 3. 15, 16, 17. If it be but a man's Covenant, no man
disannulleth or adds thereto. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises
made -- And the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, etc.
Compare these expressions with, v. 22. [But the Scripture has concluded all
under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe, And v. 14. [That the blessing of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the spirit
through faith:] And v. 9. [So then, they which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham.] Hence the Argument is. The promise of blessedness through
faith, is the sum and substance of the new Covenant. Believe in the Lord
Jesus and thou shall be saved, is the promise of blessedness through faith.
Ergo, it is the sum and substance of the new Covenant, or of the Covenant of
grace. (These two terms I use as of the same import, to express that Covenant
which is opposed to the Covenant of works strictly so called.) The Minor is
past denial. The Major stands upon this foundation. That the same inheritance
and blessing which was given by promise to believing Abraham (which promise is
called the Covenant) is now proposed to all the world, (Gentiles as well as
Jews) to be obtained by the same faith that Abraham had, and given to them when
they believe.

As to Mr. Eyres second Argument, that when the new Covenant is mentioned, Jer.
31. and Heb. 8. it runs quite in another strain: I must desire thee (Reader)
to have pati^nce till thou come to the particular debate of those Texts which
thou shall meet with below: wherein thou shall see it fully proved, that there
is nothing spoken in them, but what does confirm the truth of that which I
here assert. I refer thee thither purposely, that I may forbear tautologies.

But Mr. Air has a special reason, why this Covenant, Romans 10.. 12.
6, 9. cannot be the Covenant of grace, because it requires confession as well
as faith: and so justification by the new Covenant would be justification by
confession, as well as by faith.

Rep. The Apostle answers this fully, v. 10. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness: and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Hence it
is manifest, that faith, and faith only, is requisite to justification: but
confession also is required of them that are justified, unto salvation,
according to what our Lord himself speaks; whosoever shall confess me before
men, him will I also* confess before my Father: but whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before my Father, Matthew. 10. 32, 33. Luke 12.
8. Indeed our complete and final justification at the day of judgment, is no
small part of our salvation: but the Apostle here distinguishing justification
as a thing going before, from salvation as a thing following after, teaches us
to understand him of our initial justification, or of the first right to the
inheritance of life, which by the promise is given a man as soon as he
believes; which yet is to be understood, not as if confession were of as
universal and absolute necessity to salvation, as faith it self (for if a man
believe in the very last moment of his life, when he has neither opportunity,
nor ability of body to make confession, he shall be saved notwithstanding) but
that it is Vid. Am^s. Cas. Con. l. 4 c. 3. q. 2.
necessary in its time and place: but faith only absolutely, universally and
indispensably necessary: as the Apostle also intimates in his proof subjoyned,
v. 11. mentioning faith without confession, whosoever believes on him shall
not be ashamed. Even as our Cha^. p^nstrat. de Baptis. l. 5. c 9. 3. and
Spanh^^. dub. evang. part. 3. dub. 96. page 493, 494.
Protestants argue against the Papists: that though it be said, Mark. 16. He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved; yet is not Baptism hereby made
as necessary to salvation as faith it self: because it is not mentioned in the
negative proposition presently added: He that believes not shall be damned.
Not, he that is not baptized shall be damned. Nor finally, is confession
required as by it self, and in coordination with faith, but as in subordination
thereunto; being indeed the natural effect thereof, and that wherein the truth
and life of faith does exert it self.

To what is added, that the Apostles scope is to answer that question,. 13.
how a man may know that he shall be saved? and that he does describe the
persons that shall be saved, by two marks or characters, faith and confession;
I reply, we have been too often imposed upon by pretended scopes: and Mr.
Shepherd is falsely alleged as a witness, that the Apostles scope is to
answer the foresaid question: for he says it not: but is purposely arguing in
that very place which Sound beleev. p. 230.
Mr. Air referres to, out of this very Text, that we are not justified before
we believe. Yet is it most true, that a man may come by faith to know that he
shall be saved: and the ground of it is, because faith is appointed of God to
be medium fruitionis, a means of obtaining salvation; and therefore cannot be
denied to be medium cognitionis, a means by which a man may know that he shall
be saved. Even as the same Law which made works the means of life, do this and
live, if a man had kept it, would have also bred the assurance and knowledge
that he should have lived. But, 1. As it is not the knowledge of life simply,
but life it self which is promised in those words (for it were too gross to
paraphrase them thus, do this, and thou shall thereby know that thou shall
live) so it is not simply the knowledge of justification and salvation, but
salvation it self which is promised in these, believe and thou shall be saved.
The righteousness which is of the Law says thus, do this and live, v. 5. But
the righteousness which is of faith says this, if thou believe thou shall be
saved, v. 6, 8, 9. What can be more plain? 2. When it is said, v. 10. with the
heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mout^ conf^ssion is made
unto salvation: must we read it thus? with the heart man believes unto the
knowledge of righteousness: and with the mouth confession is made unto the
knowledge of salvation. What will become of the Scriptures, if men may
interpret them after this rate? 3. And here (to see how it falls out) Mr. Air
is forced to contend, that the Apostle mentions faith as that which
evidenceth justification as a mark or character: which way of evidencing he
could by no means approve of, when I urged it, p. 77.. 3. and 4. of his book.

4. If thou believe, thou shall be saved. That these words propound. 14.
the condition or means of salvation, and not only describe the persons that
shall be saved, we have proved chap. ^ sect. 1.
before by several Arguments. And according to my promise there, I shall add
something here, that if it be possible Mr. Air may suspect the truth of that
notion which he cannot defend, but by turning the Scriptures into a nose of
wax. And 1. I say, that if the foresaid words do only describe the persons that
shall be saved, then are they here used otherwise then the like words or manner
of speech is used any where else in Scripture. Mr. Air has not yet produced
us one place, where such phrase of speech is a bare description of a person (at
least, unless we will take his bare word that so it is meant:) And though it
be hard to be peremptory in such a nicety, and deny universally that there is
any example in Scripture of such phrase of speech used in such a sense; yet
upon the most diligent and critical observation which I have made on purpose to
discover it, I can find none, neither in the Old nor New Testament, and
therefore shall deny it, till Mr. Air, not only say it, but prove it. For if
the foresaid words, If thou believe thou shall be saved, do only describe what
manner of persons they are that shall be saved: then do they not suspend
salvation upon the act of believing, but their meaning is this, If thou be one
of those who be or shall be believers, thou shall be saved. Show us the like in
all the Scriptures. And hence, 2. It follows, that these words do not present
believers as such ( reduplicative) as the objects of salvation: but only
Specificative, the men that are believers; but under some other respect and
notion. For example, Peter gives a legacy to Simon the Tanner that lives in
Joppa by the sea side. The messenger that carries the legacy knows not the man,
but tells him, if he be the Tanner of Joppa, this legacy is his. Which words do
not indeed propound the condition, but the description of the Legatee from his
place and profession: and the legacy is not given him in respect of either of
these circumstances, but immediately as the person whom these circumstances
describe, or it is not given the man Quatenus he is a Tanner; but it is given
the Tanner Quatenus he is the man whom Peter meant in his will. In like manner,
when it is said, if thou believe thou shall be saved, if the meaning be this;
if thou be one of them that do or shall believe, thou shall be saved; then
salvation pertaines not to men as believers, but to believers as men, under
some other notion and capacity. And that must be either. 1. As they are men
simply, or, 2. As they are sinful men, or finally (which I suppose Mr. Air
will say: for to affirm either of the former were intolerably absurd) as they
are elect. And so the issue will be this: believers Quatenus they are elect (
Specificative) are the objects of salvation. Now see (Reader) what this will
come to at the long run. 1. Hereby is faith divested of all necessity, and
usefulness in order to salvation, farther then it is a mark or s^gne (as all
other saving graces are) of a man that shall be saved. Even as the profession
and place of the Tanner forementioned contributed nothing to his obtaining of
Peter's legacy: it served only to describe the person to whom it was given. And
is this that precious faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1. more precious then gold, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
the Christians riches, Jam. 2. 5. by which he obtaines and inherits promises,
Heb. 11. 33. and 6. 12. righteousness, Heb. 11. 7. salvation, Ephesians. 2. 8. and
all good things whatsoever, 2 Pet. 1. 3. so highly every where commended in
Scripture, and urged upon such terms of necessity? How can we be said to
obtain promises, righteousness, and salvation by faith, if faith serve only
to describe the person? It may be this new divinity will shortly produce a new
Rhetoric: and that is no more then needs. 2. If the elect had been described
by their names, parents, time and place of their birth and habitation, they
might be said to obtain promises, righteousness, salvation by these as well
as by says, if there be no other necessity of faith to righteousness and
salvation, then as it is a description of the persons that shall be saved. 3.
And according to this gloss, there can be no ground of exhorting, beseeching,
and commanding sinners to believe on and accept of a Savior: no more then of
exhorting, or commanding them to be elected; as we have demonstrated in the
place before mentioned. 4. Nor have the words according to the same gloss, the
form and nature of a promise, but of a mere conne^e Axi me, affirming the
consequent upon supposition of the Antecedent. For, if thou believe, that is,
if thou be such a one as art or shall be a believer, is but a periphrasis of
election unto faith: for the down right meaning, without circumlocutions is
this. If thou be one of those whom God from eternity purposed to make a
believer, thou shall be saved. And why? not because of the Promise by which God
has obliged himself to give salvation upon their believing, who before had no
right to it, (that will infer a conditional Promise, which Mr. Air abhors) but
because he that purposed the one, purposed the other also: and this he
commanded to be declared and published to the world. And I say in like manner;
If the Sun rise, we shall have light upon the earth: and if God make stones the
children of Abraham, they shall be able to speak. But we know from the
Scriptures, that the inheritance of life and salvation is given by Promise,
Gal. 3. 18. Romans 4. 13, 16, 20. Heb. 6. 13, 15. 5. And we know from the same
Scriptures, that righteousness and salvation is not given to believers
quatenus they are elect, but rather to the elect quatenus they are believers:
that is, they are not only given to the men that are believers, but given to
them as they are believers. It was Abraham's faith that was imputed to him unto
righteousness, Romans 4. 3. and the Promise was to him and to his seed through
faith, ver. 16. Romans 3. 22. The righteousness of God which is by faith of
Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe; where we have distinctly
set down the righteousness which justifies us. The persons justified, They
that believe. The means or condition of their Justification, By faith of Jesus
Christ. The same distinction is accurately observed, Gal. 3. 22. That the
Promise by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe. The
Promise is that of salvation and blessedness. Compare, ver. 6. 9, 18. Here
then we have again the persons to whom the Promise is given, namely, believers;
the condition or means, by faith. To teach us, that the Promise of life and
salvation is not only given to men that are believers, but given to them as
believers. Righteousness, not only upon them that are faithful, but
righteousness by faith: a Promise not only to them that do believe, but a
Promise by believing. 6. If thou believe, th^^ sh^lt be saved: or, Believe, and
thou shall be saved. Life and salvation is here promised as the reward of
faith: a reward, I mean, not properly, but metaphorically, as the word is used
in Scripture often, not for a reward of debt, but for a reward of grace. Now I
would ask, why it is called a reward? Mr. Air will tell me, because it follows
faith. Be it so, (though I think there is much more in it.) But faith may be
con^dered, either as an act required of us, or as the work of God in ^s. Now I
would know, whether life and salvation be the reward of faith as it is our act,
or as it is Gods work? If the former, (as most certain,) then Mr. Air must
quit his beloved gloss: for if salvation by the Promise, be made consequent to
faith, as an act required of us, and performed by us, then faith is the
condition upon which we are entitled to salvation by the same Promise: and so
salvation pertaines to us as believers formaliter, and not only as to the men,
whose property and privilege it is to be believers sooner or later. If the
second be said, namely, that salvation follows faith, and so is the reward
thereof, as it is the work of God in us, then God rewards himself, he does not
reward us. Even as if I should call Gods preserving the world the reward of his
creating it; or the destruction of the world the reward of his preserving it:
or his glorisying our bodies, the reward of his raising them out of their
graves: or his calling us unto faith the reward of his predestinating us: for
each of these actions is consequent to the foregoing. And yet I doubt not, but
if a man should talk after this rate, he would be accounted to utter strange
kind of tropes. 7. Mr. Air may do well to remember that he has yet given me
no similitude of Answer to the main Argument. When the Law says, Do this and
live: or, If thou do this, thou shall live: or, He that does these things shall
live: all the world ^cknowledgeth, (and Mr. Air dares not deny it) that the
words do not only describe the person, but propound the condition of life. When
then the Gospel says, Believe and thou shall b^^saved: or, If thou believe
thou shall be saved: or, He that believes shall be saved; wherein does this
form of words oppose the other, that these must be interpreted as a
description of the person rather then the other? 8. To conclude, Mr. Air by
this gloss has discovered the nakedness of those two Reasons he gave, why
the Apostle here did not describe the tenor of the New Covenant, viz. Because
he requires confession as well as faith: and when the New Covenant is
described, J^r. 31. and Heb. 8. it runs quite in another strain, whereas if,
when the Apostle says, If thou believe thou shall be saved, his meaning be
this, If thou be a person that do or shall believe, thou art also a person
that shall be saved: or in short, if his meaning be only to describe the person
that shall be saved, what manner of man he is; I suppose Mr. Air himself will
grant, that there is no strain in the New Covenant, wheresoever described,
that will exclude the necessity of faith and confession, if this be the whole
use of them. And therefore this may be the tenor of the New Covenant,
notwithstanding any thing that is in either or both those Reasons to the
contrary.

My next Argument to prove, that faith has the same order to. 15.
Justification in the Covenant of grace, which works had to Justification in
the Covenant of works, was this; else Justification by works, and Justification
by faith are not opposed.

Mr. Air answers, That faith is put objectively for the righteousness of
Christ.

Rep. Chap. ^ sect. 3.
Which we have showed before, does involve the Apostle in the guilt of such
intolerable nonsense and self-contradiction, that I shall need add no more
now. If the Arguments there advanced do not firmly prove, that faith is to be
taken properly, not objectively, for Christ or his righteousness; I am content
to come to the penance of a public recantation of all I have written.

SECT. V.
MY fifth and last Argument for the antecedency of faith to Justification,. 16.
was aken from 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you; but you are washed, but you
are sanctified, but you are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, etc. where
there is an evident opposition between the time past and present, in respect of
their Justification.

Mr. Air answers, That the Apostle says, In times past they were
unsanctified: He does not say they were unjustified before Conversion.

Rep. The Apostle says neither the one nor the other in so many words: but if
that which he does say, will not infer that they were unjustified, as well as
unsanctified, before the time he speaks of, what can be thought of the
Scriptures, but that they are a sealed book, which no man can open? Compare the
ninth verse with this Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? -- And such were some of you, but ye are justified. The
Apostle in the same verse, having mentioned fornicatours, idolaters, etc.
adds, And such were some of you, but you are sanctified. I appeal to common
sense, whether the former word will not as forcibly infer that they were
unjusti^^ed in times past; as these latter, that they were unsancti^ied in
times past? But the matter is too clear to be disputed, that in their
unconverted estate, there was a bar against their entrance into the Kingdom
of God, which was now removed in their Justification. Ergo, They were before
unjustified. Hence 2. I argue thus. He that in the condition he is in, cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, he in that condition is not justified. These
Corinthians, in the condition they were in before their Conversion, could not
enter into the Kingdom of God. Ergo, These Corinthians in their unconverted
condition were not justified. The Assumption is the words of the text, No
unrighteous can inherit the Kingdom of God. -- And such were some of you. The
Proposition stands upon this ground, That he that is justified is an heir of
the Kingdom: and therefore it is so far from being impossible, that being
justified he should inherit the Kingdom, as that he cannot be excluded from it
without being disinherited, Tit. 3. 7. That being justified by his grace, we
should be made heirs, according to the hope of eternal life. Compare Gal. 3.
26, 29. Romans 8. 30. and 5. 17, 18, 21.

Therefore Mr. Air tells us. 2. That if any man will strain. 17.
this consequence from the words ( strain it?) then he will own his former
answer, That they were not justified before conversion in foro conscientiae,
or, in foro Ecclesiastico.

Rep. 1. Which he does well to profess not to maintain, but upon supposition
of the foresaid inference; for if Justification here be meant, that which is in
conscience, or before the Church (which last member of the distinction we heard
not of till now:) surely Mr. Eyre's principles will not permit him to account
it a straining; if a man shall infer that these Corinthians were not justified
in conscience before, because the Apostle says, Now you are justified. 2. Mr.
Air remembers me (when he has no reason in the earth for it: as the Reader
shall see when we come to the place) that Anal^g^m perse positum stat pro
famosiori significate. That which may be spoken analogically of many things, is
yet to be understood in its most native, simple, proper sense, when it is put
by its self: Ergo, when it is here said, You are justified, it is to be
understood of Justification simply so called, and not of Justification in
conscience, or before the Church. 3. The Argument but now mentioned here
returns. The Justification here spoken of, is that which gives right to the
Kingdom of God. But Justification in cons^ience or before the Church, is not
the Justification which gives right to the Kingdom of God. Ergo, neither of
these is the Justi^^cation here meant. The Assumption is out of question; the
Propo^tion manifest. Two things the Apostle affirms of these (...) in the time
of their ^entil^sme and unbelief. 1. That the (...) 2. ^^at therefore they
could not then (...) Now that they were believers, their condition is altered
in both respects; and in opposition to the former, he tells them they were
sanctified; and in opposition to the latter, they were justified.

4. If when it is said You are justified, it must be meant of Justification. 18.
manifested in conscience, or in the Church: when it is said, You are
sanctified, why should not sanctification be understood of that which is
declared or manifested?

In answer to this, Mr. Air dilates upon the differences between Justification
and Sanctification; and concludes, that when I say, Nothing can be alleged for
Justification before believing, which will not hold as strongly for
sanctification before believing: it has nothing but my confidence to support
it. If I had said, Nothing could be said against sanctification before
believing, which will not hold as strongly against Justification before
believing, there had been the more appearance of reason for this censure: but
as my words lay, I appeal to himself for judgment: for Justification before
believing he lays these two foundations; namely, the eternal Will and Purpose
of God to justify, and our Justification in the death of Christ. And it cannot
be denied, but that the Scriptures speak every whit as much, concerning the
Will of God to sanctify, Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 These. 2. 13. and of our Sanctification
in the death of Christ, Romans 6. 6. Col. 3. 3. Wherefore seeing this is all that
Mr. Air has to say for Justification before faith, I was no more confident
then true, in affirming, that as much might be said for sanctification before
faith.

As to the differences which here he puts between Justification and. 19
Sanctification, I own them as readily as any man, (except what shall be below
excepted.) As, 1. That the former is a work or act of God without us: the other
is the operation of God within us, etc. But he should have remembered that we
are not now comparing the nature of the things, but the likeness of
expressions. Now suppose we should say as some (whom Epist. dedi^. fol. 3.
Mr. Air counts worthy of the honor of his patronage) De^r^ and E^ton etc.
quo(...). (...). Christ dyin^ 99.
That our m^rtification is nothing else, but the apprehension of sin slain by
the body of Christ; or, we m^rtifie our selves only declaratively in the sight
of men: If Mr. Air should urge the text under debate, 1 Cor, 6. 11. against
this notion, and should say, the Apostle tells the Corinthians, Such and such
they were in times past, but now they were sanctified. Ergo, They were not
sanctified before: Does not the a^swer^ly as fair for the foresaid Authors,
That they were now sanctified in their own apprehension, or declaratively in
the sight of men, as for Mr. Air himself, who interprets Justification in
such a sense? And if it be law: full for him to fancy a distinction between the
act and effects of Justification, and obtrude it upon us without one syllable
of Scripture to countenance it: let others be allowed on their own heads, to
fancy some such like distinction of sanctification, and it will be a thing not
worthy the name of a work or labor, to prove, that men are sanctified (as well
as justified) before they believe.

The second difference that Mr. Air puts between Justification and. 20.
Sanctification is this, That the sentence of Justification is terminated in
conscience: but Sanctification is diffused throughout the whole man, 1 These. 5.
23.

Rep. The intent and sense of this, I own also. But 1. I reject the term of
Justification, terminated upon conscience. Passio (as well as actio) est
suppositi. It is the man, not his conscience, which is justified. Again, the
meaning of it is, that a man's Justification is manifested or declared to him.
But this manifestation is either by immediate revelation, and that is not to
the conscience (properly), but to the understanding: or by the assistance of
the Spirit enabling the conscience to conclude a man's Justification; and then
it is the conscience that terminates, not upon which Justification is
terminated. 2. Assurance by our Divines is wont to be made a part of
sanctification, and may very well be included in the sanctification of the
Spirit, 1 These. 5. 23. as distinct from soul and body. If then the
Justification spoken of here (and in other places of Scripture) be our
assurance that we are justified, then the distinction here proposed between
Justification and Sancti^cation falls to the ground.

A second Argument which I mentioned, to prove, that Justification. 21.
here could not be meant of that which is in conscience, is this. The
Justification which they now had, was that which gave them right and title to
the Kingdom of God, which right and title they had not before: for if they had
this right before, then whether they believed or no, all was one, as to the
certainty of their salvation: they might have gone to heaven, though they had
lived and died without faith.

Mr. Air answers, 1. The elect Corinthians had no more right to salvation
after their believing, then they had before: for their right to salvation was
grounded only upon the Purpose of God, and the Purchase of Christ. 2. Yet it
will not follow, that they might have gone to heaven without faith: seeing
Christ has purchased faith for his people no less then glory: and God has
certainly appointed, that all that live to years of discretion, whom in his
secret Justification he has adjudged to life, shall have this evidence of
faith.

Rep. The former answer is such as I never read before, in any writings of God
or man, viz. That some men that live in adulteries, idolatries, blasphemies,
murders, and all manner of ungodliness, yet have as much right to the Kingdom
of Heaven, as the most faithful, humble, mortified, laborious Christian or
Apostle that lives upon the earth; the height of whose blessedness it is, that
they have right to enter into the Kingdom of God, Rev. 22. 14. If this
blessedness may be had in the service of sin and Satan, in the fulfilling of
the lusts of the flesh, and of the mind, in the unfruitful works of darkness;
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow shall be as to day, and much better. 2.
None have right to heaven, but under the notion of a reward; wicked and ^ngodly
men, that live in contempt of God and all good, have no right to heaven as a
reward. Ergo, whiles such, they have no right to it at all. Shall I need to
prove the Assumption? If ungodly Atheistical wretches have right to heaven as
their reward, as the reward of what? of the good service they do to the devil?
for grace they have none: The Proposition is undoubted: for heaven or the
inheritance, and the reward are Synonyma's in Scripture Language, words of the
same import, and reciprocal. Col. 2. 18. and 3. 24. Heb. 11. 26. 2 John 8. And
therefore it is well observed by Dr. Twiss, De ^raedest. Digr. 3. c. 5. p. 34.
f.
Deum intendisse manifestationem, etc. God intended the manifestation of his
mercy upon mankind, -- ex congruo, juxta obsequium ejus qui salvandus est,
suum. The sense of which he delivers Against Mr. Cotton. p. 41.
elsewhere. God will bestow salvation upon all his elect (of ripe years,) by
way of reward, and crown of righteousness, etc. for which he quotes at large,
2 These. 1. 6, 7, 8, 10. and then adds, It is pity, this is not considered (as
usually it is not) especially for the momentous consequence thereof, etc. 3.
And of be^ievers the Apostle says, 1 These. 1. 6, 7. It is a righteous thing
with God to recompense to them rest: and on the contrary, that God were unjust
if he should not save them, Heb. 6. 10. Now take righteousness and
unrighteousness in any sense; the words will bear according to their use in
Scripture, I appeal to the conscience of any man that is acquainted with the
Scriptures, whether it be agreeable to them, to say, that God is unjust if he
does not save them that live in all manner of ungodliness and debauchery,
(supposing them to be elect.) If there be any expression in Scripture that does
sound to such a sense: if they do not say the contrary, that the justice of God
is engaged to take vengeance of such, unless they repent and bring forth
fruits of righteousness, then must we read them backward, and understand them
in a sense contrary to what the words pretend to, See Ez^k. 18. 20, 25, 26, 27.
to the end. Exodus 34. 7. Romans 3. 9. Ephesians. 2. 3. and other places without number.
4. But let us examine the text: The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God Be not deceived: neither fornicatours, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,
etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And such were some of you, but you are
washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified. The inference in the
affirmative is this. Ergo, now they might and should inherit the Kingdom. That
which made them incapable of inheriting the Kingdom before, was not only the
filth of sin (from which they were now washed in sanctification) but the guilt
of sin, from which they were now also washed in Justification. Hence the first
Argument, That Justification which washes away the guilt of sin, upon the
removal of which they were made capable of inheriting the Kingdom, that
Justification gave them right to the Kingdom. But the Justification which they
now had, and not before, was that which washed away the guilt of sin, upon the
removal of which they were capable of inheriting the Kingdom. Ergo, This
Justification is that which gave them right to the Kingdom. The Proposition is
necessary, as consisting of terms immediately contrary. Guilt is obligatio ad
poenam, an obligation to punishment: that which is contrary to it, and destroys
or expels it, is a right to impunity: if the loss of heaven be part of that
punishment to which they are obliged; that which is contrary to it and expells
it, is a right to heaven. The Assumption is so plain in the text, as nothing
more. Time was when you could not have inherited the Kingdom of God, because
of the fearful sins you lived in; but now you are justified, and therefore may
inherit it. 2. The same bar which lay against the entrance of other sinners
into the Kingdom of God, lay against these Corinthians also. No fornicatours,
idolaters, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And such were some of you.
But ye are justified. But the want of Justification and pardon is a bar or
hindrance against the entrance of other sinners into the Kingdom of God. This,
I think, will not be denied; and if it be, it is easily proved: because the
Justification of these Corinthians is mentioned by the Apostle* as that which
changed the case, and put the difference between them and other Gentiles yet
unconverted, in respect of their capability of inheriting the Kingdom. Now he
that perishes for want of Justification or pardon, perishes but for want of a
right to heaven: Ergo, he that may now inherit heaven because he is justified,
or by virtue of his Justification, may therefore inherit it, because he has
now a right to it by his Justification.

And whereas Mr. Air says, that their right to salvation was. 22.
grounded only in Gods Purpose, and in Christ's Purchase: I thought the
Scriptures had mentioned a third, and a more immediate ground then either of
these, and that is the Promise, Gal. 3. 18. a Promise made not only to them
that be believers, but through believing, ver. 22. and Romans 4. 13, 16, 23, 24.
though I confess Mr. Air is concerned to take but little notice of it; for if
the right to heaven be given by the Promise, then they that are without the
Promise (as these Corinthians were sometimes no less then the Ephesians; Ephesians.
2. 12.) are also without a right to heaven. As for Gods Purpose; if that give a
right to Heaven, it must be proved either from Scripture or Reason. There is
not a word in Scripture to proveit. Reason is against it. Men may purpose many
benefits to others, without any Vid. Less. de Just and Jur. l. 2. c. 40. dub.
^. and Azor. Instit. moral. par. 3. l. 1^ c. 15.
intention of obliging themselves thereby, to give them: and if they be not
obliged to give, others have no right to receive. Add, if Purposes essentially
do give right, then the donation of right is a thing of its own nature
incapable of being purposed; for the right is given eo ipso, that it is
purposed to be given: and nihil agit in simile. The Purchase of Christ may with
much more reason be said to give a right to heaven. But the Purchase of Christ,
(though it was made for our good, yet not in our names (for Christ in
purchasing, was neither our Mandatory, Proxy nor Delegate) and therefore gives
right immediately to none, but by the intervention of that Covenant which was
sealed and established in his blood, even the Promise through faith in Jesus
Christ, as we shall show more particularly hereafter.

And as to the second answer, wherein Mr. Air denies my consequence,. 23.
viz. That if the Elect have right to heaven without faith, then they may
inherit heaven without faith; we shall make this good, and then enquire into
the reason of his denial. The consequence therefore is thus proved. To deny
heaven to him that has right to it, is to deny a man his right (a thing most
unworthy to be thought of God. Vid. Sebast. a Costa. Com. in loc. and Decret.
Greg. l. 4. Tit. 17. c. 7. Si vero a^ er c^nnot. (...) Alciat. ib. cum in
mu^^is c^sib.
Lam. 3. 35.) Ergo, if wicked men, any of them, have right to heaven, they must
have it, whether ever they believe or no. Here of necessity Mr. Air must
distinguish of right: but whatsoever distinction he apply, he must quit his
assertion. That the elect have no more right to heaven after they believe, then
before He will not say, the right which the wicked have to heaven is
conditional, and so may be lost for nonperformance of the condition: and if it
be absolute from eternity, it admits of no condition in time: L. Perfecta C. de
donat. quae sub modo.
a perfect donation admits of no after-conditions: at least, unless they be
added Vide Covar ruv. var. Resol. l. 1. c. 14.
in continenti, presently. If he say this right is given them sub termino, or
in diem, as if I give Titius ten pounds, when he comes to the age of twenty
one; so God gives ungodly men a right to heaven, but they cannot enjoy it till
they believe: yet even thus it must be acknowledged, that they have more right
when they believe, then they had before: as Titius has more right to what I
gave him, at the age of twenty one, then he had before: for he had before but a
remote right ( jus ad rem), and at that age he has an immediate right. But
neither will this, (which Mr. Air must stick to, or to nothing) salve the
sore: partly, because the day when a wicked man shall repent and believe, is in
it self contingent and uncertain, (in its self, I say, because it is known to
God: but Gods knowledge alters not the nature of things, he knows what events
shall come to pass contingently, and what necessarily). Now dies incerta
aequiparatur conditioni, what is given upon an uncertain day, is all one as if
it were given upon condition, according to the determination of the I.
Stipulatio ista.. inter certam ff de verb. oblig.
Civil Law: as if I promise ten pounds to Titius upon the day of his marriage:
it is all one as if I promised it upon condition he marry: and if God promise
ungodly men to give them heaven when they believe, it is all one as if he
promise it on condition they believe: which Mr. Air cannot away with. Partly
and principally (which also is my second Argument for proof of the consequence)
because the right which is given a man to the Kingdom by Justification,
according to Scriptures, is independent upon time, so that if he die the very
next moment that he is justified, he shall and must be saved: yea, such an
immediate and necessary dependence there is of the Kingdom upon Justification,
that nothing more is required to make a man morally and immediately capable of
inheriting the Kingdom, but that he be justified, Romans 8. 30. Whom he
justified, them he glorified. See also Romans 5. 9, 10, 17, 18, 21. Tit. 3. 7.
and other texts before mentioned: all importing such an immediate connection
between Justification and the inheritance, that though no other change be made
in a man's state, yet being justified he shall be saved. Ergo, if the elect have
right to heaven while they are ungodly, they must be saved, whether ever they
be converted to the faith of Christ, or no.

No, (says Mr. Air) it will not follow: because Christ has. 24.
purchased faith, and God has purposed to give it as well as glory.

Rep. Both which I grant in thesi: but if Mr. Air will take in the hypothesis
too, and tell us that God did purpose, and Christ did purchase faith for a
people that had right to heaven before, I shall desire him to prove it; for I
am not like to believe it. Yet I am out of doubt that God never purposed faith
to any such person, but to such as are aliens, strangers and foreigners, that
they through faith might partake in the rights, and liberties and immunities of
his Kingdom, Ephesians. 3. 5, 6, 9, 11. For, 2. Give me leave to ask, To what end
should God purpose to give faith, if men have right to the Kingdom without it?
It must be purposed either as a means to the obtaining of righteousness and
life, (and then I have what I would; for then no man has a right to heaven but
by faith: and if any man has right without it, the gift of faith as to them,
in order to that end, is utterly needless and superfluous;) or it is purposed
as part of the natural essential perfection of man's nature, unto which he is
restored by Christ: and this I deny: at least, I am very doubtful of it, and
desire it may be proved. Vide (...) in Sent l. 4 did. 14 ^. 19. ad. 3.
There are some things, which in themselves are perfections of man's nature, as
love to God and our neighbor, and all the virtues pertaining to the first or
second table: that faith which Adam had in his innocence, and the frame of
righteousness in which he was created. Other things are no virtues at all, but
upon supposition of sin, and do always imply imperfection: as shame for sin,
brokennesse of heart, repentance, and faith in a Mediator, as it signifies an
abnegation of our own righteousness, and a dependence upon another for
righteousness. These of the latte^ sort are no part of the essential
perfection of man, yea, they do essentially suppose imperfection; for faith in
a Mediator is at an Vide Aquin. 1. ^ ae q. 9^ art 3^ o and (...) ^.
end, when we shall be perfected in glory, 1 Pet. 1. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 7. there
being no farther use of it, nor object for it; for even Christ himself (as it
seem^) (...) (...).
cease to be a Mediator, after he has brought all his redeemed ones unto God,
1 Cor. 15. 24, 27, 28. though the virtue and effects of his Mediatourship abide
for ever. Faith it self therefore being no part of our inheritance, nor means
of obtaining it upon Mr. Eyres supposal, that it is no means of obtaining
right to it, it remains, that it is not necessary to any man's salvation: and
then what should hinder, but that men may be saved without it? 3. If this be
the true reason why the elect in their ungodliness cannot inherit heaven;
though then they have right to it, namely, because they have not that, as yet,
which God is purposed to give them before they go to heaven; then their
incapacity of heaven, even while they live in all manner of wickedness, is not
at all privative or positive, but purely negative: that is, they are therefore
incapable of heaven, not because the Law, or sin, or any thing they do,
deprives them of the possession of heaven; but because God has not done what
his purpose is to do, in all whom he intends to glorify. Will thou see
(Reader) what are the issues of this Gospel? 1. Hereby sin is made of a like
necessity to the enjoyment of Heaven, as faith? for he that purposed to bring
the elect to heaven, purposed also that they should be sinners, ipso
permittente, by his permission: And so (for example) Adam and Eve, while they
were innocent, had a right to heaven, but they could not enjoy it till they had
sinned: because he that purposed to give them heaven, purposed also to permit
them first to sin. 2. Yea, so far was sin from being their hindrance, that it
was their furtherance rather: for having sinned, the more was over and past of
those things which God had appointed should go before their salvation: and so
by their sin they became nearer heaven then they were before. 3. And on the
contrary, the purpose of giving faith, is rather a hinderance then a
furtherance of their happiness, for they have right to heaven even while they
live in all manner of ungodliness: only that which hinders their enjoyment is
that there is a purpose of giving faith, which must be accomplished before they
can inherit; were it not for that purpose they might go to heaven presently,
and as they are. 4. And that without all gainsaying of the Law: which though
it be a bug-beare, even to the elect themselves, to terrify and affright the
conscience, while they live in sin and ungodliness; yet has no authority (it
seems) to debar them from entrance into heaven, no more then if it never had
been violated. And so, if it might be supposed ( per p^ssibile vel
impossible,) that an unrighteous man might go to heaven, yet were this no
impeachment to the justice of Gods government, but would argue at most some
kind of mutability in God, in not doing according to his purpose. Whereas the
Lord himself professes, that if he should give life to an impenitent sinner,
it were against his equity. The ways of the Lord are equal, Ezekiel. 18.
throughout: Fifthly,

If ungracious men have a right to heaven, only they cannot. 25.
possess it till they have the evidence of faith; either this evidence is of
such necessity, that if they have it not, they shall lose that life to which
they are adjudged, or no. If not; then whether they believe or no, they shall
be saved: if so; then there is no absolute justification before faith, and
justification must be conditional.

To this Mr. Air answers. 1. By this Argument not only faith, but all other
works of sanctification, and perseverance in them must be the conditions of our
justification: and then we may be said to be justified and saved by them: but
this is no good Argument. No man is saved or glorified without works. Ergo, men
are saved by works. 2. This reason makes as much against absolute election
before faith, as against absolute justification. 3. The answer is, election and
justification are absolute, because they depend upon no antecedent condition:
not because they are without consequents that depend on them.

Rep. To the first we reply. That if the question be concerning our first
entrance into a state of justification; we have already (with the Apostle, Romans
10. 10.) excluded works from being at all necessary thereunto. But if the
question be of our last and universal justification at the day of judgment,
which the Apostle there calls salvation, Mr. Air knows we maintain, that
perseverance in the faith to the end, and in a Christian conversation, is a
necessary condition of salvation; according to Scriptures, Rev. 2. 17. and 22.
14. Col^s. 1. 23. 2 John. 8. Heb. 10. 26, 36. and the places quoted by M. Air,
Prove. 28. 18. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Matthew. 24. 13. And the consent of Ames. Bellar.
enervat. tom. 4. lib. 6. cap. 6. de n^ces. oper. ad salut. ad obj. ex Romans 8.
13. Mortific. tio igitur est conditio a^ vitam: quis negat? Gerhard. de bon^^
operib. c. 9.. 55. 4. Zanchius Gry(...) Sohnius, Piscator. ibid.. 45. Chamier.
(...). de bon Oper. Nece^^ cap. ^. sect. 7. 11, 15, 17, 20 (...) etc. appellat
(...) quibus non (...). ^. (...) Davenant de (...) Act cap. (...) 5. and 6. and
(...).
Protestants. But when he infers, then we may be said to be saved by works; I
deny the consequence: partly because of the ambiguity of the word works, which
in our use generally has another sense then with the Apostles, who oppose
them, not only to faith (as we have largely proved before) but sometimes also
to sanctification, Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done
but by the renewing of the holy Ghost: partly, because the works of
sa^ctification are not the condition properly of our obtaining, but of not
losing our right to the heavenly Kingdom. As if Titius upon (...) his entreaty
give him a farm, to be held by him jure feudi: the nonperformance of that
homage and fidelity which the feudatory is bound to, forfeits his right:
nevertheless his title is grounded in the Donors benevolence. In like manner
we are saved by grace through faith: though if we do not by the spirit mortify
the deeds of the flesh, we forfeit our life, Romans 8. 13.

To the second I reply, That there is no comparison between. 26.
election and justification, as is at large above demonstrated. Let us set Mr.
Eyres parallel before us, that the dissimilitude may the better appear. Thus
then he argues. Faith is of such necessity, that they that have it not shall
lose the life to which they are elected, or not: if not; then whether the elect
believe or no, they shall be saved: if it be, then there is no absolute
election before faith.

Here, 1. The comparison is between an Act that gives a right to life (such is
justification) and an Act which gives none, such is election: which indeed
does make the donation of right to be a thing future, but is not it self the
Act which gives it, as we have showed before. Now if a sinner have a right to
the inheritance, and yet it be necessary for him to believe that he may
inherit, then is his inheriting suspended upon believing; that is, faith is the
condition of his inheriting, and so the right he had to it before, must needs
be conditional: more then this, neither reason, nor the civil Law requires, to
denominate a gift to be conditional. In election the case is otherwise: which,
because it does not transmit or conveigh any right, but is only a preparation
or preordination in the mind of God, of those causes by which it shall be made
to exist in time, therefore may the purpose it self be absolute? yea though it
be of things which do not exist but upon condition. Thus Dr. In Co^vin. dofens.
Armin. Cont. Tilen page 355.
Twisse. Neque enim negamus decreta Dei quoad res volitas dici posse
conditionata: quatenus scil. neque vita aeterna nisi sub condition fidei
conferenda sit; nec damnatio, etc. and particularly of justification or pardon
of sin he adds: Remissionem peccatorum and salutem omnes consentiunt nemini
contingere nisi sub condition fidei. i. e. All agree, that pardon of sin and
salvation betides none, but upon condition of faith. God may absolutely will or
purpose to give a right to life upon condition of faith: but he cannot
absolutely give a right to life, and yet afterward require us to believe under
a penalty of forfeiting, or losing that life: for then the gift is not
absolute, but conditional. 2. The word necessary must be distinguished: for it
may be understood, either in reference to God; and so whatsoever he purposes
is necessary, because his purposes being immutable, and his power irresistible,
it must needs be, that whatsoever he purposes must come to pass: or in
reference to us; and so that is necessary which is enjoined us by precept, as a
means appointed and ordained of God for such or such an end. The necessity of
faith in the former sense will by no means infer that it is a condition; but
in the latter sense it will and if God give a right to life, and yet our
believing remain necessary, as a means appointed for the obtaining of life;
then the right we had before was but conditional. The necessity of faith
compared with election, is only a necessity of existence, upon supposition of a
powerful and immutable cause. Obj. But I my self grant (will it be said) that
faith is necessary as a means of obtaining life; yet are we elected unto life:
so that hitherto the case is still the same. Ans. Therefore we distinguish
farther. Gods giving life may be considered either simply as it is Gods act,
and the execution of his eternal purpose; or as withal it is our blessedness,
and reward. In the former respect, faith has no other order to life, then
purely of an antecedent: because he that purposed to give life, purposed also
to give faith before it: but it is neither means nor condition nor cause of
life no more then Tenderton steeple was the condition or cause or means of
Godwin sands: or an earthquake over night of the suns rising the next morning.
It is in reference to life, only as by the promise it is made our reward, that
faith has the nature and order of a means to it. Now, if faith according to
the constant language of Scripture, be necessary as a means to the obtaining of
life as a reward; then whatsoever justification adjudgeth us to life before
faith, must be conditional. But upon supposition of election, both unto faith
and unto life, if there were no other act of God which made faith necessary to
us, (...), it would be only necessary in regard of its presence or existence,
but not at all necessary as a means to be used by us, in order to our receiving
of righteousness and salvation; and so election will nevertheless be absolute.

And therefore the third answer which Mr. Air gives as most direct. 27.
to the Argument, namely that justification is absolute, though faith be
necessary, because faith is necessary only as a consequent, is without
strength. For, 1. If by consequent he mean that which is purely and only so,
sin and death will put in for as necessary an interest in justification as
faith it self. 2. If by consequence he mean an effect, then is it again
supposed that faith is an effect of justification. which should be proved and
not unworthily begged. I read in Scripture of believing unto righteousness: of
being justified unto believing, I read not a word. 3. Mr. Air himself when he
would distinguish justification from election, determined the former precisely
to a non-punition. If now it lay claim to faith too, as it is genuine proper
effect, his distinction evaporates into a nullity. 4. Nor does he ascribe any
thing more to faith in the matter of justification, then all our Divines with
one consent ascribe to works, namely a necessity of presence, for the necessity
of faith as a consequent is no more. Which they indeed ascribe to works from
certain and plentiful evidence of Scripture: he, to faith, without any
evidence at all.

And so much for the defense of the Arguments, which I advanced to prove, that
we are not justified till we believe.

CHAP. IX.
A Reply to Mr. Eyres thirteenth Chapter; Containing a vindication of my
answers given to those Scriptures, which seem to hold forth an immediate
actual reconciliation of sinners unto God, upon the death of Christ, without
the intervention of faith.

SECT. I.
AGainst what we have hitherto been proving, I know. 1.
nothing that with any appearance of truth can be objected from the Scriptures,
more then a Text or two, that seem to hold forth an immediate, actual
reconciliation of sinners unto God upon the death of Christ: which if it be so,
then their justification is not suspended upon believing: and some other way
must be found out of reconciling the Scriptures to themselves. But the
Arguments drawn from those places which seem to favor it most, are so
inconsequent, and contrary testimonies, so many and irrefragable, that I am
very little solicitous about the issue. Both these things we shall show in
order: and first we examine those places which Mr. Air produces for the
affirmative.

Matthew. 3. 17. marches in the front. This is my beloved son. 2.
in whom I am well pleased, that is (says Mr. Air) with sinners. The
inference should be, Ergo, God was well pleased with sinners (that is,
reconciled to them) immediately in the death of Christ.

To this, in my sermon I gave a double answer. 1. That the wellpleasednesse of
God need not be extended beyond the person of Christ, who gave himself unto the
death, an offering and a sacrifice unto God of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.
2.

Mr. Air in his reply to this, produces many testimonies, of Musculus,
Calvin, Beza, Paraeus, Ward, Ferus; and some reasons, to prove that which never
came into my mind to deny, namely, that God is in Christ well pleased with
sinners. To all which I shall need return no other answer, then an explication
of that which is given already. The words therefore may be understood either,
1. As a testimony of God concerning his acceptance of, and well-pleasednesse in
Christ, as a sacrifice most perfect and sufficient for obtaining of those ends,
and producing those effects for which it was offered, Ephesians. 5. 2. And thus is
God well pleased with Christ only, and above all other, men or Angels: or, 2.
As they do also note the effect as then existing, namely, Gods
well-pleasednesse with sinners for Christ's sake. Now was it such a prodigious
crime in me to say, the words may be taken only in the former sense, and so
confined to the person of Christ, that I must be printed as a man that thinks
my self worth a thousand such as Colvin, Beza, Paraeus, etc? Whose judgments I
had not then consulted, nor do now find any thing which I consent not to,
except one passage in Beza. When 1. Mr. Eyres exposition cannot consist,
without an addition to the Text. And whereas the Text is, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased: he must add, in whom I am well pleased with
sinners. 2. And that such an addition as neither the Greek of the LXX
interpreters, nor of the New Testament is acquainted with, namely that the
verb (...) should govern two dative cases, one of the cause, and the other of
the object. Add the word sinners, and the Greek runs thus, (...). Let Mr. Air
match this construction, if he can. 3. And if he give the right sense of the
words, then (...) in whom, is not the dative case of the object with whom God
is well pleased; but of the means or cause through which God is well pleased
with others, namely with sinners: Whereas the same particles construed with the
same verb, are elsewhere perpetually a note of the object. 1 Cor. 10. 5. 2
Cor. 12. 10. 2 These. 2. 12. Heb. 10. 38. suitable to the Hebrew (...) to which
they answer.

The Authors whom Mr. Air musters up to face me, have no quarrel with me at
all. They do amplify Gods well-pleasednesse with. 3.
Christ from the effect which follows upon it, namely, his well-pleasednesse
with sinners. But do any of them deny, that the words may be understood
precisely of Gods acceptance and approbation of what Christ has done in order
to the salvation of sinners? Let us see the reasons which Mr. Air has against
it. 1. Says he, the words are a solemn declaration of Christ's investiture in
the office of a mediator. Answ. What then? do they therefore prove, that the
effects of his mediatourship, and particularly this of Gods being well-pleased
with sinners, were then presently communicated and applied to sinners? may it
not suffice that they testify Gods singular approbation of Christ to be a
Mediator, and of all his mediatory performances, though they do not produce
their effects upon many sinners till many ages after? But (says he) the words
were spoken ^^r their sakes whom Christ represented! as Joh. 12. 30. Answ. But
the consequence is still abortive. Because the words were spoken for their
sakes, must they therefore needs signify that God was actually well-pleased
with them, even while they continue strangers and enemies against God? might
they not be spoken for their sakes, though they intend no more then to describe
that person in whom God is well pleased, and to direct sinners to him, that
through faith in him God may also be well pleased with them? as those words,
J^h. 12. 30. were spoken for the sake of sinners, that upon that testimony
which was there given unto Christ they might believe. 2. The second reason is a
plain negat^r, that the Text quoted by me, Ephesians. 5. 2. makes for my purpose.
When it is framed into some similitude of an Argument, it shall have an answer.
3. The third is, Because no reas^n can be given, why those words should be
terminated to the person of Christ; seeing God was never displeased with him.
Answ. 1. We have given three reasons already from the Text. There is no other
person mentioned in the Text, as the object of Gods well-pleasednesse: and if
there were no more, that is enough. 2. God was never displeased with Christ
q^oad affectum: but he was displeased with him Oeconomically and quoad
effectum: for Christ bare his Fathers displeasure. 3. But if God had never been
displeased with him, what consequence is this? God was never displeased with
Christ, nor had Christ any suspicion of it. Erg^, it was needless that God
should declare himself to be well pleased with him? There was ground enough of
such a declaration, if it were for no other end, but only to manifest how
infinitely acceptable the sacrifice of Christ was unto God, above all the
sacrifices under the Law: and that he was displeased with them in comparison of
this. In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou had no pleasure; then
said I, lo I come, etc. Heb. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. The fourth and last reason is
this. The wellpleasednesse of God is to be extended to them for whom Christ
offered up his sacrifice. Ergo, to sinners, Answ. The Antecedent, if it be
meant of the extent of the words which we are debating, begs the question.

SECT. II.
MY second answer was, that if Gods well-pleasednesse spoken of in the Text, be
extended also unto men, yet will the words. 4.
prove no more, then that it is through Christ, that God is well pleased with
men, whenever it be that he is well pleased.

This plain answer Mr. Air will have to be thus glossed, namely that my sense
of the words, (...) well (...), is as much as, I will be well pleased, when
they have performed the terms and conditions required on their part; and then
very se^^ously desires his Reader, to observe how bold I make with the holy
Ghost, in that when God says, He is well pleased, I say no, he is not now, but
he will be hereafter.

But 1. Mr. Air makes more bold with me then he ought: for neither did I say
nor mean, that the words I ^m well pl^ased, should be thus sensed, I will ^e
well pleased; but interp et the words as spoken inde^initly in respect of time,
that it i^ through Christ that God is well pleased whenever it be that he is
well pleased. As if I should say God is well pleased with obedience or with
praise, do not necessarily s^ppose that there are then any, putting forth the
act of obedience or praise, with which God is then actually well pleased (for
what if all the men in the world were a sleep at once? as it is like they were
some times in No^h^ Ark) but that these acts are pleasing to God whenever
they are put forth. 2. And if I had given this sense of the words, putting the
present tense for the future* yet, does not Mr. Air make a bold with the holy
Ghost as I, when toward the latter end of his very next paragraph, he
acknowledges such an Heterosis of Tenses to be very frequent in Scripture? Yea,
has he not already made bolder? not only here in adding the words, with
sinners, to the Text; but in rendering the Greek word (...) of the pretertense
in Joh. 3. 18. as signifying not only one that now believes not, but one that
shall never believe, page 110.. 3. Nor did I mention faith or any other
condition upon which God is well pleased with sinners: not that I disowne it;
but because it is impertinent to my present business, for we are not now
disputing, when, or upon what terms God is well pleased with sinners; but
whether he be well pleased with them immediately upon the death of Christ?

For justifying of my interpretation, I showed from Scripture, that. 5.
verbes of the present tense have sometimes the signification of the future:
sometimes are barely notes of affirmation, without reference to any determinate
time, of which we shall set down examples presently. But by the way, Mr. Air,
to humble me, tells me, that every schoole-boy knows, that Aorists have the
signification of the preterperfect tense, not of the future.

Ans. Which if it be true, the boys know more then their Masters, for it is a
rule in Vide Dom. Busb. Gram. Graec. page 35. Pfocen. de ling. grae. N. T. pur.
page 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Dr. Hammond Annot. in Mat. 23. 35. g. and Auth r.
Excerpt. ad sinem clement. Alexand ex pantaeno ubi etiam statuit verbum. (...)
in Psalm. 19 4. Poni (...).
Grammar, Indefinita sunt tempora incertae significationis: sumuntur enim pro
praeteritis: and interdum pro praes. and Futur. The same does Eustathius
observe on that of Iliad. a. ci^ca princip.
Homer (...), not (...), as some latter copies read it. Examples are frequent
in Scripture, Joh. 15. 6. (...). Matthew. 23. 35. (...) Matthew. 6. 5, 16. (...)
and many other places Examples of the present tense, put in the signification
of the future, I alleged these, Joh. 4 25. The Messiah comes, that is, will
shortly come. Mr. Air will have this sense of it. The promise of the Messiah
draws nigh to be fulfilled.

Rep. But we are not now enquiring into the theological truth, but grammatical
construction of the words. If Schoole-boyes should construe the words, as Mr.
Air does english them: I believe their Master would con them thanks. Another
place was, Joh. 5. 25. The hour is coming, and now is M. Air, answers. The
dead then did hear the voice of the Son of God. Answ. Whatsoever be the
meaning of the words, the same hour could not be (that is, now exist) and yet
be coming too. Another place was, Joh. 14. 3. If I go, I come again. This I
think, Mr. Air grants to be for my turn, for he excepts nothing against it,
and one place is as good as a hundred, and if it were worth while, I would also
vindicate the next place, which is, 2 Cor. 3. 16. In the mean time, the
judgment of our translatours is sufficient to oppose to Mr. Eyres: Who if they
had not thought verbes of the present tense, might have the signification of
the future, would not so have rendered them.

Examples of verbes of the present tense as notes of affirmation,. 7.
without reference to any determinate time, were these, Romans 8. 24. By hope we
are saved; that is, it is in the way of hope and patient expectation that men
are saved, whenever it be that they are saved. Mr. Air answers? They are
saved by hope, that is, they have now the joy and comfort of their salvation
through faith and hope. They are now saved by hope, or they shall never be
saved by hope: in the world to come they are saved by sight, not by faith or
hope.

Rep. 1. But the Apostle supposes the salvation he speaks of to be absent, not
present, because we hope for it. 2. We have observed before, that joy and
comfort are sometimes expressed by the name of life; never by the name of
salvation in the New Testament. 3. To be saved by sight ^ little better then
nonsense: what Divine can be found that ever penned such uncouth language?
sight is it self our positive salvation. And we are saved in the world to come,
by that hope which we exercise in this present life: forasmuch as salvation is
the end of our hope and faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9. I must confess, I am so well
acquainted with the abilities of the Author whom I oppose, that I know not
almost what interpretation to put upon these his strange kind of disputings.
Another Text is, 1 Cor. 15. 57. Thanks be unto God, who gives us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ. The meaning is, it is through God that we have
the victory over death, be it when it will be that we have it. Mr. Air will
have it read, th^nks be unto God who gives us, or has given us the victory;
for (says he) the Saints have already obtained victory over death and the
grave in Christ their head. Rep. But the Apostle speaks manifestly of the
victory which God gives them in their own Persons: the time of which he does
also describe in general a little before, v. 54. So when this corruptible shall
have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality; then
shall be brought to pass the saying that is written: death is swallowed up in
victory. This therefore is the victory which God gives. So Heb. 10. 35. Your
confidence has a great recompense of reward. That is (says Mr Air) in the
present effects which it did produce, as inward peace, joy, etc. Rep. And yet
in the very verse foregoing, v. 34. it is called that better and enduring
substance in heaven, and in the following verse, v. 36. The promise which is
obtained, after that with patience we have done the will of God, and v. 39. The
saving of the soul. The last place I mentioned was Jam. 1. 17. Every good gift
comes down from above: Not as if it must needs be coming down when the Apostle
spoke those words; but that whenever any one receives a good gift, it is from
God. Against this Mr. Air excepts nothing. If then in these and many other
places, and that by Mr. Eyres own confession (for he acknowledges an heterosis
of tenses, to be a trope very frequent in Scripture) verbes of the present
tense have sometimes the signification of verbes future, sometimes are only
notes of affirmation, without respect to any definite time: Why does Mr. Air
make such outcries against me, to so little purpose, for interpreting the
present words ( In whom I am well-pleased) according to the Analogy of other
places?

Why (says he) I should have shown that it must be so expounded here.. 8.
Rep. Nay, but by his leave, I have performed my undertaking, in showing that
they yield him no proof of what he sought in them. Besides, my judgment of
the words is, that they ought to be confined to the person of Christ: and that
I thought (and yet think) sufficiently proved, because they mention no other
persons, and they are a complete sentence without the addition. What I speak of
this second answer, is upon allowance to Mr. Air of the selvidge he would sow
upon them, to show that notwithstanding that addition, yet the words do not
come up to his purpose.

SECT. III.
Nevertheless, I did also farther show that his interpretation. 9.
could not be right; because the Text would then contradict plain testimony of
Scripture, particularly that in Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to
please God, or to be pleasing unto God.

Mr. Air answers. The Apostle speaks there of men's works and actions, not of
their persons.

Rep. 1. But the Greek See 2 Cor. 5. 9. Rom 12 1. and 14. 18.
(...), when it denotes Gods well-pleasednesse with a person, is never used,
but to signify Gods complacency in or approbation of a person because of his
qualities, or actions, or both. So does (...) also, when it notes, not the
decree or purpose of the will (as sometimes it does) but the affection, as when
it is said in chapter 10. 38. If any man draw back (namely by unbelief, Heb. 3.
12.) my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Where Gods displeasure is with the
person: but grounded in his displeasing quality. viz. Of unbelief, and on the
contrary: Enoch is here said by faith to please, or to be pleasing unto God, v.
5. (...). Seeing then the word imports such a delight in, or approbation of a
person, as supposes him endued with lovely and amiable qualities: and nothing
in man is lovely in Gods eyes without faith (for God delights not in his
physical substance, or natural perfections of any sort, Psalm. 147. 10.) it
follows, that when we are said by faith to please God, or to be pleasing to
him; or that it is impossible to please him without faith: it must be
understood of the pleasingnesse of the person, as well as of the action. Indeed
there is in God a love of benevolence toward the elect, even while they are
most displeasing to him: but a love of complacency or approbation he has not
toward them till they believe. They that are in the flesh cannot please God,
Romans 8. 8.

2. Nor can I imagine how God can be perfectly well-pleased with men, and yet
perpetually displeased with every thing they do: which yet he must be supposed
to be, if faith do only commend our actions, not our persons unto God. Amongst
men it is unconceivable, how a total displeasure with another man's actions, can
consist with wellpleasednesse with the person. That which commends the work
does also commend the worker: and if the work be unacceptable, the worker also
is so far unacceptable: if all his works be unacceptable, himself also is
wholly unacceptable. 3. I ask, whether faith it self be pleasing unto God?
principally out of doubt, Joh 6. 29. Then when we are said by faith to please
God, it is a great deal too slender to interpret it of pleasing him in
obedience only. 4. And though it be most true, that our obedience is not
acceptable to God without faith, yet cannot Mr. Air own it, if he will be
true to his doctrine, that sins are pardoned before the sinner has a being;
for that obedience wherein God sees no sin, is acceptable to him. The
obedience of the elect is such wherein God sees no sin (I speak of those works
which they may perform before they believe: as prayer, hearing of the word,
etc.) Ergo, it is acceptable to God. The assumption is manifest: for not to see
sin, and to pardon it, are all one: and God has from eternity pardoned the
sins of the elect: (as says Mr. Air.)

In the following part of this answer, he gives us a reason why our. 10.
works without faith cannot please God: for (says he) bonum est ex causa
integra. Now what is not done in faith, is not done in love, Gal. 5. 6. and
consequently is not fruit unto God.

Rep. Against which I have no great matter to except: only, 1 I wonder he
should not account the Apostles reason worth taking notice of: who, when he had
said, without faith it is impossible to please God, presently gives this
reason; for he that comes unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. 2. Whatsoever effect there be in the
obedience of the elect unregenerate, yet are their works never a whit the more
unacceptable for it, upon any other account then because that defect is sinful;
and the sinfulness being supposed to be pardoned, and that from eternity, it
cannot make the work unacceptable: pardoned sin, and no sin, are much of the
same strength, as to any harm it can do us. 3. If works cannot please God
while there is something wanting which should make them entirely good, how
comes it to pass that the person should be so hugely well-pleasing while there
is nothing in him but evil? men's persons are under Law as well as their
actions: Ars est in fabrica rei. See John Yates Mod. of Divin. page 8. Ex viro
vere magno, A^exand. Richardsono.
Divinity was at first impressed in the very frame and constitution of man's
nature. If an action materially good, be yet displeasing* because of its
deformity to rule in respect of manner: surely the person cannot be
well-pleasing, while he is every whit as much out of frame, and fallen all in
pieces (as I may so speak) and not so much as begun to be repaired again by a
spirit of renovation.

In the next place Mr. Air offers us two Arguments to prove,. 11.
that Gods well-pleasednesse with the elect, is the immediate effect of the
death of Christ. If he mean immediate in respect of time, and exclusively of
every qualification in us, without which God will not be well-pleased with us;
let us see his Arguments. The former is from reason the latter from testimony
of Scripture.

First (says he), That which raised a partition wall between God and the
elect, was the breach of the Law: Now when the Law was satisfied for their
sins, this partition was broken down; his favor had as free a current, as if
they had not sinned.

Answ. The Argument supposes that the satisfaction of Christ was no more, and
needed to be no more then a removens prohibens of our good: which Mr. Air
charge upon Mr. Baxter (though most unjustly) as a very heinous error, and
exagitates it with a^rimony* sufficient. Therefore I shall not need to confute
it: yet one thing I shall offer to the Readers consideration. If the reason of
Gods wellpleasednesse with sinners be this only, that Christ has removed that
which separated between God and them, then the elect are upon the same terms
with God as Adam was (and all mankind in him) before the fall: and Christ by
his death has not made a new Covenant, but established the old. But this is
most notoriously false. Ergo. The reason of the consequence is plain: for what
follows immediately upon the removal of a hindrance, had all its causes in
being before: as, if my house be lightsome immediately upon letting down of ^he
shuts of the windows, it supposes the sun to be up. Now the only means and
instrument of the communication of life, before the death of Christ, was the
Covenant of works made with Adam and all mankind in him. Ergo, if Gods
well-pleasednesse follow immediately upon the death of Christ, as that which
has removed the hindrance, it follows by virtue of that Covenant, or by none
at all. 2. But if the well-pleasednesse of God, do not follow necessarily and
immediately upon the death of Christ, Mr. Air himself will acknowledge his
Argument to be null. My answer therefore is. That the death of Christ did
indeed immediately undermine and weaken the wall of partition, so as that it
could not long stand: but it did not totally demolish and throw it down,
presently; because it was not so agreed upon between the Father and the Son,
in his undertaking for our redemption: which because I am purposely to prove by
and by, I shall desire the reader to have a little patience till he come to it.
3. In the mean time, I must confess to Mr. Air, I do not understand what he
means to tell us of a wall of partition raised between God and the elect. What?
are they justified, and all their sins pardoned, and that from eternity, and
yet is there a wall of partition between God and them? Is pardoned sin able
to separate between the soul and God? Woe to poor sinners, if this be true.

But let us see his Scriptures: (for one Text of Scripture is of more. 12.
consequence to me then a hundred such Arguments) they are these, Ephesians. 1. 6, 7.
and 2. 13, 14. Col^ss. 1. 20, 21. and 2. 13, 14. 2 Cor. 5. 19.

Rep. To Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. we have answered before; and have showed from the very
letter of the Text, that it does not only not exclude faith from being
necessary to Gods acceptance of us, but also does necessarily include it. Ephesians.
2. 13, 14. speaks not of a partition wall between God and sinners, but between
Jews and Gentiles. The words are these. But now in Christ Jesus, yea who
sometimes were afar of, are made nigh by the blood of Christ; for he is our
peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition between us. Indeed in ver. 16. there is mention made of
reconciliation unto God: but such as throws down the wall and bulwarks, which
Mr. Air would build upon it. And that he might reconcile both unto God, in one
body by the Cross, having slain the enmity thereby. Can any thing be more
plain, then that Jews and Gentiles are first made one body by faith, before
they are actually reconciled to God by the virtue of the Cross of Christ?
Therefore holy Bayne observes well upon the place, That we must get fellowship
with Christ, we must be incorporated with him and with believers, before we can
be reconciled with him. And surely this incorporation is by faith, ver. 13. 17,
20. chap. 3. 6, 12. and 4. 4. John 10. 16.

The same I say to Col. 1. 20, 21. And (having made peace (or making. 13.
peace (...)) through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things
to himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in
heaven. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by
wicked works, yet now has he reconciled, in the body of his flesh, through
death, etc. Does not the Apostle speak as plainly, as it is possible for man's
tongue to utter it, that by the body and death of Christ, these Colossians were
reconciled now? which particle now is expressly opposed to the time wherein
they were alienated, and enemies in their minds by wicked works. I shall here
transcribe something of a reverend and renowned ^p Davenant on the place.
Doctor of our own, because his words are so clear and full. Ex hoc loco
colligimus, etc. Out of this place we gather, that there is a double
reconciliation considered in Scripture: the one general, finished in the
sacrifice on the Cross, of which the Apostle spoke in the verse foregoing. It
pleased the Father by the blood of the Cross, to reconcile all things to
himself; and John chap. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the
sin of the world. This I call general, because it is considered according to
the value of the sacrifice, which is not only general, but infinite; and
according to the manner of proposing it in the preaching of the Gospel, which
is also indefinite and general. -- But besides this reconciliation in the
Cross, and generally Applicable unto all, the Scripture shows us also a
particular and applied reconciliation in the hearts and consciences of
particular men: namely, when that sacrifice of Christ, which has in it an
universal power of reconciling all men, is actually applied to the
reconciliation of this or that man. Of this speaks the Apostle when he says:
Now has he reconciled you. 2ly, we are taught when and how men are made
partakers of this particular reconciliation, namely, by the faith of the
Gospel. -- As Romans 3. 22. Thus far Davenant. If then Mr. Air will urge this
place aright, it overthrows the thing which he would prove by. What consequence
is this? The Scriptures ^ear witness, that they that believed, were reconciled
unto God by the death of his Son. Ergo, They were reconciled while they were
in unbelief.

The next place is Col. 2. 13, 14. And you being dead in your sins,. 14.
and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him,
having forgiven you all trespasses. If Mr. Air will argue from this verse, his
inference must be this. Erg^, all their trespasses were forgiven them
immediately upon the death of Christ. But the Adverbs of time, though they be
not here expressed, yet are they necessarily implied, as appears plainly from
the parallel place, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. where their death in sin is expressly
limited to the time past, namely the time of their unbelief, in opposition to
the time present, namely, the time of their Conversion; which words if we
borrow from thence and put them here, the Apostles sense is plainly this: you
were in times past dead in sins; but now, since you have believed, are
quickened, that is to say, have your sins pardoned, which to be his meaning is
undeniable, from ver. 12. the verse next foregoing, where he tells them, that
they were risen with Christ in Baptism, through the faith of the operation of
God: And then presently adds, as another excellency and privilege of the same
faith, (if at least the privilege be not the same in other words) that they
were quickened together with Christ, through the pardon of their sins, where,
as their being raised with Christ in Bapptisme, does by no means note
simultatem temporis, that they were baptized at the same time as Christ was
raised, but similitudinem qualitatis, that by faith and baptism they were
conformed spiritually unto the image of Christ in his Resurrection, (See Romans
6. 4, 5, 6.) so neither does their being quickened with Christ in the
forgiveness of their trespasses, signify that their sins were then forgiven
when he was quickened, (much less immediately upon his death, which Mr. Air
should and would prove:) but our conformity to him in our deliverance from
death moral, as he was raised from death natural.

But it may be it is the next verse which Mr. Air thinks more for his purpose,
ver. 14. Blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances which was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross.
The words (as I conceive with our Expositors) are to be understood of the
abrogation of the ceremonial Law, by which the Jews were separated from the
Gentiles, and the Gentiles from that access unto God which the Jews had. And
this indeed was a necessary and fair preparation to the reconciling of the
Gentiles through faith: but how it should follow from hence, that the Gentiles,
or any sinners else, were reconciled to God immediately upon the death of
Christ, is beyond my comprehension. And yet (if I may speak my own judgment) I
see no reason why the words may not be understood metonymically, and that be
said to be done in the death of Christ, whereof the death of Christ is the
cause that it is done, though it be not done presently, but sometimes after:
for the death of Christ did indeed give the ceremonies their deaths wound; but
they did not totally and perfectly expire, till sometime Vide Scot in Sent. l
4. d, 3. qu 4 n. 7. 8, 9, 12 etc. See also D Godwin in Romans 8. 34. sect. 5. p
171
after the Gospel had been preached: for surely, some years after the death of
Christ, if the Jews, (at least multitudes of them, who lived farthest from the
sound of the Gospel) were not bound to observe the Laws of Moses, yet they
might observe them without sin, which after the Gospel was fully preached, they
could not do. But if Mr. Air himself, or any man else, shall think fit,
hereafter to engage in this Argument; I shall desire him to form his Reasons
from these and the like texts, into some Logical shape, that we may be assured
of what it is they ground upon; otherwise men may accumulate texts of Scripture
in insinitum, and an Answerer be left uncertain what he opposes.

The last text mentioned by Mr. Air, is 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was. 15.
in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself: which words Mr. Air confesses
I thus glossed. That God was in Christ, acting toward the reconciliation of
the world to himself: but this gloss Mr. Air confuteth; How? Why, he tells
his Reader, It is not so. Is not this a gallant confutation? But I am out of
doubt* that it is so, and that the Apostles meaning is plainly, not that
sinners were reconciled immediately and presently by the death of Christ, but
that God appointed and accepted his death, as a most sufficient means and
cause by which they should be reconciled, when they believed, and not before;
the death of Christ effecting this immediately. That notwithstanding all their
sins, yet there lies not on them a remediles necessity of perishing, but that
if they shall believe on him that died for them, they shall be justified and
saved. Even as if we should say of a Physician, that has found out a
Catholicon that would cure all diseases; Here Is a man that has cured all
diseases: not that his remedy had actually cured them (for there may be many
thousands to whom it was never applied) but that it cures all who will suffer
it to be applied. Aquin. 3 ^ ^q. 49. art. 1. ad 3 m.
Christus in sua passione nos liberavit causaliter, id est, instituens causam
nostrae liberationis, ex qua possent quaecunque p^ocata quandoque remitti, vel
praeterita, vel praesentia, vel futura. Siout si medicus faciat medicinam, ex
qua p^ssent qu^^unque morbi sanari, etiam in futurum. Of which more by and by.
That the place is thus to be interpreted, is manifest from the context. For
after the Apostle had said, God was in Christ, or by Christ reconciling the
world unto himself; He adds, And has committed unto us the word of
reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ; a^ though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God. If
we were reconciled in the death of Christ quoad effectum, to what purpose are
Ambassadors sent abroad into the world, most earnestly and importunately to
beseech sinners that they would be reconciled unto God? It will be said the
meaning of that exhortation is, that sinners would ^ay aside the enmity of
their hearts against God, and return to him by faith in his Son Jesus
Christ. Answ. Most truly, if one word more be added, namely, that we exhort men
to believe on Christ, that they may partake in the reconciliation prepared and
purchased in his blood, for all that come unto him; for surely the
reconciliation which the Apostle exhorts to, is not only active, in our ^aying
aside our enmity against God, but also passive in Gods being reconciled to us.
1. That is the proper importance of the Greek word (...) (...) of the passive
voice, though we cannot so happily render it in English, as to express its
significancy. It denotes properly, not our act of reconciling our selves to God
(for the word being of the passive voice, notes that we also are passive in the
reconciliation spoken of) but our doing of that, upon which another (namely
God) is reconciled with us. As when the same word is used in the same sense, 1
Cor. 7. 11. But if she depart, let her remain ^^married, or be reconciled to
her h^sband, (...): which is not meant of her laying aside of enmity against
her husband, but of her ^sing means to obtain the favor and affection of her
h^sband, that he may be reconciled to her. So Matthew 5. 24. Be reconciled to thy
Brother, (...), which is not meant properly of a man's reconciling himself to
his brother, but of doing what he can, to gain his brothers good affection to
him. In the like sense does Peter use another word, Acts 2. 40. Save your
selves from this untoward generation. In the Greek the verb is passive (...),
Be you saved from this untoward generation, that is, convert unto God, that you
may be saved from the destruction which is coming on this generation. In like
manner, when the Apostle says here, Be ye reconciled unto God; he exhorts us
indeed unto faith, not as that by which we reconcile our selves to God, but as
that by which we partake in Gods reconciliation with us. If then we be
perfectly reconciled before, what needs this exhortation? 2. Or that other in
the next verse but one, namely, chap. 6, 1. We then as workers together with
him, beseech you also, that you receive not the grace of God in vain. This
grace of God is that which before he called the Ministry of reconciliation,
even the Gospel, inviting us through faith to a reconciliation with God. And
what is the receiving of this grace in vain, but a not believing of Christ and
his Gospel, through which unbelief the reconciliation begun in the blood of
Christ, and preached in his Gospel, becomes of none effect to us. If we were
perfectly reconciled immediately upon his death, our unbelief could not hinder
our reconciliation.

As to Mr. Perkins testimony, which Mr. Air in the words following. 16.
opposes against me, namely, that the actual blotting out of sin, does
inseparably depend upon satisfaction for sin; if Mr. Air will square it to his
own rule, he must show us, that to depend ins^parably, and to depend
immediately are all one, which will be hard to do. Does not our Glorification
depend inseparably upon our Predestination? yet not immediately. And when
afterward Mr. Pemble is quoted with great ostentation, to justify that God is
well pleased with the persons of the elect unregenerate, but not with their
unregeneracy: it may be of some authority with men that cannot read English.
Mr. Air sets down his words at large: and what says he? why, that God loves
the persons of the elect, but not their vices: as Parents love their childrens
persons, even while they chastise them for their vices. But is God therefore
well pleased with the elect, because he loves them, that is, has purposes of
doing them good; or because Parents love their children, and would do them all
the good they can, are they therefore well pleased with them, even while they
are correcting them for their vices? let themselves judge. We have showed
before, that well-pleasednesse imports an approbation of a person, and
supposes him endued with lovely and amiable qualities. And as for the
inference which I made upon Mr. Eyres distinction, between unregenerate men and
their unregeneracy; it was grounded upon presumption, that the said distinction
intended to show the difference between Gods well-pleasednesse with the Elect,
before and after their Conversion: otherwise I undertake not its defense.

In the next place, Mr. Air adds something to clear up the difference. 17*
between the actions of regenerate and unregenerate persons; As, 1. That the
best actions of unregenerate men are impure and sinful: which though they are
pardoned unto all the elect, yet are they not acceptable to God, but in
themselves most abominable and loathsome in his sight.

Answ. The best actions of unregenerate men are materially good, (as Prayer,
hearing of the Word, Almesdeeds, etc.) It is the want of a good principle, and
a good end which makes them unacceptable unto God, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. If the
sinfulness of them be pardoned, they must needs be acceptable, as we observed
before.

2. Says he, The best works of good men are acceptable and pleasing unto God:
1. Abstractly, and in themselves: thus faith, hope, love, are pleasing to God.
2. Concretely, as they are acted by us: and so they are acceptable to God, as
they are washed and cleansed in the blood of Christ.

Answ. 1. Abstracta dicunt essentias; faith, hope, and love in their abstract
nature, are not considered as our actions, but as virtues, and in themselves
good: therefore that part of the answer is impertinent; might we suppose that
these virtues might be found in persons not elect, their own goodness would
commend them to God, as much as when they are in persons elect. 2. For a work
to be washed and cleansed in the blood of Christ, is to have the sinfulness
thereof for his sake pardoned: which because it is done to the elect, as much
in their unregeneracy as after; the good works they do, when regenerate, can be
no more acceptable then before.

SECT. IV.
OF all the places in Scripture, which speak of our reconciliation unto God by
the death of Christ; I know none that seem to. 18.
make it an immediate effect of his death, but that in Romans 5. 10. and
therefore I opposed that to my self, and answered it in my Sermon. And that
the truth of my answer, and the impertinency of all that Mr. Air says against
it may the better appear, I shall transcribe the text at large, ver. 8. But God
commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us, ver. 9. much more then being n^w justified by his blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through him, ver. 10. for if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled we
shall be saved by his life, ver. 11. And not only so, but we also joy in God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. The
main objection is out of ver. 10. We were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son. The answer which I gave to it in short was this, That Christ's death was
the price of our reconciliation: and so it is through the death of Christ that
we are reconciled, be it when it will be that we are reconciled, which that it
is the Apostles meaning, we shall prove by and by; in the mean time let us see
what Mr. Air has against it. His exceptions are six.

1. Says he, It offers a manifest violence to the text, To say, That we were
reconciled, is as much as we shall be reconciled. Answ. And it is a manifest
violence to my words, to say, that I so interpret it. I say, we were reconciled
quoad meritum, immediately in the death of Christ, that is, his death purchased
reconciliation for us: and therefore through that death it is, that we are
reconciled actually and effective whenever it be.

The second exception is the old irrational notion, That if reconciliation
depend upon conditions to be performed by us, then we are the causes of our own
reconciliation. Where, not only the consequence is false, (as we have largely
showed above) but the antecedent also impertinent: I am not now disputing
whether reconciliation follow faith, but whether it exist immediately upon the
death of Christ?

The third. This reconciliation was made when we were enemies. Ergo, before our
believing.

Answ. Yet will it not follow, that it was made immediately in the death of
Christ, which is the thing Mr. Air should prove. If we be not reconciled
before we are born, it is sufficient to prove, that we were not reconciled in
the death of Christ immediately, whether faith be supposed to be necessary or
no. 2. The word reconciled is used twice in ver. 10. If they both relate to one
and the same reconciliation, (of which I doubt, as I shall show farther by and
by) yet I readily grant that it was made in the death of Christ. Were not my
words plain enough before? That we are said to be reconciled unto God in the
death of his Son, inasmuch as Christ's death was the price of our
reconciliation. The cause was then in being, though the effect do not follow
till some time after.

The fourth, If the meaning were no more but this, That it is through the death
of Christ that we are reconciled, be it when it will be that we are reconciled,
then this clause, when we were enemies, would be superfluous.

Answ. The emphasis of those words is plain. God reconciles his enemies to
himself, whenever it be that he reconciles them; and Christ purchased
reconciliation for enemies, not for friends. See C^l. 1. 21.

The fifth, God was in Christ, not imputing our sins to us, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Answ.
That does not prove, but that I rightly interpret the Apostle here. 2. In 2
Cor. 5. 19. reconciling and non-imputing are all one: the latter interprets the
former. God did act toward the reconciliation of sinners, and the
non-imputation of their sin in the death of Christ, but they were not therefore
presently reconciled, and their sin non-imputed, as we have showed from the
text before. God laid the foundation of a future reconciliation in the death of
Christ.

The sixth, That what I grant yields the question, viz. The immediate
reconciliation of sinners upon the death of Christ. For if Christ, by the
shedding of his blood, paid the total and full price for our deliverance from
the curse of the Law, then were we actually set free from the obligation of it;
for when the debt is paid, the debtour is free in Law.

Answ. I deny the consequent, and the proof of it. Christ purchased our
Glorification: must we therefore needs be glorified as soon as he was dead?
that is to say, many hundreds of years before we are borne. And if he purchased
one benefit to follow not till many years after the price was paid, might he
not also purchase another, and particularly our deliverance from the curse of
the Law, to follow after a like distance of time? 2, The reason or proof is
most impertinent. Christ cannot purchase our deliverance from the curse,
unless the said deliverance follow presently and immediately, because the debt
being paid, the debtour is presently discharged As if I should say, the payment
of the debt does presently discharge the debtour. Ergo, men cannot purchase
reversions. 3. The payment of the debtour does presently discharge him: but if
it be not the debtour himself which makes the payment, but some other, he is
not discharged ipso facto, as we shall show anon.

And now, Reader, I shall acquaint thee with the Reasons, why. 19.
I interpret those words, Romans 5. 10. We were reconciled to God by the death of
his Son, not of our actual and complete reconciliation, but of that which is
purchased: and so the meaning of the words, we were reconciled, will be this;
that our reconciliation was then purchased, yea, and also perfect ex part
causae, on Christ's part, so that nothing can now hinder our actual, personal
and perfect reconciliation with God, but our own refusing to be reconciled: God
having constituted a most sufficient cause of our reconciliation in the death
of Christ. 1. From ver. 8. and 9. While we were yet sinners Christ died for us,
much more then being justified now by his blood. etc. What in ver. 9. is called
Justification, that in ver. 10. is called reconciliation: and for Christ to die
for us while we were sinners, ver. 8. is all one with what is said, ver. 10.
When we were enemies we were reconciled by his death. But the time of their
Justification is expressly separated from the time of Christ's death for them,
by the particle now; While we were yet sinners Christ died for us; but we are
justified now: which particle now, though it have several senses in Scripture
(as we shall show by and by,) yet here, being put after the participle (...),
and separated from the Conjunction ^, by the interposition of two entire words
(...) and (...), and expressly opposed to the time past ( when we were yet
sinners) must therefore needs be an adverbe of time. And the time it notes, is
their present time of Conversion and believing, opposed unto that whole time
wherein they were yet sinners. And so the whole sentence runs thus, (most
pertinently to the Apostles scope) If while we were yet sinners (under the
power and condemnation of sin) Christ died for us: much more then being
justified now (that we are believers) by his blood, etc. Accordingly, if the
particle now be borrowed from ver 9. and repeated in ver. 10. the whole sense
of the verse will be this. If while we were enemies we were reconciled (sc.
causaliter and quantum ad meritum) unto God in the death of his Son; much
more being now, (viz. since we are believers) reconciled, (quoad effectum) we
shall be saved by his life; and so the first reconciled signifies that which is
ex part Christi, and the second that which is ex part nostri: the former,
reconciliation in the cause; the latter, in the effect. Just as this same
Apostle distinguishes the same word, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. God was in Christ
reconciling. -- Be ye reconciled. And surely faith must be supposed to the
reconciled in the second part of the verse, or it is of no use at all to
salvation: for the Apostles discourse supposes that there is a necessary and
immediate connection between reconciliation and salvation: so that he that is
reconciled is immediately capable of being saved. Much more being reconciled we
shall be saved. But no unbeliever is immediately capable of being saved, though
Christ have died for him: for he must believe first, (as Mr. Air himself will
grant:) If it be said, that faith it self is part of our salvation; the
Objector must suppose, that the Apostle speaks of himself and the Romans, as
of unbelievers, to this sense: much more being reconciled, we shall have faith
given us, which is unreasonable to suppose.

2. And that our being reconciled in the death of Christ, is to be understood.
20.
in reference to the sufficiency of what Christ has done, in order to our
reconciliation, appears farther from the comparison of contraries, by which the
Apostle illustrates this whole doctrine, from v. 12. to the end of the chapter.
Look then, as by virtue of Adams disobedience death passed upon all mankind,
as soon as they are the children of Adam: so by the obedience of Christ is
reconciliation obtained, by which all that are borne of Christ by faith are
reconciled unto God. Now if a man should say, All men are dead in Adam, as in
ver. 15. though he speak of the effect as wrought, yet he must be understood as
intending no more, then that the cause of all men's death was in being, as soon
as Adam sinned (for surely men cannot be dead before they are borne, or have a
being) so when it is said, men are reconciled in the death of Christ, the word
reconciled must be understood in like manner, as noting the virtue of the
cause, not the effect as already produced. I know Mr. Air thinks, that all men
were actually and quoad effectum, condemned in Adam. But I would he would make
this probable, yea, or conceivable; for I confess my dull head cannot
apprehend it: though I do easily conceive how we may be said to be condemned in
him causally (for the common sin of our nature) namely, that the causes of our
condemnation were then in being, which do certainly produce the effect of
condemnation upon us, as soon as we exist. But condemnation is a real transient
act. Ergo, it supposes its object really existing: but it is unconceivable how
men should really exist, five or six thousand years before they are borne.
Seeing then our reconciliation in the death of Christ, by the Apostles own
Explication, is of the same kind with our condemnation in Adam: it is manifest
it must be understood of reconciliation in the cause, not in the effect.

Nor let it trouble the Reader, that the Apostle speaks as if the effect. 21.
were wrought (we were reconciled) for nothing more common in Scripture, then
to speak of the effect as wrought, when provision is made of a sufficient
cause, by which it shall or may be wrought, Ezekiel. 24. 13. I have purged thee,
and thou wast not purged, that is, there was nothing wanting on Gods part that
might conduce to her purging, though the effect did not follow, Col. 1. 23. the
Gospel was preached to every creature under heaven: not that every person and
Nation had then heard the Gospel (for they have not yet heard it) but that by
Gods permission and commandment they might hear it. Christ has abolished
death, 2 Timothy 1. 10. namely, he is the author and cause of its abolition, or
he has abolished it quoad meritum, for death is not destroyed de facto and
quoad effectum, till the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 26, 54. so in verbs of active
signification, Heb. 4. 12. The Word of God is powerful, -- piercing to the
dividing asunder, etc. Psalm. 19. 7, 8. converting, making wise, rejoicing the
heart, enlightening the eyes, all which do not so much signify the act, as the
virtue and sufficiency of the cause. In like manner, when Christ is said to be
the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the
whole world, 1 John 2. 2. it is to be understood of the virtue and sufficiency
of his blood to take away sin, not of a propitiation then presently wrought and
effected: for there is none such before faith, if the Apostle may be believed,
Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood. Multitudes of like instances are obvious.

A third Argument is that mentioned in my Sermon out of v. 11.. 22.
By whom we have now also received the atonement, which in plainer terms is
this, That now, that is, since we are believers, we are actually reconciled
unto God.

Mr. Air answers, 1. That I might as well argue, that because the Apostle
says 1 Cor. 15. 20. Now is Christ risen. Ergo, he was not risen before he
wrote that Epistle. Or from Ephesians. 2. 2. The Spirit that now works in the
children of unbelief. Ergo, he did not work in them before.

Rep. Does Mr. Air then think, that the particle now in this place is to be
taken in the same sense, as in those? if he does, his next answer is a nullity:
if he does not, he might have spared this. The word (...) now has several
uses, sometimes it is a mere supplement or redundancy, Psalm. 39. 7. sometimes a
note of transition, as when it is said, Now it came to pass. sometimes of a
continued act, as Ephesians. 2. 2. Heb. 9. 24. sometimes of a supposition, Romans 8. 1.
1 Cor. 7. 14. sometimes of opposition, or of assumption, 1 Cor. 15. 20. Heb.
11. 16. but most commonly and naturally of time, and particularly of the time
of men's being converted, Romans 6. 19, 21, 22. and 1^. 30. Gal. 2. 20. and 4. 9.
and elsewhere often; so is it taken here, as being distinguished from the time
of the death of Christ, ver. 10. and superadding some other benefit then what
was effected immediately in his death, namely, the receiving of reconciliation;
neither of which are to be found in either of the places mentioned by Mr. Air,
nor will any of the other sense of the word comport with this place.

His second answer therefore is, We cannot receive or apply reconciliation to
our selves but by faith, yet it follows not, that God did not account it to us
before.

Rep. The accounting of reconciliation to us, is an expression I never heard
before. 2. Justification and reconciliation are here used to signify the same
thing. Ergo, to receive the atonement is all one with the receiving of
Justification, or pardon of sin, as Acts 26. 18. and 10. 43. which we have
showed before, cannot be meant of our knowing our sins to be pardoned.

SECT. V.
FOr farther Explication of the difference between our reconciliation. 23.
in the death of Christ, and after our believing, I observed (out of Grotius) a
distinction of three periods of the Will of God. 1. As it may be conceived
immediately after sin committed, before the consideration of the death of
Christ. And now is the Lord at enmity with the sinner: though not averse from
all ways and means, by which he may return to friendship with him again. 2.
As it may be conceived after the death of Christ, and now is the Lord, not only
appeasable, but does also promise, that he will be reconciled with sinners,
upon such ^^^mes as himself shall propose. 3. As. the same Will of God may be
considered after an intercession on Christ's part, and faith on the sinners
part: and now is God actually reconciled, and in friendship with the sinner.

Against any of these particulars Mr. Air excepts nothing, but exclaims
against the whole as extremely gross; and why? forsooth, because it makes God
changeable. But as gross as it is, not our Protestants only, but the
Scriptures also own every syllable of it, nor will the satisfaction of Christ
stand without it. God was in friendship with Adam, while he continued righteous
and without sin. I conceive it is next to an impossibility, that the righteous
Lord should be at enmity with a righteous man, who neither is a sinner, nor in
the room of a sinner. After Adam had sinned, was not God at enmity with him?
Yes surely, unless Christ be dead in vain: by his death we were reconciled
while we were enemies. After the death of Christ, God is reconciled unto
sinners. Lo here, God is a friend, an enemy, and reconciled again: and is this
such monstrous Divinity with Mr. Air? But for the Readers farther information,
I shall endeavor to show, how God may be first a friend, then an enemy, then
reconciled, without any variableness or shadow of changing in himself; and
then shall add a word or two more concerning our reconciliation in the death
of Christ, and so return to Mr. Air.

Reconciliation is the redintegration or renewing of friendship:. 24.
( Vide Arist. ad Nichom. 8. 2, 7.
) and friendship is either (...), between those who may be equally serviceable
one unto another, in any office of love and friendly communication of good, in
a way of arithmetical proportion: or (...), between those that are of unequal
condition, the one excelling the other in dignity, or age, or power: between
whom there cannot therefore be any reciprocal communication of good, but in a
way of geometrical proportion: he that is of low degree and meaner rank,
imparting love and honor, and observance to him that is of high degree,
according to that authority, dignity or eminency in any kind, wherein he is
exalted above him.

And this (for example) is the friendship between ( Aristot. ibid c. 8, 11.
) a Prince and. 25.
his subjects, consisting on his part, in his providing for their liberty and
welfare, by and according to Law: and on their part in their subjection and
obedience to him, according to the same Law: As on the contrary, the enmity
between them consists, on their part, in their breaking of the Laws,
established and maintained by his authority: and on his part, in the egresse
and exercise of his authority, in inflicting punishment upon them for their
offense, according to the same Laws; so that a supreme Governor as such, is
at peace with all those against whom his Laws have no quarrel; and an enemy
to all with whom his Laws are at enmity. Thus stood the case originally between
God and man; God being engaged by his Covenant to reward obedient man with
life, and to punish him if he should be disobedient in the least; the former of
which was his friendship; and the latter (when the Law was broken) his enmity,
Romans 5. v. 10. 13. 15, 16, 17. compared. As on the other side, man's love and
friendship to God, consisted in his obedience to the Law, Matthew. 22. 37, 39.
and his enmity in rebellion against it, Romans 8. 7.

From which grounds it will be easy to understand how God may. 26.
be a friend, an enemy, reconcilable, and reconciled with the same persons
successively; for while the Will of God, (I mean his revealed royal Will or
Law) is to do good, and nothing but good to man, God is so long his friend:
when upon man's disobedience the same rectoral Will of God was to inflict evil
upon him, he was an enemy. When the New Law of grace is enacted, detracting so
far from the rigor and poremptorinesse of the former, as to make it possible
for the sinner to obtain life upon other terms, God is said to be
reconcilable: when upon the entreaty of those Ambassadors, whom the King and
Lawgiver sends into the world, sinners are prevailed with to accept of and
perform the terms of peace, then is God said to be reconciled. Reconciliatio
(says judicious ( Antisynod. de morte Christi. c. 1. p. ^5 12^. and Dav^n.
dissert. de mort. Christi. p. 65. 68.
) Ames) non infert aliquam intrinsecam mutationem in Deo, sed talem mutationem
in dispensatione extrinseca, qua fit, ut influentia propensae ejus volunt atis
in peccatores ordinate possit deriv^ri, ad eorum salutem perficiendam: Sicut
post Augustinum, Lombardum, Thomam, Commentatores omnes and Calvinus instit.
lib. 2. cap. 16. etc. Yea, so far is all this from making any change in God,
that he must of necessity be changed, unless this be true. Should he be an
enemy to man perfectly righteous, or not an enemy to him while a sinner, or not
reconciled to him when penitent, and a believer, he must deny himself; so
little cause has Mr. Air to charge us with Vorstian Divinity.

Then for the second thing, I wish Mr. Air had told us more. 27.
plainly what he would have, when he contends for the reconciliation of the
elect, immediately in the death of Christ. Does he mean that they were then
perfectly reconciled? This I am so far from believing, that though I
thankfully acknowledge that Christ merited a perfect reconciliation (as he did
also a perfect sanctification) yet I cannot believe, that the elect are
perfectly reconciled during this life, no, nor till the Resurrection: For 1. If
the elect be already perfectly reconciled, then Christ is no longer a Mediator
between God and them. But Christ is most certainly a Mediator between God and
them: not an arbiter only, or internunti^s, but a Mediator. The Assumption all
Christians yield. The reason of the Proposition is, because it is the very
nature and work of a Mediator to ( Vide Hug. Grot. de satisfact p. 172. ex
Suida.
) make peace: and common sense informs us, that there is no need of a
Mediator where there is no disagreement; and the Scripture is express, Gal. 3
20. A Mediator is not of one, that is, of them that are at perfect friendship
and agreement one with another. And therefore when all enmity between God and
man shall be destroyed perfectly, Christ shall cease to be any longer a
Mediator. For he must reign till all enemies be put under his fe^t, and then
shall Christ deliver back his mediatory Kingdom into his fathers hands, 1 Cor.
15. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. To say, he a Mediator still, not to perfect, but to
manifest reconciliation, is to say nothing: For the want of the manifestation
of reconciliation is some part of enmity, or not. If it be, then God and
believers are not yet perfectly reconciled: if not; then shall not Christ need
to be a Mediator between God and them for that end. 2. If it be the work of
Christ in heaven to make reconciliation for sinners on earth, then those
sinners are not perfectly reconciled to God at present. But the first is true.
Ergo. The text is plain, Heb. 2. 17. It behoved him in all things to be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
in things pertaining unto God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people. The Apostles scope is to show the necessity of Christ's sufferings on
earth before he went to heaven, ver. 9, 10. namely, that from the experience of
his own sufferings and temptations here, he might be the more merciful and
faithful to make reconciliation for our sins. Compare Heb. 4. 15. Nor can this
be meant of making known or manifesting reconciliation. For 1. The Greek word
(...), notes such an act as is conversant. first about God: that he might be
faithful in things pertaining to God, says the text: even as the object of the
service of every High Priest ordained for men, is things pertaining to God,
primarily and in the first place, Heb. 5. 1. But to manifest reconciliation, is
an act primarily and totally conversant about us, not an act to Godward for us.
2. The manifestation of reconciliation being wrought by the Spirit of Christ,
is most properly an act of Christ, as King: but the reconciliation here spoken
of, is precisely and formally the act of Christ as Priest. 3. And as the Greek
word is not so much as pretended to signify a manifestation in any other
place, so in this especially it cannot have that sense, because the
construction will not bear it. (...), to reconcile sins, is as much as (...),
to make a reconciliation or propitiation with God for their sins.

But if Mr. Air mean no more, then that the death of Christ did immediately
effect an imperfect and initial reconciliation, he knows that I yield it in
part, viz. that God through the death of Christ, has so far forth laid aside
his enmity against sinners, as that he is ready to receive them into his favor
if they will believe and repent: whereof also he has given them such assurance
in his Gospel: that if now they be not reconciled, it is because they will not
be reconciled: if they die, it is because they will die. But if his meaning be,
that this reconciliation is begun to be applied immediately upon the death of
Christ; then 1. Let him no longer urge the bare word: but seeing reconciliation
has its degrees, let him demonstrate that it must-be understood, not of the
first degree (which I stand for,) but of the second, which begins in
application. 2. I desire also to know, by what act God does apply this
reconciliation to men that have no being till many ages after Christ's death? Is
it by some act of his mind? surely that will be very dangerous to affirm,
that any immanent act of God has its beginning after the death of Christ. Is
it a transient act? show us then its object: it is past imagination, how an
effect can be wrought and exist in or upon an object, which it self has no
existence. Lastly, i^ the benefits purchased in the death of Christ, be none of
them applied or actually given us, before Christ's sitting down at the right
hand of God: then neither was reconciliation applied to us, or given us
immediately in or upon the death of Christ. But the first is true. Ergo, so is
the second, Heb. 5. 9. Being made perfect, (that is, exalted into glory, see
chap. 2. 10.) he became the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey
him: without this we could have received ( See Dr. Reynol^s. in P^. 110. p.
427. 429. and Dr. Go^win on Romans 8 sect 5. p. 71, 177.
) none of the benefits purchased in the death of Christ: and therefore surely
reconciliation was not begun to be applied immediately in or upon his death,
Heb. 8. 4. If he were on earth, he should not be a priest. Romans 4. 25. who was
delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification, 1 Cor.
15. 17. If Christ be not raised -- you are yet in your sins. And a general rule
it is amongst Divines, that Christ in his intercession is the applying cause of
all the benefits purchased in his death. Seeing then it is certain, that our
reconciliation, though purchased in the death of Christ, yet is not applied and
actually given us till his entrance into heaven, if now it be asked when Christ
in heaven does give us this reconciliation? I answer in the words of the
Apostle, Act. 5. 31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sin (which is the reconciliation we
speak of) and 2 Cor. 5. 20. we are Ambassadors for Christ; as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be you reconciled unto God.
And now I return to Mr. Air.

SECT. VI.
I Had said in my Sermon, that it is through the death of Christ that. 29.
the promise of reconciliation is made, by and according to which we are
actually reconciled to God after we do believe.

This, after Mr. Air has represented and paraphrased as he pleased, and
charged it (of course) with the imputations of Arminianisme and Popery, at last
he advances four Arguments against it, as he says: but if the Reader will
peruse them, he will find there is not one: I say again, not one: but all of
them levelled against a position, which never came into my mind to own. viz.
That Christ purchased only a conditional promise. Si sat sit accusasse, quis
erit innocens? I say therefore that Christ did indeed purchase the conditional
Covenant: but I say withal, that if we look to the intention of Christ in
purchasing, he purchased the infallible application or donation of every
blessing of the Covenant unto some, namely the elect. If this be Arminianisme,
I am an Arminian: yea and so strong in the persuasion, that I cannot hope of my
self, that I shall be altered by any man's writings which I have seen, or am
like to see while I live. But what? cannot a general pardon be purchased for
all, because it is intended that some shall infallibly be pardoned and saved by
it? or is not such a pardon the first Act and degree of our reconciliation,
because other things are purchased as well as it? more then this I shall not
need to say to any of Mr. Eyres Arguments: nor do I intend to say more to the
three last: the first, because it pretends some Scriptures for an immediate
reconciliation in the death of Christ, I shall answer to particularly.

The Argument then is this. The Scripture no where says, that Christ died to
obtain a conditional grant, but to make an end of sin, Dan. 9. 24. By the
blood of his cross he has made peace, Colos. 1. 20. Broken down the partition
wall, Ephesians. 2. 14. Delivered us from the curse, Gal. 3. 13. And our Savior does
not say, Math. 26. 28. That he shed his blood to procure a conditional promise,
but for the remission of the sins of many, i. e. of all the elect.

Answ. Of the first part of the answer more anon. As to Dan.. 30.
9. 24. Mr. Air cannot be ignorant that learned men are of different ways in
expounding what it is to make an end of sin. Vide J^nium. and Willet. Hexapl.
in loc.
some interpreting it of that end of sin, not which Christ made, but which
sinners themselves make by repentance, Vid. Rolloc. comment. in loc.
some of restraining and confirming the godly, that they might not be guilty of
a defection from God. But understand it of the end made by the death of Christ,
what is the inference? Ergo, it is not through the death of Christ that the
promise is made by, and according to which we are reconciled to God when we
believe. Does Mr. Air think this consequence needs no proof? If this text
afford him any thing for his purpose, it will exclude the intercession of
Christ, and the Covenant of pardon made in his blood from being at all
necessary or useful to the making an end of sin. To Colos. 1. 20. It pleased
the Father, having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to
reconcile all things to himself, etc. The answer is ready. That the making of
peace in the death of Christ, is here mentioned as the means to that
reconciliation of all things to himself, which the Father intended thereby; for
both the making of peace and reconciliation are here mentioned as the acts of
God, as the first and principal cause: and the latter, the effect and end of
the former. God has made peace in Christ's death, that he might reconcile us to
himself. I appeal to any man that knows what a consequence is, whether it will
hence follow, that sinners were reconciled immediately in the death of Christ,
without the intervention of a Covenant, that is, without the ministry of
reconciliation. Yea rather the just contrary follows: for making of peace in
Christ's death, is here made the means and cause of a future reconciliation that
follows, when? even when by the Gospel sinners are converted unto God. As is
evident in the example of these Colossians, v. 21. And you that were sometimes
alienated, and enemies by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled. As also by
that place altogether parallel to this, Ephesians. 2. 15, 16, 17. Having abolished in
his flesh the enmity, even the Law of commandments -- so making peace. And that
he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, and came and
preached peace unto you, etc. Here we see. 1. What is meant by making of peace.
viz. A plucking up the bounds, and throwing down the wall that separated the
Gentiles from the Jews, and by consequence from God: or an obtaining of a
Covenant of peace that might reach even unto the Gentiles, (who before were
afar off, and strangers from the Covenants of promise, v. 12, 13.) that they
also might be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of the promise
in Christ by the Gospel, chap. 3. 6. 2. Here is the end of this peace made by
the cross. viz. That both Jews and Gentiles in one body might be reconciled to
God: that is, through the same faith in the same Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
there is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, but
all are one in him through the same says, Gal. 3. 28. and 5. 6. 3. The means
by which they came to be of the same body, namely, by the preaching of peace,
v. 17. Can any thing be spoken more fully against the immediate reconciliation
of sinners in the death of Christ? or for proof, that Christ obtained that
Covenant of peace, through the preaching of which the Gentiles were converted,
and so reconciled unto God? Gal. 3. 13. says that Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law: that is, paid the price of our redemption, or obtained
eternal redemption for us, as Heb. 9. 12. but does it say that we are delivered
without a Covenant made in the same blood and death of Christ? nay the Apostle
supposes the just contrary, namely that blessedness (whereof sure our
reconciliation with God is no small part) is given to us by Covenant, v. 11,
14, 15, 16. Even that which he calls the promise by faith in Jesus Christ, v.
22. The last text is that mentioned in my sermon, Matthew. 26. 28. Christ (says
Mr. Air) does not say that he shed his blood to procure a conditional promise,
but for the remission of the sins of many. Ans. But he says, his blood was the
blood of the New Testament, which was shed for the remission of sins. Of which
former words Mr. Air is content to take no notice. But out of doubt they teach
us this, (or they teach us nothing) that by the blood of Christ was the
Covenant of remission obtained and sealed: or that Covenant by which sin is
pardoned to them that believe, for the blood of Christ pardons not sin
immediately, but unto them only that drink it by faith, Joh. 6. 53, 54, 55,
56, 57. Hence the Apostate from the faith, is said to count the blood of the
Covenant by which he was sanctified, an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 29.

SECT. VII.
HAving thus showed from the Scriptures that sinners are not immediately. 31.
reconciled in the death of Christ, I proceeded farther to show the grounds of
it: and they are two: partly because the death of Christ was no^ ^ol^^^ejujdem,
but tantidem; not the payment of that which was in the obligation, but of the
equivalent, and therefore does not deliver us ipso facto: partly the agreement
betwixt the Father and the Son, of which more by and by.

Mr. Air answers to the former. Whether the death of Christ be solutio ejusdem
or ^antidem, as it is a satisfaction or payment of a debt, so the discharge
thereby procured must needs be immediate: for that a debt should be paid and
satisfied, and yet justly chargeable, implies a contradiction.

Rep. Yea? Then the Lawyers abuse both themselves and us: for there is scarcely
a determination more common in the Law, then L. mutuum.. 2. ff. de reb cred. l.
cum. ^. de sol. l. Debtor. ff. de sol. (ubi pro debitorem legendum creditorem)
l. si ^c.. 3. ff. de re ju^.
that a debtor is not discharged ipso facto, upon the payment of any other
thing, then of that same which is in the obligation. Titius is bound to pay
Sempronius a hundred pounds in current money of England: when the day of payment
is come, he brings the full value in corn, or he is bound to pay silver, and
he brings gold: is he hereby discharged? No. But if he bring the very same
thing which he was bound to, he is discharged ipso facto. Now if when he brings
gold instead of silver, or corn instead of money, some act of the creditour is
requisite to admit the payment of one instead of the other, that so the debtor
may be freed: then is it also in the creditors power (especially the debtor
also consenting) to propose upon what terms he will that the debtor shall be
freed: either presently or after some time, either upon condition or without,
which is all I seek for at present: the consequence of this we shall see by and
by.

In the mean time Mr. Air will have me prove that the death of Christ is not
solutio ejusdem. A service which I little expected to be put upon, by an
English Divine. Vide librum ^vi mei reverendissimi Robert^ ^ arkeri de
descensu. l. 3.. 57, 58. p g. 108 109 The Assemb larg. Catech. o^ justi. q. 2.
1. All our Divines acknowledge that Christ made a true proper satisfaction
unto God for our sins. L. ^^tisfact. ff de solut.
Ergo, his death was not solutio ejusdem: the payment of the very same which
was in the obligation, but of the equivalent only. 2. Mr. Air himself but
just before, did intimate some kind of acknowledgement, that the death of
Christ was a payment of it self refusable. Ergo, it was not solutio ejusdem, L.
quod in di em ff de sol. and l. quod quis 49. ff ^^ Action. and l. Accept 19.
c. de usur.
for no creature can refuse to admit of that. 3. It was not Christ's death but
ours, that was in the obligation: for the Law requires that he that sins dye,
and no man else. If he that sins not dye, that death cannot be the same
which was in the obligation Ut and in contractu ersenali de facto. Ulpian. in
l. inter ^ rtif. 31. ff. de sol.
. In corporal punishments, which metaphorically may be called the payments of
debts to the Law, the sameness of the person is essential to the sameness of
the payment: so that si alius s^lvat, aliud s^laitur: if another person pay,
it is another thing that is paid. 4. If Christ paid the idem, then no man's sins
are pardoned. The Law it self would admit of satisfaction from the sinner, if
he were able to make it: if sinners by suffering of punishment, could satisfy
for their sins, they should be discharged from farther punishment without
pardon: it would be no grace to free them. Grot. de satisfact. Christi. c. 6.
p. 119. and videsis Andr. Essen. de satisfact. l. 2 sect. 3 ^. 3. p. 519, 520,
521 etc.
Vbi idem solvitur, out a debitore, aut ab alio nomine debitoris, nulla
contingit remissio, nihil enim circa debitum agit Creditor aut Rector. 5. Our
obligation was ex delicto: Christ's ex contractu voluntario. It was not any
breach of the Law that subjected him to death, but his own voluntary act, Joh.
10. 17, 18. Wherefore, though the things which Christ suffered were much of the
same kind (though not altogether) with what sinners were by the Law obliged to
suffer; yet was not he obliged to suffer by the same Law that they were, but by
a Law peculiar to himself, as a voluntary surety for them; in which respect it
is, that we say his payment was not Vide Cameron. disp. dc satisf. p. 363
Respons. ad obj. 1. m.
ejusdem, but tantidem. And these are the common Arguments, which are wont to
be made use of in this matter: which Mr. Air might have spared me the pains
of transcribing if he had pleased, and instead thereof (seeing they are so well
known) have given them some answer.

In the next place he advances four Arguments to prove, that the. 33.
death of Chrst was solutio ejusdem. I confess, I wonder at his undertaking:
but let us see his Arguments.

1. Says he, Christ was held in the same obligation which we were under: he
was made under the same Law, Gal. 4. 3, 4. Ans. Why? Is a surety held in the
same obligation, because he is bound to pay the same sum? then is there no
difference between the surety and the principal debtour. The Apostle in Gal. 4.
3, 4. says that Christ was made of a woman, made under the Law. As the former
expression implies; that though he were of a woman quoad corpulentam
substantiam, yet he came not from her quoad rationem seminalem, according to
the common rule of nature, by which children are wont to be borne into the
world: so does the latter imply, that though his obedience for substance, were
the same which the Law required of us; yet was it not performed by virtue of
that common obligation which lies upon us, but by special economy and
appointment. S^e P. Ushers Immanu^^. page 10. f at the end of his Body of
Divinity, and Essen. ubi s^pra lib. 1. sect. 4. cap. 9. page 288. and Joh
Dried. de capt. and Redempt. tract. 3. page 242, 243, 244, etc.
He that was Lord of the Law, might have exempted himself from subjection to it
if he had pleased. See Philip. 2. 6, 7, 8. So that Christ's obedience, though in
some respect the same with ours, as having the same rule and object, yet was it
of another kind then ours in regard of the principle and manner of performance,
in that the Law which bound others, did yet bind him no farther then himself
pleased to be bound.

The same answer I give to the second text. Gal. 3. 13. Christ was made a curse
for us, and dyed for us, Heb. 2. 9, 14. Isa^ 53. 4, 5. for none of these things
prove that he was any of those, who by the Law were obliged to die: yea it is
certain he was not: for the Law obliges none to death but sinners: yea and
for the very matter of the curse and death which Christ suffered, (though that
do not immediately concern our question: for though he had suffered the idem
in regard of the matter of his punishment; yet formally, as his death was a
satisfaction or payment, that idem was no more then the tantundem which I plead
for) yet I say it is certain that there is some kind of evil in the curse
executed upon sinners, which was never executed upon Christ, as an exclusion
from all interest in Gods favor; the defacing of his image in his soul, rage
and despair of conscience, and the like. The answer therefore is, Christ was
indeed made a curse for us, not that the Law did curse him, or had power so to
do: but because by special compact between his father and himself he endured
that punishment (for the maine) which the Law threatened against sinners, Heb.
10. 5, 7. A body have thou prepared me -- Lo^ come to do thy will, even as it
was by a special Law, that beasts were slain and sacrificed unto God of old:
and not by that general Law, which curses every one that sins. Hence it
follows thirdly, that when our sins are said to be laid upon Christ, Isa. 53.
6. (Which is Mr. Eyres third Argument) it does by no means follow that the
death of Christ was that which the Law required, but that Christ was made to
bear that punishment, which in weight and value was the same which we should
else have borne, though it be not arithmetically the same. If any man can make
more of those words, let him. His fourth and last Argument is this. If God
would have dispensed with the idem in the first obligation, Christ need not
have died.

Which is a very strange consequence: for God did therefore dispense with the
idem, that there might be way made for the death of Christ. That which was in
the obligation was our punishment: if God did not dispense with this, it had
been impossible for Christ to have died for us, but the Law must be executed
upon every sinner in his own person. But behold the proof.

If the justice of God would be satisfied with less then the penalty of the
Law, he might as well have dispensed with the whole.

Ans. As if that which is not the same must needs be less. I confess I
account it no better then loss of time to answer these things under the notion
of Arguments.

Hitherto then the matter is safe. That the death of Christ was not. 34.
the payment of the same which was in the obligation. Ergo, it does not deliver
ipso facto: for explication of which I added: that if the debtour himself do
bring unto the creditour that which he ows him, it presently discharges him:
but the payment of a surety does not.

Why not (says Mr. Air) Amongst men there is no difference: so the debt be
paid, it matters not whether it be by the principal, or his surety: the
obligation is void in respect of both.

Ans. Which if they be both in the very same bond and obligation, has some
thing of truth in it: (though then also the surety has the same action against
the debtour, which the creditor had before) otherwise it is most notoriously
false, and the contrary determined frequently in the I. in summa l. Si poenae.
D. de condict. in deb. l Si quid possessor ff. de Pet. Haered. l. Papin. ff.
Ma^d.
civil Law. If the payment of the surety do presently discharge the debtour, it
is because he agrees with the creditour, that the payment which he makes shall
be accepted for the present and immediate discharge of the debtour, which is
the second thing I began to mention before, and shall now farther explain.
The death of Christ being not the very same which was in the obligation;
therefore that it may be effectual for our deliverance, there is a double act
required on Gods part, to whom this payment is made: the one is, to admit or
give way that satisfaction be made; the other factam ratam habere to accept it
when made, and consequently to discharge and free the debtour: for Christ's
satisfaction was admitted, that our obligation might he destroyed by the
intervening act of God, the supreme Governor of mankind, Romans 3. 25. Whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation -- that he may be the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus.

Moreover, Christ being not a sinner, but a surety, and his payment not the
payment of the principal debtour, but of a surety; therefore it is in his power
to agree, whether his payment shall be accepted and be effectual for the
discharge of the sinner presently, or for some time to come: absolutely, or
upon condition. Whence (by the way) appears what little strength there is in
Mr. Eyres second exception, viz. That Christ's payment is less efficacious,
then if we had paid our selves, if we be not thereby discharged presently,
because Christ's satisfaction produces its effects according to the agreement
between his Father and himself, and no otherwise: and the virtue of it is to be
measured by the greatness of the effect, which could not be wrought by any
mere created cause: whether it produce it sooner or later, upon condition or
without.

Wherefore if we prove that the Father and Son agreed, that none. 35.
should have actual discharge by the death of Christ till they do believe; we
carry the cause, by Mr, Eyres own judgment. Yet in yielding thus much he has
not a little prejudiced the authority of his own determinations. (so I call
them, because he lays them down so peremptorily and axiomatically as if they
needed no proof). How often does he tell us before and after this concession,
that our discharge in the death of Christ, must needs be present and immediate?
as page 68.. 7. Our discharge from the Law was ^ not to be sub termino or in
diem, but present and immediate. And in this chapter,. 13. The death of Christ,
as it is a satisfaction or payment, so the discharge thereby procured must
needs be present and immediate. As if it were a contradiction in the nature of
the thing, that we should not presently be discharged, if Christ has made
satisfaction. And yet here yields that by a contract or agreement between the
Father and the Son, the discharge obtained in Christ's satisfaction may be
suspended. It is therefore a thing possible that Christ may have satisfied, and
yet we (the elect I mean) not be presently discharged. And what then means the
must needs? were it a thing denied, it were easy to give innumerable instances
of satisfaction made, when yet the person for whom it is made, is not presently
freed: but because it is not denied, I hasten to the service which Mr. Air
challenges me to perform, with a promise, that if it be performed he will
yield the cause: and that is to show, that it was the will of the Father and of
the Son that none should have actual reconciliation by the death of Christ
till they do believe.

For proof of this, I quoted the words of the Lord Jesus, wherein. 36.
he gives us an account both of his own and his Fathers will in this matter,
Joh. 6. 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that whosoever sees the
Son and believes on him, may have everlasting life. To which Mr. Air
answers. This Text and others like it, do only show who have the fruition and
enjoyment of the benefits of Christ, to wit, they that believe.

Rep. An answer which lets me see something of what the wit of man can do in
darkening plain testimonies, whose sense is obvious at first view, even to
vulgar capacities. This is not the first time we have met with this answer in
Mr. Air: and it has been already convicted, and cast by more then a jury of
Arguments in ^hap 5. and 8.
two places: and therefore here I shall speak but* briefly to it. 1. I^ this
and the like Texts do only show ^^o are the persons that have the enjoyment of
Christ's benefits, namely believers: then either they show that believers as
such ( in se^s^ (...)) are the subjects of that life which is here promised:
and then I have what I would have; for if men as believers, are the subjects of
this life, then the proo^^s full, that they do not begin to partake in this
life before they are believers: much less before they are borne: and least of
all at the time of the death of Christ: nor was it the will of the Father or of
the Son, that they should so do. Or the meaning is, that the persons who
enjoy this life, are such whose property and privilege it is to be believers
some time or other, sooner or later, though they may not be believers when they
first begin to partake therein: and so they are described a c^ns^quenti, from
their faith as a consequent of their first partaking in this life. And if so, I
shall return Mr. Air his offer: namely, that if he will show me but one place
of Scripture, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation,
wherein persons that shall enjoy a benefit, are described from the consequent
of that benefit, with a distributive particle preposed (such as is the particle
whosoever in the present Text) and I will yield him the cause: at lest so far
forth as it is concerned in these Texts. But if Mr. Air cannot give one
instance of the like phrase of speech in all the Bible (as I know he cannot)
then let him take heed least he become guilty of that, which he does elsewhere
groundlesly charge upon me: I mean, of attempting to suborne the spirit to
serve his own turn. And what I speak of the description of a person in order
to his receiving of a benefit, is true also in respect of any evil threatened.
How many hundreds of times are such sentences in Scripture? As for example,
Matthew. 5. 22. Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause -- Whosoever
shall say unto his br^ther Racha -- Whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be
in dang^r of such and such punishments. Can these (or the like expressions any
where else) be only the descriptions of persons that shall be punished? and
that from the consequent of their punishment as already begun.

2. The Lord by comparing faith to seeing, seems to allude to Isreal's. 37.
looking up to the brazen serpent for healing, Numb. 21. As he also does almost
in the same words, altogether in the same sense, Joh. 3. 14, 15. As (...) lift
up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, etc. Now I would know, when it is
said, Numb. 21. 8. Every one, or whosoever looks upon it ( s^. the Serpent)
do the words only describe the persons that should be healed from their
property o^ looking up? or do they also pro^^^^ the Act upon which their
healing was suspended? If the latter, (...) those words, Whosoever se^^ and
believes the Son, (...) life, must be understood in the same sense. If the
former, th^n the Israelites might also have been healed before they looked up
to the serpent: for to denominate them lookers, it is sufficient that they
looked up at any time, whether before or after they ^^re healed. But I will not
do one work twice: enough has been spoken already against this notion, unless
it had some better authority then merely man's invention.

The next place I mentioned was, ^^l. 5. 2, 4. without faith Christ. 38.
shall profit us n^thing. (...), it was not the will of God nor of Christ, that
any man should be justified by the death of Christ, till he does believe.

But (s^ith Mr. Air) this place is p^lp^^ly ab^^e^. The Apostle does not (...)
witho^t faith Christ shall profit ^s nothing; but if we (...) any thing (...)
Christ as necessary to attain salvation, we are not bele^vers: our profession
of Christ shall profit us nothing.

Rep. Where does the Apostle say these words? If M. Air give us only the
sense of them; we shall show presently, that what I say is included as part of
the sense. But I will never believe while I live, that Mr. Air has rightly
expressed the Apostles sense. As if the Apostle spoke against joining of any
thing with Christ as necessary to attain salvation (unless by joining with
Christ, he mean in an equal degree of causality, or as sharing in that kind of
causality which Christ put forth for our salvation). For out of doubt, Faith
and Repentance are necessary to be joined with Christ, that we may be saved. 2.
But to discover how palpably Mr. Air has abused me in charging me with an
abuse of the Text, let us transcribe the words. v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. If you be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again to every
man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to the whole Law. Christ is become
of no effect to you: whosoever of you are justified by the Law, you are fallen
from grace. For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by
faith. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision; but faith which works by Love. 1. I do here observe the
Apostles Argument by which he proves, that if they be circumcised, Christ shall
profit them nothing. Thus it runs. He that is bound to keep the whole Law for
justification, to him is Christ of no effect for justification. He that is
circumcised is bound to keep the whole Law for justification. v. 3. Ergo,
Christ is of no effect to him: or as the Apostle varies the words, v. 4. Ergo,
he is fallen from grace, whosoever he be that expects to be justified by the
Law. In opposition to this he declares in his own, and other Christians example
the only way how Christ may become profitable, and of effect to us for
justification, and that is by faith, without legal performances, v. 5. For we
through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. And have I yet
abused the Text, because I say it has this sense, that without faith Christ
shall profit us nothing? yea. 2. The whole discourse of the Apostle proceeds
upon this ground, that legal observances make Christ of none effect to us,
because they overthrow faith. For he that will be justified by the Law, must
keep the whole Law; and that destroys faith: as he had also often and plainly
told them before, chap. 3. 12. 10, 11, 17, 18. compare Romans 4. 14. 3. Mr. Air
himself acknowledges in the very next words that the Apostle attributes that
to faith which he denies ^o other works, v. 6. In Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by
love. I assu^^ But the thing denied to other works, is, that they are able to
justifie^ yea rather that they make it impossible for us to be justified,
because they make Christ to become of none effect to us, v. ^, 4. Ergo, the
thing ascribed to faith is, that by it we are justified, and through it does
Christ become profitable, and grace of effect to our Justification. Ergo,
without it Christ profits us nothing, as to that end and purpose. Therefore Mr.
Air contradicts himself immediately, in his Comment upon that, v. 6. When he
says, that the intent of the Apostle here, was not to show what it is that
does justify, but what are the exercises of divine worship in which Christians
should be conversant.

But out of doubt his meaning was to show, how Christ and grace become
effectual to our Justification, if he do here ascribe to faith that which
before he had denied to other works: which is Mr. Eyres own grant, and the
Apostles unquestionable intent: for the words (as appears by the particle for,
in the beginning of the verse) are the reason why through faith he expected
Justification, and not in the way of circumcision, ver. 5. to wit, because
circumcision avails nothing, no, nor uncircumcision neither, but faith which
works by love, which reason of his faith he had also given before, chapt. 2.
16.

As to those two truly godly learned Authors, Calvin and Perkins, whom Mr.
Air alleges as abetting what he says, concerning the Apostles intent, if
the cause were to be carried by number of voices, we could quickly dispatch it.
But neither do either of these gratify Mr. Air a whit. Calvin's words are
these, Quantum ad praesentem locum attinet, Paulus nequaquam disputat an
charitas ad justificandum cooperetur fidei, sed tantum indicat quae nunc sint
vera fidelium exercitia. i. e. As to the present place, Paul does by no means
dispute, whether love do cooperate with faith unto Justification, but only
intimates what are now the true exercises of the faithful. Is this all one, as
if he had said, faith availes us nothing in order to our Justification before
God? the contrary to which he had spoke but just before, upon v. 5. Obj.
Nullane igitur utilitas erit circumcisionis? Respondet, in Christo nihil
valere: ideoque justitiam in fide sitam esse, etc. Perkins his words are these,
in answer to the objection of the Papists from those words, Faith works by
love. Paul (says he) does not show in this verse what justifies, but what are
the exercises of godliness in which Christians must be occupied. And he does
not show how faith justifies, but how it may be discerned to be true faith,
namely, by love. But neither does this intend any thing more, then to show the
reason why Paul describes justifying faith as working by love, viz. not that it
justifies as working by love, though it be the property of that faith by which
we are justified, to work by love. But he was far from thinking, that faith was
no whit available to our Justification before God. It is his own observation
upon this very verse, not far before. The second Conclusion, Faith is of great
use and acceptance in the Kingdom of Christ. By it, first our persons, and
then our actions please God: and without it nothing pleases God. And
immediately after these words which Mr. Air refers to, disputes for
Justification by faith without works, against the Papists.

The last place I mentioned was 1 John 5. 11. He that has. 40.
the Son, has life: he that has not the Son, has not life.

Mr. Air answers, He does not say, that all who have not faith, (except final
unbelievers,) have not the Son or any bene^t by him.

Rep. This upon the matter is to deny that the testimony is true. 1. Life does
here signify all that blessedness which God has given us in Jesus Christ,
ver. 11. Ergo, he that has not the Son, has no benefit by him. But he that
believes not, has not the Son; for to have the Son is to believe on him.
Ergo, he that believes not, has not the Son, nor any benefit by him. That
we have the Son by believing on him is manifest: 1. From the Apostles own
interpretation; for having spoke in general, He that has the Son has life, he
applies it particularly to those to whom he writes, v. 13. And these things
have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that you
may know that you have eternal life. 2. From the perpetual sense of the phrase,
throughout all these Epistles, as chap. 2. 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the
same has not the Father: but he that acknowledges the Son, has the Father
also; suitable to what this John records in his Gospel. chap. 12. 44, 45. He
that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me: And he that
sees me, sees him that sent me. And more expressly in his Epistle, 2 ep* v.
9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, HAS NOT
GOD: But he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, HE HAS both the Father and
the Son. Compare 1 ep. 2. 24.

2. If we are said in Scripture, any where to have the Son, in any other sense
then by believing, or as excluding believing, why have we no intelligence of
it? Mr. Air might very well think we should interpret his silence (partly, in
that he declares not how we may be said to have Christ any otherwise then by
faith; partly, in not attempting to justify it from the phrase of Scripture)
as an argument that himself is conscious, that the doctrine which he here
suggests has no footing in the Scriptures. Briefly, the Apostle speaks without
distinction or limitation, He that has the Son, has life: even that eternal
life whereof he spoke in the verse immediately foregoing. If the Son may be had
without believing, then eternal life may be had without believing also;
wherefore we wind up the Argument. If it were the Will of God that none should
have the life which is in his Son, till by believing he had the Son; then
was it his Will that none should be justified by the death of Christ till they
did believe. The reason is: because the life of pardon or Justification is an
eminent part of that life which God has given us in his Son, and virtually
includes all that life we have by Christ. But the antecedent is proved true
from the text. Ergo, the consequent is true.

To these texts mentioned in my Sermon, and now vindicated, let. 41.
me add one or two more. If God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood; then was it not the Will of God, that any man
should have actual remission or Justification by the blood of Christ, till he
did believe. But God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith
in his blood. Ergo. The Assumption is the Apostles own words, Romans 3. 25. The
reason of the Proposition is plain, because if any man be pardoned and
justified immediately in the death of Christ, then is not Christ a propitiation
Inseri^ fidem, ut doceat, fidem esse conditionem, sub qua Christus nobis datus
est propitiatorium. Dav. Paraeus in loc.
through faith, but without it. Not that our faith contributes any degree of
worth or sufficiency to the blood of Christ, by which it may be made in its
kind a more perfect cause of our remission: but because God has so
constituted, that our remission shall not follow, and so our sins not be
propitiated quoad ^ffectum in the blood of Christ till we believe.

Again, the Compact and Agreement between the Father and the Son, in his
undertaking the work of Redemption, is set down at large, Isa. 53. throughout;
particularly, ver. 10. 11, 12. where also the Justification of those for whom
he died is mentioned, as the fruit and effect of Christ's offering himself for
them, and bearing their iniquities, but not before their faith, but through it,
ver. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, that is, by
the knowledge of him, where knowledge (as elsewhere in Scripture often)
signifies faith. And what shall I say more? we have proved from multitudes of
Scriptures, that God requires, commands and exhorts all men to believe, that
they may be justified by the blood of Christ. And what stronger evidence can we
need then this, that it was not the Will of God that men should be justified by
that blood before they did believe? even as under the Law there was no
propitiation by sacrifice typical, but supposed on the offenders part, the
concurrence of some act (as Lev. 5. 5.
c^nfession, Chap. 23. ^9 30.
humiliation, ^b. 1. 4, 3, 2 and ^assim.
laying his hand on the head of the sacrifice, L^v. ^. 16. and ^ide Joma.
Pe^r^k. 8 8, ^.
or the like,) signifying that faith, by which sinners should be justified,
when Christ the true sacrifice should be offered up. And as to Mr. Eyres two
evasions, that to be justified by faith does sometimes signify, By faith to
know that we are justified; (He might as well say, the world was made by faith:
For by faith we know that the world was made, Heb. 11. 3.) And that otherwhile
faith signifies Christ believed on: we have often (and I trust satisfactorily)
discovered, that they are inventions from beneath, not doctrines from above.

Let us now see what Mr. Air brings to prove, that it was the. 42.
Will of God and Christ, that his death should be available to the immediate
and actual reconciliation of sinners, without any condition performed on their
part. Four principles he lays down, which neither singly nor jointly can bring
forth the Conclusion they are in travel with.

1. Christ by the Will of God, gave himse^f a ransom and sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor unto God.

Answ. But the Question is, Whether it were the Will of God, that remission
should follow immediately upon the offering up of this sacrifice, before the
sinner believes and repents?

2. That this ransom was alone, and by it self, a full, adequate, and perfect
satisfaction to divine Justice for all their sins.

Answ. But the Question is, whether satisfaction may not be made by a voluntary
surety, with this agreement, that they for whom it is made, shall not be freed
by it, till they perform such or such a condition? If it may, (as Mr. Air
granted but now) then he should have told us, not only that Christ made
satisfaction, but that he made it with this intent, that the elect should be
presently discharged by it. Otherwise he begs the Question a second time.

3. God accepted it, and declared himself well-pleased therewith: insomuch that
he has thereupon covenanted and sworn, that he will never remember their
sins, nor be wroth with them any more, Isa. 43. 25. and 54. 9, 10.

Answ. The Question is still begged. No doubt but God was well-pleased with the
death of Christ, as with a sacrifice or satisfaction in it self so perfect,
that his justice could not require more. But whether he accepted it and was
well-pleased with it, so as that it should presently, without the intervention
of faith, produce the pardon of any, is the question: which is here resolved by
a go-by. It is certain, that some effects of Christ's satisfaction are not
communicated to the elect, before they believe, much less immediately in the
death of Christ: and seeing we are to grow up in him in all things, till we
have attained to the fullness of the life of Christ; I confess it is beyond my
comprehension, how we come to be perfect in one part of his life, that is, in
one fruit and effect of his death, while we remain imperfect in all the rest.
As to the Covenant which Mr. Air speaks of, that God will never remember the
sins of the elect, nor be wroth with them any more, Isa. 43. 25. and 54. 9, 10.
The former place proves no more, then that God takes it as one of his royal
prerogatives, to be a God that pardons sin (as he also does elsewhere, Exodus
34. 6, 7. Mich. 7. 18.) the latter, that the pardon which he gives is eternal:
neither, that the elect are pardoned immediately in the death of Christ, or
while they continue in unbelief. But the contrary is plainly supposed, Isa. 54.
1* 2, 3.

4. That by this ransom of Christ they are freed and delivered from the curse
of the Law, Gal. 4. 4. and 3. 13.

Answ. Quoad meritum, not quoad eff^ctum till they believe, as we have showed
before: Christ's death has redeemed us from the power of sin, as well as from
the curse of the Law, 1 Pet. 1. 18. were the elect therefore sanctified
immediately in the death of Christ? He has redeemed our bodies as well as our
souls: yet are not our bodies redeemed quoad eff^ctum till the Resurrection,
R^^. 8. 23. till then they lie in their graves, by virtue of that common
obligation unto death, which the first Adam brought upon all men, 1 Cor. 15.
22, 49, 56.

And thus thou see (Reader) with what success Mr. Eyr^ has attempted to
prove, That it was the Will of God in giving his (...) death, and the Will of
Christ in giving himself, that his (...) should be available, to the immediate
and actual reconciliation of sinners, without any condition performed on their
part. ^is next undertaking is to prove. That there was no such compact and
agreement between the Father and the Son, that his death should not be
available to the immediate reconciliation of sinners, but only upon conditions
performed by them. In the issue of which, whether he has been any whit more
happy then in the former, we come now

CHAP. X.
An Answer to Mr. Eyres fourteenth Chapter, and all the Arguments therein
contained, by which he endeavors to prove, that there was not any Covenant
passed between God and Christ, to hinder the immediate and actual
reconciliation of Gods elect by his death, and to suspend this effect thereof
upon terms and conditions to be performed by them: but contrariwise, that it
was the Will both of God and Christ, that his death should be available to
their immediat^ and actual reconciliation and Justification, without any
Condition performed on their part.

SECT. I.
HIs first Argument is this: There is no such Covenant does appear in
Scripture. Erg^; there is none.. 1.


Answ. That the Antecedent ^s false, has been already proved from John 6. 40.
and 3. 15, 16, 19. and Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 1 John 5. 11. and Romans 3. 25.
and Isa. 53. 11. and all those places which declare Justification to be
consequent to faith: or wherein men are persuaded and commanded to turn unto
God, that their sins may be forgiven them. Many such places have been already
produced and vindicated against Mr. Eyres exceptions: and it were no hard
matter to produce many more, as J^r. 26. 2, 3. Stand in the Court of the Lords
house, and speak unto all the Cities of Judah, all the words that I command
thee, diminish not a word. If so be they will hearken. and turn ev^ry man from
his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil which I p^rpose to do unto them.
And Jer. 36. 3. It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which
I purpose to do unto them: that they may return every man from his evil way,
that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin: Plainly discovering our
conversion unto God, to be the condition of our partaking in his pardoning
mercy. Which does also notably appear by the contrary steps which sinners
tread, in working out their own damnation, Mark 4. 12. That seeing they may
see and not perceive, and hearing they may hear and not understand, lest at
any time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them. But
of this we have spoken enough before.

His second Argument is this, The Covenant between God. 2.
and Christ was, that upon giving up himself to death, he should purchase a
seed like the stars of Heaven, Isaiah 53. 10.

Answ. What Is the inference? Ergo, it was the Will of God that Christ's death
should be av^^able to their immediate reconciliation. Can any man divine how
this inference follows? especially when it is against the express letter of
the text, which I wonder. Mr. Air would take no notice of, v. 11. By his
knowledge shall my righ^^^us s^^v^nt justify many. And for the other text
which follows, H^^. 2. 13. (...) I and the children whom God has given me; The
Apostle mentions it to prove, that both he that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified are all of one, v. 11. But what it is Mr. Air would conclude from
hence, at least, how these words should afford him that which he would conclude
from them, is that which I have no hope to understand till he has informed me.
He must needs be unanswerable that so writes, as his Reader shall never be sure
of his meaning.

The third Argument is this: If it were the Will of God that the death of
Christ should be the payment of our debt, and a full. 3.
satisfaction for all our iniquities; then was it his Will that our discharge
procured thereby, should be immediate. But it was the Will of God that the
death of Christ should be the payment of our debts, and a full satisfaction for
our iniquities. Ergo. The Assumption Mr. Air supposes will not be questioned.
The Proposition he thus proves: because it is contrary to justice and (...)
that a debt when it is paid, should be charged either upon the (...)ty or the
Principal.

Answ. I see now I was mistaken in the former chapter. I thought there Mr. Eyr^
had yielded it a thing possible for such an agreement to have passed between
the Father and the Son, as that the Sons satisfaction should not presently
and immediately effect the discharge of those for whom he satisfied. But this
argument supposes, that the death of Christ was neither payment nor
satisfaction, if such a Covenant passed between them. If it be possible that
there might be such an Agreement pass between the Father and the Son, (as it
is most certain it did) then must this Argument needs be inconsequent, which
infers the actual and immediate freedom of the elect in the death of Christ,
because his death was a satisfaction. We shall therefore prove by and by, that
satisfaction does not necessarily infer the discharge of the debtour. In the
mean time, I except, 1. Against the confused use of those two terms, payment
and satisfaction, which in this Argument ought to be distinguished; the former
noting such a payment as is of the thing it self in the obligation, the latter
a payment refusable. 2. That the will of God is here made the cause of Christ's
death, being a satisfaction: in which (though I believe Mr. Air means no ill)
there may be a very great mistake: for it seems to imply that it was not so
much the value and worth of Christ's offering which made it a satisfaction, as
the will of God who would accept it as satisfactory. 3. But to the Argument it
self; That Christ paid our debt, is an ambiguous expression: either it
signifies, 1. That he was punished for our sins* and so paid that sum which
otherwise should have been required of us, (and in this sense it is most true)
or, 2. That he translated our very obligation upon himself, and so paid as in
our names, and as representing us in making payment: and thus I deny it, as
dangerously false. The reason is ready: because what is done, as in our name
and person, is not so much his Act that does it as ours, whom he represents in
doing it: whether he represent us by our will and consent (as Proctors and
Atturnies that pay and receive moneys, or transact business in our name, and
Ambassadors whom Princes send into foreign Nations) or by the authority of
Law (as what Tutors do in the name of their Pupills and Minors:) in all which,
whatsoever is done as in the person of another, is not so properly his Act that
does it, as theirs whose person he represents. And if Christ thus paid our
debt, then his payment was more properly our Act then his own; we our selves
have satisfied, merited and redeemed our selves: which a Christians ears can
never endure. Now to apply the distinction. When Mr. Air says, that Christ's
death was the payment of our debts, if he mean it in the former sense, of what
is ^quivalenter the payment of our debt, I deny his proposition: If he mean it
in the latter sense, of what is our debt subjective, I deny his assumption, and
say, that it was never the will of God that Christ's death should in this sense
be the payment of our debt. And the phrases of Scripture, which declare that
Christ dyed for us, and for our sins, do indeed well prove the former, that
Christ was substituted in our room to make satisfaction to the Law for our
sins; but they do by no means prove that he paid our debt in the latter sense,
viz. as standing in the same obligation with us, and representing our persons
in the payment which he made: no more, then those words, (...)
Matthew. 2. 22. Archelaus reigned in the room of his father Herod, will prove,
that Archelaus represented the person of his deceased father, as then King in
Judea. Though I will not deny that our Divines are sometimes wont so to
understand the phrase of Christ's satisfying in our names and in our person, as
meaning no more then simply a commutation of persons, he suffering that which
otherwise we should have suffered. But if we will speak properly, Christ stood
not as a sinner, or as a debtor, ex delict^, but as a surety for sinners, and a
debtor by voluntary contract, in dying for us.

But the assumption will not be disputed, if Mr. Air, by his payment of our
debt, mean no more, then satisfaction for our debt. The proposition is most
faulty, and that which I deny. The proof of it is this. It is contrary to
justice and equity, that a debt when it is paid, should be charged either upon
the surety or principal.

Ans. Which is very true, when that which is paid is the same which was in the
obligation. Solutione ejus quod debetur, tollitur obligatio. Now the obligation
of Christ was obligatio fidejussoria, which he has fully discharged in his
death, so that it cannot be required of him a second time: being once dead he
dies no more, but is sat down at the right hand of God for ever.
Nevertheless the sinner (who is obliged ex delicto) is not freed in the
sureties discharge, unless it be proved that the surety made payment with this
Videl. Cassi^s 16 and l. quoties 37. ^^f de silut. and liberat.
intent, that the debtor (that is, the sinner) should be presently discharged
as well as himself. That Christ had such an intent, Mr. Air proves, because his
death was a payment or satisfaction. The question then between him and me now
is, whether an agreement between a credit^r and a surety, that the debtor shall
not be discharged immediately upon the sureties payment, be possible, or
consistent with the nature of that payment and satisfaction which a surety
makes? Mr. Air is for the negative (and the Reader has his word for it, and
nothing else, instead of Argument). I am for the affirmative, upon the
following grounds. Peter owes James a 100. l. whereof he is not able to pay him
one farthing. John out of love and compassion to Peter, and without his
knowledge, interposeth as a surety. ^^gageth to James, that if he will accept
of payment from him, he will pay him the said 100. l. provided and agreed
between them both, that Peter's bond shall remain in full force, and so himself
not be discharged till a month after; upon these terms John pays his money, and
James receives it. Here the sum is paid, and yet the debtor remains for a
time obliged. Ergo, he is not discharged immediately upon the sureties payment.
Nor is there any thing in this agreement inconsistent with the nature of
payment or satisfaction. 1. John the surety might have chosen whether he would
have paid or engage to pay the said 100. l. 2. James the creditor also might
have chosen whether he would have admitted John to be paymaster or no. 3.
Forasmuch therefore as there is no Law to compel the one to pay, or the other
to receive, but it is merely the voluntary act of both which mutually engages
them; it follows necessarily, that it is in the power of them both to agree
upon the terms and time when Peter shall be discharged by virtue of this
payment: because it is in our power to put what Laws we please upon actions
which depend merely on our own will: otherwise a man might be free and not free
at the same time, and in reference to the same action, which is a
contradiction. Therefore payment is made (for the creditor is possessed of as
much as the debtor ought him) yet the debtor is not presently discharged. Ergo,
the payment of a debt (or rather satisfaction for a debt) does not in all cases
presently discharge the debtor. Other cases the Reader may see in the civil
Law: which I desire him to look in the places which I have directed him to, in
this and the former chapter: to spare my self the pains of transcribing them.

Nor is there any thing, in all this, contrary to justice and equity, as. 5.
Mr. Air pretends: for, against whom is this injustice? Not against the
creditor nor the surety: for it is by the consent of them both that the debtor
be not presently discharged: and it is a known maxim, volenti non sit injuria.
Not against the debtor, for he has not paid his debt; nor did the surety pay
it with this purpose and will, that he (the said debtor) should be presently
disobliged, but in convenient time. Yet that which follows, That the same debt
cannot be paid and unpaid, is true; but nothing to the purpose: because our
question is not whether payment or satisfaction be made; but whether he that
pays for another may not agree with the creditor, that the person for whom he
pays shall not presently be discharged, but at some distance of time after?
Mr. Air acknowledges. That the effects of Christ's death, as it is the
meritorious price of faith, holiness, glory, are not present but future. But
was not the death of Christ the meritorious price of our discharge from sin and
the curse, as well as of those blessings? and if Christ did merit them, to be
given, not presently, but many years after his death, why not this?

But let us see how Mr. Air illustrates this (for proof we have none.). 6.
As when a man that is a trespasser, or any one for him, pays a sum of
money, which is sufficient, both for discharge of his trespass, as also for
the purchase of a piece of land; from the trespass his discharge must be
present, if the satisfaction be full, though the enjoyment of the land may be
in Diem.

Ans. 1. But neither yet do we hit the mark: for the question is not, whether
it be possible for a debtor to be discharged presently and immediately upon the
payment which another makes for him (which is the utmost this instance can
reach to:) but whether it be not possible for him, not to be discharged upon
such a payment, presently? which universal negative one particular instance can
never well prove: especially when other instances without number may be
invented, which will infallibly prove the contrary. 2. Still I long to know the
reason of that peremptory necessity, expressed in those words, From the
trespass the discharge must be present, if the satisfaction be full. Cassius
has Maevius in suite, for that his cattle have broke into his corn, and done
him damage to the value of 5. l. Lucius gives the said 5. l. to Cassius, that
the next Term (and not before) he may discharge Maevius: which accordingly he
does. Is this contract impossible? If it be, show us what contradiction there
is in the terms: if it be not, we are not bound to believe, that the discharge
must needs be immediate, though Mr. Air say it. 3. Nor yet am I able to
conceive, (such is my dullness) why the effects of satisfaction should be more
immediate, then those of merit: Especially considering that the satisfaction of
Christ is also the price of our peace and pardon: and that the difference
between them is rather respective then real: the same obedience being called
satisfaction, as it is ordered to Gods honor: and merit, as it is ordered to
our benefit and advantage. The piece of land which one purchases for another,
might it not be enjoyed presently, if the vendee and purchaser did so agree? it
might, (especially if the price be full: as that is, which Christ paid for us
many years ago.) Is it not then the agreement between the vendee and purchaser
which defers the possession till such a time? it is so. Why then should not the
case be the same in satisfaction? why (says Mr. Air) a debt cannot be paid
and unpaid. No more can a price be paid and unpaid (say I). But neither does
the price nor satisfaction produce their effects necessarily, or by way of
natural causality: but voluntarily according to the compact between the party
paying and receiving: which if it did not hinder, the vendee were as much bound
to give present possession of the goods bought (having received the full price
of them) as the creditor to forbear the inflicting of evil upon the trespasser
(upon satisfaction made by a third person.)

SECT. II.
THe fourth Argument is this. If nothing hindered the reconciliation. 7.
of the elect with God but the breach of the Law; then the Law being satisfied,
it was the will of God that they should be immediately reconciled. But nothing
hindered their reconciliation with God, but the breach of the Law. Ergo.

Ans. This Argument were something if the sinner himself had suffered according
to the Law. As if it might be supposed that Adam after his sin could by
suffering have satisfied for his disobedience: no doubt but he had been
presently restored into the same state of favor which he was in before, and
might have gone to work again for life upon the security of the very same
Covenant, with good success. And if Christ had paid the idem (a thing
impossible, unless he were a sinner, or we were Christ) then indeed had his
sufferings delivered us ipso facto, and we had not needed a Covenant of grace
to pardon or save us, but are in as good a capacity of life without it, as Adam
was before he fell: as we have observed before. But that first Covenant being
violated, and no satisfaction made (or possibly to be made) but by a voluntary
surety; God is left at liberty (as I may so speak) to propose what terms and
time he pleases, for the restoring of sinners into a state of life and peace,
Gal. 3. 21, 22. Now when Mr. Air says, that nothing hindered the reconciliation
of sinners with God but the breach of the Law, the speech is somewhat improper;
for though sin made the breach between God and them, yet it is not that
properly which hinders reconciliation, but the sinners inability to make
satisfaction: could he have satisfied, sin could have had no power to have kept
him at a distance from God: and so I perceive does Mr. Air mean, by his
explication. God (says he) having made a Law that the soul which sins shall
die, the justice and truth of God required that satisfaction should be made for
the sins of the elect, no less then of other men. To the Argument therefore
the answer is ready. If satisfaction were made so (which it was not) as that
the Law had been answered in the very thing which it required, viz. the sinners
punishment, then I would yield it wholly, and more then Mr. Air will thank me
for: namely that life is given us by the very same Covenant which was made with
Adam in his innocence. But satisfaction being taken strictly for a payment
refusable, which one is admitted to make for another; and then it produces the
effect of our reconciliation no otherwise, then as he that admits and he
that is admitted to make payment shall agree. Wherefore I deny the proposition
as being grounded in the former false supposal, viz. That satisfaction cannot
be made in any way, but it must needs effect a present discharge: which I have
already disproved. The explication of this Argument I and no fault with (more
then that one expression, That the only cause of Christ's death, was to
satisfy the Law: whereas they that deny his death to have been satisfactory at
all, do yet assign many causes of his death, which our selves allow of) but
there is nothing in it which tends to prove the thing denied, more then a
comparison or two, which need a little consideration.

As when the cloud is dissolved, the Sun shines out: when the partition. 8.
wall is broken down, they that were separated are again united: so the cloud
of our sins being blotted out, the beams of Gods love have as free a passage
toward us, as if we had not sinned.

Ans. Now would I know what is that moral necessity of Gods communicating life
to us upon Christ's satisfaction, which answers to the natural necessity of the
Suns shining forth upon the dissolution of the cloud: (for to say that God may
salva justitia communicate life to sinners, Christ having satisfied, is not to
the purpose: it is a must and not a may which must make Mr. Eyres Argument
consequent,) one of these three it must needs be: either, 1. A necessity of
obligation by virtue of some Law or Covenant: but the only Covenant which God
made with man before the fall, was that made with Adam in innocence, promising
life upon perfect obedience. If by virtue of that Covenant God stands still
engaged to give life to men, supposing satisfaction to be made for
disobedience: then does that Covenant made with man in innocence, stand still
in force as the only way of life, and men (at least the elect) are legally and
in strict justice as innocent as if they had never sinned: both which are
desperately false and overthrow the very foundations of faith, or, 2. The
necessity of a decree: God having decreed that the elect shall be reconciled
immediately upon Christ's satisfaction for their sins; it must needs be that he
having satisfied, they must be immediately reconciled. But the very supposing
of such a decree, is the begging of the question: and being supposed, it will
not infer that the elect must needs be reconciled by the death of Christ
immediately, quatenus it was a satisfaction; but simply quatenus it was decreed
to be immediately antecedent to their reconciliation: or, 3. A kind of natural
necessity: God being essentially good, cannot but do good to an innocent
sinlesse creature, or to a sinful creature, supposing satisfaction to be made
for his sin: which is all one, as if himself had never sinned. But this is
wider of truth then either of the former: for (whatsoever may be said of it in
reference to a creature perfectly righteous) out of doubt there was no other
necessity of Gods accepting Christ's satisfaction, then his own good pleasure.
He might justly have destroyed sinners, and never provided a propitiation for
them. It is therefore as clear as the Sun when the clouds are dissolved, that
there is no necessity of an immediate reconciliation between God and sinners
upon the death of Christ: but only of a reconciliation to follow then, and upon
such terms as God and Christ agree. 2. Wherefore to the comparison I answer:
that Christ died not merely to dissolve and scatter the clouds of sin; but to
create a Isa. 51. 16. and 65. 16. ^ Cor. 5. 15. 17.
new heaven (and a new earth) in which himself was to shine as the Malac. 4. 2.
Sun of righteousness, and to dispel the clouds and darkness of sin: my
meaning is, Christ died not to repair the old Covenant; nor by removing of
hindrances, to make us capable of the influences of life and love, in that way
in which they should have been derived to us by the first Covenant: but
therefore died he, that by means of death for the redemption of transgressions,
he might become that new and living way, through which we might come unto God
by faith, and partake in life and remission of sins. Heb. 9. 15. and 10. 17,
20, 22. compared. 3. Observe one thing more (Reader) from M. Eyres application
of his similitude. So (says he) the cloud of our sins being blotted out; the
beams of Gods love have as free a passage toward us, as if we had not sinned.
What are these beams of love? Is pardon of sin any of them? if it be, then
behold the sense of the comparison: viz. Christ having satisfied, God can now
pardon sin as freely as if men had no sin, and so had never needed pardon. This
is a rare notion: but there is yet something worse then nonsense included in
it; namely, that sinners are discharged without pardon: as having (in Christ)
paid to the full the debt which they owed: as swearers and drunkards are
discharged upon payment of the mulct enjoined by Law, without the Magistrates
pardon; and become from thenceforth immediately as capable of the benefit and
protection of the Law, as if they had never broken it. If immediately upon
Christ's satisfaction the elect become in like manner as capable of the
blessings of the promise as if they had never sinned, there is then no need
that they should believe and repent in order to the obtaining of life and
salvation.

The fifth Argument succeeds. If it were the will of God that the. 9.
sin of Adam should immediately overspread his posterity, then it was his will
that the satisfaction and righteousness of Christ should immediately redound
to the benefit of Gods elect: for there is the same reason for the immediate
transmission of both to their respective subjects: for both of them were heads
and roots of mankind. But the sin of Adam did immediately over spread his
posterity. All men sinned in him, Romans 5. 12. before ever they committed any
actual sin. Ergo.

Ans. I deny both proposition and assumption. First, for the assumption: I deny
that any man is guilty of Adams sin, till he exist and be a child of Adam. He
that is not, is not under Law, to be capable of breaking it or fulfilling it:
of receiving or enduring any good or evil effects of it. And as to Romans 5. 12.
which M. Air quotes to prove that all men sinned in Adam before they had any
being of their own: neither does the text say so, but only that death passed
upon all men, f^r that all have sinned: which if M. Air will render in whom
all have sinned (as I deny not but he may by the help of an ellipsis, thus.
Death passed upon all men by him in whom all have sinned) yet will it be short
of his purpose. Does not the Apostle say in the same verse, Death has passed
upon all men? and v. 15. through the offense of one, many be dead: which many
himself interprets of all. v. 18. for (as Beza notes well, v. 15.) many in this
comparison is not opposed to all, but to one. Is it therefore lawful to
infer, that men are actually dead before they are borne? Nothing less. The
meaning then of this speech, All men are dead in Adam, is no more but this:
That sentence of death passed upon Adam, by virtue of which all that are borne
of him, eo ipso that they derive their being from him, become subject unto the
same death. In like manner, all are said to have sinned in him: not that his
posterity then unborne and unbegotten (that is, no body) were immediately
guilty of his fact: but because by the just dispensation of God, it was to be
imputed to them as soon as they had so much being as to be denominated
children of Adam. His offense tainted the blood, and according to Gods Covenant
and way of dealing with him, was interpreted as the act of the humane nature,
then existing in himself (for tota natura generis est in qualibet specie) but
was neither imputed nor imputable to particular persons partaking in that
nature before their own personal existence. In short: we sinned in Adam no
otherwise then we did exist in him; for operatio sequitur esse: but to exist in
Adam, is not to exist simply, (but rather the contrary: for when men are men
and have a personal existence of their own, they exist no longer in Adam, but
out of him: as every effect wrought exists out of its causes) but only notes a
virtue or power in him productive of us ( positis omnibus ad ag^ndum
requisitis.) So to sin or be guilty in him, is not to sin or be guilty simply;
but only notes the cause of the propagation of guilt, together with our
substance, to be then in being. If we apply this, it will follow, that as no
man partakes in Adams guilt, till he be borne a child of Adam; so none partake
in the righteousness of Christ, nor the benefit of his satisfaction, till they
be borne unto him by faith. And that does the Apostle put out of question in
this very dispute, Romans 5. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners; so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous: which words
were written many years after Christ's death: and yet then there were many who
in times and ages to come were to be made righteous by Christ's obedience: Ergo,
they were not made righteous immediately in his death. That for the minor.

The proposition comes next to be canvased: where I deny that. 10.
there is the same reason for the transmission of Adams sin and Christ's
righteousness to their respective subjects: for though both of them were heads
and roots of mankind, as the Apostle shows, Romans 5. 14. and so far forth they
agree, both communicating their effects to their children: Adam, sin and death
to his natural children: Christ, righteousness and life to his spiritual
children: yet the same Apostle in the same place shows that there is a diverse
dissimilitude or disagreement betwixt them, and that in several respects, v.
15, 16, 17, 18. particularly in that he calls our justification by the
obedience of Christ the gift, and free gift in opposition to that judgment
which by one came upon all to condemnation, v. 15, 16. implying the obedience
of Christ to be so performed, as that there is yet required an act of grace on
Gods part, to give us the effect of it: (as well as an act of faith on our
part, that it may be given to us, or that we may receive it: of which the
Apostle speaks in the next verse, v. 17. They that receive abundance of grace
-- shall reign in life: for we receive the grace of God by faith, 2 Cor. 6.
1.) suitable to what this Apostle had said before, chap. 3. 25, 26. that Christ
was set forth to declare the righteousness of God -- that he might be the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus. But the effects of Adams disobedience
came upon his posterity by the necessity of the same judgment which passed
upon himself, as the natural father of all men: so as there needs no other act,
either on Gods part, or on our part; but eo ipso that we are borne of Adam we
become liable both to guilt and punishment. But of this we have spoken more
largely before.

The sixth Argument follows. If the sacrifices of the Law were immediately. 11.
available for the typical cleansing under that administration; then the
sacrifice which Christ has offered was immediately availeable, to make a real
atonement for all those sins for which he suffered. The reason of the
consequence is, because the real sacrifice is not less efficacious then the
typical. But those legal sacrifices did immediately make atonement without any
condition performed on the sinners part, Lev. 16. 30. Ergo.

Ans. 1. I except against the proposition: because there is no necessity of the
consequence. The atonement made by sacrifices might be available to an
immediate cleansing, though Christ's be not, because, 1. God might will the
former, though not the latter. 2. The people cleansed by sacrifice were all in
being. 3. And all actually guilty of those sins from which they were cleansed
by sacrifice. 4. And the punishments from which they were delivered, were for
the most part carnal and outward, and as it were present, being either actually
upon them (as their, separations from the congregation for leprosy or other
defilements, sudden plagues destroying multitudes of them etc.) or in sight
(as it were) and near at hand: in which respect it was necessary that the
atonement made by sacrifice should have the more immediate effect. But they who
are purged by the sacrifice of Christ, many of them were not in being when his
sacrifice was offered, nor multitudes of them, yet much less had they then
committed those sins from which his sacrifice does afterward purge them: nor
is the punishment of their sins already upon them, but put off in expectation
of repentance. If Mr. Air will give me that liberty which ^e takes himself, I
might as well argue thus. If the sacrifices under the Law obtained no pardon
but for sins committed, then neither does the sacrifice of Christ obtain
present pardon for sins to come, not yet committed. But the first is true,
Ergo, so is the last. I doubt he would not grant my proposition. The reason
which he adds for confirmation of his own, has no weight: for the efficacy of
the sacrifices typical and real is rather to be measured by the greatness of
the effect wrought, then by their quickness in working them. That sacrifice is
of greatest efficacy which produces the greatest effect, whether it produce it
immediately or no: for example. The sacrifice of Christ is of greater efficacy
then those under the Law: because they sanctified to the purifying of the
flesh, but the blood of Christ purges the conscience, Heb. 9. 13, 14. But it
did not purge our consciences immediately as soon as it was offered: for we had
then no consciences to purge. Yet (I hope) Mr. Air will not say, that Christ's
sacrifice is therefore of less efficacy then the other.

But the assumption is that which I do most except against. viz.. 12.
That those legal sacrifices did immediately make atonement without any
condition performed on the sinners part. How does Mr. Air prove this? Thus: it
is said, Lev. 16. 30. the Priest shall make an atonement for you. Ergo, there
was no condition required on the peoples part. But neither was the atonement
perfectly made by the offering of the sacrifice: but it was moreover required
on the Priests part that he entered into the holy of holies, and made atonement
there, to v. 12, 15. (a type of our Lords entrance into heaven to make
reconciliation there for our sins, Heb. 9. 24. and 2. 17, 18. and 4. 14, 15.)
and on the peoples part, that they did upon that day humble and afflict their
souls: otherwise they could not have any benefit by that atonement: as we have
observed before out of v. 29, 30. and Lev. 23. 27, 28, 29. We have also already
showed that in some other cases some actions were required, as conditions
without which sinners received not the benefit of that typical atonement. But
for the general this may suffice, that the people who received the benefit of
those sacrifices were a people in Covenant with God, and worshippers of him,
Heb. 10. 1, 2. which was the grand condition of their partaking in the effects
of that whole ceremonial service, and were therein types of the spiritual
worshippers of the new Testament, who come by faith to the blood of sprinkling,
even to Christ crucified, for a spiritual and eternal cleansing.

SECT. III.
WE come now to Mr. Eyres seventh Argument. Some of. 13.
the Elect are reconciled to God, immediately by the death of Christ, without
any condition performed by them. viz. elect Infants. Ergo, all the elect are so
reconciled.

Answ. I deny the consequence, because it infers an universal from a
particular. The Apostle says, It is appointed unto all men once to die, Heb.
9. 27. and through death to enter into Heaven: shall I say this is false,
because Enoch and Elijah went to Heaven, and never saw death? If the general
directions, commands and promises in Scripture, must all be arraigned of
falsehood, if they be not applicable to Infants, as well as unto persons that
have understanding to know their Masters will* we shall make sad work:
exceptions of particular persons make no breach upon a general rule. The
Apostle says, He that will not work, must not eat: If we should give Infants
no more food then they work for, the world would be soon at an end.

2. But I deny the antecedent also. viz. That elect Infants are immediately
reconciled to God by the death of Christ, without any condition performed on
their part. A double answer therefore are our Divines wont to make to this
objection. 1. That Infants may have the seed or habit of faith, though it be
not wrought in them in the ordinary way of preaching. 2. That their Parents
faith is the condition of their salvation, if they die before they are capable
of putting forth the act of faith themselves. Mr. Air will not hear of either
of these answers, but invades them both.

The former, 1. Because Infants have no knowledge of good or evil,. 14.
Deuteronomy. 1. 39. and there cannot be faith without knowledge. 2. Faith comes by
hearing of the Word preached, Romans 10. Now Infants hear not; or if they do,
they understand not what they hear.

Answ. 1. Will thou see then (Reader) what is the aim and upshot of all Mr.
Eyres discourse? this it is, that there is no necessity of believing or
repenting, that men may be saved: for Infants are saved without it, as not
being capable of so much as the habit of either: and God does not give
salvation unto Infants in one manner, and to men in another; (these are his own
words) therefore men also may be saved without it. 2. Or if he shall say (as he
does somewhere else) that God has purposed to give faith to all that are of
years of discretion, before he give them salvation: yet still we retort upon
him what he requires of us, Let him clear it up from Scripture, let him show us
the text that says, that God has purposed to have Infants in one way, and men
in another. 3. And yet I know not whether he has so much charity to Infants,
as to allow them any room in the Kingdom of Heaven: he cannot, if his Argument
be good; for the text is express, Mark 16. He that believes not, shall be
damned; and Infants are incapable of believing: for they cannot hear the Word,
nor have they any knowledge of good or evil: nor does God save them in one way,
and men in another. 4. But to what he speaks here of the incapacity of Infants,
having the seed or habit of grace, the answer is easy. It is true, they know
neither good nor evil: but it will not follow (I trow) that they are neither
good nor evil. They have the habits of sin in them, even whiles they are
incapable of the act, Ergo, they are capable of the habits of grace too:
otherwise sin and grace were not contraries; for contraria tribuuntur eidem.
And it is certain, that as all are now borne in sin; so all should have been
borne righteous, if Adam (the father of us all) had not transgressed.

And to the second exception, viz. That faith comes by hearing. 15.
of the Word preached, Romans 10. 17. the same answer will suffice: faith may be
considered, either in its complete act, (and so no doubt it comes by hearing;
the reason is rendered by the Apostle in the same chapter, ver. 14. How shall
they believe on him of whom they have not heard?) Or 2. In its seed, root or
habit: and so I deny that it is always and in all persons, wrought by hearing
of the Word preached. The Christian and godly instructions of Parents, as they
are ordained of God to be a means of instilling his fear into the hearts of
their children, Ephesians. 6. 4. Isa. 28. 9, 10, 11. so are they not unfrequently
blessed with success, according to the capacity of children, as in Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15. And sometimes God by his own immediate working, may inspire
that grace into the heart of an Infant, which it is not possible any means
should be used by men to effect. David seems to have been gracious from a
child, Psalm. 22. 9, 10. and 71. 5, 6. and Isaac, G^l. 4. 29. and Christ
blessed Infants, Mark 10. 16. and he blesses by doing or working that in them,
which godly Parents can do no more, then desire may be done, when they are said
to bless their children.

But we have a famous instance (which puts all out of doubt) of John. 16.
the Baptist, who was filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mothers womb,
Luke 1. 15. What says Mr. Air to this? He cites these words, and gives answer
to others a great way off, ver. 41. whereupon Mary's salutation of Elizabeth,
the babe is said to leap in her womb; and tells us, That this exultation,
Divinitus facta est in Infant: non Humanitus ab Infant: and therefore is not
to be drawn into an example, or urged as a rule to us, what to think of others.
Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus. We cite the words of v. 15. (and so does Mr.
Air too,) to prove Infants capable of the habit of grace: and he answers to v.
41. which is no part of the objection he had proposed against himself. But
whereas he says, it is not to be urged as a rule to us, what to think of other
Infants; he should have given us the reason too; for it proves invincibly, that
Infants are capable of the habits of grace, (which is all intended to be proved
by it) and by consequence, that Mr. Eyres two Arguments to the contrary, from
Infants want of knowledge and inability to hear, are nothing worth. Vi^^
B^co^m. de side ^ustif. Q ^1. per tot.
Ergo, the Scriptures contradict not them that say, Infants may have the seed
of faith.

Nor yet do they say any thing contrary to Scripture, who assert,. 17.
that Infants perform the conditions of reconciliation and salvation by their
Parents; forasmuch as it is manifest throughout the Scriptures, that Infants
follow the condition of their Parents, whether they be the Infants of Gentiles,
or of the people of God. And as the former are strangers from the C^venant,
together with their Parents, and thereby liable to all the evils that accompany
such a condition, Ezra 10. 3. Deuteronomy. 7. 2, 3, 6. Isa. 56. 3. so does the Lord
claim a special right and propriety in the children of his people, Ezekiel. 16.
20, 21. in regard of which they are called holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. (the greater is
their sacrilege, who refuse to gi^e unto God the things that are Gods, but
will needs have their children kept at liberty, to choose whether they will
serve God or the devil, when they come up to ripeness of understanding) which
relation of theirs to God, as some of his people, and of him to them, as their
God, by virtue of their Parents faith, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. Nehem. 9. 8. (for
never since the world was made did God make a Covenant with a faithful man, the
blessings and bene^it of which should reach no farther then his own person*
witness his Covenant with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Phineas, David, etc.)
does signally include the Promise of pardon of sin, Jer. 31. 33, 34. and 32.
38, 39, 42. And if Noah's faith was available, to the saving, not of himself
only, but his family also, Heb. 11. 7. and the faith of godly Parents, for the
life of their children, Matthew. 15. 28. John 4. 50, 51. I see no reason why it
should be denied, to be of as great acceptance with God, for the salvation of
such of them as die in their infancy.

Yet a double Argument Mr. Air has against it. 1. Hence. 18.
it will follow, that all the children of believing Parents are justified:
which he supposes no man will say.

Answ. But he might have known that the Lutherans say so; and that without any
great inconvenience, which I am able to foresee. That which I apprehend will be
readiest objected against it, (though Mr. Air object not it, nor any thing
else) is, that many children of godly Parents live and die in sin: Ergo, They
were never justified. But this inference will not pass: for it will be
answered, That the Parents faith remains no longer the condition of his childs
pardon and salvation, then during the state of infancy: when he is grown up to
the use of his own understanding and will, a personal faith of his own is
required upon the same terms of necessity, as of others, who from their birth
were without God, and strangers from his Covenant. Israel in Egypt is likened
to a child, Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6, etc. Hos. 11. 1. and in Gods dealing with them
there, (when they were in their Infantage) we have a type and emblem of his
dealing with other Infants, who are the children of his servants, and of such
as believe on him, after the example of Abraham. Their father Abraham's faith,
was the condition of their deliverance from the bondage of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 10. 15.
Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their
seed after them. And because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto
your fathers, has the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed
you out of the house of bondmen, chap. 7, 8. Nevertheless, after they had been
farther instructed in, and known the Will of God, he required of them, that
they should fear, him, and walk in all his ways, and love him, and serve him
with all their heart and soul, Deuteronomy, 10. 12, 16. Otherwise they were liable to
a return, to the same or a worse bondage, then that out of which they had been
redeemed, chap. 28. 65, 68. And it is also observable, that the Infants in
Israel, continued their right to the promised land, while their Parents were
cut off for rebellion, Numb. 14, 30, 31.

As to the second exception, That we may as well assert works. 19.
of supererogation, as that one is justified by another faith. I had thought
Mr. Air had better understood what works of supererogation are, then to
trouble us with such an impertinency. But to the two texts of Scripture in the
margin, to which he refers us, Ezekiel. 18. 20. and Hab. 2. 4. to prove, that a
man's faith or righteousness is available, only to his own salvation: they are
both to be understood pro subject a materia. He that is furnished with means
and abilities, for the exercise of a faith of his own, or for performing works
of righteousness, cannot expect salvation by the faith or righteousness of
his Parents, while himself lives in unbelief and unrighteousness.

The eighth Argument is the old postulatum, that faith cannot be. 20.
the condition of our reconciliation, but it will then needs share with Christ
in the glory of this effect, which we have showed already at large, to be
contrary to the judgment of Scriptures, Reason, Lawyers, Divines, I may add,
of all sorts of persons. All men will acknowledge, that the freest Promise
imaginable becomes not obligatory, but upon supposition of acceptance by him to
whom the Promise is made: Vide D Marta. Neapol. Digest. Noviss. Tom 3. Tit.
Donatarius.
and the freest donation becomes invalid, if he to whom it is given will have
none of it. And faith being no more then an acceptance of Christ, John 1. 12.
Rev. 22. 17. one would think it might be made the condition of the gift of
righteousness and life, without danger of sharing in the glory of Christ. More
of the unreasonablenesse of Mr. Eyres crude assertion, (though it be more then
needs, and more then once I intended) the Reader shall find below, in answer
to Mr. Eyres nineteenth chapter.

Enter the ninth Argument. If it were the Will of God, that. 21.
his people should have strong consolation, and that their joy should be full;
then it was his Will, that their peace and reconciliation should not depend
upon conditions performed by themselves; for it is impossible that any soul
should enjoy a firm and settled peace, whose confidence toward God is grounded
upon conditional Promises: and (says the Apostle) our salvation is by grace, to
the end that the Promise may be sure to all the seed, Romans 4. 16.

Answ. We expect other manner of proof of the consequence, then what is here
presented us, It is most true, that Gods Will is, that his people should have
strong consolation, not without faith, but through faith, as is most express
in that very place which Mr. Air quotes, Heb. 6. 18. That we might have a
strong cons^lation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us. Also the Apostle John, 1 Ep. 1. 4. gives the reason of his writing
the doctrine of the Gospel, namely, that through the faith thereof our joy may
be full. But it is the wildest reasoning that ever I met with, to infer, that
if the gift of peace and reconciliation be suspended upon believing, then he
that believes cannot have strong consolation; just as if I should infer,
because the Lord says, John 16. 24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy
may be full. Ergo, He that asks can never attain to fullness of joy. The
strength of our joy and consolation depends upon the immutability and
faithfulness of the Promise which we believe: and by how much the more
steadfastly we believe, by so much the more do we partake in the comfort of the
Promise. But that is above all, that Mr. Air should quote, Romans 4. 16. to
prove, that if our salvation depended never so little upon our works, we could
not be sure thereof; (Amongst which works he includes faith, absurdly enough,
but suitable to his dealing with the Authors whom he quotes here, and
elsewhere, applying to faith what they speak against works,) when the very
words of the text are expressly and purposely against the inference which he
makes from them. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the
end the Promise might be sure to all the seed. Since man was borne upon the
earth, was it ever thought possible that these words should yield this
inference? Ergo, if salvation depend on faith, we can never be sure of it?
Though neither does the text speak of the certainty of the subject, or of our
being sure of salvation: but of the certainty of the object, or of salvation's
being sure to us.

Let us hear the tenth Argument. If it were the Will of God, that. 22.
the death of Christ should be available for the reconciliation of the elect,
whiles they live in this world; then it was his Will, that it should procure
for them immediate and actual reconciliation, without the intervention of those
conditions, supposed to be required of them. The reason is, because they cannot
perform all the conditions required of them, till their last breath: this being
one, that they must persevere to the end.

Answ. This Argument (with many of the rest) if it prove that sinners are
reconciled without any condition performed on their part, yet it does not prove
(what it should do) that they are reconciled immediately in the death of
Christ, or before they believe. If we contended for no more then that faith
were antecedent to Justification, not the condition thereof; this Argument
would not hurt us; and therefore is not like to be very serviceable to Mr.
Air. 2. Nor does it so much as pretend to disprove Justification upon any
condition, (as suppose upon the first act of faith) and therefore is yet
farther impertinent. 3. But that which it would disprove (if it had strength
enough) is the conditionality of final perseverance unto Justification. But
neither do we make final perseverance the condition of our first Justification;
but the first simple act of faith, and perseverance in the faith to the end,
the condition of final Justification, as Paul also does, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, From
HENCEFORTH there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, etc. So Rev. 2.
17. To him that overcomes will I give a white stone, etc. of which we have
spoken before. Wherefore I deny that, which should be Mr. Eyres Assumption,
viz. That it was the Will of God that the elect should be perfectly and
completely reconciled or justified, whilst they live in th^^ world. The
reasons of which denial I have already given at large, and shall not now repeat
them. And whereas Mr. Air thinks much, ^^at the elect should be denied perfect
reconciliation, not only till they believe, but not till death; He may be
pleased to understand, that I deny them to be perfectly justified or
reconciled, till the resurrection. For as long as any enmity remains
undestroyed, they are not perfectly reconciled. But all enmity is not destroyed
till the resurrection, 1 Corinthians. 15. 25, 26.

And what has Mr. Air against it? words and nothing else.. 23.
1 (Says he) innumerable Scriptures declare that the Saints are perfectly
justified. A^sw. But does not quote us so much as one: and a good reason why.
2. That nothing shall be able to separate from Gods love. Answ. Not for ever,
but for a time it may, til^ all enemies be subdued: the last of which is Death.
The happiness which the soul enjoyes in the mean time is its own, not the
happiness of the person, as our Lords Argument supposes, M^t. 22. 31, 32. 3.
Justification is as full and perfect as ever it shall be, it does not grow and
increase, but is perfect at first. ^nsw. Prove it: it grows in the renewed acts
of pardon, H^l 12. 17, 1 Joh^ 2. 1. 2. ^or God does multiply ^orgivenesses,
Is^. 55. 7. It grows in the perfection of its parts: whereof the most absolute
and complete is our Justification in the day of judgment. It grows in the
perfection of its effects: which are begun in the soul first, and so take
place upon the body, and the whole man, R^m. 8. 10, 11, 23. Paul expected a
farther participation in the righteousness of Christ, then he attained to in
this life, Gal. 5. 5. Phil. 3. 8, 9, 11. 4. Baptism (says Mr. Air) which
seals to us the forgiveness of all our sins, is administered but once in all
our lifetime: to show that our Justification is done all at once. Answ.
Baptism seals that Promise, by which all sins past are forgiven; ( Luke 3. 3.
M^rk 1. 4.
) and all sins future shall be forgiven when committed, the sinner continuing
in the faith of Jesus Christ; from which if he fall away, it is impossible that
he should be renewed again to repentance, Hebr. 6. 6. or be capable of having
another Covenant made or sealed to him, by which his sins may be remitted, Heb.
10. 29. Mr. Air here adds some texts of Scripture, Ezekiel. 16. 8, 9. Acts 13.
39. 1 John 1. 7. Col. 2. 13, 14. to what purpose I cannot imagine; unless it
be to prove, that all sins are forgiven at once (for neither of these texts
speak a word of Baptism.) If he mean all sins past are forgiven upon the first
act of faith, I have granted it: but if he mean all sins to come also, it lies
upon him to prove it: that is, that sins not committed are sins.

SECT. IV.
THe eleventh Argument proceeds thus. If it were the Will of. 24.
God, that the death of Christ should certainly and infallibly procure the
reconciliation of his Elect; then surely it was not the Will of God, that it
should depend on terms and conditions on their part: because that which
depends upon future conditions is, as to the event, altogether uncertain.

Answ. 1. Neither does this Argument prove, that we are justified immediately
in the death of Christ, or before we believe. 2. I deny the consequence with
the proof of it: for although that which depends upon future conditions, as to
the event be uncertain, as the word uncertain signifies the same with
contingent, (for it is a true rule in the Civil Law, ( L. Si pupillus ff. de N
vat.
) Conditio necessaria non suspendit dispositionem) yet is this uncertainty or
contingency to be understood in reference to man, and the second and immediate
causes of a things existence; not in reference to God, to whom even contingent
events g Vid^ doctisfimum D. Ramum Schol. Dialect. l. 5 c 6.
are as certain, as if they were necessary: we shall make strange work in
Divinity, if events shall be denied to be contingent in their own nature,
because in reference to Gods Will or knowledge they are certain and infallible,
and so far forth necessary; for example, God did will the certain and
infallible sa^ety of all those that were in the ship with Paul, Acts 27. 24.
yet nevertheless it came not to pass, but upon condition of their abiding in
the ship: without the performance of which condition they had perished, ver.
31. Except these abide in the ship, you cannot be saved. And Mr. Air might
easily have foreseen, that this Argument wounds himself as much as us. He
acknowledges the Covenant made with Adam, to have been conditional: and in
that very thing places the main difference between it and the Covenant of
grace; obedience then was the condition of Adams continuance in life; and sin,
of his death. But did not God know that Adam would sin, and will to permit it?
or will Mr. Air deny this, because his death was suspended upon a future
condition, and therefore was altogether uncertain, as to the event? Physician
heal thy self. It is by the Will of God, that contingent things come to pass
contingently.

Nor is the twelfth argument more happy. If God willed this. 25.
blessing to the elect but conditionally, then he willed their reconciliation
and Justification no more* then their non-reconciliation and condemnation; for
if he willed their Justification only, in case they should believe and repent,
then he willed their damnation in case they do not believe and repent. Ergo, he
willed their Justification no more then their damnation; contrary to John 6.
38, 39. and 17. 21, 22, 24.

Answ. ( Vide Amyr^ld^m Sp^^im. Anim^d. Speci^l. co^tra Sp^^h^m. a p. 146. ad
siu^m libri.
) Out of doubt God wills the damnation, even of the elect themselves in case
they do not believe and repent: (though that case supposes what is not to be
supposed, without more d^stinctions then my present matter will permit me to
digress into) but Mr. Eyres inference, that therefore he wills their damnation
as much as their Justification, is merely drawn in, without any disposition in
it self to follow; for the Prom^se of remission, upon condition of faith, is
not made unto men, who are as it were i^ m^di^, between life and death; but
unto sinners already under condemnation: and is given as a remedy against that
death under which they are already held. God thereby manifesting, that
although* according to his own Laws and constitutions, he cannot save
impenitent and unbelieving sinners, ( Heb. 3. 19. Jer. 3. 19.) yet is it far
more acceptable to him, that sinners should and be saved, then by their
obstinacy provoke him, and as it were constrain him to execute his justice
upon them. Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. and 33. 11. Lament. 3. 33, 34, 2 Pet. 3. 9. As
Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing, therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live. Wherefore
we answer by the usual distinction of the Will of God: which is either Vid.
Chamier. Panstrat. de Praedest. c. 6.. 3 and 14.
voluntas (...), determining of events: or voluntas (...) determining of what
is good and acceptable in the sight of God: by the former God does will
infallibly that his elect shall be justified by the death of Christ. By the
latter, though he will their Justification much more then their damnation (as
has been showed) yet he wills it no otherwise, then that if they will not be
reconciled, but turn away from God through unbelief, Christ and his
righteousness shall profit them nothing.

The thirteenth argument undertakes great matters. Conditional. 26.
reconciliation necessarily supposes free will.

Answ. It does indeed suppose voluntatem per gratiam liberabilem, the will
freeable by grace, not per naturam liberatam, freed by nature. If the case of
sinful men were the case of devils, to be judicially so confirmed and obdurate
in sin, as that it were impossible for them to repent and believe on a Savior;
Mr. Air would then put me hard to it, for I should never be able to give any
tolerable account why a conditional reconciliation should be preached and
pressed so vehemently upon a sinful world. But how does Mr. Air prove that a
conditional reconciliation supposes free will? Thus,

Either God willed it unto men, upon a possible or impossible condition. Answ.
Upon a condition possible.

Mr. Air, Then either it is possible because God will bestow it, or because
man can perform it. Answ. Because God will bestow it, though this disjunction
be not well expressed, for man's ability to perform is not contrary to Gods
bestowing, but the effect of it. But Mr. Air says, we cannot mean it of a
condition possible by Gods gift, because God will bestow upon us nothing but
what Christ has purchased; and Christ has purchased nothing, save what God
has promised in his Covenant: and Mr. W. denies that the Promise of faith is
any part of the Covenant, or any effect of it, page 32. and others that are for
this conditional reconciliation, look upon it as a ridiculous conceit, that God
should promise men salvation upon a condition, and that he should work this
condition in them and for them.

Answ. Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum, Tendimus in Latium. I do not
wonder Mr. Air is so grossly out, seeing he has no shorter way to his
Conclusion. It is very hard to me to conceive how this Argument proceeds: but
thus I think it is. The thing which Mr. Air is proving is this, That no
condition, or particularly, that faith is not a condition possible by the gift
of God* The proof stands thus, If God bestow nothing but what Christ has
purchased, then faith is not a condition possible by the gift of God. But the
first is true. Ergo, so is the last. The Proposition stands upon this ground.
Christ (according to us) has not purchased faith* Ergo, if God bestow nothing
but what Christ has purchased, he does not bestow faith. The Antecedent is
thus proved. What God has not promised in his Covenant, Christ has not
purchased. But God (according to us) has not promised faith in his Covenant.
Ergo, Christ has not purchased it. This is the demonstration. But yet we need
several things to be demonstrated. First, that God gives nothing but what
Christ has purchased. 1. He gave Christ himself to be a purchaser, Esa. 9. 6.
To us a child is borne, to us a Son is given. 2. Mr. Air denies Christ to
have purchased the Covenant of remission. 3. And our natural being and
faculties will hardly be proved the fruit of Christ's merits. 4. And such of our
Divines, (who yet are neither Papists nor Arminians) who suppose faith to be an
immediate effect of the same grace, with the giving of Christ to be our
Redeemer, will yet need a farther proof of this position then I do. Secondly,
that Christ has purchased nothing, but what God has promised in his Covenant,
for the very making and enacting of the Promise or Covenant of grace, is the
fruit of Christ's Purchase, (whence his blood is so often called the blood of
the Covenant, Heb. 10. 29. and 13. 20. Matthew. 26. 28.) 3. That I deny that the
Promise of faith is any part or effect of the Covenant. I do indeed deny that
it is an effect of the Covenant made with us, that is, that we are not in
Covenant with God, when God promises to give faith: but he promises to give
faith, that we may thereby be brought into Covenant with him. But the Covenant
being taken largely, for a declaration of that whole good, which God will work
in and for his people, and so God promises faith: for explication of which, I
must refer the Reader to the place where I purposely treat of it. In the mean
time (Reader) has not Mr. Air gallantly performed his undertaking? Something,
I perceive, he would feign fasten upon us: but his cord (his threefold cord) is
made of burnt flax.

As for those that look upon it as a ridiculous conceit, that God. 27.
should promise salvation upon a condition which he works in us, is Mr. Air
of their mind, or is he not? If he be not, why does he trouble us with them?
If he be, why does he fetch such a compass to come at his Conclus^on? had it
not been shorter to argue thus? If faith be the condition of salvation, then
God does not give faith: the reason is, because it is ridiculous, that God
should promise salvation* upon a condition which he works in us. But
(according to us,) faith is the condition of salvation. Ergo. if Mr. Air think
this Argument of the Remonstrants unanswerable, they will be much beholden to
him. But I deny the Proposition, Vid^ ^pis^op D^venant. dissert de m^rte
Christi^. 5. p 57. ad ob^. 2.
and say, there is no inconvenience in affirming, that God gives salvation upon
a condition of his own working. Provided it be understood (as it ought)
according to the difference which the same action has, in reference to the
universal, and its particular cause. Indeed it were ridiculous to suppose, that
God should make any action, which is wholly and immediately from himself, the
condition of any blessing he gives; as that he should promise to glorify us
upon condition he raise us from the dead: to raise us, upon condition he
justify us: to justify us, upon condition he give us faith. But the same
faith which God works in us, is also our act (for it is we that believe, and
not God, though he make us to believe) and as it is our act, so is it performed
voluntarily, and a fit object of a command or promise: I mean, capable of being
commanded or rewarded, or of being made the condition of a reward. And thus
(for example) obedience was the condition of that life which was promised to
Adam. (this Mr. Air grants.) Nevertheless to the exercise of that obedience
the concurrence of God was necessary, as of the first cause: for creatures
essentially depend on God, not only for their being, but for their motion and
operation, Acts 17. 28. Ergo, a voluntary act of ours may be the condition of
our salvation, though God work that act in us. How many orders does God give to
Joshua, Gideon, David and others, concerning the times and places, when and
whither they should remove their host, that they might put their enemies to the
rout, or escape an overthrow by them. These motions were the conditions of
those special victories or deliverances which God would give them; yet by the
efficiency of Gods power and providence did they move from place to place.
Hundreds of like instances are obvious.

One thing more Mr. Air adds, If (says he) any shall say, that. 28.
God did will that by Christ we should have faith, and after that
reconciliation; yet 1. It will follow notwithstanding, that our reconciliation
is an immediate effect of the death of Christ (as Owen proves against Baxter,
page 34.) And 2. Then all the controversy will be about Gods order and method,
in conferring on us the effects of Christ's death.

Answ. That reconciliation is an immediate effect of the death of Christ, may
be understood in a double sense: either 1. By comparing the effects with the
cause (and then the meaning is, that the death of Christ contributes an
immediate efficiency to our reconciliation, whenever it is that we are
reconciled: and this is all that Mr. Owen says in the place mentioned.
Meritorious causes (says he) do actually and ipso facto produce all those
effects which immedi^t^ly slow from them: not in an immediation of time, but of
causality. I doubt not, but the death of Christ has in its kind an actual and
immediate influence upon our eternal glorification, which yet is the last
effect or benefit we receive by him.) Or 2. By comparing the effects with the
cause, and one with another, and so that is the immediate effect of the death
of Christ, which exists immediately upon the death of Christ, without the
interposition of any other cause to produce it. Of this only is the Question,
as also Mr. Air himself has hitherto understood it: otherwise I am persuaded
himself will grant, that all the Arguments he has hitherto used (one or two at
most only excepted) come not within sight of the Conclusion they aim at.

As to the second thing, that then all the controversy will be about Gods
order and method, in conferring on us the effects of Christ's death: though if
there were nothing else but this in question; it will be of very dangerous
consequence to pervert and trouble that order, which God uses in bringing
sinners to life: yet is there much more in question, viz. whether upon
supposition of Christ's Purchase, and Gods special purpose of giving faith to
some, the same faith, as it is a voluntary act of ours, may not by Gods Will of
Precept, be made the condition of our partaking in righteousness and
reconciliation by the death of Christ? This is the thing which Mr. Air should
have disproved, if he had intended his Argument should have concluded any
thing. We have already showed at large the monstrous inconveniences that attend
the denial of it: and so much has been spoken by those that are for the middle
way of universal redemption, especially the French Divines, that I cannot*
think it worth my labor to add any thing more. The Lord Jesus has put the
matter out of Question to me, John 6. 39, 40. And this is the Fathers Will
which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day. And this is the Will of him that
sent me, that every one that sees the Son and believes on him may have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. The former verse
declares his own and his fathers special Will to save the elect. The latter,
that yet the condition of believing is imposed on all men (the elect, as well
as others) that they through the performance thereof may be saved.

And so we are come to the last Argument, which in brief is this,. 29.
The imputing of our sins to Christ was formally the non-imputing of them unto
us. But our sins were accounted or imputed to Christ without any condition on
our part. Ergo, they are discounted or non-imputed to us, without any condition
performed by us.

Answ. I deny the Proposition, namely, that the imputing of our sins to Christ,
is formally the non-imputing of them unto us: because 1. If this be true, then
does not God for Christ's sake forgive any man's sin, as the Apostle says he
does, Ephesians. 4. 32. the reason is plain, because it was not for Christ's sake that
himself was punished. Our pardon is not the effect of Christ's punishment, but
on the contrary, his punishment is the effect of our pardon, if the imputation
of our sins to him be formally the non-imputation of them to us. 2. What then
is the meaning of Paul's prayer for them that deserted him? 2 Timothy 4. 16. The
Lord grant that it may not be imputed to them: that is, the Lord grant that
Christ may be punished for them? or what is the meaning? The Lord grant they
may be some of those for whom Christ has been punished? that were all one as
to pray that they may be elected from all eternity. Whatsoever sense M. Air
will put upon the words, it will either not agree with sense, or not with
himself, or not with the text. 3. Upon the same principle it will follow, that
the death of Christ as it was a satisfaction, and his resurrection from the
dead contributes nothing to our justification, neither by way of influence, nor
by way of evidence: for might it be supposed that the Lord Jesus had lain for
ever under the power of death, that had been the best evidence to us that we
should never be punished, if his punishment were formally our nonp^nition: and
by way of influence it can do nothing, because Gods freeing or taking off
punishment from us is in nature before his laying it on Christ, if the imputing
it to Christ be formally the non-imputing it to us: many other inconveniences
attend this doctrine: but it is needless to insist upon the mention of them.

Besides these Arguments, there are several testimonies of Scripture. 30.
which M. Air mentions, to prove our reconciliation to be the actual and
immediate effect of Christ's death: let us view them, Colos. 1. 14. Ephesians. 1. 7.
Heb. 9. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. Heb. 1. 3. and 10. 12, 14. Colos. 2. 10, 13, 14.
Romans 8. 33, 34.

Ans. 1. We have already answered at large to Romans 8. 33, 34. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
Ephesians. 1. 7. and by consequence to Colos. 1. 14. for the words are the same in
both those places. We have therefore here to answer no more then the texts out
of the Hebrews, and one out of the Colossians; let us take them in order, Heb.
9. 12. Christ has obtained eternal redemption for us. I cannot assure my self
how M. Air understands this text: but if he see no more in it then all men I
can meet with, he can conclude no more from it then what was never denied,
namely that Christ has purchased eternal redemption for us. But he has also
purchased eternal life and glory for us: will it therefore follow that our
glorification, is the actual and immediate effect of his death? he gave himself
to redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. are we therefore freed from all sin
immediately in his death?

The next is Heb. 1. 3. Christ by himself has purged our sins, and afterward
sat down as having finished that work, Heb. 10. 12. Ans. The former place
(according to the original) says no more then that Christ in his death made a
purge of our sins: (...) which is no more then we have often yielded, that
Christ has made a plaster in his own blood for the curing of our wounds: that
is, in dying he performed that righteousness which is the cause of our
remission: his blood being that which washes us from all our sins. But that
this purge had its effect immediately upon its own existence, is that which M.
Air must give us another Text to prove: whereas he adds, that he afterward
sat down as having ^inished that work, Heb. 10. 12. and good reason: because
that one offering of himself was so perfect and sufficient for all those ends
unto which it was ordained, that there is no need that himself or any thing
else should be offered a second time, for those ends. But if M. Air mean that
he has so perfectly reconciled us in his death (not only quoad constitutionem
causae, but quoad effectum) as that there needs nothing more to be done toward
our reconciliation, he may do well to reconcile the Apostle to himself, who
tells us his work in heaven is to make reconciliation, Heb. 2. 17, 18.
Wherefore in all things it beboved him to be made like unto his br^thron, that
he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God,
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people; for in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. compare
Heb. 4. 15. and 7. 25.

The like answer I give to Heb. 10. 14. By one offering he has perfected. 31.
for ever them that are sanctified, namely, that Christ's death has perfected
us quoad meritum, not quoad efficaciam. The death of Christ (says the Dr.
Godwin. in Romans 8. ^4. sect 5. page 177.
Author often commended) was perfect for an o^lation, to which as such nothing
can be added: there needed no more, nor any other price to be paid for us. But
hence to infer, that therefore we were perfectly reconciled quoad effectum in
the death of Christ, is point blank against the Text, which tells us in the
very next foregoing words, v. 13. that Christ does yet expect till his enemies
be made his footstool: amongst which the Apostle reckons sin and death, 2
Cor. 15. 26, 55, 56. which, though (together with Devils) they were destroyed
in some sense in the death of Christ, Romans 8. 3. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Yet, forasmuch
as the holy Ghost witnesses that Christ does yet expect a farther destruction
of them, it lets us understand, that these enemies, and sin in particular, was
no farther destroyed in his death, then as therein was laid the foundation and
cause of a perfect and eternal remission, which by virtue of that blood carried
up and pleaded in heaven, should be given unto them that by faith come for it
unto the throne of grace; as the Apostle explaines himself, Heb. 4. 14, 15* 16.
and in this very chapter, v. 26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there r^mains no more sacrifice for sins: implying, that
a wilful rejecting of Christ through unbelief (which I conceive to be that
special sin which the Apostle means) deprives us of the benefit of remission of
sins by his sacrifice: which how it can be if sins were perfectly and
absolutely pardoned immediately in his death, I cannot conceive: see also, v.
38, 39.

The last place is least of all to purpose: Christ (says M. Air). 32.
has made us complete as to the forgiveness of our sins. Colos. 2. 10, 13, 14.

Ans. 1. The Apostle speaks to such who had already received the Lord Jesus, v.
6. And of such no doubt it is true, that all their sins are pardoned. 2. But
neither does the Apostle limit our compleatnesse in Christ to the forgiveness
of our sins: nor does he say that we were made complete in his death, but
rather in his exaltation: And ye are complete in him who is the Head of all
principality and power. His scope is to root and establish the Colossians in
the faith of Christ, v. 7. in opposition to such innovators as would have
introduced the worship of Gentile Demons, v. 8, 18. or the observation of
Jewish rites, v. 20, 21. as if without these Christ had not of himself been
able to save them. But ye are complete in Christ (says the Apostle) or be ye
content with Christ (as the words will bear to be rendered) as who alone is
most sufficiently able to give and increase you in all good, and to deliver you
from all evil, and bestow on you the reward of eternal life, v. 15, 18, 19. But
what all this is to the purpose I know not. It seems Mr. Air had a mind to
bring it in for company.

CHAP. XI.
A reply to Mr. Eyres fifteenth Chapter: of justification in Christ as a common
person. Justification not proved thereby to be before faith.

SECT. I.
WE are now come to the review of those two Arguments. 1.
mentioned in my Sermon, which Mr. Air made use of to prove that the elect
were justified before believing. The former in short I thus proposed.

If we are justified in Christ, then we are justified before we believe. But we
are justified in Christ, Ergo. This Argument Mr. Air proposes more at large
in his answer to my Sermon: showing withal how each part was proved in his
conference with me, (concerning which I am able to give the Reader no account:
having so perfectly forgotten the method he used in proposing and prosecuting
his Argument) the sum is, Christ was justified in his resurrection, as a
common person: Ergo, the elect were then justified in him.

My answer to this in my Sermon is large and distinct. The sum is: if
justification be taken properly, I deny that we were justified in Christ: if
improperly, I deny that it will follow, that we were justified before faith,
because we were justified in Christ's resurrection, no more then it will follow,
that because we are said to be risen with Christ. Ergo, men are risen from the
dead before they are borne, or dead, or while they are lying in their graves.
But because M. Air has taken my answer in pieces, let us see what he does
animadvert upon each part of it.

First then, I say we may conceive of a threefold justification. 1. A
justification purposed in the decree of God, Gal. 3. 8. 2. A justification
purchased and impetrated in the death of Christ, Heb. 9. 12. 3. A justification
exemplified in the resurrection of Christ: who himself was justified in his own
resurrection, and thereby became the exemplary cause of justification to
believers, by virtue whereof themselves shall also be justified in due time,
etc.

What says Mr. Air to this? 1. He infers in general, that then by my own
confession, justification in a Scripture sense goes before faith. The vanity of
which triumph we have already discovered, chapt. 1.. 2. should I say that our
glorification may be conceived as purposed of God, as purchased by Christ, as
exemplified in his glorification; I should not count him worthy of a reply that
should infer, that I had therefore yielded glorification to be before
believing. Mr. Air therefore foreseeing that I would deny either of these to
be actual justification, tells his Reader before hand that, That were a poor
put off, because omnis justificatio simpliciter dicta congruenter exponenda est
de justificatione actuali. Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiori
significato. When we speak of justification simply, there is no man but
understands it of actual justification.

Which makes me believe his report concerning his book (at least some parts of
it) that it had cost him but little pains: for I cannot see how such
observations could cost him much. I mention justification cum adjecto with a
limitation: and in the close of my answer, oppose each branch of my distinction
to justification simply so called; and this I may not be allowed to do, because
of Analogum per se positum, etc.

Nextly, He speaks something on each member of the distinction,. 2.
and says, 1. That which I called justification, purposed in the decree of God
is real and actual justification. Ans. Thou have then thy choice (Reader)
whether thou will believe, the Apostle or M. Air. The Text quoted ( Gal. 3.
8.) says thus: The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles
through faith, preached before, the Gospel unto Abraham. The justification here
spoken of, is surely justification simply so called, because it is put by it
self, without any Term of restraint or diminution: and M. Eyres rule is,
Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiori significato. And this justification
(according to the Apostle) was a thing foreseen: a thing that God would do* a
thing before the existence of which the Gospel was preached to Abraham: all
which notwithstanding, M. Air will have the eternal decree of God to be our
justification. But of this we have spoken already, as also of what he notes
upon the second branch of the distinction.

The great exception is against the third branch, wherein I say, that. 3.
Christ in his resurrection being himself justified, became thereby an
exemplary cause of a justification future to them that should believe. I did
little expect so much vehemence and acrimony in opposing this, as I meet with
in M. Eyres answer to it.

1. (Says M. Air) there is not the least hint thereof in holy writ: the
Scripture no where calls our Savior the example or pattern of our
justi^^cation.

Rep. If the Question be concerning a name or term, where does M. Air find in
Scripture the Term of a common person (in which he so much delights) attributed
to Christ? 2. If concerning that which is equivalent; surely, the Term of an
exemplary cause, is every whit as agreeable to Scripture as the other: for in
all spiritual and eternal blessing we bear the image of the heavenly Adam, 1
Cor. 15. 49. and we are predestined to be conformed to the image of Christ,
from the beginning to the end of our faith, Romans 8. 29, 17. Now wherein we bear
Christ's image, therein was he an exemplary cause; for to an exemplary cause no
more is required then that another thing be conformed to it, as its image, and
exist by virtue of it (which I desire the Reader to observe, because M. Air
does often confound an example with an exemplary cause, as if there were no
difference between them.) If then we in our resurrection and justification bear
the image of Christ, then he in his resurrection and justification was the
exemplary cause of ours. And whereas M. Air says, that Christ in his works of
mediation was not an exemplary, but a meritorious cause: it is not universally
true. For the resurrection and ascension of Christ were acts of Christ's as
Mediator: and yet in them he was not the meritorious cause of any thing.

He proceeds thus. It was needless Christ should be a pattern. 4.
of our justification: for this pattern must be of use, either unto us, or unto
God. Not to us, because we do not justify our selves: not to God, because he
needs no pattern to direct him.

Rep. The disjunction is imperfect: for it was needful for the glory of Christ,
as the Apostle expressly witnesses, Romans 8. 29. Them he also did pr^d^stinate
to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the first born among
many brethren. It is no small part of Christ's glory to be the first begotten
from the dead, and a person so far advanced above all others, that their
highest glory shall consist in a conformity to him, and in being fashioned
according to his image. 2. It is also of as much use to us in all respects, as
if we are said to be justified in Christ's resurrection as a common person:
whether we respect the evidence which his resurrection gives, or the influence
which it has upon our justification. And whereas Mr. Air says it can be of
no use to us, because we do not justify our selves, it is a strange kind of
reason. Cannot a soul by faith behold the certainty and glorious effects of his
justification (notwithstanding all the opposition of sense and reason) by
looking on Christ justified as an exemplary cause, to whom himself also shall
be conformed in one time?

Secondly, Mr. Air argues against it thus. He that pays our debts. 5.
to the utmost farthing, and thereupon receives a discharge, is more then a
pattern of our release.

Rep. More then a pattern of our release? Is this all Mr. Air contends for?
upon what pretense then does he oppose me? I acknowledge Christ to be the
meritorious cause of our release in his death, and not only the exemplary cause
of it in his resurrection. As to the thing which (I think) Mr. Air intends, I
have told him often, that Christ entered into an obligation of his own to make
satisfaction for our debt: from which obligation he was discharged in his
resurrection: God acquitting him, as having paid as much as was demanded. But
if Christ had power to do what he would with his own; then was it in his power
and his Fathers, to give us the effect of this satisfaction, when and upon what
terms they pleased: and to suspend our discharge (notwithstanding Christ were
long before discharged) till himself should sit down at the right hand of
Glory, and give it us with his own hand, according as sinners in successive
generations come to him for it. M. Air has often said the contrary, but
proves it no where.

His third Argument charge high ( magnis tamen excidit ausis:). 6.
take it at large. If Christ were only a pattern and example of our
justification, then was he justified from his own sins, and consequently was a
sinner, which is the most horrid blasphemy that can be uttered. The reason of
the consequence is evident: for if Christ was but a pattern of our
justification, then was he justified as we are. Now we are justified from our
own sins which we our selves have committed.

Rep. 1. This the charge: this the proof. But because M. Air is so careless
of what he speaks, let us see whether the matter be mended according to his own
principles. He then does not only acknowledge, but contend that the elect were
justified in Christ as a common person. Now what is a common person? It is a
general term, and should have been described more plainly then it is: but
something he speaks of him,. 1. Whatsoever is done by or to a common person as
such, is to be attributed to them in whose steed he stands, and. 4. 1. The act
of a common person is the act of them whom he represents. The sum is. A
common person is he that represents another both in what he does, and in what
is done to him. Now then thus I proceed. If Christ were justified as a common
person, then was he justified from his own sins, and consequently was a sinner,
which is the most horrid blasphemy that can be uttered. The reason of the
consequence is evident: for if Christ was justified as a common person, then
was he justified as we are (for a common person is he that represents another
both in what he does, and in what is done to him) Now we are justified from our
own sins, which we our selves have committed. Ergo. Let M. Air answer this for
himself, and he has answered for me. But because he has put me out of hope of
the former, I will do the latter presently. 2. In the mean time I will propose
one thing to M. Eyres consideration. If the justification of Christ as a common
person were actually, and formally the justification of the elect, then are not
the elect justified of grace but of works: (which is the most horrid
contradiction to the Gospel that can be uttered:) the reason of the consequence
is evident: because Christ was not justified of grace but of debt. Ergo, if
that act of justification which passed upon him, be that which justifies us,
then are not we justified of grace.

But to M. Eyres Argument (if it may so be called) I deny his consequence,. 7.
(as evident as it is) and the proof of it. To the former I say, that Christ's
resurrection was his discharge from his own* obligation, which he voluntarily
undertook to suffer and satisfy for our sins: and therein he became the
exemplary cause of a like discharge which should follow on them that believe,
from that obligation which comes upon them involuntarily and necessarily
because of sin. To the proof I say, that Christ's Justification was such as ours
is, in regard of its common nature and effects, (which is sufficient to the
agreement of the example and counterpart: as the sacrifices of old represented
Christ dying, though he were a man, and they were beasts) not in its principle
and special nature. Surely it will not be denied, that we bear the image of
Christ in our resurrection from the dead: but then (will Mr. Air say) he was
raised as we are: now we are raised from corruption. Ergo, he also was raised
from corruption, which is as horrid a contradiction to Scripture as can be
uttered, Psalm. 16. 10. or he was raised by his own power, John 2. 19. Ergo, if
we in our Resurrection are conformed to him, then are we also raised by our own
power; which is blasphemy as bad as the other: that makes Christ as bad as
sinners; this makes sinners as good as Christ. Did M. Air think it possible to
convince men's understandings by such Argumentations as these? His fourth
Argument is upon the point all one with this, and has been answered already
over and over, in that wherein it differs from this.

His fifth Argument is. That I recede very far both from the. 8.
meaning and expressions of all our orthodox writers, who do constantly call
our Savior a common person, but never the exemplary cause of our
justification: particularly my Grandfather Parker, de descens. lib. 3. sect.
49, 50, 53.

Rep. 1. I did not think before (nor do I now) that the affirming of Christ to
be an exemplary cause of all those spiritual heavenly blessings which God
bestows on us, had been, to deny him to be a common person. The Scriptures call
him the first borne amongst many brethren, Romans 8. 29. The first borne of every
creature, Colos. 1. 15. the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20.
phrases importing that there are many others, who by his power shall be
conformed to his image in all his heavenly perfections: which is all I seek by
the term of an exemplary cause. But he that calls Christ the first borne, the
first begotten, the first fruits, is so far from denying him, as that he does
suppose him to be a common person, in regard that the proper import of these
phrases is to teach us, that he has received excellent blessings, not for
himself, but for others also. The reason why I use the term of an exemplary
cause rather then of a common person, I give the Reader a little below. 2. And
that our Divines do usually call Christ a common, person is a thing so well
known, that M. Air should not need to have quoted my Grandfather Parker to
convince me of it. He should have showed that they call him so in such a sense
as cannot be expressed by the term of an exemplary cause. So does not my
Grandfather, at least in the point of Christ's resurrection, of which he there
speaks not a word: but Do descens. lib. 4 sect. 75.
elsewhere says with Athanasius. Anima Christi descensum suum ad inferos
peregit, and ab inferis resurrectionem produxit, ut nostrae resurrectionis
imaginem concinnaret; which in sense is the very same that I say, concerning
Christ's becoming an exemplary cause in his resurrection. 3. Nor are our Divines
such strangers to the use of that expression, as M. Air represents them: Sound
Beleev page 79. 80. edit. 1653.
M. Shepherd uses it verbatim. There is (says he) a merited justification by
Christ's death: and a virtual or exemplary justification in Christ's resurrection
as our head and surety. So Med. Theol. l. 1. c. 23. th. 16, 17.
Dr. Amese, finis resurrectionis fuit -- ut se and justificatum and alios
justificantem ostenderet. 5. ut resurrectionis nostrae tam spiritualis quam
corporalis hypostasin, exemplar, and initiatio fieret. Christus enim exemplaris
causa est nostrae resurrectionis, ut a morte resurgens: Lud. Croc. s. Theol. l.
2. cap. 12. p. 353.
So others.

His last Argument is, that this expression savours rankly of Pelagianisme. 9.
and Socinianisme. For they make the second Adam a mere pattern and example of
our reconciliation.

Rep. I have read indeed concerning the Pelagians, that they deny the
propagation of Adams sin any otherwise then by imitation: and that the
Socinians say, Christ shows us the way of salvation by the example of his own
life, I know. But if I, who thankfully acknowledge our Lords merits and
satisfaction, and live by the faith thereof, am yet guilty of Pelagianisme and
Socinianisme for affirming, that as in all things else, so in his justification
he had this preeminence above others, as not only to be justified himself, but
to become the justifying cause of others after his own pattern and similitude;
I am content to bear the reproach of both.

SECT. II.
IN the next place I gave the Reader an account why I used the. 10.
term of an exemplary cause, rather then of a common person, in these words.
I use the term of an exemplary cause rather then of a common person, because
a common person may be the effect of those whom he represents (as the
Parliament of the Commonwealth) but Christ is such a common person, as that he
is the cause of those whom he represents in every thing in which he represents
them.

This excuse (says M. Air) is both fallacious and impertinent. Fallacious,
because it seems to intimate, that an exemplary cause does express as much as
a common person: which is clearly false: for the act of the exemplar is not the
act of the Imitator; as the act of a common person is the act of them whom he
represents. Parents are examples to their children, not common persons.

Rep. Know (Reader) first, that we are not now speaking of our active,
voluntary imitation of Christ in duties of obedience: but of our being
passively conformed and fashioned like him in the participation of his
spiritual blessings, according to our condition and capacity. Thus in our
justification do we bear his image and partake in his likeness; who as he was
the first borne from the dead, so is he the first borne of them that are
justified, forasmuch as his resurrection was his justification. And as our
resurrection from death (whenever it shall be) exists by virtue of his, Joh
14. 19. He being risen as the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20.
So also does our justification. 2. This being premised I add, that to say that
Christ in his resurrection was the exemplary cause of our justification is far
more pertinent and significant, then to say, we were then justified in him as a
common person (especially according to M. Eyres use of that term, of which
more presently:) the reason is ready; because the former phrase expresses the
influence which his justification has upon ours, and the dependence which ours
has upon his, which the latter does not; for to be justified in another as a
common person, does neither declare his justification to be the cause of ours,
nor ours the effect of his: could we have delegated a person to have received
from God that sentence of absolution in our names (as Israel sent up Moses into
the mount) we had all of us been justified as immediately as himself, nor had
our justification had any dependence upon his, though we had then been
justified in him as a common person. 3. Wherefore, as to the term of a common
person (concerning which I have made a more toylesome search into the civil
law, and those few Civilians which I have, then the moment of the matter
requires) it may be understood in a double sense: either, 1. fictione
suppositi, when a person (by a kind of civil metempseuchosis) does so
represent another, in what he does, or is done to him, as that the same things
are said to be done by, or to the person whom he represents. As Ambassadors
represent the person of the Princes that employ them: what they do as such, is
reputed the act of the Prince that sends them forth, and what is done to them
as such, is reputed as done to him. We do, or receive that, which our Attorney
does, or receives in our name. Or 2. Ex re gesta, when a person does that, in
the effects of which (be they good or evil) others partake as well as himself.
Thus the punishment of high treason is common with the Traitor to his
children, though he do not represent them, neither in offending, nor in being
punished. Thus a Surety pays his money as a common person, because the Debtour
(as well as himself) if no compact hinder) has the benefit of a discharge,
though he do not represent the debtour in making payment. In this latter sense
I readily acknowledge, that Christ was a common Person in his Death and
Resurrection, because we receive the benefit of both in our measure and kind
as well as himself And in this sense an exemplary cause expresses as much and
somewhat more then a common person.

But Mr. Air will have Christ to be a common person in the former. 11.
sense: and that as well in his Death as his Resurrection. That he was so in
his death, I deny roundly. The reason is that, for which Mr. Air chooses to
call him a common person, rather then an exemplary cause, because (says he)
the act of a common person is the act of them whom he represents. But Christ's
satisfaction, merits, redemption, and perfect obedience, are not our act, so as
that we can be said to have satisfied, merited, redeemed our selves, perfectly
obeyed the Law, and borne the curse thereof, (things for ever impossible for
sinners to do, Romans 8. 3. and 5. 6.) Ergo, they are not representable as doing
of them. Would Mr. Air would give an example amongst men of a common person,
representing others in such an act which is impossible for them to put forth;
But the Scripture is express, that as it was by the one offense of one man
that all are condemned; so is it by the one righteousness of one Jesus Christ,
that all are justified, Romans 5. 17, 18.

The Resurrection of Christ I acknowledge to be of another consideration,. 12.
and that he may with much more reason be said to be a common person in his
Resurrection, then in his death. Nevertheless, neither in that do I approve the
term, (unless it be understood in the second sense mentioned) for the reason
already given. And to what Mr. Air adds, of Parents being examples to their
children, he must again remember that I am not contending that Christ is the
example, but the exemplary cause of our Justification. Sodom and Gomorrah are
set forth for examples of what judgments God will execute upon such sinners,
but they are not exemplary causes thereof. This for the fallacy.

2. (Says Mr. Air) it is impertinent, because Christ's discharge. 13.
may be ours, though we did not choose him, but God did constitute and appoint
him to be the Head, Surety, and common Person to the Elect. We did not choose
Adam, and yet his sin was imputed to us.

Answ. 1. Nor do I intend any thing more in changing the term of a common
person into that of an exemplary cause, then to express that pre-eminence
which Christ has, as in all things else, so in his Justification; which the
term of a common person is so far from doing, as that it supposes the just
contrary; for the action or passion of a common person is not so properly his
own, as his whom he represents. As, what an Ambassador does is not so properly
his own act as the Kings, and what is done to him as such, is more properly
done to the King then to him. In like manner, if Christ were raised precisely
as a common person representing us, then are we properly the first risers from
the dead, and his Resurrection has no causal influence at all upon ours. 2.
That God appointed his Son to be the Head, Surety, and common Person of the
Elect, is a contradiction; if a common person be taken in Mr. Eyres sense, for
one that represents others in what he does, and in what is done to him; Christ
is undoubtedly a Head and Surety to the Elect; so the Scriptures call him, and
both expressions imply a causal influence of life from him to us; But the
common Person described as such, is neither Head nor Surety, because the
operations of a Head and Surety are his own peculiarly: none other do the like,
and therefore are not capable of being represented in doing of them: the case
is the same in what he receives, or in what is done to him, as Head and Surety.
3. Concerning Adam, I do also deny that he is fitly called a common person in
Mr. Eyres sense of that phrase: and in what sense we may be said to have sinned
in him, we have already largely opened. His sin is indeed imputed unto us: not
that it is imputed to us that we have done it or committed it, for that is in
it self an error of falsehood: and besides is contrary to the Apostle, who
supposes this sin to be imputed unto many, who never sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, neither in individuo, nor in specie, Romans 5.
14. but because by virtue of that sin we his children stand obliged to the
suffering of death natural: he being the common Parent, who by Covenant
received righteousness and life to be communicated to his children, if himself
continued obedient, otherwise to lose it, both to himself and us.

That the Reader might see how inconsequent Mr. Eyres argument. 14.
is, inferring our Justification before says, from our Justification (in some
sense) in the Resurrection of Christ, I said, we may as justly infer that our
Resurrection is past already, because we are risen in Christ, as that our
Justification is past before we believe, because we are (in some sense)
justified in Christ. We are also in some sense sanctified in Christ, Romans 6. 6.
1 Cor. 1. 30. yet we may not infer, Ergo, we are sanctified before faith.

In answer to this Mr. Air speaks many words to little purpose; the sum of
them is, Our personal Resurrection necessarily supposes our life and death.
But to our actual discharge there needed no more then the payment of our debt,
etc.

Rep. The difference between our Resurrection and Sanctification on the one
hand, and Justification on the other, is plain and obvious; but the whole
strength of Mr. Eyres Argument lies in this one thing, that we were justified
in Christ as a common person. Now if our rising in Christ as a common person,
will not infer that our Resurrection is before faith, then neither is our
Justification proved to be before faith, because we were justified in Christ as
a common person: and if we were justified simply in his Resurrection, ^t must
be upon some other account, then because we were justified in him as a common
person. 2. Therefore Mr. Air does tacitly deny, (not publicly, for fear of
the people) that we are risen in Christ as a common person. Christ (says he)
fully merited our Resurrection to glory, in which respect we are said to be
risen with Christ, (a strange and unheard of interpretation, that we should be
said to be raised with Christ, because he in his death merited our
Resurrection, which might have been true, though himself had never been raised)
but Mr. Air might easily foresee, that as he interprets our Resurrection in
Christ, so might we interpret our Justification in Christ rising, (a phrase not
used in Scripture, but admitted by me as agreeable, or not contrary thereunto,)
not for our Justification in him as a common person, but for his merit or
purchase of our Justification. Truly this does Mr. Air own too, (though very
privately) and thereby quite and clean desert his whole argument in the very
next words. It is, (says he) no such absurdity to say, Christ has purchased
our R^surrection, though we are not risen, as to say, he has purchased our
discharge, and yet we are not discharged; for to say a debt is discharged, and
yet justly chargeable, is a contradiction. Purchased? why I thought we had been
now disputing whether the discharge of Christ as a common person in his
Resurrection, were really and formally the discharge of sinners? and not
whether he purchased our discharge in his death? But some men had rather speak
nothing to purpose, then nothing at all. As to the reason added, we have
already showed at large, in what sense Christ's death, may be called the payment
of our debt. A debtour cannot discharge a debt, and yet that debt be justly
chargeable upon him: but that another may not leave a full and sufficient price
in the Creditors hand, that he may discharge his debtour some time after that
price is paid, or upon some condition to be performed by him, I shall believe,
when I see, not words, but power and argument: which I have long in vain
expected from Master Air.

The Conclusion therefore, and sum of my Answer was this, Justification. 15.
is either causal and virtual, or actual and formal: we were causally and
virtually justified in Christ's Justification, but not actually and formally.

Mr. Eyres answer is nothing but a repetition of several things (already
confuted) concerning the imputation of our sins to Christ, and the payment and
satisfaction in his death: but upon the distinction it self he fixes nothing.
By all which, I perceive, he is weary of his argument drawn from Christ's
Justification in his Resurrection, to prove ours. I speak of a Justification
virtual and causal in Christ's Resurrection, and he answers I know not what,
concerning Christ's death. Yet the latter part of the answer deserves a little
consideration.

I grant (says Mr. Air) that the death of Christ does justify us only
virtually; but the satisfaction in his death does justify us formally. -- And
therefore Christ's dying for us, or for our sins, his reconciling us to God, and
our being justified, are Synonyma's in Scripture phrase, Romans 58, 9, 10.

Rep. 1. The distinction here proposed I never read before, nor can I
understand now, viz. How we are justified virtually in the death of Christ, as
it was his death, not as it was a satisfaction in whole or part. If the meaning
be that there was that virtue and worth in the death of Christ as made it
satisfactory, which no man's death else could be for want of the like worth: yet
is the speech strangely improper. As if a broken undone debtour, seeing a very
wealthy man that has many thousands more lying by him, then his debt comes to,
should say, his debt is virtually paid, or himself virtually discharged by that
man's money. 2. To say that Christ's satisfaction does justify us formally, is
to deny our Justification formal to be Gods act, (for it was not God but Christ
that satisfied) or that it does at all consist in the pardon of sin (for Christ
did not satisfy by having any sin pardoned to him) or that he was justified
before us: yea rather, we are first justified, if his satisfaction justify us
formally: because himself was not properly justified till his Resurrection. I
have often read that Christ's satisfaction justifies us materially, being that
matter or righteousness for which we are justified; never till now, that it
justifies formally. 2. The next observation, that Christ's dying for us, or for
our sins, and our being justified, are Sy^^nyma's in Scripture, is most plainly
refuted by Scripture, Romans 4. 25. who was delivered, (namely, unto death) for
our sins, and rose again for our Justification.

In the next place Mr. Air undertakes the answer of an objection,. 16.
not made by me, but by some others, and it is here brought in by head and
shoulders, without the least occasion offered, saving what Mr. Air has made
to himself, by forgetting his own argument and the right prosecution thereof;
and deflecting from our Justification in Christ as a common person, to the
Purchase of Justification in his blood. Nevertheless, because the truth is on
the objectours side, and Mr. Air in answering contradicts himself, let us see
what is said. The objection is this, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Christ was made sin for us,
(...), that we might be made (he does not say, that thereby we are made,) the
righteousness of God in him. Ergo, the laying of our sins on Christ is only
an Antecedent, which tends to the procuring of our Justification, and not the
same formally.

Thou see (Reader) that the scope of the objection is to prove, that the
death of Christ is the meritorious cause of our Justification, which Mr. Air,
after frequent acknowledgements of the truth of it, does now plainly deny: and
that of Justification not as signifying the act but the effects. What, have we
heard so often of Christ's procuring, meriting, purchasing Pardon and
Redemption, when he is here denied to have done any thing, tending to the
procuring of our Justification? But let us see Mr. Eyres answer: it consists of
three parts.

1. (Says he) That this phrase, that we might be, or be made, does not always
signify the final, but sometimes the formal cause: as when it is said, That
light is let in, that darkness may be expelled.

Rep. But in this sense is that phrase very rarely, if at all, used in the New
Testament, and improperly, wheresoever it is used: and thrice in this chapter,
but a little before, used in its most obvious sense, verse 10. 12, 15. and in
this text cannot have that sense which Mr. Air here mentions, because himself
acknowledges in his very next answer, that the imputation of our sins to
Christ, and of his righteousness to us do differ. But the Apostle in this
verse speaks of the imputation of our sins to Christ, and of his righteousness
to us; Ergo, the making of him to be sin for us, and of us righteousness in
him, is not formally the same.

Mr Air, 2. Though the imputation of our sins to Christ and of his
righteousness to us, differ: yet the imputation of sin to him, and
non-imputation of it unto us, is but one and the same act of God.

Rep. 1. I must needs say this is to be wise above what is written: The Apostle
supposes the imputation of righteousness, and non-imputation of sin to be one
and the same act (differing only in respect of the terminus a quo and ad quem)
Romans 4. 6, 8. David describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works. -- Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
will not impute sin. 2. Mr. Air argued not far before, that God promises
nothing in his Covenant which Christ has not purchased. But nonimputation of
sin is the special blessing promised in the Covenant, Heb. 8. 12. for the
pardon of sin, and the non-imputation of it is all one, Romans 4. 7, 8. Ergo, it
was procured in the death of Christ 3. According to the model of this
distinction, the death of Christ procures the imputation of righteousness, but
not the non-imputation of sin, that is, it procures positive blessings, but not
the destruction of, or our deliverance from the evil and miseries of sin, which
makes our Lord but half a Savior. 4. Would Mr. Air had told us what is that
imputation of righteousness, which in its formal notion includes not the
non-imputation of sin; or that non-imputation of sin, which includes not
essentially the imputation of righteousness. He has told us long since that
both these are immanent and eternal acts of God, and as such, the death of
Christ procures neither: the effects of both are one and the same, and it is
therefore impossible to distinguish them in reference to their effects. It is
to me a mystery beyond comprehension, how that imputation which constitutes a
sinner righteous, should yet include nothing of the non-imputation of sin, or
how sin can be non-imputed to a sinner, and yet he abide unrighteous, unless
some other act concur to make him righteous.

His third answer is, The non-imputation of sin to us, antecedes. 17.
the imputation of righteousness to us in order of nature only, not of time.

Rep. That is, the righteousness of Christ avails nothing to the non-imputing
of sin to us. The very naming of these hideous doctrines is a sufficient
confutation of them. Should I have delivered such things, the names of all the
most loathsome heretics that ever were, would have been accounted too soft to
have been thrown at my head.

Yet Mr. Air has not done object^ng against himself, but in the. 18.
end of this third answer brings in some body objecting thus. We were not then
(I suppose he means when Christ died,) Ergo, righteousness could not then be
imputed to us.

His answer is, They might as well object, our sins were not then. Erge, they
could not be imputed unto Christ in the business of Justification, God calls
things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4. 17.

Rep. 1. I deny the parity of reason between the one and the other. Sin can
neither be punished nor pardoned before it be committed, in ^r to the person
that sin^eth. Nevertheless, he that has the absolute dominion of his own life
(as Christ had) may as a Surety suffer all that punishment, which by the Law
can at any time grow due to sin: for even amongst men, L. S^ipula^^s sum and L.
potest. ss. de fide juss and. side ^^ss. instit. de fide-juss.
(...) accipi potest in ^uturam obligationem, Sureties are admitted upon future
obligations. If as soon as death by the Law was made the punishment of sin,
before men had broken the Law, the Lord Jesus had given up himself to death,
that in case we should sin, his death should have had the same effect as now it
has: in this case our sin, (though then but possible) had been imputed unto
him; for he had borne the penalty due to it, and threatened against it, but his
righteousness had not been imputed to us, upon the same supposition, that we
had not sinned. In like manner, though the sins of the elect were not in being,
(I mean of all the Elect borne since his death) when Christ died; yet the full
penalty which could at any time grow due to them, was then in being, and
determined by the Law, which punishment also (in sum and substance) he might
and did undergo, that when we should sin, we might yet be washed in his blood
from all our sins. The future sins of the Elect, Christ might make so far
present in himself, as to endure all the penalty which they could at any time
deserve, it being not our desert of punishment which obliges him to suffer it,
but his own voluntary submission to it, which makes punishment due to him as
our Surety, before it become due to us as actual sinners; But pardon of sin
being essentially the destruction of that very obligation, which the sinner
has contracted upon himself, does therefore essentially suppose the sinner
and his sin in being: though another may suffer for him, yet another cannot be
pardoned for him, pardon of sin being a personal privilege, that is, such as
rests in the person of the sinner, or nowhere. 2. And that God in the matter of
Justification calls things that are not as though they were, is no part of
the Apostles meaning, Romans 4. 17. but to show the ground of Abraham's steadfast
believing on God, for the obtaining of a blessing, to sense and reason
impossible, namely, that he should become the father of many nations, his own
body, and Sarahs womb being dead, v. 19. The reason hereof was, because God is
he that raises the dead, and is able to give being to things out of nothing,
for he calls things that are not, as if they were, therefore Abraham against
hope believed in hope, v. 18. This is that faith through which he, and all his
children in the same faith obtain righteousness.

Having thus at large demonstrated the weakness of the argument,. 19.
from our Justification in Christ as a common person, to prove our
Justification before faith I left this censure upon it, they are credulous
souls that will be drawn by such decays as these into schism and faction, to
the hardening and discomforting of more hearts in one hour, then the opinion
it self (should it obtain) will do good to; while the world stands; which
censure is of such ill resentment with Mr. Air, that he has used no less
then two leaves of paper, to wipe off the dirt, untruth, slander, (and what he
pleases) cast upon himself and his Church thereby.

As to the Argument, his own deserting it in plain ground is evidence enough
that it is too weak to bear the weight which is laid upon it, and if men will
embrace opinions which have no stronger foundations, is not their own credulity
in fault? The charge of schism and faction was not intended against him, or
any of his charge in particular: (I little know whether all under his charge be
of his opinion, or whether all of his opinion in the place he lives in, be
under his charge) but in general against all, who without better ground then
the foresaid Argument will afford them, shall by jealousies, separations,
envyings, backbitings, rash censurings, etc. violate the rules of Christian
love and peace, whereof if neither Mr. Air, nor any of his charge are guilty,
yet some others of his judgment in this point, are: and that so foully that he
would loath to undertake their defense, if he will be true to the Profession
which here he makes of himself.

CHAP. XII.
A Reply to Mr. Eyres Sixteenth Chapter, concerning our being in Covenant with
God before believing.

SECT. I.
THe third and last Argument for proving our Justification. 1.
to be before faith, I thus proposed, and as I thought, according to Mr. Eyres
mind.

If we are in Covenant before we believe, then we are justified before we
believe; But we are in Covenant before we believe. Ergo,

This Argument Mr. Air disclaims as being none of his: at least, as not being
proposed in that form in which he dressed it: and hereupon expatiates in two
leaves of paper, upon the discourse which passed between himself and me,
showing the orderly progress in which his arguments advanced, with my answers
then given to them: to which I do not intend to digress so far as to reply. 1.
Because the Basis and foundation of his whole Argument, as he has now proposed
in print, is laid in this, that we were justified in Christ's Justification, and
therefore, as to the sum, is answered already. 2. Because there is no proof
of any particular branch of the Argument* but is proposed again before he has
done* and therefore must be answered hereafter. 3. Because though I have
altogether forgotten the order of his arguments, and of my own answers, yet I
very well remember, that as I understood his argument in no other sense, then
as it is set down in my Sermon printed, so many things I spoke by way of
answer, whereof his relation takes no notice: but I must desire him to take
more notice of before he and I part.

My answer then to the foresaid argument was double, 1. That upon supposition
that we were in Covenant before we believe, yet would it not follow that we
were justified before we believe; because the blessings of the Covenant have an
order and dependence one upon another, and are enjoyed successively one after
another.

To this Mr. Air replies in the second paragraph of this his sixteenth
chapter, and says, That though a man be not sanctified and glorified before
faith, yet if he be in Covenant with God, i. e. one of the elect, he is
certainly justified: For, 1. God from all eternity did will, not to punish his
Elect, which is real Justification.

Rep. To this (Reader) thou must expect no other answer from me, then what I
have at large given already.

2. Says he, Justification is the first benefit that does accrue to us by the
death of Christ, for Justification goes before Sanctification, and faith is a
part of Sanctification.

Rep. I acknowledge that our English Divines, (whom I confess in matters of
this nature I prefer before any other) are wont to place Sanctification in
order after Justification, which also is so plain from Scripture that it cannot
be denied. But Mr. Air also knows that they are wont to distinguish faith and
sanctification as two things, (as the Scriptures also do, 1 Timothy 2. 15. Acts
15. 9. and 16. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16.) though I do not find that they
do all express this difference in the same manner. Should I interpose my own
opinion, it may be I should find little thank for my labor, and therefore I
shall say no more then what others have said before me. 1. It being plain, that
faith and holiness are t^o things in the use of Scripture, Mr. Air should
have proved and not laid it down so rawly without any distinction, that faith
is a part of sanctification. I deny it, provided I may be tried by
Scripture Language. 2. As faith is in the understanding, a persuasion of the
truth of the Gospel, and the Promises of life and glory contained therein, so
is it wont to be distinguished from sanctification, 2 These. 2, 13. is not so
much a part of it as a cause: for by how much the more steadfastly we believe,
and see the glory of the Promises, by so much the more are we changed into the
image of Gods holiness, 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 3. 18. and 7. 1. 3. As faith is
in the will, an acceptance of Christ, that by him we may be brought unto God,
it has much the same difference; for as God has made Christ to us
sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. so does faith receive him, and in that respect is
not properly any part of our sanctification, but the turning of the soul to
Christ, as unto a most sufficient principle and author thereof, Acts 26. 18.
and so much for the exceptions against my first answer.

My second answer was a flat denial of the Assumption, viz. that we are in
Covenant with God before we believe, if the phrase of. 2.
being in Covenant be understood properly, for such an interest in the
Covenant, as gives a man right and title to the blessings of the Covenant. Mr.
Eyres proof is this. Some benefits of the Covenant, to wit, the Spirit which
works faith is given us before we believe.

My answer to this was large and distinct, though Mr. Air reproach it
sufficiently with a design of darkening the truth, and blinding the Reader,
but that's no matter. I showed, 1. That the word, Give, had a double sense in
Scripture. 1. When no receiving follows, and so it signifies no more then the
Will of God constituting and appointing, Acts 4. 12. Ephesians. 1. 22. and 4. 11. 2.
Sometimes it includes a receiving and possession of the thing given: Thus the
Spirit is given when we receive him, and are as it were possessed of him, and he
dwells in us. In this sense is the Spirit never said to be given in Scripture,
but unto them that do believe, Luke 11. 13. Gal. 3. 14. Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. with
Romans 8. 10. 11.

2 I showed also that the Spirit may be said to be given three ways:
essentially, personally, or in regard to some peculiar operations which he
works in us. Now there being no peculiar work of grace before faith it self,
which may not be wrought in an hypocrite (which has not the Spirit) as well as
in a child of God, therefore the Spirit is neither given nor received before
faith be wrought, but is given and received together with faith and not before.
This is the sum, the further explication the Reader may see in my Sermon at
leisure.

Mr. Air thus expounds the giving of the Spirit, That God according to his
gracious Covenant, does in his appointed time give or send his Spirit in the
preaching of the Gospel, to work faith in all those that are ordained to life.

Rep. Then see ( Reader) what a proof we have, that the Spirit is given us
before faith. Mr. Air should prove, that we have some benefits of the Covenant
before faith, viz. the Spirit, when he explains it, he tells us the Spirit is
given before faith, not in that sense in which the word give or given includes
our receiving, but as it signifies the sending or constituting of the Spirit,
to be by way of specialty the efficient cause or worker of faith. Mr. Air does
not so much as open his mouth against what I said before, that the Spirit is
said to be given to us in reference to some peculiar work of his upon or in us,
which work is faith. Here when he should show how he is given us before faith,
he says, he is sent to work faith; in which sense the Spirit may be said to be
given in the first sense mentioned of that word, but not given to us, so as
that we can be therefore said to receive him, eo ipso because he is sent to
work faith; and therefore this is but a deserting of the Argument in hand; nor
are we yet proved to have received any benefit of the Covenant (I mean, any
saving benefit) before faith.

Therefore Mr. Air answers secondly, That though the Spirit be not given us
one atome of time before faith, yet it is enough. 3.
that it has a precedence in order of nature, though not of time, and that
faith is not before the Spirit.

Rep. Neither, for if the Spirit be not said to be given to us, but in
reference to his working of faith in us, then faith is wrought in nature before
the Spirit can be said to be given to us: as if the Sun be said to dwell or
be in my house, because it enlightens my house, then in order of nature my
house is first enlightened before the Sun can be said to be or dwell in it.

There is but one thing more in this Chapter that needs answer: and that is
this; I had said the Spirit is not given us, but in reference to some peculiar
operation of his; working faith in us, and added for illustration, that as a
man does first build himself an house, and then dwell in it: so Christ by his
Spirit, does build, organize, and prepare the soul to be a house unto himself,
and then dwells in it.

Mr. Air answers, But is not that organizing preparing act of the Spirit one
benefit of the Covenant? and is not the Spirit in that act the cause of faith?

Rep. If these interrogations have the force of an affirmation, Mr. Air should
have proved them, and not barely asserted them. I have answered sufficiently
already. There is no peculiar work of grace before faith it self, which may not
be wrought in a hypocrite, (who has not the Spirit,) as well as in a child of
God: Ergo, there can be no work of the Spirit before faith it self, in
reference unto which the Spirit can be said to be given to us. Preparative
works do not difference a believer from an hypocrite, and therefore in
themselves are no fruit or benefit of the Covenant. So much ^o the sixteenth
Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
A Reply to Mr. Eyres Seventeenth Chapter. Concerning the Covenant wherein
faith is promised and by virtue whereof it is given to us.

SECT. I.
HAving thus showed that we receive not the Spirit before we believe,. 1.
it remains that we enquire, whether faith it self be not given to us, by
virtue of the Covenant made with us? for if we are in Covenant with God before
faith be given us, it is every whit as much to Mr. Eyres purpose, to show that
we are in Covenant before we believe, as if he had proved that the Spirit is
given us before we believe. For answer therefore to the question, understand
(Reader) that it may have a double sense. 1. Whether the Covenant of grace,
that is, the Gospel, have any efficiency in converting the * ^id. Dr. Ed.
Reynold Sinful. of si^ page 337* Mr. b^lk(...) o^ the Coven^^^. p^^t, 4. page
318.
soul* and working it to believe? and in this sense I readily grant that faith
is given us by virtue of the Covenant. Or 2. Whether God have engaged himself
by Covenant to any sinner in the world to give him faith, so that if God should
not give him faith, he were unfaithful, and a breaker of his own Covenant? In
this sense is the question to be understood, and my answer to it was: ( a)
Faith is not given to us by virtue of the Covenant made with us, but by virtue
of the Covenant made with Christ; God has promised Christ that sinners shall
believe on him, Isa. 53. 10. and 55. 4, 5. Psalm. 2. 8. and 110. 3. Matthew. 12.
21. Psalm. 89. 25, 26. etc. Hereupon Mr. Air disputes largely, that faith is
given to the Elect by virtue of the Covenant made with them: the sense of which
we have already explained, that the Elect are supposed to be in Covenant with
God before they believe, and so God obliged to them by Covenant to give them
faith. I deny it. See we what Mr. Air brings for proof of it.

First, a similitude at the end of his first section. If one promise. 2.
another, that in case he shall bear so many stripes, or perform any other
condition, he will then take care of and provide for his children, does not
this promise made with the father, most properly belong to his children? The
case is the same between Christ and us: He performed the condition, and we
receive the benefits of the New Covenant.

Answ. Whether the case be the same between Christ and us, is the proper debate
of the next Argument: in the mean time this comparison is not to our case,
because the Prom^se made to Christ, that Jews and Gentiles shall come into him
by faith; is a promise that he shall have children spiritual; that he shall
have a numerous seed, even like the stars of heaven for multitude. But as the
promise made to Abraham concerning the multitudes of children which he should
have, was no promise to them that they should become children (which were
promise to nothing, that it should become something) so the promise to Christ,
that many Nations shall come unto him, and become children to him in a spiritual
sense, is no promise to them, nor have they thereby any right given them to be
made believers; but unto him, and in gratiam sui, for his own honor and glory.
Much less does such a promise hinder, that that faith by which they become
children unto Christ, may not be enjoined them as the condition upon which they
are to partake in Christ and blessedness by him.

The serond and great Argument is this, If there be but one Covenant. 3.
of grace, which is made both with Christ and us, then faith is given us by
virtue of the Covenant made with us. But there is but one Covenant of grace
made both with Christ and us. Ergo, Hence, a little before I am bid to show
that there are two distinct Covenants of grace, one made with Christ, and the
other with us, or that there is any other Covenant made with the Elect, then
that which is made with Christ, etc.

Answ. Before we can give a distinct answer, to this we must first enquire how
we may conceive of the form and tenor of the Covenant of grace. The tenor of
the Covenant of works is plain and intelligible, Do this and live; But (it
seems) there is no Covenant of grace made with men at all (though some men are
the intended objects of the blessings therein contained) but only with Christ:
with whom we are to conceive the father striking a Covenant to this sense: If
thou will make, or do thou make satisfaction for the sins of the Elect, and I
will give them grace and glory; where the condition is Christ's death, or rather
his satisfaction, (for his death, if it had not been satisfactory, had availed
nothing) and the promise is, that the Elect shall have grace and glory. This
being explained I do utterly deny, that there is but one Covenant of grace made
both with Christ and us, which is Mr. Eyres Assumption.

And 1. I desire Mr. Air to reflect a little upon his own principles,. 4.
and tell me, whether pardon of sin be a blessing which God promises in his
Covenant to give, or the condition which Christ was to perform? The former out
of question, if Scripture may be Judge, Heb. 10. 16, 17. But whether Mr. Air
will allow it, or how he can allow it I cannot tell. We have seen him before
very peremptory in these two assertions. 1. That the imputation of our sins to
Christ, is formally the non-imputation of them unto us. 2. That Christ's
satisfaction was (formally) the payment of our debt, and so must needs
discharge us ipso facto, because the discharge of the debt is formally the
discharge of the debtour. How these principles clash one with another we have
showed already, (for Gods act in punishing of Christ, is in nature before his
bearing it, or satisfying by bearing it; as action is in nature before passion.
If then Gods act in imputing our sins to Christ, (that is, punishing them in
him) be formally the non-imputing, (that is, the pardoning) them to us, then
the death of Christ, as it was the payment of our debt, is not the thing that
discharges us: and if this, then not that:) But my business now is to infer,
if Christ's death be the payment of our debt, and so our formal discharge, then
our discharge from sin is the condition of the Covenant of grace, (as Mr. Air
has modelled it) not a promise upon the performance of the condition. The
reason is plain, because Christ's satisfaction (which is the payment of our
debt, and formally the discharge of the debtour) is the condition of the
Covenant of grace (according to Mr. Air;) But that cannot be the form or
tenor of the Covenant of grace, which excludes the pardon of sin from being
promised therein. Ergo, that is not the form which Mr. Air presents us with.
2. If the words aforesaid contain the substance and tenor of the Covenant of
grace, then the said Covenant does not only not require and command faith and
repentance as necessary means which we are bound to, for obtaining the promise
of life and salvation; But whosoever shall preach such a necessity of faith and
repentance, does in so doing contradict the tenor of the Covenant of grace.
The reason of the consequence is plain, because to the obtaining of a Promise
made upon condition, nothing more is required then the performance of the
condition. If then Christ has fulfilled the condition of the Covenant of
grace, nothing more can be enjoined and required of us, to the obtaining of any
blessing of the Covenant: and whosoever shall yet preach a necessity of faith
and repentance, as acts which we are bound to put forth that we may be saved,
destroys the Covenant of grace. But both these are desperate consequences,
which we show thus. The Gospel and the Covenant of grace are both one, Gal. 3.
8. compared with v. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 3. 6. with chap. 4. 3, 4. and Ephesians. 3. 6, 7.
and Col. 1. 23 But the Gospel obliges all men to believe and repent (the elect
as well as others) that they may be saved: and thus did the Apostles (the
special Ministers of the New Covenant) preach wheresoever they came, Mark 16.
15, 16. Luke 24. 47. Mark 1. 14, 15. Acts 2. 38. and 3. 19. and 20. 21. and 26.
20. Romans 10. 6, 8, 9. Col. 1. 23, 28. etc. Ergo, the Covenant of grace requires
faith and repentance, as necessary in point of duty that we may be saved; or
else the Apostle's Ministry had destroyed the Covenant.

Hence thirdly, it will be impossible for any man to sin against the. 5.
Gospel or Covenant of grace, (as Mr. Air has framed it) for none can sin
against the Covenant, but he that is a Covenanter, either de jure or de facto:
I mean, either such a one as actually is in Covenant, or else is bound to enter
into Covenant. Now upon supposition that none are Covenanters but God and
Christ, there can be no breach of the Covenant but on one of their parts. And
consequently, neither will it be any grace in God to preserve the Elect from a
final breaking of Covenant: such being the constitution thereof, that it is
impossible ex natura rei, that it should be broken but by God or Christ: nor
can any by unbelief or Apostasy violate the covenant (seeing it has no
preceptive part) which is surely contrary to Scripture, Heb. 10. 29. He has
counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing. Hence 4ly. No man becomes worthy of punishment for breaking the covenant
of grace through unbelief or Apostasy (as the Apostle in the same place says
they do, and that most justly; and I shall farther show when I come to it) Nor
5ly. Is salvation and eternal life given as a reward to them that keep the
covenant of their God: (which is contrary to innumerable Scriptures) the reason
is, because the covenant promises a reward to none, but unto them that fulfill
the conditions of it. If Christ only fulfill the condition, then our grace and
glory may be his reward: but glory is not the reward of our faith or obedience.
Mr. Air will say, yes, because glory follows our faith and obedience. But
though I readily acknowledge that glory is called our reward only
metaphorically, and one reason of the similitude is that which Mr. Air
mentions, because glory follows our faith and obedience, as wages follows the
work: yet is not that the only, or of it self a sufficient reason (as we have
showed before) nor are the Scriptures or our Divines wont to rest in it. The
Scriptures tell us that God will reward every man according to his works, See
Romans 2. 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Gal. 6. 7. Rev. 22. 12. etc. I acknowledge the
sense in which our Divines understand the words viz. that the phrase, according
to his works does not signify the proportion of desert, but the suitableness,
and agreeableness between works, and the reward which God gives: if the works
be good, the reward shall be good: if evil, the reward shall be evil also.
But this is as much as I need to show, that eternal life is not called a
reward merely because it follows faith and obedience. For if so, then a
believer quatenus a believer, or a godly man quatenus a godly man is no nearer
the reward, then if he had neither faith nor godliness, upon any other score
but this, that these by Gods appointment are to go before the reward. And if
God had appointed that all that shall be saved should live to 20 or 30 years of
age, their arrival at such an age, had been every whit as conducible to their
reward, as now their faith and godliness is supposed to be. Again? Our
Divines account it no ascribing to the desert of See Down^. o^ Just^^. l. 8.
cap. 5. sect. 1^.
works, that God should reward them that have the greatest degrees of grace,
with the greater degrees of glory. If this be so, then glory is not called a
reward merely because it follows faith and Godliness (for that it would do,
whether those graces were more or less.) But wherein then (will it be said)
stands the difference between a reward of debt and of grace? between a reward
properly so called, and a reward so called metaphorically? Surely amongst other
differences this is one, that God ( dignatione sua) of his own grace and
vouchsafeing, is pleased to accept of our faith and imperfect obedience, so as
to reward them with eternal life, not only above, but without all dignity and
desert in them. Whereas a reward properly so called, has always respect to
some work as its meritorious cause, from which also it has its measure and
proportion.

And whereas Mr. Air expects that I should have showed, that. 6.
there was one covenant of grace made with Christ, and another with us; it were
strange if it should pertain to me to prove any such thing. I thought it had
layn upon Mr. Air, not only to say, but to prove that the covenant of grace
was made with Christ. It was always very far from my thoughts, that the
covenant made with Christ, was the same with that which is made with sinners:
my reason is this. Those covenants which agree not, neither in the persons
covenanting, nor in their preceptive part, nor in their promissory part, are
not the same* The covenants with Christ and us disagree in all these. Ergo they
are not the same. The assumption we prove by part. 1. They agree not in the
persons covenanting. In the former the covenanters are God and Christ: in the
latter God and men. One of these two things I guess Mr. Air will say, either,
1. That though the whole covenant be not made with us, because it is Christ*
and not we which performed the condition of it: yet the promissary part of it
pertaines wholly to us: because it is our blessedness which is promised
therein. Answ. That is, men are not the subjects or persons that join
themselves in covenant with the Lord (as the Scriptures speak, Jer. 50. 5.) but
only the objects concerning whom God has spoken that he will do them good,
even as brute, or inanimate creatures may metaphorically be said to be in
covenant with God, when he promises any blessing upon them for his servants
sake, as Hos. 2. v. 18. God promises to make a Covenant for his people with
the beasts of the field (that they shall do them no hurt) and with the heavens
and the earth, that they shall concur to yield them blessings, v. 21, 22. Or
rather when God promises, that the heavens and earth shall receive some
farther persection then they now have, for his childrens sake, Rom 8. 21. In
this case these creatures may (but improperly) be said to be in covenant with
God: and (but more improperly) that God has made a covenant with them: and the
Scripture somewhere speaks in a language very near it. But God governs men
in a way suitable to their natures, drawing them with the cords of men:
blessing them, not as he blesses the earth, and other inanimate or brute
creatures; but bestowing blessedness on them as the reward of some former act
or actions of theirs: and so they are not only the objects for whom God
covenanteth, but the subjects with whom. Now if the constitution of the
Covenant of grace be such that men are taken into it, mediante action
voluntaria, not without some voluntary act of their own intervening, then Gods
declaring concerning them that he will bless them, is not a sufficient ground
upon which he can be said to have made the covenant of grace with them. But
such is the constitution of the covenant of grace that men are taken into it,
not without some voluntary act of their own intervening. Ergo, the assumption
is plain from the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13. That thou should enter
(or pass) into covenant with the Lord thy God -- that he may be unto thee a
God -- as he has sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob;
which to be the substance of the covenant of grace (excepting the additions and
explications peculiar to the times of the gospel) appears. 1. In that it is
for substance the same which was made with their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, which not only the Scriptures witness, but Mr. Air grants, to be, for
substance, the covenant of grace. The promise to the fathers that they should
have a seed was peculiar to themselves: but the other blessings promised,
pertained to the seed as well as to the fathers: only the Lord requires of
them to enter into, and keep his covenant (as their fathers did) that they
might inherit the blessing of their fathers. 2. Because the covenant here
mentioned, is expressly distinguished from the covenant of the law made with
them in Horeb, v. 1. The words of the covenant made with Israel in the land of
Moab, beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb. 3. Because the
Apostle calls this very covenant (excepting as above excepted, the additions of
grace, and explications of promises, proper to the times of the Messiah) the
righteousness which is of faith, and the word of faith which he and other
Apostles preached, compare chap. 30. v. 11, 12, 13, 14. with Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9

Or else he may say, that we also performed the condition in Christ. But this I
think he will not say, because he so distributes the covenant of grace into
parts, as to ascribe to Christ the performance of the condition: to us, the
receiving of the benefit.

Secondly, the covenant made with Christ, and that with us, agree. 7.
not in their preceptive part. Of him it was required that he should make his
soul an offering for sin, and give his life a ransom for many, Isa. 53. 10.
Heb. 10. 5. 7. Of us there is no such thing required: but only that we believe
as Abraham did: so shall we partake in the blessings of his covenant, Romans 4.
23, 24. Gal. 3. 6, 7, 9, 16, 22. Heb. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15. 3. The promises made
to Christ in the covenant of redemption, are of a higher nature then those made
to us in the covenant of reconciliation; to wit, a name above every name,
whether in heaven or earth: the inheritance of all nations: dominion from sea
to sea. See Philip. 2. 9. Heb. 1. 4. and 2. 9. and the other places mentioned,.
1. The most which is promised to us is a conformity in our measure unto him in
glory.

SECT. 2.
Mr. Eyres second Argument proceeds thus. If Christ merited. 8.
nothing for himself but only for the elect, then all the promises made to him
do belong to them; But the first is true. Ergo.

Answ. I deny the consequence: because though Christ merited nothing for
himself, (it being unworthy to rank him amongst such mercinary servants, to
whom nothing is due but for their labor: in which sense are our Divines to be
understood, when they deny him to have merited for himself) yet what he did and
suffered was necessary for himself at least as a condition, without which he
had not obtained that advancement which now he has ( viz. power of sending the
Spirit, Act. 2. 33. dominion over Angels, in short, all power, both in heaven
and earth) as our Divines do liberally grant. Which promises are not made to
us, but to Christ: though instrictnesse of propriety he did not merit them. And
therefore though I do not find that he is called his own mediator, yet he was
his own way unto the father, Joh. 14. 4, 6. forasmuch as not without the
rending of his flesh, and the shedding of his own blood, he entered into the
holy place. Heb. 9. 11, 12. Mr. Air proves his consequence in these words.
Christ is the mediator of the new covenant, Heb. 12. 24. Faith is bestowed
upon us, by virtue of that covenant whereof Christ is Mediator. Now Christ is
the Mediator of the covenant made with us, not of a covenant made singly and
particularly with himself: for a man is not properly a Mediator for himself.

Answ. Which words, if they had stood by themselves as an argument directly
proving the maine question, viz. that faith is given us by virtue of the
covenant made with us, they had been of more strength then all that Mr. Air
has said for it besides. But as they now stand for a proof of the foresaid
consequence; I cannot imagine into what form to cast them, though I have
toyled my self about it more then enough. Therefore leaving it to Mr. Air, to
show how they prove his consequence; let us consider them as an argument by
themselves, the form whereof is this. What is given us by virtue of that
covenant whereof Christ is Mediator, is given us by that covenant which is
made with us: the reason is, because Christ is the Mediator of the covenant
made with us, not with himself. But faith is given us by virtue of that
covenant whereof Christ is Mediator. Erg^, I cannot guess what strength the
argument loses in this form, if it loose any, Mr. Air must thank himself
for speaking no plainer: my answer to it is this, faith may be said to be given
by virtue of the covenant in a double respect. 1. Operatione and ^fficacia
foederis, by the operation and efficiency of the covenant working faith in the
soul, by the power of the Spirit accompanying it. In this sense I deny the
proposition, because what is given us by the efficiency of the covenant, does
not suppose us to be in covenant before our receiving it: forasmuch as the
working of faith it self, by which we are brought into covenant, is the effect
of the covenant, or 2. Ex obligatione faederis. and so that is given by virtue
of the covenant, which we by the covenant have a right to receive, and God by
the same covenant has obliged himself to us, to bestow upon us. In this sense
(which only is proper to our Argument) I deny the assumption: because there is
no covenant whereof Christ is Mediator, which gives any man a right to the
receiving of faith, or makes it due to him that faith be given him: as I shall
farther show by and by, when I come to examine Mr. Eyres answer to my
explication of Heb. 8. 10. And that faith is given us by the righteousness and
merits of Christ, will never prove that therefore it is given us as unto a
people in covenant with God. What? may not Christ merit faith, that thereby we
might be estated in the covenant? though I will also tell Mr. Air, that the
three places he mentions, viz. 2 Pet. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 3. Romans 8. 32. to prove
that we obtain faith by the merits of Christ, would never convince me if I
were contrary minded.

The third argument proceeds thus. If faith be given us by virtue. 9
of that covenant, whereby justification, sanctification, perseverance and
glory are bestowed upon us, then faith is given us by virtue of that covenant
which is made with us. But the first is true. Ergo so is the last. In the same
covenant wherein God promises to cleanse us from our filthiness, to cause to
walk in his ways, etc. he promises to circumcise our hearts, to make us
believe, etc. Ezekiel. 36. 25. etc. Jer. 31. 34.

Answ. I deny the assumption, if understood according to the foregoing
distinction, of what is given by a covenant obligation. Till I see better
proof then any I meet with in Mr. Eyres book (which I believe I never shall)
it will never enter into my heart, that God is as much bound to give faith to
sinners and rebels, as he is to give righteousness and salvation to
believers. As for the proof out of Ezekiel. 36. and Jer. 31. I deny that God does
give righteousness, or glory by virtue; that is, by the obligation of the
covenant there mentioned. The reason (which shall be farther explained by and
by) is, because those texts do not express the form and tenor of the covenant
of grace; but only the matter and particulars, wherein God would make the said
covenant, as administered in the days of Christ, to excel it self in its
administration before his coming. As for example, that it shall have greater
efficacy in giving ability to fulfill it: and to confer more excellent,
spiritual and eternal blessings, to them that do fulfill it. But he that
declares, that his purpose is to establish and enact such a covenant, by and
according to which such excellent blessings shall be given, does not by such a
declaration oblige himself to give them: it is the covenant it self enacted and
established, which enduceth the obligation. Wherefore the texts mentioned, do
indeed declare that the effects of the new Covenant (that is of the Covenant in
its new administration) shall be far more excellent then of the old: but they
do by no means declare that the said Covenant shall produce these effects in
one and the same way or manner. It produces faith by its real efficacy (as I
may so call it) for it is the new Covenant which administreth that Spirit by
which faith is wrought: and having thus brought souls within the bond, and made
them to take hold of it self, it produces justification, perseverance and
salvation by its legal efficacy, inasmuch as it makes these and all other
blessings due to them that believe.

The fourth argument succeeds. Faith is given by virtue. 10.
of that Covenant which was made with Abraham and his seed. Ergo, it is given
by virtue of the Covenant made with us.

Answ. I deny the antecedent. The reason is, because the seed of Abraham
according to Scripture, are they that do believe. Romans 4. 11 16. Gal. 3. 7, 9,
26, 29. If then the promise be made to them that are believers, the thing
promised cannot be, that they shall be believers. And therefore Mr. Air, in
the proof of his antecedent, does palpably contradict that which he would
prove. The same Covenant (says he) which God made with Abraham, is made with
all the faithful to the end of the world, and therefore they are called the
children of Abraham, Gal. 3. 7, 29. A Covenant made with the faithful is not,
that they shall have faith.

And so we come to the last argument, which only was mentioned. 11.
by Mr. Air, and answered by me in my sermon. If faith be given us by virtue
of the Covenant made with the house of Israel, then is it given us by virtue of
the Covenant made with us: for the house of Israel, is the whole company of
Gods elect, who are therefore called Spiritual Israel. Romans 9. 6. But faith or
the Spirit which works faith, is promised in the Covenant made with the house
of Israel. Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 8, 9, etc.

Answ. Though Romans 9. 6. will by no means prove that the elect as such, are
Spiritual Israel (for the words may, and I think must be understood of
believers as such) yet I will have no quarrel here with Mr. Air about his
interpretation. Nevertheless I do ingenuously confess to him, I am very much
puzzled about one objection, which it concerns him as much as me to see well
answered. Suppose then a man should say, that by the house of Israel, is not
meant the elect as such, but believers: and that it is not faith which is here
promised, but some greater measures of grace, which they that believe should
receive; above what were usually communicated before the times of Christ: he
might thus argue from the words? Whatsoever blessings are promised in the
Covenant recorded, Jer. 31. and Heb. 8. are such as are peculiar to the days of
the New Testament. But the giving of faith, is not peculiar to the days of the
New Testament, (for since sin entered into the world, there was no other way of
salvation then b^ faith: and therefore God gave faith in all ages to the
elect.) The proposition may not be questioned. For the time and season of
giving the blessings mentioned, Heb. 8. is expressly determined, v. 8. Behold
the days come when I will make a new Covenant, etc. and v. 10. This is the
Covenant which I will make after those days, and in reference to these
blessings in this Covenant called a better Covenant, and the promises thereof
better, v. 6. All which prove that the blessings here mentioned are such as
were never given before. But as the pardon promised, v. 12. the knowledge of
God, v. 11. Gods being a God to his people, v. 10. are all more perfect then
ever before, though the substance of these blessings were always the same: so,
it is not the substance and being of faith which is here promised, but some
more eminent degrees of grace, then ever were dispensed before these times of
the New Testament. Unless Mr. Air can answer this argument better then I, the
whole foundation of his discourse sinkes, and he does but labor in vain to
prove from these Texts, that faith is given us as unto a people in Covenant
with God before our receiving it.

Nevertheless other reasons preponderate with me to cleave to my. 12.
former interpretation: and therefore yielding that faith it self is promised
in this Covenant, I deny Mr. Eyres assumption, understood in the sense often
mentioned. viz, That faith is given by the obligation of that Covenant, in
which Israel is supposed to be before they believe. To the Texts mentioned for
proof, Jer. 31. and Heb. 8. I gave a double answer. 1. By retortion. That if
Mr. Air urge the words of these Texts rigorously, they will prove more then he
would have. This he hopes is no hurt. But as they say in Logic, that those
Syllogismes are fallacious which, though they conclude true, yet in the same
form will conclude false: so is that interpretation of Scripture to be
suspected, which though it may serve a man's purpose, will yet, if received
carry him beyond his purpose to that which he will not grant. That which it
proves more then I thought Mr. Air would have granted, I delivered in these
words. It is manifest that this covenant contains a promise, of sending Christ
to dye for our sins, Heb. 10. 14. 15, 16. So that we may as well infer from
hence that we are in Covenant with God before the death of the mediator, as
that we are in Covenant before we believe: and then his death shall serve not
to obtain all, or any of the blessings of the Covenant, but only (as the
S^cinians) to declare and confirm to us, that we may believe, that God of his
own good will, without expecting any satisfaction, will do all this good for
us, etc.

Mr. Eyres first answer, is but a repetition of his argument now under debate:
and is more particularly answered below. Two things he says to it. 1. That it
is not manifest that these texts contain a promise of sending Christ to dye
for us. The Apostle, Heb. 10. 15. mentions the Covenant, not to prove, that God
would send his Son to dye: but that being come he has offered up a perfect
sacrifice, v, 10, 12, 14.

Rep. The words are these, v. 14, 15. By one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified, whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us.
And then quotes, or rather cites the words of Jeremy; Now if the Holy Ghost in
that place of Jeremy do witness; that Christ by offering himself, should for
ever perfect them that are sanctified: then does he also testify, that Christ
should come at the time there mentioned, to be made a sacrifice: and the coming
of Christ, though it be not expressed, yet is included and understood, as
promised in that Covenant. Yea, and all the promises or predictions of the
glory of the Church in the New Testament, above it self under the old, do
signally include the promise of Christ himself as the Author of that glory and
perfection.

Secondly, He ownes it as an undeniable truth; that the new. 13.
Covenant was made with all the elect in Christ, before the foundations of the
world were laid: it being the fixed and immutable will of God, concerning all
those good things which in time were bestowed upon them. Therefore it is called
an everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23. 5. As it shall have no end, so it had no
beginning.

Rep. It is very strange to me, that the New Covenant should be now discovered
to be older then the world: and that at no less distance, then there is
between time and eternity. And more strange, that Mr. Air should tell us
gratis, that it is Gods immutable purpose, without so much as pretending the
least jot from Scripture; where either the Hebrew (...) or the Greek (...)
which we are wont to render Covenant or Testament, may be taken in such a
signification: which appear not, either in the Old or New Testament (unless
where they are used Metonymically, or Metaphorically, or other ways
tropically) in any other sense, then of a Law, or a Testament, or a Convention.
And most strange, that he should also tell us gratis that it is called an
everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23. 5. not only a part post, but a part ante,
not only as having no end, but also as not having beginning: when the Hebrew
word will by no means enforce it: and it is most certain, that that Covenant
made with David had a beginning, recorded, 2 Samuel 7. 16, 19. and all the places
mentioned in the margin, as Genesis 17. 7. etc. Do also speak of such everlasting
Covenants, as we know were not without beginning. And whereas Mr. Air does
afterward acknowledge, that notwithstanding this Covenant be eternal; yet
there are more especially three periods of time, wherein God may be said to
make this Covenant with us. As 1. Immediately upon the fall of Adam. 2. At the
death of Christ. 3. When God bestows on men the benefits of the Covenant. If
we are properly in Covenant from eternity, there is no act of God in time by
which we are brought into Covenant: nihil agit in simile, therefore these three
periods of time, are but three degrees of manifestation that we are in
Covenant. Accordingly, as I argued before in the matter of Justification, so
now in the matter of the Covenant. If the Covenant of grace consist essentially
in Gods eternal purpose of blessing the elect, then is not the word Covenant
(that Covenant I mean by which the elect are saved) taken properly in all the
Scriptures: forasmuch as it no where signifies the foresaid purpose. A thing as
incredible and abominable as the former.

But let us farther examine this undeniable truth. If the foresaid. 14.
purpose of God be the Covenant of grace, then Christ did not obtain by his
death that God should make a Covenant with the elect. But the consequence is
false (and Socinianisme) Ergo so is the Antecedent.

Mr. Air answers. Though we do not say that Christ procured the Covenant (he
might have added, and therein we agree with the Socinians) yet we say, the
effects of the Covenant, or the mercies themselves, were all of them obtained
by the blood of Christ; as deliverance from the curse, inherent holiness, etc.

Rep. Such a salve for the honor of Christ's merits, I remember we had before
in the matter of Justification. viz. That Christ merited the effects of
Justification, not the act: even as he merited the effects of election, but not
the act. As if the reason were the same between a particular univocall cause
(such as Justification is) determined to a particular kind of effect (which
causes do always produce their effects immediately, without the intervention
of any other cause:) and an universal cause of several heterogeneous effects
(such as election is) and therefore produces nothing but by the sub-serviency
of those several kinds of causes* ordained to their several kinds of works;
But the like distinction here, between the Covenant and its effects is of worse
consequence if I mistake not. Therefore against Mr. Eyres answer, I have these
things to object. 1. It makes void the death of Christ: for if the elect,
before the death of Christ, have a foederall right to the blessings of the
Covenant, then they are righteous before his death: (for to be righteous by
righteousness imputed, and to have right to blessedness are inse parable.)
But Christ is dead in vain if righteousness comes by any other way or cause
then his death, Gal. 2. 21. 2. If the Elect are in Covenant before the death of
the Mediator, they must have the blessings of the Covenant whether he die or
no; for every Covenant induces an obligation in point of faithfulness (at
least) upon the Covenanter to fulfill his Covenant. If then God have made a
Covenant before the death of Christ with the Elect, what should hinder their
receiving these blessings without his death? Either God is unable to fulfill
his covenant: (but he is Almighty,) or he is unfaithful, (but he is a God that
keeps covenant:) or our sin hinders, (but he has covenanted before the death
of Christ, that sin shall not hinder: for pardon of sin is a special branch of
the covenant.) Or finally he has covenanted to give us these blessings through
the death of Christ, and no otherwise. But then we are not in covenant before
the consideration of Christ's death: and besides, (which I most stick at) then
the whole reason why God should punish his dear and only Son so grievously
is this, it was his pleasure so to do. But surely he that does not afflict men
merely because he will, Lam. 3. 33. would much less deal so with his Son. 3.
Either Christ and his merits are part of the blessings of this covenant, or no.
If they be, then it is false that Christ merits all the effects and blessings
of the covenant: for he did not merit that himself might merit, or be by his
death the meritorious cause of our blessings. If not, then the New Covenant is
never a whit better or more excellent then the Old. The first covenant was
faulty, because it could not bring sinners to perfect happiness, Heb. 8. 7, 8,
9. and 7. 19. Romans 8. 3. If the New Covenant cannot give us the blessedness it
promises, unless Christ merit and bring forth the effects thereof, then is it
altogether as impotent and unprofitable as the old: a fair advancement of the
Covenant of Grace. 4. Nor can I conceive how this eternal Covenant can consist
with what Mr. Air has hitherto been disputing for, viz. That the New Covenant
was made with Christ: he performed the conditions, and we receive the benefit.
Christ's death was either the condition of the Covenant, or of the effect of it.
Not the former, if it consist in Gods purpose; Mr. Air knows how our Divines
disgust a conditional purpose in God. And how it should be the condition of the
effects, when it is not the condition of the Covenant it self, I cannot reach.
I know Mr. Air will tell me that there are no conditions of Gods purpose, and
yet there may be and are conditions of the things purposed: But then that
purpose is not a covenanr properly so called: Metaphorically, it may be, it may
so be called: but then it is such a Covenant as is neither made with man nor
with Christ, but with God himself: being no more then his own resolution within
himself. And yet the foresaid position, viz. That there are no conditions of
Gods purpose, though there are causes of conditions of the things purposed, had
need of a distinction too; for so far forth as they are the effects of
purpose, they have no other cause or condition: and so far forth as they have
other conditions or causes, they are not the effects of purpose. The existence
and order of the things purposed is from Gods purpose. For example, he did
purpose that first he would give up his Son to death for us, then call us,
then justify us, then glorify us, and had there been nothing else but Gods
purpose, these four had been the simple successive effects of his purpose; but
had not had the relation of cause and effect amongst themselves. That Christ's
death merits our salvation is not from Gods purpose, but from the convention
between the Father and him. That faith is the condition of justification, and
glorification is from the promise of grace made with us: That glorification is
also a reward, is from the same promise: That it is not only a consequent but
an effect of our justification, arises from the nature of that act, as being
an adjudging unto glory: that it is an inheritance, is because it is given by
Testament. Wherefore all these purposed acts of God may be considered, either
simply, ratione existentiae, in respect of their existence, and so they have no
other cause but his purpose: or quoad modum essendi, according to that (...)
habitude or relation which they have one to another in their execution, arising
either from the nature of the things themselves, or some Law, Covenant and
constitution of God; and thus they are not the effects of his purpose. But I
have been two long in my reply to this answer of Mr. Eyres: A word more to
prove that Gods eternal purpose is not the New Covenant, and I pass on.

That Covenant which is of the same common nature with those. 15.
Covenants that are wont to be made amongst men, does not consist ^ Vide Less.
de Just. and jur. lib. 2. cap. 13. D. 1. 5. Grot. dejure. Belli. lib. 2. cap.
11. 2.
in the mere will or purpose of God. The New Covenant or Covenant of Grace is
of the same common nature with those that are wont to be made amongst men.
Ergo, the New Covenant does not consist in the purpose of Gods mind or will.
The proposition is certain. Because, whether Mr. Air will allow Gods Covenant
to be a Covenant properly so called, or will rather call it a promise, it is
certain there are no Pacts, Conventions, Covenants, Stipulations,
Restipulations, Testaments, Pollicitations, Promises or Contracts of any kind
made amongst men which consist in the internal purpose of the mind: and
therefore if Gods Covenant or Promise be of the same common nature with these,
neither can that consist in his purpose. The assumption is supposed by the
Apostle, Gal. 3. 15. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, though it be
but a man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth or adds
thereto, and ver. 17. And this I say, that the Covenant which was confirmed
before of God in Christ, etc. Where the whole strength of the argument lies
upon this supposition, that the covenant made with Abraham was a true formal
Covenant or Promise, such as usually passes between man and man. See to the
same purpose, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. many more arguments I could add if need were.

SECT. III.
The direct answer to the Argument, and the proof of it out of. 16.
Heb. 8. I thus delivered in my Sermon. In the Covenant as recorded in Heb. 8.
There are three things of distinct consideration, the confusion of which ( so
it should have been printed, not the conclusion; and so it is printed in the
second Edition of my Sermon) is the only support of Mr. Eyres Argument. 1.
There is the matter and blessings of the Covenant on Gods part: I will be their
God and they shall be my people. 2. The bond and condition of it on our part:
and that is faith, in those words, I will put my Laws in their minds, etc. In
these two things is the tenor and formality of the new Covenant; They that
believe, the Lord will be their God, and they shall be his people. 3. There is
also a promise and declaration that God will work this condition, by which men
shall have an interest in this Covenant and a right and title to the blessings
of it. I will put my Laws into their minds, that is, I will give them faith:
which faith is not promised as an effect of the Covenant already made, but as a
means by which we are brought into Covenant, and thereby invested in a right to
all the blessings of it, etc.

That this is the true meaning of the text (Reader) thou shall see proved
below: In the mean time (according to my promise) take a farther Explication of
the words which I shall set down in distinct propositions, that Mr. Air may
see what little ground my words afford him of all his wonderments and
paratragediations.

Prop. 1. The Old and New Covenant so called, ver. 8. and 13.. 17.
are not two Covenants opposed in their nature and substance: but one and the
same Covenant of grace under an Old and New Administration. This many learned
men have proved, and our Divines generally grant it, and Mr. Air himself for
one in this his seventeenth Chapter. 2. and therefore I set it down without
farther proof.

Prop. 2. Therefore that which is called the New Covenant, and described, ver.
10, 11, 12. does not contain the form and tenor of the Covenant of grace; but
only the differences between the Old Covenant and the New, and the matter
wherein the latter excells the former. And that the name of a Covenant is given
to it, does not alter the case: it being so frequent in Scripture to use the
name of Covenant, when not the form, but the matter or quality and efficacy of
it is signified, 2 Cor. 3. 14. Romans 9. 4. 1 King. 8. 21. Hos. 2. 18. Job 5. 23,
etc.

Prop. 3. The differences between the Old Covenant on the one side, and the new
on the other are thus stated in the text. The Old in general is called faulty,
ver. 7, 8. and the faultiness of it described in two particulars. 1. That it
could not give strength and ability to the people to fulfill it, and by
consequence, 2. That it could not make them blessed in the favor and enjoyment
of God, ver. 9. They continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not,
says the Lord. In respect of which it is elsewhere called weak and
unprofitable and unable to make any thing perfect, chap. 7. 18, 19. compare
also Romans 8. 3. and Gal. 3. 21. On the contrary, the New Covenant in general is
called better, ver. 6. and its betternesse (bear with the Anglicisme)
expressed in two opposite respects. 1. That it should minister ability and
strength to keep Covenant. 2. And by consequence perfect the people in the
favor and enjoyment of God, ver. 10. I will put my Laws into their mind. --
And I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. The former of
which is farther illustrated, ver. 11. They shall all know me, etc. and the
latter, ver. 12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, etc. Hence the
new Covenant is elsewhere called a ministration of the Spirit, Life and
righteousness, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8, 9.

Prop. 4. From what has been said it appears, that the Apostle in this place
is so far from denying the Covenant of Grace (formally so taken) to have any
conditions, as that he does plainly suppose the contrary. 1. In that he says
the New Covenant has its Laws as well as the Old, ver. 6. He is the Mediator
of a better Covenant established upon better promises, (...), enacted. The word
implies that the New Covenant is also a Law requiring something of us; that we
may obtain the blessings of it: though it be enacted upon better promises: it
being promised long before, that this Covenant should make us perfect, and not
the former. 2. Because one great part of the perfection of this Covenant
consists in this, that it should have virtue to enable us to keep it, or to
preserve us from breaking it, (as Israel brake the former) which were no
perfection at all, if the said Covenant had no condition in it which we were
bound to keep. Let us now see what Mr. Air objects against my exposition.

First he denies. That the whole matter, and all the benefits of. 18.
the Covenant on Gods part are confined to those words, I will be their God,
and they shall be my people, That promise being not put alone, but with other
promises, denotes one particular blessing.

Rep. The contrary is evident from the opposition here made between the old
Covenant and the New. For I will be their God (in the new Covenant) is directly
opposed to, I regarded them not (in the old.) Therefore as Gods not regarding
them, was not one particular evil, but contains all the miseries which befell
them for their breach of that Covenant: so on the contrary, I will be their God
contains all the comfort and blessedness which is given them by this. And
indeed the most frequent sense in which that phrase ( I will be their God) is
used in Scripture, is to denote God to be a benefactor liberally giving
whatsoever pertaines, add (...) to the welfare and felicity of his people,
Psalm. 144. 15. Exodus 3. 15. Rev. 21. 7. Jer. 7. 23. with Deuteronomy. 26. 3. and Exodus
19. 5. and Lev. 26. 12. Rev. 21. 3, 4. and other places innumerable. Nor can I
find it so much as once in all the Scriptures, whether by it self or joined
with other promises, where, with any show of reason, it can be confined to one
particular benefit. Nor does Mr. Air pretend any Scripture for it, but his own
word only. But what is that one particular blessing which it must denote?

Either (says Mr. Air) the formal part of man's happiness which consists in
the fruition and enjoyment of God.

Rep. But that cannot be the meaning here, because then, God by the New
Covenant is not the God of any while they live in this world, which though it
be true in regard of the perfection and full enjoyment of those blessings which
God promises, when he says, I will be their God: yet in respect of all
degrees of enjoyment it is false for in the New Covenant he promises the
pardon of sin, Heb. 8. 12. which is a special blessing contained in the said
words, I will be their God, Romans 3. 29, 30.

Or 2. (says he) It relates to the knowledge of our interest and propriety in
him. Thus, I will be their God, is as much as, they shall know that I am their
God, and that they are my people.

Rep. Nor can this be the meaning. 1. Either this knowledge results from the
experience of Gods being their God: and then we are to seek, as much as before,
what it is for God to be their God. Or from partaking in some other blessings,
mentioned in this description of the New Covenant: and then that grand promise,
I will be their God, promises just nothing upon the matter, for if the meaning
be, such and such blessings will I give them, and thereby they shall know that
I am their God: this promises nothing; but only declares how excellent those
benefits shall be, such as shall evidence plainly that God is their God: and
thus the grand pro^ise of grace will be made a nullity. 2. Mr. Air should also
have taken some pains to allay the harshnesse of his interpretation. I will be
their God, that is, they shall know that I am their God. If I had taken this
liberty of interpre^ing, he had accused me justly of chopping and changing the
Word of God at pleasure. 3. When God promises to be their God, he promises
that which is contrary to his not regarding them; But his not regarding them
was not merely his not manifesting himself to them to be their God: Ergo, his
being their God is not merely his making them to know that he is their God.

Or 3. (Says he) I will be their God, etc. imports as much as I will protect
them, and they shall worship me.

Rep. But what is that protection? If it impart our whole deliverance from all
spiritual enemies and miseries, and the bestowing of all good which makes us
happy; then it is the thing which I contend for. If of any particular
deliverance or any one particular blessing, show us what it is: and that I will
be their God is taken so much as once (as many scores of times as it is used in
Scripture) so restrainedly.

Next he denies that in these words, I will put my Laws in their. 19.
minds, etc. is expressed the bond and condition of the Covenant on our part:
for the words are a promise not a precept, and then tells me of Dr. Tw^sse, Dr.
Preston, Mr. Strong, Mr. Baxter, who all acknowledge that this Text expresses
an absolute Covenant.

Rep. Indeed the words have not the form of a precept: nor did any man ever
dream that they had (as I know of.) But they do declare that the New Covenant
shall be so much better then the Old, as to enable us to fulfill the precept
and condition of it, which the Old could not do: For as it was the faultiness
and imperfection of the Old Covenant, that the people brake it: so is it the
excellency of the new, that it shall enable them to fulfill it. The new
covenant then has a condition as well as the old: or else it has no glory
above the old in this respect, that it ministers strength to fulfill it. Is
Mr. Air satisfied now? or will he show me wherein any of the Authors mentioned
contradict this: though I will not be bound to justify all the expressions of
every one of them. And when he adds in the words following (by way of scorn)
That I may as well say, that the bond and condition of the covenant on our
part, is expressed in that clause, I will be their God: which, one would have
the condition of the covenant on our part* who that one is, I do not know: but
I know one who may stand in steed of many hundreds, These. 4. page 109. ex Genesis
17. 1. Hos. 2. 16. 23.
Dr. John Reyn^lds, who was accounted the ornament and wonder of his age for
piety and learning; that does so expound those words: and that from one who is
above all, even God himself: who does plainly so sense the words in some
places, D^^t. 26. 17, 18. Zech. 13. 9. Nevertheless I did wave this
interpretation in this place: and interpret both clauses, I will be their God,
and they shall be my people, as expressing one and the same thing, in reference
to two terms, (as when it is said, I will be their father, and they shall be
my children) because whatsoever is essential to the taking of the Lord for our
God. I conceive to be included in the words foregoing, I will write my Laws in
their hearts, etc.

Whereas I said, that faith is not promised as an effect of the Covenant,. 20.
already made: but as the means, by which we are brought into Covenant: this
Mr. Air invades by many arguments. ^ (says he) the same words cannot be
formally both a precept and a promise. This is answered already. The words are
a promise: but they suppose a precept what? Is it such a strang^ thing in
Scripture* that that should be promised which is our duty to do? Ezekiel. 26, 27.
God promises to cause us to walk in his statutes. Is it therefore no duty of
ours to walk in his statutes? In the same chapter, v. 26. he promises to give
a new heart and a new Spirit: yet are we elsewhere commanded to make as a new
heart and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 18. 31 God has promised to circumcise our hearts
to love him, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Yet is it our duty to circumcise our hearts. Jer. 4.
4. And may not then faith be promised, and that as the condition or means by
which we are brought into Covenant?

Mr. Air. 2. If the promise of faith be a part of the new Covenant; then faith
it self is an effect of the Covenant, or a benefit given by virtue of it; But
the promise of faith, is part of the new Covenant; Ergo.

Rep. I deny the Assumption. The new Covenant works or begets faith, but
it does not promise it. Note therefore (Reader) that there is a great
difference between what is promised concerning the new Covenant, and what the
new Covenant promises. Concerning the new Covenant, it was promised that it
should be effectual to quicken the soul, and cause it to believe: but it self
does not promise to make us believe. If it did, forasmuch as that can be no
other then an absolute promise, then God does promise in the Old Testament
(namely Jer. 31. 31.) that he will promise faith in the New. But a promise to
promise, and that to the very same persons, concerning the same benefit, is so
contrary to reason, and runs such an infinite course of promising, without
beginning or ending, that it may not be admitted. But how does Mr. Air prove
his Assumption? Thus. All the promises of God do belong either to the Covenaut
of works, or to the Covenant of grace. The promise of faith is no part of the
Covenant of works; Ergo, of the Covenant of grace.

Rep. I deny the proposition. The promise of the Covenant of grace it self, Of
which Covenant is it a part? of the Covenant of works? or of the Covenant of
grace? not of the former, for that promises no good to sinners. Not of the
latter: for the Covenant it self is the thing promised. If then the Covenant it
self may be promised, and yet that promise be no part of the Covenant: may it
not also be promised to be in such a manner or degree more or less
efficacious, and perfect, and yet that promise in like manner be no part of the
said Covenant?

Hence we answer the third argument. If the promise of faith be an effect of
Christ's death, then it is an effect of the Covenant already made: for all the
effects of his death, are effects of the Covenant which was confirmed by his
death.

Rep. I deny the consequence with the proof of it. Not to question again
whether Christ merited the Covenant: M. Air here acknowledges that he
confirmed it in his death; But that which confirms the Covenant, is no part of
the Covenant: for the whole Covenant is the thing confirmed; Ergo all the
effects of Christ's death are not the effects of the Covenant which God has
made with us. Yea and the preaching of the Gospel to all nations (Gentiles as
well as Jews) that they thereby might be brought into Covenant, is an effect of
the death of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 16, 17. Colos. 1. 20. But affording the means by
which men may be brought into covenant, is not an effect of the covenant. In
like manner, the promise of a better covenant, which God would make in the
days of Christ (a covenant more able, and successful in all respects) may be
very well yielded to ^^ the effect of the death of Christ: but it will by no
means foll^^ that therefore that promise is also an effect of the Covenant
promised.

4ly. Thus he speaks. The Scripture no where affirms that faith is promised as
a means to bring us into covenant, or to invest us with a right and title
thereunto.

Rep. Nor does it any where say: that it is promised as a part of the Covenant
already made with us. But it says that in sense which Mr. Air denies, and
that in this very place: supposing (which Mr. Air has not hitherto denied)
that faith is included in those words, I will put my laws into their minds,
etc. For in these words (as we are forced often to note) is declared the
success of the new covenant above the old, that it should enable men to
believe; that God may be their God, and they his people. But if it were not
promised in this place, yet the constant voice of the Gospel is; believe and
thou shall be saved. Which words show, that faith is the means by which we
obtain the blessings of the Covenant. What says Mr. Air against it? Nothing
but this: we may as well make Baptism, Sanctification, Perseverance, etc. (to
which the promise of salvation is sometimes annexed) means to bring us into
Covenant.

Rep. Alas! how frigidly? where is the Scripture that says, Be baptized and
thou shall be saved? or where does it say to men that are strangers from the
covenant, persevere and you shall be saved? Indeed they that have already
received Christ, are wont to be exhorted to holiness, and perseverance in the
faith, that they may not lose or forfeit their right, Rev. 22. 14. and 21. 7. 2
John 8. Heb. 4. 1. etc. But our first entrance into covenant is never ascribed
to either of them. But Mr. Air shall have measure pressed down and running
over, I mean, many plain testimonies of Scripture where faith is promised as
a means to bring us into Covenant with God.

CHAP. XIV.
An answer to Mr. Eyrs eighteenth chapter, Jer. 24. 7. Heb. 10. 14, 15. Ezekiel.
11. 19, 20. and 36 25, 26, 27, 28. and other places proving faith to be
promised as a means by which we are brought into Covenant with God, vindicated.

SECT. I.
FOr proof of this I mentioned many places of Scripture:. 1.
to all which Mr. Eyres answer is upon the matter one and the same; and
therefore we shall be brief in our reply to this chapter, because one general
vindication will serve the turn for all. As to his first Paragraph, wherein he
charge me so severely, for saying, the words of the Covenant (described, Jer.
31 and Heb. 8.) are to this sense. This is the Covenant which I will make with
the house of Israel, when I shall write my Laws in their hearts, I will be
their God, etc. He does but show how desirous* he is of an occasion against me.
I told the Reader plainly in that very place, that I did not therein give the
Grammatical translation of the words: (though if I had so rendered them, it
might have been justified by an elleipsis of the Hebrew particle, ^, of which
there are examples good store in Scripture, if it were worth while to produce
them) and set down those words for no other end, but to let the Reader know,
that the very description of the new covenant; as to it is matter and effects,
in the said texts, did suppose the form and tenor of it, to be such as those
words do represent: having showed but just before, that there were three things
in the Covenant (as described, Heb. 8.) of distinct consideration. viz. the
matter and blessings of it on Gods part: the bond and condition of it on our
part: a promise and declaration that God will work this condition. Therefore
while Mr. Air opposes that which he calls my rendering of the words, (though I
confess I am not able to dive into the sense of his Argument) he sights with
his own shadow, when afterward I say, the words will bear to be read, thus;
This is the covenant which I will make, says the Lord that gives his Laws
into their minds, etc. (...) etc. though neither did I seek any advantage from
this observation (as I also plainly told the Reader) yet the whole text
according to this reading, agrees wholly in sense with our translation* and
therefore neither needed Mr. Air to have quarrelled with me about it, nor
shall I need to vindicate it.

Come we then to the matter it self. The Apostle out of the Prophet. 2.
J^r ^y, does thus describe the new covenant, Heb. 8. 10, This is the Covenant,
which I will make with the house of Israel, after those days says the Lord: I
will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts, and I will
be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. In which words I told the
Reader there were three things of distinct consideration. 1. The matter and
blessings of the covenant on Gods part: in those words, I will be their God,
and they shall be my people. 2. The bond and condition of it on our part, and
that is faith, signified by the writing of Gods Laws in our hearts. 3. A
promise or Declaration, that God will work this condition. I will put my Laws
into their minds. That this is the certain, undoubted meaning of the Holy
Ghost; we have already showed by uncontrollable evidence from the text it self.
We shall now confirm the same by comparing it with other places of Scripture.

The first we mentioned was, J^r. 24. 7. I will give them a heart to know me
that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God f^r
(or when) they shall return unto me with their whole heart. Where we have the
very same arguments, as here. viz. The blessings promised. I will be their God.
The condition on the peoples part, which is their returning with their whole
heart: and the cause of this return, I will give them an heart. Mr. Air
answers. That their returning unto God, is not the condition of Gods being
their God. We go on then, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. I will put a new spirit within
them, that they may walk in my statutes and do them, and they shall be my
people, and I will be their God. Which is the sum of the covenant on Gods
part. So Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, 28. Again the Lord promises, that he will
cleanse and purify them, and so they shall be his people, and he will be their
God, Ezekiel. 37. 23. And after he had promised, that they should walk in his
judgments, and observe his statutes, it follows, Moreover I will make a
Covenant of peace with them, it shall be an everlasting covenant, which ^^
s^^me is this, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, v. 20 27. To
all which Mr. Air gives the same denial as to the first. We shall therefore
prove that in all these places, faith is promised as a means to bring us into
covenant with God. And then take a view of the reasons of Mr. Eyres denial in
general, or upon particular places.

For the former, the substance of Gods covenant with men is this,. 3.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people: as not only all the Divines
which I can light on, but the Scriptures also, witness. Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13. That
thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God -- that he may
establish thee for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God.
More then this we need not, nor are we capable of. And God himself accounts
that he has fully kept his covenant, when he becomes a God to a person or
people, Zech. 8. 8. and therefore to be their God is the total sum of the
Covenant on his part. Moreover the Scriptures certify us, that the Covenant
made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, contains all the blessings, which God by
Covenant gives to any people, Gal. 3. 9, 14, 18. Romans 4. 13, 16, 23, 24. But I
will be thy God, was the sum of the covenant made with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, Genesis 17. 7. Exodus 3. 6. with Matthew. 22. 32. etc. In those words
therefore is contained all the blessings of the covenant on Gods part. Hence
our Argument proceeds thus. If God promise faith for this end, that he may be
our God, and we his people; then is it promised as a means, by which we are
brought into Covenant with God. But-faith is promised for this end, that God
may be our God. Ergo, it is promised as a means to bring us into covenant. If
the assumption be denied, we confirm it diversely. 1. From the plain scope of
some places. as Ezekiel. 37. 23. -- I will cleanse them: So shall they be my
people, and I will be their God. and chap. 14. 11. -- That they may be no more
polluted with all their transgressions, but that they may be my people, and I
may be their God. Even as he is often said to have brought them out of Egypt
(which signifies spiritually, the bringing of sinners out of the darkness and
slavory of a sinful condition, into the way of life, Jude v. 5.) that he might
be their God, Lev. 11. 45. and 26. 45. and 25. 38. and 22. 33. Numb. 15. 41. 2
Faith is promised for this end, that we thereby might obtain that, which was
promised to Israel, when God brought them out of Egypt: though they obtained it
not, because they continued not in Gods covenant; Ergo, it is promised as a
means for this end, that God may be our God, and we his people. The reason of
the consequence is, because this was that which the Lord said to Israel, when
he brought them out of the Land of Egypt: obey my voice; so will I be your God,
and ye shall be my people. Jer. 7. 23. and 11. 4. The antecedent is written
with a Sun beam in the place under debate, Jer. 31. 31. etc. Where the writing
of Gods Laws in our mind (which in some other of the places mentioned is
called, the putting of a new Spirit within us, and a causing us to walk in his
statutes) is most apparently promised as a means of obtaining that good which
Israel, by the covenant made with them, in the day when the Lord took them by
the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, did not obtain; for herein
lay the imperfection and faultiness of that covenant, that they brake it, and
consequently, that the Lord regarded them not. In opposition to both which it
is that God promises to write his Laws in their minds, and so to be their God,
other things we refer till by and by.

It is therefore a truth beyond contradiction, that the giving of the first
grace is promised; not as a part of the Covenant, but as a means. 4.
and qualification on man's part for his entrance into covenant. Let us see what
Mr. Air has against it: and first in general, from. 4. downward.

First he excepts against the fitness, of my expression in calling our
conversion the first grace, which he says is more properly spoken nf Gods
eternal love, or of Christ himself.

Answ. But the question is only understood of the grace of God in us (which is
more frequently called by the name of grace, then either of the other two, Jam.
4. 6. 2 Pet. 3. 18. Heb. 12. 28. and 13. 9. etc.) The first of which is faith,
or our conversion unto God. But even in this sense (says Mr. Air) inherent
sanctification is unduly put in the first place, which is a consequent, both of
justification and adoption, Gal. 4. 5 6. though it be promised in Jeremy,
before remission of sins, yet in other places it is put after it, as Ezekiel. 36.
25. 26. Jer. 32. 38, 39.

Answ. The former part is true of sanctification, strictly and most properly
taken, for the habits of the life of holiness, opposed to the body of sin in
us. But in this sense, I deny faith to be any part of sanctification: and if
Mr. Air does thus interpret the promise of writing Gods Laws in our heart,
etc. Then shall I also deny that faith in Christ is herein promised: but only
a greater measure of grace to them that believe: which will much advantage his
cause. But if sanctification be taken largely for any gracious workings of God
upon the soul, so as it includes faith it self; then do I deny that it is any
where in Scripture put after remission of sins. The two places mentioned (for
of Gal. 4. 5, 6. we speak below) say nothing so, Ezekiel. 36. 25. Then will I
sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean, from all your
filthiness, and from all your Id^ls will I cleanse you. Mr. Air takes it for
granted that this is meant of pardon of sin: and I acknowledge that sprinkling
or washing with water does sometimes also include that, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But
sometimes also it signifies our regeneration or conversion unto God, Tit. 3. 5.
and so do I understand it in this place, for a through conversion of them from
dumb Idols, to the true and living God; the former of which is more peculiarly
intended, v. 25. and the latter, v. 26. my reason is, because the cleansing of
them from their Idols, is expressly opposed to their defiling themselves with
Idols, chap. 37. 23. Neither shall they d^file themselves any more with Idols
-- But I will cleanse them: and that for this end that he might be their God.
Which (by Mr. Eyres own acknowledgment) includes remission of sin: and
therefore the said remission is not meant by cleansing them from their Idols:
otherwise the sense were this, I will pardon their sin, and so I will pardon
their sin. The second Text is Jer. 32. 38, 39. They shall be my people, and I
will be their God: and I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may
fear me for ever; for the good of them, and of their children after them: to
which I add the next verse, v. 40. And I will make an everlasting covenant
with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, etc. Here
indeed it cannot be denied, but that Gods giving a heart to fear him, is
mentioned after the promise of forgiveness of sin included (amongst other
things) in the words foregoing, I will be their God; But though it be mentioned
after, yet is it apparently mentioned as the means to this end, that God may be
our God. I will give them a heart to fear me, for the good of them and of their
children, The fear of God is promised for this end, that he may do us good: or
(as v. 40.) that he may never turn away from us to do us good. Ergo it is
promised for this end, that he may be our God: because (as we have showed
before) for God to be our God is all one as to be our benefactor and to do us
good. Wherefore this verse follows the former in place or writing, not in
dependence: declaring the way which God will take that he may be our God:
namely, by putting his fear into our hearts: and so advances what Master Air
would prove from it, by overthrowing it.

Secondly, He utterly denies that the giving of a new heart is. 5.
promised as a means on man's part for his entrance into covenant. For, 1. The
Scripture no where affirms it: and it is weakly concluded hence, because it is
sometimes mentioned first in the recital of the covenant, etc.

Answ. Whether it be affirmed in Scripture, or no, I am content to refer to
the judgment of any Reader that has but understanding enough to see that two
and two make four. But we do not conclude it from hence, that the promise of a
new heart is first mentioned, but that the promise of Gods being our God is
last mentioned, (unless it be in the place last debated.) And that as the
happy issue and upshot of Gods giving a new heart: and because it is first
mentioned as to be given, which elsewhere is required and commanded us, for
this end, that God may be our God, and we his people. And what is required of
us for such an end, that if God promise to make us do, is promised as a means
to the same end.

Mr. Eyres 2. The promise of a new heart includes not only the first act of
faith and repentance, but the continuance and increase of these gifts. Ergo,
all the promises of Sanctification are either no part of the covenant: or the
same promise is both a means to bring us into covenant, and also a part of it.

Answ. This Argument (if it may so be called) (...) in form. If the promise of
a new heart include not only the first act of faith and repentance, but the
continuance and increase of these gifts, then the new heart is not promised* as
a means of our entrance into Covenant with God. If this be not the scope of the
Argument, it does not touch the question: if it be, I deny the consequence. The
being or first act of faith and repentance is promised as the means by which we
enter into covenant: the continuance of these as the means by which we continue
in covenant, which continuance nevertheless is part of the Covenant made with
them that believe: for unto him that has shall be given and he shall have more
abundantly.

Mr. Air, 3. The promises of sanctification have the same ground, viz. The
merit of Christ: the same end, viz. Gods glory. Faith and repentance are not
promised only subserviently for our benefit, but for Gods glory. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. The same manner in which they are promised: he does nor say I will
write my Laws in their hearts, that I may pardon their sins: but, I will write
my Laws, etc. and their sins and their iniquities I will remember no more;
Ergo, they are parts of the Covenant.

Answ. If all this were granted, yet I cannot see how this Argument concludes;
God promises to make a New Covenant: th^s promise has the same ground and
end, etc. with the covenant it self; Ergo, the promise of making the New
Covenant is part of the New Covenant; Will Mr. Air allow of this? 2. The maine
thing also is left out in the enumeration. The promise of faith is an act of
Gods Dominion and Liberty (at least as to us) Romans 9. 18. But the promise of
righteousness and salvation is the act of God as a merciful Governor, Judge,
and Rewarder of his people, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Jam. 4. 12. Who by these promises
envites, encourages, and draws men to believe. 3. As to the particulars
mentioned, the first of them has been answered often. The second affords a
canvase worthy of a deeper head then mine, viz. whether repentance (for
example) have any other preciousnesse, excellency, or bene^it in it, then as it
is a means appointed of God, by which we obtain precious and excellent
promises? The question is the same concerning faith in Christ, as it is an
affiance placed in him for life and salvation. Neither of these were any part
of that soul-perfection in which man was at first created: neither any part of
that Image of God unto which we are by Christ restored, Ephesians. 4 24. Neither any
part of our happiness, though the way thereto. (For they shall both cease in
heaven.) Neither proposed to us in the Gospel, ut propter se appetibile, sed
propter aliud. Indeed it is good to repent (and now of absolute necessity to
salvation) but it were better (if it were possible) to do nothing for which a
man need to repent. If then the whole benefit of these acts lay in the use to
which God has ordained them, and in the promises which are made to them, then
it will be apparent that God has not promised them any otherwise then as
means of obtaining the bl^ssings of his Covenant. But I will not be
peremptory. 4. To the last, indeed it is not said that God does write his Laws
in our hearts that he may pardon our sins: and good reason why? Because the
scope of the place is only to declare what shall be the effects of the
Covenant, not the manner in which it does produce them. Nevertheless, that the
pardon of sin is one end of Gods writing his Laws in our mind is apparent. 1.
Because (as we have showed already) God is said in Scripture to write his Laws
in our minds, or to give us a new heart, that he may be our God: which promise
(as we have proved, and Mr. Air confesses) includes the pardon of sin. 2.
From the contrary effects on them that are without, Mark 4. 12. That they may
not perceive -- nor understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and
their sins should be forgiven them. 3. God expects repentance that he may
forgive sins, Jeremiah 36. 3. and 26. 2, 3. Ergo, he promises it as a means
to the same end.

His third and last general Argument is, It sounds harshly that God promises
faith as a means on our part to bring us into Covenant. For if he promise to
bestow it, it cannot properly be called a means on our part.

Answ. Sounds are to be judged by every man's ^are. If God sometimes require us
to walk in his statutes that we may be blessed: and elsewhere promise to cause
us to walk in his statutes; to say, that this is a promise of enabling us to do
that which he has appointed to be the means of our blessedness, sounds never
a whit harsh in my ear, no more then to say, that the promise of giving speech
to Moses, Isaiah, or Jer^my, was a promise of enabling them to perform the
means which they were to use for the discharge of their office; or the promise
of strength to Abraham and Sarah to become the parents of a child, was the
promise of the means which they were to use for that end.

And now I perceive I have prevented my self in what I should have replied to
Mr. Eyres answers to particular places, there being nothing said to any of them
but what is here already replied too. He concludes with a distinction of that
promise, I will be their God, and which (says he) may be taken, either, 1.
More generally as comprehending all good things whatsoever: and so faith is
included in it. Or 2. More restrictively as noting one particular bene^it and
privilege distinct from the rest, etc.

Where the first member is to large, and the second to narrow. I have
diligently perused (I think) all the places in Scripture where those words are
found: and cannot discern where they are either taken more largely then to
signify the communication of that good which is part of our felicity, as
distingushed from those acts of the soul by which we tend and move toward it.
Nor yet so strictly as to note some one only privilege and benefit. And for
Mr. Air to obtrude a distinction upon us of words which cannot be
distinguished but according to their use in Scripture, and yet never go about
to enform us where the Scriptures afford the least protection to it, is no
better then to beg the question.

For vindicating my Interpretation of the Covenant as described, Heb. 8. I had
also quoted at large, Heb. 10. 14, 15, 16, 17. After he had said before, This
is the Covenant which I will make with them after those days, says the Lord,
I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them
(add here then he says, or then it follows) and their sins, and their
iniquities will I remember no more. Mr. Air will have them read thus. After he
had said before, This is the Covenant which I will make with them after those
days (then) the Lord says, I will put my Laws into their hearts, etc. This
is the place which first established me in the right understanding of the
Covenant, as I have described it. The only question between Mr. Air and me
here is, whether those words ( says the Lord, ver. 16.) be the words of the
Apostle, or the words of Jeremy cyted by him. I am for the latter, 1. Because
those words are in that place of Jeremy. 2. Because this Apostle rehearses the
same words as the words of Jeremy, Heb 8. 8, 10. If Mr. Air can show better
evidence for his interpretation, he should have done it.

CHAP. XV.
An answer to Mr. Eyres nineteenth Chapter, wherein he endeavors to prove,
that in the New Covenant there are no conditions required of us to invest us
with a right and title to the blessings of it.

SECT. I.
MOst of my work in answer to the things contained. 1,
in this Chapter is already performed: there being little throughout but what
has had its trial in the foregoing Discourse. Mr. Air, before he comes to
Argument premiseth two things (he might have said three.) 1. What he means by
the New Covenant. 2. What by a condition. Upon the former I shall animadvert
nothing, having so largely already confuted it. This only I observe, that he
calls the New Covenant an engagement, and that by word or promise: and
distributes the Covenants of God into that of works, made with Adam: and that
of grace made (not with men) but with Christ: and yet, not far before placed
the very essence of the Covenant in Gods eternal purpose of doing good to the
Elect. To what he speaks concerning a condition, I have nothing to add more
then what has been spoken already. His definitions out of Dr. C^well, C^ok^,
etc. I consent to, if by casus incertus he mean no more then that which is in
it self and in its own nature contingent. 3. He enformes us, that some by a
condition mean no more then barely an antecedent. But that is an improper use
of it: we take it in its most proper Law-sense.

Come we then to the arguments: they begin. 6 The first is this, In. 2.
all those places wherein the nature or tenor of the ^ew Covenant is declared,
there is not any men^ion at all of the least condition, Jer. 31. 33. Ezekiel. 36.
25, etc. Hos. 2. 18, 19, 20.

Answ. This is answered already. In these and the like places, not the form
and tenor, but the quality, virtue and effects of the Covenant are described,
2. And so described as that a condition is plainly supposed: because one effect
of the Covenant is, to give strength to fulfill it. 3. The tenor of the
Covenant is elsewhere described as manifestly conditional for the word of faith
which the Apostles preached is the New Covenant, 2 Cor. 3. 6. But the tenor of
the word of faith which the Apostles preached is this, If thou believe thou
shall be saved, Romans 10. 8, 9. Again, the promise by faith of Jesus Christ is
conditional. The New Covenant is a promise by faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 22.

The second Argument is this. All those Covenants which God. 3.
made to prefigure this Covenant, were free and absolute without any condition.
Ergo, the Covenant it self is much more so. The Antecedent Mr. Air proves, in
the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. with Noah, Genesis 9. 11. with Phinehas,
Number. 25. with David, 1 Samuel 13. 13, 14. Isaiah 54. 3. Psalm 89. 20.

Answ. A Covenant may be called absolute, either antecedently, when in its
essential constitution it has no condition, neither required, nor supposed,
expressed nor understood. Or consequently, when it becomes absolute upon the
performance of the condition. In this latter sense I yield the Covenants
mentioned to have been absolute: In the former I deny it, because the faith of
the parties with whom those Covenants were made, was supposed and in being,
before those promises were given them, and that as the ground and reason
(though not the cause) of their being given them. This does the Scripture
testify of every one of them, of Noah, Genesis 6. 18. with 7. 1. But with thee
will I establish my Covenant, for thee have I seen righteous before me in this
generation. Whence he is said to be heir of the righteousness which is by
faith, Heb. 11. 7. Of Abraham, Nehem. 9. 8. Thou foundest his heart faithful
before thee, and made a Covenant with him. See also Romans 4. 13, 21, 22. Of
Phineahs, Numb. 25. 11, 12, 13. Wherefore say, behold I give unto him my
Covenant of peace -- Because he was zealous for hie God. Of David, Acts 13. 22,
23, 32, 33. compared, and therefore he (amongst others) is said by faish to
have obtained promises, Heb. 11. 32, 33. Indeed faith was not in these
Covenants proposed to them as the condition which they were to perform: (it
needed not they being believers before:) but when God promises the same
blessings (in substance) to a sinful world, as he had before done to them, it
is expressly upon condition of the same faith, Romans 4. 12, 16, 23, 24.
Galatians 3. 7, 9, 14. etc.

Thirdly, thus he argues. If there were any condition required. 4.
in the New Covenant to entitle us to the blessings of it, it would not be a
Covenant of pure grace; To give a thing freely and conditionally are
contradictories, works and conditions which men perform are their money, Isa.
55. 1, 2.

Answ. This is the Argument of the Quorum, without which nothing can be done.
Many things we have already spoken from Scripture, Reason, Divines and Lawyers
to evince the falsehood of it: something more I will here add (according to my
promise) to the same purpose. 1. If every conditional promise be contrary to
grace, then neither can God encourage us to any act of obedience by a promise
of rewarding it, nor may we take encouragement to obey out of respect to the
reward, without prejudicing the Grace of God. The Reason is, because, do thus
or thus, and I will give thee this or that, is a conditional promise: more then
such a form of words we have not to prove that God ever made a conditional
promise. But the consequence in both the parts of it is grossly false: for God
does make conditional promises to encourage us to obey his will: and we are to
take encouragement from them for that end. For example, he promises, Lev. 26.
3, 12. If ye walk in my statutes and keep my commandments, and to them, -- I
will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. Which,
that it pertaines to Christians as well as to the Jews, the Apostle expressly
teaches, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. And from thence inferres immediately, Chap. 7.
1. Having therefore these promises let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and Spirit* etc. The promises he mentions a^e Gospel
promises, therefore promises of grace. Yet out of respect to the good promised
are we to come out and separate from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit: and
God has given us these promises for this end. Moses rejected the pleasures of
sin, because he had respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 25, 26. So
Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 18. So Christ himself, Heb. 12. 2. Multitudes of
conditional promises we have in the Gospel: which therefore surely are not
inconsistent with grace, Mat. 6. 14, 15. Joh. 14. 21, 23. Romans 8. 13. Mat. 7.
7, etc. If a man promise another (to whom he has no natural relation, but out
of a mere desire of his good) that he will make him heir to five hundred per
annum, on condition he will go no more into an Alehouse or into none of the
Popes dominions: in such a promise there would be found every thing which
according to Scripture or Philosophy (as we have showed before, chap. 5.) is
required to an act of grace, and yet the promise is conditional. If Mr. Air
shall use his old evasion, and say, that in the places forementioned there is
no proposing of a condition, but only a declaring of the persons, who shall
enjoy such and such blessings: besides what has been spoken against it before,
I shall only add this, that then the said places, and innumerable others like
them, do not declare that faith or righteousness, or prayer, or any other
duty, to which the promise is made, is any whit more acceptable to God then
unbelief; or unrighteousness, or neglect of prayer: but only that the person
believing, the person that keeps the Commandments of Christ, the person that
prays, etc. is more acceptable to God, then he that does not these things:
which is such a prodigious assertion, that till I know whether Mr. Eyr^ will
own it, I will not go about to confute it. 2. If the condition being performed
(be it of what kind it will be) the thing promised do eo ipso become a due
dept, then is it unjust to make the full price of a thing, the condition of any
contract. The reason is, Because whatsoever becomes a debt by contract
supposes (...) repassum (as they call it) or an equality between that which I
part with, and that which I receive for it: If then the full price be the
condition another is bound to, then have I double as much as what I part with
is worth. For if the condition had been the payment of six pence for what is
worth a 100. l. the six pence being paid, it becomes by virtue of the contract,
proportionable to that which is worth a 100. l. otherwise it could not make it
a due debt. If then I have in six pence, what is proportionable to that I part
with, then if the said 100. l. had been the condition of the contract, I had
had double as much as that I part with is worth: because the said 100 l. is in
it self proportionable: and again it becomes proportionable, by being made the
condition of the contract: so that it has a double proportion of worth, to
that I part with for it:

In the next place Mr. Air brings in his adversaries as objecting. 5.
against this his third argument, and clearing themselves from any impeachment
of Gods grace, though they assert the covenant to be conditional. But in none
of his objectionss does he take notice of what he might very well suppose,
would be principally insisted upon, for wiping off his aspersions. As 1. That
the Covenant of grace is not made with righteous persons, but with sinners, and
enemies, and children of wrath: who if they had had their due, and the rich
grace of God had not prevented, had been past all capacity of having any new
terms of life and peace proposed to them. 2. That the conditions required, are
neither so much as is Gods due, nor yet so much as man was once able to
perform: which the Apostle mentions as a glorious difference between the
righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of faith, Romans 10. 5, 8, 9.
God accepts the heart, though in many things we sin all. Therefore these
conditions are such as are indeed available for our good, through the
acceptance of a gracious and merciful governor (as Benhadads servants
prevailed with the merciful Kings of Israel, when they supplicated for life
with sackcloth upon their loins, and ropes about their heads, 1 Kings 20. 31,
32.) though they avail us nothing in the trial of justice. But let us see Mr.
Eyres objections.

First he supposes us objecting thus. We ascribe no meritoriousnesse. 6.
to these conditions, as the Papists do unto works. His answer is. 1. The
Papists assert no other works and conditions to be necessary to justification
and salvation then we do. 2. They ascribe no more meritoriousnesse to works
then we do: for Mr. Baxter says, that the performers of a condition may be said
to merit the reward. 3. The condition required of Adam himself was not
meritorious in a strict and proper sense.

Rep. 1. The first is a calumny. The Papists (some of them) dispute, that it is
a thing possible to keep the Law of God; and that facile and parvo negotio:
they are Bellarmin^s words, d^ J^stif. lib. 4. cap. 11. 2. The second is a
calumny: as Mr. Baxter (a man borne to reproaches) has sufficiently showed in
his admonition to Mr. Air. Reader, if thou art not read in the fathers, do but
peruse V^ss^^ Theses. De bonor. op^r. merit. or Bp. Vshers answer to the
Jesuits challenge; or any other Protestant, who replies to the testimonies of
the fathers, which the Papists are wont to boast of; and thou will find that
they do all justify the sense, in which the fathers use the word merit, though
they disclaim the term, as Mr. Baxt^r also does. The Fathers indeed intending
no more thereby, then simply to obtain^. As when they say of the Virgin Mary.
M^ruit ^sse matter redemptoris. She obtained (this honor or privilege) to be
the mother of the Redeemer. Sine merito nostro meruimus, we have obtained it
without our merit, and the like. 3. The third (I confess) is to me a very
difficult question, viz. Whether Adam in the state of perfection did or could
merit any thing of God? on the one hand I see the Apostle asserting roundly,
that to him that work^th, the reward is imputed of d^bt, not of grace, Romans 4.
4. On the other hand I am not able to conceive how the creature can lay an
obligation of justice upon his maker, Romans 11. 35. Who has first given to him,
and it shall be r^compens^d to him again^? Nor am I certain what life it was
that was promised to Adam. Some Divines are of opinion that it was the same and
^o other, which is now promised through Christ to them that believe: others
(and particularly Mr. B^rr^^g^s) are peremptory, that the a Gosp conver^. ^er
3. page 43.
Law to Adam, had only the promise of a natural life to be continued. I shall
wave all dispute concerning it, and deliver my opinion in these four
conclusions.

1. There is a proportion between a spotless, perfect, sinlesse
righteousness, and the reward of a happy and an unafflicted life. That he,
that never did any evil, should never suffer any evil (unless he become a
surety for another that has wrought evil) is but just. So much at least is
signified by the Apostles expression, R^m. 4. 4. To him that works the reward
is imputed of debt, not of grace. And the law of nature (the rule of natural
justice) written and acting in men's consciences, in their excusations and
justifications of themselves, for what they have well done, Romans 2. 15. attests
the same.

2. God, as author of his creatures being, and all his faculties and abilities,
has a right of absolute sovereignty and dominion over him: by virtue of which
he may justly challenge, the utmost service the creature can perform, without
engaging himself to give him a reward. It was therefore (I do not say of grace,
but) o^ his goodness and bounty, that he would condescend to promise a re^ard
to man for his obedience to the Law. This ^ ^ay down as a concession.

3. Gods promise of rewarding man's obedience* does not make himself a debtour
to man properly, but makes the life promised to become a debt. Life may be
legally and in justice due, and yet God not a debtour: For there is d^bitum
reale, as well as personale, suitable to the distinction of actions in the
U^pian. l. Action. Genesis ff. de oblig and Act.
Law, into real and personal, the former per quam rem^^ stram quae ab ^li^
p^ssi^^^r p^tim^s: though he be Justit. l. 4. c. 6.. omnium autem.
^^l^o jure nobis obligatus: of which they give Ibid. aeque si ag^t.
several instances. The latter, Qu^ cum eo agim^s qui ^^ligatus ^st n^^is, ad
faci^ndum aliquid, vel dandum: Inst. eod.. omnium a^tem
idque vel ex c^ntract^ vel ^x (...)l^ficio. Whence it is manifest, that an
action purely real, and not mixed with a personal (as sometimes it is)
supposes no person to be, in justice, obliged as a debtour: and yet the thing
a due debt. In like manner, life might have been given to Adam as a due debt;
he being worthy of such a reward: and yet God in promising it become a debtour
to none but to himself only.

4. Therefore Gods rewarding Adam (supposing him to have continued perfectly
righteous) is an act of goodness and faithfulness, quoad exercitium, but an
act of justice quoad specificationem. That is, it was Gods goodness to promise
a reward of life to him, and his faithfulness to execute it: but upon
supposition that he deal in rewarding him, jure rectorio as a good and
equitable Governor, it is just that he reward him with a life, as perfectly
free from all mixture of evil, as his obedience was free from all mixture of
sin, Genesis 18* 25. That be far^e from thee to do after this manner, to slay the
righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that
be far from thee: ^ all not the Judge of all the earth do right?

The next objection he thus proposes. The conditions required. 7.
of Ad^m were legal: but the conditions of the New Covenant are evangelicall.
He answers. All conditions performed for life, are legal conditions: the
precepts, both of Law and Gospel have the same matter.

Rep. Repentance toward God, and faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ, were
neither required in the Law given to Adam, nor in that given to Israel; Gal. 3.
12. 2. The conditions required of Adam, were as much as justice it self could
exact of him: The conditions required of us are such, as nevertheless justice
might condemn us: and avail us nothing, but in Gods gracious and merciful
acceptance, Jer. 3. 1, 12. Thou have played the ^^rlot with many l^vers, yet
return again to me (...) and I will not cause mi^^^ng^r to fall upon you, for I
am m^rcifull says the Lord. Hence thirdly, perfect sinlesse obedience, of it
self commended man unto God (his equitable Governor) as worthy, not only not
to be punished, but to be rewarded suitably to his nature: (that it did not
merit of God, so as to lay an obligation of justice upon him to reward it, is
merely by accident; because of the infinite distance and supremacy of God over
man.) But faith and repentance do only dispose us to be enriched, enlivened
and perfected by the fullness and sufficiency of another, even the Lord Jesus
Christ: even as poverty may be said to commend one to a liberal man, inasmuch
as it disposes him to be a fit object for liberality to exercise it self upon.
And this is intimated in the place which Mr. Air quoated but now, Isa. 55. 1,
2. if his exposition of it be true. viz. the conditions which men perform, are
their money, for v. 1. it is said, come buy wine and milk, without money and
without price, which coming, is says; and this faith, as it is the condition
upon which we partake in the blessings promised, is therefore metaphorically
called a buying (and thus far forth it agrees with legal conditions;) but as
it is a buying without money or price, it supposes the said blessings to be
freely given (as Rev. 22. 17. it is expounded) and thus far forth it is
opposed to legal. This I put here, because I had forgot to do it in its right
place, which was,. 4.

Thirdly, he supposes us thus objecting. Evangelical conditions are more
facile and easy then legal were.

His answer is. There can be no condition imagined more facile and feasible
then Adams was, viz. to abstain from the fruit of one tree.

Rep. 1. Our Divines are not wont to place the whole of the condition required
of Adam in that one precept of not eating the forbidden fruit, any otherwise
then symbolically: for as that tree had the nature of a Sacrament, and the not
eating of it, a visible profession of universal subjection unto God: so the
eating of it was a visible and universal renouncing of his authority, and of
that obedience which Adam owed him. 2. The objectors (who they are I know not)
have (I presume) this sense. 1. That if we compare the nature of the acts, it
is far easier to believe, then to keep the law, and this is certain: for de
facto multitudes believe, who never kept the Law perfectly. 2. That it is an
easier way of salvation to be saved only by committing our selves to Christ in
his way, that he may save us, then to have the whole care and burden of so
great a work upon our selves: this also is true; because in this way our
salvation is sure: in the other it was uncertain, even when man was righteous
(as the event proves sadly) and unto sinners impossible 3. That the commands of
Christ are nothing so grievous to be borne, as those given to the Church before
his coming, this also is undoubted, Act. 15. 10. 4. That faith in exercitio, or
to believe, is far easier to us, through the strength of God enabling us,
then it was to Adam to keep himself in that state of righteousness in which he
was made: for it is God which enables us to perform those acts which himself
has made the conditions of our interest in his covenant. So (will Mr. Air
say) Adams ability to keep the Law, was given him of God. True. But 1. Not of
grace, but ut naturae debita (as we maintain against the Papists) as due to
his nature, out of that common goodness, which furnished every creature in its
kind, with those principles and abilities which were necessary to them for the
attaining of the respective ends to which they were created: which if they had
wanted, the work of God had been imperfect, and unlike himself: but the
creature had been in no fault 2. The use and improvement of those abilities was
left to Adams free will, supposing that common concourse of divine providence,
without which no creature can move, in its kind, toward its own end. But to
quicken us when we were dead, and restore lost abilities: yea, to vegetate and
maintain them against contrary principles and inclinations from within, and
oppositions from without, is such special grace as Adam in that state received
not.

Some other reasons Mr. Air adjoyns: but he tells the Reader, that he has
mentioned them before (more then once or twice) and I also have answered them
before: and therefore shall refer the Render thither, and so pass on to his
twentieth chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
A reply to Mr. Eyrs twentieth chapter, containing the solution of his
Arguments, tending to prove, that God is the God of his people before they
believe.

SECT. I.
FRom the Apostles description of the New Covenant,. 1.
Heb. 8. I retorted* this argument upon Mr. Air. If God be not the God of any,
nor they his people before they believe, then none are in Covenant with God
before they believe. But God is not the God of any before they believe. Ergo.
Hereupon Mr. Air disputes against the assumption largely: and advances many
arguments to prove, that God is the God of his people before they believe. Let
us take them in their order.

First, If God be their God whom he does peculiarly love,. 2.
and whom he has chosen, then is he a God to some before they believe. But God
is their God whom he has chosen.

Answ. If by choosing be meant from eternity, of which the Apostle speaks, Ephesians.
1. 4. I deny the Minor, God is never said in Scripture to be the God of any in
reference to his eternal election of them: that being no more then a purpose of
making them his people, and of becoming a God to them. God is not the God of
them that are not, Matthew. 22. 32. Let us see the proofs. God was the God of
Israel: now he became their God by setting his love upon them and choosing them,
and by separating them from other people, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. Lev. 20. 24, 25.
Answ. 1. I deny, that either the choosing of them, Deuteronomy. 7. or the separating of
them, Lev. 20. are to be understood of eternal election; of which nevertheless
Mr. Air pretends to be understood in his Major, by quoting for proof, Ephesians. 1.
4. otherwise I would have denied the Major for even in vocation (which also is
sometimes in Scripture called choosing, as we have showed elsewhere, God
separates men to himself from the rest of mankind: yet will it by no means
follow that therefore he is the God of some that believe not: for vocation is
the giving of faith. As to the texts before us, it is manifest that the
choosing, spoken of, Deuteronomy. 7. is a temporal act, for the cause of it is set
down, ver. 8. Because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto their
Fathers: expressed more plainly, chap. 4. 37. Because he loved their Fathers,
therefore he chose their seed after them. So also chap. 10. 15. 2. Much less
is it said, that this love or choosing them was the thing in respect of which he
is said to be their God and they his people: but the contrary is employed, verse
6. The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people to himself above
all people, etc. Where the making of them to be his people (which also includes
the correlate of becoming their God) is mentioned as the end and effect of his
choosing them: which effect, when it is wrought is easy to learn from Exodus
19. 5. Now therefore if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant,
then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people.

Again (says Mr. Air) the Lord, Ezekiel. 16 8. declares concerning spiritual
Israel, that they became his, whilst they were in their blood; that he swear
unto them and entered into Covenant with them: which swearing, as it referres to
spiritual Israel must be understood of the oath which he made to Christ
concerning the blessing of his seed.

Answ. Nothing but uncertainties. 1. It is not fair in a dispute to ground a
conclusion upon Types, unless we have firm demonstrations of the Antitype.
Mr. Air should therefore prove that the words there spoken are not peculiar to
Israel in the letter. 2. That the spiritual Israel typified are the Elect as
such, and not believers as such. 3. That the Israel there spoken of were his,
before he entered into Covenant with them. The text is express against it. I
entered into Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine; Which way does this
prove that Gods eternal Election is the thing in respect of which he is our
God and we his people? 4. That the said Covenant was a type of the Covenant
made with Christ.

Yet again, The Prophet inferres this their relation unto God from his
everlasting love, Jeremiah 31. 1, 3. Answ. Negatur.

The Apostle likewise, Romans 8. 31. Answer. Negatur.

So 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure -- The Lord knows who
are his. Implying, that the Election and foreknowledge of God does make men
his. Ans. Mr. Air knows how Mr. Mede and others expound this place.

Prove, 1. That by Gods foundation and knowledge is meant his Election and
foreknowledg. 2. That his are meant of, his by Election. It may be meant of
such as are his by sincerity of faith. 3. That if men were called his in
reference to his Election of them, it must therefore needs be understood in the
same sense, as when he is said to be our God and we his people.

The second Argument is this. God is a God not only to his. 3.
people who are called and do believe, but to their seed, who are not called
and do not yet believe. As the God of Abraham and his seed. So Act. 2. 39. The
promise is to you and your children. This is the ground of Infant Baptism.

Answ. It is not then in reference to Election that God is said to be our God
and we his people, for certainly all the children of faithful Parents are not
elected. 2. The children of the faithful are altogether in the same Covenant
with their Parents, whiles by reason of their infant age, they are in moral
consideration, ra^^er parts of their parents then divided from them by a
personal subsistence of their own, as not being then able either to own or
reject their Fathers Covenant: Nevertheless when they come of age they must
themselves answer and fulfill the conditions of the Covenant, as their Fathers
did: else will God call them (as he did Israel, Hos. 1. 6, 9.) Lo Ammi, and Lo
Ruhama; ye are not my people, nor will I be your God; And thus I think are all
those Covenants to be understood, wherein God promises mercy to the faithful
and to their seed. God promised mercy to David and his house, yet so that thy
children take heed to their way, to walk in my Law as thou have walked before
me, 2 Chronicles. 6. 16. and chap. 7. 17, 18, 19. God promised mercy to Abraham and
his seed: by virtue of which promise he was gracious to the children that had
not rebelled against him: though the same promise profited not their Parents
because of their unbelief, Deuteronomy. 1. 39, 40. With Heb. 4. 1, 2. and often does
the Lord require of them to return to him, and obey his voice, that he might
give them the blessings of their Fathers Covenant. See Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42.
Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13. and other places innumerable. In like manner the promise is
to you and your children (says Peter) Act. 2. 39. therefore are they exhorted
to repent and be baptized, that they and their children might continue the
people of God, and partake in the full blessedness promised long before, and
now exhibited in Christ Jesus. The same promise is left to all in the Church
under the Gospel, Heb. 4. 1, 2, etc. But it concerns them to see that they do
not fall short of it through unbelief, as the Apostle there speaks. The sum is,
God is the God of the infants of faithful Parents (in sign whereof they are
baptized.) But they when they are grown up must see that they personally
fulfill the conditions of the Covenant: otherwise God remains no longer their
God; unless it be external, and in regard of outward Administrations, which
does not concern our question.

Thirdly, thus he argues. They whom the Lord has purchased. 4.
to be a peculiar people to himself, have the Lord to be their God.

Answ. I deny this proposition. Christ purchased his wife before he made her
his wife: and he purchased a people out of the hands of those Lords that ruled
over them, (Sin, Satan, the Law,) and God himself as the Judge and Executioner
of his Law before he made them his people. Indeed Mr. Air tells us a little
below, that by the purchase of the blood of Christ we were made (...) a
peculiar people, Tit. 2. 14. when the text says no such thing, but the just
contrary. He gave himself for us that he might purify to himself a peculiar
people zealous of good works. He might as well say that by the death of Christ
immediately we are made zealous of good works, or redeemed from all iniquity,
that is, made to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts (for that is the
meaning of those words here, as appears by their opposition to verse 12.) That
which makes us a p^culiar (or a choice and excellent) people is Christ's
purifying us: which purifying being the effect and end of his death, is some
other act then his dying for us. Compare Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. 2. This Argument
contradicts the first. There Mr. Air argued that God was our God and we his
people by the act of eternal election: if that be true, then the purchase of
Christ is not that which immediately makes God our God and us his people. 3.
The promise, that God will be our God and we his people, is no effect of
Christ's death if his purchase immediately made, that God was our God and we his
people; for what was already done could not be promised to be done.

But (says Mr. Air) What a man purchases he obtains a Legal right and
propriety in, therefore the Apostle concludes from hence that we are not our
own but Gods, because we are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.

Answ. A right! Why, I doubt not but God and Christ have a right, not only by
creation, but by redemption to the obedience and subjection of all the world
(at least wheresoever he comes by the Gospel to challenge it) that they should
not live to themselves, but should wholly addict themselves to glorify God in
their souls and bodies. Otherwise let Mr. Air tell me how men can be said to
deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2. But if this were not so, and
that it were no sin in men to deny the Redeemer to be their rightful Lord (as
the Apostle says he is, Romans 14. 9.) What has Mr. Air gained? If I buy a
piece of Land to make it a Garden an Orchard, or a Vineyard, it is neither of
these till I have made it so. Or, if I purchase a servants freedom that I may
make him my heir; some other act besides the mere purchase is necessary that
he may be my heir: In like manner, if Christ purchase sinners, that he may
purify them and make them his peculiar people, they are not his people, nor is
he their God, merely because of his purchase. See Exodus 19. 5. We shall clear
all this by a distinction at the end of Mr. Eyres Arguments.

Mr. Air proceeds fourthly. We receive faith it self upon this. 6.
account, because we are Gods people. Ergo, God is our God before we believe.
The antecedent he proves, Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons, God has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba father. So. Isa. 48. 17. I
am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to prof^t.

Answ. I deny the Antecedent. The proof is such as I never expected to have met
with from a Scholar and a Divine. To Gal. 4. 6. I deny that the Spirit of the
Son there mentioned is to be understood of faith, but of that Spirit of
prayer (which includes that boldness, liberty and confidence spiritual) which
God gives to them that are his Sons by faith; For we are the Sons of God by
faith in Jesus Christ, says this Apostle, not far before chap. 3. 26. and
receive the Spirit of the Son through faith, ver. 14. a Spirit given to
believers, not a Spirit given to make men believers, Joh. 7. 38, 39. Rom* 8.
14, 15. for we are believers before we are Sons, Joh. 1. 12. as to the other
text, Isa. 48. 17. I consent to Junius that the meaning is, Praesto quod mearum
est partium: not that they had actually believed (which sense the very next
ver. contradicts) but (as Piscator in his Scholia upon the place) because he
had taught them, ea quae apta, vel comparata sunt ad prodessendum, those things
which if they had observed, would have been very much for their profit and
advantage.

Fifthly, (says Mr. Air.) None do or can believe and repent. 7.
but they to whom the Lord does manifest this grace; That he is their God.
Erg^, the Lord is our God before we believe and repent.

Answ. This is strange Divinity, that the soul must be assured by revelation
that God is his God, before he can believe or repent. If this be true, souls
are in worse condition after they have repented and believed then before: many
faithful souls are groaning all their days after this manifestation of God to
be their God. But what is the proof? We ch^se and love him because he chose and
loved us first, Joh. 15. 16. 1 John 4. 10, 19. H^^. 2. 23. And Buroughs, Rivet
and Zanchy are quoted to prove, what? That God begins with us first, and makes
us his people, before we owne^* him for our God.

Alas, the thing to be proved is, not that God gives faith and repentance (of
which there was never an^ question between Mr. Air and me) but that he is our
God and we his people* before he give it us: we have showed from Scripture that
he gives faith that he may be our God and we his people. And if God make us his
people ( viz. by giving us faith and repentance) before he be our God, (which
is the sense of the Authors whom Mr. Air quotes) have they not fairly proved
his proposition, viz. That none can believe and repent but they to whom God
has manifested himself to be their God?

His sixth and last Argument is. They to whom God is a Father. 8.
and a Shepherd, have the Lord for their God. But God was our Father and
Shepherd before we believed. All the Elect are the sheep and children of Jesus
Christ before they believed, Joh. 10. 16. Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 13. Jer. 3. 19.

Answ. I deny the assumption. Indeed the Elect are called the sheep of Christ,
Joh. 10. 16. not that they were his sheep at present (for none of the qualities
of sheep mentioned or not meant oned in that Chapter a gree to men dead in sin
and ungodliness: and much less to men that are not: and a shepherd actually
there cannot be where there are no sheep;) but pro^eptically from what they
should be: of which manner of speech we have given many instances before from
Scripture. Thus says Abraham to his servant, Genesis 24. 4, 38. Thou shall go
unto my kindred and take a wife unto my Son Isaac. Not that she was his wife,
or any man's else before he took her: but because she was to be made his wife,
or she whom God had appointed for him, ver. 44. and if Abraham knowing
Rebeckah, had said to his man (as is usual to be said amongst our selves in
like cases) I have a wife for my son in such a place: it would have argued no
more, then that he had an intention (if he could) to make such a one his sons
wife. Thus Q^est. super. L^v^t. cap. 23. and Hieron. in Ez^k. 30.
Augustine observes, that before the ordination and sanctification of the
Priests, they are yet called by the name of Priests, Exodus 19. 22. Non quia jam
sacerdotes erant, sed quia futuri erant, hoc eos jam tunc Scriptura app^llavit,
per anticipationem: sicut sunt pleraque talium locutionum. Nam and filius Nave,
Jesus appellatus est, cum long postea hoc nomen ei Scriptura narret impositum.
As to Isa. 53. 10. and Heb. 2. 13. We have spoken to them often. It should be
proved, and not only said that the seed and children there mentioned are meant
precisely of the Elect. As to Jer. 3. 19. But I said, how shall I put thee
among the children, and give thee a pleasant land -- and I said, Thou shall
call me my Father, and shall not turn away from me. Deodate gives the true
sense, viz. my will indeed is firm to re-establish you, but true conversion is
the only means and necessary condition of it. God according to the order of
government he has* established, cannot give the inheritance of children to any
but those whom he has converted and made his children, Junius upon the place
to the same purpose.

Upon the survey of this whole dispute, I have only two things to. 9.
observe. 1. That whereas I have proved the words of those covenant, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people, to be a promise made to them that
believe; of the many places in Scripture, where those words are used, Mr. Air
cannot find us so much as one, wherein they are applied to men that are not
converted unto God. 2. His arguings from such passages of Scripture, wherein
men are sometimes said to be the Lords, or to be Gods, or the Lord thy God, and
the like, conclude nothing, till it be proved that such expressions imply as
much and the same with those words in the Covenant, I will be their God, etc.
forasmuch as men may be said to be his, and he theirs sometimes in some other
sense then those words in the Covenant signify. All the earth is Gods, and all
the fulness thereof, Psalm. 50. 12, 10. 11. All men are his, Ez^k. 18. 4.
generally, whatsoever is made by him, or used to his glory, or subject to his
government, or separated more immediately to his service: as the Levites were,
Numb. 3. 12. and the first borne, Exodus 13. 2, 12. or the like: these in a
general sense are his. So the Lord thy God (a phrase which God often uses
when he speaks to Israel) mostly signifies, the God whom they professed and
externally worshipped: or at least, whom they ought to have worshipped* as is
to be seen in places without number. Therefore it is not every sense, in which
we are called his, or he ours, which will conclude him to be our God in the
covenant sense, Jer, 7. 23. compared with Jer. 31. 33. where it is plainly a
promise of spiritual, eternal, universal and perfect blessedness, though
gradually accomplished. Accordingly, neither did I use any of the foresaid
texts or phrases (though I might have used many with great advantage) to prove,
either that I will be thy God, etc. contained all the blessings of the covenant
on Gods part, or that it is a promise made to them that believe and are
converted: but those plain texts, where these words are set down syllabically,
as the matter and sum of the Covenant: nor can Mr. Air gain any thing by
the use of them, till he has better reconciled the Scriptures to his cause.

As to the following observation, which I had from some learned Jewish and
Christian writers, viz. That God is never said to be our 10.
God in reference to his giving the first grace, but only in reference to the
blessings which he promises to them that have faith. My memory did a little
fail me in the words, but not at all in their sense. If Mr. Air must needs
know my authors, they are Upon Genesis 28. 13.
R. Solomon Jarchi, who says, that God is not in Scripture said, to be the God
of any, whiles they are alive: endeavoring to prove it out of Job 15. 15. c It
is in Tanchum fol. 13. Col. 3 (...) id est N^n in venimus in Scriptura, Deum
nomen ejus junxisse* hominibus justis ^um in vivis sunt, ut scribe. retur ^eus
cujus^^bet, etc. ^ In Berachoth fol. 5. Col. 4
etc. and assigns a peculiar reason, why in that place of Genesis 28. 13. God
says he is the God of Isaac, whilst Isaac was yet alive. The same author
does there also repeat the words in Tanchuma (though he do not quote the place)
where it is said, The holy blessed God, does not join his name to the Saints
while they are alive, but when they are dead, as it is said, to the Saints
which are on the earth, etc. and to the same purpose the Jerusalem (d) Targum,
though I know some of them, and particularly More N^* voch. part. 3 cap. 51
Maim^^des give a far different reason of Gods calling himself the God of any
one: though with far less probability. As to the notion it self, I seek no
more from it, then that God is called the God of a people or person, in
reference to the blessedness and rewards which he gives to them, especially
that of a heavenly and eternal life. And thus far forth it is grounded on
Scripture, Rev. 21. 3, 7. Otherwise I cannot conceive how our Lord concludes
the resurrection from hence, that he calls himself the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Matthew. 22. 32. and the Apostle so expounds it,
Heb. 11. 16. He is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for
them a City; which place firml^ shows that God is called their God, in
reference to the reward of a heavenly blessedness specially, which he gave
them. Mr. Air (whether willingly or ignorantly, himself best knows) quite
mistakes the Argument from the place, as if it were no more but this, God was
the God of Abraham Is^ack* and Jaco^, who were believers: Ergo he is not the
God of any before they do believe. No. The Argument is grounded in the Apostles
interpretation of the phrase: He is called their ^o^, inasmuch as he has
prepared for them a City. Nevertheless^, ^f I had argued in his sense, the
Argument had been strong and unde^iable; for their faith is mentioned as the
reason upon w^^ch God became a God unto them: as appears by the note of
inference (...) wer^f^re. Wherefore he is not ashamed to be called their God.
Hence the Argument is (and let Master Fire answer it if he can) If Gods being
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacoh were a consequent of their faith, then is
it also a conseque^t of all other men's faith, or he is not the God of any other
before they believe: the reason is, because he is the God of all men in the
same way. Romans 3. 29, 30. But the first is clear from the te^t; Wherefore*
Ergo, so is the last, Mr. Eyres parallel, if he will review it, he will
acknowledge to be rediculous and unworthy of an answer.

And as thus, Gods being our God, is clearly made a consequent of. 11.
faith, so elsewhere our being his people is made a consequent of the same
faith, 1 Pet. 2. 10. In times past you were not a people, but are now the
people of God.

This (says Mr. Air) is to be understood in reference to the external
administration of the Covenant, and not the real participation or interest in
the blessings of it.

Rep. 1. If the words be spoken of Jews (to whom this Epistle is written, chap.
1. 1.) they were externally the people of God before: and in reference to them
it must be therefore something more that is here promised then that they shall
be externally the people of God. 2. If of Gentiles (whom the Apostle also
includes in this promise, Romans 9. 25.) their condition had been happy, if the
want of an external covenant had been the worst: and they had had right and
interest in Christ and everlasting life by some Covenant internal. But all
gentiles equally in their gentile state are strangers from the Covenants of
promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. that is, have no right to any of those blessings which
pertain to the household and City of God, v. 19. no more then Spaniards, or any
other foreigners have a right to any of the privileges, honors, preferments
of the City of London, or an Indian in America, has right to inherit with the
Son of an Englishman. 3. To be externally in covenant, is to be in covenant by
visible profession: and it is opposed to him that is in covenant internally by
true faith: this is the usual sense of that distinction; used by the Apostle
(for substance) when he distinguishes between: a Jew outwardly, and a Jew
inwardly, Romans 2. 28, 29 if M. Air have here the same sense (as he seems to
have, or at least willing to have) then when the Apostle says, you are now a
people, and Mr. Air interprets him of a people only visible and external;
either he supposes that they had faith long before the time he speaks of, or
that they were but hypocrites now, both which are absurd. If he use the
distinction in any other sense, I know neither Scripture nor reason to justify
it. 4. What manner of people they now were, and formerly had not been, is set
down, v. 9. Yea are a choice generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, etc. all which they were internally (if Mr. Eyres gloss be
true) even while they were a generation of Vipers, base idolaters, a profane
people, defiled with all manner of abominations: yea and multitudes, many years
before they are borne: for this internal covenant is nothing else but Gods
election or Christ's purchase. 5. These words in Peter, are taken out of Hos. 2.
23. which text Mr. Air urged but even now in that very sense which here he
opposes. 6. The former part of the verse is an universal negative: you are
sometimes (...), not a people: Ergo, whatsoever God had done for them toward
their salvation, before their conversion, was not sufficient to denominate them
to be a people of God. 7. Especially when it follows, but now you are the
people of God: which being the accomplishment of that promise so frequent in
Scripture, they shall be my people, contains more then a promise of that,
whereof a hypocrite, or a hypocritical people is as capable as themselves.

CHAP. XVII.
A Reply to Mr. Eyres 21 Chapter, being a vindication of the additionall
Arguments proving the Covenant to be conditional.

SECT. I.
AT the close of my Sermon I added four brief Arguments, proving that we are
not in Covenant. ^.
with God before we believe. The first was this, Isa. 55. 3. Come unto me (that
is believe on me, Joh. 6. 35.) and I will make an everlasting covenant with you.

Mr. Air answers. 1. The particle va^ may be taken illatively, thus, come unto
me, For I will make an everlasting covenant with you.

Rep. 1. If this be the sense of the words, yet at first sight it is evident,
that the rational particle for notes the following words to be a reason or
motive to that act, which is here called a coming unto God, that is believing
Ergo, the words still suppose that we must believe before God make a covenant
with us: for his making the Covenant is proposed as the end of our coming.

Or 2. (says he) If we take the words as they are rendered, they are all one as
if he had said, I will perform or give you all other benefits promised in my
everlasting Covenant.

Rep. This also yields the Argument, for hereby it is acknowledged that faith
is required, as the means which we are to use for obtaining all other blessings
of the covenant: and a means for obtaining good things by another promise, is,
formalissime, a condition: faith therefore is yielded to be the condition of
obtaining pardon of sin, and all other blessings besides it self; which is that
Mr. Air has hitherto disputed against. What follows in this answer has been
spoken to largely already; and to what purpose it is mentioned here again I
apprehend not.

My second Argument was this. The voice of the Gospel (which. 2.
is the covenant of grace) is every where, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou
shall be saved, in opposition to the covenant of works, which says, do this
and live, Romans 10, 5. 6, 9. This is the Covenant whereof Christ is mediator,
Heb. 9. 15, that they that are called (unto faith) shall receive the promise of
the eternal inheritance.

Mr. Air answers. The Gospel properly and strictly taken, consists neither in
precepts, nor promises of the New Testament, but in the declaration of these
glad tidings, that the promises which God made unto his people in the
Old Testament, are now fulfilled.

Rep. This is indeed a prime part of the Gospel; but no otherwise then as it
tends to hold forth Christ Jesus as the only and most sufficient cause or
author of salvation, to as many as will believe on him; and therefore the whole
doctrine of the Gospel is summarily comprehended in this, that whosoever
believes shall be saved, Mark. 1. 14, 15. and 16. 15, 16. Matthew. 4. 17. 23.
Heb. 4, 1, 2. Act. 20. 20, 21 and a hundred other places. If the Gospel have
no precept, how are men then professedly subject to it? 2 Cor. 9. 13. Or what
is it to obey or not obey the Gospel? Romans 10. 16. 2 These. 1. 8, 1 Pet, 4. 17.
But what is the direct answer to the Argument? This.

The command of believing; with the promise of life to believers are parts of
our ministry, they are not the tenor of the Gospel or New Covenant.

Rep. 1. A strange answer: our ministry is the ministry of the Gospel; Ergo
when we command men to believe with a promise of life, we preach the Gospel:
Ergo, such a command and promise are parts of the Gospel. 2. Yea, they are the
sum of all we preach, if we preach no more then the Apostles, Romans 10. 8, 9.
The word of faith which we preach, and yet surely the Apostles were ministers
of the New Covenant, 2 Cor. 3. Then Mr. Air tells us again, that the tenor of
the New Covenant is, I will put my Laws into their hearts, etc. And I can but
answer him again, that not the tenor, but the matter of the effects of the New
Covenant are there described, Act. 5. 31. Christ is said to be exalted to give
repentance, and remission of sin to Israel. Is not therefore repentance to be
preached in his Name for the remission of sin? or may we not say, repent that
your sins may be blotted out? To Heb. 9. 15. He answers as to other texts
formerly, that it describes only the persons that are saved, but not the
terms or means by which they do obtain salvation. See thou not (Reader)
how faith is denied to be so much as the means of salvation? and no more
ascribed to it then to eating, drinking, sleeping, reasoning, crying, or the
like, which do all of them in some degree describe the quality and condition of
the persons that shall be saved? Though I confess not from that which is
proper and peculiar to them; but that alters not the case. But of these things
more at large before. Hitherto we have not one Scripture example of such phrase
of speech, serving only for a description.

My third Argument is this. The Covenant which is to be preacheed. 3.
to every man, and every man called upon to fulfill the conditions of it
(namely faith) that he may receive the blessings of it, is not an absolute
promise. The Covenant of grace is to be preached to every man, and every man
called upon to fulfill the conditions of it, that he may receive the blessings
of it; Ergo, I have put it thus into form, because Mr. Air quarrels at the
form. He yields,

That the Gospel or Covenant of grace ought to be preached to every creature,
Mark 16. 15. Matthew 28. 19. But denies that the absoluteness of the New
Covenant is any way inconsistent with this preaching; Because to preach the
Gospel is no more then, 1. To publish that the Son of God is come to save men
from their sins. 2. To press and exhort all men to believe on him. 1. With
the assent of their minds. 2. With the embraces of the heart: to trust, rely,
and roll themselves upon him, for all the purchases of his death, and in so
doing, confidently to expect the fruition of them.

Rep. Here are words enough: but whether they tend, I can scarcely see. I must
therefore crave leave of Master Air to be better satisfied in the following
Quaeres. 1. Whether there be any promise of life and salvation made to every
man? If there be not; what covenant of grace it is which is preached to every
man? It is a strange Covenant which promises nothing: the Covenant of grace
consists essentially in this, that it is the promise of the inheritance, G^l.
3. 18. If there be; whether that promise be absolute or conditional? If the
former, every man shall be saved: if the latter, the cause is yielded. If
Master Air would put his assertions into the form of promises, we might
understand him better. If I tell a man then, that Jesus Christ is come to save
men from their sins, do I promise him any thing or no? If I do, lets know
what it is, for my part I profess I cannot imagine: if not, I would ask. 2ly.
Whether we require men to trust and rely on Christ, or whether says be
required as a means to enjoy the purchases of Christ's death? if we do, we
press men to the performance of a condition; for a means used by us to obtain
a benefit by another promise, is a condition, as we have often observed: if
not, whether the soul do not believe it, knows not why nor wherefore? Paul
gives a better reason of his faith, Gal. 2. 16. We knowing that a man is not
justified, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, we have believed. But more of this
by and by. In the mean time I perceive the reason why we were told so
carefully, that the Gospel consists neither in precepts nor promises; and that
after so long a dispute, that it is an absolute promise.

I said in the minor, that every man is pressed to fulfill the conditions. 4.
of the Covenant, that he may obtain the blessings of it, and so says the
Apostle, Heb. 4 1. a promise is left us of entering into his rest, let us fear
l^st we fall short of it, viz. by unbelief, v. 2, 3. No (says Mr. Air) The
words are an exhortation to sincerity and perseverance in our Christian
profession, by a similitude taken from foolish racers, etc.

R^p. As who should say, it is not faith, but sincerity and perseverance which
is the condition of the promise. The promise mentioned is of such constitution,
as that our obtaining or not obtaining it, is suspended upon our believing or
not believing: so that if we believe; we obtain it, v. 3. if we believe not,
we loose it; (as the unbeleevers in Israel lost Canaan) v. 2. and chap. 3. 19.
If a racer lose the Crown, because he gives over before he comes to the goal,
then his running to the goal, was the condition of his obtaining the Crown, if
it be obtained by virtue of another promise.

The major I cleared by several questions. 1. Whether there be. 5.
an absolute promise made to every man, that God will give him grace?

No (says Mr. Air) yet the general promises of the Covenant are a sufficient
ground for our faith: forasmuch as grace therein is promised indefinitely to
sinners.

Rep. 1. The promise of giving faith can be no ground of the first act of
faith: because faith does not receive it self. But the covenant which is to be
preached to every man, is the promise of that good which faith receives: (for
the covenant and the promise, are all one in Scripture, Gal. 3. 17, 18, 21.)
Ergo, the absolute promise is not the Covenant.

I asked, 2ly. Whether it be sense to exhort men to take hold of Gods Covenant,
or to enter into Covenant with God, if the Covenant be only an absolute promise
on Gods part? Mr. Air says yes. For to lay hold of the Covenant, is to take
up those gracious discoveries which God in his Covenant has made of himself to
sinners, and to resolve not to be beaten off, etc.

Rep. To take hold of the Covenant in Scripture language, is to join our
selves to the Lord (which is done internally by faith:) Isa. 56. 4, 5, 6.
hereby do we obtain the promises there mentioned: for, by faith we obtain the
promises, Heb. 11. 33. and 6. 12. But our joining our selves to the Lord, were
not to take hold of his Covenant, it his Covenant did not require ^s to join
our selves to him: much less could we be said thereby (more then by any other
act) to obtain the promises of his Covenant, if the said Covenant did not
require this our joining as a means for that end. It is not only presumption,
but naturally impossible, for a soul to resolve not to be beaten off from God,
without a promise and a command to lay hold of it. But neither can men by faith
lay hold on that Covenant, which it self promises to give the very first act
of faith: nor can they be commanded so to do. As to the other phrase of entering
into Covenant, Mr. Air understands it of men's visible giving up themselves to
be the Lords people. But that giving up of a man's self to God is surely an act
of the heart: though a man may also with his mouth profess it: and hereby we
are admitted, not into a Covenant of our own, but into Gods Covenant: Ergo, his
Covenant cannot be an absolute promise, because we cannot by any act of our
own be admitted into that.

I asked farther, whether, if the Covenant be an absolute promise,. 6.
men can be accused and damned for unbelief and rejecting the Gospel? was it
ever known that men should be counted worthy of death, for not being the
objects of an absolute promise? Mr. Air answers. The condemnation of
Reprobates does inevitably follow upon their not being included in that
Covenant which God made with Christ. Rep. That this is nothing to the purpose,
himself acknowledges in his next words. Their exclusion from this Covenant is
but an antecedent, and not the cause of their destruction. We seek therefore an
answer. That Is this, formally the cause of their damnation is not their
non-being the objects of Gods absolute promise, but their disobedience to the
command of God, viz. of believing. Rep. But does the Covenant command them to
believe? If it does, it is not an absolute promise: if it does not, their
unbelief is no rejecting or violation of the Covenant (in which yet the Apostle
places the heynousnesse of the sin, Heb. 10. 29.) and therefore is not
necessarily damning: for it is not any sin against the Law, but that which is
called a putting from us the word of life, Act. 13. 46. a neglect of so great
salvation, Heb. 2. 3. a refusing of him that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12. 25.
which is peremptorily and remedi^essely damning. But if they are commanded to
believe, I would know what? The promises of mercy to wretched sinners (says
Mr. Air) which all men are commanded to believe, both assensu intellectus and
amplexu voluntatis.

Answ. 1. The soul cannot embrace, or be commanded to embrace that good which
is not offered it in a promise: no more then the eye can see, or the ear can
hear, or the tongue can taste; without an object to be seen, or heard, or
tasted. The question then still remains, what promise it is wherein that mercy
is offered which all men are bound to embrace under pain of damnation? Is it
absolute, or conditional? If the latter; the cause is again yielded. Not the
former. 1. Because absolute promises offer no mercy to all men, but only
declare what God will do to some men, and what is not off^^ed to all, neither
can nor may be embraced by all. 2. It Is a contradiction, that a promise of
mercy should be absolute, and yet m^^ be bound to embrace it under pain of
damnation. So that hithe^^^ I cannot see any cause of damnation on man's part,
in respect (...) unbelief, if the Covenant be absolute: nor do I everexpect
that Mr. Air or any man else should be able to declare it.. 7.


My last Argument was this. If the Covenant of grace be an absolute promise,
then none but wicked and ungodly men are in Covenant with God. The sum of the
reason is, because none else are capable of all the blessings of the absolute
promise; whereof conversion it self is no small part. This Mr. Air ownes.
Against him I oppose. If men are required to convert unto God, that he may give
them the blessings of his Covenant, then they that are converted are more
capable of the blessings of the covenant, then they that live in sin and
ungodliness. But men are required to convert unto him, that he may give them
the blessings of his covenant: for the subjects of covenant-blessings are not
the wicked, but the godly, Neh. 1. 5. Levit. 26. 3, 9, 40, 41, 42. Psalm. 106.
4. 5. and 111. 5, 9. Deuteronomy. 7. 12. 2 Chronicles. 7. 17, 18. And from this Mr. Air
(if he please) may rectify the mistake of his second answer.

Upon the whole debate, I remain much more consident then before,. 8.
that I spoke nothing contrary to truth or soberness, when I said of my
Sermon, that something might be said to it, but nothing could be answered:
whereof I am content that any man be judge, who acknowledges the Scriptures to
be the Word of God, and can read English. And to those farther observations,
which Mr. Air has pleased himself in making upon the conclusion of my Sermon,
I shall exercise so much self-denial as to forbear a reply, till my time and
paper lie upon my hands.

FINIS
A Catalogue of some books printed for, and sold by ^amund Paxton, over against
the Castle Tavern, near to the Doctors Commons
THe holy Ar^^^, c^ntaining the body of Divinity, or the sum and substanc^ of
Christian Re^igion; for the benefit and delight of such as thirst after
righteousness; wherein also are fully resolved, the questions of whatsoever
point of moment have been, or are, now controverted in Divinity, By John
Godolphin, J. C. D. fol.

The holy Lymb^ck or A Semicentury of spiritual extractions: wherein the
spirit is extracted from the letter, of certain eminent places in the holy
Scriptures. By John Godolphin, J. C. D. 12o.

The Temple measured, or a brief survey of the Temple mystical, which is the
instituted Church of Christ, wherein is solidly and modestly discussed, most of
the material questions touching the constitution and Government of the visible
Church, militant here on earth, etc. By James Noyes of New- England. 4o.

The visions and prophecies of Daniel expounded, wherein the mistakes of former
interpreters are modestly discovered, and the true meaning of the text made
plain by the words and circumstances of it, By Thomas Parker of New- England.
4o.

A copy of a letter, written by Thomas Park^r, to his Sister Mrs. Elizabeth
Averey: touching sundry opinions, by her professed and maintained, in 4o.

A precept for the baptism of Infants out of the New Testament, where the
matter is first proved from three several Scriptures, that there is such a
word of command, secondly it is vindicated, as from the exceptions of the
separation, by Nathani^l Stephens Minister of Feny Drayton in Leicester shire,
4o.

A brief and excellent treatise, containing the Doctrine of godliness or a
living unto God, wherein the body of Divinity is substantially proposed, and
metaphorically digested by way of Question and Answer, by Mr. John Norton of
New- England, 8.

The Quakers principles Quaking: or a pretended light proved darkness, and
perfections found to be greatest imperfections, by Ralph Hall, 4o.

Englands complete Law-Judge and Lawyer, by Charles-George, Cock, one of the
Judges of the High-Court of Admiralty of England, and also of the Court for
Probate of Wills, and granting Administrations, 4o.

Church Members set in joint, or a discovery of the unwarrantable and
disorderly Practice of private Christians, in usurping the peculiar office and
work of Christ's own pastors, namely public preaching, 4o.

Justification by faith, or a confutation of that Antinomian error, that
Justification is before faith, being the sum and substance of a Sermon
preached at Sarum; both by Benjamin Woodbridge in 4o.


