WRENS ANATOMY. DISCOVERING His notorious pranks, and shameful wickedness;
with some of his most lewd facts, and infamous deeds; both in his government of
Peter-house College, and domineering in three Bishoprics, to his perpetual
shame and infamy.

Matthew Wren speaks over a desk with writing implements, petitioned by priests
and church wardens only canonical prayers

no afternoon sermons


Altar-cringing Pristes

Churchwardens, for Articles.



Woe be unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture,
says the Lord.

Jerem. 23.1. Printed in the year, That Wren ceasd to domineere, 1641.

WRENS ANATOMY.
SECT. 1. His birth, parentage, and education.
THe world since its first creation, being by the fall of man, something
degenerated from the first perfection and purity of nature, wherein the most
blessed Almighty was pleased to vouchsafe it, the nature and quality of
exceeding good, and by the fall of man, sin entering into the world, and by sin
death and corruption of nature, ruling and conquering all living creatures, so
that by sin, death, corruption, and depravation of nature, and natural things;
the world hereby not being what it was at first, at sundry times, and several
ages, and in diverse places, from various causes, or rather imperfections and
blemishes of nature; it has been observed to produce monsters of several
kinds, some of one fashion, and some of another, some whose causes were known
and understood by the learned and judicious, and some whereof the reason was
inscrutable; but of all Monsters, those Monsters in soul, seem more
mavelous than those which are either deficient, or redundant in body.

The subject that now we are to treat of, has not been esteemed a Monster in
body, nor a wonder to behold in person, but whether a monster in soul (if he
think to have any) or a wonder to behold his profession and practices, I leave
to other men's judgments; who (not so much as feeling the least part of h^s
tyranny) shall but only hear, that one procreated of He was born in
Cheap Side, his father (being an Haberdasher of small wares) kept the corner
stall, next unto Cheap-Crosse, and was brought up in the University of
Cambridge.
ordinary parentage, some well disposed kindred, in so eminent a City (as
being the chief in the Kingdom) and brought up in so famous an Universitie,
should commit so many monstrous outrages, and such prodigious wickedness.

2. His first preferments in the University.
DUring his time at Cambridge, he first attained unto a fellowship of a
College, which was the beginning of his rising, and so spent some years in
that place; where whilst he was fellow, there fell out an accident, which I
cannot pass by, but as it was reported to By a credible person yet living.
me, I shall relate; this Mr. Wren greatly frequented one Mr. Parishes house,
and this Mr. Parish had a very handsome and proper woman to his wife; in whose
life time, Mr. Wren lived a batchellour, and since her death has married a
wife of his own, and they say, he has preferred or provided for Mrs. Parishes
children: but to the matter; this being known and well noted in the Town, that
the little bird fluttered so often about Mr. Parishes house, it happened that
Dr. Batchcroft was in election to be Master of Keys College, which Mr. Wren
hearing of, said, What? He? Why he is not a fit man to govern a College;
which words came to Dr. Batchcrofts ear, who afterward upon some occasion
speaking to Mr. Wren, said; I thank you Mr. Wren, it seems I had your good
word, yet methinkes, I might be as fit a man to govern a College, as you to
govern a Parish; which word struck Mr. Wren with silence.

After this, Mr. Wren attained to the degree of Doctor, and obtained to be
Master of Peterhousse, and was preferred to be Clerk of the Kings Closet;
where he got the length of Canterburies foot so exactly, that the freshmen of
Cambridge smelt his Bishopric at least two or three years before it fell,
knowing him to be a notable crafty insinuating fellow, as they would often say
among themselves.

3. His bringing Latin Service into the College.
THis wicked Wren, being Master of Peter-house College, and Clerk of the
Kings Closet, besides other preferments, being intimately familiar with
Canterbury, and being a quick-sighted bird, and of an active spirit, perceived
the times drive so hard after Popery, he smelt the way to a Bishopric, and
studied nothing more than to please the Papists, and Canterbury; and among
other devises, he was noted to be either the first or one of them who brought
in use again, Latin service in his College; thinking that young Students
being trained up therein, and used thereto, would be an introduction to Latin
service in Churches; which when he should come to be Archbishop, might be
effected: and in the mean time, thought it would be excusable if any question
should arise, because the Rubric of the Service book, does allow private
prayers in any tongue that they themselves do understand, (perhaps intending
forrainers and strangers Churches here in England) which words he spied, and
wrested to his own advantage, and so brought up Latin Service in Peter-house;
and by his example, some other Colleges did the like.

4. His introducing Altars, and bowing thereto.
ANother of his feats, and that no small one to please Canterbury, was the
bringing in of an Altar, which was the direct way to the bringing in of Mass;
for in vain should the Prelatists and Papists, labor to bring in the Mass, if
there should not first way be made for to bring in an Altar, which after that
they had but gotten that, and Latin service, and that both these were well
settled, and all quiet, the work were more than almost done; for how easy were
it for the Priest, having an Altar, and Latin service, to say Mass, there
being so little difference, and the Country people so unable to distinguish
them, or to discern the diversity between Latin service, and Latin Mass,
and how easy were it for the Prelatists to dispute and cavil upon
transubstantiation; especially when Controversies must be decided by Bishops
an^ Archbishops, and they to have power of undoing other Ministers, that should
oppose them* all which this wicked Wren well knowing, he first practices to
bring in an Altar, and to do it smoothly, he first for many causes him moving,
makes an Altar of a Table, and tumes it Altar-wise, that so it may have an
Altars place, and after that it only wants the name, and for that purpose he
will not all on a sudden baptize it anew; but first promiscuously confounds the
names of Table, and Altar; calling it sometimes one, sometimes another; and an
Altar in one sense, and a Table in another, that so at last he might call it an
Altar altogether; and then being an Altar indeed, and having both name and
place, the materials (if need be) might easily be changed from wood to stone,
and so having Latin service, or Masses, a Priest, an oblation, (as one of his
Chaplains called it) and an Altar, the^ wanted nothing that could give the Pope
and Canterbury content, but only worshipping the Host, or Sacrament, which
himself practiced and performed in his own person, as has been proved before
a Committee, and bowing to the Altar, which he, and all his, and many others
did; so that hereby, he had almost done all that could be desired by the
Jesuits, or requisite for a reconciliation to Rome.

5. His being made Bishop of Herefore.
THese things being so bravely performed, and handled with such dexterity, and
admirable skill, gave Canterburyes little grace such Archcontent, to see his
little bird so active, nimble, stirring, and so real, he thought to requite
him well, both for his reward, and encouragement, and to animate others to
follow his steps, and likewise to enable him to do more, and greater service;
he plods with might and maine, to advance this wicked Wren; and the Bishopric
of Hereford falling then void, he with all have and speed, procures him to be
made Bishop, and so he is immediately, and now the little bird having done his
Arch-grace so great, and such illaudable service, he is gotten into his
Pontificalibus, and so having him for his fast friend, and ready to promote him
higher, he studies nothing more, than to requite his Grace, and to manifest his
further deserts.

6. His procuring Cosens to succeed him in the College.
ANd to show himself mindful of his work, and watchful care, looking as
well behind him as before, he remembers what service he has done in his
Mastership of the College, and considers how conducible to the purpose it will
be, to leave his like in his place, and after much debating with himself, he
can fearce find in all England, an ill looked Machiavell bad enough to succeed
him, but Popish Cosens; him he pitcheth upon, he having lately played his
notorious pranks, in silencing Ministers (being visiter of York) and having
long been known to hold Popish opinions, to have written Popish Books, and
to have played many notable Popish parts, and persecuted Master Smart, and many
others; for reward of his deeds, and furtherance of other services, he shall be
the man to succeed him; he only of all men in England shall be Master of
Peter-house, and indeed (to say truth) of all the wretches in England, he is
most like unto wicked Wren, and cursed Canterbury, and therefore let him take
it; and so farewell Friar.

7. His notorious Articles, called Wrens Articles.
AND now this wicked Wren being in his Pontificalibus, and having attained to
the first step toward the long desired honor and splendor, to which his
ambitious mind aspired, hoping at last to arrive at the very Fastigium of
Arch-Prelacy, (if Gregory come not between) his next business is to hold his
Visitation; which that he may do it laudably, to cursed Canterburyes content,
he plods and ponders such mischievous and most abominable Articles, that he,
and the devil to help him, could devise; and these he intends to foyst upon
the poor Churchwardens, whom he knows to be such handtamed slaves, to the
Prelates his predecessors, that the stoutest of them all, durst not disobey
his Prelate-ships pleasure, but nolens volens, must obey, though to the hazard
of their souls, or else if any should but so much as dare to refuse, he should
be beggard and undone, by this cruel proud wretch, and therefore he very well
knowing their necessitated submission, lays on load, both for them and the
Ministers; verifying the old saying, Set a beggar on horseback, and beele ride
boyond measure; so this wicked Wren, draws such Articles, as the wisest and
learned Churchwardens in England, could not possibly know how to answer in
their presentiments; and thus he begins his projects.

8. His harrowing the Diocese of Hereford.
THese Articles though they were most odiously base, and more than half
devilish, yet that poor ignorant Country durst by no means refuse them,
though they should all have sworn to betray their own Fathers, such was the
rage and insolency of this cruel proud tyrant; and thus having received these
Articles, and taken the oath, they all became Wrens sworn vassalls, and bound
in conscience upon their oaths to present unto him any man that should
discourse profanely (as he esteemed it) at meale-time, touching Religion, or
the holy Scripture, thereby to make men afraid ever so much as to mention Gods
Word, or any goodness, and injoyning an impossibility of avoiding manifest
perjury in the Churchwardens, who could not possibly if they had been so many
Spirits, have been present, waiting at so many several men's Tables at once;
and likewise they were bound by oath, to certify by their presentment, whether
the Ministers expounded the holy Scriptures according to the sense of the
a^ncient Fathers? which was a task requiring Churchwardens better learned
than ever Bishop Wren was, and rather requiring the Doctors of the Chair to be
Churchwardens, and come to Bishop Wrens Visitations. And thus it pleased the
great wisdom of God to besot this doltish Ass, as not to see his own blind
foolishness in these and many such like abnominable absurdities put upon the
poor Churchwardens. Which Articles with his other lewd and tyrannous
demeanor, made such havoc in the Church, vexed and molested the Church
Officers, grieved the people, excommunicated, presented, molested, so many
innocent people, suspended, deprived, banished, beggered, so many honest, able,
religious, painful Ministers, that this miscreant wretch, the devils
Plow-Chu^le, did even harrow up the whole Country, so that he brought it into
a most miserable case, as ever did any Antichristian Prelate.

9. His translation to Norwich.
THis wicked Wren having thus mischievously behaved himself in Hereford, and
having made such hurly burly, and such stirs, that all the whole Country was
in grief, vexation, and unquietness, and having swept out, by one villainous
trick or other, by one tyrannical practice or other, all the most painful,
honest, and lest Ministers; and in their places, brought in idle drones, dumb
curres, idost Shepherds, and Altar-cringing Asses, and thereby having rendered
the Country very flexible and tractable to Arminianisme, Papisme, Prelatisme,
or Atheism, partly by fear of his tyranny and cruel practices, and partly by
taking away their good and faithful Shepherds, who stood in the gap, and
would be ready to speak for the truth, so that the Country might seem very
reducible to Popery for any succeedant, and being become very disquiet and
dangerous for himself so odiously hated, to reside in it any longer, under
whose heavy burden and pressure the Country groaned, in so short a time; it
was now become high time for that little devil cursed Canterbury, to bestirre
himself for his Journeyman Wrens sake, and to prevent a forcible detrusion or
some such dangerous attempt, he thought it best by a timely translation to take
him away, both to reward his diligent service, by promoting him to a better
place, and to rid him of the cumbersome enterprises he had entered too far into,
(having done all that could be done or desired in that place,) and also to make
way for his further service, to do as much in another Diocese; he procured
with all haste, care, and diligence, his translation to the Diocese of
Norwich; too good a nest for such a shameful unclean bird.

10. His silencing and depriving fifty or sixty Ministers.
AND no sooner was this Matthew mischief, or wicked Wren settled in the
Prelaticall dignity of Norwich, and being very mindful and studious of his
Arch-masters will and pleasure, and knowing singularly well, that nothing could
be so pleasing and acceptable to cursed Canterbury, as to do mischief enough,
to persecute all good religious people, to oppose all profession of Religion,
to hinder all good Preaching, to root out all practice of Religion, to profane
the Sabbath, to forbid all Lectures and afternoon Sermons, to suspend,
silence, deprive, banish, imprison, and ruin all good Preachers, faithful
Pastors, honest Ministers, and faithful laborers in Gods harvest, that so
there might be none left that could teach the Word sincerely, truly,
powerfully, none that durst profess and practice Religion honestly, uprightly,
boldly, thereby to make way for Popery, the only thing in the world, which he
knew very well Canterbury desired and aimed at, and at which he saw him drive
with all his force; but presently this ungodly wretch was so far from mending
his manners since he left Hereford, that rather growing worse, by seeing how
Canterbury had stuck to him, and rewarded his former projects, he falls to
work lustily, without either fear or wit, and prosecutes his purpose, so
keenely, so eagerly, as if he were stark mad, and not a Minister in the
whole Country, though never so conformable a man, if he be but any reasonable
Preacher, but that he will have him down, and does so bestirre himself, that
at one Visitation he silenced, suspended, deprived, imprisoned, or drove out of
the Country, no less than filtie or threescore of the best Ministers in the
Country, all at one clap, and turned many of them, their wives and children,
out of all their living and maintenance, for any thing he either knew or cared
a begging.

11. His silencing of Master Ward of Ipswich.
THis notorious wicked wretch this Matthew mischief was in these his wicked
acts and lewd enterprises, so far from bearing with age, reverencing grace,
regarding learning and true abilities for the Ministry, respecting pains, or
commiserating the wants of families and children, that he still without any of
these respects aimed principally to do the most hurt to the best men, his care
was chiefly to suppress good men, to oppress religious men, to repress all
piety and grace, and to impresse his stamp of Arminianisme and Popery in all
places where he had to do. Among many other honest, good, and gracious men,
who felt the sting of this venomous Scorpions tail, that ancient, famous,
good, and painful man, Master Ward of Ipswich, was one who because he was an
able, eminent, and noted man, therefore so much the more at him did this
venomous Viper swell, and took such speech course to bring him down, that he
never rested till he had it effected.

12. His putting in wicked and corrupt Arminian Ministers.
AND as this infamous wretch, and lewd Prelate, was most vehemently circumspect
to watch all opportunities to do all the harm he could in the Church; to spy
all advantages against all good men; to be notoriously subtle in finding
faults; mightlly aggravating the smallest, where he found any; wonderfully
cunning to make faults where none were, desperately wicked, to outface the
innocent, to suspend honest Ministers for scarce any cause, to silence them
without a cause, not suffering them to preach after-noones without his License,
which perhaps he would not grant, to deprive the best men sometimes for very
small causes, sometimes and most often for denying his innovations,
imprisoning, degrading, banishing for what cause he pleased, or merely for his
pleasure, the poor men being utterly remediless; the Arch-antichrist, and
this his Journeyman Prelate being both so vehemently resolute to sweep out all
that they thought untractable to Popery, so to empty the Churches, to void the
Country of all good men, to make way for innovations and mutations, and as he
was likewise most eager, keen, and active, to innovate, change, alter, and
deforme what he pleased in or concerning the Church, to erect Altars, to remove
Tables, to make railes, to set up Tapers and Candlesticks, golden plate on
Altars, embroidred and carved images, crucifixes, Saints pictures, and such
Babylonicall idolatries, so was he most fervently zealous, and most wonderfully
careful to introduce a Ministry that should yield to all things, to bring in
such as he knew most certainly to be for all turns, for all purposes, for all
matters whatsoever should be put upon them, such as would be willing to omit
preaching, to observe bowing, crowching, cringing; to set up Altars, to worship
Altars, to speak for Altars, to preach for Altars, and to be ready to alter
both the Church and themselves at his will and pleasure, and frame themselves
for all sizes, for otherwise though he had been never so wary, and circumspect
to root out all good Preachers, never so active and diligent to bring in
innovations and alterations, all had been in vain, all to no purpose without
this, without placing and bringing in such as were for his purpose, and
therefore this he was most careful of, this he thought would make sure work
for all the rest, so that hereby we may be certain what to think of them that
he thus brought into Churches.

13. His worshipping the Sacrament of his Altar.
AND thus this Matthew mischief, or wicked Wren, having thus ungraciously
effected the most of his damnable plots, facinorous acts and idolatrous
services, practicing so much superstition in his own person, and compelled
others to the same, having rooted out like a wild Bore, many hundreds of better
men than himself, having wasted the Church, and made havoc of the servants of
God, and having set up so much idolatry, and compelled so many thousands to the
same, to the eternal hazard of their souls, partly by sore constraining them
to bow down to his altars and images, and partly by sleight and satanicall
cunning, deluding them in causing all the pewes and seats to be so contrived,
that the people must of necessity kneel down and bow toward the East, where
he had placed his Altar Altar-wise, and having exercised his whole power,
might, and authority, for the suppressing of powerful preaching, prohibiting
all Sundays after-noone-Sermons, weeke-day-Sermons, and all catechizing,
except the common Catechism in the Service-Booke, and all exposition of that
Catechism, but only the bare Question and Answer, least as he and his
Officers said, the expounding of the Catechism and Service-Booke, should be as
ill as Preaching; and commanding all Bells to be rung alike, that thereby
people should not know where any Sermons were, and where only prayers were;
and having thus set himself wholly against Preaching, and not that only, but
likewise against prayer, not suffering any prayer before Sermons, but only
that in the thirty-ninth Canon, a notable piece of Canonical nonsense, nor
suffering any prayer at all after Sermons but only Gloria patri, etc. He grew
still more and more rooted in sin and not only bowed to the Altar, but also
bowing to the Sacrament, and elevating it above his head, that the people,
being behind his back, with his face toward the East, might see the same above
his head, as the Priest uses to do in Mass, which the Papists call the
elevation of the Host; at which elevation they use to fall down and worship
it, so that Satan having fully possessed his heart, in stead of growing better,
he waxed continually worse and worse, so that it is mavelous to consider,
that one impe to the devil, though he were possessed with a legion of devils,
should do him so great service in so short a time.

14. His translation to Ely.
AND now, lastly, having committed so many outrages, and villainies, and filled
so many Countries with so much superstition, idolatry, and Popery, and having
silenced, excommunicated, deprived, or banished so many honest Ministers,
besides all others, at least fifty godly, learned and painful Ministers, in
two years space, with many more other times; and having so played the arch
persecuter, that England never had nor heard of the like; far worse by many
degrees, than ever bloody Bonner, or graceless Gardener were, their Religion,
times, and laws considered, and compared with this wicked Wrens; he grew so
hatefully odiously abominable again to the very vulgar and common people, that
for fear least Ipswich Seamen should hurt his satanicall corpse, he smelt no
Mustard, and for the safety of his person, was glad some certain time to make
buttons in private, standing in great need of his old arch-friend and
Master-Prelate once again to stand his Journeyman-Bishop in some stead by a
friendly and timely translation, least by some violent mischance or other,
Gregory should be wronged of his due expectations, which his sure friend and
Master the arch-prelate, not unmindfull of his state, nor forgetful of his
services (whom he intends for his own successor at his advancement to the
papal chair, if Gregory cross not them both in the very nick) he befriends
him with a desired removal to the unwelcomming chair of Ely, where his
goodness not much increasing he stays, expecting only one other translation
by the favorable equity of our Worthies, now assembled for such purposes,
from his chair of Prelaticall residence, to be suspended from all earthly
affairs, at the triangle posts near the Church of St. Egidius in campis, to
which Justice I leave him.

FINIS. MYEDIR.

