A Word to the JVRY in the behalf of JOHN LILBVRN.
SIRS.
YOu are of the Neighbor, and Christ shows in the 10th of Luke, that that
person is a Neighbor that does works of love and mercy; it would be an
abominable cruelty if you should find him guilty upon that pretended Act of
Parliament, in regard he was not legally accused or convicted of any crime or
Fact for which he was banished, or that it could be made Fe^lony if he
returned. The Law that Pharaoh made, that the Midwives should destroy the male
children was as legal (a the before mentioned Act of Parliament) but the
Midwives found the innocent babes not guilty, and the Text says God dealt well
with the Midwives because they feared the Lord.

A Word to ^he People that shall hear remainder of the Trial of John Lilburn,
or that Illegal Sentence; which is much desired and eagerly pursued to be
obtained by his Enemies. and those that are Enemies to the People of England,
in as much as they have made themselves Lords to rule contrary to Law.

SAmuel 14 h Chap. verse 45. And the People said unto Saul, shall ^onathan dye?
no as the Lord lives he shall not dye; So the people rescued him; Likewise
many of the People of England have said by their Petition* shall John Lilburn
dye? (and indeed all the People of England ought to say as the Lord lives John
Lilburn shall not dye) for he has not offended against any Laws that has
been made by our Forefathers for our Preservation; he has only offended those
Bylaws, which are no Laws: But such as have been Tyrants made it to succor
themselves in their Tyranny; besides it was made by them that were constituted
a Supreme power of this Nation, by the People of this Nation, who long before
demanded of them by Petitions to surrender their Power to a new Representative
equally chosen by the People; For that they the People saved and judged, that
they did not Act for the good of the People, but for their own good, and
therefore were not a Legal power qualified to make Laws, after the People by
Petitions demanded of them, do sur^urrender their Authority.

A Word to the Souliery.
YOu were first raised to succor the People from being subject to the
tyrannical wills of Tyrants, either in their Lives or Estates, or of the Lives
or Estates of any one of them, or more as in the (as of the Kings demanding the
five Members) likewise consider that clause Di^ mentions of Trajan: when he
made A Captain he gave him a Sword, saying, If I do well, you see, they for me;
If I do amiss, imply it against me; So if those that command you, do command
you to defend any members of this Commonwealth (whose servants ye be, of whom
you receive pay) you are to obey them therein, but on the contrary, if they
command you to kill, or gu^rd the illegal Execution of any one Member of the
Common wealth, you are not to obey them therein; but in stead thereof* imply
your Arms against those that impose such illegal, cruel, and bloody commands
upon you.


