FREE PORTS, THE Nature and Necessity of them STATED.

blazon of the Commonwealth of England, used a a printer's device

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, Printer to the Council of STATE; and are
to be sold by Nicolas Bourn in Cornhil, at the Corner shop, at the entrance
into the Exchange. 1652.

FREE PORTS, THE Nature and Necessity of them STATED.
UPon this certain and clear ground, that some Countries can best spare their
Commodities at some seasons of the year; and that other Countries have not at
the same time alike urgencie or occasion for them, does arise the wisdom of some
Nations in fetching Commodities from the places of their Growth at that fit and
seasonable time, and storing them up till the Necessity of other Nations do
call for them.

At which time, those Countries that have this Necessity, being furnished
from those Magazines or Stores, both the Shipping of the said Countries are by
this means prevented of their emploiment, and the Price, as much as the Market
will bear, is raised upon them.

As First, all Countries, whose commodities are Annual, such as are VVines,
Fruits, Grain, Fish, Oils, Tobacco, Sugars, Galls, Cottons, Silks, Indico, and
many other Drugs, as many of the Commodities of Spain, France, most part of the
Commodities of the East and West Indies, Canaries, Streights, etc. All these
have their Seasons, and Harvest for those Commodities, at which time, they are
most cheap, and easiest to be had.

Secondly, All Countries who are subject to Mounsons, or Trade-windes, to
extremities of seasons for heat or cold, or to deluges of Rain, among which we
may reckon many Ports of the East Indies, many of Guiny, and Africa, some Coasts
on the West Indies, with all the more Northerly Regions of Greenland, Russia,
Poland, Norwey, Sweden, Denmark, Prussia, etc. all those do likewise oblige a
Commerce to them, at some times of the Year only.

Countries therefore, who have no immediate Traffic with these places named,
or that do neglect the going thither with ships of their own, at those fit
Seasons; As such Countries as are either not well seated for Trade to those
Parts, or as have not Convenient Ports, and number of Shipping to manage the
Trade; or who are not expert in matters of Traffic, and Navigation; or such
as are at feud or war with those other Nations; All these Countries, it is
certain, when they stand in need of the Commodities of any of the aforesaid
places, must be beholding to the said Stores, or Magazines for them; and must
be content to abide the Prices or Rates set upon them.

Those Nations on the other side, who lie advantageously upon the Sea, and
abound with good Harbors, Rivers, and Shipping; whose People also are well
experienced in the managing of affairs of Traffic, and Navigation; and go
generally secure from danger; These have likewise this Advantage further, of
being able, at their own pleasure, to make themselves such a rich and general
Magazine or Store as we speak of for other Nations:

Which design scare any People has ever pursued with such studied Industry,
or made proof of the vast benefits and advantage which come's thereby, to so
high a degree, as has Holland.

They fetching the Commodities of Russia, Norwey, Poland, Prussia, Sweden,
Denmark, etc. and bringing them into their own Countries, do lay them up there
at pleasure, till by advice weekly from all other parts, they are directed
where to find a Market for them; And accordingly carry them into England,
Ireland, Scotland, France, Portugal, Streights, or other places Southward: They
on the other side go at fit Seasons to the Streights, Portugal, France, Spain,
West and East Indies; and fetching the Commodities of those Southern countries,
do usually dispers them again back, into the more Northerly Regions; both into
those that belong unto this Commonwealth, and to those others also that we
speak of, placing their whole Interest in the encouragement and sagacious
Managerie of this Course and Circle of Traffic.

Arguments tendered to move this Nation to undertake the like general Mart, as
has the HOLLANDER;
Drawn, First, From Exspectation of like benefit to us, that our Neighbors have
upon this Account certainly gained to themselves, seeing this kind of Trade
would effectually conduce

Both to the increasing, and to the better distributing Riches to this Nation,
then by that we now have; That is,

If Ports for Landing and Storing up foreign commodities; and exporting them
again upon such easy Duties, as we may hold the Market in all other countries
with our Neighbors the Hollanders, may in all the fittest places of this
Commonwealth be opened.

Secondly, It would tend as much also to the increasing the Power and Strength
of this Nation, both by Land and by Sea: as well in Guarding and plentifully
planting and peopling those Maritime or Frontier-Towns, and the Countries
thereabouts, which shall be appointed and allowed for free Ports; as in
multiplying the Shipping of our Countries. A proof of which we have already
had in Dover, which, after the Composition-Trade was settled there (that made
it in some kind a free Port) did within Ten years time arise from nothing to
have near two hundred sail of pretty great Shipping; with an Increas of Stock,
Houses, and all things answerable, although, having lost it now but near as
long, it is quite decayed in all again.

More particularly, Opening of Free Ports, will conduce to the Quickening of
Trade; to the Imploiment of the poor throughout the whole Commonwealth: to the
making of all Foreign Commodities more cheap, and more plentiful; seeing every
man will bring in, when he know's he may (if he find no market here) freely
carry it out again. It will likewise serve to the preventing of Famine, and
scarcity of Corn; to the raising the Exchange, and bringing in of Bullion: to
the augmenting of the Revenue of the State: and to the making other Nations
more dependent upon this.

As a further Inducement to all which, is offered to Consideration the many
Advantages that this Commonwealth has above our Neighbors, the Hollanders,
(how much soever they have raised themselves by this Art) for the putting in
Practice such an universal intercours of Traffic as is desired.

As First, From the Largeness of this Commonwealth's Dominions, and number of
our Ports and Harbors, above those of our Neighbors.

Secondly, From the plenty of commodity we have from within our selves, and
from our own Plantations: which alone being now restrained to our own
Shipping, will afford a Stock very great to begin with.

Thirdly, From the Freedom and Independencie that our Shipping have upon the
Ports of any other State, or Nation; and the Soveraigntie we keep and maintein
in our own Channel. Whereas it is well known that our Neighbors the Hollander's
ships, have not only a great, but a necessary Relying upon the Ports of their
shipping continually being forced to put in, and for the most part to Winter
in our Harbors, we in the mean time very seldom or rarely bearing into any
foreign Port for shelter.

Fourthly, From the Privileges many of our Ports have for being fitter
Out-lets on any winds, then those of our Neighbors, and better situated for
most Trades, either Southerly or Northerly.

Lastly, From the Boldness of our Coasts safe and excellent Road-steads; And
for being at all seasons free from being frozen in and stopped; Whereas our
Neighbors have on the other side a flat and dangerous Coast, barred and
inconvenient Harbors; and such as are by reason of Ice, shut up and useless for
almost a third or fourth part of the year; which singular Conveniences or
Privileges coming to this Nation so immediately from Providence, are not
altogether to be neglected.

The third Consideration (although in some regard most principal to be weighed)
is, the Inconveniences we at present lie under from the Trade we have; and
the Damages that will unavoidably grow upon us, if this Trade only continue;

For, First, The trade we now drive tend's, or is only for Consumption; it
being very little of foreign commodities that is re-transported upon the
present encouragement (...) or settled rate of half Custom.

For, though it may be objected, that look what Tonnage, Subsidy, or Custom
is paid upon foreign goods inwards, which are spent in the Nation, is only
disbursed for a while by the Merchant, and at length really accounted for to
the immediate Buyer or Spender; and that therefore this Custom inwards, though
it should be great, cannot destroy the Merchant: Yet the case is however very
different, and altogether otherwise in a Tax or Rate of half that custom set
upon all the same unconsumed Goods when carried outward, specially if there
was an Over-valuing (as in many there is) of those Goods inwards.

Seeing although it be said the other was paid by the Nation (that is the
custom inwards,) upon all Goods here spent; yet this custom outward is solely
taken from the purs of the Merchant, and cannot be re-imbursed to him again in
other countries, especially when another foreign Merchant shall carry the
same commodity thither, and by paying less custom shall afford it cheaper; for
then this Tax outward must eat our Merchant up by little and little, and put a
discouragement upon him.

For Example.
The Hollander and we deal for spice, for Wines, for Sugar, Indico, Silk,
Cotton, and for the Manufacture of Spanish Wool: all which (with other
Commodities) we fetch from the places of their Growth, or first Production, in
the respective shipping of each Nation; for some of which Commodities our
Merchants at coming in pay in Custom, in Impost, and by over-rating the
commodity 10.15. and in some things near 20 per Cent. which if those Goods were
sold here, and spent in the Commonwealth, the Merchant perhaps could not so
much feel it (unless in a perishable and uncertain commodity, where he often
suffer's) for he then rate's his Goods accordingly when he sell's them.

But if he shall desire to transport again those Goods into the East-Lands,
into the Streights, or into any other places or countries where he know's they
are wanted: Though of this great custom he do receiv the one half back again;

Yet if the Hollanders shall upon the same Goods pay but 2 per Cent. Custom,
they have the Advantage by this means before our Merchant of 5.6. or 8. per
Cent. in their Market (beyond Sea) being clean so much loss as to our
Merchant, so to the Nation, and to the emploiment of its Shipping; this kind
of outward Trade being by this means at length wholly left off and deserted.

These two wholly differing in kind one from another; For a Nation to deal or
traffic in VVares and Merchandises for its own expense and consumption, as
country Gentlement, or ordinary Tradesmen; And for a Nation to make its self
a shop, and to buy and sell for the furnishing and provision of other Nations;
as a man that keep's a VVare-hous, or Store-hous; which latter Trade is that
we speak of;

In regard that a Nation that only buie's and trade's to furnish it self, is
confined to a Stock, and such a Stock, as must not exceed its own expense or
Consumption: And the Emploiment of Shipping and Returns of foreign Goods must
be still as confined, and limited answerably; and neither Trade, nor Shipping,
nor Stock are at utmost able to exceed the value of our Native Commodity
exported: For if the Liberty here of the Merchant and People for Trading and
buying of Foreign Commodity, should exceed our Exportation, or the value
thereof, and not rather be less then otherwise, it does but tend more and more
to the Loss of our Wealth, and to our Decay and Ruin.

Wherefore all Consultations whatsoever about Trade, if Free Ports be not
opened, and this VVhole-sale or general Trade be not encouraged, do still but
terminate in some Advice or other about Regulating our Consumption; and have no
other good at farthest, but preventional, that our Balance of Import exceed
not our Export: which to confine our selves to alone, is, on the other side, a
Course so short, as it will neither serve to raise the Strength of this Nation in
Shipping, or to Govern the Exchange abroad; nor yet to avoid the Damage and
Mischief the Subtlety of the foreign Merchant will hereby bring upon us.

Whereas if Free Ports be opened, and Exportation of foreign Goods
encouraged; not only the Mischief of the Consumption and carrying out of our
Treasure; and of Lowness of Exchange, will most effectually be prevented, but
both our Stock and Shipping will be indefinitely or proportionably increased.

Lastly, A great Part of the Revenue of the State is for want of this general
Trade clearly lost; for supposing Free Ports to be opened, we must grant
there will be an Access of wealth to the Nation, and an Increas to this
Commonwealth by Strangers.

And consequently, Our Consumption of foreign Commodities will not be at all
less, but more; and therefore the Incom or Custom paid upon it. Over and above
which, the State may have a Custom or Duty in a very short time of one per
Cent. upon the value of some Millions of Goods yearly, which now (by Reason of
the Discouragements aforesaid) are carrried into other Parts, and for which
they yet receiv not one Farthing.

B.W.

FINIS.

