The Servant doing, AND THE Lord Blessing. A SERMON preached at the Funeral of
the Right honorable Richard Pepys, Lord Chief Justice of the upper Bench in
IRELAND. Who deceased 2. January Anno 1658. By Edward Worth D. D.

Psalm 82. 6, 7. I have said, Ye are Gods, -- But ye shall die like Men, etc.

Dublin, Printed by William Bladen, Anno Dom. 1659.

To the Right Honorable JOHN THVRLOE Esquire; Principal Secretary of State to his
Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereto belonging.
May it please your Honor,
CVstom has made it usual (if not necessary) on the new year, to offer some
signal of duty. Nothing of mine is worthy acceptance: but the engagement of
Christ to reward wise and faithful service, is, though transcribed by a hand
not only vveak but defective. On this account (as an acknovvledgment of many
debts wherein I stand bound to your Honor) I presume on this Dedication, or
rather Oblation.

Sir, This Sermon was a child of obedience to his Excellency's and the
Council's Order; at its first birth entertained like children, with regard or
not, as love is borne or not borne to the parents; and now laid open to
public view, because the face gives clearer evidence than the voice, and the
eye a faithfuller verdict, than the ear. Though its subject matter needs not to
seek a Patron (for Magna est Veritas; who can do ought (eventually) against
the Truth?) yet the author having tasted the bitterness of persecution by both
the extremes, and observing the same Spirit (though in new clothes) attempting
to act still; presumes to publish it, (which is now charged as his great crime)
and to present it to your Honor, whom the World knovvs too just to acquit the
nocent, and too charitable to condemn the innocent; and whom the Author
confesses his no less good than great friend, (pardon the expression) and
therefore is glad of any occasion solemnly to profess himself,

(Right Honorable!) Your Honors in the best duty, as obliged, so devoted
servant, Edw. Worth.

JVstitia manet in aeternum, quidni and Justitiae vindex? Tanta etenim fuit
Pepys probitas, eaque apud bonos aestimatio, ut vix opus erat acrioris
eloquentiae myrrha famam ejus condire: Worthius tamen alter Arimathaeus, non
solum purioris eloquii sindone beatum Antistitem volvebat, sed vel e suggesto
detonans spirabat balsamum and aromata; Quae ut difflentur latius, sciaturque
quam amabilis fuerat Pepys, quam amavit eum Worthius; Imprimatur Funebris
Oration, ad exequias Clarissimi defuncti habita, utpote quae nihil Fidei
Orthodoxae, bonis moribus, aut Imperio nunc florenti adversum teneat.

Guil. Petty Cler. Concilii.
Datum ex Camera Concilii, Febr. 21. 1658.
Matthew. 24. 46. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall
find so doing.
CHAP. I. The Coherence.
THe Text and the Gloss, the Word and the Work of God v. 44 Be ye ready. Calls
to the Watch, v. 42. VVatch. This Watch consists in the exercised act of
Christian Wisdom, over our selves, to our work, and for our end. The first is
the Main-Guard, the other two, By-Guards. 1. we must watch over our selves.
First, Look to our Cinque Ports, at every sense set a Sentinel. Secondly, Give
the Allarm when the Enemy appears even at a distance. Thirdly, Open freely to
our friends, the motions of the good Spirit. Fourthly, Examine all comers,
whence they are, from God or the Devil? whether they go, to Heaven or Hell? and
what is their business, Sin or Grace? 2. We must watch to our work, take heed
how we hear, fast, give alms, watch unto prayer with all perseverance. This
duty like blood, should run through every vein. 3. We must watch for our end,
for the day of the Lord's coming. In the Orders here given this last watch
seems most especially concerned, VVatch.

But drowsy Man will not easily be brought watch, or kept on it by sense of
duty; Christ therefore allarms us with expresses of danger. That day of the
Lord is like the Basilisk, slain, if prevented; slaying, if it unseen surprise
us. VVatch, therefore watch.

This conclusive particle (therefore) referrs Worlds Funeral. Those of the
highest rank, are first in Mourning, v. 29. The Sun shall be darkened, the Moon
shall not give her light, the stars shall fall, and the powers of Heaven shall
be shaken.

The Sun shall be darkened. That eye of the world (as one says) shall as it
were weep it self blind. The Moon shall not give its light. A new Moon, and a
strange Change, not recovering but losing light. The stars shall fall. God
shall (as it were) cast those spent candles out of their sockets. In a word,
the Eclipse shall be universal, even sky-color died sable, and therefore all
things covered with blacks. The sadness of which covering will be so much the
more sad and dreadful, by how much the day of that change, and time of that
day is more uncertain, more sudden, and less expected. The uncertainty is
declared v. 36. Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of
heaven, but my Father only. The suddeness and inexpectancie, v. 37, 38, etc.
As it was in the days of Noah, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. And
those aggravations which thus lead the Van to this VVatch, do in like manner
bring up the Rear. The day of the Lord, and the time of that day is uncertain,
v. 42. Sudden and unexpected, v. 44.

First, the time of that day is uncertain, v. Ye know not the hour when your
Lord comes. The Apostles were the Lord's Ambassadors 2 Cor. 1. 20.
extraordinary on Earth. The Angels are the Lord's Officers of State in Heaven.
Christ is the Lord's Lieutenant in Heaven and Earth, all power is committed to
him: yet the Apostles, Matt. 28. 18.
the Angels, Christ himself (as man) knew not the time of that day. And is it
not the highest presumption to arrogate to our selves the knowledge of that
which the Apostles, the Angels, Christ (as man) knew not? is not this next to
that of the old Serpent to our first Parents, Ye shall be as Gods knowing? God
3. Genesis 5.
has made us his Stewards not his Secretaries, he therefore that pries into
his Cabinet will prove more bold then welcome. What the good God has not made
known, the wise God knows is not good for us to know. So in this instance, knew
men that day afarr off, 'twould make them delay the work of Repentance, knew
they it nigh at hand, 'twould make them distrust the truth of Repentance, least
arising from fear not love. Knew they it afar off, 'twould tempt to
presumption, knew they it nigh at hand 'twould tempt to dejectedness, both
ways tend to destroy Society and hinder duty. Latet ultimus dies ut
observentur omnes, the last day is not known that everyday might be observed.
An accused Malefactor is not sollicitous concerning the hour wherein the Judge
comes to Town, but concerning what friends he shall engage, what desence he
shall make at his trial.

Thus it concerns us not to know the times and the seasons which the Father
has put Act. 1. 7.
in his own power to secure Christ as our Advocate, his merits as our Plea, to
watch that our Oil be not to Buy when it should be to Mat. 25.
Burn. It was a good answer of a sage Father that a day before death was time
enough to Repent, but a better question on second thoughts of the youg gallant,
Oh Sir how shall I know when I shall die? Nay, said the Father, that may be
presently. Hoise therefore your Sails while the wind serves: VVatch, for ye
know not the hour wherein the Lord comes.

Secondly, the time of that day will be sudden, in such an hour as you think
not, the son of man comes. We are not Freeholders in these houses of Clay, but
Tennants at will, at best Tennants for Life. Three Lives are no long term,
our's is shorter, it is but for one Life, and what a Bubble, what a Puff, what a
VVink is that Life!

-- Plos, Fabula, Foenum,
Vmbra, cinis, punctum, vox, sonus, aura, nihil.
A thousand years are to God but as one day, 2. Pet. 3. 8.
and the longest lived [Methuselah] reached Genesis 5. 27
not the length of this day. Immediately after the Flood this day was
contracted one half. Eber lived longest yet came short of Five hundred. Genesis
10. 16. 17. v. 18. 19.
In the next age another half, Peleg reached not Three hundred. Jacob not two.
Genesis 47. 9.
And in Moses time the cloth shrunk up to seventy years, and what was more
then this was but a course list, Labor and Sorrow, Psalm. 90. 18. We compute
the life of a man to be seven years, and seven years (all men will grant) are
not many: but suppose we did live many years, yet many years are no long life,
for though we are apt to misjudge them long before hand, because we desire to
live them, yet when once they are past and transacted how short do we find
them. Solomon assigns a time to be born and a time to die, none to Eccl. 3. 2.
live; as if our VVinding-sheets were laid in our Cradles, or our Cradles
rocked in our graves.

Scilicet ex illa qua primum nascimur hora,
Prorepunt juncto vitaque morsque pede.
Certainly these Houses of Clay cannot be our Mansions both on a legal and
physical account: on the former, because by Sin they are forfeited into the
Lords hands, thus death enters by Sin, per removens prohibens. On the latter,
because they are Earthly Tabernacles, 2. Cor. 5. 1.
22 Ier. 29. Oh Earth, Earth, Earth, mark thrice earth, made of Earth,
maintained by Earth, and anon turned into Earth, Earth was the matter of our
generation, Earth is the matter of our augmentation, Earth shall be the matter
of our dissolution, Sperma faetidum, saccus stercorum, cibus vermium, a deal of
froth, a sack of filth, and a gobbet for the grave. Wherein as in a pitched
Field, heat, cold, draught, and moisture, are continually fighting and striving
which should be master, until at length one becomes praedominant; and then the
battle being ended each Element returns to his old home, and how small a matter
is great enough to end this battle? it is a usual speech, that a man may live
of a little, it is a certain truth that he may die of less. The weapons of
death are as many as the waves in the Sea, Beasts in the field, the tiles in
the City, yea as diseases in man's body, and the least of all these, even a
prick of a pin is sufficient to put an end to this battle when the Lord gives
the charge. It Is easy to believe this of others, hard of our selves, and by so
much more hard by how much the approach of death is more nigh. In an hour which
ye think not of your Lord comes. and therefore,

Thirdly, That hour will come when least weapon wherewith our first Parents
were wounded, was not dying, 6. Genesis 4.
but the broad point thereof daily experience has blunted, wheresore Satan
whets out another more contracted, and no less deadly. Ye shall not die this
day, or this week, or this month, or this year, and thus concluding to the last
period, what does he but retail that to us which he sold in gross to our first
Parents? for is not the total of all these parcels ye shall not die? and are we
not apt on this score, to put off death farther by how much it comes on
faster? thus it is observed that Old men are most what most covetous, when
dying, then most buisie how to live, such was that fool in the Gospel, a fool
in grain (as one cal's him) who measured his years by his barnes, and his life
by his stores, and thereon sang requiems to his own Soul, but death comes and
both puts a stop in his note, and turns his longs and his larges into briefs
and semibriefs. Thou fool this night shall thy Soul be taken from thee.
Therefore 17. Luke 20.
be ye also ready for in such an hour as ye think not the son of man comes.
His coming is uncertain, sudden, unexpected.

In these respects that day is compared to the coming of a thief, v. 43. Know
this that if the good man of the house had known in what watch the thief would
come, he would have watched and not have suffered his house to be broken up.
The coming of a thief is uncertain, he gives no signals precedent. Sudden, he
makes what speed he can. Unexpected, the time he chooses is that of deep sleep
and security. So (you have heard) is the day of the Lords coming. To which we
may add a fourth. A thief comes not to break the house up, and so be gone; but
to make whatever is portable to be his booty. Thus death strips men of all
their externals. Of all our buildings it only leaves us a tomb, of all our
lands only a grave, and of all our goods only a Tablecloth for the worms.

We are here like Boys playing for counters, which come and go: one while the
heap is on this side, another while on that, at length comes the Master and
sweeps all away. And alas, how great losers will Great men then be if for
nothing they must part with all? Said I, for nothing? Surely if it be not for
better, it will be for worse. For better it will be to the servants who keep
on, for worse to those who keep off this Watch.

The Subjects and Adjuncts of both are described. v. 46, 47. Of the later in
the rest of the Chapter.

The first Subject described Relatively, in relation to God, A Servant. Gods
household, A Ruler.
Absolutely, by his Habits, Faithfulness. Wisdom.
Act, Giving illustrated by the Object Personal, Them. Real, Meat.
Adjunct, Time In due season.


Adjuncts described Distinctly, The duty considered Materially, Doing.
Formally, So doing.
Privilege in its Kind, Blessedness. Season, At the Lords coming.

Conjunctly, Order. First Duty, then Privilege. Subject, One and the same, That
Servant.


Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.

CHAP. II. Our relation of Servants.
GOd is the Lord, his dominion is absolute Lord till Man is created, his
special Dominion is over Man. Inferior creatures serve the Lord passively, man
actively: as they praise God objectively with man's mouth: so they serve God
with man's hands. Man therefore in a special respect stands thus related to the
Lords service. Whose obedience to God (as to the manner) should be like
childrens to parents, free and ingenuous, but (as to the matter and end) like
servants to their Lords. For as servants may not act according to their own
wills, but their masters; nor for their own but their masters behoof: Even so
the Lords servants act in all things conformably to the Lords will of precept,
as their ground; subserviently to the Lords glory, as their chief end. Devils
conform to Gods will of purpose: Wicked men may (as Jereboam did) to Gods will
of prophesy: but the Lords servants do to his will of precept.

Devils likewise and wicked men may subserve the Lord and his glory
effectively, or God may serve himself by them: but the Lords servants do it
intentionally, and make it their aim and chief end. Nor is it mercenary (even
for the Lords servants) secondarily to respect their own good, or the
recompense of reward: (for Scripture motives cannot stir up directly an
unlawful affection) provided the Lord and his glory be the chief end. And
though there be special acts of Gods service (as especially referring to this
supreme end) yet he that in all things eyes Gods word as his Rule, Gods glory as
his Aim, is rightly said in all things (even in his shop and at his plow) to
serve the Lord. And such is the service here meant, whereby we serve God in
holiness, (the sum of Luke 1. 75.
the first Table) in rightousness, (the sum of the Second) (sincerely) before
him, (entirely,) all the days of our life.

To this service we are obliged by Creation,

First, By Creation. 1. The benefit of Creation is infinite, because the
distance is infinite between not being and being; wherefore in that we are, we
are infinitely obliged to serve that God by whom we are. 2. Each thing returns
to its first principle, waters to the Sea, a stone to the earth. God is the
Rock out of which we Isa. 51. 1.
are hewn, our returns should be to him; and no other way so to return, but by
the way of Service. 3. Each creature for its single perfection makes such
returns. Man should much more, who is Index Rerum, the complex of all
perfection. A Microcosm, he has being with the stones, growth with the trees,
sense with the beasts, and reason with the Angels: so that all creatures may
say of man, as Israel of David, Have we not all our share in man? And shall
stocks and stones, shall dogs and swine, shall toads and serpents serve God in
their places? and shall not man serve God in his? 4. Every inferior creature
subserves the superior, water and earth that has being and not life, subserve
grass and trees that have being and life; grass and trees that have being and
life but not sense, subserve beasts and birds that have being, life and sense;
beasts and birds that have being, life, sense and not reason, subserve man that
has being, life, sense and reason. God is man's sole superior, and shall not
man serve him? shall this string be out of tune: and break this admirable
harmony? 5. God designed his own service in making us. Patriae te genui non
Catilinae said the Roman to his Son: so may God to us. I made you not to serve
Sin or Satan, your selves or the world, but to serve me. The making of a piece
of work, is a legal title, whereon to ground property, and the maker knows best
how to determine the use and end of his work so made. God is our maker, and he
has made us for his own service. We therefore are the Lord's Servants by
Creation.

Secondly Providence, We are uprising and downlying in the Lord's Family, fed
at his Table, Clothed at his cost. From him we receive Meat, Drink and Wages.
If we give but part we expect service, and shall not We serve God who gives
all? All that We have, yea, all that all Creatures have, God has empowered us
as Stewards in his Family to gather in the Rent from the whole Creation, and
for all, he requires no other payment from us then this of Suit and Service.

Thirdly, We are the Lords Servants by Redemption, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, humbled himself to the form of 2. Phil 7. 8.
a Servant. By which means it is both our privilege, and therefore Luke 1. 74.
Said to be granted [(...)] granted as a special Act of Grace, and our duty to
Serve the Lord. Our duty because we are not our own, we are bought with a
price. It is stealth to rob a man 2 Cor. 6. 20.
of his purchase, Sacrilege to rob God of his. God's motto is servo, I save, a
Christians is servio, I serve.

Fourthly, We are God's Servants by Covenant Covenant-Servants. Baptism and
the Lord's Supper are called Sacraments, that is, military engagements, the
first obteining, the second renewing that Obligation to fight as Soldiers
under Christ's Banner against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. They are in
the like sort called Seals ratifying our Covenant agreement, as Apprentices
seal their Indentures, not thereby witnessing what they have done, but what by
Covenant they stand obliged to do. Under both notions We are thereby engaged to
the Lord's service.

In a word, We are the Lord's made Servants, his hired Servants, bought
Servants, sworn Servants. God is the Lord, We all his Servants.

CHAP. III. Our Work of Service.
Servitus implies servitium, are we God's Servants? Leviathan is placed in the
Sea barely to take his Pastime therein. Adam in Paradise had no such idulgence:
but must dress the Garden. Less since the fall Genesis 3, 19. In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread. Whether considered as a Commination, thou shall not
eat without sweating, or as a Promise, on sweating thou shall eat, or as a
Command, that thou may eat thou must sweat, which way soever we consider it,
these two are inseparably joined, sweating or working, and eating. Cain and
Abel were Heirs apparent to the whole Earth, yet the one a tiller of the
ground, the other a feeder of Cattle. And Christ himself was Lord both of
Heaven and Earth, yet is he called not only the Carpenters Son, but the
Carpenter. It seems before he entered into Mark 6. 5.
his public Ministry he wrought at that Trade. Though all Gentlemen are not
bound to be Tradesmen, yet all are the Lord's Servants, and therefore bound in
one kind or other, in Church or State to do the Lord Service.

First, Nothing is next to evil, therefore the evil is to do nothing. When the
Devil finds the House empty, swept and garnished, 12. Mat. 44.
he enters with seven worse Devils, an House emptied by Idleness, and garnished
by Pride, is (as it were) swept for the Devil. It is therefore good advice to
be still so emptyed that when the Devil tempts us to Sin, we may be able to
answer that we are not at leisure, we have somewhat else to do. David's Idleness
made way for Adultery, Murder, Blasphemy.

Secondly, Even not doing, provokes God's wrath. The evil Servant in the
Gospel, did 19. Luke 20.
not riotously mispend his Talent, but wrapped it up, and for that reason was
rejected, the Tree cut down as cumbring the ground, not for 13. Luke 7.
bringing forth evil fruit, but for not bringing forth good. And that dreadful
sentence depart ye cursed etc. is grounded on Sins of omission, 25. Mat. 4.
not feeding, not clothing, not visiting, not doing.

Thirdly, Our time of doing service for God is one of our movables, yea, bonum
periturum. But by well-doing, we shall make that fixed which is fluide, and
settle that in effect with us which in it self flies from us.

Fourthly, the Time of our doing is but short, day, an hour, part of a day, a
moment part of an hour. I cannot but weep (says one) when my Hourglass stands
by me and I consider how slowly my work goes on, and how fast my time goes, as
fast as one grain of sand follows another. Subduct the time of Infancy,
Dotage and Sleep, which are times of not doing, the time spent in Sin which is
ill doing, and the time requisite for supply of the necessityes of Nature,
which is besides our main business that we are to do, and how little time
remains for us to do service for God?

Fifthly, A great part of our short time is already misspent. It may be we have
lived 20. 30, or 40. years, and what have we done for God all this time? it
concerns us now to make the best improvement of our Old Lease, and to do much
in that little time which remains.

Sixthly, On this short time of doing hangs Eternity. Lost now, will be Lost
for ever, does it not then concern us to do that well, which being once
well-done will make us Men, more then Men, Angels, more then Angels, for ever?
does it not corcern us so to employ our time, that we may eternally rejoice so
to have employed it? does it not concern us to be doing, and so doing? that
when the Lord comes he may find us so doing.

CHAP. IIII. The manner of Our Work.
So run, So fight, So do. One blemish in the deformed. One flaw in the grant,
invalid. Malum ex quolibet defectu. If the manner of doing be defective, a
great part, yea the better part is wanting, and therefore a deed done is in
Gods account a deed not done, where the manner of the doing answers not the
matter of the deed. 1. Cor. 11. 20. This is not to eat the Lord's Supper. Alas
how many of these few good deeds which we score up to our selves to have done,
how many will shrink like Gideons Army at the great day of reckoning, and prove
good deeds not done, Sermons not heard, prayers not made, Sacraments not
received, Alms not given, in a word, good deeds not done, because not done in
a right manner, because not so done?

So, referrs to the verse precedent, and thence faithfully, wisely, justly.

1. The Lords servants must be faithful in doing, faithful in Divinity, and
faithful in morality, faithful in head and in heart: as faithfulness is
opposed to unsoundness in principles, or heresy; and as opposed to unsoundnes
in practice, or hypocrisy. First, as faithfulness is opposed to heresy. All
sin is damnable, yet we find not this epithete in such sort affixed to any as
heresy, damnable heresy. The leprosy 2 Peter 2. 1.
of the head was under the Law reputed the worst. Errors of judgment are not
under the Gospel the least. They are works of the flesh, Galat. 5. 20
and shut out of heaven, and if this be no little punishment, neither are
heresies, peccadilloes, or little sins. The Lords faithful servants hold fast
the form of sound words in faith and contend 2 Timothy 1. 13.
earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Jude 3.
Saints. Once delivered, as Christ once died. A new Creed supposes a new God,
and new Gods prove Old Devils. New faiths, old heresies. The Lords servants
must be faithful, as faithfulness is opposed to heresy. And,

2. As faithfulness is opposed to hypocrisy. Hypocrites Devils first born,
Heirs to hell as their portion, the portion of Hypocrites. But sincerity is
Christian perfection, Walk before me and be thou perfect. Compleatness is
required in the Law, sincerenefs accepted in the Gospel. Genesis 17. 1.
And where this is seen in Gods Servant, even gross sins are past by unseen, as
in Asa.

2. The Lords servants must be wise in doing service. Wisdom is usually
defined, Scientia operandorum, distributed into Ecclesiastical and Civil. But
the wisdom here spoken of, is of another nature, or rather Wisdom above nature.
Wisdom from above. Not only that Jam. 3. 17.
auriga virtutum, without which virtue is not virtue, but sin; even zeal
without knowledge, is but like fire in the thatch; like swift horses without a
skillful wagoner. But that (...) that complex of all virtue, discovering to our
cost the right mark, happiness, and directing the right ground and byas,
holiness. This is Summa Summarum, in one word, Religion. Be Psa 2. 10, 11. 12.
Ephesians. 3. 15.
wise, Serve the Lord. Kiss the Son. Let us walk circumspectly, not as fools,
but as wise.

Though this faithfulness and wisdom be Stewards or Rulers over his household.
Many things are here considerable. 1. Rule and Religion are not inconsistent.
Though Lazarus had been a beggar, yet Abraham (in whose bosom he rested) had
been a mighty Prince. In Gods-house are both Rulers and Ruled. 2. All in Gods
house are not Rulers. The question implies this, Who is that faithful and
wise Servant whom the Lord has made Ruler? The body of the Saints and them who
have the rule are clearly distinguished, Heb 13. 24. We are all Crabstocks by
nature, God grafts upon us what fruit he pleases. On some one kind, on others
another. If all were Rulers who should be Ruled? 3. Such as are Rulers in the
Lords house should be of Gods making. The hand out of the Cloud must put on the
Crown, with this motto (...) a Deo coronatus. What servant dates own him as a
Steward whom the Master ordains not? God has set us our ranks, (...), the
breaking of them must cause confusion. 4. Those who are made Rulers over us are
Servants under God, and are to serve God in their places, as God has placed
them in his service. If Rulers as Rulers serve not God, God will not as Rulers
own them. That duty which God requires of us, reaches every capacity,
especially that of our spheres, we are bound to serve God as others cannot
serve him, Rulers therefore as Rulers. And indeed that we are in Gods service,
which we are in our proper places. Rulers are called Gods, as bearing Gods
image. Wherefore as God is Optimus Maximus: so those who are like to God good
in serving. And this is the proper act of these Rulers they are to distribute,
to give.

The gifts and graces which Gods servants abundance, but redundance. And to him
who thus has, shall be given. As milk in the breast is Luke 8. 18.
both more and better for being sucked.

That which these Rulers distribute is meat, poison, nor altogether sauce, but
meat. Not what may infect or puff up the soul, but feed it.

This food must not only be good but proper. demensum suum. Prove. 30. 2.


And herein lastly, must Rulers over God's changes to the time; Yet above all
others is it required in them, like these Heads of Issachar, to know the times,
what Israel ought to do.

In a word, Gods servants must do his service Faithfully, as Rulers over his
household, giving his servants meat: wisely giving meat proper, in proper
seasons. Who is that faithful and wise servant, whom the Lord has made Ruler
over his household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that Servant
whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.

CHAP. V. The reward of Working aright.
Servants, Friends, and Children are distinct relatives Servants are his
Friends, and such as are his Friends are his Children also. And being his
Children, shall not miss their Childrens Portion. Blessedness.

The first Sermon of Christ on the mount blessing, so shall the last sentence
on the bench. He concludes as he begins. The influence of this Sun of
righteousness to his disciples in Virgo was and in Libra shall be Blessed.

It Is the last Scene denominates the play in Tragedy or Comedy. Though the
Children of God may taste blessedness now, as Jonathan did honey on the top of
the rod, yet they shall not eat with a full hand till the Lord's coming. The
contract is made now, but then shall the Marriage be consummated. Blessed when
the Lord comes.

The Lord comes both to the good and ill Servants, messenger with a writ of
ease, to the ill as a Iaylor with a mittimus, and in both warrants this clause,
ne omittas propter aliquam libertatem. His coming to the evil is like the
coming of an Husband provoaked to an Adulteress wife, dreadful ungrateful. To
the good, like the coming of a living Husband to a faithful spouse, cheerful,
welcome. The Lords servant loses nothing by death but what is better lost then
kept, Sin and misery. He dies in life, and therefore lives in death, and is
Blessed at the Lord's coming. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he
comes shall find so doing.

Though there be nothing for the Lord's pay; the Lord has done that, to the
utmost farthing; yet is there somewhat for them to do, Men and Brethren what 2.
Acts. 37.
shall we do to be saved? God finds his doing and then gives the blessing.
Holiness goes before happiness. And indeed were it possible for an unholy
person to enter Heaven, yet to him Heaven would not be Heaven. For communion
with God is not only ungrateful but grievous to an unholy person: and by so
much more, by how much more close and spiritual, as appears in all ways of
communion in grace. And this communion with God is the Heaven of Heavens, which
to an unsanctified man would be rather a Hell then a Heaven. Without holiness
we cannot see God. That Servant whom the Lord blesses he finds so doing.

It is not ita fecisse, so to have done, but ita facientem so doing.
Perseverance is the Queen of graces. Others may strive well, but she alone
shall be crowned. Iudae laudantur exordia sed finis proditione damnatur. Many
who have blossomed fairly at spring have been blasted before Gal. 5. 7.
Harvest. Ye did run well is no honor, but I have finished my course. Those
are blessed 2. Tim. 4. 7.
whom the Lord finds so doing. Nor does this order of blessing restrain Gods
freeness in blessing, for as he freely gives grace to do: so he freely gives
glory on doing. Blessed is that servant whom the Lord finds so doing

That servant. The subject is one both of garment the same, only new trimmed.
Blessed is that Servant, (that Servant) whom his Lord when he comes shall find
so doing.

CHAP. VI. Application to the occasion.
THis whole Sermon in all its parts might be exemplified in his single instance
whose Funeral we at present solemnize. The harmony is full, I shall touch, and
but touch a few strings.

First, he was the Lords Servant, and as a Lords will his rule, his Lords glory
his end. 1. His Lords will his rule in sacred things determined by Scripture,
in Civil by the Laws of the Land. To which purpose he would often say, That if
men were left to themselves, their lust and interest in things civil would be
their Law, their fancy and temptation in things sacred, their Bible. When every
man did that which was right in his own eyes, all was wrong done. Disorders in
Tribes, as in Benjamin; in Cities, as in Gibeah; in Families, as in Micah's.
The result of this principle: In those days there was no King in Israel, Judge.
21. 25.
but every man (followed the light within him) did that which was right in his
own eyes.

Secondly, His Lords glory was his chief end. Not his own glory. His juice was
not put forth in leaves and suckers, but fruit. The character of a real Saint
might be rightly applied to him. He was more than he showed, yet showed more
then most who are called Saints do. 2. Not his own profit. Others may talk of
Self denial, he practiced it. And though ascended to the top of the Tree, yet
filled he not his own pockets, but shak'd down the fruit.

Nor was he only a Servant in relation, but action. He was not a loyterer, but
labourer in that station wherein God had set him. Gods service in this age is
most what lip-service, his was life-service. He was a Doing Servant.

And a so doing a Servant. Faithful and wise. He was faithful as faithfulness
is opposed to heresy. A Catholic Christian, expressly refusing in a dark and
gloomy day to leave the ark for a Cockboat. A Protestant of the best edition,
that is, not superstitious nor factious; not idolatrous, abhorring Sacriledg;
nor sacrilegious, abhorring Idols. Not enlarging the windows of Truth to weaken
Peace, nor enlarging the pillars of Peace to obscure Truth. In a word, whether
we respect God or Man, Church or State, he was a lively transcript of the
Protestant Religion. Which was so fixed in his heart that at the time of his
death (if we may call it a death in regard his soul seemed rather to be given
up by him, than taken from him) at the time of his death he expressed his deep
sense and sorrow, That even the Pulpit often eccho's reflections against the
Protestants, indulgences to Heretics: censuring those as Goats, (if not Dogs
and Swine) and excusing these as weak or straying sheep.

Secondly, He was faithful as faithfulness is opposed to Hypocrisy. A
plain-hearted Jacob, a downright Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed without guile,
even when and where guile was the fashion. He dared not look one way and row
another, (as Watermen use) but he dared speak as he thought, and do as he
spoke, (as good men should use.)

Thirdly, He was faithful as faithfulness signifies an act of the heart
resting on Christ. Thus even when he drew nigh the harbor, he not only
anchored himself on that Rock, but also provoked others thereto. His words
were: My confidence is alone in Christ and his merits, can you say so too?

Esse Phoebi dulcius lumen solet jamjam cadentis. How pleasant are the beams of
the setting Sun? how precious the faith-expressions of this setting Saint?

Secondly, As he was faithful in doing: so was he wise. Not to speak of that
gift of wisdom which fitted him as a Judge for the Bench, or as a Councellor
for the Board, because this Glowworme may shine on a dunghill. The Children of
this world may thus be wise in their generation, but Luke 16. 8.
that grace of wisdom which by right means guides to right ends, (the supreme
especially,) wherein true wisdom consists, and wherein such was his eminence
that in vulgar speech, the Honorable title of honest is prefixed to his titles
of Honor. Few mention his name without some Eulogie. The honest Lord Pepys, or
the good Lord Pepys.

This faithfulness and wisdom, Sword and He had done nothing in public on
account whereof he might be afraid to live private.

I speak before Rulers, and possibly such as take work out of his sampler,
wherefore I shall presume in some instances in things sacred and civil.

First, in things sacred as a ruler over Gods household. He not only desired
but endeavored. First, That a Candle might be set up in every Candlestick.
Secondly, That this Candle might be lighted and give forth its light to the
whole house. Thirdly, That this light might be maintained and Oil duly
Ministered. First, That a Candle might be set up in every Candlestick. Distinct
Ministers, in distinct Congregations. As fixed Stars not wandering Planets.
For this reason (among many others,) he would no less freely then frequently
declare his judgment against the maintenance of Ministers by Salaries. As that
which left them at large, (like those of old sine titulo) without relation to,
or dependence on any particular charge or people. And as that which opened such
a door to pluralityes, tot quots, Nonresidens as never was since the world was.
Many Parishes, yea some Barronies in this way not supplying one Minister, nor
he regarding to supply them. Never such a way to feed the Shepherd and starve
the Sheep, a little experience might possibly have proved; never such a way to
starve both shepherd and Sheep.

Secondly, He both desired and endeavored that each Candle might be lighted,
that Gospel Ordinances might be administered by all Gospel Ministers, and this
light not put under a bushel to the prejudice of the whole House. He would
often express his grief that so many Shepherds in this Land, in this City
especially, should sheer the Fleece, yet not own their Flocks as sheep, yea
disown them as not sheep. Or if they feed them once or twice a week in a green
pasture, yet, (as that no less good then great Bishop Usher expressed it) not
feel how they thrive. This was to him, and should be to us a lamentation and
for a lamentation.

Thirdly, He both desired and endeavored that the Candles lighted should be
maintained and Oil duly ministered. To which end, from his first coming into
this Land, he put forth his utmost for recovering to the Ministers their proper
and legal freehold, the Tithes. And would often say that he did not understand
how any could scruple to receive Tithes in specie, who did not seruple to
receive salaries out of Tithes.

He was a faithful and wise Ruler in civil things as well as sacred. Both as a
Master in his own Family, and as a Magistrate in the Commonwealth. First, as a
Master, his Servants were not like slaves but lower friends. Quid servus?
Amicus humilis. Secondly, As a Magistrate, the Chief Justice. He might shake
his lap with Justice Samuel, and say, whose Ox or Ass have I 1 Samuel 1213
taken?

Abstinuit alieno ut siquis unquam, as was spoak tit-ting the balance, (...),
so strict, so severe a Justice, that he seemed incapable of a temptation of
doing Injustice.

And herein, as his faithfulness was like the primum mobile, so his wisdom was
like the Coelum Chrystallinum that tempered the violence of that motion to due
time and season, both in his particular and general calling, as a Ruler and as
a Servant, as a Judge and as a Christian. First, as a Judge. It Is said that a
Judge must not pass sentente either lying or running but sitting, (i. e.) with
a patient speed and a speedy patience. Thus he abhorred delays in judicature,
as that which turned judgment into vinegar: rashness as that which turned it
to wormwood; both to be shunned by a due fermentation (as the Jews speak,) by
observing due seasons for acting.

As a Christian, he incorporated the daily Acts 23. Job. 12
necessary food, as he had his eating and drinking, so his praying seasons, and
for the solemn seasons of public worship, none more observant.

At which season God bearing him witness as Abel; whilst he was serving God,
God served him, with a call to the Upper Bench. Servus ad legem fit judex, or a
summons to the Vpper-House. Henoch the seventh from Adam, walked Genesis 5. 24.
with God, and was translated anno sabbatico. Thus the Lord translated this
Henoch to complete that sabbath in Heaven which he began on Earth. And with the
new year enters eternity in a new place, state, and work, but in his old
company the Lord God, who coming finds him, whom he finds welcoming him. God
finds him doing here, he finds God blessing there. Where for the present we
must leave him, and where it is his happyness for ever to be left, for

Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.
FINIS.

