Works of Darkness Brought to LIGHT. OR A true Representation to the whole
Kingdom of the Dangerous Designs driven on by Sectaries in the ARMY: As also
laying down the unreasonableness of their DEMANDS, Which if not granted, they
refuse to DISBAND.

Together with VII. new QVERIES propounded to the ARMY.

LUKE 3.14. And the Soldiers demanded of John, saying; And what shall we do?
And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely,
and be content with your wages.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1647.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. TO The disobedient Army under the Conduct of Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX.
Much to be lamented Gentlemen and Soldiers,
IT greives your friends and glads your enemies, that you who have been famous
for your victories should now become infamous for your disobedience: It may be
said of your practices, as it was of the writings of Origin, ubi been, nemo
melius, ubi male nemo pejus: what things he did well, none did better; wherein
he did ill, none did worse; the same may be said of you, whiles you did well in
obeying the Parliament, encountering with your enemies, none did better; but
when once you did ill, in disobeying the Commands of this state you serve; and
in picking quarrels with your friends when you had no enemies to fight withal,
in this none did worse. It has made me wonder that you whose Tenets are, you
must not fight for Religion, should stretch your Consciences so far on the
tenter-hook of your own designs, as to fight against it: I know most of your
Persons, and have read all your Papers with a bleeding heart and weeping eye,
my very soul mourning in secret for the proud and imperious language; vain and
carnal confidence, Peremptory and high demands, weak and groundless jealousies,
sinful and ungodly compliance (with all parties to carry on your own) which is
scattered up and down throughout all your papers; Lies have been your refuge,
and under falsehood have you hid your selves. That your selves and the Kingdom
might see I do you no wrong, I shall produce your own party and Papers, to give
palpable Demonstration to all the world, that you have contrived and carried on
your designs with falsehood and deceit. From your Party I might evince it thus;
did not Cromwell (your great Ringleader into Disobedience) solemnly protest and
promise upon his life and honor many times and often in the House of Commons,
Cromwels Promise falsified.
that the Army should disband and lay down all their Arms at their door, when
ever the House Commanded them? now whether your papers agree with his promise,
the world will witness. It seems he can take that liberty of Conscience with the
Papist to promote the Catholic cause, per fas et nafas, by right means or
wrong, by truth or falsehood: This palpable breach of Cromwels engagement makes
all indifferent men believe that this promise of obedience was only made; that
your purpose of disobedience might be the less suspected, and the practice of
it the more easily promoted. Is not this like the practice of Garnet and
Jesuit, who (a little before the powder plot was to be acted) did lay his
Commands on the Papists to obey their King, and keep themselves quiet? and all
was that the plot might not be suspected. If Cromwell follow Garnets steps, I
would have him take heed of Garnets end. 2. The falsehood of your Papers I could
declare in many particulars, which I will scan and survey in this following
Treatise; I shall in my Epistile instance in one Palpable falsehood only. In your
letter to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London:
These in brief are our desires and the things for which we stand, beyond which
we shall not go. See the Letter from Sir Thomas Fairfax and the chief Commanders
in the Army to the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of
London Dated from Royston, June 10. 1647. P. 4 li. 14.
you signify what your desires are, and the things for which you stand, beyond
which you promise you shall not go. And in your See the Declaration from Sir
Thomas Fairfax and the Army from St. Albanes. June 1^. 1647. P 12. l. 29.
Declaration 4. days after this you have these words. There are besides these
many particular things which we could wish to be done, and some to be undone;
but these proposals afore-going present, being the principal things we bottom
and insist upon, we shall (as we have said before) acquiesce for other
particulars in the justice and wisdom of the Parliament. In which words I
cannot but give you to take notice both of Pride and falsehood. 1. Pride, in
that in some particulars only you will acquiesce in the wisdom and justice of
the parliament, in other things it seems you will not; Touching those proposals
in your Declaration you will not acquiesce in the justice and wisdom of the
House; in those you seem your selves the most Competent judges on intolerable
pride! 2. The falsehood of those words appear in this; although you bound up
your selves by promise, that beyond your desires expressed in your letter, Dated
10. of June, and your Proposals in your Declaration at St. Albanes, June 14.
you would not go, but acquiesce in the justice and wisdom of the Parliament
for other particulars; yet have you since the time you made that promise
imperiously demanded, and Peremptorily insisted upon about 20. Particular
Proposals more, in your Humble Remonstrance, dated June 23. and in your
manifesto dated June 27. and in other Papers. Thus have you made lies your
Refuge, and under falsehood have you hid your selves. Having thus dealt plainly
with you, I shall now retire into a corner and weep for you, and that upon these
4. Considerations.

1. Considering the Temptations you lie under at this day. Your selves confess
it in the opinion and humble advice of the Council of War at Bury, 29 of May
1647. page 7. line ult. Oh it is the hour of your Temptation; the Temptation
that I conceive lies upon you, is this; that you have many of you been used so
long to Command that you have forgotten to obey; that many of you from deep
penury have aspired to gainful offices, and from being clothed in rags, are
now arrayed in Scarlet; this I fear will be a prevailing Temptation upon you to
make you unwilling to disband, knowing that then you must return to your
obscure dwellings and callings, to be Tinkers, Tapsters, Tailors,
Tanker-bearers, Porters, Cobblers, Bakers, and other such mean trades, of which
you could not subsist before these wars.

2. Considering the Designs you drive at; among many this is the sum of your
desires, to new-mould the House of Commons; which you call purging (but others
think corrupting) the House. Oh then M. Peter's would be busy abroad to get in
some famous Common-wealths-men, such as Hughson the Shoo-maker, Hobson the
Tailor, Quarterman the Marshal. These in your account would be faithful Members
in the House of Commons.

3. Considering the indirect means you use to drive on your designs, and that
by fraud falsehood, stattery, and Compliance with all sorts of men. Comply you
do with the King to permit his malignant Chaplins to come to him, and have
common prayers read before him, contrary to the order of both Houses; Comply
basely you do with malignants: a new smooth term for them you have in your
Remonstrance found out; least you should displease them too much in calling
them Malignants: therefore you call them the Kings late Partakers, See humble
Remonstra. P. 12. l. 27.
and desire for them more then ever they durst desire for themselves. Doubtless
these helpers shall be your shame and ruin, as the reeds of Egypt, shall they be
unto you to fayl and wound you.

4. Considering the ill Consequences that either have or may fall out. as 1.
Have not you strengthened the hands of the wicked, and greived the hearts of the
godly wise? 2. Have not you stirred up a spirit of disobedience in many people
of the land against the Parliament? 3. Have not you rendered the Parliament base
and low before the people? 4. Have not you countenanced and encouraged all the
desperate Sectaries in the Kingdom? 5. Have not you blemished and contemned a
godly and Orthodox Ministry, and encouraged illiterate mecanick unworthy
fellows to preach, where, and when, and what they list? 6. Have not you
permitted all scandalous Ministers, that will, to read the Common Prayer Book
within your quarters? 7. Have not you hardened the Kings heart in his former
ways, in allowing him his seducing Chaplains who have caused him to err; and
to have as free a use, within your quarters, of the Common Prayer Book, as ever
he had when he was at White Hall? 8. Have not you exceedingly retarded the
releif of Ireland; had you not rather to pick quarrels with your friends here,
then to fight with your enemies there? 9. Has not your approach to London
raised the price of Provisions, and interrupted the Trade of this City, above
200000. l. weekly? These inconveniences we have already felt, what yet we may
further undergo the Lord knows. I have no more to say, but to Commend this
following subject to your Patronage, wherein I shall endeavor to set forth to
the world and your own Consciences, the Dangerousness of your designs, the
unreasonableness of your demands, together with some new Queries to your
Consciences. in the mean time rest,

Your humble Servant, if you will not presume to be the Kingdoms Masters, Tom
Tell-troth.

Works of darkness brought to LIGHT; OR A true Representation to the whole
Kingdom of the dangerous Designs etc. driven on by the ARMY.
Oye Inhabitants of ENGLAND;
WIth what face can ye endure a small Council of war to control and disobey the
great Council of state? Are ye weary of the Common Law, or rather willing the
Marshal Law should rule you? will ye delight rather to see Soldiers in Buff,
then Nobles in their Parliament Robes? Had ye rather the Land should run down
with tears and blood, then flow with milk and honey? will ye be beguiled with
the flattering words and plausible pretenses of a Revolted Army? will ye suffer
the Army under pretense of justice to bring you under oppression, and under the
notion of Liberty to bring you into bondage, and under the name of Saints of
light to act the part of the Angels of darkness? That you might not be deluded
for time to come, I shall briefly dispatch these 3. particulars. 1. Show the
Armies dangerous designs. 2. Unreasonable demands, together with some new
Queries to their Consciences touching their refusal to disband at the Command
of the two Houses of Parliament.

I begin with the first. viz. the dangerous designs driven on by the sectaries
in the Army; why they refuse to disband. I shall reduce to 7. heads, which I
shall make appear by plain and Demonstrative Reasons.

The first grand design the Army drives at, is to new-mould the Honorable House
of Commons; ^. Design.
to increase the numbers of Independent Members, that so they might carry the
Votes of the House as it shall please themselves, that if it were possible they
might promote their wicked designs in a Parliamentary way. This design is so
clear, that he that runs may read it; since the writs were Issued forth for new
elections to fill up the House; how Industriously have the Independent Party
endeavored to fill the House with Independent Members; using M. Peter's by
persuasion in the Pulpit, and the Army by terror, to deceive and affright the
people, forcing many places in the Country to choose Soldiers, and others, men
of no considerable interests in the Kingdom, to be Members of Parliament: yea
their violence against the XI. Accused Members, manifests this to be the
design, declaring to the Parliament in their Papers, See the Armies humble
Remonst. p. 14.
that they must take some extraordinary courses, til the XI. Members be
suspended the House, and some other of their demands satisfied: And not being
content with this they vent their spleen also against other Members of the
House of Commons, branding them with the ignominious term of See the Armies
humble Remonst. P. 10. P. 14.
a Party, men that drive their own interests, Accomplices to the Members
accused, accusing all them to be disaffected to the public good, who are not
affected to their own Party. It Is clear by this the new moulding the Parliament
is the first and grand design.

The grand design and main intent
is to new mould the Parliament.
The Army then and Country-clown
will turn the Kingdom upside down.
To destroy the House of Lords; 2. Design.
The Petition of Lambs Congregation to the House of Commons, See that
seditious Petition from Lambs Congregation.
that none might have a negative voice; does directly justle out the power of
the House of Peers. The Sectaries are not ashamed to say that the Lords of
this Realm ought not to sit in Parliament, unless they do come in by Election
as Members of the House of Commons do? this will more evidently appear if ye
read those seditious Pamphlets against the House of Lords, written by the
Sectaries. It is said in one Sectarian Pamphlet, See the just man in bonds. P.
^.
that the Lords are but painted puppies and Dagons, that our superstition and
ignorance, their own craft and impudence have erected; no natural Issues of
Laws, but the mushromes of Prerogative, the wens of just government; putting
the body of the people to pain, as well as occasioning Deformity, sons of
conquest they are and usurpation, not of choice and Election; intruded upon us
by power, not constituted by consent, not made by the people from whom all
power, place, and office that is just in this Kingdom ought only to arise. And
in another seditious Pamphlet it is said thus; See Pearl in a dunghill. p. 3.
why presume ye thus O ye Lords; set forth your merit before the people.
Remember your selves, or shall we remember ye? which of you before this
Parliament minded any thing so much as your pleasures, plays, masks;
feastings, buntings, gameings, dancings etc? For what other have you been but a
mere clogg to the House of Commons in all their proceedings? how many necessary
things have ye obstructed? how many evil things have ye promoted? And in
another Pestilent Pamphlet it is affirmed; See Remonstrance of many thousands. p
7.
that the Lords must stand to be chosen for Knights and Burgesses by the
people, as other, the freemen and gentry of this nation are. Yea there is
another seditious Book entitled An Al-arm to the House of Lords, which
contains in every page of it, railing against the Peers of the Realm; See the
book entitled an Al-arm to the House of Lords.
the several passages would be too tedious for you to read or me to write, let
this suffice to let you see the endeavors of the Sectaries, to overthrow and
alter the very foundamentals of the government of the Kingdom; now least you
should imagine that this spirit of dis-affection to the House of Lords should
be confined, only within the breasts of the unknown Authors of these seditious
books; it is meet I should let you know that this malignant humor runs as
blood throughout the veins of all the Sectaries; when the Sectaries, in and
about London, Petition, it is only to their own House of Commons, they never
take notice of the Lords House at all; witness that factious Petition from
Lambs Congregation, and another Petition from the Sectaries of London,
delivered to the House of Commons, by that Turn-coate Samuel Warner, Tichbourn
and others, in opposition to the Renouned Remonstrance of the City, which was
humbly presented to both Houses; but their seditious Petitions, but only to the
House of Commons. By this it appears that destroying the Lords House, is the 2.
Design driven on by the Sectaries.

Ye nobles all be ware a fall
The Brownists do against you brawl.
They say you shall not sit an hour
If the upper House yield not to the lower.
To cut off the King if he sides not to the Independent party. 3. Design.
It Is true, of late they seem to appear for him to gain Malignants on their
side, but it is notoriously known how their Principles are directly against
Monarchy: What desperate speeches have some Independent Members uttered against
the King! yea it will never be forgotten how enraged the Independent Members of
the House and Sectaries of London were against the City Remonstrance, chiefly
because there was this passage in it; for the preservation of the Kings person
according to the Covenant: Yea the Sectaries publish to the world in Print that
the King for his mis-government must lose his life: See the just man's
Justification, P. 1.
it is said in one Pamphlet (...) that You (meaning the House of Commons or else
the rude multitude) should think of that great Murderer of England (meaning
the King) for by the impartial Law of God there is no exemption of Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, etc. more then of Fishermen, Cobblers, Tinkers or
Chimney-sweepers: and elsewhere it is said See Arguments proving that we ought
not to part with the Militia Arg. 10.
that according to Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants He (meaning the King)
ought to be brought to exemplary and condign punishment, he being the greatest
and most notorious Delinquent in the whole Kingdom, etc. Yea they speak their
minds more fully in another Pamphlet See the Remonst. of many thousands. p. 6.
We do expect, according to reason, that ye should, in the first place, declare
and set forth King CHARLES his wickedness openly before the world, and withal to
show the intolerable incoveniences of having a Kingly Government from the
constant evil practices of those of this Nation; and so to declare King CHARLES
an enemy, and to publish your resolution never to have any more. By all this it
appears that the Sectaries intend, as the 32 Syrian Captains did (1 King.
22.31.) to fight neither with small nor great but with the King of Israel. In
laying down this Design I would have none of you conceive as if I were a
Malignant Royalist (I hate Arbitrary power and Tyranny in Princes as much as
any) I only mention this that Malignants might not be brought into fools
paradise to join with the Army, conceiving them to be for the Kings honor and
safety who are the greatest enemies of both.

Malignants all believe this thing
Sectarians would destroy the King:
Yea they do wish there might be none
For to succeed him on the throne.
To introduce an universal Liberty and Toleration for all sorts of false and
heretical opinions. 4. Design.
All the sectaries in the Kingdom labor with might and main to promote this; in
one Pamphlet it is boldly asserted, See Williams Bloody Tenet of Persecution for
the cause of Conscience in the preface to the Parliament p. 2.
that it is the will and command of God, that since the coming of his son the
Lord Jesus, a permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish or Antichrist an
Consciences and Worships be granted to all men in all Nations and Countries:
And elsewhere it is said, See Compassionate Samaritan. p. 5.
that Liberty of Conscience is to be allowed to every man or sort of men to
worship God in that way or manner as shall appear to them most agreeable to Gods
Word. Numerous Pamphlets there are abroad besides broacht by the seducing
Chaplains of the Army and their accomplices as Mr D^lls Sermon before the
Parliament; many small and trivial Tracts of M. Saltmarshes, M. John Goodwin in
his blasphemous book entitled Hagio m^stix etc. and in his impudent Queries
against an Ordinance of Parliament for the Suppression of Heresies, with
abundance of other Pamphlets which cry up this their Diana of Toleration; yea
these Army-Chaplains have so corrupted their hearers and disciples from the
simplicity of the Gospel that the whole Army now contends for Toleration by the
sword in the Field, which their Teachers could never make good by Argument eit
er in Press or Pulpit: Yea the whole Army declare this to be the design. I Will
give you the Armies words See a Letter sent from Sir Tho Fairfax and the chief
Commanders in the Army to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the
City of London, Dated from Royston, Jun. 10.
We wish that every good Citizen and every man that walks peaceably in a
blameless conversation, and is beneficial to the Commonwealth may have liberty
and encouragement, it being according to the qust policy of all States even to
justice it self. By this you may see the intendments of the Army if they
prevail in this present undertaking.

The great Diana cried up in the Nation
Is a licentious lawless Toleration:
All in the Land own not this cursed Action,
Only a base or discontented Faction.
To pull down the godly and orthodox Ministers of the Kingdom and to open a
wide door (as in the days of Jeroboam) that the (...) of the people may take
upon them the Priests office; 5. Design.
He who in Jobs account, should not be worthy to set with the dogs of his
flock, is judged meet by Sectaries, to be Pastor over the flock and sheep of
Christ. The prophanest sort of men in the land, did never so grossly abuse godly
Ministers, as all the Sectaries do at this day. See M Dels preface to his
Sermon before the Parliament and in his reply after.
They abuse them in their names, calling them the Priests of Baal: in their
office, making them to be but the Props and Toes of Antichrist. Yea they
account Ministers Calling to be Antichristian, their maintenance to be Jewish,
their preaching to be legal, and their persons contemptible. And will not they,
think you, pull down them to set up phanatick and fantastic Teachers of their
own? then poor Paul Hobson the Tailor, Quarterman the Marshals man, and Hughson
the Shoo-maker, with multitudes of mean and illiterate fellows, will serve to be
the Armies Evangelists.

Ye Presbyterian stars, in Christ's right hand
Though Armies pull you down, yet shall you stand.
Out live you shall these troubles, do what can
Hobson, or Hughson, Del, or Quarterman.
To keep off Independent Members (many whereof are guilty of capital crimes)
from a due and legal trial. 6. Design.
It Is only the sound of the Trumpet, and noise of the Drum, that makes the cries
of the people cannot be heard against the Tyranny, Bribery, and injustice of
the Independent party. were it so that the Army were disbanded, that the
freeborn Subjects of England should not be terrified by an Army; there are
thousands in this Kingdom who would fully prove many of them to be brought into
the House upon undue and illegal Elections; that they have treasured up vast
sums of money, obstructed justice, retarded the Releif of Ireland, and acted
many other intolerable injuries to the Commonwealth, which would make them an
abhorring in the eyes of all the people; Fleet-wood, Harrison, and Ireton, with
many others know, were the Army disbanded, their elections would be questioned;
Seeing they cannot continue themselves Members by right, they will do it by
power; yea Leivtenant General Cromwell knows, there is some body in the world
that can accuse him of that, and prove it clearly to his face, which would make
him blush, and be Cromwels lascivious carriage.
ashamed to enter within the House of Commons doors; very unbeseeming a man of
his condition and profession. His own guiltiness in this and other things; as
also the guiltiness of many others of his faction, makes them unwilling to
disband.

Great are the sums I know not what
Which Independent Members got.
The ground of not disbanding now is plain
Least questioned they should be for unjust gain.
Least of some Members there be an ejection
For coming in by an undue Election.
With Parliament and City they will fight
Least Cromwels lusts and lies should come to light.
If all these Designs take not; their last Design, is, 7. Design.
to go over into Ireland under Cromwell, and the rest of the Independent
Officers; if they cannot be Masters here, they would be Lords there; if cannot
befool this Kingdom, they would inslave that: Ireland is but a Reserve, if
cannot procure a Tolleration in England, they make no doubt to establish it in
Ireland; field Marshal Skippon, and Major General Massey will not serve their
turn, therefore they refuse to go under their Command; if their Commanders be
not Sectaries, they rather fear a suppression, then look for a Tolleration.

Ere they tread Irish ground for Cromwell they will cry
Skippon content them cannot nor Massey.
The reason is, they are not of their Sect,
Which makes the Army wholly them reject.
The state to their own terms if cannot tie
England must suffer still and Ireland dye.
Thus I have endeavored to lay open the dangerous designs driven on in the
Army; which I dare affirm with so much confidence, that I would have you
believe nothing to be true, if you find not all to be true. If you ask me what
are the likeliest means to prevent these dangerous Designs? I answer briefly.

1. All the Counties in the Kingdom should Petition Humbly the Parliament, for
the speedy disbanding of the Army, they having as much from the state as they
can expect; the Declaration against them revok't, the act of Indemnity
enlarged, and most of their Arrears presently to be paid, and all to be
unquestionably secured; what can they as Soldiers desire more?

Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, Buckingham, and Hertford, should declare humbly to
the Parliament how they are abused, in that a seditious inconsiderable party of
such County, should presume to present Petitions to Sir Thomas Fairfax, under
the name of the whole, which they will not own; they likewise should represent
how surreptitiously the Petitions were gotten, by whom fomented, contrived and
subscribed, that they might come to condign punishment, for so high an affront
against the Parliament. This would gain more Honor to those Counties then they
have lost, in having such a factious party in the midst of them.

Sheirs and Buroughs for which the XI. Honorable (though accused) Members
serve, should Petition the Parliament, that the Knights and Gentlemen legally
and fairly chosen by them, should be Commanded to attend the service of the
House, til the Charge can be proved against them.



Marshal Skippon, and Major General Massey, these two valiant Commanders to be
in supreme Command for the business of Ireland.

Army Drives at, together with the Remedies to prevent them; I come now to the
2. head, To lay down wherein the unreasonableness (I had almost said
Treasonableness) of the Armies demands does consist.

1. Their first unreasonable Demand is (which they call reasonable) See the
Armies humble Remonst. p. 10.
that the Army may be paid up equal with those that have deserted it though
invited by the Parliament to do it. Is this a reasonable Demand, that they that
have deserted the Army out of conscience and obedience should have no more of
their Arrears then they that stand out still in disobedience against the
Parliament?

2. Their second Demand is more unreasonable See the Armies humble Remonst. p.
^1. l. 1.2 We have ground to claim more then they or rather that they or some
of them should forfeit their Arrears.
that they that deserted the Army (though out of obedience to the Parliament)
should forfeit their Arrears; or at least that the Army should have more of
their Arrears paid them then the deserters of it shall; were not this to
justify the wicked and condemn the righteous; to punish the one for obedience
and reward the other for disobedience, which would be a provocation in the eyes
of God, neither consisting with equity and conscience in the Army to demand,
nor with the justice and honor of the Parliament to grant, to punish one for
obedience and reward another for disobedience.

3. Their third unreasonable Demand is to require more security for their
arrears then any in the Kingdom ever yet desired; See the Armies humble
Representation, p. 15. l. 3.
the credit of the Excise and the profits arising out of Delinquents Estates,
and Ordinance of Parliament will not content them; though millions of money have
been lent upon this security: Were these terms offered to all other Officers
and Soldiers in the Kingdom they would thankfully accept it as a due and safe
recompense for their service.

4. Their fourth unreasonable Demand is to limit the Parliament to a very day
to grant their desires, else to threaten them to their faces; which is such an
affront to a Parliament that never was offered in this world. In one of their
Papers they prescribe the very day when they must have a months pay; See
Humble Remonstrance p. 14. l. 15.
in another paper they declare that it they receive not security and assurance
to themselves and the Kingdom of a safe and hopeful proceeding and that by
Thursday night they must be forced to take extraordinary courses. It Is worthy
your notice that this Demand of theirs was presented to the Commissioners at S.
Albans June the 23. being Wednesday, and yet were so impudent to terrify the
Parliament, that if they did not gratify their desires the very next day
following they must be forced to extraordinary courses; they would allow but a
day to the Parliament to consider of their Demands; which is such a high breach
of the privilege of Parliament that I cannot but stand amazed and wonder with
what conscience we can suffer, or with what face they can endeavor the
subverting of the indubitable privileges of Parliament.

5. Their fifth unreasonable Demand is See the Armies humble, Remonst. ^ 2. l.
6.
that there be no listing of new forces in or about London, when themselves do
gather together the most notorious Sectaries in the Kingdom to their Army; yea
draw their Train of Artillery from Oxford; take many loades of new arms out of
Windsor Castle; seize upon powder coming from Northampton to London, fortifying
some Garrisons, and do all things in preparation to a new war: yet the
Parliament and City must sit still, look on, and all lie at their mercy; whether
this be reasonable, I leave to all indifferent men to judge.

6. Their sixth unreasonable Demand is that See humble Remonst. p. 15. l. 12.
the Members accused be forthwith suspended or sequestered the House, and that
before any particular Charge or Proofs were brought in against them. Is it
reasonable that those honorable persons who are but Members accused should be
suspended the House, and yet Nathaniel Fines a condemned Member should sit
still in the House? Is he fit to sit as judge to condemn others, that is a
condemned man himself? Behold, O ye people, the justice of the Army! Is it
reason that Colonel Long, who is only charged (but not proved) by the Army to
be a Coward, should be suspended the House, and yet poor Not. Fines, who is a
Coward upon Record, adjudged by a Council of WAR to dye for Cowardice, must
still sit in the House?

7. Their seventh unreasonable Demand is in the behalf of the King and
Malignants, for whom the ARMY is now become dissembling Mediators: they desire
that See humble Remonst. p. 12. l. 26.
provision be made for the rights, quiet, and immunity of his MAJESTY'S Royal
Family and his late partakers, etc. How far they will extend this comprehensive
term, Immunity for the KINGS Family and his late partakers, none but themselves
know: in part we may know what they mean: so much Immunity has the KING and
his late partakers already from the ARMY: viz. His Chaplains about him, and
Cringings and Common prayers in use before him: which how agreeable this is to
the Directions of PARLIAMENT which have been given, or the Covenant which has
been taken, I leave to wise men to consider.

(...)
