A GAD OF STEEL, wrought and tempered for the Heart to defend it from being
battred by Satan's temptation, and to give it a sharp and lasting edge in
heavenly Consolation.

SHEVVING THAT Deus est optima possessio, God is the best possession.

By HEN. WALKER, SS. Theolog:

The Night is far spent, and the Day is at hand, let us therefore cast away
the deeds of Darkness, and let us put on the Armor of Light. Romans 13.
printer's or publisher's device HOMO ASPICIS VT VIVVNT PELLICANI SANGVINE PVLLI
SIC CHRISTO EFFVSO SANGUINE VIVIS

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. F. 1641.

To the Reader.
I Do here (kind Reader) present thee with a Gad of Steel, which though it
be but small, may by well and often perusal be means to procure thee more
happiness to thy Soul, then the richest Diadem in the world can procure to
thy Body, it is Steel (as we say) to the back; Let therefore no hypocrite
think to shroud himself under it; no, it cuts sin to the quick; and my
desire and prayer to God is, that where it comes, it may cut it down; which to
the glory of God, and salvation of his Elect, is the end of my endeavor; yet
let me crave of thee, but this one request by the way; that is, that after thou
have read this Epistle before thou read the Book it self, thou pray to God
for his holy spirit to go along with thee and lead thee in the perusal of
it; for, Legere and non intelligere est negligere? And holy things are of such
a heavenly property, that (though they fill sanctified hearts with unspeakable
joy, yet) to peruse them with graceless carnal hearts, they savor not.

But because my little Enchiridion it self is but a Gad of Steel? my Epistle
(to be brief) shall be but a small turret to couple it and your hearts
together unto GOD? So shall I rejoice and ever remain,

Yours, in the Lord Christ. H. WALKER.

A GAD OF STEEL wrought and tempered for the Heart to defend is from being
battred by Satan's temptations, etc.
IN every Society, truth and Peace is the only stay and means to keep them
safe and maintain their happiness; For the accomplishment whereof is most
requisite, the purchasing of gracious and faithful hearts to God: to whom
having our hearts rightly bent to seek his glory, will best direct us in our
Duties one to another; If we seek God truly, we cannot fail our Brethren;
but if we have flouting, hollow, dissembling hearts to our Brethren, we cannot
be sincere to God; And it is a sign of a gracious heart, to rejoice to see
others endued with goodness, and brought nearer unto GOD: Romans 1, 8,
Thus was it with holy Paul, Rom 1.8. First (says he) I thank my GOD, through
JESUS CHRIST, for you all, because your Faith is published throughout the whole
world. It is our duties to rejoice for the grace bestowed on others. In all the
Churches of the world, the patterns and examples of the Saints and servants of
God, should be in greater estimation with us, then all the pomp and glory of
the world; Luke, 15.
How did that Woman rejoice, Luke, 5. when she had found her lost groat,
calling her neighbors and friends to rejoice with her: And surely it is our
duty when we see one brought to Christ, by a nearer union or relation then
before, we ought to rejoice, and to encourage such a one all we can, to pray
for him, and not to deride him; but with David: Be glad to see him enter into
Gods house, calling us to come in and hear the word of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1.
Psalm. 122.1.


Yet alas! how lamentable are our times, wherein men care not for heavenly
practices themselves, nor do but jest and taunt at such who labor that way;
Many rejoice with their associates and acquaintance in the way to hell, but few
there are who go hand in hand to heaven; but how lamentable and woeful is the
end of that Joy; that whereas we ought to rejoice in the Faith of our friends,
yet many have not whereof to rejoice for their friends whom they most esteem,
except their Drunkenness, Swearing, Cosening, Whooring, Gaming; alas, this
does but publish their Damnation, if they repent not; At this should we
rejoice, to hear our brother or our friend, to say with the Prodigal, I will
go to my Father. Oh, let us help them forward that go to GOD; But alas, what
a lamentable thing is it to see how earnestly men will press their friends to
drink till they be Drunk, to lie in their behalf, to go on in revenge, etc.
And how seldom men press their friends to hearing Gods word, to reading, to
holy practices: Some are afraid of displeasing their friends, others are
carnally tender over them, and would not have them so much mortified, not to
set themselves too much upon so melancholy a work; thus many souls drop into
hell.

God is more worth then all the Kingdoms of the world; David knew, that having
once got him to be his GOD, Psalm. 32.
that he should want nothing. Psalm. 23.

When a man (by Faith) can truly say to God; I am thine, and thou art mine, and
Christ is glorified in me. Ioh. 17. Ioh. 17.
This lays claim to salvation, this lays hold on the merits of Christ as a
man's own, and assures him of the p^rdon of all his sins; Will a man spoil
his own goods. Malac. 3.8. Malac. 3.8
And he that knows himself to be in God, knows himself to be safe from all
evil and that nothing can take him out of Gods hands, such a man will dye
before he will renounce God, and give himself over to a sinful course of
life. But alas what misery is the Swearer in, he cannot say, God is my God;
what misery is the Sabbath breaker in; God is ashamed to be called the God of
such as pollute his holy Sabbath; so the Drunkerd, God will not own the
Drunkerd, the Adulterer, the Idolater, Whoremonger, etc. Can these have any
interest in Christ, can these that continue in their sins ever think to find
the mercy of God, shall such ever think to be saved, and come to Heaven; no,
no, If such men as these will be saved they must forsake these courses of life,
they must become new men, and love Gods word, and love the Church, and love the
Saints, and servants of God, delight in his word, in his Ordinances, and in his
Sabboths to sanctify them; and then, Isay, 12
and never till then let them once dream of coming to Heaven, Isay, 12. For
then shall they see their redemption, when they sanctify the name of the Lord,
and fear the God of Israel, when they are no more disceived of their former
sins, and come to the understanding of the Law of God; when they leave their
lusting after sin, and learn the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, Isay, 29.23
Isay. 29.23. and 24.

How lamentable then is the condition of many men amongst us, nay of the most
part of the world, who are drawn away from God with those three inordinate
appetites which St. John speaks of: The lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, the pride of life: These are like the three troops of Caldeans, as St.
Bernard compares them, St Bernard
which drove away Jobs cattle; oh that the eyes of the world were but open to
see how many people those three drive into Hell daily; They draw them into Hell
(as it were) upon fetherbeds, the world passes away, and is gone, and on a
sudden, before they bethink themselves where they are, poor wretches the
Devil comes and seazes upon them, and away he carries them into Hell; oh that
men would think and beware of these things betimes, they would not then account
of Gods children as they do, no they would have a better esteem of them.

Object. Some it may be will say,oh but do not so many, and such great men do
thus and thus, will you be wiser then they.

An. Alas, alas; thou must not think to do as the world does, if thou will be
the Child of God, but thou must be transformed by the renewing of thy mind,
that thou may prove what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of
God, Rom, 12, 2
Romans 12.2. What if many painted Iezabels have such a complexion, such eyes,
such hairs, Non quos Deus fecit, sed quos Diabolus infecit, not such as God
has made, but such as the Devil has transformed; what if they disguise
themselves like harlots, thou that art a daughter of GOD must not do so; what
if many cozen by false weights, and short tale, thou that art a Son of God
must not do so, what if many drink till they be drunk, live in wantonness,
profane the Sabbath, and walk in sin daily; yet if thou will be a Child of God
thou must not do so; for these shall be damned if they repent not; the world
shall be condemned. 1 Cor. 11.32.
1 Cor. 11.32. Oh, it is an heavy case to be damned: Do but consider in what
a case an unrepentant sinner lies in at the point of death; suppose that now
thou saw him even giving his last gasp; God the Father will not give him
one smile, but is full of displeasure against him; God the Son, gives him
sentence to depart from him, and will not spare him one drop of his Blood; God
the Holy Ghost, leaves him a dispairing Conscience; the Devils in hell flock
about him, like Crows about carrion, ready to tear him to pieces, and death
stands with his dart struck into his very heart, and the poor tormented
wretch lies crying out, oh I am tormented, I am tormented, I am damned; oh what
shall I do, I am damned for ever, I shall burn in the flames of Hell for
ever; now consider, would thou be in this man's case? oh then live not as
such men live, for they that live as the wicked live, that is in sin, and are
careless of Gods worship; and regard not his word, nor his holy Ordinances, no
marvel if they dye dispairing, and so are damned.

Object. Some may say, what then shall I do, I shall surely be damned, since I
am a great sinner, a Drunkerd, a Sabboth-breaker, a Swearer, or the like.

Answ. Luke 8.11. Ephesians. 2.8.
Get faith in Christ whereby thou shall receive remission of thy sins, Luke.
8.11. Ephesians. 2.8.

Object. Oh, but how can I think to have my sins pardoned whilst my heart
lusts still after sin, and I cannot overcome my sins.

Answ. Christ gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world, Gal. 1.4. For by Christ we not only enjoy remission of
sins to eternal life, but sanctification to a spiritual life, Ephesians, 20
for by the spirit of God we are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 1.20.

Quest. How shall I do to lead my life so as it may please God, and my soul
may be saved.

Answ. According to Gods will revealed in his holy word, in which if we expect
to profit we must fix our hearts on God; and daily call upon his name, for
prayer is a mighty prevailing thing with Almighty God, where fervent and hearty
prayer is put up to God, God cannot depart till he leave a blessing behind him,
it binds the hands of God that he becomes a petitioner himself as he did to
Moses; let me alone says God. Oh gracious God: how great is thy mercy, oh how
pitiful a God have we, to whom be praise and glory for ever.

AMEN.
A divine Prayer.
1 Pet. 5*10
O GOD of all Grace, who have called us to thine Eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, Psalm. 10.17
Which do prepare the Heart and cause thine Ear to hear, 1 King. 8.28
Have respect to the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, Ezra, 9.6
I am ashamed and blush to life up mine eyes unto thee my God, for mine
iniquities are increased over mine head, Hosea. 14.2
But O Lord, I beseech thee take away all mine iniquities and receive me
graciously, for Jesus Christ his sake; Romans 3.25
Whom thou have set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood;
Lord Ezekiel. 11.19
put a new Spirit within me, and take away the stony heart out of my flesh, 1
Cor, 7, 17
And as thou have called me, so endue me with grace to walk before thee; 2
These, 3, 17
Stablish me in every good word and work, 2 These. 3, 1
Let thy Word have free course amongst us and thy Name be glorified, 1 Timothy, 2, 2
That all may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and honesty;
Psalm, 17, 8
I humbly beseech thee, make me dwell in safety under the shadow of thy wings,
from this time forth for evermore.

AMEN.
FINIS.

