Dauentry Brimidghani The most Illustrious and High borne PRINCE RUPERT, PRINCE
ELECTOR, Second Son to FREDERICK KING of BOHEMIA, GENERAL of the HORSE of His
MAJESTY'S ARMY, KNIGHT of the Noble Order of the GARTER.


THE BLOODY PRINCE, OR A DECLARATION OF THE Most cruel Practices of PRINCE
RUPERT, and the rest of the CAVALIERS, in fighting against GOD, and the true
MEMBERS of His CHURCH.

By I. W.

For the vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity to
practice hypocrisy,

Esaias 32.6. It is a pastime to fools to do mischief,

Prove. 10.23. The transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the
wicked shall be cut off,

Psalm. 37.38. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the ward of the Lord may
have free course, and he glorified even as it is with you, that us may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have not faith,

2 These. 3.1, 2. LONDON, Printed MDCXLIII.

To the Bloody PRINCE, the PRINCE RUPERT, and all the bloody Prelates and
Cavaliers, now in a posture of War against God and all good men, the Author
wishes either speedy conversion, or sudden confusion.
MOst Bloody Prince, and all your bloody Prelates and Cavaliers: I have as you
may see by this ensuing Discourse, taken a little pains, to set that before
your eyes in words, which by your actions you will not take notice of: namely,
your unreasonable wickedness, and the doom that will follow: Advising you to
take heed of persisting in such distractive ways, as now you are in; which
counsel of mine, if you shall take, you will find it the best piece of work
that ever you took in hand; but if you refuse and reject it, you will, I am
sure, repent one day, when it is too late.

Farewell.

Ungodly men's practices declare them to be wicked.
Psalm 52. And part of the first, and part of the fifth verses: Or as the
Hebrew and Latin read it, part of the third and part of the seventh verses.

Why boastest thou in evil, or in mischief, O mighty man? God shall destroy
thee for ever, or, to perpetuity.


THIS Psalm, as the Title tells us, was penned upon the occasion of Saul's and
Doegs cruelty against the Priests and people of God: the one commanding, and
the other acting that wicked and mischievous exploit. A wicked King commands a
wicked work, and as wicked a servant obeyes him. And commonly it is so, that
when there are wicked commanders, there wants not one ill instrument or other
to execute their wicked desires. Such a one was this man Dorg, an Edomite, or
an Idumean, as the Greek here translateth it, or a man of Adamah, a City of the
tribe of Nepthalie, Josua 19.36. And he it is to whom David here speaks, Why
do thou boast thy self to do mischief, or, in doing mischief (as it is
in the first verse) God shill destroy thee for ever, as it is in the fifth
verse. God speaks not only to him, but to all other Doegs in the world, even
to those of our times, which do act their mischievous designs daily against
God, his truth, and people, and all that they think stand in any relation to
God, or do engage themselves in any service for him; whose practice I shall
here lay open, and the doom that will follow: and therefore I have chosen part
of these two verses, in the unfolding of which, you may see the great Doeg of
our Kingdom, Prince Rupert and all his bloody followers, with their
mischievous practices, and also their woeful doom that will follow.

And first, I shall speak of part of the first verse, Why do thou boast thy
self in evil, or in mischief, O mighty man? And first, here you may observe
a charge laid upon Doeg, and all such bloody ones that do kill the Ministers
and people of God, they are charged with doing evil, or mischief. Secondly,
the manner of laying this charge upon them, it is by way of interrogation: Whey
do you do it? The same expression is used Psalm. 2.1. which shows, that there
is no reason to be given for such wicked actions, much less for boasting in
them.

Or if you will, here is set forth the practice of Dug, and all wicked men like
him:

First, they do evil.

Secondly, they do it boastingly or joyfully.

Thirdly, here is set forth the unreasonablenesse of it, Why do thou boast
thy self, O mighty man?

And first of their practice, and from thence observe this point of Doctrine:
That,

It is the practice of evil men to do, evil things, of mischievous men to
do mischievous things.

Prove. 1.16. You shall find Solomon speaking of such, giving warning to his
son to take heed of them, saying: Cohibe pedem tuum a s^mit a illorum, quia
ped bus suis ad malu^^ concurrunt and festinant ad effundendum sanguinem. They
do evil, and they make haste to do it; they shed blond, and fill themselves
with the spoil of the shine. Such you shall find also Psalm 10.7.8.9.10. and
11. verses: Execratione os ejus plenum est, frandibusque and dolo, subest
lingue ej^s malestia and v^nit as: desidet in specu villarum in latebr is
occ^sur is innocentem, ^cuh ejus contr i defectum viribus delitescunt. His
practice is to kill, and the wickedness of his practice is, that he kills the
innocent. Likewise Psalm 94.6. Viduam and peregrinum interficient, ac pupillos
occident dicent^s non respicit Iah, neque animadvertit Deus Iahakcbi. They kill
the father less and widow. And see their wicked carriage in it; God, say they,
sees not, the God of Jacob regards not. There is a pregnant place for this
purpose, Esaias 32.6.7. verses. Sed flagitiosns dicetur flagitium eloquens, cujus
animus efficit iniquitatem; exercendo by pocrisi and proloquendo in Deum err
orem exhauriendo animam famelic^, and potum sitientis subtrahendo: and tenacis
instrumenta mala dicentur, qui scelerat a consilia init ad perdendum humiles
sermonibus falsitatis etiam quum egens eloquitur jus. I might multiply many
more places, but the point is so clear and obvious, that it needs not.

The reasons of the point are these: First, Ephesians. 2.3.
it is natural to wicked men to do wickedly: if men are not restrained by an
overruling power, they run into all manner of wickedness as the Horse rusheth
into the battle.

Secondly, wicked men do wickedly, because they love it, Psalm. 52.7. There is
a sutablenesse between sin and their souls, and so the acting of it is very
easy to them, even the vilest abominations that can be wrought, as murdering
the Saints, idolatry, blasphemy, and what ever else comes under the name of
evil.

Thirdly, the Devil does instigate and stir them up thereunto; he rules in
their hearts, 2 Cor. 4.4. He carries them with all swiftness and violence to
accomplish his own will.

The first use may serve to inform us, that it is no wonder to see wicked men
follow their wicked courses so eagerly and so constantly as they do: their
own hearts carry them on thereunto, and the Devil seconding them with his
temptations, they are carried on vehemently, God also giving them up to their
own wills, they can do not otherwise. If you look into the ScriStures, you may
find wicked Cain killing Abel, a wicked Nimrod mightily hunting and
persecuting the Saints, and a wicked Saul, and many others doing the like.

And now you see wicked men enraged against God, his truth and his people, even
a wicked army of Cavaliets, led forth by a wicked Prince, fighting against
religion, imprisoning and killing faithful Ministers, shedding the blood of
the Saints of God with all outrage and cruelty. It is no wonder to see them so
doing; all wicked men would do the like if God should not restrain them, they
do but what their own hearts carry them unto, God having given them up to
their own wills and affections: therefore think it not strange, seeing they
are carried by such a power that they cannot resist of themselves.

The second use may be a use of instruction, to teach every one to take notice
of the natural bent of his own heart, and where God has wrought a change, to
acknowledge the freeness of his grace, and the mightiness of his power.

The third use may be to reach all wicked men that are carried on with such
violence in wicked ways, to take notice by their actions what they themselves
are, even wicked persons, you are wicked, but you will not acknowledge your
selves to be so; but look upon your actions, and they will tell you to your
faces, that you are wicked wretches.

But you will say, What actions?

I answer, your swearing, blaspheming, drunkenness, with other outrages, which
your own hearts tell you of. All you wicked Cavaliers, loook upon your cursed
and divelish actions, and they will cry to you with a loud voice, that you are
a company of wicked wretches, risen up against the Lord, and against his
people, even company of wicked Doegs, to whom the Prophet speaks, Why do you
boast your selves in evil?

But you will say, our actions are not wicked, neither are we our selves so.

No: Are not your action; wicked? Then there were never wicked actions wrought
in the world: take but a view of your actions. Is it not a wicked action to
murder godly and faithful Ministers, and to imprison them? Then Herod's action
was not wicked in imprisoning and killing John the Baptist, not the Jews in
imprisoning and killing the Apostles: but they are charged upon them as wicked
actions, even by God himself, and so shall your actions be changed upon you;
even this of imprisoning and killing the Ministers of God.

Again, what think you? Is it not an evil action to kill the Saints, and to
shed their blood that are as the apple of Gods eye, and the signet on his right
hand, that are his precious ones, Esaias 43.4. of whom God has said, he will
contend with those that contend with them? And yet these you kill and imprison;
nay, you aim at them above all others, Psalm. 37.14. Gladtum eduxerint improbi
and adduxerint arcum suum, ad dejiciendu pauperem and egentem ad mact andum
rectos via: here is a wicked crew charged not only with killing the godly in
common with others, but for aiming at them above all others: and is not this
your practice? Do not you bend your force most against them that are most
godly? And yet, O ye wicked ones, you will not yield that your actions are
wicked; but let your hearts speak, and they will tell you, that your actions
are wicked, and that Cain-like you seek to kill the Saints, because their
works are good, and your own bad; and God will one day tell you so to your
endless woe if you repent not.

But you will say, you fight not against the godly, but against rebels and
traitors that will not yield obedience to their King.

To which I answer: First, that they refuse not to obey the King, so far as his
commands agree with Gods, and more ready they are to obey him in such things,
then any of you which do hate, and openly oppose all such persons, and things,
and commands, as have any stamp of God upon them.

Secondly, they do not disobey the King, but stand up in a defensive way, to
defend themselves and their posterity, from Popery, tyranny and slavery, which
you labor to bring us all unto. Do not some of you remember, how you gave the
first onset against the Parliament, endeavoring to destroy that honorable
Assembly before they ever took up arms, or did any thing in a hostile way? And
therefore your first rising was not to suppress disobedient subjects, but to
destroy such as were obedient and loyal.

And both the Parliament, and all that stand up with them, do what they do in
defense of the King, and that religion, and those laws which the King himself
is sworn to maintain; and therefore that cavil will no way free you, being
you are wicked persons, nor free your actions from being wicked actions.

But you may say, Have we shed more blood then the Parliament, or imprisoned
more then they? We may charge them with the same crimes that we are charged
withal.

I answer as before, they are necessitated to what they do, in defense of
themselves, of religion and liberties. Besides their aim is not to shed blood,
their endeavors have been, and still are, for peace; but you are still for
war and bloodshed. Besides all this, there is a great difference betwixt
your shedding of blood, and theirs: for they are exceeding tender and careful
of the faithful Ministers of God, and of his servants, and would, if it were
possible, preserve them above all other, from prison and sword: but your aim
is altogether against such whom you are pleased out of your divelish malice to
call Round heads, which term shows what you are, even such whose tongues are
set on fire of hell, which do speak worst of those of whom God speaks best.
The holy God loves holiness, and commands it, but you hate it and condemn it:
you are contrary to God, and all his ways, and yet in your opinion you are not
a company of wicked wretches. But if all this will not convince you of your
wickedness, what think you of all your blasphemies, and cursed oaths, which
daily ( Rabshakeh-like) you belch out against God, saying with those, Psalm.
42. Vbi est Deus tuus?

In a wod, do but look upon the cursed practices of all the wicked wretches
that ever you read or heard of, and see what villainy was ever done by them to
declare them to be wicked ones, that you are not guilty of, and then you will
without doubt be of my mind, that you are a company of wicked ones indeed.

And so I come to the fourth use, which is a use of exhortation, to all you
that stand up thus wickedly against God, to cease from all your cursed and
wicked designs which you have so violently pursued so long. Go no further on
in your wicked ways; hear what the Prophet David says to you, Psalm. 75.5. O
ye vainglorious fools, be not so vain-gloriously foolish, and you that are
wicked, lift not up your horn on high, and speak not with a stiff neck, march
not so madly against God: for Job says: Never did any harden themselves
against him and prosper. So Psalm. 11. Depluet super improbos prunas ignem and
sulphur, ventusque procellosissimus portio calicis little futurus est. Therefore
take heed, it is hard for you to kick against pricks. Acts 9.6. Then even thou,
bloody Prince Rupert and all thy company, shall find one day, that all the
threatenings of God are against you, and that the way wherein you walk, is
exosus Deo, and you will speed accordingly; which I will speak of in its place.

And so I have done with the first point: I now come to a second, which will
arise from this word boasting, or glorying, they not do evil, but they also
boast in it, it is their glory: whence the point is this:

That wicked men do not only do wickedly, but also boast and glory in the
doing of it. So says Solomon, It is a pastime to a fool to do wickedly,
Prove. 10.23. And again, Fools make a mock of sin.

What are those fools but wicked men? for there is nothing properly folly but
wickedness. So the Prophet Hosea tells us, they make the King glad with their
wickedness, and the Princes with their lies, Hosea 7.3. (...) Surely they were
first glad themselves, and then they made others so too.

The first reason is, because all their joy depends upon the satis faction of
their wicked desires: their wickkednesse is the fountain from which they fetch
all their comforts. Now whatsoever a man makes the fountain and storehouse of
his joy, the more that is opened unto him, the more he does rejoice: the wicked
have no other fountain of joy, but the bringing about of their evil devices;
and when they have success in them, then they most rejoice.

The second reason is, because when they do wickedly, they have what they
would: and we know in a natural way; every on rejoices when he has what he
would; wicked men's wills are setupon wickedness, and when they have most
opportunity to practice it, then they most rejoice, because their wills are
fulfilled.

Thirdly, when wicked men are doing wickedness, they are in their proper
element, where they cannot choose but sport themselves, even as the fowls in the
air, and the fishes in the sea, and so every exeature else after its kind.

First then, let us take notice how the sons of men are bewitched by Satan
and their own wicked hearts, to sport themselves in that which is their
mischief and undoing, seeding their senses with the delights of wickedness,
and walking on merrily in the path that leads to the chambers of death, from
whence there is no returning.

Let all wicked men take notice in what a woeful estate they are in, whilst they
glory in their shame, as the Apostle says, Phil. 3.17. Nay, in that which
without repentance will hold them in everlasting chains of death and
darkness: For the subject matter of your joy, is nothing but your wickedness,
worse then a thing of naught, as the Prophet speaks, Amos 6.

And especially you which do daily bring upon your selves blood-guiltinesse, by
plotting the death and undoing of all that have any resemblance of God in their
words or actions, you take pleasure in nothing but in unrighteousness, Romans
1.21. in robbing, stealing, whoring, and above all, killing the people of God
when your Divelish paws can fasten upon them, then you think you have cause
to rejoice more then ordinary; you are never so full of shoutings, as when your
heats and hands are most full of theft and blood shed; you make your selves
drunk with blood as with sweet wine, and make joyful acclamations at the
accomplishment of your most inhumane devites: there is nothing so delightful
you, as that which is most hateful to God and all good men. O let not my
soul, not the souls of any that think to come to life, come into the secrets
of your rejoicing, which do by your joy, your present wicked joy, work out
your eternal sorrow: for God in the midst of all your cursed delights, laughes
at you; for he sees the day of your everlasting downfall coming, that take up
Arms against the Lord Jesus Christ, his truth and people.

To inform us what will deprive a wicked man of his joy, namely to deprive him
of his wickedness. And alas! that cannot hold long it self, it will wear you
out, even your drunkenness, your whoring, and the rest of your wickedness. It
may be the sword shall devour you, there will be ere long the end of your
wickedness, or your end, or both, and then where will be your joy, when the
matter and ground of your joy shall be taken away? Nay, which is worse, there
will be a sting stinging in your souls to all eternity; which remembrance of
your wicked pleasures will dally renew, that you shall hever be able to
withstand it. Why then will thou let the refreshments of thy soul depend upon
so woeful a foundation as the satisfaction of thy wicked and beastly lusts,
which can be but for a season, Heb. 11.26. The fountains of thy joy will
quickly be drawn dry, and then all thy joys will bid thee an eternal
farewell; nay, it may be, before thou are aware of it, even suddenly all you
cursed lighters against God, may be met withal and destroyed. However, it
will not be long before the foundation of your joys and delights (namely your
spoiling of the Saints, and robbing of the Lords dear once) shall be taken
away from you, and then your joys will perish. And so I have done with this
second point, and come to the third, which will arise from the interrogation,
Why do then boast thy self in evil? The point is this: That

Wicked men have no good reason to commit evil, nor to boast in it: sin is
an unreasonable thing, no man can lay down any good reason for the defense of
it, Psalm. 2.1. Quare tumultuantur gentes and nationes meditantur inane? They
can give no reason for what they do: and therefore when our Lord Christ laid a
charge of wickedness upon him that had not on the wedding garment, he was even
speechless, he could give no reason for the way he was in. But I will be
brief in this point.

The first reason is, because God never commanded sin, and nothing can be
reasonable but what he commands; no, though it have a show of good in it: who
required these things at you hands? Esaias 1.12.

Secondly, because God has absolutely forbidden sin, therefore it is
unreasonable.

Thirdly, because it tends to the destruction of him that commits it, and there
is no reason why any one should destroy himself; nor is there any reason why
it should be rejoiced or boasted in, because there is in evevery sin a kind of
poison that eats out all joy, and overthrowes all peace and comfort, and there
can be no cause of rejoicing in that which overthrowes and spoils our joy,
nay, it is the cause of eternal woe and sorrow.

The first use may be a use of information to inform us, that every wicked man
is an unreasonable man, he is not guided by reason, unless it be reason
fetched from beneath, even from the Devil or their own darkened minds, and
carnal hearts, which are opposite to that divine reason by which we should be
guided in all our ways. And the truth is, no man walks safely any longer then
he is guided by this divine and pure reason, namely God and his truth. Indeed
man is a reasonable creature, and endued with a reasonable soul, the powers of
which carry him to actions reasonable, as they respect his outward being, and
way of converse amongst men, so a wicked man may do many actions in themselves
reasonable; but in regard of the manner of them, not being guided in them and
to them (as was said before) by that divine reason which should guide every man
in all his actions, they are against God, and so most unreasonable. But I will
not insist upon his: for we are not here to show, that an action in it self
good, being done in an evil manner, may be evil to a man, the text speaks
here of actions every way evil, both materially and formally, and to do such
actions is an unreasonable thing, but more unreasonable to rejoice and boast in
them.

In the next place, this will lay a heavy charge of unreasonable nosse and
spiritual madness upon those who, like Ahab, have sold themselves to work
wickedness, that devise mischief upon their beds, and when they come abroad,
they practice it and tell it, that like Doeg murder the Ministers and people of
God. O ye unreasonable ones, why do you do thus? O ye bloody Prelates which
have (not long since) shed the blood of many godly Ministers and people,
whipping some, starving some, and stigmatizing others, nay, you have shed the
blood of souls by taking away the powerful preaching of the Word from them, as
much as is you lay. And now being by the force of a Parliament for the present
restrained, you thirst after the blood of godly Ministers and people, more then
after wine: and now, whilst your hands are bound, you send abroad your hellish
devices, which like an cating gangrene, have gone through the land; you must one
day be brought before the great Judge, who will demand a reason of you why you
have done all these things, when you will not be able to render a reason for
the least of you wicked ways.

And all you roaring and revelling Cavaleers, why do you kill, steal, and
follow such vile and rebellious courses? Can you tell why? What has God done
to you? Or what fault can you find with his ways, that you so stand up
against him? You would have his true worship down, and false and Popish
worship let up. Why do you rise now, and gather on heaps, to pull down and
hinder that true spirltuall way of worship of the Lord Jesus, which he himself
has constituted by his apostles and Teachers in the primitive times? Sure you
can give no reason for it. And why do you kill the Saints, and imprison them
above all others? What have they done to you? Sure they have not hurt you. I
know you have nothing to say unto them, unless it be^ in matters of their God,
as those wicked ones had against Daniel. Daniel 6.
And I am sure you will find that but an unreasonable reason, if you do but
confider it: if there be no reason for any thing that God commands not, as sure
there is not, then this your doings will prove unreasonable, for I am sure God
never commanded you to spoil his people, whom he loves there all other:
therefore do but consider what you do, and you will find that all your
actions in this bloody war against the Saints of Jesus Christ, have been all
this while, and still are against the highest and purest reason, even against
God himself, the spring and fountain of all good reason.

You most barbarously profane the Lords day in buying and selling, playing and
sporting, and if you solemnly perform any service to God it consists in
nothing for the most part, but reading a Popish Service book, and surely God
will ask you also why you do this, when you shall never be able to answer
him, but shall be ^^ritten dumb before him, though now you will not fear him,
not regard his counsels to be guided by them: and so I have dome with this
point also, and with these words, Why be stest thou thy self in mischief.

I now come to speak of the woeful destiny of these wicked unreasonable men,
which is set before their and our eyes, in part of the fifth verse, God shall
destroy thee for eves. In which words, you may observe these two general
things:

First, the certainty of the destruction of wicked men, They shall be destroyed.

Secondly, the irrecoverablenesse of their condition, being once destroyed, It
shall be for ever.

In the first, we may take notice of the person that shall undertake this
work, and that is one which can go through with it, and do it to purpose,
even God himself.

Secondly, the manner of their overthrow, They shall be destroyed, which word
has a great force in it, and so I might make divisions of the two general
things, but I will handle them as they lie in the lump, because I shall not
have time to unfold every word according to the extent of it. And therefore I
will fall first upon the first general, the certainty of the destruction and
overthrow of all wicked men, and bloody persecutors, God shall destroy them;
whence the point is this, Retreagentur improbi ad sepulcrum usque omnes gentes
oblita Dei. Psalm. 37.2. The Lord there does encourage his people to a patient
abiding the malice and mischief of wicked men: for says he, they shall be
soon cut off as the grass, and wither as the green herb; and so verso 20.
says he, The wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the
fat of Lambs, they shall consume into smoke: and so also, verse 15. Glad^^^
little intrabit in cor little, and arcus little confringentur: Here in all these
expressions as you may see in the whole Psalm, he aims as at all wicked men,
so especially at such as aim most at the ruin and overthrow of his people,
they above all shall be met withal; the heat of Gods judgments shall melt
them even as the fire melts the wax, their prosperity shall vanish away even
like smoke, and the very remembrance of all their wicked persecuting the
Saints, shall like a sharp sword pierce their souls for ever.

The first reason is, because God has decreed the destruction of such. So Jude
tells us, Jude 4. verse, and Psalm 33.11. Consil^um vero Ichova in seculum
consistit, cogitationes animi ejus in at a^es singula^^ ^o who can hinder what
he has decreed, all the world cannot do it. Have I said it, and shall I not
do it, says he by that wicked Prophet Balam, Numb. 23.18. therefore it must
be so that you must be destroyed all the root of you that stand up against God
and his people.

The second reason why God will destroy them is, because they are his enemies,
Those mine enemies, says he, that would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither and slay them before me. Such as are enemies to Gods people,
are enemies to God himself, because there is such a near relation between
God and them, they are his Spouse, his betroathed ones, Hos. 2.19. they are his
children, 2 Cor. 6. ult. and therefore those that fight against them, fight
against him, their enemies are his enemies, and therefore he will destroy them.

Thirdly, God will destroy wicked men and bloody persecuters, to declare his
justice. So the Apostle says, Romans 9.22. Those that do oppose him to his
face, and blaspheme his name, and do that which he has forbidden, and will
not be reformed, he will declare his justice upon them to their destruction: he
will even tear them to pieces, and none shall deliver them, Psalm. 50.22.

But it will be demanded, who are these wicked men that shall be destroyed?

I answer first in general, that all may be said to be wicked men that have
not interest in the Lord Jesus, and all such must be destroyed. To such he
will say at that great day, Depart from me ye wicked, ye workers of iniquity,
I know you not, that is, I approve you not, you have no interest in me, you
shall be destroyed, you are workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.23.

But secondly, I answer more particularly, that this Text which I am now upon,
does not aim especially at these, neither do I aim at them in my discourse;
but especially at such as do (as I may say) constitute themselves in a posture
of open war against God and his people.

You will say, Who are they?

I answer, they are the wicked Bishops, and all the wicked Cavaliers which are
now gathered together into an Army, under the command of the grand Captain of
wickedness, the Devil, which like a Captain goes about daily to see how many
of the Saints of God he can devour.

First, I say, the Bishops, because I do believe, that they have been the
great incendiaries and blowers up of all this mischief, partly by introducing
so many base and wicked innovations in the worship of God, which godly
Ministers and godly Men could not endure: and partly by working out so many
Monopolies and unlawful taxes upon the State, that men were not able to bear.
And in the defect of the observation of their Canons and inventions, what
miseries were men brought into? They were persecuted even to strange Cities and
Countries, kept in dungeons and darkness, in hunger and solitariness, spoiled
of their goods and enjoyments; and what ever those bloody villains could say
or do, was in a manner made law; so that your cursed and irregular wills,
almost ruled the Land. How many godly Ministers have you silenced? And the
blood of how many souls have you shad, O ye bloodguilty wretches: therefore
you are worthy to go in the first rank of persecuters, whose sins are gone
before hand to judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24. You have openly declared sins before
hand, and therefore surely the Lord aims at you in special, at at a
generation whom he will destroy.

And the next to you are those men whose hearts your cursed Canons have taken
such impression upon, that they are carried out to practice that which you
first began: and surely your hands and hearts are still in the business, and
many of them are held and led on in the work by your subtle persuasions, and
the force of your deceitful arguments, but this cannot excuse them. For seeing
they follow your wicked steps, they must also partake of your woeful
destruction: so now I have told you who I mean by wicked and bloody men, that
must be destroyed, even the whole Army that stands up in this wicked war: I
say all, both head and tail, without repentance, must fall under the revenging
hand of the Almighty God, and feel the weight of his just judgments.

But it will be demanded who I mean by the faithful Ministers and faithful
people of God, whom I say are imprisoned, persecuted, and killed?

I answer: I mean such as the Scriptures set forth to us to be such, even such
as are in their hearts and lives a holy people unto God, 1 Peter 2.9. You are a
holy Nation, says the Apostl^: and do you not hate these, and ^^o^^^^ and
revile at these, even because they are holy? Do you not seek to kill these?
Your very soul (...) you the you do, and you do it in despig^ God, because
it is against his express word, who has said, Sancti estote: nam ego sanctus
sum, 1 Peter 1.16. And yet you would destroy them for their holiness: God
commands them to be holy, you deride them for it: whose word shall stand, Gods
or yours? God says they are a holy people, you say they are Roundheads,
Sectaries and Schismatickes, and what you please. These are the Saints, which
as strangers and Pilgrims, Abstineatis a carnis cupiditatibus, 1. Peter 2.11.
Such as desire to walk with their God, though it be in a way which men call
Heresy, Acts 24.14. Such as desire to have, Conscientiam sine offensa apud
Deum, and apu^ homines semper. Acts 24.16. Such as cannot, nor dare not, to
follow the ways of Popery, and other like courses which the world will follow
to save their liberties and outward estates. Such a one Moses was, that
forsook the pleasures of sin to follow his God, Hebrews 11.26. Such were
those which you may read of at large in the same Chapter, that suffered with
joy the spoiling of their goods for the Lord Jesus sake.

And so now I have told you who I mean by wicked men, and who I mean by the
Saints of God.

Now I come to the use of the point that I delivered, namely, that wicked and
bloody persecuters must be destroyed.

The first use is a use of instruction to the Saints that are persecuted, to
teach them to pity the wicked, though they persecuted them: for they must be
destroyed, it will be misery enough to them that God will destroy them. So did
Stephen Acts 7. toward the end: Positis antem gentbus clamavit voce magna
Domine ne statuas ets hoc peceatum. So did our Lord and Master Christ, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do: so let us do when they lay their
wicked hands upon our bodies, let us pity their miserable souls.

Secondly, let it teach us patience in all our sufferings, because they cannot
be long, the workers of our sorrows shall shortly be destroyed.

The second use is a use of terror to the wicked themselves that must be
destroyed: Take notice of your doom and misery, your future destruction is
more certain then your present enjoyments, your sorrows will come certainly
and wonderfully upon you, and you shall not escape his hand. All your strength
and policy shall not be able to deliver you. It is likely you may think with
Senacherib, Isa. 36. that your great multitude will be a means to preserve you;
but alas! if you had all the men in the whole Kingdom together on your side,
this would not do it, when God shall once arise to fight against you. Know you
not that he slew by his Angel in one night, an hundred fourscore and five
thousand, Esaias 37.30. And are not you an Army much like unto his, that do
reproach and blaspheme the living God? Have you not uttered the same language
that some of them did to the servants of Hezekiah, saying, Your God whom you
serve, shall not be able to deliver you out of our hands. And as the wicked
Jews to Christ, Where is the God in whom you prayed? let him deliver if he
will have him. Now what is become of these? Are they not destroyed? And shall
you escape? No, no, it cannot be, you shall not escape, when the time is once
come that God will have you down, even the stars in their comse shall fight
against you, as they did against Sisera, Judge. 5.

But you will say, We have strong horses, and they may be a means to save us.

I answer, No: they cannot neither, Psalm. 33.17. Mendax est equus ad salutem,
and multitudine roboris sui nonliberat sessorem. A horse is a lie: For so it is
to be read.

How a lie?

Why? Because strong horses do in regard of outward strength, promise a great
deal of help in time of war, and whosoever shall depend upon this strength,
as upon a promise, will find it but a lie; and so shall all you Cavaliers
find, not only horses, but all the outward strength upon which you do
depend, it will prove but a lie.

But you may say, We are Princes, and Lords, and great men, our means and
titles will bear us out.

I answer, No: this cannot; for those great Princes we read of, Ezekiel.
32.24.25.26. The Princes of Elam, Meshek and Tubal, they being great Princes,
while they were alive and in prosperity, they caused a terror in the land of
the living, even among the people of God; yet now they lie with the
uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war, and
they have laid their swords under their heads, and which is worst of all to
them, and shall be to you, their iniquities are upon their bones, and your
iniquities shall be upon your bones; and this will be intolerable. They
notwithstanding their Princely power, were overcome, and so shall you be. You
may now walk in the pride and stubbornness of your own hearts, saying, We
have gotten us horns by our strength: but these your horns of strength shall
be broken. God himself will fight against you with an outstretched arm, and
none can turn him back.

But you will say, Stay a while, we are not destroyed, yet, it may be yet that
you Roundheads may be made quake by us first.

I answer, it may be indeed that God may suffer you to do more mischief
before he destroy you: he may suffer you to do the Scullians office, to
scour his chosen vessels, he may make rods of you, as he did of Cyrus, to
whip his people; and then into the fire of his judgment you go without
remedy. And what then will you, nay, what can you do, though you cloth your
selves with scarlet, and deck you with ornaments of gold, yet all this will not
help you? Jerem. 4.30. Your terrible looks will not fright him that sits upon
a glorious throne, and sends forth his destroying messengers when he
pleases: Nor will the glittering of your spears and weapons of war daunt
him; neither will he be allured by the costlinesse of your apparel (though
it be golden and shining) to forbear you: But he will come against you with
the force of his power; he now speaks against you every day, and you will not
hear his voice, he bids you take heed of meddling with his people, for whom he
has engaged himself. Yea, he speaks to you by signs from heaven,
foretelling your future destruction, which in its season shall come upon you:
therefore give glory to the Lord God of Israel, before he send darkness, and
your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while you look for light, he
turn it into the shadow of death, and make it as gross darkness, Jerem.
13.16. light being here taken for prosperity, joy and deliverance, it shall be
turned into sorrow, trouble and destruction. Wherefore be not proud, but hear
and regard the word of the great God, which now sounds in your ears, that so,
if it be possible, you may return and escape that terrible destruction which
will be so tedious to you: But if you will still persist in your courses of
fighting against God, and seeking to set up Popery, and laying heavy burdens
upon the consciences of godly men, then (...) what God says further to you,
Esaias 8.9. Consoci^ini, o populi, and conterimini, auremque prabete quotquot
estis in locis longinquis terra: accengimini and conterimini, accingimini and
conterimini. This is spoken to you, even to you the whole Army of Cavaliers.
This will be your end though you gather your selves; nay, though you gird your
selves with all the strength you can, yet you shall be broken in pieces. And so
because time calls upon me, I must have done with the first general, namely,
the certainty of the destruction of wicked men. I come now briefly to speak of
the last, namely, the irrecoverablenesse of their condition, being once
destroyed. Whence the point is this: That

The condition of wicked men, being once destroyed, is irrecoverable, they can
return to their place no more, nor never see light, but must to all eternity
endure that which is unsufferable, 2 Thessal. 1.9. There the Apostle says,
that they shall be punished with eterni exitii, eternal destruction. And Mark.
9.16. our Savior says, that the sire of their destruction is never quenched.
So says the Prophet David, speaking of the wicked, they shall arise, says he,
to everlasting shame and contempt Dan. 12.2. Rev. 20.10.

And our Savior himself tells us the reason of it, in that parable, Luke
16.26. There is a great gulse ^ed between them and life, which they cannot
pass nor recover themselves from their miserable condition.

The second reason is, because they shall be held by the almighty power of God
in that destroyed condition; there shall be, as it were, fresh blasts of his
powerful wrath to kindle the flame of their torment, Isai. 30. ult. Flasus
Ichova quasiterreute Sulphuris, incendit eam. The force of this flame, and the
power of this breath, shall for ever over over whelme them, that they shall
never recover themselves.

I might draw another reason from the manner of their destruction: It shall be
a destruction that makes them incapable of recovery, even like the breaking of
a Potters vessel, Psalm 2.9. which you know can never be made whole again.

Let every one then take notice of the woeful estate of wicked men; when ever
the day of their destruction comes, it comes for ever. Indeed it is true, Mors
communis onunibus, death is common to all, but there is a secondamors, a second
death, which binds up all its prisoners to all eternity. Do but think then what
all wicked men will get at last when they come to end their days, when all
their fore-past happiness will be swallowed up with the thoughts of their
endless misery: What good will it do them, like the rich glutton, Luke 16. to
fare deliciously every day, and to glory in their doing mischief, when at last
they must be destroyed for ever.

Let all the wicked crew of blasphemous wretches see, if they can comfort
themselves with hopes of obtaining their ownedesires, their desire is, that God
would damn them, and that he would ram them into hell, that they may return
no more. See, I say, if you can comfort your selves with these hopes, you shall
have your desires without all question, you shall be so stopped, as it were,
into the gulf, that you shall be sure never to get out. Can you cheer your
hearts with it? Oh no! rather tremble at it, and be afraid thus wickedly to
open your mouths any more: You now glory in your firing houses, and doing all
themischiefe your divellish hearts can invent; but you little think (what ever
you say) of dwelling with everlasting burnings, Isai. 33.14. which will (not
withstanding all your pomp and wicked boasting in your present evil courses)
be your woeful condition ere long, when you will ourse the day that ever you
set your hearts, and tongues, and hands, to fight against God, and against his
people.

An answer to an objection that might be made against this precedent Discourse.
NAmely, that whereas I change the Prelates and Cavaliers with such vile and
wicked actions as do declare them to be wicked persons, and such as God will
certainly destroy for their wickedness: it may be said, that the other Army
which is for the Parliament, is as vile and wicked as they, and so all that I
have said, may be as s^^ly applied to them.

I answer, That it is true indeed, that some of the Parliaments Army are as had
as the Cavaliers, and such as are a very shame to the cause they pretend to
stand for and it were to be wished they were all casheer'd, although there were
but Gideons army left behind. But yet all this does not prove the army to be
as bad as the other: some of the Cavaliers themselves being judges: for some of
them, have said, that they did fight against the Roundheads, because they
served God better then themselves. And besides, it is very well known to all
that will take notice of any thing, that there be many hundreds, if not
thousands in the Parliaments army, that do stand up for the true worship of
their God, which the whole army of the Cavaliers do oppose: and whereas you
shall hardly find one in all the Army of the Cavaliers, that will not
blaspheme the name of God by cursed oaths, you shall find many of the other
that do fear an oath. And many other things I could say to this purpose, but
this may suffice all that are not bent to quarrelling. Farewell.


