A Word of Comfort: Showing, That the Providence of God excellently appears
in the Afflictions of the Just.
1. MEN curious in their censures, and distrustful in their actions, have
never ceased in all times to argue with Divine Providence about the afflictions
of the Just; but I, with the assistance of heaven, intend at this present to
prove the eternal Wisdom makes it self visibly appear, by the same things
wherewith many think to overthrow it. Now I make it good by four reasons: The
first whereof shall show, worldly blessings cannot be great but by the
experience of evils. Secondly, that tribulation is the nursing mother of all
virtues. Thirdly, that there is no spectacle more glorious among the works of
God, then an innocent afflicted for justice, and patient in affliction.
Fourthly, that it is a proof of beatitude.

We then deliver in the beginning of this discourse a notable Maxim drawn out
of Aeneas Gaza, an ancient Author, inserted in the Bibliothec of the Fathers:
(...). Aen. Gaza.
Never do we sufficiently know the sweetness of good, without the trial of
evil. Joseph mounted upon the triumphant Chariot of Pharaoh by prisons and
fetters: David to the throne of Saul by many persecutions: And their great
prosperities were much more sweet unto them, because they were foregone by
sharp afflictions. We see the same in nature; where the Sun is more resplendent
after its eclipse, the sea more calm after a tempest, and the air much
brighter after a shower, which made a great Statesman say, Maris coelique
temperiem, turbines tempestatesque commendant: habet hac vices conditio
mortalium, ut adversa secundis, and adversis secundis, and adversis secund a
nascantur. Occultat utrorumque semina Deus, and plerumque bonorum and malorii
causae sub diversa specie latent. Plin. in Paneg. Trajan.
Storms and tempests contribute to the clearness of the heavens, and the
smoothness of the sea. The condition of mortals has this proper, that
adversities grow out of prosperties, and prosperities from adversities. God
hides from us the seeds both of the one and other, and many times the causes
of blessings and evils are covered under one and the same appearance.

One may here object, that if we must always have evil to taste good, we might
infer, Angels then were not sufficiently happy, because they arrived at
Beatitude without passing through Tribulations, these being the flower-deluces
of Gods garden, which neither wrought nor took pains to be clothed with the
robe of glory: we might conclude God himself had some defect in his felicity,
since he always has a most accomplished beatitude, with exclusion of all
manner of evil. I answer to that, there is very much difference between the
condition of things eternal and temporal. Angels entered almost as soon into
felicity as into being, because they were placed in the upper region of the
world, where miseries cannot approach, and who having besides a singular
knowledge of Gods favor, stood not in need to be aided by the counterpoize of
adversities. But as for us, we are not only borne in a soil, which is as
fertile in calamities as forests in birds, and rivers in fish, but besides we
are extreme ignorant of Gods grace, when we long enjoy prosperity; which is the
cause that adversity, though necesarily tied to our condition, makes us
notably open our eyes to know the felicities which follow it, and to understand
from what source they proceed. As for that which concerns the Divinity, it
cannot, to speak properly, endure any thing contrary, by reason of the
condition of its essence, which is fully replenished with all sorts of
beatitude. God (said Philon) is incommunicable to tribulations, he is always
vigorous, ever free from dolor or pain, perpetualy in action without wearynes,
still plunged in a sea of most pure delights, as being the height, end, and
aim of felicity.

Thereupon unable to suffer (as he is God) and yet willing to undergo some
special part in the great sacrifice of patience which began with the world, he
took a body, and in that body drank the cup of the passion, showing evidently
to all mortals that tribulations by their darkness avail to the brightest
rays of glory, which S. Augustine spoke in very express terms.

Unicus ille de Patris substantia natus, aequalis Patri in forma Dei, Verbu^
quo facta sunt omnia, non habebat ubi flagellaretur, ad hoc autem in carne
indutus est, ut sine flagello non esset. Aug.
The only Son borne of the substance of the Father, and equal to the Father
in divine essence; the Word, by which all things were created, had nothing to
suffer, as God, and is clothed with our flesh to participate in our
punishments.

2. The second reason, which visibly shows the secret of divine providence in
the tribulation of the Just, is, that God being the Sovereign Sanctity, was
necessarily to procure and plant it in the souls of his elect, by all the most
effectual ways which his wisdom had ordained. Now there is not any shorter
way to virtue then a well-managed affliction, and therefore it was necessary to
maintain adversity in the world as the nource of great and generous actions of
Christianity. Quia eras acceptus Deo, necesse fuit ut tentatio probaret te.
Tob. 12.13.
It was necessary (says the scripture) to try thee by tribulation, because
thou wast acceptable to God.

It is a matter almost impossible to preserve a great virtue in perpetual
prosperity; one must be more then a man, and have a double spirit: which is
excellently well observed by S. Augustine, upon the words of Elizeus: I entreat
your spirit may be doubled in me. Elizeus (says he) begged the spirit of Elias
might be doubled in him, because he was to live in the favor of Court and
worldly prosperities, where the way is more slippery and dangers most frequent.
His Master Elias had passed his life in many persecutions, wherefore a single
spirit was sufficient for his direction, adversity tunes are subject to deep
dronkennesses and supine forgetfulness of God, the Prophet says by an
instinct of the Divinity; Let your spirit be doubled in me. Reg 4.2.9. Aug. l.
2. de mira^. Scrip. Obsecro ut fiat in me duplex spirit us tuus. Fiat in me
duplex spiritus. Boet. de conso. l. 2. pros. 8.


Prosperity under the show of felicity deceives us; tribulation is ever true:
the one flatters us, the other instructed us; the one tyeth up our senses and
reason, the other unbinds them; the one is windy, empty, giddy, ignorant, the
other sober, reserved, and prudent; the one withdaweth us from real good by
the allurements of vanity, the other reduces us by a wholesome way into the
duty from whence we wandered. S. Bernard says excellently: Quando hoc in^autis
non sunt ad disciplinam quod ignis ad ceram, quod so lis radius adni vem vel
glacie^ Sapiens David sapiens Solomon sed bladientibus nimis secundis rebus
alter de part, alter ex toto desipuit.

Magnus qui incidens ^in adversa non excidit, vel parum a sapientia, n^ minor
cui praesens faelicitas s^ arrisit non irrisit.


Prosperity is in weak and inconsiderate souls, as fire to wax, and the
suns rays to snow. David was very wise, and Solomon much more, yet both
charmed by the great success of affairs lost understanding, the one at least
in part, the other wholly. We must affirm, there is need of a strong spirit to
subsist in adversity, without change of reason or constancy: but it is much
more hard to taste very pleasing prosperities, and not be deceived. This is the
cause why wise Providence, ever to keep virtue in breath, cease not to
exercise it in this honorable list of great souls, and we behold that
following these proceedings, it thence deriveth great advantages and many
beauties. The Scripture notes that Job Job 42. Merser. in Job.
returned into the luster of his former state, gave titles to his three
daughters, much observed: for he called one by the name of Day, the other
Cassia, or as some Interpreters say, Amber, and the third Amaltaeas Horn, so
the Septuagint translate it. We must not think so holy a man would herein do
any slight thing, or not to some purpose. But if we believe ancient Fathers
upon it, he meant by these 3. names to signify the three conditions of fortune.
The first (which was before his great adversities) is compared to the day
rejoicing us with the natural sweetness of it is serenity. The second which
was that of his calamity, to amber, because it is properly in tribulation where
virtue diffuseth her good odours. It resembles aromatike spices, which more
show their virtue when they are pounded and brought into powder in a mortar; or
incense, which never lets it so much appear what it is, as when it is cast on
coals: so that this Motto of the Wiseman may be attributed to it: Quasi ignis
refulgens, and thus ardens in igne. Eccles. 50.10.
A resplendent fire, and incense burning in the fire. In the end issuing forth
of tedious tribulations, and having been hardened and fortifyed under storms;
it opens it is bosom, and unfoldeth admirable fruits, which fitly make it to
be called the Horn of abundance. Wherefore we say with S. Ambrose, Est ergo
beatitudo in doloribus, quos pl^na suavitatis virtus comprimit, and coercet,
ipsa sibi domesticis opibus abundans vel ad conscientia vel ad gloriam. Ambr.
offic. l. 2. c. 4.
there is a certain beatitude in dolours, which virtue of sweetness and
delight represseth, from whence it acquireth palms, and inestimable riches, as
well for satisfaction of it is conscience, as the condition of glory.

3. For we affirm for a third reason that God has not a more glorious
spectacle on earth then a Just man afflicted and patient. Is it not that which
God himself meant in the book of Job, where the Prince of darkness telling
he had gone round about the world; he said not to him: Have thou seen the
Monarchies and Empires, which bow under my scepter, and circumvolve under my
laws? Have thou seen Palaces of Kings and Princes, whose turrets penetrate the
clouds? Have thou seen armies all enclosed with swords, making the earth
tremble under the clashing of their arms? Have thou beheld the theaters,
beauties, and triumph of greatness? Have thou considered all the wealth which
nature reserveth for me in magazins? He says nothing of all that. What then?
Numquid considerasti servum meum Job, quod non sit ei similis in terra? Job 8.
Have thou looked on my servant Job, who has not his like on earth? And what
makes him more admirable, then that which Cassianus Ex locuplete pauperrimus,
nudus ex divite, ex valido tabidus, ex inclyto and glorioso ignobilis,
sterquilinii factus ^abitator, and velut quide^ corporis sui saevissimus
carnifex, testa radebat saniem, and membro^ glebas vermium mersis in profunda
vulneribus, manibus detra^ebat. Cassia. Cola. 5. de nece Sanctorum.
mentions; A man was seen abounding in all sorts of blessings become very
poor, having not so much as wherewith to cover his nakedness, fallen from a
most perfect health into a prodigious malady, which disfigured his whole body,
and having lost so many goodly farms, reduced to the extremity of being the
inhabitant of a wretched dunghill: But he out-braving his miseries, and showing
himself to be nothing curious, took a rough stone to wipe his wounds, and
putting his hand far into the bottom of his ulcers, drew thence the
corruption and worms, which made him honorable by the lights of his patience.
Have we not cause to cry out with Tertullian, Quale in illo viro feretrii Deus
de diabolo extruit! quale vexillu^ de mimico suae gloriae extulit? Tert. de
pat. c. 13.
Oh what a trophey has God erected in this holy man! O, what a standard has
he advanced in the sight of all his enemies! I dare freely pronounce it, there
is not any approaches more near to God, then a man laden with afflictions,
and become invincible in the arms of patience. And I ask of you, what made
Toby to be called the Good God, (...). Clem. Alex. Paedag. 2.
but this amirable virtue? I say, although many have been honored with marks
of the Divinity, by reason of their favors and benignities toward men, (there
being nothing which so charmeth people as the profusion of benefits) yet
interest was the cause great men were flattered with such titles above their
deserts, whereas quite otherwise Praise rendered to Patience is much more
sincere, as being expressed by a certain veneration afforded to a virtue
absolutely heroic: which makes me conclude, that men, ravished with the sight
of this notable patience which shined in Toby, when having done well, evil was
retributed, surnamed him the Good God, not for any other reason but his
admirable constancy, having this Maxim well engraven in their hearts, that God
has not on earth a more perfect Image of his greatness, then a patient man.
Denis (...). Dion. ep. 8.
likewise plainly calls Patience the imitation of the Divinity, and adds,
Moses was honored with the rays of divine vision for his singular mansuetude.

4. Lastly, I say tribulation confirms us in the faith of future things, as
being a manifest proof of Beatitude. For reasoning though never so little by
the light of nature, we judge if there be any justice in men, it is in God as
in its source, with an incomparable eminency, and therefore we cannot imagine a
Divinity without the inheritance of goodness and equity, which perpetually
accompany it. Now when we see innocent men continually afflicted, who go out
of this life by bloody and horrible ways, many times oppressed by the tyranny
of men, and having none to revenge their ashes, we necessarily conclude, there
is in the other life another Justice, and another Tribunal, where Causes must
be decided in a last Court of Judicature. We say with S. Paul, Expectatio
creaturae revelationem filiorii Dei expectat: vanitati enim creatura subjecta
est, non volens, sed propter eum qui subjecit came in spe: quia and ipsa
creatura liberabitur a servitute corruptionis in libertate^ gloriae filiorum
Dei. Romans 8.
The expectation of the creature looks for the revelation of Gods children:
For every creature is subject to Nothing, not of his own liking, but by the
ordinance of him, who has subjected him with hope of rising again: For
creatures shall be delivered from the servitude of all corruption into the
liberty of the children of God. That was it, which comforted all the Martyrs in
hideous torments, when their souls were torn out of their bodies with
incomparable violence. For although mortal members yielded to the sword of
persecution, yet they beh^ld, though with an eye drenched in blood and tears,
the bright glory which waited on them, and saw as in a mirror the thrones of
these prodigious sufferings disposed all into crowns. There Stephen saw his
stones changed into as many rubies to serve for matter of veneration to piety,
and an example of courage for all posterity. There Lawrence looked on his
flames turned into roses and delights. There Felicitas, the mother of glories
and triumphs, beheld seven sons, who received her with palms in their hands
into the beautiful pavillions of heaven, where all torments made an end to
give beginning to infinite comforts. That is it which animated all the just in
so great a heap of tribulations, and which made them speak these words of
Tertullian, Satis idoneus patientiae sequester Deus si injuriam deposueris
penes eum, ultor est; si damnum, restitutor est; si dolorem, medicus est; si
mortem, resuscitator. O quantum patientiae licet ut Deum habeat debitorem!
Tert. de pat. 15.
God is payable enough, in that he is the Arbiter and Feoffee of your patience.
If you commit an injury to him, he is the Avenger of it; if a loss of goods,
he is the restorer; if a pain or malady, he is the Physician; since it makes
God himself the debtor, who by the condition of his independent nature, being
not accountable to any, does notwithstanding particularly bind himself to
patience.

Let us conclude with four excellent instructions to be observed in adversity,
which are expressed in the book of Job; Job 1. Tunc surrexit, and scidit
vestimenta sua, and tonso capite corruens in terram, dixit, Nudus egressus sum,
etc.
for it is said, He rent his garments, and having cut off his hair, and
prostrated himself on the earth, said, Naked I came out of my mothers womb,
and naked I return into earth.

Note, that rising up he rent his garments, to show he courageously discharged
himself of all exterior blessings, which are riches and possessions signified
by garments. He cut his hair, which was a sign he put the whole body into the
hands of God, to dispose of it at his pleasure. For as those Ancients
sacrificing a Victime first pulled off the hair and threw into the fire, to
testify the whole body was already ordained to sacrifice; so such as for
ceremony gave their hair to temples, protested they were dedicated to the
service of the Divinity, to whom the vow was made. In the third instance, he
prostrated himself on the earth, acknowledging his beginning by a most holy
humility. And for conclusion he prayed and adored with much reverence. Behold
all you should practice in tribulation well expressed in this mirror of
patience. First, are you afflicted with loss of goods, either by some
unexpected chance, or by some tyranny and injustice? Abate not your courage,
but considering the nullity of all earthly blessings, and the greatness of
eternal riches, say, My God, although I have endeavored hitherto to preserve
the wealth thou gave me, as an instrument of many good deeds, yet if thou
have ordained in the sacred counsel of thy providence, that I must be deprived
of them for my much greater spiritual avail, I from this time renounce them
with all my heart, and am ready to be dispoyled, even to the last nakedness,
the more perfectly to enter into the imitation of thy poverty. Say with Lewis,
Archbishop of Toulouse, Divitiae meae Christus, desint caetera. Omnis copia
quae Deus meus non est, mihi inopia est.
Jesus is all my riches, and with him I am content in the want of all other
wealth. All plenty, which is not God, is mere penury to me.

If you be tormented with bodily pain, by maladies, by death of allies, say, My
God, to whom belongs this afflicted body? Is it not to thee? Is not this one of
thy members? It now endures some pain, since thou have so appointed, and it
complains and groneth under the scourge: where are so many precepts of
patience? where is the love of suffering? where conformity to the cross?
Olalla a Virgin, about thirteen or fourteen years of age, as she was
martyred, and her body torn with iron hooks, beheld her members all bloody,
and said, O my God, what a brave thing is it to read these characters, where I
see thy tropheys and monuments imprinted with iron on my body, and written in
my blood. Quam juvat hos apices legere qui tua Christ trophea notent. Prudent.
A creature so tender, so delicate, shall she show such courage in the midst of
torments, such transfixing pains, and cannot I resolve to suffer a little
evil with some manner of patience? If it be the death of an allie, behold that
body, not in the state wherein it now appears, but in the bright luster of
glory, wherewith you shall behold it in the day of the Resurrection, wiping
away your tears, say what Ruricius did, Fleant mortuos qui spem resurrectionis
habere non possunt. Fleant mortui mortuas suos, quos in perpetuum existima^t
interiisse.
Let them bewail the dead, who cannot have any hope of Resurrection. Let the
dead lament their dead friends, whom they account dead for ever.

In the third place, arm your self with profound humility, and looking on the
earth from whence your body came, say, My God, it is against my pride thy rod
is lifted up in this tribulation. Shall such a creature as I, drawn out of the
dust, become proud against thy commandments, and so often shake off the yoke of
thy law? I now acknowledge from the bottom of my soul the abjectnesse of my
nothing, and protest with all resentments of heart my dependence on thee. The
little herb called Trefoyle, foldeth up the three leaves it bears, when
thunder roareth, thereby willing to tell us, it will not lift a creast, nor
raise a bristle against Heaven. Lightning also, which teareth huge trees
asunder, never falls upon it. My God, I hear thy hand murmuring over my head
in this great affliction, and I involve me within my self, and behold the
element whereinto I must be reduced to do the homage my mortality owes thee.
Exercise not the power of thy thunders against a worm of the earth, against a
reed which serves for a sport to the wind.

Lastly, take courage what you may in the accidents that happen, and by the
imitation of our Savior retire into the bosom of Prayer, which is a
sovereign means to calm all storms. Jesus prayed in his agony, Factus in
agonia prolixius orabat.
and the more his sadness increased, the more he multiplied his prayers. Say
in imitation of him, Domine quid multiplicati sunt qui tribulant me. Multi
insurgunt adversum me. Multi dicune animae meae, non est salus ip^ in Deo ejus.
T^ autem Domine susceptor meus, etc.
My God, why are my persecutors so increased? Many rise up against me. Many say
to my soul, there is no salvation for it in God. But Lord thou art my
Protector, and my glory, thou art he who wilt make me exalt my head above all
mine enemies.

An Example of Constancy in Tribulation.
WE are able to endure more then we think. For there are none but slight
evils, which cause us readily to deplore, and which raise a great noise, like
to those brooks that purle among pibbles; whilst great ones pass through a
generous soul, as huge rivers which drive their waves along with a peaceful
majesty.

This manifestly appears in the death of Sosa and Eleonora, related by
Maffaeus in the sixteenth Book of his History of the Indies. Muffaeus Hist.
Indicar. l. 16.
This Sosa was by Nation a Portingale, a man of quality, pious, rich, liberal,
and valiant, married to one of the most virtuous women in the whole Kingdom.
They having been already some good time in the Indies, and inflamed with the
desire of seeing their dear Country again, embarked at Cochin with their
children very young, some Gentlemen and Officers, and with about six hundred
men. The beginning of their navigation was very prosperous; but being arrived
at Capo de bona speranza, they there found the despair of their return. A
Westernly wind beat them back with all violence; clouds gathered, thunders
roared, heaven it self seemed to break into fire over their heads, and
under-foot they saw nothing but abysses and images of death. If they would
anchor, the Ocean tosseth them; if return to the Indian coast, contrary winds
blow to stay their passages. Their sails are torn, mast cracked, rudder
broken, their ship shaken with surges beginning to leake, industry of men
fruitless, and all let loose to the sway of tempests.

To conclude their unhappiness another Southern wind violently thrust them
into the port, where they met with shipwreck. They must avoid this
counter-buffe if they would not be buried in the waves. They cast anchor to
stay the ship, and leaped into cock-boats to recover shore with the more
safety. Sosa first of all saved himself, his wife and children, carrying with
him his gold, silver, and jewels, so much as so imminent a danger would permit.
The boats after a return or two were scattered, the cable unto which the
anchor of their ship was fastened brake, the sides leaked, the keele opened,
every man sought to save himself, many were drowned, other strugled with the
Ocean, golden coffers, painted cabbinets, and the goodly riches of the Indies
swo^, with men halfe-dead tossed by the waves amongst fardells and packs, and
losing life, lost not (as yet) the sight of that which made them live. Some
became black with the buffe^s they received, others bedewed the sea with their
blood, yet all desired to reach the haven; so much desire of life possesses
us. Scarcely got they thither, but they saw their vessel sink down to the
bottom, leaving them not any hope of return. The dead bodies of their
companions with the doleful baggage utterly spoiled with seawater, were cast
up at their feet. On what side soever they reflect, nothing is seen but
calamity. Here the dead which begged burial, there the living all drenched in
water, laden with wounds, overwhelmed with toil, worn with hunger to arrive
in a savage Country, where having nothing almost to hope, they have all to
fear.

All that poor Sosa could was to kindle fire, and draw our some tainted
victuals wherewith to take refection; his heart was seyzed with apprehension of
this disaster, in which he saw all he esteemed most precious involved,
notwithstanding clearing his brow he comforted this afflicted company, and said,

It was not time to think upon their losses, but to give God thanks he had
saved their lives. That they were not so ignorant of the sea, as not to know
full well when one makes account to embrake thereon, he must expect hunger,
thirst, losses, shipwracks, and all the miseries of mankind. And therefore when
they happen they must be regarded as things already foreseen, and profit made
of evils for expiation of sins. As for the rest, being so distitude of all
things in a strange Country, there was no better riches then mutual
correspondence, which would preserve the whole body adhering together, as
discord infallibly ruineth divided members. He added (fetching a deep sigh)
they might behold their poor Lady with her tender infants in the extremity of
pevill, and that although both sex and age required they should be somewhat
assisted, he would neither spare himself nor his for common safety.

All answered with tears in their eyes, he might confidently lead them where
he pleased, and that they had no farther hope of their lives, but in the
obedience they resolved to yield to his commands. Having then remained
thirteen days in this miserable Port, barricadoed with huge stones and
costers left as remainders of their shipwreck to defend them by night from
thieves and wild beasts, they put themselves in the way to bend toward the
East, directly to a great river, which the Portingales had heretofore named of
the holy Ghost. Sosa went foremost with his wife, who showed masculine courage
in a tender constitution: she had her little children by her sides, whom turn
by turn every one carried. Andrew de Vase the Pilot was in the same rank,
bearing the standard of the Cross, attended also by about fourscore
Portingales, and an hundred servants who bore Arms. Then followed Mariners,
poor creatures, and other inferior people who were not yet cured.

The good servants moved with compassion of Eleonora, whom they beheld walking
on foot, framed her a kind of Litter, and sought all they might to comfort her;
but that lasted not long. Needs in the end must the poor Lady travel through
places, where nothing was to be seen but wild beasts, and Cafres more inhumane
then beasts; over rocks inaccessible, mountains which raised their heads above
the clouds, valleys not to be looked down into without horror, torrents
swollen with showers, marshes cloyed with mud, and which was most irksome, they
must go at random through ways of which every one was ignorant, nor could
any direct them; so that they made an hundred leagues of thirty. Their little
store of victual failing, they eat, first, pieces of rotten whale, and other
garbages of the sea, then wild fruits, leaves, and lastly spared not the
carcases of beasts, which they found in the desert. From that tolerable, they
must seek it among Moo es and tigers, and buy it at eight Crowns the pint.
There were many, who (overwhelmed with these hideous disasters) left the spoil
of their bodies of cruel Aethiopians, to birds and beasts, bidding a sad adieu
to their companions, with the last words that they desired to be delivered to
their friends and kindred. But the fears and present calamities of every one
made them to forget the dead with their requests.

The unfortunate Sosa oppressed with sorrow, considering so many mishaps
redoubled one upon another, and beholding his wife, who to comfort him showed
her self indefatigable both in mind and body, she carrying her children in her
turn, and encouraging all the rest, it most sensibly wounded his heart to see
a Lady so tenderly bred endure with such constancy the utmost of worldly
miseries.

At last after four months travel, they came to the river of the holy Ghost
ere they were aware, where a petty King commanded, who very courteously received
them, partly moved with the sight of so great a calamity, and partly also
desiring by this opportunity to make use of the Portingales favor, whereof he
stood in need for his affairs. He let them understand, as well he could, his
desire of their stay with him, in expectation of the commodity of re-embarking.
Otherwise, should they hazard themselves to proceed forward on their way in
this miserable equipage, they would be in danger to be robbed by a neighbor
Prince, one of the greatest thieves in the Country.

The more this Barbarian King showed himself courteous, so much the more Sosa
grew suspicious of his proceedings, and sinisterly judged, that such sweetness
in a man unknown was but the cover of an evil purpose. He thanked him for his
favor, and very earnestly besought him to accommodate them with Boats to pass
the River, which the other unwillingly did, seeing the peril whereinto they
hastened to fall. They went, there remaining not above six score of five of six
hundred men, and having been five days on the river, they landed at adventure,
rather constrained by night, then invited by the commodiousnesse of place.

The next day they descryed a squadron of about two hundred Aethiopians, who
came toward them, which made them prepare for defense: but troubled at their
arms, they showing themselves peaceable enough, the other by gesture and
signs discovered their infinite miseries. These people wholly practiced in
tricks of deceit, and who would make benefit of this occasion, let them with
much ado understand they might pass along to the Kings Palace, where they
should be very well entertained; which they attempted, but approaching to the
City in Arms, the King of these Barbarians timorous, and wicked, forbad them
entrance, and confined them to a little wood, where they remained certain
days, passing the time in a poor traffic of knives and trifles, which they
bar^ered for bread.

But this treacherous Prince, who meant to catch them in the snare, seeing they
had some commodities, sent word to Sosa he must excuse him that he denied
entrance into the City, and that two causes moved him to it. The first whereof
was the dearth of victual among his people, and the other the fear his
subjects had of the Portingales Arms, they never as yet being accustomed
thereto. But if they would deliver their weapons, they should be received into
his City, and his people consigned to the next towns to be well entertained.
This condition seemed somewhat harsh, but necessity disgested all. They agreed
with one consent to satisfy the King, Eleonora only excepted, who never would
consent to betray their defenses in a place where they had so much need of
them. Behold ^m disarmed and separated, some dispersed into several villages
here and there: Sosa with his wife, his children, and about twenty other
brought to the Regal City.

Scarcely was he arrived, but all his company were robbed, beaten with
bastonadoes, and used that very night like dogs; whilst himself had little
better entertainment: For this Prince of Savages took all his gold and jewels
from him, and drove him away as a Pyrate, leaving him only life and his poor
garments. As they went out of this calamity deploring their misery, behold
another troup of Cafres, armed with javelins, who set upon them, and let them
know they must leave their apparel, if they meant not to forsake their skins.
They were so confounded, they neither had strength nor courage to defend
themselves: Behold the cause why they yielded what was demanded, as sheep their
fleece. There was none but Eleonora, who preferring death before nakedness,
stood a long time disputing about a poor smock with these savages: but in the
end, Violence bereaved her of that, which Modesty sought by all means to keep.

The chaste and honorable Lady seeing her self naked in the sight of her
domestiques, who cast down their eyes at the indignity of such a spectacle,
presently buried her self in sand up to the middle, covering the rest of her
body with her dishevelled hair, and every moment having these words in her
mouth, Where is my Husband? Then turning toward the Pilot, and some of her
Officers there present, she said unto them with a settled countenance, My good
Friends, you have hitherto affoorded to my husband your Captain and to me your
Mistress all the duty may be expected from your fidelity: It is time you leave
this body, which has already paid to earth the moity of it is tribute. Go
think upon saving your lives, and pray for me and mine: But if any one of your
return to our native Country, he may recount to those who shall please to
remember the unfortunate Eleonora, to what my sins have reduced me. Having
spoken these words she stood immovable in a deep silence some space of time,
then lifting her eyes to heaven, added,

My God, behold the state wherein I came from my mothers womb; and the
condition whereunto I must quickly return on earth, one part of me being
already as among the dead. My God, I kiss and adore the rods of thy justice,
which so roughly, though justly have chasticed me. Take between thy arms the
soul of my honored husband, when he dies. Take the soul of my poor Children
which are by my sides. Take mine, now on my lips, and which I yield to thee,
as to my Lord and Father. There is no place far distant from thee, nor any
succor impossible to thy power.

As she spoke this, Sosa her husband came, having escaped out of the hands of
these thieves who had robbed him, and finding his wife in this state, he stood
by her not able to utter a word. The Lady likewise spoke only with her eyes,
which she sweetly fixed upon him to give comfort in the violence of these
insupportable afflictions. But he feeling his heart wholly drenched in
bitterness, hastened into a Wood of purpose to meet with some prey, at least to
feed his little children, which were as yet by their mothers side. Thence he
ere long returned, and found one of them already dead, to which with his own
hands he gave buryall, immediately after he went again into the Forest to
hunt as he had accustomed, finding no other comfort.

His heart was perpetually in Eleonora's, where he survived more then in his
own body, and coming to behold her once again for his last, he perceived she
was already deceased, with his other child, who dyed near her: there being
only left two poor maids, who bewailed their Lady, and made the Wilderness
resound with their sad complaints. He commanded them to retire a little aside,
then taking Eleonora by the hand, he kissed it, standing a long time with his
lips fixed unto it, and nothing to be heard but some broken sighs. That done
with the help of the maids, he buried her near his two children without any
complaint or utterance of one word. In a short space after he returned into the
thickest of the Forest, where it was thought he was devoured. So joining his
soul at least to hers, who had tied her heart to his in death, with examples
of her constancy.

Behold here a lively pattern of constancy in tribulation, in the persons of
Sosa and Eleonora, who even now we beheld resplendently glittering in gold and
jewels, guarded by a numerous attendance, and in an instant not only despoiled
of these worldly vanities, but even reduced to the greatest extremities
imaginable, to show that this world has nothing in it, which deserves to be an
object for our affection: But that we ought always to have our hearts and
minds irremoveably fixed upon the riches of Almighty God, who can when he
pleases raise the afflicted to the height of glory, and throw down the most
glorious to the bottom of affliction.

FINIS.

