A WORD FOR GOD. OR A Testimony on Truths behalf; from several Churches, and
diverse hundreds of Christians in Wales (and some few adjacent) against
Wickedness in HIGH PLACES. With a Letter to the Lord General CROMWELL.
Both, first presented to his own hands, and now published for further
Information.
Job 36.1. Suffer me a little, and I will show thee that I have yet to speak on
Gods behalf.

Esa. 44.8, 9. Fear ye not neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that
time, and have declared it? ye are then my witnesses. Is there a God besides
me? Yea there is no God, I know not any.

They that make a graven image are all of them vanity, and their delectable
things shall not profit, and they are their own witnesses, they see not, nor
know, that they may be ashamed.

To Oliver Cromwell Captain General of all the Forces in England, Scotland and
Ireland.
SIR,
FOr as much as you have caused great searching of heart, and divisions among
many of Gods People by a sudden, strange, and unexpected alteration of
Government, and other actions to the great astonishment of those who knew your
former public Resolutions and Declarations; considering also, how (contrary to
foregoing Acts and Engagements) you have taken upon you a Power by which you
are utterly disinabled (if there were in you a heart) to prosecute the good
things Covenanted and contended for, with so many great hazards, and the
effusion of so much precious blood: and by reason whereof you are become justly
suspected in your ends in time past, and actions for future to very many of
those, of whose affections and faithful services, you have enjoyed no small
share, in all the difficult passages and enterprises of the late War. These
things considered by us, (as we know they are by many Churches and Saints) and
there being a deep sense upon our Spirits of the Odium, under which the name of
Christ, his Cause, People and ways do lie (as it were) buried; and also of the
exceeding contempt which the wonderful and excellent operations of God are
brought into; even those eminent wonders, which the Nations have been
Spectators and witnesses of, and wherein your hands have been partly engaged;
We cannot after much serious consideration and seeking of the Lord, many of us,
both together and a part, but present to your hands the ensuing testimony, which
(however you may look thereon) is no more then necessity exacts from us, for the
clearing of our own Souls from guilt and discharging of our duty to God and
men. Therefore we earnestly wish you to peruse and weigh it, as in the sight of
God, with a calm and Christian like Spirit, and harden not your neck against
the truth as you will answer it to the great judge, before whose impartial
Tribunal you (as well as we shall be very shortly cited to give an account of the
things done in the body, whether good or evil. Where the true motives and ends
of all your Actions will be evident, where no apology will be accepted of,
your slighting and blaspheming of the Spirit of God, nor for the hard measure
you give his people, by reproaches, imprisonment and other oppressions; and
where Pride, Luxury, Lasciviousness, changing of Principles and forsaking the
good ways, justice and holiness will not have the smallest rag of pretense to
hide them from the eyes of the Judge: Which things (whatsoever you say for your
self) are (even at present) to be read in your Fore head, and have produced
most sad effects every where. Especially, first, The filling of the Saints
hearts and faces with inexpressable grief and shame: And secondly, The stopping
(at least) of the strong current of their Prayers, which was once for you; if
not the turning thereof directly against you. To these we might add (thirdly,
The hardening of wicked men, yea the refreshing and justifying of them in their
evil doings, and speaking against the Gospel, Name, and Spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And lastly, Gods signal withdrawing from you and your designs.
Oh then! that you wouldly down in the dust and acknowledge your iniquity, and
return unto the Lord by unfeigned repentance, doing your first works, and that
you would make have to do so, least Gods fury break forth like fire upon you,
and there be no quenching of it. This would rejoice us much, as being real
welwishers to your souls everlasting happiness, though we must declare with
equal pity and detestation against your designs and way.

A Word for GOD.
THe wise God that teaches the Fowls of Heaven to know their appointed times,
who directs his peoples work in truth, Ier. 8.7.
has we hope directed us (after a long time of silence and earnest seeking the
Lord) to express and and declare what we find in our Consciences touching the
transactions of this season; and though some may think (as we our selves have
been tempted to think) that this is a time, wherein the prudent should hold his
peace, it being such an evil time, that men are made offenders; yea, Traitors
for words: Ier. 20.9. Isa. 62.6.
Yet considering how the Lords remembrancers should not keep silence, and
fearing that if we should altogether hold our peace at such a time as this (as
Mordecay said to Hester) deliverance would come another way, and we could
expect no share in the enlargement of Gods people, or safety in the day of
trouble: Hest. 4.14.
withal finding how self would prompt us (like Issachar) to see that rest is
good, and outward prosperity pleasant, Genesis 49.15.
and how the same temptations (which we find and fear many of our dear
Brethren to be under) have set upon some of us, as to have men's persons in
admiration because of advantage, and by good words, fair speeches and
promises, to be deceived and drawn away in simplicity; Jude 16. Romans 16.8.2
Sam. 15.7. Gal. 2.13.1 Chro. 4.23.
especially, by the example of some eminent men (like Peter) in so much that
many Barnabasses are carried away with their dissimulation, and as well
Ministers as Military men willing to serve the King for his Work and Wages.
However seeing every man must give an account unto God for himself; we have
examined what particular duty was incumbent upon us, and how in faithfulness
toward God and meekness toward men, we should perform the same: Romans 14.12
Moreover considering how the Saints did formerly bear their Testimony (not
loving their lives unto the death) and by the blood of the Lamb, and their
testimony did overcome; Rev 12.7
and how God did heretofore stir up some of his People (both in England and
Scotland) to bear witness (to the truth and ways of God) against the ways
and wickednesses of men) as a fore-lorn hope; though they were in comparison
but a few; like Joshuah and Caleb, two of twelve; Numb. 14.6, 7, 8, 9. Rev.
7.3.2 Pet. 1.12.
or like the two VVitnesses, a small yet sufficient number. Observing also,
that there are present Truths, and every work being beautiful in its season
(as in the beginning of the late Wars) was the witnessing against the Book of
Common Prayer, Surplesse, Cross in Baptism, and other Ceremonies (being
superstitious things, imposed by the Bishops) and against Ship Money,
Monopolyze, etc. (civil things) imposed formerly by the King. All which were
afterward Declared, Protested and Covenanted against; which Protestation and
Covenant are fresh in the memories, and pressing upon the Consciences of some
of us, even unto this day: Besides the Engagement, and the several Acts of
Parliament, made against Monarchy or Kingly government; all which now seem to
be forgotten or neglected and those that speak or write in defense of such
things, as the Parliament, Army, and the Godly People in the Three Nations
approved, asserted and purchased at a dear rate, are now accounted fanatic
fools, disturbers of Civil States, and intermedlers in things that concern them
not; under which notion many suffer imprisonment, and other trials, as evil
doers from those men, who now build what they did once destroy; Aug. 1.1650.
page 7, 12.
and justify what they did once condemn. Witness their own VVritings,
particularly the Declaration of the Officers and Soldiers of the English Army
(whereof the Lord Cromwell was General) the words whereof are as follows.

We are persuaded in our Consciences that the late King and his Monarchy was
one of the ten horns of the Beast spoken of, Rev. 17. verse. 13, 14, 15. And
that we were called forth by the Lord to be instrument all to bring about that
which was our continual Prayers unto God, viz. The destruction of Antichrist,
and the deliverance of his Church and people; and upon this single account we
engaged, not knowing the deep Policies of worldly States men, and have ever
since hazarded our lives in the high places of the Field (where we have seen
many wonders of the Lord) against all the opposers of the work of Jesus Christ,
whom we have all along seen going with us, and making our way plain before us;
and having these things singly in our eye, namely the destruction of
Antichrist, the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, the deliverance of his
Church; and the establishment thereof, in the use of his Ordinances, in purity
according to his word, and the just, civil, Liberties of Englishmen.

These with many other expressions, both in the Declaration and several other
Papers of the Army, Saunders, Okey, and Allured.
and Letters of the General, cited both in the Declaration of the Members of
several Churches, and Petitions of the Three Colonels; besides several other
Papers which might be instanced in; which we leave to all unbyassed men to
consider; and compare with actions done by the same men since that time: but in
pursuance of our duty to God, our fellow members and Countrymen, as we are
Christians, having a right to the things of Christ; and as we are men, having a
Right to our native Privileges: We do Declare our real Apprehensions and
Consciences (which to the great grief of some of us) we have so long concealed,
waiting if God might by his Providence alter our minds.

First, That the sins and present condition of this Nation holds parallel in
many things with the old Israelites after the mighty wonders of God, showed
unto them in their great deliverance out of Egypt. Psalm. 136.13.
For instance: They and we have soon forgotten God our Savior, and the great
works which he did; we have not set our hearts aright, and our spirits have net
been steadfast with God, but have gone back, and dealt treacherously, and turned
aside like a deceiptfull bow; and not trusting to his salvation, Psalm. 78.8,
9.10. Psalm. 106.28, 29. Neb. 9, 3.7
have provoked the Lord to anger with our inventions; so that men have dominion
over bodies, and over our Cattle at their pleasure. And we are in great
distress, for this is a day of trouble, and of Blasphemy, for the children are
come to the Birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

Secondly, That blessed Cause, and those noble Principles propounded, and
prosecuted by the old Parliament, and the good People of this Nation (in the
maintaining of which God did miraculously appear) are now altogether laid aside
and lost; and another cause and interest (quite contrary as we conceive)
espoused and maintained; For then the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, the
extirpation of Popery, and popish Innovations, the Privileges of Parliament,
the Liberty of the Subjects, and an equal distinction of Justice were Declared
and fought for; and Tyranny, Oppression, Injustice, Arbitrarynesse; Destroying
the Privileges of Parliaments we Declared and Engaged against: But how far
some men have now receded from, and acted contrarily to the dishonor of God,
scandal of Religion, great grief of many faithful men, and the strengthening
of the wicked in their principles, and justifying their practices, we leave to
the consideration of all those that are sober and wise.

Thirdly, Moreover the unadvised and unwarrantable changing of the Government
and swearing thereunto, does (as we judge) put a necessity upon the chief
undertaker thereof to overthrow the very foundation of a Commonwealth: and to
maintain the things comprised in the said Instrument (whether right or wrong)
and to turn the very edge and dint of his Sword against the faces and bowels of
such as should or shall declare their consciences contrary thereunto.

Fourthly, As a consequence and fruit of this forbidden Tree, many of the
choice servants of God and faithful of the Nation (some Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Ministers of the Gospel, Soldiers, etc.) are imprisoned without knowing their
accusers or having so much liberty as was granted by the Heathens to the
Apostles, or the benefit of a fair and public trial, according to the
sundamentall laws of this Nation.

Fifthly, Under pretense of necessity still to continue the heavy burdens of
Taxes, Customs, Excise, etc. upon the Nation, without (yea contrary to) the
Consent of the People represented in Parliament, and contrary to their own
INSTRUMENT.

Sixthly, Notwithstanding all the fair pretenses and promises of Reformation;
yet what abominable and horrible Impieties, Injustice and Oppression are there
couched and covered under this new Form, from the Head to the Tail (as the
Prophet says) treading in the very foot steps of their Predecessors; Act.
27.30.
witness the receiving of the Honors, Profits, Customs, Benefits, Tenths, and
First Fruits coming in formerly to the Crown; the exalting of Sons, Servants,
Friends and Favorites (though some of them known to be wicked men) to the
highest places and greatest preferment, which the good Rulers of old, as
Gideon, Nehemiah and others did not do; because of the fear of the Lord, and
the Bondage that was heavy upon the people: Witnesle also the unreasonablenesse
of the Army to have so many Officers, which might easily be reduced to a lesser
number, and both Officers and Soldiers for many years to receive their pay
(even in a time of peace) when the poor Peasants or Tenants (who pay but ten
shilling rent per Annum) do pay out of their penury, to maintain them in their
pomp and luxury.

Seventhly, We cannot without grief mention the sad effects of the secret
design of Hispaniola, to be the loss of so many men's lives, the expense of so
much blood and treasure, and the endangering of this Commonwealth by Invasion;
as also thereby rendering us a scorn and snuff to the Nations round about.

Lastly, We do declare and publish to all from our very hearts and souls, that
those of us that had any hand in joining with the Parliament and Army
heretofore, had no other design against the late King and his Party, save as
they were enemies to our Lord Christ, his Kingdom and people, hinderers of his
work, and oppressors of the Nation, and that it never came into our hearts to
think or intend the pulling down of one person to set up another; or, one
unrighteous power to promote another: but we aimed as primarily at the glory of
God; so likewise at the general good of the Nation, and particular benefit and
just liberty of every man; and it greives us, that any just cause is given them
to stumble at Professors, or complain that they are deprived of their Freedom,
and several ways more oppressed, then in the days of the wickedest Kings; we
do also believe in our heart, that (though the worst things are not without
Gods permission and providence) yet that this Government is not of Gods
approbation, or taken up by his Counsel, or according to his Word; And
therefore We do utterly Disclaim having any hand or heart in it, and for the
Contrivers and undertakers thereof, we suspect and judge them to be great
transgressors therein; and so much the more, because they are Professors of
Religion, and Declarers, Engagers, and fighters against the very things they
now practice: And it is most evident to us, that they there by build again,
what before they did destroy; and in so doing they render themselves and the
Cause, Religion, Name and People of God abominable to Heathens, Papists and
profane Enemies, which is a grief to our Souls to consider. We do also detest
the practices of these men in imprisoning the Saints of God, for their
Consciences and Testimony, and just men; who stand for moral and just
principles, and the freedom of the Nation and People; and their breaking off
Parliaments to effect their own Design. We do also from our Souls Witness
against their new Modelling of Ministers (as Antichristian) and keeping up
Parishes and Tithes (as Popish Innovations.) And we Disclaim all adherence to,
owning of, or joining with these men in their ways. And do withdraw, and
desire all the Lords people to withdraw from these men, as those that are
guilty of the sins of the later days; 2 Timothy 3.5.
and that have left following the Lord, and that Gods people should avoid their
sin; least they partake with them in their plagues: Thus concluding our
Testimony, We Subscribe our Names hereunto.

William Jones. John Morgan. John Thomas. Evan Jones. John Phillips. Thomas
Jones. John Beevan. Thomas Lewis. Gabriel Lewis. Howell Thomas. Thomas
Phillips. William Howels. William Waters. Howell John. John Price. Meredith
Phillips. William Jenkins. Thomas Prosser. Jenkin Griffith. Howell Williams.
Thomas Williams. Richard Howell. Watkin Price. William Powell. Thomas Powell.
Lewis Williams. Lewis Reece. Reece John. Howell Reece. Richard John. Richard
Price. John David. David Morgan. Morgan William. Morgan Robert. John William.
Lewis David. Thomas Edwards. Reece John. Jenkin Jones. William Jones. Jenkin
Rosser. Rice Rosser. Nicholas Griffiths. Lewelin Beevan. James Powell. Mirick
Morgan. Evan Meredith. William Jones. Meredith Rees. William Edward. Richard
Roberts. Lewis David. Morgan John. Richard Thomas. Meredith William. Witkin
Rice. William VVatkin. Reece David. VVatkin David. David William. William
Phillips. John Williams. Henry Thomas. John Jones. John Farmer. Henry
Meredith. Trehern Morgan. Richard David. Evan John. Edward Evan. Thomas Evan.
David Evan. Howell Waters. Jenkin Waters. John Howell. Phillip David Rice
Richard Edward Matthews. Watkin Richard Thomas Evan. Lewelin Jenkin. Jenkin
William Thomas William Evan Lew lin John Lewis William Waters Morgan David
John David David Walter Reece Jones Phillip Jones Jervice Jones Edward Jenkins
Watkin Jenkins David Thomas Rice Jones Evan John David William Henry Williams
John Bedward Thomas Tunman Robert Tunman Roger Griffi^h. Thomas Morgan William
Price David Davies David Price Richard Morris John Evans David Powell Walter
Lewis Richard Meredith William Morris James Haydock William Bostock Phillip
Russell Edward Williams James Morgan David Rutherch William Bays Reece Jones
Richard James William Hopkins Lewis Jones William Watkins Richard Mils John
Thomas John Smith William Price Vavosor Powell John Williams John Hammer Moris
Griffith Edward Owens Richard Griffith Walter Davies Thomas Gwin Thomas Vaughan
John Powell Rees Havard Roger Thomas Thomas Lewis John Watkin Walter Lewis
William Thomas William Lewis Richard Vaughan David Jones Rice Thomas Henry
Thomas John Williams Thomas Powell John David John Rowbuck Evan Watkin Charles
Lloyd Hugh Thomas Rosser Watkin Thomas Griffith Lewis Price Morgan Lloyd
William Thomas Lewis James John Thomas Robert Thomas Howell Watkin Thomas Priee
Roger Williams John Baddam John Powell David Roberts John Pugh Thomas Parry
Howell Williams Walter Price William Bevan Lewis Prytherch David William
Lewclin ap John Ienkin Griffith Peter Chidlowe Arthur Chidlow William Jones
Owen Humphrey Evan Thomas Samuel Brees John Lewis William Beatsley Thomas
Morgans John Symonds William Beddoes Morris Williams James Williams William
Matthews Lewis Price Evan Ellis Richard Tudge William Fernell Edward Gretholder
John Tomkins Thomas Tudge Hugh Evans Owen Lewis Owen Jones Edward Brees Ralph
Robothom William Lewis John Powell David Kadwalader Rowland Tudge David Evan
John Tibbots Samuel Williams Richard Bromley Richard Baxter John Crowther
Francis Mason John Evans David Phillips William Evans Thomas Ellis Thomas
Crowther Thomas Fernelb Richard Irish Henry Jones William Phipps William
Becket Daniel Brees Francis Hanckock Edward Irish Oliver David William
Dabellis Lewis Pugh Richard Rogers Owen Jones Edmund Rosser John Meredith
William Thomas Llewelin Lewis John Rowland Lewis Williams William Lewis
Edward Williams Howell Rees Kowland Morgan Phillip Gyles James Watkins John
James Lewis Jones Michael Watkins Edmund Morgan Rosser Thomas John Rosser
Thomas John James John Elias Thomas John Howell William John Rosser Watkin
Daniel John Thomas ap John Gilbert Morris Matthew Prichard Edward Jones Owen
Edward David Thomas John Pugh Howell Thomas Reece ap David John Benan Thomas
Lloyd Kenrick Jones James Quarrel Enward Williams Edward Moore John Roberts
John Brown Alexander Powell Hugh Powell John Nicholas Phillip Williams Robert
Sanctley John James Edward Roberts Walter Thimbleton. John Fowler Hugh Prichard
Henry Williams William Win Richard Saltonstall Rice Jones Richard Williams
Phillip Rogers Riohard Roberts Thomas ap Thomas Ellice ap Roger David ap Edward
David Lloyd Thomas Edwards Francis Lith James Park John Meredith John Owens
William Iennings George Ienkins William Heatley John Lewis David Jones Ieffrey
Parry John Hughes John Evans Richard Jones William Rider John Ratlieffe William
Jones Ralph Hopley Hugh Price Griffith Jones Brian Sixsmith Mathaniel Edwards
John Meredith
A POSTSCRIPE.
Reader,
THis paper had sooner come into thy hands, if the Subscribers hereof (who were
willing to do nothing rashly) had not waited for further Council and direction
from God herein then they had at their first intention of the publishing
hereof, and withal it was deferred for a time, Rev. 2.21.
hoping that God might some other way convince the Person chiefly concerned in
it; and seeing God gave him time to repent, and yet he repented not, we have
published this our Testimony. To which you might have had many more Subscribers
(who were willing to own this Paper) if convenience and Providence had made way
for it to come into their view: There has been great endeavors to stifle it
in the Birth; to that end, some of the Subscribers were threatened with
imprisonment, and Orders were issued out to imprison some (whereof one was
secured) namely Mr. Vavasor Powell, who was taken by a company of Soldiers,
from a day of Fasting and Prayer at Aberbechan in Mountgomory shire, where many
Saints were gathered together, which caused much sadness, yea and much heart
breakings to them all; and he remained for some time a prisoner upon that
account.

FINIS.

