THE SPEECH SPOKEN By Sir WILLIAM WILD Knight and Baronet, One of His
MAJESTY'S Sergeants at Law, (And Recorder of the City of LONDON.) TO His Most
Sacred MAJESTY CHARLES THE SECOND: In His Passage from the TOVVER to
WHITE HALL. April 22. 1661.

Being the Day before His CORONATION.

April 12 LONDON, Printed by William Godbid for Edward Powell.

Most gracious Sovereign,
TO declare the Happiness of Your People in the Enjoyment of this glorious
Day, is a Subject for an Angel, not a Man.

It is not long since, Most Mighty Prince, But yet 'twas long Sir, that for
want of Your Royal Presence, Your People were miserably entangled in, and
infested with, many Sad and Destructive Revolutions; such, that thereby so
Violent a Sea of Confusion and Disorder, was broke in upon them, that their
Lives, Liberties, Estates, and that which is most dear to all Good Men, their
very Religion, (the best Reformed throughout the World) were ready to have been
swallowed up.

But no sooner did Your Glorious Person appear amongst them, but those Furious
Waters did abate, and that Black Cloud of Misery, and Calamity from thence
exhaled, and ready to fall upon them, was dispersed and gone, and they, in a
full Careere to their Pristine Glory and Happiness.

And now by this time, Most Puissant King, I make no Question but all Your
People, I am sure Your Loyal Ones, and I have Charity enough, to hope they will
all prove such, are fully satisfied, that because it was in England, as
sometimes 'twas in Israel, that they had no King amongst them, therefore their
latter days were so Calamitous; Quod tot tantaque mala conciliarat non
habuisse Regem.

But to the Everlasting Praise of our good God, we have now not only a King
amongst us, but such a King which is a Blessing to His People, not of a
Mushroom Descent, but the Son of Nobles, of a most Royal Stem, not entitled
to His Kingdoms by Perjury, and Villainy, but by an Ancient and Undoubted
Right, A KING of whom it may be truly said, that had all that Clemency,
Goodness, and Sweetness of Temper proper to a Prince, and advantageous to a
People, been totally lost, they are all reunited, and concentred in His Royal
Person.

And therefore; as I said at first, of our Happiness, give me leave Most
Illustrious Prince, to say also of our Joys, their Declaration is an Angelical
Employment, Matter in truth, rather of Admiration, than for Expression. Exigua
gaudia loquuntur ingentia stupent: Only let me say this, and I hope I may say
it with a Pious Allusion,

This is the Day which the Lord has made, we will Rejoice and be Glad in it.

And that Our Joys may not be short lived, Your Happiness and Our Joys being
like Hypocrates his Twins, must live, and Dye together.

May Your Days be many, Your Reign ever peaceful and prosperous, and Your
posterity Numerous; May Your Feet be always upon the Neck of Your Enemies; Let
them be ever blessed which shall bless you, and Cursed be they which shall
Curse You; and let all your people say Amen.

I know well Most Mighty King, that neither the Time nor the Place, will admit
of any long Discourse; and that I now speak not only to a Solon but a Solomon;
One that is no Friend to many words, as well knowing, in multiloquio non deest
Peccatum; And therefore be pleased to give your Servant leave in a Word to
deliver his Errand, which is, in the Name of this Ancient and renowned City,
most Cordially to Congratulate your Gracious Accession hither this Day, upon
this solemn and glorious Occasion, and as a pure signal of that true
Allegiance, and duty, which they owe to your Sacred Majesty, humbly to present
unto your Royal Hands this Purse of Gold; which let me assure You comes from
Free Hearts, full of Loyalty and Fidelity, the best of Presents to a Gracious
King; and therefore I am confident, that as they offer it cheerfully, your
Majesty will vouchsafe to accept it Graciously. I have done Sir, and have no
more to say but this,

God Save the KING.
FINIS.

