A LETTER FROM The Marquess of Worcester TO The Committee of Parliament
sitting in the County of MONMOUTH, Concerning His Sons landing with Irish
Forces: AND The Committees Answer thereunto.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and Answer be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
June 9, 1646.

To the Governor of Chepstow, and the rest of the Committee for the Parliament
for the County of Monmouth.
HAving notice that you are not ignorant of my Sons being landed with the Irish
Forces, I am so much a father and tenderer of the whole Countries Ruin and
Destruction, that if their coming hither be upon the return of yours occasioned
to be hastened, you, and not I, must be the occasion of the same, who the whole
Country will have just cause to curse. I am not able to subsist without my
Rents and Living, which you have taken all from me; if you please to give me
undelayed Reparations therein, I shall be glad to have occasion to live a quiet
Neighbor amongst you: if otherwise, it shall be evident to the whole world,
that you force me to what mine own nature has no liking of, and yet no other
then the Word of God and the Law of Nature does warrant and allow. Thus,
expecting your Answer by this Messenger, I rest

As you give occasion, H: Worcester.
Raglan, May 29. 1646.
The Committees Answer.
We received your Lordships Letter by a Drum: your Sons landing with Irish,
and your other Sons News of the Kings being in the head of a great Army, are
pretty Iesuitical inventions to uphold your Soldiers spirits, but cannot
discourage us in prosecution of our just cause: We see not how the bringing
over such bloody Irish Rebels, agrees with what your Lordship would be
esteemed, a Father of your Country; we believe so unnatural a one can hardly be
paralleld, and in charity to your Lordship shall forbear imprecations of curses
on the Author of our miseries, least we thereby add a greater weight to your
score; you know whom to blame for want of Rent; your fathership of the
Countries Ruin, has been the cause of depriving both your self and us from
enjoying our own; and had your Lordships will and good nature accepted what was
about six months ago respectfully offered, this poor County had not now so
groaned under the Burden of War: For your Lordships undelayed Reparation, we
must try your patience by a little further consideration; your vvarrant from
the Word of God or Law of Nature for your actions we find not, unless Raglan
be our Antipodes, where the Rule is opposition to Britains true Bible and
Nature; we shall leave your Lordship to your own good Inclinations, and in
requital of News, and for your Lordships better information, have sent you His
Majesty's and the Scots Declarations, not desiring further to trouble you, but
hope we may have occasion to subscribe our selves

Your Lordships Friends and Servants, Roger Williams, Thomas Hughs, Henry
Herbert, William Herbert, Rice Williams, Chr: Katchmey, William Blethyn, Edward
Morgan.


FINIS.

