THE COVENANTS Plea for INFANTS: OR, The Covenant of FREE GRACE, pleading the
Divine Right of Christian Infants unto the Seal of holy Baptism.

Against the Rusticke Sophistry, and wicked Cavillations of Sacrilegious
Anabaptists:

Being the Sum of certain Sermons had in the Parish Church of Cranham, near
the City of Gloucester, in Gloucester- shire, with the exceptions of certain
Anabaptists against the foresaid Sermons, and the Authors answers thereunto.

Very seasonable for weak consciences in these unsettled times of Schism and
Apostacy.

By THOMAS WYNELL Minister of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall for the Author. 1642.

TO MY MOST INDVLGENT mother the Famous UNIVERSITY of OXFORD, all flourishing
increase of Divine Graces, and Commendable Literature be wished and multiplied.
Men, Fathers, and Brethren,
I Have with a mournful eye, and a sad heart beheld the distractions of these
times, and seen the devil, that Mille-artifex, taking the opportunity (as
always he does) to erect his throne upon our woeful miseries. They say Rome
must pack out of England, so it is credibly reported: and now the Envious-one
labors to bring-in Amsterdam. The KINGS power, in causes Ecclesiastical, must
be taken from the Pope, and reason good: and now the devil labors strongly to
lay it upon the people; so that (if the devil can do it) Caesar must always
behold his Glory in Captivity. Ceremonies must down, and let them fall, if
they and the Gospel may not stand together; but let not American novelties
ponere obicem, to the Covenant of free Grace. Stand fast (ye Worthies) and
acquit your selves like men; View over this Treatise (I beseech you) and (if it
may not be to your disparagement) vouchsafe it your Patronage. Nay more (if you
think it may any way further the Protestant cause) join with me (I pray) in
presenting it to the Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT. Nothing is herein (for
ought I know) dissonant to the Orthodox faith. It is the first fruits of my
labors that ever saw light, and I Dedicate it to my dear Mother, knowing that
hereby I shall have an affectionate construction put upon all mine assertions.
I pray let it not be thought ambition in me, that I sue unto you for Patronage,
but accept all in favor, as I present all in love: What is amiss (I pray)
correct, and what is right (I pray) allow. And thus (not to retard your more
weighty employments) I commit you all to the good dispose of Isreal's Keeper
(who can do for you beyond what I can ask or think) and so I rest

Your most obedient son THOMAS WYNELL.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER Grace, Mercy, Peace, Strength, Stability, and
Settlednesse, with a blessed increase of all heavenly gifts from the Sanctuary
by Gods Ordinances of Grace, to the perfect edification of the Soul, etc.
Christian READER,
HE that puts himself in Print in matters of Controversy, does not only bid
battle to the opposite party, but also expose himself to the critical
censure of all beholders, and standers by. And by how much any Writer seeks
the applause of men in publishing his works, by so much the Righteous God
makes him a looser. And that work (mostly) is most prosperous, wherein least
of fame, and most of conscience is sought and aimed at. This poor Treatise of
mine, though mean for phrase, style, and artifice, yet needful in these times
of schism, and heresy for the subject matter thereof, as that which may
occasion my faithful brethren (more able) to crush the insolences of a
dangerous faction, the daughter of the Separation, and the Mother of
Libertinisme. As for my call to this employment, it is this, viz.

There were nere unto my dwelling a company of the Separation, who under took
to erect a Church by entering into a Covenant, and these carried on their
resolutions hand-smooth, until they were grown into a great faction. And (as
it is the property of that Schism to speak at random) they began to let fly
against the Church assemblies of England, as false, Antichristian, and out of
Gods way.

VVhereupon I began to enquire into the nature of their Covenant, and told
them, that if it were a Covenant of first entrance into the true visible Church
of Christ, then of necessity the parties so entering must have the seal of
first entrance imprinted upon them, which (under the Gospel) is Baptism. For
if the Ministry which they leave be false in the very constitution thereof,
then the Sacraments by them administered, must needs be nullities; and so now
they having a lawful ministry constituted and set in Christ's way, they must
begin all anew, Baptism and all. Thus (by way of arguing) I spoke unto diverse
of them, which did so puzzle them, that not long after some of them fell upon
this practice of sealing their covenant by Baptism, renouncing their Baptism
in their infancy, as a nullity and an Idol. and being demanded by the
Magistrates of the City of Gloucester (before whom they were convented) who it
was that advised them unto this practice, they nominated me to be the first
that put them upon it: whereas I was so far from it, that I held that the
dangerous Covenant of the Separation would necessarily lead unto this. And
moreover one Walter Coals of Painsewicke a Tailor (a man of good behavior a
long time, and well esteemed by the godly and best Christians) This man (I say)
fell off first to the Separation, (where he had his bane.) And God having given
him another child, he refused to have it baptized until it could answer for it
self. This matter fell into debate in Mr Wels his Congregation at Whaddon,
Pastor to the Separation there, where the said Coals was a member. Now Mr Wels
and the Church Officers of his division (foreseeing the ill consequence of this
business) had resolved to determine against the said Walter: but this being
perceived by the said Coals, he desired to go out of the company. And happy
had it been for him, if he had returned to his former godly, and profitable
courses of doing good. But he goes further, and turns plain Anabaptist. And
so making a journey to London he brings down one Thomas Lamb a chandler (as
it is reported) and one Clem: Writer a Factor in Blackwell-hall London (both
Anabaptists) into this Country. And I being in London, these two travellors
(by Walter Coals his directions) came on the Lord's Day to Cranham (where I did
and do serve in the work of the Ministry) and there the said Lamb (being in
a grey-suit) offers to preach in public, but being disappointed by Gods good
providence of his wicked purpose, he retires to a private house in Cranham
abovesaid, and by Preaching there he subverted many And shortly after in an
extreme cold, and frosty time, in the night season, diverse men and women were
rebaptized in the great river of Severne in the City of Gloucester. And so at
length returning from London, I found the face of things much altered, and many
strangely leaning to the heresy of the Anabaptists. And they put on the
business with such peremptory boldness, as if all the world had been unable
to gainsay their practice, or refute their doctrine. VVhereupon to clear my
self, and to satisfy others, I undertook the controversy at Cranham, where
they had left their poison. And when I undertook it, the Anabaptists from
Gloucester, and Painswicke came to hear me, and set upon me in the open face
of the Congregation, as soon as I came down out of the Pulpit. I desired them
to forbear public tumults, and to send in their exceptions against what I
had laid down for Poedobaptisme. And at first they sent me in a paper with no
hand to it: but this I rejected, and delivered back to them again, because I
knew no one of them would stand to it, when once the folly thereof was
declared. At length I received about two sheets of paper, and yet (though it
came in the names of them all) there was but one hand unto the same, and this
Champion does so stoutly manage the matter, that surely if his cause were
suitable to his stomach, neither men nor Angels could stand before him. It is
high time then for us to bestirre our selves, when condemned heresies shall
find such bold abettours, and that in the Land of light and truth. The Lord put
it into the heats of our Parliament to settle a Government among us with speed,
that out-facing impudency may be called to an account, that truth and peace
may dwell in our Land. And now (Gentle Reader) peruse the ensuing tractate,
wherein if thou find any benefit, give God the glory, and afford me thy help
at the Throne of Grace. And so I have done, and do thou begin.

Thine in the Truth T.W.

ERRATA.
Page 6. line 1. for Cor. read King. p. 8.l.7. for up; r. upon. p. 10. l. 21.
r. Gods Covenant of Grace. p. 11. l. ult. add, of Gods command, but because.
p. 16. l. 31. for, their God, r. the God. p. 36. l. 22. for under, r. of. p.
42. l. 16. dele not. p. 81. l. 4. let Petitio principii, be put in the Margin.
Ib. for, disputationibus, r. disputations. Ib. l. 20 for well by, r. well as.
p. 107. l. 14. for, profession in the, r. profession of faith in the. p. 110.
l. 16. for, as whatsoever, r. as if whatsoever. p. 111. l. 20. dele or. p. 114.
l. 17. dele saved and. p. 115. l. 22. for, certify, r. rectisie. p. 116. for,
to, r. of, p. 119. l. 6. ^or, hearts. 6.1. heart, p. 122. l. 28. for, not, r.
not the.

THE COVENANTS Plea for INFANTS.
MATTHEW. 28.18, 19, 20. All power is given unto Me in Heaven and in earth. Go
ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Teaching them to observe all whatsoever I have commanded you. And lo I am
with you always, even to the end of the world. AMEN.


THE monstrous brood of Anabaptists in former ages, and now in these our days,
have made, and do make this portion of Scripture their maine Fort, and
strongest Barricado to beat back poor, helpless, and harmless infants from
being consecrated into Gods peculiar by baptism, though born of Christian
parents. Now against these unjust oppressors, and sacrilegious thieves I am
now come into the field, to maintain the christian birthright of infants,
whose parents are sealed unto God, and of His Family: And to set them into
their own border, possession, and inheritance.

And because some of Satan's troopers of late in mine absence have made an
in-rode into this Parish, and by perverting of this Scripture have carried away
some, and staggered many others, therefore I have chosen to insist upon this
Text, to let all men see how it makes nothing at all for the establishing of
their wicked purpose.

This whole Chapter contains the History of our Saviors resurrection, and a
Rehearsal of what He did on earth between the time of His triumphant
resurrection, and His glorious Ascension.

The former we omit for brevities sake. In the latter, the Spirit of God
relates how Christ (being risen from the dead, and by virtue of His
resurrection possessed of all power and authority over all things and persons,
in heaven and in earth) gave a command, and commission unto his Apostles to go
out among the Pagan-Gentiles, and plant the Gospel among them, and not confine
themselves any longer within the precincts of Judea. And why? Because all power
is given unto Christ in heaven and in earth, which before was not given unto
him. This is our Saviors preface, and it is a material passage, and the
ground of our Saviors sending of His Apostles to plant the Gospel among the
Pagan-Gentiles. Now all power and authority concerning the Church of God was
conferred on Him for ministering the kingdom of heaven among Jews, and
Gentiles. And hence observe this point for your instruction.

Viz. That all power and authority concerning the Church of God was given unto
Christ, and conferred on Him by virtue of His meritorious death, and triumphant
resurrection from the dead. Ephesians. 1.19, 23. Ps. 2.6, 9. compared with Acts
13.33. Heb. 2.9, 10. Luke 24.46, 47.





1. He had it in the mind and decree of His Father; for we were chosen in Him,
and He was still the head of His, the Church. 2. He had it vertually in His
sufficiency to vanquish enemies, and to deliver His chosen; for He was a lamb
slain from the beginning. 3. Actually; and by way of execution among Jews and
Gentiles, without difference. He had it not, until the time of His glorious
resurrection. Acts 2.32, 36. For then was He declared to be the son of God,
and the Jews Messiat. Romans 1.4.
Now this point may be put to sundry good uses.

Acts 2.36, 37.

Psalm. 2.1, 8.



viz. 1. Of Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17. 2. Of image, Gal. 4.19. 3. Of carriage. Gal.
2.20. Now if we are thus one with Christ, Christ will be Alsufficient unto us
against every evil, and for all good things of soul or body, in life and
death that we shall stand in need of.

substantial, and lasting joy. Psalm. 118.22, 23, 24. Ps. 149.2.

And let this suffice for the Preface. We are now to treat of Christ's glorious
Commission unto His Legates and Apostles. Wherein before we come unto the
particular scanning of the whole text, we will premise two things in General,
which will appositely reach the present controversy between us, and the
Anabaptists.

1. The first General is this, viz. That the Apostles, and first planters of
the Gospel must no longer keep within the precincts, and borders of Judea, but
go out among the Pagan-Gentiles, and instruct them in the Mystery of the
Gospel, and so seal them also into Gods peculiar by baptism.

2. The second General is this, viz. That the Apostles had a Commission from
Christ to go unto all Nations without limitaion, and were not to take up their
settled residence in any one Nation, but to travel from Country to Country,
their Commission was so large and ample. They were for Spain, they were for
Rome, for Italy, for Corinth, for Asia, for Macedonia, for Philippi, etc. And
in this they had a peculiar Commission, which was to plant foundations where
Christ was not named, to bear the Name of Christ before jews and Gentiles, to
be the immediate penmen of the Holy Ghost, to deliver unto them the immediate
will of God concerning faith and worship, and to confirm their doctrine by
miracles, as part of their extraordinary Commission. Now let the Anabaptists
show us any such Commission among all the mopping apes of their Apostolical
instructers, by whose miraculous endowments, they hope to see all the world
brought to the obedience of their faith.

Now this second observation we shall not speak of here in this treatise; for
such was the impetuous madness of the Anabaptists at their first entrance into
their new way, (for young beginners are most fiery) that I thought it prudence,
to forbear the further prosecuting of this text: for their objections would
have been so many, that in answering of them, I should have spent whole
sermons, and so have deprived mine auditory of more necessary instructions; and
therefore I resolved to deal with them by writing, and to publish my
Sermon-notes (or at least the sum of them) upon this first General; this
being the very hinge, upon which the controversy betwixt us, and the
Anabaptists is turned.

The first General point then is this, viz. That the Apostles, and first
planters of the Gospel, were no longer to keep within the borders, and
precincts of Judea, but to go out among the Pagan-Gentiles, and instruct them
in the mystery of the Gospel, and being so instructed to seal them into Gods
peculiar by Baptism.

Now as this point stands clearly upon the text, so other Scriptures suffrage
with it, as Mark. 16.14, 18. Act. 10.34, 38. Act. 13.47, 48. And this primitive
administration of the Gospel, unto the Pagan. Gentiles is called a bearing of
Christ's name before them. Act. 9.15. And an opening of a door of faith unto
the Gentiles. Act. 14.27. 1 Cor. 16.9. And here faith must be the door of
admittance.

But to make brief way to the clearing of the truth, against the obstreperous
clamours, and darkening cavillations of the Anabaptists, or opposers of
paedo-baptisme, we are to consider, what the state of the Gentiles was in point
of religion, before the Gospel was preached among them by the Apostles, and
first planters of Christ's Kingdom, and then what their estate is now (where
the Gospel is planted and they baptized) in point of Religion.

The state of the Pagan-Gentiles in point of religion, before the Gospel was
planted among them, may be presented unto you in two Generals. viz.

1. They were without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers
from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.
Ephesians. 2.12. 2. They had their visible and Country-Idols, and they were carried
away to dumb Idols, even as they were led. 1 Cor. 12. 2. Romans 1.18, 32. Psalm.
115.2, 8. Thus the Sidonians had their Astaroth, the Moabites their Chemosh,
the children of Ammon their Milchom. 1. Cor. 11.33. The Philistines their
Dagon. 1 Samuel 5.1, 2. The Ephesians their Diana. Act. 19. And the Athenians
their Hotch potch.
This was their state in point of religion. And therefore is there any reason,
that these should be baptized, before they were turned from their Idols, and
called to faith in Christ, and repentance toward God? Surely none. And
therefore Christ would that such should be first made Disciples, before they
should be baptized into the name of the sacred Trinity. And the Apostles did
so. For its expressly said, that many of the Corinthians hearing, believed,
and were baptized. And there is good reason for this; for

First, its fit that mere aliens, and professed Idolaters, (Gods professed
enemies) should manifest their faith and repentance, before they should be
sealed into Gods peculiar by baptism.

Secondly, none of their kindred were ever before in the state of Christianity,
from whence they might claim right unto Gods seal of Admittance. But now a
Church was to be raised of persons grown up to years, and so confession of
faith must be the ground of their baptism, their parents being not baptized
before, and in the state of Christianity.



1. First, it cannot be said that such Gentiles are aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, without Christ, strangers from the Covenants of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. 2. It cannot be said
that such Gentiles have their Countrey-Idols, by which they are carried away,
seeing they are turned from them. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. 3. It must needs be
acknowledged that such Gentiles are not far off, but in Jesus Christ made
nigh by the blood of Christ. Ephesians. 2.13. having access unto the Father
through Christ by the Spirit, verse 18. 4. It must needs be acknowledged, that
such Gentiles are no more strangers, and forreiners, but fellow-citizens with
the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone.
Ephesians. 2.19, 20. 5. It must needs be acknowledged, that such Gentiles are all
baptized into Christ's body. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Gal. 3.27, 28, 29. Now bring me any
such Gentiles as these, among the Pagan-Gentiles, before the Gospel came among
them, and was embraced by them. And therefore these things being considered,
who but a stupid dolt, and perverse wrangler, can hence conclude, that infants
of Christian parents should be debarred from the Sacrament of Baptism in
their infancy. And the reason is because their parents are not now found in the
state of heathenish Paganism, (as were those among whom Christ sent His
Apostles before they received Christ and His Gospel) but now they stand in
Grace, and Covenant with God, as His peculiar people, holy, and beloved.
Now, albeit it is a truth, that all children of baptized parents are
baptizable, and to be baptized, yet to prevent impertinencies, and all
collateral cavillations, I propound the question concerning paedo-baptisme in
these terms, viz.

Whether children of holiest parents in purest Churches are to be baptized in
their infancy?

The point between us and the complete Anabaptists is simply concerning
paedo-baptisme. If my controversy lay with the Semi-Anabaptists, I would lay my
proposition in other terms, but the complete Anabaptist does hold, that no
child in infancy is baptizable, let his parents be never so holy, and let the
administration be never so pure.

Now we maintain the affirmative of this question against the Anabaptists upon
these grounds; viz.

Cor. 7.14. cum Romans 11.16. And a Spiritu Sancto recepto ad Baptismi
administrationem is an invincible argument with St. Peter. Acts 10.47.

Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Ghost, as well as we?

Ob. I but, say our busy-Anabaptists, there was a visible manifestation of the
holy Ghost in a miraculous manner, up-those that Peter speaks of there; but
there is no manifestation of the Holy Ghost, upon Infants of Christian parents
in their infancy, more then upon Infants of Turks and Pagans.

Sol. I answer, that there was a manifestation of the Holy Ghost, as well to
the eye of sense, as to the eye of faith, but here to the eye of faith only.
That was miraculous and extra ordinary; this oraculous and ordinary. And a
standing Oracle is as much to be credited; as a Miracle, if not more; For
miracles are but secondary confirmations of divine faith, but Gods written
Oracles are primary. Manifestations of holiness may be fallacious, but Gods
Oracles are certain, and can never deceive. And the singer of God has written
holiness upon Infants of Christians, and Paul (Gods Ambassador) has
proclaimed it unto us. A writing, and a proclamation, that the heilish spite,
and virulent tongues of clamouring Anabaptists, shall never be able to
obliterate or disanull by their bastard exposition of this sacred Oracle;
forcing it to speak the strange language of a seduced Anabaptist, and not the
heavenly language of the sacred Scriptures, a practice plainly diabolical and
hellish. But put case (oh monster) that God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost should come unto thee, and say, these are holy children. Do
thou think Gods meaning were, that they are no bastards, but lawfully begotten?
Surely, if that should be Gods meaning* He should not speak according to the
usual language of his own written word. For tell me, where God terms
children holy, for their being mere legitimates? Can thou bring one text of
Scripture, where children are said to be holy, unless it be in relation unto
the holy Covenant under which they were borne? And if God should say that such
children are holy, because of the holy Covenant, under which they were borne,
(as children are said to be holy for that only reason in the Scripture.) Did
not God in this say unto thee, I have set these children apart unto my self?
Psalm. 4.3. Did not God in so saying say unto thee, set them a part unto Me as
My Portion. And how would thou set them apart unto God, but by putting Gods
seal upon them? Well, we need not suppose Gods speaking thus unto thee, for
God does so speak unto thee, and unto all men in this sacred Oracle. And on
children of Christian parents it must stand, as an unchangeable Oracle, that
they are holy.

Quest. But (say Anabaptists) that children of Christians are holy, the text is
expressly clear; but what holiness does the Apostle mean?

Sol. I answer, that doubtless the Apostle means such holiness as the
Prophets in the old Testament do mean, when they call the children of Gods
Vovenant People the holy seed. Not holiness by legitimation, as Bellarmine the
Jesuit, and his disciples the Anabaptists dream, but such holiness as has
the promise of the kingdom of heaven. Mark. 10.13, 16. Matthew. 19.13, 14, 15.
Luke 18.15, 16, 17.

Ob. I, but say Anabaptists, these were not children in propriety of speech,
but young beginners in Christianity, and such as were little in their own eyes,
as Matthew. 18.1, 6.

Sol. The stories are not the same; For it is said in Mat. 18. that Christ
called a little child, and set him in the midst of His disciples to teach
them humility, and in the other places, that we have cited ( Mark. 10. Matthew.
19. Luke 18.) that they brought children unto Christ that He should bless them
And to say that the words are not taken in propriety of speech in these texts,
is just like their other stuff: For

1. In the places that we have quoted its said, that the children were brought
unto Christ, not led and presented only, (...), apportabant, borne to Christ,
as we bear a burden. 2. They were such (...) as. St. Luke terms (...),
children newly borne. 3. The disciples blamed those that brought them. And
would they blame men for bringing young beginners in in Christianity, weak
Christians, and such as were little in their own eyes unto Christ? 4. They
very gesture of Christ proves them to be children in propriety of speech. For
it is said that Christ took them up in his arms. And thus you see how these
shuffling juglers will catch at any thing, and so can they allege Scripture,
they care not how little it is to purpose; so they may puzzle others, and avoid
the evidence of truth against themselves.
Quaest. But put case (say they) we grant the places to be meant of Children in
propriety of speech, how can you hence conclude, that they ought to be baptized?

Sol. Very well; for if the Kingdom of God, which is the proper inheritance of
Saints, does belong unto them, then the seal and cognizance thereof is theirs
in all equity. But the end wherefore we alleged these Scriptures, is to prove
that the holiness attributed unto children by Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. is the
holiness of Gods Kingdom, or the holiness of Gods grace, under which these
children were borne, as the children of the Covenant by birth, because borne of
a parent in covenant. And infants are no where in Scripture phrased holy, but
in relation to the holy Covenant, under which they were borne. And so from the
covenant their title stands good to the initiall seal thereof, which under the
Gospel is Baptism.

Quaest. If the holiness of the Covenant gives Infants right unto Baptism,
why then do you not administer the Lords supper unto them also.

Answ. Because the Lords Supper belongs only unto such as can spiritually
examine themselves, and discern the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29.

Now the sum of all is this, viz. Children of Christian parents are holy (by
virtue of Gods holy Covenant) in their infancy, and therefore to be Baptized
in their infancy.

Or thus more largely, viz.

Whenever persons appear unto the Church (under the Gospel) to be holy, by
virtue of Gods holy Covenant, then the Church is to baptize such persons. But
Infants of Christians, even in their infancy are persons that appear unto the
Church (under the Gospel) to be holy, by virtue of Gods holy Covenant. Ergo,
The Church under the Gospel is to Baptize infants of Christians in their
infancy.
Quaest. But how do Infants of Christians appear unto the Church under the
Gospel to be holy; prove that (say they) and we have done.

Sol. I answer, that persons may appear to be holy unto the Church (under the
Gospel) two ways, viz.

1. Sensitively, by their words and pious actions, and and this is the only way
that the Anabaptists do know, for they are altogether led by sense: and thus
Infants of Christians neither do, nor can appear unto the Church (under the
Gospel) to be holy. 2. Oraculously, by virtue of a Divine Oracle, and thus
children of Christians appear unto the, Church (under the Gospel) to be holy.
The Holy Ghost has engraven this Oracle (1 Cor. 7.14.) upon such children. And
such children do utter this Oracle in the circumcised ears of all
understanding Christians, though Anabaptists hear no such voice. And let these
suffice for our first ground.
of Gods Covenant with Abraham, and their Fathers, which were sealed unto God
by Circumcision, and in Covenant with him. For the Text says not, Thou shall
keep My command therefore, but thou shall keep My Covenant therefore, thou,
and thy seed after thee, in their generations, Genesis 17.9. implying, that this
command had reference to the Covenant, and was part of it. For here God is to
be considered, as God in covenant with His people, and all his commands are
branches of His Covenant, all grounded upon His free grace in Jesus Christ, and
therefore in the next verse, ( viz. v. 10.) He calls Circumcision by the name
of His Covenant, saying, This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep between Me
and you, and thy seed after thee: every man-child among you shall be
circumcised. And to put the matter out of all doubt, that Circumcision is
called by the name of the Covenant, the Lord speaks expressly afterward,
saying, And My Covenant shall be in your flesh, v. 13. to teach us that the
Covenant made infants capable of the seal, and not Gods mere Mandamus, as our
abstracting Anabaptists play with notions. And so they will consider God here
in His absolute prerogative, and not as in Covenant with this people. Whereas
the Seal can be nothing, but a confirmation of the promises of Grace unto such
as have the promises made unto them. So then the promises of grace made these
infants capable of having the promises confirmed unto them by Gods initiall
seal. Now what seal should be authentic in Heaven, and seal up divine
promises unto persons under the promises, or in covenant with God, that
depended upon Gods institution. Now God instituted Circumcision, and commanded
it to be imprinted on the flesh of his people in covenant, as the proper
subjects capable of the same. So that the command that the Anabaptists talk of
so much, are the words of institution, it being Gods prerogative incommunicable
to institute Sacramental signs; because He only can make them effectual to
supernatural ends, and give the things signified thereby.

Now Circumcision did bind the circumcised to the obedience of the whole Law,
Gal. 5.3. And this obligation was laid on very Infants before they could have
any knowledge of the Law.

And again, Circumcision is a seal of the righteousness of faith in the
Messiah, Romans 4.11. And this seal was imprinted on very infants, before they
could have any actual faith or knowledge of righteousness.

And unto this obedience and faith, the Covenant (under which they were borne)
had bound them, though the initiall seal had been denied them. Such an
Anabaptisticall wickedness could not have put these infants into the condition
of aliens. The Covenant it self would have bound them to faith and obedience.
And the Covenant it self would have made them capable of Gods saving mercy,
though the initiall seal had been denied them. Such an Anabaptisticall
cruelty could not have blockt up heaven against them. Consider this you stout
Champions for Hell, which do what in you lies to make Gods Covenant of free
grace void, and of none effect unto his people. And to stop the course of Gods
mercy unto the souls of men.

Well, the being of infants in covenant under the Law made them capable of
Circumcision, the initiall seal of the Covenant. To be in covenant then with
God makes a man capable of the initiall seal in infancy, according to the
ministration of Christ, under which he is borne, i.e. whether the ministration
be of Christ to be exhibited in the flesh, or of Christ already exhibited in
the flesh. The substance is the same. The Covenant is nothing but Christ
ministered. Whether it be man's Savior to come, that is ministered (as to the
Jews and their proselytes in types) or man's Savior already come be ministered
(as to Christians without types in clear demonstrations) in the ordinances of
Grace, yet it is the same Savior Jesus Christ, The same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, Heb. 13.9. (i.e.) In the Ordinances of Grace in times past, present
and to come, nothing has been, is, or shall be ministered (for the eternal
salvation of the soul) but Jesus Christ. The Covenant now and formerly with
Jews is the same, in relation to the eternal welfare of the soul. For,

1. The foundation of the Covenant is the same, as Gods free eternal, and
unchangeable love to his elect. 2. The occasion of the covenant the same, as
man's misery by his fall in the loins of Adam: of which this Covenant of Grace
is a pregnant, and merciful remedy. 3. The Author is the same, as God
gracious, merciful, flow to anger, pardoning iniquity, etc. 4. The thing
promised is the same, as Christ the Redeemer, and Savior of mankind. 5. The
spiritual eflicacie of the Ordinances the same, as the mortification of the
flesh, and the renewing of the creature to Gods Image in Jesus Christ. 6. The
subject's the same, as a people in Covenant with God to yield obedience to the
faith. 7. The end Cujus the same, as the glory of Gods mercy to His Elect, and
the unexcuse of the Reprobate. 8. Finally, the end Cui the same, as Good works
here in this life, and the immortality of the soul, and eternal blessedness
in the life to come.
Only Gods manner of ministering Christ unto man for his eternal salvation is
diverse, according to the diversity of Christ state: viz. as not incarnate,
and to come; or incarnate and already come; and so the ministration is diverse
in the Ordinances of Grace.

Before Christ was come in the flesh all the Ordinances of Grace directed the
eyes of the faithful unto Christ to be exhibited for their salvation and
redemption. (And therefore all the Ordinances of grace must needs be typical)
And this did quiet their consciences, and filled their hearts with joy.

And since Christ is come, all the Ordinances of Grace, serve to confirm the
faithful in this point, and minister Christ exhibited (in the flesh) unto us.
And this causes us to rest in Him for Redemption, and salvation, and to expect
no other Savior.

Now if Infants under the typical ministration of Christ were capable of the
initiall seal of this Covenant (because borne under this Covenant) in their
very infancy, when they could declare no right they had unto it, but their
birth; then Infants of Christians under the Gospel, borne under the same
Covenant of Grace, are capable of the present initiall seal of this Covenant,
though they can show no right they have unto it, but their being born of such
parents as are Christians. The manifestation of faith is no more requisite to
the administration of Baptism unto such as are borne Christians, than it was
to the administration of Circumcision unto such as were born Jews. But as such
as were made Jews had Circumcision administered unto them, because they
testified faith in the Messiah, and such as were borne Jews had it by birth,
as children of parents in covenant. So such as are made Christians are to have
Baptism ministered unto them, upon the testimony of their faith, but such as
are borne Christians are to have it by birth, as children of parents in
Covenant with God, and of his household and family. For as it was a rule of old,
that nemo circumcidendus qua Infans, or, qua adultus, but quatenus foederatus.
So now, nemo baptizandus qua infans, or qua adultus, but quatenus foederatus.
Now if infants of Christians appear unto us to be foederati (as they do) then
we are to administer baptism unto them in their infancy. Baptism herein
answering to Circumcision. And so the fond quaere of the Anabaptists is
groundless. What (say they) shall we seal a blanke? But this question implies
this blasphemy, namely, that Gods written Covenant is a blanke, for Gods
covenant is written upon the children of parents in covenant, as Christian
parents are in covenant. And if so, then their infants are in covenant,
otherwise the parents are not in covenant. For though it follows not, children
are in covenant with God, therefore their parents are in covenant with God, for
Abraham was in covenant with God, but his father Terah was not: yet it follows
undeniably, parents are in Covenant with God, therefore their Infants are in
Covenant with God.

Now then the Infants of Christian parents have the Covenant of Grace, written
upon them by birth, because children of such parents. And because their being
in Covenant in their infancy appears unto the Church, therefore the Church is
to baptize them in their infancy; for when persons appear unto the Church to
be in Gods Covenant of Grace, then the Church is to put the Covenant under
seal unto them; and it is their due, and the Churches duty.

And so in the business of paedo-baptisme, we are not to look to the
righteousness inherent in the parents, nor to the righteousness in the infant
(for of neither of these can we have certain, and infallible knowledge) but to
the righteousness of the Covenant, or to the free grace of God in Christ, as
Romans 4.11. where Circumcision is called, the seal of the righteousness of
faith; And therefore the seal of imputative righteousness. And hence is the
gross mistake of our Anabaptists. They think that the efficacy of Baptism is
grounded on the practical righteousness of the creature, manifested in words
or works, (which stinkes of Popery all over) but orthodox Christians in the
business of paedo-baptisme do look to Gods Covenant of free Grace, and so
present their children unto Gods mercy, and Fatherly love in Jesus Christ, our
Righteousness, Covenant, and atonement.

And albeit our infants have no inherent righteousness manifested unto us by
their words or actions* yet God has righteousness to be imputed, by virtue of
His Covenant of Grace (saying, I will be thy God, and the God of their seed in
their generations) And therefore we dedicate our children unto God in their
infancy by Baptism.

Now our Popish Anabaptists cannot endure to hear of Circumcision, as if that
should be to the Jews before Christ's incarnation, the same with baptism unto
Christians since. Oh they labor to cry down this, as the grossest absurdity,
that ever was uttered by the tongues of men. But this is no new thing, for the
old heretics heretofore did lead upstart punies in the right way, how to
fasten themselves to their own errors, and Popish pride.

But I pray what difference between these two, save in the outward ceremony?
For was not Circumcision as sacrament of entrance into the true Church of God
before Christ's incarnation? And is not Baptism the same unto us Christians
since Christ's Ascension.

Why does the Apostle call baptized Christians, circumcised Christians, and
Baptism by the name of Circumcision? Col. 2.11, 14.

Was not Circumcision a seal of the same justifying faith, as Baptism is now
unto us? Romans 4.11.

And in a word, did not Circumcision signify the mortification of the flesh,
and the renewing of the mind, and so bind over the Jews unto the obedience of
Gods will? Romans 2.28, 29. Gal. 3.21. And does not Baptism the same now? Romans
6.3, 11. 1 Pet. 3.21.

Now show us any substantial difference between these two Sacraments; for if
there be no substantial difference, then without controversy there is a
substantial union. You say, there is a wide difference, for the one was the
cutting off of the foreskin of the flesh, and the other is a washing with
water. So say we, but this difference is but ceremonial; but as an initiall
seal, how differ they, or in any other spiritual effect necessary unto
salvation? When we look upon Sacraments, we do not look upon them by halves,
as you Anabaptists do, and detain our senses in the bodily part of them. We
look upon the mystical part of them, as they are of spiritual use to confirm
the Covenant of Grace, and to further a man in the way to Heaven. And so
circumcision was that unto the Jews before Christ's incarnation, as Baptism is
to Christians since.

Now to overthrow this, Anabaptists usually allege two things, viz.

First, they allege that Baptism cannot be the same unto Christians since
Christ's incarnation, as Circumcision was unto the Jews before, and why?
Because (say they) Circumcision was to be administered unto Infants, on the
eighth day, but Baptism is not to be administered unto Infants on the eight
day.

Sol. This objection proves nothing against the point in hand, for the eighth
day fell out to be in such a time, wherein the Infants could make no
sacramental use of the Sacrament of Circumcision, and they were a blanke in
their sense, as much as our Infants. Under the law they were to be kept from
Circumcision until the eight day for a ceremonial reason. Levit. 12.2, 3. And
this makes nothing at all against what we have said, touching the substantial
identity of Circumcision and Baptism. For things that do differ
circumstantially, may yet be altogether one in substance.

Secondly, they allege that under the law females were not circumcised, but
under the Gospel they are baptized.

Sol. We answer, that this (neither) makes nothing against the point in hand,
which is paedo-baptisme; for grant that the proportion holds between
Circumcision and Baptism, were it but in males, this were enough to refute
their own conclusion. For this would infer that the state of infancy does
not make persons incapable of the initiall seal of the Covenant of grace under
the Gospel. But they oppose paedo-baptisme in males and females. But we answer
that under the law the females were circumcised in the males, as the Church is
circumcised in Christ. The males bearing the type of Christ upon their flesh,
and the males and females in matrimonial conjunction representing Christ and
His Church. And unto this the Apostle alludes. Ephesians. 5.22, 33. And now such a
typical discrimination of sexes being removed, Christ exhibited puts no
difference in Baptism between males and females. Gal. 3.27, 28. So then the
argument stands good, that Infants are capable of Baptism, because borne under
the Covenant of Grace.

Matthew. 28.19.) imports, that all the children of the Christian Church are to
be baptized. And Gods Covenant of grace with the parents, put under seal unto
them by Baptism, does necessarily put the Infants of such parents under the
same Covenant of grace; as the seed of such parents. For to grant, that
baptized parents are put under the Covenant of grace by divine warrant, is to
grant that the children of such parents are put under the same Covenant, by the
same warrant. For the separating of Children from parents in Covenant is to
dissolve that Covenant* which God made with Abraham in the promised seed, for
the eternal salvation of Jews and Gentiles. Now the very being of the parents
under the seal of this Covenant does prove unanswerably, that their infants
are in this Covenant. And if this proves the being of Infants in Covenant, then
it proves unanswerably their right of having the Covenant put under seal unto
them by divine warrant, and so (by necessary consequence) their divine right
unto Baptism. For by birth they are in the Covenant, because borne under the
Covenant, as children of such parents. And admit the parents unto Baptism upon
the testimony of their faith, and that brings the children of such parents into
the Church by birth; so then baptize the parents, and thereby of necessity you
make the Infants of such parents baptizable by divine warrant, and it cannot be
avoided.

Now that Matthew. 28.19. does warrant our baptizing of Infants whose parents are
baptized, may thus be evinced and made good; viz.

All true members of the Christian Church are to be baptized by Christ's warrant
in Matthew. 28.19. But all Infants of baptized parents are true members of the
Christian Church. Ergo All Infants of baptized parents are to be baptized by
Christ's warrant in Matthew. 28.19.
The Minor proposition I thus prove, viz.

That proposition whose contradictory is false, and absurd, is a true
proposition. But the contradictory of this Minor proposition is false, and
absurd, ergo. This Minor proposition is a true proposition.
Now the contradictory of this Minor proposition is this, viz. Some Infants of
baptized parents are not true members of the Christian Church. But this
proposition is false, and absurd, and as much as to say, as some Infants of
baptized parents are Aliens, Pagans, and Insidels.

Thus then I argue, viz.

Infants of baptized parents are either true members of the Christian Church,
or else they are Aliens, Pagans, and Infidels; there is no medium, there is no
neuter. But Infants of baptized parents are not Aliens, Pagans, and Infidels.
Ergo. Infants of baptized parents are true members of the Christian Church.
And so by necessary consequence Christ's Commission, Matthew. 28.19. is a divine
warrant, for the baptizing of Infants, whose parents are baptized. Now let the
Anabaptists show us any child, or infant of baptized parents, that is not a
true member of the Christian Church, and prove him by the word of God to be no
member of the Christian Church, and we will not baptize that child.

Again, to contrive my Syllogism in another mood, which may as well accomplish
my purpose, and prove that Christ's Commission for baptizing, is for the
baptizing of Infants whose parents are baptized, as well as for the baptizing
of the alien upon the testimony of his faith in Christ.

Thus I argue, viz.

All true members of the Christian Church are to be baptized by virtue of
Christ's Commission in Matthew. 28.19. But some Infants of baptized parents, are
true members of the Christian Church, Ergo. Some Infants of Christian parents
are to be baptized by virtue of Christ's Commission in Matthew. 28.19.
Now that some Infants of Christians are true members of the Christian Church
may thus be proved; viz.

All true members of Christ in the Church are true members of the Christian
Church. But some Infants of baptized parents are true members of Christ in the
Church, ergo. Some Infants of baptized parents are true members of the
Christian Church.
Now then if Christ's Commission Mat. 28.19. be, that we should baptize all true
members of the Christian Church; and that some Infants are true members of the
Christian Church, then some Infants of Christian parents are to be baptized by
virtue of Christ's Commission. Mat. 28.19. And this proves that persons may be
baptizable in their infancy, and ought to be baptized.

And as for what you instance from the practice of the Apostles, that will not
serve your turn. For the Apostolical Ministry lay, in gathering of a
primitive Church from Judaisme and Paganism. But instance in the practice of
ordinary pastors in a Church gathered (as the Church of Corinth, or any other
mentioned in the new Testament) and bring me thence but one instance, that any
children (whose parents were baptized, and in the state of Christianity) were
held back from baptism, until they could give an account of their faith in
person, and then you will speak to the present condition of Gods Church in
these times. But this you cannot do, and therefore in drawing extraordinary
instances into an ordinary canon, to bind all the Churches of God unto like
practice, is to overthrow the nature of Gods Covenant of Grace, and to make
that a personal Covenant ( i. e. to terminate in the person baptized) which
God has made sociall, i. e. to believers and their seed jointly saying, I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed in their generations.

Now for this Commission in the 28. of Matthew. verse 19, 20. Its a full, and
univerfall Commission, belonging to all the Ministers of Christ under the
Gospel, unto the worlds end. And of these Ministers, some are extraordinary,
and to cease; and some are ordinary, and to continue. So then in this short
Commission, here is somewhat Apostolical, and peculiar to extraordinary
Ministers, which cannot be applied unto, nor expected from ordinary pastors in
settled Churches; As to plant foundations, to work miracles, as proofs of their
immediate calling from God, to be led by an unerring spirit in delivering
immediate oracles from Christ, as standing canons of divine faith, and worship,
etc. And so their practice was extraordinary, and no such thing is to be
expected from ordinary pastors, but to build upon the foundation, which the
Apostles laid. Now the Apostles committed the Churches gathered unto ordinary
pastors and teachers, which must proceed in the work of the Ministry, where
the Apostles left, for the edifying of the body of Christ, etc. And that this
is such an universal Commission (as we speak of) the Apostle Paul makes
clear, and puts it out of all doubt. Ephesians. 4.8, 13. where he expoundes the
meaning of this Commission. For whereas Christ in this text (here) says All
power is given unto Me, go ye therefore and teach all Nations etc. Paul upon
the same ground and occasion says, when He ascended up on high (meaning
Christ) He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, etc. And He gave
some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some pastors, and
teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, etc. For how long? Until the end of the
world, says Christ. Until we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, says Paul. See then what confusion the
Anabaptists do speak, when they urge from this text Apostolical imitation in
ordinary pastors, without distinguishing of what is herein peculiar to
extraordinary Ministers, and what is common to Apostles and ordinary pastors.
This I thought good to speak, to prevent a mischief that might befall unstable
souls (through the juggling fraud cunning craftiness of the Anabaptists) for
want of a right understanding of our Saviors mind in this text. For they will
hence take occasion to cry up Christ's Commission unto His Apostles in Matthew.
28.19, 20. viz. of making men Disciples, before they could be capable of
Baptism, putting no difference between those that are to be made Christians of
Aliens, and those that are borne Christians of Christians; and also putting no
difference between the Apostolical ministration and the Pastoral
ministration, and so by a confused urging of the text in the strict letter,
they seduce many an unstable soul unto their heretical practice of
rebaptizing. Whereas could they but look upon this Commission, as an universal
Commission, they would soon discern the fraud of these men, and would not be
carried away by them. Christians then in these days should labor, to be men
in knowledge, and not be always children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Ephesians. 4.14. Seducers have a slight,
whereby they can deceive children i. e. men of little knowledge in divine
mysteries, and of an unstable and wavering mind. These seducers can use the
Scriptures, as the juglers use their dice. For as the jugler has a slight to
make his dice to turn up what may serve his turn, to defraud such as he
plays withal, so seducers have a slight (when they deal with men of little
knowledge and of a wavering mind) to make the Scriptures speak their own
language, for to win men unto their party. And the metaphor is here by the
Apostle taken from the jugler, for he says, (...). Men deceive novices and
ungrounded Christians. But how? In the dice-playing of men. And so our
Anabaptists meeting with Novices and ungrounded christians, will make this and
other Scriptures speak their own principles and language, to deceive men and
lead them into error. And therefore I thought good to acquaint you with the
true meaning of this text, which the juggling Anabaptists pervert to their own
ends, and do not make it speak the mind of Christ, but the language of their
own seduced and seducing hearts. and it is blasphemy to say that any text of
Scripture does speak their hellish principles. Simple ones may be carried away
with their good words and fair speeches, but grounded Christians know, and see
their juglings and method of deceiving well enough. The text warrants and
commands the baptizing of all true members of the Christian Church. And
therefore it warrants the baptizing of Infants of baptized parents: and this
Inference cannot be avoided. And so much for this third reason for paedo
baptism.



Now the ends are, to put on Christ. Gal. 3.27. To dye unto sin, and to live
unto God. Romans 6.3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3.21. And God does ordinarily make Baptism
effectual unto these ends, in persons that were baptized in their infancy.

For among those that were baptized in their infancy we have as humble, meek,
and mortified Christians, (men and women) as any among the Anabaptists, to say
no more. We have those that dye daily unto sin, and are vexed in soul to see
the abominations of others. Again we have those that bear upon them the
marks of the Lord Jesus. Their lives are holy and lovely. They are sound in
the faith, grave in their behavior, and ready unto every good work. They deny
themselves, they advance free grace, they afflict their souls, and seek the
peace of Jerusalem.

Ordinarily our ministry does gain them, and sweetly win upon them, they
grow in grace, and submit unto Gods word in all duties. And certainly God does
not ordinarily work by a false ministry, and a false Sacrament. I say God does
not thus ordinarily by false and unlawful means, though sometimes He brings
light out of darkness.

Now I challenge all the Brownists, and Anabaptists in the world to answer me
this one thing, though nothing be more rife with them, then to condemn our
Ministers and Baptism, as false and Antichristian.

Certainly God would not ordinarily give testimony to a false Ministry, and
false Sacrament by making them effectual to the proper ends, whereunto the
true Ministry and Sacraments are appointed in the Gospel.

The Apostle Paul uses this very argument to prove his calling to be right,
and from the Lord. 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. saying, Am I not an Apostle? Am I not free?
Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Are not you my work in the Lord? If I
be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you, for the seal of mine
Apostleship, are ye in the Lord. 1 Cor. 4.15.



Now if we should forbear by virtue of a divine restraint, (as we pretend)
then we should lay iniquity upon whole kingdoms, and godly societies, as
taking liberty where God has put a restraint.

And how should we justify our practice, and condemn theirs, by the word of
God? For they would tell us, that we put restraint upon men's consciences, where
God has put none. And that we misinterpre^t the 28. of Matthew. verse 19. And
that our inter pretation of the text is absurd and ridiculous, and that neither
Christ's Commission, nor the Apostles practice does any way countenance our
cause.

Again, they would tell us that we do evade the evidence of 1 Cor. 7.14.
against us, by a base and beggarly shift, plainly derogatory to the Majesty of
the holy Scriptures, in saying that children of a believer are said there to
be holy in opposition to bastardy, as if they were holy for no other more
noble cause, but for their being mere legitimates: a notion too low for the
Spirit of divine Oracles, a notion plainly ridiculous in the apprehension of
every ordinary capacity, the Scriptures no where terming children holy, but for
the holy Covenants sake under which they were borne. Now for us to pretend
Apostolical imitation, and walking according to Christ's primitive Commission,
and yet to put off Apostolical Authority with such a bastardly gloss, would
give other Churches (which we oppose) just cause to think, that our way is
rather a diabolical delusion, then an ordinance of Christ, and that
fantastical humors do rather sway with us, then conscience.

Again, they would tell us that our way of rebaptizing has been always
condemned, in all reformed Churches by the holiest and ablest Christians for an
heresy, and that paedo-baptisme was never so condemned in any reformed Church,
but practiced and maintained an Ordinance of Jesus Christ under the Gospel,
and that God ordinarily has blessed it by making the same effectual, to the
comfort and sanctification of the baptized.

Furthermore they would tell us, that denying Baptism unto Infants of baptized
parents is grounded upon an hellish foundation, and is the inlet of many
hateful heresies, which have been always found with the abettours of this
practice, though at their first entrance into this trade, they have not been so
vile and loathsome. Yet for the maintaining of this way (when opposed by the
Churches and Ministers of Christ) they have been enforced to hold many gross
and palpable heresies, which our Anabaptists will be driven unto, though as yet
they deny not the doctrine of predestination, orginall sin in Infants, the
morality of the Christian Sabbath, the Person of the Holy Ghost, etc. I say
(though as yet they seem to be more tolerable) they must be driven unto these
and many more such abominations, or else they cannot hold up their trade.

Finally, they would produce many learned authors, that have condemned our
practice, and refuted our tenants, which to this day are not answered, by any
of the contrary party. Now for us to make so pitiful a schism from all the
Churches of God, and not to refute those that have written against us, would
argue rather obstinate folly, then conscience and zeal.

And so much for this first General.

THE COVENANTS Plea for INFANTS, vindicated.
Anabaptist. A Brief answer unto Mr WYNNNELS arguments, and reasons that he
delivered in public, for to prove the lawfulness of Infants Baptism, with
propositions annexed.

Answer. A full reply to your answer, vindicating the arguments, and reasons
for paedo-baptisme, against your frivolous exceptions, with an answer to your
annexed propositions.

Anabaptist. First you argue from the difference of state and time of the
Pagan. Gentiles in the Apostles times, and us now under the Gospel. For you
say that they were such as had their several country Idols, and that they were
strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, and without God in the world. For
answer unto this. First we grant, that this was the general state and
condition of the Pagan-Gentiles: but there were many particular persons, as
Cornelius and others is the Acts, who were men truly fearing God, and such as
were called out of the state of Paganism unto the profession of the Gospel,
and therefore they were not all under Paganism, and yet we do not find that
any of the seed of those persons were baptized, but only such that did hear
the word and believe. Act. 10. latter end.

Answer. Well. If this were their state in general, that is as much as I
require. And for particular extraordinary instances, they cannot infringe the
truth of an ordinary and general canon. However, to the point. Show one
example that any of the seed of Cornelius, or of any Jew or Gentile converted
to Christianity were baptized, when they were able to answer for themselves and
not before and then (and not before then) the cause is yours. John Baptist
baptized a world of people. And from John Baptist to the end of the Acts, was
about forty years: But show that any one of the posterity of those John
baptized, or of those the Disciples baptized (who were more then those John
baptized, Jo. 4.12.) I say, give one example of any one such baptized, when
grown up; and then you speak to the purpose. Else give over calling for
examples.

Anabaptist. Again further. Admit we grant you that this were the condition of
them all in particular, as well as in general, yet this would make nothing for
your purpose. For we Gentiles are all Generally as bad in our natural
condition as they were, and we are such as know not God, nay are open and
professed enemies to God, as well the seed of believers as other stand
therefore seeing our condition by nature is the same with the Pagan-Gentiles, I
know no reason why we (so long as we remain in our natural condition) should
have greater privileges then they, unless the holy Ghost had any where given
commission for is in Scripture. And therefore until you can prove a difference
between them and us by nature, you in effect as good as say nothing.

Answer. Here (as a man more then confident of his cause) you seem to grant
your antagonist more then is required. Here you have found out an argument,
which in your opinion is more then demonstrative. And oh how happy is your
Church in having so mettalsome a champion, that is able to say something, that
your Apostolical fraternity be not trodden down of the Idolatrous
paedo-baptists. But, however your words may pass in your Church, as oracles:
yet we (the maintainers of Gods Covenant) judge your assertion in all this
prattle to be but an aspersion. And either make your charge good, or else we
will look upon you as an agent for the devil, and not for Christ. Prove that
all the children of believing parents are open and professed enemies to God.
Show where the Scripture so terms Infants of Christian parents, seeing such
are borne Christians, and called (...), Saints. I Cor. 7.14. You show your
self to be an open and professed enemy to the holy seed, in casting so soul a
reproach upon persons, that God has so highly honored. And as much may be
said of the Infants of the Jews, namely that they were borne in original
sin, yet the Scripture terms them no where open and professed enemies to
God, though you say the promises made unto them were but temporary. Nor did
this estate debar them from being sealed into Gods peculiar in their infancy,
by the seal of His holy and eternal Covenant. Now if you say that infants in
their infancy, must not be baptized because they cannot understand the meaning
of that mystical Ordinance, nor have says to apply the promises therein held
forth; by the same reason the Infants of the Jews should not have been
circumcised, for circumcision had in it the same essential mystery with
Baptism, though held forth in a type. And so your argument blames God Himself
for preposterous dealing, in prescribing the seal of the righteousness of
faith to be imprinted on persons, before they manifested, or could manifest any
faith at all by profession, or practice. And circumcision was a seal of the
same righteousness of faith, which we Christians build our eternal salvation
upon, and that is faith in Jesus Christ. Romans 4. and Romans 5.

Ob. But there was a special command for circumcision in the time of infancy.

Sol. But your reason (I say) blames God for that command, because Infants of
Jews were as much in the state of nature, as Infants of Christians. So then
the same reason that you allege to blame us for our practice, does blame God
for His command. Again, we answer that there was such a command for the
circumcising of such Infants in their infancy, whose parents were under Gods
seal, but no such command for Infants, whose parents were not. Profession of
faith was needful unto such whose parents were not under Gods foederall seal.
And so Abraham (in whom the Church of the Jews began) had says before he had
the seal; for being uncircumcised (or before circumcision) he had the
righteousness of faith. Rom 4.11. But no such thing afterward required of
Abraham's seed, but the contrary commanded, namely, that his seed should be
circumcised in their infancy. So for baptism under the Gospel: For such,
whose parents are not under the seal of Gods Covenant, are not to be baptized,
but first to manifest the righteousness of faith. And here (as in Abraham) the
righteousness of faith must go before the initiall seal, but when parents
(as Abraham) are once under the seal of Gods Covenant, their seed (as the seed
of Abraham) are to be sealed unto God in their infancy by virtue of their
Christian birthright; for by birth they are under Gods Covenant, and that
Covenant under which they were borne is to be put under seal and ratified
unto them, as joint confederates with their parents, and of Gods peculiar
people with them. For the express words of the Covenant are I WILL BE THY
GOD, AND THE GOD OF THY SEED. And therefore when God does put the initiall
seal upon the parents. He does enright the seed of such parents unto the
Covenant and initiall seal thereof in their infancy, as the Lord has clearly
resolved the case when He put His Covenant under seal with Abraham. And
therefore you Anabaptists are destroyers of Gods Covenant, and will have it to
terminate in the party baptized, and not to extend to his or her seed, as their
Christian jointure by birth. So then the Covenant that God makes with us
Christians is not, I will be thy God and the God of thy Seed jointly. But I
will be thy God, and not the God of the seed, until they manifest faith in
practice and profession, and then I will be the God of thy seed also. And so
this Covenant will be no privilege unto children of Christian parents at all,
for the children of Turks shall be received by Baptism, when they testify
faith in christ, and and repentance toward God. And so Gods Covenant of Grace
must always terminate in the party baptized, and go no further. And is not
this mad Divinity, that the children shall be excluded, when God has joined
parents and children as joint-partakers of the same Covenant, and inheritance?
And are not you herein the devils attournies sent of purpose to wrangle
children of Christian parents out of the spiritual inheritance, unto which
they are borne as Christians by birth? The Lord plead the cause of His Covenant
against these perverse disputers, maintain the inheritance of our seed and
offspring against the cursed machinations of these sacrilegious thieves and
robbers, which steal from God, from us, and from our children. But you call
for a difference beteeen us Christians, and the Pagan-Gentiles by nature, and
unles this be showed nothing, in effect is spoken against you, or for us. By
nature, that is, by natural generation, this (I believe) is your meaning, a
notion indeed high enough for Anabaptists, who look upon all Gods ordinances
like sensual beasts. But upon that natural generation of procreation of seed
you may behold the Covenant of Grace established, and set up, had you any
spark of spiritual discerning in you. for so did St. Paul. Ephesians. 2.3, 4.
etc. And had you learned the language of the Scriptures, you might truly say
that the children of Christians are Christians by nature, and not sinners of
the Pagans; as the Apostle speaks of the Jews, saying; we are Jews by
nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles. Gal. 2.15. Here Jews by nature, and
sinners of the Gentiles are opposite members. But how were they Jews by
nature? Surely, as St. Peter speaks, because they were the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant, because borne under the holy Covenant. Act.
3.25. And how were not the Jews sinners of the Gentiles? Surely Divines (whom
you may seem sooner to refute then understand) tell us, that such as were borne
Jews had not their sins imputed unto them, otherwise they were borne in
original sin as well as the Gentiles, but the holy Covenant of Grace was
established upon them, which Covenant was appointed as a remedy to fre e them
from original corruption, and to restore them to Gods favor. But this is a
kind of language which you Anabaptists happily do not understand. For had you
any knowledge this way you would not reason so wildly, and turn Gods Covenant
out of doors; by putting no difference by nature between such as are born
Christians in the Church, under the holy Covenant; and such as are born Pagans,
out of the Church, and strangers from the covenant. And therefore seeing by
nature there is so wide a difference between such as are born Christians, and
such as are born Pagans, you in effect as good as say nothing. For God bath
engraven His Covenant upon the Infants of Christians, and made this known unto
his Church, and therefore the Infants of Christians are to have the privilege
of Baptism in their infancy. But God has not engraven His Covenant upon
children of Pagans, therefore they are not to have it, until they testify
faith and repentance. And this covenant written upon children of Christians in
their infancy, is the Commission that the Holy Ghost has given in Scripture
for baptizing Infants of Christians in their infancy. 1 Cor. 7.14. And now I
pray put your heads all together, and let me hear what you can say against
this. But go on.

Anabaptist. Again further. This argument of yours is but from humane
conception, and does tend to the overthrow of a divine institution, which may
not, nor ought not to be: unles you can prove where and when the holy Ghost
has or does expressly lay down, or give commission for the alteration of that
express institution that Christ gave unto His Disciples, to teach and instruct
all Nations to observe and follow the rule that they left them. And therefore
the alteration of times, and state is not sufficient to alter a divine
institution, until it be altered by divine Authority, by which it was at first
commanded. As for instance, Suppose the King should establish a Law, and an Act
of Parliament, for the practicing of any particular action, in the Land, and
the cause may be removed, for which this Law was established, yet this Act does
still remain in force to be practiced, until the Author thereof does disanull
it by proclamation or alteration. So in like manner, Christ has established an
Institution for Baptism, and confirmed it by the Apostles practice, according
to their commission; and therefore, until Christ does disanull this
Institution, or alter it, we may not, nor dare not to alter it, upon pain of
open rebellion against the King of Heaven; let the time alter never so much;
that is not a ground sufficient to alter an Institution. And this for answer
unto your first, and chiefest Argument. Now to pass by many groundless, and
sensual arguments, which are not worth answering, because they savor of
nothing but censuring; we desire to come to your chiefest reasons, wherefore
Infants should be Baptized.

Answer. No Argument that is truly deducted from the Scriptures of God, is from
humane conception. But this Argument of mine, against which you except, is
truly deducted from the Scriptures of God: Ergo, This Argument of mine, against
which you except, is not from humane conception.


And then again thus, viz.

No Argument that is deducted from the Scriptures of God can overthrow a divine
Institution. But this Argument of mine, against which ye except, is truly
deducted from the Scriptures of God: Ergo, This Argument of mine, against which
you except, cannot overthrow a divine Institution.


Now let me but prove the Minor Proposition, and you are overthrown
irrecoverably, though you seem to be armed with Law and Gospel against us.
Well, the point that I have to make good is this: namely, that the Argument I
here used, was truly deducted from the Scriptures of God. And to make this
good, the very rehearsal of what I said will be enough, without any more ado.
The sum of what I said was, that the state of the Pagan Gentiles before the
Apostles planted the Gospel among them, was not the same in point of religion,
as is the state of the Christian- Gentiles, where the Gospel is embraced, and
they baptized. Now I represented the state of the Pagan-Gentiles unto you in
two particulars. 1. I told you that (before the Gospel came among the
Pagan-Gentiles) they were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.12. And I am sure this is no humane conceit
unless the Oracles of God are humane conceits. 2. I said again, that before
the Gospel came among the Pagan-Gentiles, they were carried away to dumb
Idols, even as they were led. 1 Cor. 12.2. Neither is this any humane conceit.
Then finally the Gentiles where the Gospel is planted, are not of this
condition in point of religion, but in covenant with God, and of Gods family
and household, as you may see in any Sermon-notes prefixed.

If this Argument does overthrow the sense that you give of Matthew 28.19. then
you do not give the right sense of the text. For no argument truly deducted
from the Scripture, can overthrow the true meaning of any Scripture. And so if
your manner of baptizing (which you would have to be warranted by that of our
Savior Matthew. 28.19.) will not stand with the nature of Gods covenant of
Grace, among the Gentiles, where the Gospel is planted: then Christ means not
your way of baptizing in Churches, where the Gospel is planted. So then this
argument of mine tends not to the overthrowing of any institution of Christ in
Mat. 28.19. but lays a ground for the refuting of your wrong interpretation of
the text, the true meaning of which text you may afterward see in due place.
For (it should seem) this is the keeping of your song, and afterward iterated
again and again. And for me to run over the same things again and again,
would argue me to be as void of matter, as you are of reason. But, I pray, one
thing more. What are those sensual and groundless arguments of mine, that you
so slightly pass over, as not worth the answering? I termed Anabaptists
indeed a monstrous brood, sacrilegious thieves, Bellarmines Disciples etc. Do
these savor of nothing but censuring? Are these the sensual and groundless
arguments you mean? But I argued that the promises of God made unto the Jews
in the Messiah, were spiritual and eternal promises. Mat. 23.32. Act. 3.25,
26. Heb. 11.16. And this you pass by untouched, not because the argument is
sensual and groundless, but because you cannot answer it. Moreover I told you
that circumcision was the seal of the righteousness of faith, and that this
seal was imprinted on very Infants in their infancy. And is this a groundless
and sensual argument, not worth the answering? Alas, alas, you cannot answer
it. And therefore for ought you have said, or can say, my doctrine must stand
good, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against it. View it over again,
and consider it more punctually. And then happily you will either be Hodson, an
Ambaptist in the city of Gloucester grown as light to the head since he was new
baptized, as he was light in the heart before.
Hodson-peevish, or of another mind. And now having made so manly an encounter,
let us see whether your valor will endure the brunt of the battle. Let us
hear your killing exceptions against my reasons, that I had for paedo-baptisme.


Anabaptist. Because you say that children are holy, therefore they may be
baptized, 1 Cor. 7.14. Now we would know what holiness you mean.

Answer. I did not say that children are holy, that is too general; but that
children of Christian parents are holy. And we therefore say so because the
Apostle Paul the penman of the Holy Ghost speaks it. And so when you ask me,
what I mean by holiness in this discourse, you demand withal what the
Apostle means by it; for I only relate his words. The meaning then of the
Apostle is the same, as was the meaning of the Prophets, when they said that
the Jewish Infants were holy, because borne under an holy Covenant. Jews by
nature, and not sinners under the Gentiles. So the meaning of the Apostle is,
that the children of Christians are holy, i. e. Christians by nature and birth,
not sinners of the Pagans, unto which Pagans God has not committed His
Oracles, nor put them under His seal. But go on, and we will follow you.

Anabaptist. If you say an inward holiness, then grace must come successively
from parents. And so by this rule we shall make our parents the authors and
conveighers of grace, and so mightily wrong the Lord Jesus Christ. For there is
nothing does make us truly holy but grace, for by nature we are all filthy and
corrupt from top to toe; and by this ground we draw grace from our parents
loins, which to affirm is most gross and false, and no less then high
blasphemy against the Spirit of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Answer. What holiness we mean you may see in our answer immediately going
before. But if we should say that it was inward holiness, How does that
infer that grace must come successively from parents? Seeing parents and
children do not derive inward holiness and grace from one another. but as
joint-confederates they both derive and draw holiness from the Covenant of
Grace under which they both are. For the express words of the Covenant, are. I
will be thy God and the God of thy seed, jointly, as copartners in the same
Covenant. And therefore you err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the nature of
the Covenant. The Sadduces endeavoring to overthrow the doctrine of the
Resurrection, drew an argument (ab absurdo) wherein there were more words then
matter (like the arguments of you and your brethren of the separation) Matthew.
22.23, 28. thinking to puzzle their answerer with multitude of words, seeing
they wanted weight of argument. So you use many words, and sport your selves
with your own fancies. But as Christ answered the Sadduces, that they did
err, because they neither knew the Scriptures, nor the power of God. So say I
to you, that you therefore err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Nature of
Gods Covenant of free Grace with His people: And who wrongs Christ think you?
You or I? You in making the grace of God of less extent by the coming of
Christ, in setting Moses above Christ? For Moses allowed Infants of Gods
Covenant people the initiall seal in their infancy, but Christ denies it unto
them, if your Divinity will hold. Or I in setting Christ above Moses, both for
clearenesse and extent of grace? Now if Moses in his typical ministration
afford unto the Infants of Gods Vovenant People the initiall seal, and Christ
denies it in His Gospell-ministration, then surely the shadow is to be
preferred before the substance. And herein you show your self to be as stout
an advocate for the obstinate Jews, against Christ, as if from them you had
received thirty pieces of silver to betray Him. But what high blasphemy against
the Spirit of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ have you found out spray you? Oh
this, namely, that children should draw grace from their parents loines^ But
who a ^irmes this, you or ^^? If ^, then the Apostle affirms it, for ^d only
said, that children of Christian parents are holy, and so says the A^ostle?
An^ is the Apostle an high blasphemer in saying so? But go on, I pray, I know
you love not to be interrupted in so weighty a case of conscience, as this is.

Anabaptist. Again, if this be true then the unbelieving wife is made holy
too, and she may be baptized as well as the children, although she be an
infidel which is against your own affirmation.

Answer. It Is true; that children of Christian parents are holy (if that be your
meaning) and upon this ground are to be baptized, as is said in my
Sermon-notes. But how does it hence follow, that the unbeleeving wife (though
holy to the believing husband) is therefore as well to be baptized, as the
children of the believing parent? For the Covenant is, I will be thy God and
the God of thy seed; not I will be thy God and the God of thy wife though an
infidel. It Is one thing to be under an holy use, another thing to be under an
holy conditition. The believing party is said to have a sanctified use of the
infidel, but the infidel is not said to be holy, as the children are. For
such children are not said to be sactified unto the parents, but holy in
themselves, by reason of the holy Covenant under which they were borne, as
children of a parent in Covenant with God, and joint-confederates. In the
original the unbeleeving party is said to be holy not to, but in the
believing party. Not that one of them absolutely considered were sanctified in
another, for we are sanctified only in the Lord Jesus Christ; but as
considered in the relation of husband and wife in lawful matrimony, so the
infidel party is sanctified in the believing party for conjugall society, and
for raising up of an holy seed unto God. And if you can but look into the
original, and consider the scope of the place, you cannot but suffrage with
me. But go on.

Anabaptist. But you say it is such an holiness as has the promises of the
Kingdom of heaven. If so, then thus we affirm, that all those to whom the
promises of the Kingdom of heaven are made unto, shall have it made good unto
them, and so consequently all the children of one believing parent at least,
shall also go to heaven by this rule.

Answer. This we say that all the children of one believing parent shall go to
heaven for ought you or I know. We are in charity so to judge, so to hope. You
can say no more for such as profess themselves to be believers, then that you
hope the best. So may, so must we hope of such children. Could we tell which
were which, and did we know that such a child neither had grace, nor ever
should have grace, but were a reprobate, we must not baptize that child. But
since that is morethen we know, or can know: Therefore we stand bound to
baptize all children of Christians, least we should deny to elect children the
scale of the Covenant.

Answer. But we affirm, that the Apostle does not speak of such an holiness
in that place, but of such an holiness as is opposite to uncleanness. For the
Apostle does answer an objection as some of the believing Corinthians might
make concerning their present condition; as, whether they might live with their
wives now, they being converted, and their wives infidels. Now the Apostle does
answer them, that they might live together; for conversion does not disanull
matrimony If so, then your children were unclean, but now they are holy. That
is, they are your children, being lawfully descended and borne of your loins,
and so are your children and being so borne are accounted holy in the Apostles
estimation.

Answer. And we affirm the same with you, that children of Christian parents
are holy, as holiness is oposite to uncleanness. and Pagans are said to be
uncircumcised and unclean) which is of larger extent then bodily uncleanness.
But I conceive your meaning is, that children of Christian parents are holy,
that is, they are no bastards, but lawfully begotten, and so holiness here
shall be opposite to adul^ery, fornication, and bodily uncleanness only. And
so Lawb your founder in his directions to you expounds the place. But ask that
ass ^ow he can make good his exposition. And his letter will answer you, that
you must take it upon his word, or else he knows not what to say to you. And I
believe you had this deep Divinity from that letter, for that letter bears
date Feb. 11. Anno 1641. And your papers bear date March. 22. Anno 1641. So
that allowing a considerable time for the coming of his letter from London to
you; you might have time enough to make use of your instructions. And so as
your Religion is grounded upon Scripture perverted, so it must be maintained
by Scripture perverted: perverseness being the foundation of your Church,
perverseness must be your weapon of defense. But in this exposition both you
and your master seem to affirm a strange paradox, namely, that children borne
of unbeleeving parents are all bastards, which may overthrow all succession in
Kingdoms, and inheritances, and by this Divinity all the primitive Christians
were bastards, because borne in Paganism. And Abraham the Father of the
faithful was a bastard too, because his Father was an Idolater. But I pray how
does your reason prove your assertion? You say in effect that children of one
believing parent are not bastards, but legitimates, and that this is meant by
the holiness the Apostle here attributes to children. And why? Because (say
you) that the Apostle does here answer an objection as some of the believing
Corinthians might make concerning their present condition, whether they might
live with their wives now, they being converted, and their wives infidels. You
say the Apostles answer to this is, that they might live together, because
conversion does not disanull matrimony. Well, this reason confutes your own
assertion, for it implies that infidels may live together in matrimony; how
then can the children of such be bastards? Must not then their children
lawfully deseend and be borne of their loins? Thus you speak contradiction.
And where find you any such language as yours, in the Scriptures? What authors
have you consulted for the meaning of that text. viz. 1 Cor. 7.14. Paraus tells
us that such children are not unclean, but holy i. e. says he, not Pagans,
but Christians. Tremelius says, that the children are said to be holy, because
they are partakers of the holiness of God in the Church ( ex foedere) by the
Covenant. Beza says the children are holy. i. e. In promissione censeantur,
etc. they are judged to be in the promise, because unto every believer it is
said, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed. Peter Martyr thus. This
holiness is believed to be, that these children do appertain to the Church
of Christ. Calvin ut sancti in in Ecclesia reputentur. i. e. That they might be
reputed Saints in the Church. And you confess that such children are holy in
the Apostles estimation; And if the Apostle esteems them holy, then God
judges them to be holy, and for holy children of Gods Vovenant People we
must take them to be, according to the constant phrase of the Scripture. For
where faith is, there Christ is, where Christ is, there the holy Covenant is,
but faith is with the believing parent, therefore Christ and the holy Covenant
is with him also, and the Covenant is, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed. Therefore the holiness of children (that the Apostle here speaks of)
must needs be holiness peculiar to the children of faithful parents. But
holiness of children by legitimation is not peculiar unto children of
believing parents. For among the civil heathens, and Pagans, have not men
their own wives, and women their own husbands? Are not these joined together in
lawful matrimony? And are not the children that issue from men and women so
joined, their own children lawfully descended, and borne of their loins? And
are not such children so begotten of persons in wedlock therefore holy, because
lawfully descended, and borne of their loins? If to be mere legitimates be
to be holy, then the Apostle does predicate no peculiar thing of the children
of Christians, more then may be said of the children of Pagans, begotten and
borne in wedlock. Then the Apostle need not to have said that now they are
holy, seeing one of you is a believer, for they were holy before, if
legitimation would make them holy. But let Pareus, Tremelius, Beza, Peter
Martyr and Calvin hold their peace, and let us a little hear what your worthy
Founder Th. Lamb says for the true meaning of the Apostle, in this text. viz.
1 Cor. 7.14. Thus says he. As for the 7 Cor. 14. I say that the holiness of
the children did not arise from that one parent was a believer (as our
opposites say) but from this that the unbeleever was sanctified by or to the
believer, which could not have been if they had not been lawfully married
before, therefore the holiness of the children spoken of here, can be no other
but that which is opposed to bastardy. Here this wise man maintains the
contradictory of your opposites conclusion. He says that the holiness of the
children does not arise from that one parent was a believer. But how proves be
this? Surely testimonium dicentis is full en^ugh, he being a man of such an
infallible a spirit, that a bare [I say] must serve your turn. But whence then
does this holiness arise? From this (says he) that the unbeleever was
sanctified to or by the believer. Very good! because the unbeleever was
sanctified to the believer, therefore the children of such were holy. And why
was the unbeliever sanctified to the believer? Was it not because he was a
believer, and so made pure by faith, and then unto the pure all things are
pure. Tit. 1.15. Now then, because he was a believer, therefore the infidel
was sanctified to him for conjugall society, and because the infidel was
sanctified to the believer for conjugall society, therefore the children of
such were holy, and so by necessary consequence because one of the parents was
a believer, therefore the children were holy. Faith made the conjugall society
holy, the holy conjugall society made the children holy, and therefore faith
made the children holy.

Quest. But how can the faith of the parent make the children holy?

Answ. Surely, not by infusing of sanctifying grace into the children, but by
putting the parent into Christ. Now faith puts the parent into Christ, and
Christ puts the parent so put into Him, into the Covenant of grace, and the
Covenant of grace is I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, and hence is
it that the children of such parents are holy, namely because of the holy
Covenant. And therefore the holiness spoken off here may be and is somewhat
else, then that which is opposed to bastardy, namely the holiness of the
Covenant, which the says of the parent puts him into for himse^fe and his
seed. For (Goodman-Cocks-combe) how can the children of those be bastards that
are lawfully married? But you acknowledge that the parents of the holy children
here spoken off were lawfully married before (you mean) while in the state of
infidels. And therefore it must be the holiness of the Covenant of grace,
which the faith of the parent put himself, and his children under. But you say
in the last paragraph of your letter to your Disciples, that Infants were in
the Covenant legally, but not Evangelically; and that when the law ceased, this
being in Covenant ceased with it. But for so saying, you deserve a pillory, not
a Pulpit. You might be better employed in looking to your Soap or Candles, then
in filling men's heads with such hellish notions. If this be your care and
diligence that you show for your Disciples (as you say in your foresaid letter)
you may sit still. The devil himself can show such care, and diligence fast
enough. But how prove you, that childrens being in Covenant with their parents
is now ceased under the Gospel? You say so. And your [I say] must stand as an
Oracle with such as are willing to be seduced by you. And personal faith (in
your sense) is no more requisite to the being of Infants in Covenant with their
parents under the Gospel, then under the law. For it is the same Covenant of
free grace in Jesus Christ now, as then.

And thus (for ought I see) your master and you are in hot emulation, who shall
excel in speaking of non*sense. And yet you are so confident of the truth of
your cause, that had you a 1000. lives, you would lay them all down for the
confirmation of the same. Stout words! But should you lay down that one you
have for it, it would be judged rather madness, then martyrdom, and you not a
Martyr, but a madman in so doing. And truly if you can say no more for your
cause, give over writing, and take Physic. Talk no more of your conscience,
but see your folly. Now say on.

Anabaptist. For we have examples in Scripture, where children that are borne
of two parents that were lawfully yoked together, were called to be holy and a
godly seed by birth. As for instance, Mal. 2. Ezra. Levit. and other examples.

Answer. The mere being of the two parents lawfully yoked together, is not
sufficient to denominate the children of such parents holy by birth, but their
being within the holy Covenant. The Covenant under which the parents are, is
the cause, why the children of such are holy by birth, and so called by the
Spirit of God in the Scripture, and for that reason only. And those very
instances (where you find them in the old Testament) where children are said to
be holy, will cut the throat of your own cause; for you cannot show, that the
Scripture does so much as once call the children of the Gentiles and Pagans an
holy seed, as is does the children of the Church. The holy Covenant of God (I
say) under which the parent or parents is or are, is the only cause why the
Scriptures term children holy. And I challenge you to bring me one instance
where children of parents are said to be holy for any other reason.

Anabaptist. Again, we do not find any warrant in Scripture for to give the
seals of the Covenant of grace upon imputed holiness, but upon personal
holiness and confession, Acts 16. Mat. 3. Mark. 1. For the sign of
circumcision was not given by virtue of any imputed holiness in the child,
that it did draw from the parents, but by virtue of Gods Commission unto
Abraham that he gave him for to circumcise his seed, and so ought the seal of
Baptism to be given by virtue of Christ's Commission, and not by virtue of any
holiness that is imputed unto the child.

Answer. By imputed holiness I conceive your meaning, to be imputative
righteousness; And by personal holiness inherent righteousness, or
holiness in a man's personal practice and confession. And by seals, the
initiall seals of Gods Covenant. Now I find the initiall seal of the
Covenant of grace to be given upon the ground of imputative righteousness, for
the righteousness of faith is imputative righteousness: but I find it to be
administered upon this ground, and therefore upon the ground of imputative
righteousness. And circumcision unto the Infants of the Jews, was a seal of
righteousness, but not of righteousness in their personal practice and
confession, and therefore of imputative righteousness. And thus I have brought
unto your hand what you could not find. And then for your instances Act. 16.
Matthew. 3. Mark. 1. they will not serve to help you. For the matter in
controversy is, whether children of parents already in the state of
Christianity be to be baptized in their infancy or no? And now you bring
instances of such, whose parents were not in the state of Christianity, which
is a quite contrary case. But prove by Scripture that the children of the
first*baptized were denied Baptism, until they could give account of their
faith, or else you speak not to the point, seeing children borne of Christian
parents are Christians by birth, but such as you instance in were not. And is
this fair dealing think you? And what talk you of an imputed holiness in a
child, that it should draw from it parents? What imputed holiness is it you
mean? Imputative righteousness? Do you think that imputative righteousness
is in us? How differs it then from inherent righteousness? The words imply a
contradiction. And had you ever been rightly grounded in the principles of our
Religion, you would never have vented so absurd a passage. For the children do
not draw holiness from their parents in Covenant, but as companions in
Covenant with their parents are primitively holy, as well as their parents, by
virtue of the same Covenant. For the express words of the Covenant are, I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Here the Covenant puts parents and
children both in equal relation unto God. But here you renew your old quarrel
against the Covenant of grace, like an old trotting horse, let never so
skillful a rider use his best art to bring him into a better pace, yet the
carrion will fall into his old joulting trot again, so you tell us again that
circumcision was not administered unto Abraham's seed, by virtue of any holiness
imputed unto Infants by the Covenant, but by virtue of Gods command. This is
your meaning, however your expressions be. And we answer again, that because
they were an holy seed, that therefore the Lord commanded them to be
circumcised. For the Covenant in order of nature must go before the
confirmation and seal thereof. So that the ground of Gods commanding Abraham's
seed to be circumcised, was their being in the holy, i. e. a seed set apart
unto God from other nations. And therefore the Lord does not barely command
Abraham to circumcise his males, but He brings it in with a THEREFORE, to show
that the Covenant having made them an holy seed, therefore they wereto have the
initiall seal imprinted on those holy persons. For mark the words ( Genesis
17.7, 12.) of the Covenant. I will establish my Covenant between Me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting Covenant to be
a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. And will give unto thee and thy
seed after thee the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan
for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God, verse 7, 8. And
hereupon God said unto Abraham, thou shall circumcise thy males therefore. Not
barely thou shall circumcise thy males, but thou shall circumcise thy males
therefore. i. e. Because of the foregoeing Covenant in the 7. and 8. verses.
This inference we have verse 9. in these words, viz. Thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore, thou and thy seed after thee in their generations. And then
whereas they might have asked the Lord what that Covenant was which He would
have them to keep. The Lord answers in the to* verse. after this manner; viz.
This is My Covenant which ye shall keep between Me and you, and thy seed after
thee, every man-child shall be circumcised, etc. Here circumcision is called
by the name of the Covenant, because the Covenant is the ground of it. And
circumcision did but put the covenant under seal, in which Covenant those
children were before by birth, being borne of parents with whom God had
stricken Covenant. And so this lame shift will not serve your turn. And to
conclude, as little to the purpose is it, which you say concerning Baptism;
for you say, that Baptism is not to be given by virtue of holiness imputed to
the child, but by virtue of Christ's Commission, as if holiness imputed unto a
child by virtue of an holy Covenant were not Christ's Commission. The nations
which Christ sent His Apostles unto, were not said to be holy, and therefore
by teaching they must make them holy, before they baptize them. But the
children of those holy ones were holy by birth, and so called by God himself,
and therefore to be put under the initiall seal of Gods holy Covenant, as
their right and privilege by nature and birth.

Anabaptist. Again, the Apostle does not so much as any way make mention of
baptism in that place. viz. 1 Cor. 7.14. and therefore your reason is
groundless from this place for Baptism of Infants.

Answer. How groundless this exception is, he that has but half an eye may
see. As if to be holy by virtue of Gods holy Covenant, were not a sufficient
reason to argue a man's right unto the initiall seal of this holy Covenant
according to the ministration of the covenant under which he is born, and does
live. Now the initiall seal of the Covenants ministration under the Gospel is
Baptism; but children borne of Christian parents under the Gospel are holy by
virtue of Gods holy Covenant, and therefore children borne of such parents have
right unto Baptism. The Covenant of God is engraven upon them by birth, and
therefore the initiall seal is their present privilege. And so the place
proves it. And the reason is substantial. And it proves you to be
sacrilegious thieves and robbers, for denying Infants baptism in their
infancy. And by Gods help i will maintain this charge against you before the
dreadful tribunal of the Lord Jesus Christ at the last day. And in the
interim I shall endeavor to preserve as many as I can from being seduced by
your fair pretenses.

Anabaptist. Again, you parallel this place with Romans 11.16. where you say,
that is the root be holy, so are the branches. Now this root if you take it in
the litterall sense as it is spoken, then it is meant of Abraham only, and he
was the root, and the believing Jews the branches, and therefore Abraham is
called the Father of the faithful, and in this sense believers are his seed
and branches. But if you take it in a more spiritual sense, then it may be
meant of Christ being the root, and all believers are His members. But we
conceive to be chiefly meant of Abraham the root, and believers the branches,
and so will this make nothing to the purpose, neither is it the same with the
other place in Corinthians, 1 Epist. cap. 7. verse 14.

Answer. If I paralled Romans 11.16, and 1 Cor. 7.14. (to prove that the children
of parents in Covenant are holy by virtue of Gods holy Covenant) I shall not
draw my lines awry. Seeing the express words of the Covenant are, I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed. And both places prove, that both parents and
children are holy by virtue of Gods holy Covenant with them. And so both places
are coincident to prove the same thing, though there may be some
circumstantiall differences. The place then in Romans 11.16. makes much for my
purpose. For my purpose was to prove that as the children of the Jews were
holy, by virtue of the holy Covenant with their parents, so also are the
children of the Gentiles holy, by virtue of the same holy Covenant with their
parents; (an argument never too often to be inculcated.) And now having spoken
of that text of 1 Cor. 7.14. already in our former discourse, we will say some
what for the sense and meaning of Romans 11.16. which text must needs be
understood and meant of Abraham and his branches only. Now the question is, who
are meant by Abraham's branches. Well, the point there to prove is, that as
Abraham's children among the Jews were partakers of the privileges of the
Covenant, so among the Gentiles, children engrafted into Abraham are partakers
of the Covenant as well as the natural branches of Abraham, the Jews. And
hence I inferred, that as the Jews receiving the faith of Abraham were
circumcised, so Gentiles receiving the faith of Abraham are to be baptized. And
as the Jews that were not internally and inherently godly (as long as they did
not renounce Abraham's faith) had a right to circumcision, so the children of
the Gentiles receiving the faith of Abraham were by Baptism (as Jews by
circumcision) to be admitted into the enjoyment of the privileges of the
Christian Church. Peter tells the Jews that the promise is unto them and their
children. Acts 2.39. Now the promise was not made to their seed, because they
did believe, but the seed did believe because they were under the promise. viz.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. If this must be restrained thus;
viz. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed too, when thy seed shall
believe, then no more is promised to this seed, then to the seed of the
Gentiles for when the seed of any Gentile should make prosession of his faith
in the Messiah, he was to be circumcised, as well as the seed of Abraham. But
more was due by this promise to the seed of Abraham, then to the seed of a
Gentile: therefore the seed of Abraham was under the promise in a peculiar
manner, and not the seed of a Gentile uncircumcised: yea among the Jews a
parent who was orthodoxall in judgment, albeit he showed no proof of
justifying faith in his life, yet he was put under the Covenant for him and his
seed. And the children of such had as much right to circumcision, as the
children of David. So then external subjection to the doctrine of faith does
entitle the parent, and his seed to the right of the external benefit of the
Covenant. The sum is, that as Jews were born Jews, so the seal of
circumcision was their due, not to put them under the Covenant, but to seal up
the Covenant under which they were borne. So (say I) Christians children are
borne Christians, and a right to the Covenant is not given them by Baptism,
but that right which they had by birth is put under seal. The very Covenant
under which a Christian Infant is born, stands good unto him, and binds him to
faith and obedience, and so albeit Anabaptists (like so many enraged devils,
do what in them lies to cancel the handwriting of Almighty God by
withholding Gods own seal from Infants of Christian parents, upon whom He
has engraven His Covenant, and written His promises of grace and mercy, by
virtue of their being born of such parents. A wickedness so heinous, so
horrible, so full of impiety and hellish cruelty, that I want a parallel, I
want words to express it unto my reader) yet Gods Covenant (I say) stands
good, unto them. Now the Lord make you to understand what I have written, and
give you a sight of your wickedness. And thus you have my first reason
vindicated. Which is, that Infants of Christians are Christians borne, and
therefore are to be baptized in their infancy.

The second Reason.
Anabaptist. Again your second reason is, that children are capable of
Baptisine, and your ground is from circumcision. Because children were
circumcised, therefore they may be baptized in their infancy.

Answer. If children because borne under the Covenant before Christ's
incarnation, were therefore capable of the initiall seal (even by the sentence
of Almighty God) because born under that Covenant, then children of Christians
borne under the same Covenant of grace since Christ's incarnation are capable of
the initiall seal, and it is their due by virtue of their Christian
birthright. Now that the Covenant before Christ with the Jews, and since
Christ with the Christians is the same Covenant (namely. A Covenant which
concerns man's deliverance from misery by sin, and man's restitution unto
happiness by Jesus Christ) we have showed before, we will now instance only in
three things. Viz.

1. The Covenant of God with the Jews before Christ caused the godly in
Covenant to seek for immortality after death in heaven, as their country and
abiding city for ever. Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 16. Acts 26.6, 7, 8. 2. All the
ministrations of Gods Covenant with the Jews tended to the debasement of
nature, and to the advancement of Gods free grace in the whole work of man's
Redemption, though in types. 3. All the promises that God made to the Jews
looked toward Jesus Christ, as the only Mediator in whom all Gods promises
are yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20. cum Heb. 13.8. and Genesis 3.15. Christ was the
subject of Moses, and the Prophets writings. Job. 1.45. And the Jews were
justified in the sight of God by the same righteousness of faith, as we
Gentiles are justified by. Romans 4.3.13. And this justification has essential
connection with eternal salvation. Romans 5.9, 10. And is not our Covenant the
same for substance, reducible to these three heads.
Quest. Why then is the Covenant said to be a better Covenant, and established
upon better promises? Heb. 8.6.

Ans. It Is better only in regard of the ministration, and permanency, of which
we shall be necessitated to speak more fully afterward in due place.

Now if the Covenant be the same, and the manifestation of this Covenant upon
persons unto the Church be the Churches warrant to minister the initiall seal
unto them; then if the Covenant manifested by God (unto the Church) to be upon
Infants of persons in Covenant under the law was their warrant to administer
the initiall seal that there God did appoint to be used, then the like
manifestation is a warrant for us to administer the initiall seal unto
Infants, under the Gospel, whose parents are in Covenant. But let us consider
your exceptions against this reason.

Anabaptist. But we deny the sufficiency of this reason to prove Infants
Baptism, and that upon this ground. 1. They differ in the institution. 2. In
the signs. 3. In the subjects.

1. They differ in the Institution: for the Institution of circumcision was
that infants should be circumcised, even all Abraham's lineall seed as well the
seed of the bond woman, as the free; but the Institution of Baptism is, that
they should first be taught, and they that did believe the word might, and
ought to be baptized, and not else, as we find in all the Scripture: and
therefore every ordinance must be practiced upon its own institution, and not
how we please. Now the Lord would sure have made some mention of childrens
Baptism, if they had been the subjects of Baptism, and therefore from Christ's
own charge and Commission to His Disciples, Matthew. 28, we are bound as
strictly to observe Christ's rule for Baptism, as the Jews were to observe the
order of circumcision.

Secondly, they differ in the signs, ut infra.

Answer. How do Circumcision and Baptism differ in the institution? seeing
both of them are of divine institution, annexed to the Covenant of free grace,
and the initiall seals thereof proper to the ministrations of Christ; for they
both seal Christ unto Gods Covenant people, the one seals Christ to come, the
other seals Christ already come; but both seal Christ. But to your meaning, I
answer that for the institution of circumcision; Abraham by the institution was
not to be circumcised till he gave testimony of his faith in the Messiah, but
then his seed was to be circumcised in their infancy, before they could give
any other proof of their faith, then their being borne of parents in Covenant.
And their being borne of parents in Covenant gave them right to the initiall
seal, as we have showed before. So the Gentiles were not to be baptized (as
Abraham not to be circumcised) till they did show forth proofs of their faith.
But when the parent ba entered himself, his children were to be baptized (as
Abraham's seed were to be circumcised) before they could show any more proof of
faith, then their being borne of parents in Covenant. Christ indeed ( Matthew.
28.19.) gave charge, that whom His Apostles had taught, they should be
baptized; but that none should be baptized but such as were first taught,
that is your additionall, and of that you neither do, nor can make proof. You
were answered sufficiently, that in raising a Church among Pagans, faith must
be the door of admittance. This was the Apostles case. But when believing
Pagans were baptized, I desire proof that their seed must bring a verdict of
their believing, ere they could be baptized. Divines tell us, that Heb. 6.2.
where the Apostle speaks of Baptismes, and imposition of hands: By imposition
of hands the Apostle means a practice then in use, that such children as were
baptized should after make profession of their faith, and so be admitted by
imposition of hands to the Lords Supper. Now you will have profession of faith
go before, and afford such as are borne Christians no more privilege, then
mere Pagans borne out of the Church. You say that by Christ's charge and
Commission Matthew. 28. we are bound as strictly to observe Christ's rule for
Baptism, as the Jews to observe the order of circumcision. Right. And
therefore as Abraham was not, and no Proselyte was to be circumcised till he
gave testimony of his faith, so no Alien, no Pagan, is to be baptized till he
show forth his faith. But as the seed of Abraham and the seed of any
circumcised Proselyte were to be circumcised while Infants, so the seed of
baptized Pagans (while young) are to be baptized; Baptism herein answering
circumcision.

Anabaptist. Secondly, they differ in the signs, for the sign of circumcision
was the cutting off of the foreskin of their flesh, and that was a mark in
their flesh for ever; and so the parties that were circumcised (I mean the
Infants that were circumcised) could make use of the sign afterward, as well
as at the present. But the sign of Baptism is water, and so it must be a
sign to the party baptized in the present act thereof, or not at all. Now we
know, that Infants cannot discern the sign in the present act, and so
consequently not at all, and so the sign is given in vain.

Answer. What though they differ in the signs, yet they accord in the thing
signified, and they both put the Covenant of grace under seal, unto the
children of the Church. You reason like carnal Atheists, as if all the benefit
of Sacraments lay in what is obvious to our senses. A perpetual mark in the
flesh which the circumcised (though circumcised in infancy) could after make
use of. But when? When they came to years of discretion? But what if they dyed
before, as many of them did? What use then could they ever make of this mark?
But what mark or sign in the flesh mean you? A sacramental mark or sign?
Then verily a sealing sign. But what did this mark or sign in the flesh,
seal unto the lineall seed of Abraham? Redemption by Christ, or the temporal
inheritance of the land of Canaan? You say the temporal inheritance of the
land of Canaan. If so, then all Abraham's lineall seed circumcised must be
possessed of the land of Canaan, or else God must be unfaithful. But Abraham's
seed for the space of 440 years were kept out of Canaan after circumcision was
instituted and practiced. And so by this your Divinity all this while God was a
lier, and failed of His promise. And must this sacramental sign of
circumcision seal the land of Canaan unto all Abraham's lineall seed? Why then
was Ismael and his posterity excluded? What became of Abraham's, lineall seed by
Keturah? The fonnes of Jacob became 12. tribes, and the land of Canaan, was
divided unto them only. And yet not to all these neither. For two tribes and a
half were settled on this side Jordan. Fie! Fie! What mad stuff is this?

Truly he that has any knowledge in Divine Mysteries may see evidently, that
either you read the Scriptures without observation, or conclude that you
maintain untruths against your own knowledge and consciences. And then you
come with another flim flam. You tell me, that water in Baptism must be a
sign to the party baptized in the present act, or not at all. That is, as you
expound it in the case of Infants, that the party baptized must discern the
sign in the present act, or else that that sign is given in vain. And this
Divinity is as spiritual as your Religion. This argues that the efficacy of
Gods ordinances of grace depends upon the act of the creature. In this you may
shake hands with Rome, and exclude grace, and set up works. Here is much spoken
of the act of man, but not a word of the Act of God in His ordinances of grace.
But how does this conclude Baptism to be in vain unto an Infant? You say the
Infant discernes not the sign in the present act of administration. Thus you
seem to argue.

Such as discern not the sacramental sign in the present act of
administration, have the sacramental sign given in vain.

But Infants of Christians do not discern the sacramental sign in Baptism
in the present action of administration; Ergo.

Infants of Christians have the sacramental sign of Baptism given in vain.

This argument proves, that the sacramental sign of circumcision was given to
the Jewish Infants in vain also, for they could not discern that sign as a
Sacrament, for though they had bodily feeling of the cutting off of their
flesh, yet they could not in the present act of administration discern the
sign, as sacramental, and so our Infants have bodily feeling of the water
too. And so your quarrel is against God, as well as against us. But as such as
were borne Jews were to have the initiall seal of the present ministration
imprinted on them in their infancy to seal up the Covenant (under which they
were borne) unto them, though they could have no such discerning as you seem to
require in the present act of administration; so such as are borne Christians
are to have the intiall seal of the present ministration imprinted on them in
their infancy, to seal up the Covenant (under which they are borne) unto them,
though they can have no such discerning as you require, and yet the ordinance
effectual unto them too. I thought that Baptism had been a continual act of
Gods mercy and grace, and that the saving efficacy and benefits thereof had not
depended upon the Act of the receiver, but upon the operative mercy of God, and
Merits of Christ. But it seems your Divinity shows me a new way. But why must
Infants of Christians discern the sign of water in Baptism, in the present
act? What? Because water leaves no impression upon the body, but shortly after
the act is over, the body is as dry as if it had not been washed at all? And
when the child is come to years he finds no visible mark upon his body, to
assure him that he is sealed into Gods peculiar? Oh! Is this it? I pray what
mark is there left upon your flesh, since you were washed in Severne, though
you were duckt over head and ears? Is a mark in the flesh, and a sensitive
discerning of the sign, the excellencies of circumcision and Baptism? When
the Jews came to years of discerning. God called not for the circumcision of
their flesh, but for the circumcision of their hearts. It was the mark of
circumcision upon the heart that God looked upon, for many had the mark of the
flesh, which were as bad as Ethiopians. So for us Christians when we are come
to years of discretion, its the mark of the Spirit, and of the blood of Christ
upon the heart, that God calls for, and looks upon. For a man may have the
sign of water, and discern the sign in the very act with the eye of his
flesh, and yet be a vile Anabaptist, deny original sin in Infants, deny the
Christian Sabbath, and set up the Jewish, deny Christ's taking flesh of the
Virgin MARY, deny the power of the Magistrate, and a 1000 such like
abominations; and a man be baptized in his infancy, and want your discerning;
and yet when he is come to years of discretion, he may be an holy and
mortified Christian, sound in judgment, regular in all his practices, and
sincere in all his aims. And therefore this your rotten stuff will not serve
to make a sorry garment for to cover your shame. But you have a third thing to
allege, I pray speak on, that we may consider that also.

Anabaptist. Thirdly, they differ in the subjects, for the subjects of
circumcision were all Abraham's lineall seed according to the flesh, and
strangers bought with his money too. And why? Because God had promised Abraham
a temporal inheritance, for him and for all his lineall seed as they were
borne, and circumcision was the sign thereof. But the subjects of Baptism, as
are set forth to us by Commission are only believers, and none else as we
find; and therefore we may not dare to cast off the Commission of Christ, and
practice of the Apostles, for to set up inventions of our own, as an ordinance
of Christ, where we have neither precept nor president for it in all the book
of God. Again, ut infra.

Answer. For the subjects of circumcision and Baptism I know no substantial
difference, for persons, as in Covenant with God are the proper subjects of
them both. Now men are brought into Gods Covenant either by instruction, or
borne under this holy Covenant as the seed of persons in Covenant with God.
Thus Abraham and his Proselytes became the subjects of Circumcision by
profession of their faith in the Messiah. But the seed of circumcised Abraham,
and of the circumcised Proselytes were such by birth, as children of parents in
Covenant. So when the Apostles in primitive times planted foundations of the
Christian faith among the Pagans. These Pagans were made subjects capable of
Baptism by instruction; but the seed of these baptized Pagans were capable of
Baptism by birth, as joint heirs with their parents of the same holy
Covenant, and that Covenant (under which they were borne) was to be put under
seal unto them. So then as Abraham's seed, and the Proselites seed, were to be
circumcised, when and while Infants, for Christians children are to be baptized
when and while Infants; such Infants being not Infidels, ergo believers, as
afterward you shall see in due place. And so the baptizing of Christian Infants
is no invention of man, but grounded on the Covenant of God with parents and
their children. And this the book of God warrants every where. And whereas you
say, that the promise to Abraham and all his lineall seed was of a temporal
inheritance, and that circumcision was a sign of that: That is false, if you
mean only or chiefly of a temporal inheritance (the temporal inheritance was
theirs, not as temporal neither, but as typical) for 1. Circumcision was a
sign and seal of the righteousness of faith in the Messiah. 2. The
Proselytes with their children were circumcised, to whom right unto that
temporal inheritance of the land of Canaan did not appertain. 3. Neither did
it belong unto all Abraham's lineall seed, as before we have showed.

And so all this is, as it is unsound, so fallacious and absurd.

Anabaptist. Again, the Infants might be more capable of circumcision in their
infancy, then when they were of riper age, because they here to be only
patients in the act, be they great, be they small, there was not any act
required in them as we find, but only to receive the sign upon them. But in
Baptism they must be agents acting faith in the action. Again, ut infra.

Answer. Abraham and the Proselytes who were to be first received into the
Covenant, were to be agents acting faith in the Action of administering
Circumcision, as well as Pagans at their first receiving into the Church were
to be agents acting faith in the Action of administering Baptism unto them. And
as no such thing was required of the seed of circumcised Abraham, nor of the
seed of the circumcised Proselytes, but circumcision was administered unto them
in their infancy, as the holy seed, being borne of such parents: so no such
thing is to be required of the children of baptized parents, but as holy by
birth (being borne of such parents) are to be baptized in their infancy,
because in their infancy God has made them holy, and declared so much unto us.
The Covenant (under which children are borne) makes them capable of the
initiall seal according to the ministration under which they are borne,
whether of a Savior to come, or of a Savior already come.

Anabaptist. Again there is difference in the persons, for there were none but
males circumcised, but we have example of male and female baptized. Further,
etc. ut infra.

Answer. This is no argument at all against paedo-baptisme, for males were
circumcised in their infancy, and the Covenant with the Jews and us Christians
is the same spiritual and eternal Covenant, binding to divine faith, and
obedience assuring us, and them of eternal happiness through Gods mercy in
the merits of Jesus Christ. Now if Male Infants had the seal of such an
inheritance and Covenant upon such spiritual grounds in Such a Savior,
binding the circumcised Infant to divine faith and universal obedience (though
he could discern none of these matters) then Male-Infants of Christians (being
borne under the same holy Covenant of grace) are subjects capable of the
initiall seal thereof, as children of parents in Covenant with God, and of the
holy seed by birth. So then (to exclude females) grant males to be capable of
Baptism upon the ground of circumcision, is to conclude against your own
principle. But all Israelites (females as well as the males) stood in Gods
acceptance for circumcised, as appears in the story of Sampson, who seeing a
woman of the daughters of the Philistines in Timnath, fell in love with her,
and spoke to his Father and Mother to get her for him to wife. Then his Father,
and his Mother said unto him. Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy
brethren, or among all my people, that thou go to take a wife of the
uncircumcised Philistines. Judges 14.1, 2, 3. Now if the women of Israel had
been reputed uncircumcised, then as good for Sampson to choose one as well as
the other, as good a woman of the daughters of the Philistines, as a woman of
the daughters of his brethren. What cause then had his Father and his Mother to
blame him for his choice? As good one uncircumcised woman as another. More of
this is to be seen in our Sermon-notes, to which as yet I have received no
answer. But I believe that this concerning females is none of your maine
foundations, you build your Religion upon.

Anabaptist. Further they differ in the time, for they were to be circumtised
the eighth day, but we have no set time for Baptism, but when they do
believe, then they are to be baptized. And therefore if you rightly consider
these things and the maine differences hereof, I think there is no reasonable
man that understands himself and the Scripture, will go about to parallel
circumcision with Baptism in respect of the practicing of it.

Answer. We showed you out of Levit. 12.2, 3. that there was a special reason
why the man-child should not be circumcised till the eighth day. And this
reason you pass by untouched, because you couldnot answer it: And I find no
such reason why baptism now should be forborne until any set time. Now if
circumcision had been forborne until the eighth day, because till then
infants could not, and then they could believe, this were to the purpose. But I
see you faulter in all things. You say much, and prove nothing. If you ask
Physicians why in time of the Law infants were not to be circumcised till the
eighth day? They will tell you, that until the seventh day (being a critical
day, and so a dangerous day) were past, no wound was to be made in the flesh of
a tender infant. But you say, that under the Gospel when persons believe, then
they are to be baptized. But I say, that Infants of Christians in their
infancy are not Insidels, but Saints, and of the holy seed, and therefore
believers; and so are to be baptized in their infancy, unless you can show
where the Scripture calls the Infants of Gods people in Covenant Unbelievers;
And therefore if you rightly consider these things, and the substantial
agreement between Circumcision and Baptism; I think there is no reasonable
man that understands himself and the Scripture, but will judge your exceptions
to be frivolous, and that this Argument stands firm; which is, that Baptism
is unto us, as Circumcision was to the Jews. Col. 2.11. The Covenant the same,
the ends and significations the same for substance. Infants were admittable
there, Ergo here; else children in worse case since Christ, than before.


Anabaptist. Thirdly, you seem to draw a reason from divine Authority for
Infants baptism, and you seem to prove it out of Mat. 28.19. But here give us
leave to tell you plainly, that you are foulely mistaken, and you wrest the
Text: For Christ bids them go and teach all Nations, and them that are taught
must be baptized. For Christ does not say, go, and teach all Nations, and so
baptize all the Nation; but go teach them. Now you know there is great
difference between preaching to a people, and teaching of a people; for you
may preach to a thousand people, and it may be not above two or three of all
those taught. And therefore Christ bids teach them first, and then baptize
them. But however, etc. ut infra.

Answer. My third Argument for Paedo-baptisme from Mat. 28.19. runs thus. The
Commandment of baptizing is universal to the whole Church, but Infants of
Christian parents are members of the Church, and therefore the command of
baptizing is to be extended unto them, as before we have amply declated. Now if
Infants of such parents be not members of the Church, then so dying they cannot
be saved; sithence none can be saved, but by Christ, and Christ came to save
his Church only: Ephesians. 5.26. Wherein now (I pray) am I so foully mistaken, and
wherein do I wrest the Text? Christ says indeed, that such as are taught must
be baptized, but Christ says not, that none must be baptized but such as are
taught. Prove that, or let this Text alone. The Text says, baptize all in the
Church, therefore Infants of baptized parents, unless you can show a place
that exempts them. Christ does not say, go teach all Nations, and so baptize
all the Nation: Neither did I, nor will, unless the whole Nation shall embrace
the doctrine of Christ. And then the whole Nation must be baptized, and their
seed after them in their infancy, as Christians by birth.

Ob. But the baptized must believe and repent. Acts 2. Matthew. 3. etc.

Sol. Those Texts must be restrained to the persons in hand. So 1 Thessalonians. 3. He
that labors not must not eat: i.e. men that can labor. Children though they
cannot labor, yet must eat. Infants must have meat, though they know not
what belongs to meat. In Painswick, children that know not what they do, are
taken Tenants by a rod or pen, by the custom of the Manor. This stands good,
binds the Lord of the Manor, and binds the child to Courts, and Orders, and
Privileges of the Manor. Paul challenges privileges of Romans by birth, and
children of baptized parents challenge baptism by birth, as individual
associates with their parents in covenant. As for your descant about preaching
and teaching, its a frogge of your own slime; and were a man as sick of body,
as you are of fancies, it were high time to send to the Clerk or Sexton to
tole the bell. The word (...), Matthew. 28.20. shows what Christ means by
(...), v. 19. and Mar. 16.15. where the same commission is rehearsed, the word
KPYXATE, i.e. preachthe Gospel, does the same. The Church of Gentiles was to
be raised by men and women of years, and when they came in, they brought in
their children by course with them, as Abraham and his Proselytes did theirs.
Were we disposed to shift as you do, we might say, that in Mat. 28. they were
to be made Disciples by baptizing first; because it is said in the next verse (
v. 20.) (...), teaching them. And again, it is not said, go make disciples
and baptize them, but make disciples baptizing them; to intimate, that by
baptizing them they made them disciples. Chiefly considering that Mar. 1.4.
it is said, that John (in whom baptism was first instituted) did baptize in the
wilderness, and then preach; as though he did baptize first, and then preach.
Besides, to exelude such children from being disciples is harsh, since they were
borne under the Covenant, and Christians by birth; and to be disciples, and to
be Christians are synonymaes, Acts 11.26.

Anabaptist. But however, if this answer will not serve to confute your seeming
reason, yet here is another will (I think) which is this; You confess unto us
that the word in the original is Matathusita, that is, go make disciples, and
baptize them. Now you know who are disciples, they that believe, and these by
your own confession must be baptized, and none else from that place, nor
elsewhere as we find; and therefore you are much deceived in this reason.
Again, etc. ut infra.

Answer. If it were but a seeming reason, you should do well to show where the
fallacy thereof lies. the word in the original does not unloose the joints of
my Argument: But what your monster Matathusita may do, I know not. but for you
to say that children of baptized parents are nop believers, is harsh, (as we
have said before) because they are borne under the Covenant, and so by birth
are not infidels; therefore believers. I say that such children by birth are
either believers or insidels; but not infidels, therefore believers: And
therefore you are much deceived in this exception. And who are to come into the
Church upon confession, and who by birth, we have showed you. And to raze the
foundation of Paedo-baptisme that we have laid, you must have better workmen
and better engines. And for you to cry out against a seeming reason, and to
conclude a falleris upon so poor a ground, argues rather a rash head, than
deliberate reason.

Anabaptist. Again, you do plainly deserve, Mt Wynnell, to have the same
scandalous term cast upon your self, as you cast upon us; which was, that we
were Juglers; but I submit unto any reasonable Judgo, whether this is not
plain juggling for you to turn your tongue and Text to your own purpose, and
preach that confusion, and wrest the Scripture. Nay further, etc. ut infra.

Answer. I said indeed that Anabaptists were Juglers, and this you take to your
selves, and so now I know where to have you, and what to call you, though
formerly you have declined the name. And for what I have herein done, I have
done in love to my Nation, and do commit the same to the view of all my
brethren, and do submit unto their censure, promising to rectify whatsoever
is herein amiss, if any just blame may be found out. And I shall desire you
also to maintain Gods covenant of free grace, and to submit unto your lawful
governors, which you Anabaptists refuse to do.

Anabaptist. Nay further, you affirmed diverse times over, that considering the
estate and condition of the Pagan Gentiles that they were in, you said that
there was no reason in the world why any of those should be baptized, without
confession of Christ and the Gospel; and yet here you bring a groundless
argument, that all the whole Nation should be baptized, where the disciples did
preach the Gospel; yet before you affirmed, that there was no reason in the
world why any of these should be baptized, before they had confessed Christ,
and believed the Gospel. Now if this be not gross confusion, I know not wat
is. Again, etc. ut infra.

Answer

What I said before, I will rehearse over and over again, if that will serve
your turn. And that is, that there is no reason why the Pagan-Gentiles should
be baptized, until they had given testimony of their faith in Christ; but I
said, that the children of those so baptized, are holy by birth, and so are to
have the Covenant put under seal by baptism in their infancy. This is all I
said, and so I spoke distinctly, without confusion. The point that I insisted
on was, that children borne of Christian parents are to be baptized in their
infancy, and therefore you bring a groundless accusation, and make me the
Author of your own forgeries. And that I spoke no such thing as this aspersion
does import, is clear by this: viz. A near neighbor of mine (after the
Sermon, against which you have brought these exceptions) came to me, and told
me that you apprehended, I meant that the whole Nation was to be baptized upon
the very bringing of the Gospel among them. I answered, I intended no such
thing, but that such as were to be baptized of the Pagans, where the Apostles
came to lay the first foundations, must give testimony of their faith, and that
the children of baptized parents only were to be baptized: And this answer was
immediately returned unto you. But either you have forgotten, or you conceive
that slandering may help your cause, when you want better arguments. And my
hearers at that time, who without passion took my Sermon-notes, can note you
for a slanderer. but happily you learned that trick of your brethren of the
separation before you left them.

Anabaptist. Again, we may casily see this overthrown by other Scriptures, as
Mar. 16.15, 16. There the Disciples are commanded to preach the Gospel to
every creature; that is, reasonable creatures, and he that did believe was to
be baptized: Now it were a strange folly in us to think, that Christ would so
strictly charge his Disciples to preach to every creature before baptism, if
the preaching to the Nation would bring all the rest to have right to baptism.
Then the Disciples did bestow labor in vain by this rule. Again, etc. ut
infra.

Answer. You now sight with your own shadow, and that is a strange folly
indeed. And what is it that may be so easily overthrown by other Scriptures?
your own fancy and forgery? down with it enough, it shall have no countenance
from me. But had I said as you affirm, how would that help your cause, or
wound ours? It would have argued my weakness, (unless the whole Nation had
received the Gospel) but not have established the grand principle of your
sacrilegious religion, which is Anti-paedo-baptisme. As for that of Mar. 16.16.
we shall still grant, that as such as were to be made Jews, were first to be
taught the Covenant, and then to enjoy the Seal; but such as were borne Jews
were first to be sealed, and then taught afterward: so here Christians-made
must first be taught, and then be sealed; but Christians-borne of those
made-Christians are first to be sealed by baptism, and afterward taught; for
this Scripture does bar children no more from baptism, than it does from
heaven. Thus out of the Text you argue, viz.

He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, But infants do not believe.
Ergo Infants are not to be baptized.
Thus I argue, viz.

He that believes not shall be damned, as it follows in the Text. But (say
you) Infants believe not, Ergo Infants shall be damned
Answer this and you answer you selves. Now some of your side say for answer,
thus; viz. He that is of years and believes not shall not be saved, and so say
I; he that is of years and believes not is not to be baptized. And this is all
that I require, namely, that made-Christians must first testify their faith
before baptism* but borne-Christians not so.

Anabaptist. Again, if this Commission had been from divine authority, then
the Apostles had not dared to omit the practice thereof: but we have not any
example of one person in all the Scripture that was baptized, but what had the
Gospel first preached unto him, and did believe it. Again further you say,
etc. ut infra.

Answer. The non-practice of the Apostles does not argue the non-divinity of
our warrant for paedo-baptisme, from Matthew. 28.19. For the business of the
Apostles lay in planting of foundations, and in erecting of Churches,
consisting of persons of years. And the Apostles baptized but a poor few of
the multitudes that were converted by their ministry. 1 Cor. 1.13, 17. Now if
these words Mat. 28.19. must be urged in the strict letter, then it had been a
sin for the Apostle, not to baptize such as by his preaching he converted;
but this is no sin, for then he would not have thanked God, that he baptized
none of the Corinthians, but Crispus and Gaius, 1 Cor. 1.14. And yet Paul did
beget the Corinthians in Jesus Christ by his preaching. 1 Cor. 4.15. Or he made
them Disciples, but baptized very few of them; and therefore the text cannot be
urged in the strict letter. Again, to dispute negatively from the Scripture in
a matter of fact, ( viz. we do not read that the Apostles, or any else
baptized any Infants, therefore there were none baptized by any of them) is a
kind of arguing fit for fools, not for schools; and yet this is the only
Divinity of your Church. Upon this ground I argue upon more probable reason: We
do not read in the story of the Church, from the Baptist to the end of the
Acts, that the Apostles, or any others, did baptize a child of any Christian,
when he was grown up to years, but the baptized Christians being millions,
had many children in that great tract of time, and baptized they were. Now we
read not, that it was done in their growth on profession of their faith, and
therefore in their infancy. We read of abundance that were converted from
Jews and Pagans, who on profession of their faith were baptized, but we read
no such thing of the children of any baptized Jew or Gentile, but that such
children were holy by birth. This shows a maine difference between them and
their children; viz. That such parents became children of the Church by
instruction, but the children of such baptized parents were holy, and the
children of the Church by birth.

Anabaptist. Again, further you say that this Commission was partly
circumstantiall, as for to go from Nation to Nation. We would know how you
can prove it so? by what Scripture? or where ever Christ did say so. For Christ
gave this Commission in particular to his Disciples, and they were to go unto
all Nations to preach the Gospel, and so they did fulfill the Commission that
Christ gave them. And as they were to do this, so they were to teach all
Nations to observe the like rules of them, as they had from Christ: For Christ
bid them to teach the Nations to observe whatsoever he commanded them. So they
were to leave the like Commission with every Nation as they did teach. Now we
see Christ commanded the Disciples to teach and make them Disciples, before
they should baptize them, and so the Disciples were to teach all Nations to
follow the same rule; and so the Apostle does exhort to follow their rule and
example as they left us.

Answer. Thomas Lamb your dear brother, and messenger of Jesus Christ, put
apart to preach the Gospell-grace, (as he styles himself in his letter to you,
his brethren, and prisoners of Jesus Christ) was (as he writes in that letter)
to go to Norwich in February last, Anno 1641. about the Lords work, as he had
been with you about the like work. Now the substance of this worthy
instruments commission is the Lords work, in erecting Churches, and planting
new foundations, but his going to Norwich, and coming to Gloucester, and
Painswicke, and Cranham, is but a circumstance of this man's commission, as
things concerning time and place about actions, may be termed circumstances of
such actions, without any text of Scripture to warrant the expression. I told
you that Christ's Commission in Mat. 28.19, 20. was a full Commission, to all
Christ's Ministers under the Gospel, extraordinary and ordinary; and that this
Commission was, that the Word should be preached, and that the Sacraments
should be administered; and that ordinary Pastors and Teachers in se^led
Congregations did execute this Commission fully, though they went not from
Nation to Nation, and from place to place. Now if such a circumstance may be
dispensed withal, without violation of the Commission, then the Commission of
Christ there given, binds not all Ministers in every circumstance: For we
told you, that this being a full Commission to all the Ministers of Jesus
Christ, to direct them in the work of the Ministry: and the Ministers of Jesus
Christ being partly extraordinary, and partly ordinary, therefore in this
Commission here must be something peculiar unto the Apostles (being
extraordinary Ministers) which did not, nay, could not be found in ordinary
Pastors and Teachers. Now ordinary Pastors must preach and baptize, as well
as the Apostles. What then is peculiar to Apostles (as being extraordinary
Ministers) in this Commission? I answer, that it is peculiar to Apostles here
(being penmen of the Holy Ghost, inspired immediately by the Holy Ghost) to
plant foundations, to deliver binding rules of faith and worship immediately
from God unto the Churches, which before were not given unto the sons of men:
By their preaching and working of miracles they were to convince Jews and
Gentiles, that Christ (the son of the Virgin Mary, which the Jews did
crucify) was the true Messiah and Savior of mankind, the only begotten
son of God; And such as did embrace the doctrine and faith of Christ, they
must baptize: And many were called unto the obedience of the faith, by the
doctrine and miracles of the Apostles, and these did fulfill their ministry,
when they had planted these foundations, and delivered the full canon of the
Gospel unto the Churches, and so being thus planted, they did deliver over the
Churches unto ordinary pastors and teachers, as holy companies in Covenant
with God, whereas before they were Idolaters, and Pagans, and murderers. Now I
hope you expect not new canons of sacred Scriptures, you do not expect that
ordinary Ministers should work miracles The practice of the Apostles is not
then to be followed in things of extraordinary privilege, but in matters of
ordinary faith and mortality. Now ordinary pastors find parents in the state
of Christianity, in Covenant with God, and under His seal, and therefore they
do and must baptize their children in their infancy. The strict urging of
Apostolical imitation is wicked and plain confusion; something is here
peculiar to extraordinary Ministers.

Anabaptist. Nay further you grant us, that Baptism has its Commission from
this text. Why then we would know where and when Christ gave any Commission to
alter it. If any, I pray show it us. If none, how dare you or any man to alter
and change the Commission and Commands of Christ.

Answer. I told you that Baptism was here mentioned occasionally, and that it
was instituted long before in John the Baptist. Neither did Apostles now begin
to receive a Commission to preach and baptize, for they had received this
Commission before, and they did preach and baptize. But now they had a
Commission to go unto all nations, whereas before Christ's resurrection, they
were to keep within the precincts of Judea. And for an alteration of the
commission (by baptizing Infants of Christians) we acknowledge none, neither
can you prove it an alteration, but distinguish of what is peculiar to Apostles
in this general Commission, and of what is common to Apostles and ordinary
pastors, and you are answered. I say, in this short sum of words, we have
the Apostolical ministry and the pastoral ministry included. The
Apostolical ministry being extraordinary and to be but for a time is ceased,
and no ordinary Ministers are to exercise such a ministry as the Apostles did,
by virtue of their peculiar function, neither do we, nor can we expect any
such Ministers, because we ought not to expect any new canon of holy Scripture,
nor an alteration of the present Liturgy. Heb. 8.6. The canon of the sacred
Scripture is full, and the present Liturgy is to continue unto the worlds end.
And therefore it is absurd and impious for you to utter such confusion (to use
your own phrase) and urge the Apostolical Commission upon ordinary pastors
in the strict letter. And you run it over again and again, and still you have
the Apostles Commission and practice up; whereas if you look upon their
Commission and practice as extraordinary and Apostolical, both are peculiar
unto them, and to cease with them. And (as I said before) Apostles are not to
be followed by us in things of extraordinary privilege, but in matters of
ordinary faith and morality. And so however your peevish reasonings may lead
your selves into a fools paradise, yet they shall never drive us from the
ways of Christ.

Anabaptist. Nay further those to whom Christ gave this Commission unto, He
said He would be with them unto the end of the world, but we know that the
Disciples lived not to the end of the world. And therefore the Commission does
still last to the end of the world. Thus for your third reason.

Answer. The Commission indeed may be meant of a succession of persons in the
ministerial function, unto the worlds end. But yet it cannot be denied, but
that somewhat in this general Commission is Apostolical, as to plant
foundations* and to have an immediate Commission from God for to be the penmen
of the sacred canon. Ministers do not now deliver a new canon of divine faith
and worship, nor do they prove their calling by miracles. They teach the
Church of Saints only that which is left them by Apostles and Prophets Ordinary
Ministers preach and baptize, and God is with them, and also will be with their
survivers in that holy function unto the worlds end. And thus my third reason
is good, and stand it will against the strongest assaults of Satan and his
wicked instruments.


Anabaptist. Fourthly you reason from the fruits and effects of Baptism,
saying, that God did ordinarily bless this Baptism unto Infants. But truly S,
we cannot but wonder at your folly in rendering such a reason as this. Well.
Seeing you have rendered it, we desire to answer it. You say etc. ut infra.

Answer. To see impudency in the face of an Anabaptist, is a thing that I no
more wonder at, then to see fishes in the water, or flying fowls upon the
wing. And to clamor where you cannot answer, is an old trick, that happily you
learned of Can (that great Cabalist for schism) while you were of the
separation, before you came to this perfection of impiety. Were I to deal with
reasonable men. I should wonder to see them so bereft of all reason, as to
sentence that argument folly, which the wisest in the school of Reason judge
to be demonstrative. And that is an argument drawn from the effect. Thus I
argued; we baptize children in their infancy, because God does ordinarily make
our baptizing of Infants effectual, to the ends whereunto true Baptism is
appointed in the Gospel. Now the ends whereunto true Baptism is appointed in
the Gospel, are to put on Christ, to dye unto sin and to live unto God. And
certainly God would not ordinarily give testimony to a false Sacrament, by
making it effectual to the ends whereunto a true Sacrament is appointed. If
this be folly, then you do well in excepting against it, but if truth, then
you have verily the old proverb, viz. That a fools bolt is soon shot. But let
us hear your answer for refutation hereof.

Anabaptist. You say it is effectual, but we would know wherein it does
appear, for we find generally all children to be as vile, and as wicked, when
they are come to any bigness, as any wicked men. For there is not any evil
almost, but they do show it in their tougues or actions. And this they do
etc. ut infra.

Answer. In the amplification of this reason I told you that among us (that
were baptized in infancy) we have as humble, and as meek and mortified men and
women, as any among the Anabaptists, to say no more. We have those that dye
daily unto sin, and are vexed in soul to see the abominations of others.
Again we have those that bear upon them the marks of the Lord Jesus. Their
lives are holy and lovely. They are sound in the faith, grave in their
behavior, and ready unto all good works. They deny themselves. They advance
free grace. They afflict their souldes, and seek the peace of Jerusalem. And
hereof (I say) we (through Gods blessing) have not a few; and all these
baptized in their infancy. And whereas you say, that all children generally are
as vile and as wicked, when they are come to any bigness, as any wicked men. I
must tell you, that this your charge is unjust, wicked, and slanderous, for
many children of godly parents among us (that were baptized in their infancy)
do manifest the gracious fruits of their incorporation into Christ by
Baptism, as soon as they come to any bigness. And their speeches and actions
(considering the immaturity of their age, and the corruption and frailty of
man's nature) are (for the corruption and frailty of man's nature) are (for the
general tenor thereof,) gracious and lovely, though at some times, and in
some particulars (being provoked and stirred) they are erroneous, and not
justifiable.

Anabaptist. And this they dee still remain until the word of God does work
upon them, and new mould them, so that it is the word that does change them,
and not Baptism, For we find, etc. ut infra.

Answer. Mortification, and rising to newness of life, are attributed to
Baptism Rom, 6.3, 4, 5. And salvation by Jesus Christ his resurrection is
attributed to Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21. And therefore for you to exclude Baptism
from having any stroke in the change of man from nature to grace is not to
speak according to the language of the Scriptures of God. Christ does sanctisie
and cleanse His Church with the washing of water by the word. Ephesians. 5.26. Here
the Apostle does join Baptism, and the word as joint-instruments in man's
sanctification, and therefore you are led by an anti-Apostolicall spirit in
excluding Baptism. But now you have forgotten God in your discourse, for I
said, that God does ordinarily make our baptizing of Infants effectual to the
ends whereunto true Baptism is appointed. And now you say, that it is not
baptism that changes the baptized, but the word. Well, God ordinarily by His
word changes and new mouldeth the baptized in their infancy, and so God by His
word ordinarily makes baptism effectual unto persons that were baptized in
their infancy. And this is that which we would have. And thus you see that
while you had forgotten God in His ordinances of grace, you forgot what you
were about. And why make you such an opposition between the word preached and
the Sacraments, seeing both are the word of God? The word preached is the word
audible, and the Sacraments are the word visible, both the word of God to the
fitting of His elect for Heaven. We baptize with water, that is our duty: but
it is Christ that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. We catechize and preach, but
it is God that makes His word effectual to the ends whereunto it is appointed.
God must be looked upon in all His ordinances, as a wise worker that makes
them all helpful unto one another, and one must not exclude another. The
Infants of the Jews were circumcised in their infancy, but that Sacrament
became a long time afterward effectually by the instruction of their teachers.
Shall we now for this cause exclude circumcision as ineffectuall, because God
made it not effectual unto them until a long time after by the instructions of
their instructours? Answer this and the proportion will hold in paedo-baptisme.
It Is wild divinity to say, that an ordinance is not to be used, unless it
take effect presently.

Anabaptist. For we find them to show forth as bad fruits after their
Baptism, as the vilest creatures that be, so that, if we should judge of
their Baptism by their fruits before they come to understand the word of God,
we may justly say, that their Baptism was abominable by its evil fruits. I
say, if we should judge any thing of the effect of their Baptism, then this
we may judge of it. But we will be sparing in our censures, although from
your affirmation we might justly conclude so. Yet, I say, we will be sparing in
that, and impute those evil fruits and effects (that are in children after
Baptism) unto their corrupted nature, and their Baptism to be ineffectuall
by its fruits. And therefore by all this well considered, we may see it is the
word that makes the change in the children and others. and not their baptism.
Thus we plainly see, that it is the word that makes them fit for Baptism, and
not their parentage.

Answer. We find not all baptized children of Christian parents as bad as this
your wicked charge does import. Nay there are creatures worse then the worst of
them, and therefore you are a false accuser and unjust slanderer, and you
cannot make it good. But you have forgotten the business in hand again, I told
you that God did ordinarily make our baptizing of Infants effectual to the
ends, whereunto true Baptism is appointed in the Gospel. And this the Lord
may do, though the most of those that we baptize in their infancy prove
vicious in their conversation, and but few of them religious; as long as the
Lord does it ordinarily, i. e. by ordinary means and usually, as by His word
and ordinances in His Church, for what else can you understand by the word
[ordinarily?] I say, as long as the Lord does thus ordinarily make our
baptizing of Infants effectual to the proper ends of true Baptism, appointed
in the Gospel, though but to a few of the baptized, our argument stands good.
And you can no more conclude from the vitiousnesse of the baptized in infancy,
that that practice of baptizing Infants is abominable, then you may from the
vitiousnesse of the Jews, that their circumcision in their infancy was
abominable, because there were but few of them, unto whom God ordinarily made
it effectual to the proper ends, whereunto it was appointed in the word, for
among them there were but few that did believe in the Messiah, and yield
obedience unto Gods holy Law in heart and life. And now how just your
conclusion is from my premises, let all men see. And no wonder that you make my
premises speak what you please. And should we judge of your Baptism by your
fruits, i. e. by your doctrine and tenants, (for that is the true meaning of
Matthew. 7.16. as you may see clearly evinced by the verse immediately going
before.) I say, should a man judge of the Baptism of Anabaptists by their
doctrine and tenants, he could not but conclude, that your Baptism is a most
abominable and execrable thing (though you are adulti before you are adulti
before you are baptized.) For Anabaptists deny original sin in Infants, and
hold a bundle of heresies, as you may see in Osianders Enchiridion of
controversies with Anabaptists. And the most strict in your religion are the
most vile, and God does not ordinarily make your Baptism effectual to the
proper ends, whereunto true Baptism is appointed in the Gospel. And whereas
you say that we may see, that it is the word that makes children and others fit
for Baptism, and not their parentage, I think herein you say you know not
what, in making an opposition between the word and parentage, if by parentage,
you mean Christian parentage, if not, you speak not to the point in hand. We
say that the word fits all for Baptism. The word of instruction in the
Covenant makes the alien fit for Baptism, and the word of the Covenant makes
children of baptized parents fit for Baptism, as the word of instruction made
Abraham and his Proselytes fit for circumcision, but the word of the Covenant
made their children fit for circumcision in their infancy. Genesis 17.9.

Anabaptist. Again, God suffered the Patriarchs to live in the sin of
malignity for a time, through their ignorance, yet God did bless them, and
pass it by, but this is no warrant for us to sin wilfully against the light,
nor ignorantly for want of seeking light. Again etc. ut infra.

Answer. But how comes this in? How does this batter my reason and assertion?
Oh! I cry you mercy. I apprehended not your meaning at the first. Your meaning
is, that the Church of Christ has sinned in baptizing Infants of Christian
parents, and that God passed it by, because they did it ignorantly, for want of
light. But now since Lamb your Founder, and you hid Disciples have brought it
into, and set it up in the Country, viz. that none must be baptized until
they give testimony of their faith and repentance. All (though hitherto they
have baptized children in their infancy) must henceforth forbear that
practice, if not, they sin wilfully agianst the true light that you have
brought, or at least ignorantly, if they will not seek unto your light for
direction. And so my argument is not worth a straw, for albeit God has
hitherto made our baptizing of Infants effectual to the proper ends, whereunto
true Baptism is appointed in the Gospel* because we did it ignorantly before
this light came into the country, but now you (as a new Apostle) can tell us,
that God will do so no longer. If this be not your meaning. I know not how
this story can argue against this fourth reason of mine. And most probable,
this is your meaning, for it suits well with your former blasphemies; for when
you fell upon this course of rebaptizing, you were wont to say usually to your
old acquaintance, that we are bound to bless God for the coming of this light
amongst us. However if this be your meaning (as I am confident it is) yet in
this you are deceived, for the devil did set up this light heretofore in the
country. And God did put it out again, And so yours must out too, as soon as
it has led as many wanderers into the bogges, as God has appointed it unto.

Anabaptist. Again you condemn many gross things, that have been practiced
in the Church of England, as the ceremonies, and the admitting of drunkards and
unclean persons, and such like to Sacraments. This you know was not right, as
appears by your confession and practice. Now God has suffered this a long
time, and what, shall we therefore say that God approved of these things? Nay;
if you will, so it is: But we will not conclude so. For our lives we dare not.
Why then the case is all one, and therefore this is no ground at all.

Answer. They say that a professed beggar is never out of his way; And there is
a kind of reasoning which we call beggary in Schools, and then it is used
Petitio principij in disputationibus, when the opponent is drawn so dry of
arguments, that unless the answerer grant him some absurd principles, he can
maintain the opposite part no longer. And so I think you have almost run your
self out of breath, and now unless I will acknowledge, that the baptizing of
Infants is a gross practice in the Church of England, you can say no more
against this reason. The baptizing of Infants in the Church of England must
have no more warrant from the word of God, then the admitting of drunkards to
the Lords table. But if I will not grant you this ex favore, you cannot prove
it. And surely should I grant you this, I should be a man of as little
conscience, as you are of reason. It Is one thing for God to suffer things in a
Church, and another thing to make an ordinance effectual by His ordinary
concurrency. And the godly (in all reformed Churches) that have bewailed the
things you mention, have still defended as well by practiced paedo-baptisme,
and now to this day do still the same. As for the ceremonies I dare not
conclude, that their use is a gross and sinful practice, but leave them to
every man's conscience to use or not to use, as God shall give liberty or put
restraint.

Anabaptist. Further you bring us the example of wise and learned men which do
hold for Infants Baptism. We answer, that possible it is for wise and learned
men (as any are upon the earth) for to be blind and ignorant, concerning some
things in the worship and service of God. As for instance. Apollos. Act. 18.24.
He was an eloquent man and mighty in the Scripture, and yet this man was
deceived about the same point of Baptism, for he only knew the Baptism of
John, and we see Aquila and Priscilla a couple of private persons did teach and
instruct this wise man in the perfect way of the Lord. And so also Nicodemus
Ioh. 3. he was a Ruler among the Jews, and when Christ said he must be borne
again, he thought he must have gone into his mothers womb again; see where
this were wisdom in this man. And of Balaam, he was counted a wise man and a
Prophet, and yet his Ass could see that which he could not; for his Ass
perceived the Angel of the Lord in the way, when he went to curse the people,
when Balaam himself could not see him. And so diverse other examples in
Scripture we have to the same purpose, and therefore this argument is no good
argument.

Answer. If it be possible for wise and learned men to be blind, and ignorant
concerning some things in the worship and service of God, then it is very
probable that fools, and unlearned men may be blind, and ignorant concerning
some things, in the worship and service of God much more. But your meaning is,
that you have a privilege of not erring: That indeed is a thing that your
Church holds. And why say you that Apollos was deceived about the same point of
baptism? and that Aquila and Priscilla, a couple of private persons, did
instruct him in the perfect way of the Lord? Was it paedo-baptisme that Apollos
was deceived about? If not, how the same point of baptism? For the point in
controversy between you and us is paedo-baptisme: And what mean you in
saying, that Apollos was instructed in the perfect way of the Lord by Aquila
and Priscilla, a couple of private persons? That your way of baptizing is the
perfect way of the Lord, and that Ministers must be instructed by you (being
private persons) in this point? And for Nicodemus you do well to wonder where
his wisdom was, when he talked so carnally of regeneration, as if he were to
return unto the state of infants-unborne, before he could be truly
regenerated: as we wonder where your wisdom was, when you talked so carnally
of baptism, as if you (Christians by birth, and baptized in your infancy)
must return into the state of Pagans and Infidels, and so come into the Church
by confession, before you could be truly baptized. And what talk you of
Balaam, that went to curse the people of God, and of his Ass that saw the
Angel of the Lord in his way? It must be granted, that you are the people of
God, and that I am Balaam that curse you, because I preach against you. But are
you mine Ass that see the Angel of the Lord, viz. your baptism in my way?
Surely they are silly fools that will ride upon Asses, where Horses are so
plentiful. I have many good books to inform me, and many grave Ministers,
learned and godly to advise withal, if need were. And I must tell you, that I
am so far from scrupling about paedo-baptisme, that I see the impression of
the Holy Ghost upon it. But to what purpose all this is alleged by you (here
in this place) I know not. it shows only that men may err, and so may you.
And now let all men see your folly in charging me of folly for rendering of this
reason.


Anabaptist. Also you bring the practice of true Churches against us, but this
argument is as weak as the others. For we have examples in Scripture of true
Churches that have been deceived in some things, and held gross things and
great disorders, and yet true Churches too; as the seven Churches of Asia, most
of which held gross things, and so the Church of Corinth, with others.
Therefore we see it possible and practical for true Churches to be out.

Answer. Your meaning is, that all other true Churches (as you call them) are
out in this point of baptism, and that you only are right. This is a very
compendious and pithy refutation of the argument drawn from the example of
other true Churches. But look upon this argument in my Sermon-notes, and you
shall find that the matter will not be so easily put off, as you seem to
intimate. For in this last reason I said, that we baptize children of Christian
parents, because it is the practice of other reformed Churches, which God has
blessed in that way, with great increase of heavenly gifts. Now if we should
forbear baptizing of infants, by virtue of a divine restraint, then we should
lay iniquity upon whole Kingdoms, and godly societies, where Paedo-baptisme
is practiced: And this would make a mighty division, rent, and schism between
us and other true Churches, with whom we should endeavor to hold communion and
fellowship as companies of Saints, that stand as immediately under Christ, as
our selves. Now you will say, that

In sin we are not to hold communion with other Churches, But to hold
communion with other Churches in the practice of Paedo-baptisme, is to hold
communion with other Churches in sin. Ergo We are not to hold communion with
other Churches in the practice of Paedo-baptisme.
Prove (say they) that baptizing of infants is a sin. We prove it thus, say
you.

To baptize those that are not baptizable is a sin. But infants of baptized
parents are not baptizable. Ergo To baptize infants of baptized parents is a
sin.
Well, you will prove the assumption thus: viz.

Only believers are baptizable. But infants of Christians are not believers.
Ergo Infants of Christians are not baptizable.
They now will tell you that the minor proposition is false, for the Scripture
does no where term persons unbeleevers, for the habit of unbelief negatively,
but for the habit of unbelief positively. And to be a believer (in your sense)
is requisite unto baptism for a made-Christian, but not for a borne-Christian.
And to say, that infants of Christians are not believers is absurd: And
therefore however you may seem to pass over this argument as a slight thing,
you shall sinde there was more weight in it, than ever you can answer. But you
say well (however) in saying that this argument of mine is as weak as the
others, I believe it indeed: and so as the others do stand upon such a
foundation, as you cannot undermine, so let this. And now let all men see how
well your boasting, and your answering do agree together, for you have boasted
up and down that you have answered all mine arguments, and I think all as
well as any. But let us now proceed, and consider your miscellance rhapsodie,
that follows in your papers.

Anabaptist. Again, there is as much controversy among you Ministers,
concerning who should be baptized, as it is between you and us. For you, and
Mr Cape^, and Mr Marshall, and diverse others of the best Ministers do hold,
that all the children within the Nation should be baptized: and the Ministers
of New England, and other reformed Churches do hold, that none should be
baptized but the children of believers, who are judged to be believers at
least. Now here is as much difference among you, as between you and us: And
therefore we may justly say, go and reconcile your selves, and you may do the
better with us. For if we should yield unto you, we cannot tell to which of you
to turn unto; whether to you that hold all to be baptized, or those that hold
some to be baptized. But the truth is, unless you give us better grounds then
any yet we see, we shall turn to neither of you, with Gods help to strengthen
us.

Answer. We all agree in the point of Paedo-baptisme, namely, that children of
believers are to be baptized in their infancy, and so in this point the
difference is not so wide, as between you and us. Herein you lay a false
imputation upon us, a thing too frequent in you, and that which your conscience
can well dispense withal, as appears by your usual practice: and whether you
turn to us, or New England, you must turn from your own way. Our agreement
is such, that we are all one in the point of Paedo-baptisme against you. We (in
this Land) hold, that children of all baptized parents are baptizable in their
infancy, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, under which such children were
borne, as children of all circumcised parents were circumcisable in their
infancy, by virtue of the same Covenant of Grace, under which they were borne;
and this is the opinion and practice of all reformed Churches that I know, as
the French, Scottish, Dutch, High and Low, etc. But what they do in
New England, I know not. The Records of their Church orders and tenants are not
in print. But they which say they follow New England way, will not baptize all
children of believers neither, except they be in their Covenant. Except
believers enter into their Covenant, they shall have no commons with them at
the Lords table, neither shall their children be baptized by them. But their
warrant for this practice we desire to see, for we think it unjust and impious,
that persons under Gods Covenant of Grace, should be deprived of gods seals,
which he has inseparably annexed unto that Covenant. And moreover, for them to
deny baptism unto children of baptized parents, I see no reason, though such
parents are vicious in their lives, as long as such parents remain within the
Church, and are orthodox all in the faith. I am sure that the children of the
Jews (whose parents were profane in life) were not kept back from the
Sacrament of circumcision, for that cause; And the reason is, because that
Covenant was the Covenant of Grace, and not of Works. There are two Covenants
that God has made with men, viz. the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of
Grace. And of these Covenants there were two heads, namely, the first Adam, and
the second Adam: With the first Adam God did strike a Covenant of Works; and
Adam the head of this body in Covenant did transgress, and so destroyed the
Covenant, and thereby deprived himself, and all his members of the privileges
thereof, and so death entered upon all m^n, in that all had sinned in their
Head. With the second Adam, viz. Christ, God did strike a Covenant of Grace;
and Christ the head of his body in this Covenant remains just, and the
justifier of his members; and therefore his members cannot be deprived of the
privileges of this Covenant, for the default of immediate parents. Now for
th^se men in this way (as they say) of New England, to put a stop unto the
Covenant of Grace; in denying baptism unto children of baptized parents, I see
no warrant. For first, This practice destroys the nature of this Covenant. For
the parents by their miscarriage have broken the Covenant of Works, but not
the Covenant of Grace; this remains entire in Christ, who is the head of the
children borne under this Covenant. And these children, though by natural
generation they are the offspring of such wicked parents, yet by reason of the
Covenant under which they were borne, they are the children of the Covenant.
This practice then is a presumption of an higher nature than these men are
aware off: And albeit their intent be a reformation, yet the means is
diabolical. Secondly, This practice does vertually accuse Christ the Head, as
a violater of this Covenant of Grace; for as long as the Head remains just,
and the justifier of his members, his members are not to be debarred of their
privileges whereof under the Gospel Baptism is the first. And the vicious
carriage of immediate parents, can no more exclude a child from Baptism now,
than could formerly the vicious carriage of Jewish parents, exclude their
children from the privilege of Circumcision. Now some (to evade this) say,
that the Church of the Jews was a National Chruch, but the Church of England
is not so. But this is but a mere shift to evade what they cannot answer, for
Proselytes who were not of that Nation, were to have their children
circumcised, and circumcision was enjoined and practiced before the Jews were
a National Church, even when and while they were a Family-Church. But to the
point, I say that the Church of the Jews was a National Church in some things
after a peculiar manner; as First, God had tied himself to remain with that
Nation by his Ordinances of grace, until Shiloh came. Secondly, that Nation
was once a year (in the representative body thereof) to meet at one common
place, ( viz. at Jerusalem) about the worship of God by divine appointment.
Now God has not tied himself to the Church of England for any set term of
time; nor is there by divine appointment any set place of worship for the whole
Nation to meet in once a year, about the worship of God. But thirdly, the
Church of the Jews was a National Church, because the whole Nation had
received the Doctrine and Covenant of grace, and in this sense I hope England
is a National Church. And if in this sense the Church of England be a
National Church, that is as much as I require. But surely these men have some
other meaning (when they say that the Church of the Jews was a National
Church, and the Church of England is not) than as yet they dare to utter,
(though among them you shall seldom find a man tongue-tyed.) Their meaning
is, that the whole Nation of the Jews pell-mell, were by course to be admitted
to the privileges of that typical ministration, and so the children of
vicious parents too, because of that Nation; but under the Gospel since
Christ, only the children of godly parents are to be sealed into Gods peculiar
by baptism, and others are not; and here they would bring in their Covenant as
the form of the Church: But the children of the Jews were not circumcised
because of that Nation, but because of gods Covenant with that Nation. And so
our children are not to be baptized because of such a Nation, but because of
Gods Covenant with such a Nation; and the children of all baptized parents are
borne under Gods Covenant of grace, and whether their parents be vicious or
religious in life, the childs title stands good to the Covenant. The religious
lives of his parents (being works) do not entitle him to the Covenant and
initiall seal thereof. And the vicious life of parents baptized (being works)
cannot make void the childs title to the Covenant and initiall seal thereof.
For his title unto the Covenant and initiall seal thereof lies in Christ, who
remains just, and the justifier of his members; and the elect seed may pass
through the loins of vicious parents, and often do, whereas godly parents may
have reprobates to their children. If then these men have any thing to object
against Christ, as a violater of the Covenant of Grace, let them say on, and
they shall be answered; but if nothing, how dare they deny the initiall seal
of this Covenant unto the children of this Covenant. Now many honest-hearted
Christians carried away with the fair show of these men, do not see the high
iniquity of this practice. 3. The practice of debarring infants of baptized
parents from baptism, for the loose lives of their parents is no better than
high sacrilege: For such children being not Pagans, borne out of the Church,
but Christians, borne within the Church, and of the holy seed; borne (I say)
under the Covenant of Grace, are therefore to have (as their birthright) that
Covenant under which they were borne, put under seal unto them For the
miscarriage of the parents cannot deprive the children of their portion in Gods
Covenant of Grace; seeing works are not the ground of that right of theirs,
but Gods free grace in Christ: and the child has as primitive a right unto
this Covenant as the parent. For the words of the Covenant are, I will be they
God, and the God of thy seed after thee in their generations. And therefore,
however vicious parents are to be kept back from the Lords Supper for their
reformation, yet their infants cannot be kept back from Baptism, and so put a
stop unto the Covenant of Grace, where God puts none. Fourthly and lastly, as
this is a new way, so it is grounded upon new-Divinity, which none of the
orthodox Divines in the Church of England were ever principled in, in the
Schools of the Prophets; for if that the personal sin of the immediate
parent be a bar against insants baptism, then there are more sins imputed
besides the first sin of Adam; but there is no other sin imputed, but only
the first sin of Adam. And thus you see that I am as great an adversary
against those whose practices do any way oppugn the nature of the Covenant of
Grace, as I am against you. For my purpose is to maintain the quarrel of Gods
Covenant against all opposers, as it is my duty and office, and I hope my
Brethren and Fathers in the Universities and in the Country, will assoord me
their pious aid and assistance. And that all good Christians will beseech God
at the Throne of Grace, to carry on His own work in me, and in all that shall
endeavor to hold forth the Truth of God unto His people, that godly hearts and
tender consciences may not be misled by the good words and fair speeches of
Satan's agents. And for you that are carried away into this way of re-baptizing,
the Lord give you to see where you are. And for those of the Separation, the
Lord show them wherein they do exceed, for their ways are not right before
the Lord, nor justifiable by His Word. And now for you to say that you will
turn neither to us, nor to those of New England, unless you see better
grounds; We must tell you, that you must bring better exceptions against the
grounds that we have laid for Paedo-baptisme, or else we must conclude that
you blaspheme the Name of God, in desiring his help for to strengthen you in
your way.

Anabaptist Again, you allege the qualisications of some men that hold
against as, which (you say) are as good as any of the Anabaptists, and as
loving is one another as any of the other side: But this we confess may be.
But Sir, this does ill appear sometimes, for there be some of your coat that
are ready to bite and devour one another, for a small triste many times, and
that good men too, for which they are too blame.

Answer. To what end I alleged the qualifications of good men, you may see in
my fourth reason; and what does all this prove? But that good men, yea
Ministers sometimes have their failings, for which (you say well) they are too
blame. But what? This is one of your expletives, to fill up your paper, and to
make your answerer work.

Anabaptist. Nay you said further, that they were as humble as the proudest
Anabaptist of them all. Now S^, you did well to compare the best of your selves
to the worst of them, For we account him that is proudest, to be the worst
man of them. And you compare your humble men with our proud men, but we pass
by this, and take it only to be your mistake in the heat of your expressions
and not any way to be the meaning of your intentions.

Answer. If I said any such thing, I was mightily overseen indeed, for
Anabaptists are all so proud, as if each particular strove for the supremacy.
And I was much mistaken in you also, for I thought you had been truly burdened
in conscience, and would only have alleged such things, as might have tended
to the satisfaction of conscience about paedo-baptisme, but now I see nothing
but scorning, and sleighting of what you cannot ^^fell. I pray pardon me this
mistake too. But it should seem, that this merry passage is none of the
arguments you build your faith upon, but pass it by as a null, and judge it a
mistake in the heat of expressions, as we judge of your baptizing in Severne
to be a null, and mistake in the heat of your fiery zeal, and therefore you
chose so cold a season, and so great a river to allay it.

Anabaptist. Further you demand of us, where we can bring any example of any
Church gathered, that did deny Infants Baptism. But we will quickly answer you
that we have no example of any Church gathered or ungathered, that did baptize
their Infants. And so your question is frivolous, and as you said to us, we
return the like to you; where the Holy Ghost has no tongue, we will have no
ear.

Answer. You say, no Church gathered or ungathered does baptize Infants, but
ere now you speak of reformed Churches, and here no Church baptizeth Infants.
Your meaning is, that Baptism is the form of a Church, and so no Baptism, no
Church, and Baptism of Infants is no Baptism; as though you were members of
no Church, till you were baptized. If of no Church, then no members of Christ,
and so dying not to be saved, but happily I mistake your meaning. You confess
that you can bring no example of any gathered Church in the new Testament that
did deny Baptism unto Infants, whose parents were baptized, and in the state
of Christianity. Neither does the Holy Ghost any where in the new Testament
either expressly, or by necessary deduction deny Baptism unto such children.
And therefore Anabaptists in denying Baptism unto children of baptized parents
are not therein led by the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost speaks expressly,
that children even of one believing parent are Saints. 1 Cor. 7.14. and no such
thing was predicated of any Gentiles children, before faith in Christ put that
honor upon them, and yet many, yea most of them borne in wedlock. And Lamb
your Master does acknowledge the married spoken off, 1 Cor. 7.14. to be
married, nay lawfully married before faith came to make either their marriage
or children holy. Look upon his letter, and you shall find, that either he
speaks that, or plain nonsense. But I have had speech with your Master
already about his judgment upon this text, and I think that (if your Master
will be but ingenous) we are agreed. But you his Disciple have gotten another
trick to put the Holy Ghost to silence here, in this text. (As the proverb is,
seldom comes a better, a bad Master, and a worse Scholar.) You talk of
Childrens being holy in the Apostles estimation. Happily you have gotten that
old Popith shift, that the Papists are wont to have against Paul's writings.
They say that all Paul's writing is not to be taken for the holy Canon, because
Paul says, not the Lord but I, not I but the Lord. And in that you said that
children were holy in the Apostles estimation, I suppose you rested upon that
rotten prop of Popery. And so you will have the Holy Ghost to have no tongue
where you will have no ear; for the Holy Ghost speaks as well by necessary
deductions, as in express words, and the Holy Ghost has a tongue in the true
sense of the Scripture, as well as in the express letter. But you have said
enough, you confess you have no example in the new Testament, where Baptism
was ever denied unto Infants of baptized parents, neither have you any Command
or Commission from Christ our only Monarch, and Law giver for denying of
Baptism, unto Infants of baptized parents. And therefore you do not derive
your power from Christ the King of the Church, but from the devil in so doing

Thus I argue from this ground.

Such as deny Baptism unto persons, to whom Christ denies it not, are from the
devil, and not from Christ. But Anabaptists deny Baptism unto persons to whom
Christ denies it not. Ergo Anabaptists are from the devil, and not from
Christ.
The assumption may thus be proved irrefragably.

Infants of baptized parents are persons to whom Christ denies not Baptism.
But Anabaptists deny Baptism unto Infants of baptized parents, Ergo.
Anabaptists deny Baptism to persons to whom Christ denies it not.
Now bring forth any Commission from Christ, where Baptism is denied unto
Infants of baptized parents. If you can bring no such thing forth (as indeed
you cannot) then let all men know, that you are from the devil, and not from
Christ, in denying Baptism unto such Infants. And so you set up the devil,
and not Christ in that practice. For Christ has no proviso in His Commission
for Baptism, wherein the Infants of baptized parents are denied. Show us any
place in the new Testament where Christ says either expressly or by true
deduction, you shall not baptized parents. See then whom you serve, and whence
you derive your power: even from the devil. Now take the same weapons and
sight against us, and argue thus against us. Viz.

Such as administer Baptism unto persons, to whom Christ denies it, are from
the devil and not from Christ. But Ministers of the Church of England
administer Baptism to persons unto whom Christ denies it, Ergo Ministers of
the Church of England are from the devil, and not from Christ.
We will deny your minor proposition, and you will prove it thus; viz.

Infants of baptized parents are persons, unto whom Christ denies Baptism. But
Ministers of the Church of England administer Baptism unto Infants of baptized
parents; Ergo Ministers of the Church of England administer Baptism unto
persons that Christ deny it unto.
Now the major proposition of the this later Syllogism is false, and it cannot
possibly be made good by the Scripture. Make that good, and the day is yours, I
say, make this good, viz. That Christ in His Gospel does any where deny
Baptism unto Infants of baptized parents, and then we will acknowledge that
you have your power (of debarring Infants of baptized parents) from Christ; the
which until you do we will look upon you, as persons that have your
Commission from the devil, and not from Christ. And we in baptizing Infants
of baptized parents are in the way of Christ, and have our Commission from Him,
and He will defend us from your virulent rage, and bless our ministry.

Anabaptist. Next you seem to say something concerning the Covenant, and you
bring us the example of the Church of the Ephesians, which were Jews and
Gentiles converted, and brought out of the miserable estate that they were in
before, and now being converted they were engrafted into Christ, not before,
but now being in a new condition; yet those privileges that are there spoken
to the Church of the Ephesians, which were all converts; I say you make these
privileges and benefits that they were partakers of, to belong to the whole
nation of Pagan, Jew, and Gentile in their natural condition, which is most
gross wresting of the text, and much prejudice to the privilege of the
Gospel. And likewise that place 1 Cor. 12. concerning being baptized into one
spirit, which privilege you attribute to all before conversion, which was only
peculiar to the converts of the Church of Conrinth, and therefore pray take
heed how you wrest the Scripture to accomplish your own humors.

Answer. I said in opposition to the state of the Pagan Gentiles, that the
condition of the Gentiles, where the Gospel is embraced, and they baptized, is
not now the same in point of religion, for now in Jesus Christ we who were
sometimes far off are made nigh etc. Ephesians. 2.13.22. And by one spirit are we
all baptized into one body whether we be Jews or Gentiles. 1 Cor. 12.13. And
whether this be not faithful dealing with the Scripture, let the texts by
your self alleged judge. Did I at all make any mention of persons in their
natural condition, or say that the privileges of the Gospel did belong to
the whole nation before conversion? Fie! Fie! Is this fair dealing? I spoke no
more, nay not so much, as is expressly written in the texts alleged. But
somewhat your venomous tongues must utter, and if you cannot wound our cause,
you will traduce our persons. Our question was about paedo-baptisme, and we
conveyed and contrived the matter in these terms; viz. whether children of
holiest parents even in purest Churches are to be baptized in their infancy?
And we propounded the question of purpose in these terms, that we might come
directly to the point. And therefore all that you say in this cavil is rather
ad personam, then adrem. The like false aspersion you east upon me before, and
there you are answered. And so to answer here were but to answer you in your
folly. And now what humor you are here led by let the reader judge.

Anabaptist. Further, you would know whether the Covenant be not sociall; we
answer, that it is sociall in respect of the durance or continuance of it. As
thus, that it is to all generations unto the end of the world, or else, woe
unto us, if we are left without a Covenant or Promise. For if the Promise had
ceased, then what hopes had there been for us, the force of the Promise
concerning what God is and will be to his people does still last unto the end.
But the seals, etc. ut infra.

Answer. The Covenant of Grace that God has made with His people is this, viz.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. This Promise is to parents and
children jointly, as companions and fellow-sharers of the same blessings
promised, and because parents, and children are joined together, as
fellowheires of the same mercy, therefore we termed the Covenant sociall; and
you confess that the force of the Promise, concerning what God is, and will
be to His people, does last still, unto the end of the world, and that this
Covenant in respect of it is durance or continuance is sociall, even to all
generations. Very good. Then as Abraham, and his Proselytes had their children
in Covenant, put under the initiall seal in their infancy, so are Christians
to have their children put under the initiall seal in their infancy, ut socij
promissioniscum parentibus. And in this I confess you go beyond your Master,
though yet you do not come off clearly in the business; but go on, let us
hear your restriction.

Anabaptist. But the seals and peculiar privileges belong only to believers.
Gal. 3.22. Romans 4.13, 14. with Romans 9. compared with Gal. 3. and Gal. 4. and so
in this respect the peculiar benefits; and privileges of the Covenant are
personal, and unto believers. For, etc. ut infra.

Answer. You mean that the saving benefits of this Covenant, and the inward
Grace signified, and assured by the outward seals do belong only to
believers, and true converts endued with renewing grace in Christ, their
mystical head. And so it was under the Law likewise, for Israel was as the
sand of the Sea, yet a remnant saved, and many are called, but few are chosen.
Few were endued with saving grace of the multitude that were put under the
seal of the Covenant. And the Law was nothing but Christ veiled, as the
Gospel is Moses unvailed. The Covenant is the same, which is, that the seed of
the woman shall break the Serpents head. Genesis 3.15. And that Covenant (being
made on occasion of man's fall in Adam) did concern man's deliverance from
thraldom under sin, and man's restitution unto happiness by Christ, the seed
of the woman. And now were your avail to establish your purpose, then God did
very ill in commanding children to be sealed in their infancy, seeing then they
could exercise no faith, nor manifest the same unto others, and yet were to
receive a type of Christ upon their flesh. But you seem to bring a reason to
confirm what you here say; let us hear it I pray, that we may consider it,
what weight there is in it.

Anabaptist. For the Covenant is now established upon better promises, Heb 8.6.
and to better subjects; for then it was to all lineally, though unbeleevers
might have the sign of Circumcision, but the promise of the Gospel is only
to believers, as I find.

Answer. The Apostle does not say, that our Covenant is better than that which
God made with Adam after his fall, Genesis 3.15. nor better than that which God
made with Abraham, Genesis 17. but better than the Covenant that God made with the
Jews in the day, when he took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt,
Heb. 8.9. And why better than that? Because established upon better promises.
Upon what promises was Gods Covenant with the Jews established, when he
delivered them out of Egypt? Upon the promises of the peoples obedience, Exodus
19.3, 8. But in this Covenant they continued not, but soon brake it, and so
God regarded them not. This Covenant was yet needful, that man might hereby
see his own inability, and his great need of a Savior, to satisfy for his
sin; and to repair man's nature by changing his heart and mind, and so
freely to justify his person; and this is the Covenant established upon better
promises. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. The people would obey God immediately, and they
would hear God immediately instructing them in his Law. They thought they
could have done all readily without the help and mediation of another. But
they were soon woefully convinced of their pride, and soon saw they the
necessity of a Savior, and so they chose Moses a type of Christ, Exodus 20.18,
19. And so God by the hand of Moses gave them a threefold law, as in the hand
of a Mediator; for the two tables of the law which God (viva voce) delivered
unto the people on Mount Sinai, Moses brake on the occasion of the peoples
Idolatry, Exodus 32. Which tables, albeit they contained the perfect rule of
righteousness, yet in that the people entered into Covenant with God,
immediately before they had chosen Moses to be their Mediator; and every one
stood in his own person, immediately receiving the law, and promising legal
obedience unto the same, as the ground of their right unto Gods favors; and
the people having broken their promise by Idolatry, therefore these tables must
needs be broken to pieces, as the peoples personal Covenant; and other two
tables of Gods law must be procured, wherein the people were not to appear in
their own persons, but in the person of their Mediator; and this Covenant
must be established upon Gods promises of free grace in Christ, whereof Moses
was a type: and this you may see, Exodus 34.1, 7. And this is the same Covenant
with that of the Apostle for substance. Heb. 8.6, 11. Now then (I say) Moses
being set up as a Mediator between God and this people, God by him (as in the
hand of a Mediator) gave unto the Israelites a threefold law, shadowing forth
the threefold office of Christ, and serving thereunto: Here is the Moral Law
for a Prophet the Leviticall Law for a Priest, and the Judicial Law for a
King. And so under Moses Christ was administered in types and shadows, but the
same Christ then administered as now, and effectual to the Regeneration,
Justification, Sanctification, Edification, and Salvation of Gods Elect then as
now. And thus you see, how while you allege the Scripture by piece-meale, as
the Devil does, your selves are taken in the Devils snares, even while you go
about to entangle others: And your Religion will not stand with the true
interpretation of Gods holy Word. And you cannot maintain your way, unless
you overthrow fundamentals. And this is the just judgment of God upon you, that
while you neglect the light of the Sanctuary, you should be given over to
believe the muddie sophismes of the Devils factours. The Covenant of God for
substance is now the same as it was unto the Jews.

Quest. What then does the Apostle mean by the Covenants, being better now
under the Gospel, if it was the same Covenant for substance under the Law?

Sol. View but the place, and the Epistle to the Hebrews thoroughly, and you
shall then see, that nothing else can be meant, but a better Ministration or
Liturgy, for the text runs thus: viz. But now has he obtained a more
excellent Liturgy or Ministry, by how much also He is the Mediator of a
better Covenant, which was established upon better promises. Heb. 8.6. A better
Covenant established on better promises. Now show what these better promises
are, and you have what the Apostle means by the better Covenant, whereof
Christ is now Mediator. Now these better are; I will put my laws into their
minds, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a people. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me from the
least to the greatest, for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more. Heb. 8.10. 11, 12.

1. The Old Covenant had the Law written in tables of stone, but the New has
the Law written in the hearts of the worshippers: i.e. Moses did minister the
Law unto the Jews written in tables of stone, thus did the type; but Christ
the antitype does minister Gods Laws unto Christians, written in the fleshly
tables of the heart. Moses could minister the letter of Gods Law unto the
people, but Moses could not change the heart, and renew the mind of his
people, but Christ by his Ministers can change the heart, and renew the mind
of his worshippers. And its Christ's peculiar prerogative both under the Law,
and under the Gospel, that whatsoever persons formerly under the Law, have
been renewed by grace; and what persons soever have been renewed, or shall be
renewed under the Gospel; have, are, and shall be renewed by Christ, and in
Christ. This Epistle to the Hebrews was written by the Apostle unto the Jews,
and the end of the Apostle in writing this Epistle, was to take off the Jews
from resting on the works of the Law, and Liturgy or Ministration of Moses
for salvation and eternal life, and to divert their minds unto Jesus Christ
the Prince of life, and to the ministration of Christ's blood and spirit under
the Gospel, or New Testament, or Covenant. And that the difference between
the old Covenant under Moses the type, and the new Covenant under Christ the
truth and antitype, lies not in the thing ministered for man's eternal
salvation, but in the ministration of Christ to come, and already come, is
clear by that of Paul to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 3.2, 18. Ye are our epistle
written in our hearts, known, and read of all men. Forasmuch as ye are
manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ, ministered by us, written not
with ink, but with the spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but
in fleshly tables of the heart. And such trust have we through Christ to
Godward: Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of
our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. Who also has made us able
Ministers, not of the letter, but of the spirit: (for the letter kills, but
the spirit gives life.) But if the ministration of death written, and engraven
in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly
behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to
be done away: How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious?
For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that which was made
glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excels.
For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which remains is
glorious. Seeing then we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech. And
not as Moses, which put a veil over his face, that the children of Israel
could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished. But their
minds are blinded: for until this day remains the same veil untaken away,
in the reading of the Old Testament: which veil is done away in Christ. But
even unto this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart.
Nevertheless when it (i.e. their heart) shall turn to the Lord, the veil
shall be taken away. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord. And then, Chap. 4.1. he comes with this
inference, viz Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, etc. So then the
difference lies in the ministration, and not in the substance of the Covenant.
Gods Covenant of grace with man is nothing, but Christ for salvation, Christ in
type, and Christ in person: Christ in type before His Incarnation, and Christ
in person since. Here Christ is said to be the Mediator of a better Covenant.
And in the former chapter, Heb. 7.22. He is said to be made a Surety of a
better Testament. This better Covenant coming in place did disanull the
former. Heb. 7.18. Now what did it disanull? Surely nothing but the Typical
and Mosaicall Liturgy, or Ministration. And what did disanull this typical
ministration? Surely nothing but the body of Christ offered up unto God once
for all. Heb. 10.1, 10. Read the 9. chap. of Heb. In a word, the whole
redounds to this much, the Sacrifices which they offered up year by year
continually under the Law, could not make the comers thereunto perfect, as
pertaining to the Conscience. Heb. 10.1, 2. Nay, could not so much as make him
that did the service perfect. Heb. 9.9. But the sacrifice of Christ's body once
for all, makes the comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the conscience.
Heb. 9.14. And therefore Christ is the Mediator of ^ better Covenant, than
Moses was. But the people to whom Paul writes this Epistle, and the end
wherefore he wrote it, are always to be remembered; and that will give a great
deal of light unto what is herein written.

Ob. If this be the meaning of the text, then here is nothing in peculiar
attributed to this ministration under the Gospel; for under the Law the Elect
were converted, and had their hearts changed, and renewed by Christ, and in
Christ.

Sol. Right. They had so* Grant but this, and grant my conclusion, and so
establish the contradictory of your own. For if Christ made the ordinances of
Grace effectual to the conversion of Gods Elect under the Law, and does the
same under the Gospel* then that and this is the same Covenant of Grace for
substance; and so the difference must needs lie in the administration only.
But Paul's controversy lay with the Jews, and mine lies with the Anabaptists,
both adversaries to Christ and his Gospel. The conversion of the Jews under
the Law is not to be ascribed unto those typical sacrifices, but unto Christ,
which they did typifie: but the conversion of Gods Elect under the Gospel, is
to be ascribed unto the sacrifice of Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, as
the proper cause thereof. The Law said, Christ is to be sacrificed; the Gospel
says, Christ is sacrificed for us: And they both bespake the same Christ for
the spiritual benefit of the worshippers; yet the Gospell-ministration is to
have the prerogative, for now our High Priest is more excellent. Now we have a
clearer manifestation of Gods love for every necessity of the soul. Now we
have a Throne of Grace to go to, every where. Now we have free access unto
God, without bringing our sacrifices unto others, who must (as types) offer
them unto God for us.

2. The old Covenant (in the sacrifices thereof) did again call to remembrance
the sins of the worshippers every year, and so could not make the comers
thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the conscience. Heb. 10.3, 4. The new
Covenant (in the sacrifice thereof) does wrap up the sins of the comers
thereunto in perpetual oblivion, and makes the worshippers perfect, as
pertaining to the conscience. Heb. 10.12, 18. Heb. 7.24, 28. Heb. 9.14, 15. And
so now every worshipper has boldness to enter into the Holiest by this one
sacrifice, and to draw near unto God. Heb. 10.19, 22. And for this cause the
typical ministration must needs be inferior, and the Gospel ministration
more excellent, sublime, and anagogicall. Let these things be but seriously
considered, and they will afford you a great deal of light in reading that
glorious Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews. And in a word, grant me that Gods
Elect under the Law were saved by Gods free grace in jesus Christ, in those
sacrifices typified, as (if there be any spark of ingenuity left in you) you
must needs acknowledge, and you shall grant that Covenant, and this under the
Gospel, to be all one for substance; and so the difference between that and
this to lie in the ministration only. But how say you that this
Gospell-Covenant is established to better subjects? I pray, how better
subjects? you say believers. But did God seal his Covenant under the Law to
unbeleevers? How prove you that? To children in their infancy, therefore to
unbeleevers. The inference is unsound, neither can you bring one text of
Scripture where it is said, that Infants of Jews in Covenant were unbeleevers:
And therefore let all men see how well your Divinity agrees with the language
of Scripture. If the Scripture terms infants of the Jews the holy seed, then
they are not to be termed unbeleevers; and therefore you speak wickedly, and
more than you can justify. Turn your Bible over, and by finding nothing for
your purpose, you shall see that you have said nothing to the purpose. That
unbeleevers might have the sign of Circumcision under the Law! Oh abominable
blasphemy! And the promises under the Gospel do no more belong to believers,
than they did to believers under the Law. They did and do belong to Gods
people in Covenant. And infants of baptized parents are under the promise, and
in Govenant.

Well, thus you argue: viz.

The promise of the Gospel is only to believers. But infants of Christians
are not believers. Ergo The promise of the Gospel is not to infants of
Christians.
This Syllogism may well be termed a Solacisme: But it may well pass in the
School of Anabaptists, for to speak nonsense overthrowes not the principles
of their Religion. But we have showed you before, That infants of Christians
are not Insidels, Ergo believers. And you say afterward, that infants are
saved by the Election, and therefore (say I) the promise of the Gospel belongs
unto them. But happily you had forgotten what you said here; as indeed, he that
will lie, had need have a good memory, otherwise a fluent tongue will quickly
discover a knaves heart. And now give me leave to put in my plea for our poor
infants.

Thus I argue for them: viz.

All the Elect have right to the promise of the Gospel. But some infants of
Christians are Elect, Ergo Some infants of Christians have right to the promise
of the Gospel.
And then again, thus: viz.

Such as have right to the promise of the Gospel, have right unto the initiall
seal of the Gospel. But some infants of Christians have right to the promises
of the Gospel, Ergo Some infants of Christians have right unto the initiall
seal of the Gospel.
Quest. Why then do you baptize all Infants of Christians, seeing you confess
that the promise of the Gospel belongs only to the elect?

Answ. And why do you baptize any at all, though they give testimony of faith
by practice and confession, seeing you confess, that the promise belongs only
to Gods elect? For if the certain knowledge of a persons election must be the
ground of baptizing unto us, then you shall never baptize any, but every
particular person must baptize himself: For no man by ordinary grace can have
certain knowledge of another man's election. But you will say, that albeit we
know, that there be many reprobates borne within the Church, and many
hypocrites may make a show of faith by profession (and not have it in truth)
yet when they come one and one unto us by profession of faith, we have a
charitable persuasion that this and that man so professing is of Gods election.
And so say we, that albeit we know doctrinally, that diverse Infants borne
within the Church are reprobates, yet as they come to us one and one upon the
evidence of Gods Covenant engraven upon them by birth, we have a charitable
persuasion that this and that Infant is of Gods election.

Quest. Why then do you not baptize the Infants of those that are without the
Church, as Turks and Insidels, if a charitable persuasion of Gods election be
warrant enough for you?

Sol. We answer, that such Infants are not borne under the Covenant, neither
are their parents under the seal of Baptisine, and the Scripture no where
terms such Infants holy, as it does every where the children of the Church.
And this is a direct answer unto A. R. in the 6. page of his childish book,
entitled the vanity of childish Baptism. The Adoption belongs to the children
of the Church, and not to the children of aliens. And therefore this profane
Ass speaks wickedly in his most ferious thoughts What (says he) if it be a
warrantable ground for us to administer Baptism to all Infants, because that
some particular Infants are elected, by the same reason it will follow, that
Baptism may lawfully be administered to every man and woman in the world
because among them also we may judge that some are elected. page 6. These
stout words of his do as well bear before them a professed quarrel against
God for Circumcision, as against us for Baptism. Why might not such an hellish
blasphemer say unto God. What? If it be a warrantable ground for us, to
administer circumcision to all Male-Infants of Jews, because some particular
Infants of them are elected, then by the same reason it will follow, that
circumcision may lawfully be administered unto every Male in the world, because
among them also we may judge that some are elected; why then do thou not
command circumcision to be administered unto them also? Surely to this God would
say, thus; viz. If any among other nations in the world, do belong unto Mine
election, they shall become Proselytes unto the Church, and come in by
profession in the Messiah, but when these Proselytes are put under my seal,
their Infants shall be circumcised in their infancy, though most of them be
reprobates. And so say we, if there be any of Gods elect among the aliens,
they shall become Proselytes to the Christian Church, and so be baptized upon
the confession of their faith in Christ, but for the Infants of those Christian
Proselytes, they shall all be baptized in their infancy, as the children of
the Covenant, though most of them may be reprobates, election and reprobation
being not the ground of our ministration or not ministration, but the Covenant
under which persons are borne. And thus you may see how wildly this Ass does
reason, and yet what a great show does he make of his Greek. But if he be the
Author of this pamphlet, that some report to be, then to my knowledge, he is
not overstored either with Greek or Latin. And surely had he ever come to the
passive voice of verbes in the Greek Grammar, and learned to decline (...) with
his breeches down about his heels, and a good sharp paedagogue doing justice
upon his posteriors, he would ever after have taken heed, of playing such
prankes as he has in his childish treatise, wherein few things concern our
present business; and in this tractate you may have matter sufficient to
answer the Anabaptists, about the point of paedo baptism, and to seal up
their lips too. But let us proceed. Say on, what else you have to allege.

Anabaptist. Again, their being under the Covenant is not sufficient to give
them the seal of Baptism. For if so, then those Jews in the second of the
Acts, who were within the Covenant, might have been baptized all and wholly.
But we find there, that though the Apostles preached unto the Nation of the
Jews, yet none were baptized, but they that received the word gladly verse 41.
So then we see, that their being within the Covenant (nor the Apostles
preaching unto them) could give them the seal of Baptism, but it was their
receiving and believing of the word. And so likewise of the Gentiles, the
Promise of the Covenant did belong unto the Gentiles too, as well as to the
Jews, yet I find not one example in all the book of God, where Jew or Gentile
was baptized, but only upon their confession of Christ, and believing the
Gospel. So that suppose we grant you, as much as you desire, which is, that
we are under the Covenant, yet this is not sufficient to give us proper right
unto the seals and privileges of the Covenant, until we come to believe and
confess Jesus Christ.

Answer. To be under the Covenant so, as to acknowledge Jesus Christ (the son
of the Virgin Mary) to be the Messiah and Savior of the world, was sufficient
to give men right unto the Sacrament of Baptism. But the Jews did not so,
they denied the Holy One, and killed the Prince of life Acts 3.14.15. They
looked upon Him, as one accursed, and hanged Him on a tree. And in this they
renounced the Covenant, and did depose themselves, and their children from the
title they had. Matthew. 27.25. Those Jews were borne under the Covenant, and so
accordingly were circumcised, but now in renounceing Christ, they did renounce
the Covenant they had title to by birth, and so were not to have the new
appointed seal of Baptism, till they should receive Christ Jesus. The old
ministration (as it looked toward the Messiah to come) was now out of date,
and to be done away, for the Messiah was come. And a new seal of entrance was
set up, which might assure them that He was Lord and Christ whom they put to
death. Acts 2.36, 37. They were now to acknowledge, that this was the Christ,
and so to be baptized into His Name. A Savior they did look for, and now this
is He. So then this fetch will not serve your turn. It proves firmly what is
required of such as are to be made Christians, but it will not reach unto born
Christians. That which is here spoken concerning examples, is but a repetition
of what you said before, and there you are answered.

Anabaptist. Again, you demand further of the Anabaptists, where their
Commission is to baptize. As for the word [Anabaptists] we disclaim the sense
of it, but as it is a slanderous reproach that is cast upon us for the cause of
Christ, we therein rejoice in it. But to answer your demand thus; you would
know where our Commission is, we answer from the Commission of Christ. Mat.
28.19 Where Christ bids His Disciples to teach all nations, to observe
whatsoever He commanded them. Now He commanded to teach them before Baptism,
and so the Disciples were to teach all nations to follow the like rule.

Answer. I demanded whence you had your calling, or Ordination to baptize at
all. Neither can you by the word of God justify your practice of preaching,
and administering the Sacraments, for you have neither extraordinary calling
immediately from God (as had John the Baptist, and the Apostles) nor ordinary
(from any Presbytery) unto that weighty function, which the ablest and holiest
servants of God have been afraid to venture upon. And for you to take your
turns, and go on in course, as if it were a business for every Pedlar, and
Taylour, lour, and Felt-monger to meddle with, argues clearly that you were
never men of Gods sending, but have your Commission from the devil, and not
from Christ (as we have noted before.) And now you tell me a tale of a Tub,
that you derive your Commission from Matthew. 28.19. where you say, that Christ
bids His Disciples to teach all nations to observe whatsoever He commanded
them. Where you would lay this foundation, namely, that if a man be a Disciple,
then he may teach and baptize, and so the Ministerial function shall be no
peculiar function. But if you look back upon the 16 verse of that chapter you
shall sinde, that the Disciples unto which Christ gave this Commission, were
the eleven Apostles, called there by the name of the eleven Disciples. And
therefore you belie the Lord, and pervert His word. And then you shuffle in
your own confusions and glosses, as whatsoever the Apostles did in their
ministration, all succeeding Churches, and Ministers must do, which is most
false and impious. For (as we have showed before) there were some things
belonging to the Apostolical ministration, that succeeding Churches must not
look for like. And whereas you intimate, that the Apostles were to teach all
nations to follow their practice, in teaching the persons to be baptized,
before they admit them to Baptisine, herein you utter strange confusion. For
all that you can conclude from the 20. verse, of Matthew. 28. (which is, teaching
them to observe whatsoever I command you) redoundes only to this. viz. Teach
them to observe whatsoever I command you to teach them: but not to this, viz.
Teach them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you to do in your
extraordinary and Apostolical ministration, that command them to do in their
ordinary, and pastoral ministration. And yet your strict urging of the letter
will necessarily redound to this, and so every ordinary Minister must plant
foundations, have an unerring spirit, deliver a new canon of divine faith, and
worship, and confirm their doctrine by miracles. And thus you see, how for
want of distinguishing you bring your selves into straights, and puzzle the
simple, which cannot discern the depths of Satan in you. And whereas you
intimate that the cause of Anabaptists is the cause of Christ, you therein
speak blasphemy. for your cause is the cause of the devil, and not the cause
of Christ. And you corrupt and adulterate every text of Scripture that you
allege for the maintenance of your tenants, which is not a note of Christ's
Disciples, but a character of the devils factours.

Anabaptist. Further you affirmed in your first Sermon, that whatsoever was set
up as an ordinance, in the worship of God, must have its warrant from Christ;
so say we, and close with you, but the baptizing of Infants, has no express
warrant from Christ, therefore may not be set up, as an ordinance.

Answer. Your whole trade lies in shifting, and shuffling; and I think you as
well understand what I said, as your A. R. understands Greek, But as that
Grammarlesse Ass would wipe off a just aspersion, that is cast upon you, as if
no Scholar would countenance your cause, or makes a great flourish with his
Greek, and yet scarce ever learned his Greek Alphabet, so you make a great
flourish with your Commission and warrant, as if in the name of Christ you
would convent the whole world before your tribunal, and every truth (that
Ministers do utter) must speak the language of an Anabaptist. What if I
affirmed, that whatsoever was to be set up as an ordinance in the worship of
God, must have its warrant from Christ? Does this warrant your inference. viz.
Baptizing of Infants has no express warrant from Christ, therefore no warrant
from Christ at all. Your speech implies, as if you could not deny, but that
there is warrant from Christ for baptizing of Infants of Christians, but you
would shift off the matter by calling for an express warrant. I thought that a
general proposition had been enough to warrant its particulars. As; every man
is a reasonable creature, ergo an Anabaptist is a reasonable creature. But
happily though the Antecedent be true, yet the consequent will not hold. So
likewise, all the children of the Church are baptized, or to be baptized, ergo
Infants of baptized parents are baptized, or to be baptized. This consequence
will hold with all reasonable men, but not with Anabaptists, ergo Anabaptists
are no reasonable men. And thus in all your discourses you do nothing but toye
and bassle. However I think your disputations to be as good, as your preaching,
and far more warrantable. I said that in that all power is given unto Christ
by virtue of His glorious resurrection, therefore we are to set Him up as the
Lord of our faith, and as our King and Lawgiver, and so yield unto Him divine
worship and honor, obeying Him in all things that He shall say unto us. And
all this is wholesome and good, but how well this does warrant your inference,
let all men judge.

Anabaptist. If you ask, what become of Infants in the state of infancy, if
they dye before Baptism, which is a question, that many do ask, and
therefore we thought good to answer it, thus; That we must commend them to Gods
free election, and extraordinary means of salvation. For a child is not
capable of the ordinary dinary means, as the world, and Sacraments. Now the
Apostle says, that faith comes by hearing, and an Infant is not capable of
hearing, so as to understand the word, and so consequently not of faith wrought
by the ordinary means, and without faith we cannot please God; neither can
we be saved. So then by the ordinary means that God has appointed to bring
men to salvation, we cannot judge Infants by this means to be saved. But
children are, and may be saved, and therefore we leave them to Gods
extraordinary means, to bring them to heaven.

Answer. Here you look upon me, as a man confuted in all his tenants, and
standing almost mute, and having but a question or two, to propound unto his
antagonist, even ready to subscribe unto the contradictories of his own
conclusions. You have sat in Commission upon me, and found matters very foul
on my side. By sound evidences of Scripture, and demonstrative reasons, you
have answered all my arguments, and more you would if I had alleged them. And
now to prevent future scruples, that might arise in my conscience, and to
confirm me in your express way of pious sacrilege, you assoile another
doubt, which might deter weak consciences from your Apostolical practice.
The question (which here you unanswerably resolve, and which many have
propounded unto you) is, what becomes of Infants that dye unbaptized? And here
you answer, that we must commend such Infants to Gods free election, and
extraordinary means of salvation. And your reason for this is very pregnant,
namely because such children are not capable of the ordinary means. Well, you
say, that such children are saved by Gods free election, as the cause. And for
the means they are extraordinary. But what those extraordinary means are, we
are as far to seek, as if you had said nothing. I thought they had been saved
by Christ and the spirit of grace, as the internal ordinary means of
salvation, appointed of the Father for the salvation of His elect. But (I pray)
are such Infants as you speak off, saved by regeneration, or without
regeneration? If without regeneration such Infants are saved, and go to
heaven, then flesh and blood may enter into the Kingdom of heaven, persons
without regenerating grace, and so persons in their natural estate may be
glorified, among the Saints in light. If by regeneration, then children are
capable of regeneration in their infancy, and often are regenerated in their
infancy, for they often die in their infancy, and go to heaven, by your own
confession. Now if they are capable of regeneration in their infancy, then
they are capable of Baptism (the seal of regeneration) in their infancy. And
hence I form this enthymeme, viz.

Children of baptized parents are regenerable in their infancy. Ergo Children
of baptized parents are baptizable in their infancies.
The consequence is sound, the antecedent may be thus evinced, viz.

Such children in their infancy are oftentimes regenerated, Ergo Such children
in their infancy are regenerable.
Now let us compact, what you say, and what we say (touching this point)
together, and contrive both into one entire Syllogism, and so meet as friends
in the same conclusion, thus; viz.

Such as go to heaven and are saved, are regenerated say we. But elect Infants
that die unbaptized go to heaven, and are saved, say you, Ergo You as well as
we must say that elect Infants which die unbaptized, are saved and regenerated.
And this confutes your own conclusion, for regeneration is the ordinary
means of salvation, and elect Infants that die unbaptized are saved by
regeneration. And hence, thus I infer the contradictory of your conclusion,
viz.

Regeneration is the ordinary means of salvation. But elect Infants that die
unbaptized are saved by regeneration, Ergo Elect Infants that die unbaptized
are saved by the ordinary means of salvation.
And this refutes you, and like a rod of iron dashes in pieces the earthen
vessel of your chamption A. R. page 2.7. wherein in he seems to scoff at our
thanksgiving for baptismall regeneration of Infants, whereas we may without
blushing give God thanks for the regeneration of an Infant-christian after
baptism, as for the regeneration of an alien after Baptism, that comes in
upon the testimony of his faith. For charity is the ground of our thanksgiving
here, and there. And for his exception drawn from the calling of our
Ministers, that was needless, for if Infants are not capable of Baptism, then
let the Ministers calling be never so right, their baptizing of infants must
be a nullity, and they should sin in baptizing of them. And so his discourse
concerning dipping and sprinkling is also needless, for if children were
dipped in their infancy, yet their Baptism must needs be invalide, because
Infants. And so the Ass might have saved a great deal of labor, and kept to
the point of paedo-baptisme, for the Anabaptists do simply oppose
paedo-baptisme. not as ministered by such persons, nor as administered in such a
manner, for they hold paedo-baptisme to be simply unlawful in it self. As for
the controversy of the calling of Ministers, you may read Bradshaw against
Johnson, and the Author of the book entitled the unreasonablenesse of the
separation, a very precious book wherein Bradshaw deceased is vindicated
against the calumnies of Can the Brownist. Also two worthy treatises of famous
Mr Ball deceased, And lately Rutherford a famous and learned Scot, and many more
which are not answered by any of the contrary party. And therefore for A. R.
to speak at random, without refutation of these Authors, argues his purpose
rather to calumniate, then to edisie and certify conscience. But to leave this
senseless monster, either to repentance, or to the judgment of the great day,
I return to you again. I tell you that all your redargutions are rather
confirmations, then refutations unto me. And what misery is this; All the
ablest Ministers in the land, are of my judgment about this point of
paedo-baptisme, that the Prophecy of Clem. Writer the Factour might be
fulfilled, saying, that it is thought that Ministers should be the last men, in
the Church of England, unto whom God would reveal this your light. And his
reason is a very material one, because (said he) they know this light, but do
hide it from the people, and will not hold it forth unto them. But to proceed.
A child (say you) is not capable of the ordinary means of salvation. as the
word and Sacraments. I answer, that a child indeed is not capable of Baptismall
entrance into the Church by instruction, but what? Therefore not at all. I deny
that consequence, for there is another way of baptismall entrance into the
Church, and that is by birth as a Christian-borne, because borne of baptized
parents: and of this baptismall entrance a child is capable. Thus you seem to
argue: viz.

The Word and Sacraments are the only ordinary means to salvation. But elect
infants are not capable of the Word and Sacraments, Ergo Elect infants are not
capable of the ordinary means of salvation.
This is your natural sophistry, and both propositions are unsound, and liable
to just exception. But to the major, we say, that the Word and Sacraments are
not the only ordinary means of salvation; for there is Christ and the Spirit
of Grace, which are ordinary means of salvation also. And elect infants that
die unbaptized, are saved by Christ, and the Spirit of Grace. There are
internall-ordinary means of salvation, as well as externall-ordinary means of
salvation. And therefore, though your Logic has made fools of your selves,
yet it cannot make fools of us. Thus we argue against your Paralogisme and
wicked fallacy, and we challenge you to answer us: viz.

Christ and the Spirit of Grace are ordinary means of salvation. But elect
infants that die unbaptized are saved by Christ and the Spirit of Grace, Ergo
Elect infants that die unbaptized, the saved by ordinary means of salvation.
Let elect infants die unbaptized, yet they are saved by Christ and the Spirit
of Grace, and so (by necessary consequence) by ordinary means of salvation.
There is no fallacy, nor sophistry in this Syllogism, and both propositions
are undeniable; and we need no such shifts to maintain Gods truths as you
have, to put a color upon your heresies. And this takes away your thick
covering, whereby you went about to darken knowledge.

Again you say, that an elect infant can have no faith wrought by the ordinary
means: And this assertion is groundel too, upon a false supposition; for the
outward ordinary means of faith are not the only ordinary means of faith. An
elect infant may have faith by Christ, the Author of faith; and by the Spirit
of Grace, the Spirit of faith; and Christ and the Spirit are ordinary means of
faith. And of avail too, when the outward are wanting. But the outward are of
no avail, where these are wanting. And that an elect infant that dies
unbaptized has faith, may thus be evinced. You say, That without faith we
cannot please God, then such as please God have faith. Thus I argue then: viz.

Such as please God, have faith. But elect infants that die unbaptized, do
please God, Ergo Elect infants that die unbaptized, have faith.
The proposition (I suppose) you will not gainsay; the assumption happily you
require me to make good. Thus then I prove it: viz.

Such as go to heaven, and are saved, do please God. But elect infants (say
you) that die unbaptized, go to Heaven, and are saved, Ergo Elect infants that
die unbaptized (say I) do please God.
But happily you do not so much deny their having of faith, as their having of
faith by ordinary means. That then I thus evince: viz.

Christ and the Spirit of Grace are ordinary means of faith. But elect infants
that die unbaptized have faith by Christ and the Spirit of Grace, Ergo Elect
infants that die unbaptized have faith, by ordinary means of faith.
And thus you see, that all is trash on your side, and mere juggling, and you
can as well maintain your cause, as your title to the Crown of England.

Anabaptist. And thus we have run over your chiefest arguments, at brief as
we could. We desire you would not take it offensively from us, that we have
been so tedious in writing unto you, for we could have been larger in many
things, but that we were fearful of tediousness. And if there be any thing,
wherein we are mistaken, we desire information, and we desire to submit to the
judgment of judicious and reasonable men, whether your reasons be not
answered. If you can overthrow clearly (by the Word of God) these answers, we
will cry peccavi; if you cannot, we expect according to your former promises,
that you should cry peccavi.

Answer. You have run over my arguments indeed, but you have not refuted any
one of them. They all stand unmovable as Mount Zion, and the glory of the Lord
is upon them. And as for your tediousness, that's not so offensive unto me, as
your absurd reasonings. And for your mistakes, I have showed them unto you for
your information. And if you will submit to judicious and reasonable men, so
will I; And for this cause I have published this Treatise. And whether I have
dealt unfaithfully with Gods holy Word, either in my Sermons, or in this mine
Answer to your Objections, I leave to the censure of the godly learned. And if
you, or any of your side, can say any thing more, that is material against the
point of Paedo-baptisme, I shall (by Gods help) give you such satisfaction,
whereby you (through Gods blessing) shall be able to see, that they were from
the Devil, and not from Christ, that led you into this way of re-baptizing.

Anabaptist. And thus we desire the Lord to add his blessing to our weak
endeavors, as to persuade your hearts to embrace every truth of Jesus Christ,
that as yet you oppose; and so likewise for our selves. And thus we commend all
to the disposing of Almighty God, in whom we rest.

Answer. Your meaning is (perhaps) that I do oppose the way of the
Anabaptists, and stand for Paedo-baptisme, and that herein I oppose a truth of
Christ Jesus. If your meaning be this, your prayer is impious, and a taking of
Gods Name in vain. And you pray unto God to bless your wicked endeavors, in
going about to persuade my heart, to embrace not a truth, but a lie. This
proves evidently, that God is patient, and that the Devil is impudent. And is
this the good stuff that you would have to be read before the whole
Congregation at Cranham, as you desire in your Postscript? Your desire is more
then granted, you desired to have it as public as Cranham, and I have made it
as public as England. Its now in a fair way to be read at London, at York,
at Exceter, at Bristoll, at Gloucester, at Worcester, and where not, as God
shall direct it. And I hope my brethren will make it known to more
Congregations than Cranham, for the information of Gods people in the truth. I
hope that was your end in desiring leave to have it read to the whole
Congregation at Cranham, and not revenge on me for keeping wavering souls of
that Congregation, from running into Severne after you.

But now to your three Questions, which you subjoyne as an appendix to your
exceptions.

1. You demand What express warrant we have in Scripture for the baptizing of
Infants? Unto this we say, that the question savours more of curiosity, than of
conscience. But seeing you may make bold (as you say) to propound this question
unto me, and desire me to answer you punctually by the Scripture, or not at
all. I make bold to urge you with one argument, and desire you to answer me,
either by Scripture, or Right reason. Thus I argue in express answer to your
demand and quaere.

All persons known to be under the Covenant of Grace, are to have the Covenant
put under the initiall seal unto them by express warrant of Scripture. But
all infants of Christians are known to be under the Covenant of Grace, Ergo
All infants of Christians are to have the Covenant of Grace put under the
initiall seal unto them by express warrant of Scripture.
Deny this Syllogism, or deny either proposition if you can. The major (I
presume) you will not deny: The minor is as undeniable. But, if Lambs
blasphemy must pass for orthodox with you, that you will contradict. Thus
therefore I make it good:

If all Christian parents are under the Covenant of Grace, then all infants of
Christian parents are under the Covenant of Grace. But all Christian parents
are under the Covenant of Grace, Ergo All Infants of Christian parents are
under the Covenant of Grace.
Happily you will deny the sequel of the major proposition, but therein you will
but show your ignorance, and irrational stupiditie: For sequela ab indivisis
est valida. Thus then I make it good; viz.

If the Covenant of Grace joins parents and children together, as inseparable
and immediate companions; then if all Christian parents are under the Covenant
of Grace, all Infants of Christian parents are under the Covenant of Grace, all
Infants of Christian parents are under the Covenant of Grace also. But the
Covenant of Grace joins parents and children together, as inseparable and
immediate companions; saying, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Ergo
If all Christian parents are under the Covenant of Grace, then all infants of
Christian parents are under the Covenant of Grace also.
And now answer, or give over your fooleries, nay sacrilegious practices, and
impious dissolution of Gods holy Covenant with his people, and their seed. A
wickedness happily not so well seen of you, whom subtle heads seduce with good
words, and fair speeches, the very method of the Devils agents: Romans 16.17,
18. And thus we have shaken your triumphall argument, with which you have
misled many an honest heart, the more is the pity: And it may be just with God
to scourge this Nation for our too much connivence at you. High offenses
deserve sharper censures. And to forbear correction, is to dishonor Gods
image in Superiors, and to throw down Authority for Sedition to trample upon.
If your way must stand, adieu Religion; and let us all turn Atheists. And so
much for answer to your first quaere.

2. Your second question is, What Infants do receive in Baptism? Which
question (as propounded by an Anabaptist) implies this blasphemy: viz. That
Infants receive no benefit by baptism. But unto this quaere we say, that
Infants of Christians, by baptism have the Covenant put under seal unto them,
as their native privilege. The Covenant under which they were borne, makes
them holy by birth. And Baptism under the Gospel is the initiall seal of
that holy Covenant. A seal by divine institution annexed unto that holy
Covenant. And unto this determination we desire either your brotherly
subscription, or rational dissension from the same.

3. Your third and last is, Why, and to what end we baptize Infants? And this
is answered already, as in all our discourse, so in our answers to your two
former questions. But further we say, 1. That infants of Christians are part of
Gods portion and inheritance, and therefore we will not let them lie in the
cursed condition of aliens, but seal them into Gods peculiar. For it were
sacrilege to make those common, and unclean, which God has set apart unto
himself as holy. 2. For the childrens good we consecrate them unto Gods care,
by baptizing them into the name of the sacred Trinity. God the Father is now
their father, and they are his children: God the Son is their Savior, and
they are his members: God the Holy Ghost is their Sanctifier, and they are his
Temple.

Ob. But you say, that the Covenant made them such before.

Sol. True, and baptism is nothing but a putting of the Covenant under seal
unto them.

Ob. But you baptize all without difference; if you baptized only the elect,
the matter were more tolerable.

Sol. Though diverse borne within the Church are reprobates, yet as they come
one and one unto us, we cannot say, that this or that child is a reprobate:
He may be an elect vessel for ought we know. And the adaequate end of
baptism administered, is not salvation of the baptized. The glory of God is the
principal end, namely the glory of Gods singular mercy in the salvation of his
elect; and the glory of Gods Justice in the unexcuse of the reprobate, as all
outward ministrations in the Church serve for the glory of Gods mercy and
justice. We put them all under the initiall seal of the Gospel, that they may
be made subject to the Gospel, and be judged by the Gospel. For the secret of
election and reprobation we leave that unto God. Their being borne under the
holy Covenant, is sufficient to warrant our ministration. And to know who are
elect, and who are reprobates, is no more needful to the ministration of
baptism, than it was to the ministration of circumcision among the Jews; that
being the initiall seal of the same holy Covenant unto them, as baptism is
now unto us. For they by circumcision were incorporated into Christ to come, by
that type of Christ upon their flesh, and we by baptism are incorporated into
Christ already come. And by our being washed with water in baptism, we are
assured that Christ has shed his blood to wash away our sins, and to make us
clean in Gods sight, and that that Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, which
the Jews put to death under Pontius Pilate, (and hanged him on a tree) was the
very Christ, and that we do depend on him alone for Salvation, and do look
for no other Savior. And now because you boast of a new light, which God in
former ages has not held forth to his Church, happily by this light you may
answer Saint Augustines argument against re-baptizing Donatists, which none of
your side could ever answer hitherto to this day. You say we have no true
baptism in our Church, because our baptism is administered always to persons
in their infancy. If no Baptism, then no Church, says Saint Augustine, etc.
But to apply his argument to our Church against you Donatists. If there be no
Baptism in our Church, then no Church; if no Church, then whence had you your
Church and Baptism. Show us your Commission to set up a new Church, and
Baptism new. I wonder that your A. R. a man so thoroughly versed in the Fathers
(as he would make his reader believe. page 2.) had not untyed this knot. To say
that Christ the head may be without a body for some time in this world, is
Arminianisme. For if the Church, and with it Baptism was lost, then for that
time Christ had no body in this world. And to say that the Church was lost
here, and not show that you have derived your Commission elsewhere, is to
speak absurdly, and to deal wickedly. Show out of Gods Word your Commission
then, I say not to baptize believers, and persons grown up, but to baptize at
all: Which Commission until you produce, I shall conclude that you are rather
infatuated by the Devil, than inspired by the Holy Ghost. And now if you can
reply any thing material, you shall (by Gods help) be answered. But for your
giddy fooleries and idle nonsense, I shall throw it aside among my waste
papers.

FINIS.

