A MODEL OF THE Government of the Church under the Gospel, by Presbyters,
Proved out of the holy Scriptures, to be that one, only uniform Government of
the universal visible Church, and of all National, Provincial, Classical
and Congregationall Churches: which is according to the will and appointment of
Jesus Christ. Which may serve to stay such as are doubting, with hope of full
satisfaction, and clear demonstration of this truth, shortly to be made by the
Reverend Assembly of Divines.

Composed by a Presbyterian Minister of the City of London, and approved by
diverse of his learned Brethren, and at their request Published.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Underhill, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Bible in Woodstreet. 1646.

To the Honorable City of London, and all the Inhabitants thereof, who
sincerely seek and desire a true reformation of the Church, according to the
Word of God.
GIve me leave, most famous and renowned City, and ye the Right Honorable Lord
Major, the Right Worshipful Aldermen, and religious Common Council and
Commoners, to congratulate and rejoice with you, for that honor which the Lord
has laid on you in these days of great confusion. You, under God, have been
the guard of this present Parliament, by which so great things have been done
for the safety and defense of three Kingdoms. Your free contributions of your
wealth and substance, have been the sinews of this war, undertaken for the
defense of our Religion, Laws and Liberties. Few Counties in this Kingdom have
been able to defend themselves, much less to help others, except those whom
you have encouraged, and set on work by your example, and to whom you have been
a bulwark against the enemies, who by you have been terrified from invading
them. All the associated Counties have cause to bless God for the vicinity and
neighborhood of London. And all the rest of the Kingdom may say, If the Lord
had not helped us by the Forces, Arms, and supplies of men and money from
London, we had been utterly destroyed and laid waste. But the chief glory
bestowed on you by God, is your courage for the truth, and true Christian
Religion; your earnest study, and constant endeavor for promoting an happy
Reformation of the Church in Religion, Dostrine, Worship, and Discipline,
according to the Word of God; your zeal against Sectaries, Schismatics,
Heretics, and Blasphemers, who labor cunningly to corrupt your servants, to
steal away the hearts of your wives and children, to pull many fair feathers
out of your wings, and to draw Disciples after them, and your standing
steadfast in the old paths, and walking in that good way, Ier. 6. 16. which the
Lord Christ by his Apostles has praescribed to the Universal Church; In which
all the pure primitive Churches of old, and all the best reformed Churches have
walked from the days of your Fathers, until this day. God has enabled you
wonderfully by his grace, to resist the subtle temptations of the world and the
Devil. I know when you were courted with offers of greatest honors and
privileges, to withdraw you from your purpose and resolution, of standing for
the common weal of State and Church, and of supporting and upholding of the
props and pillars of this Land, when it trembled, and was ready to be dissolved.

I cannot forget that sad time, full of fears and dangers, when (the chief
command of your City, being in the hand and power of Malignants, who had also a
strong faction, by which they attempted to overthrow you) it was the opinion
and profession of some of the most faithful Patriots, and wise members of
Parliament, that unless God did put into your hearts a resolution to stand up
for them, they had small hope of saving either the Church and Kingdom from
ruin, or our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and their own lives from destruction;
and in that juncture of time the Lord did put such a spirit of courage,
fortitude and holy zeal into you, who were the main body of the City, that you
stood up, and appeared openly for the worthy Patrons of your Religion, Laws and
Liberties, whereby they were animated to proceed vigorously in their wonted
course of justice, to the terror and astonishment of all the enemies and
disturbers of our peace. After this you have been strongly assaulted by
spiritual wickednesses diverse ways.

First, by cunning seducers, who usurping the name and outward show of rare
Saints, have stolen away the hearts of many, and with feigned sanctity and
large promises of a pure platform and model of Church Discipline and perfect
Reformation, according to Christ's own institution, have drawn them into
Schism, and separation from their own Congregations. But you, by your wisdom
have quickly smelled out their fraud, and vain boasting of great things, which
they can never perform and bring to pass.

Secondly, you have been tried, (when Scriptures failed them, and favored not
their model) with bold pretenses of new lights, which you have scorned, as
wise men are wont to scorn, and not vouchsafe to look after those ignes fatuos,
wandering lights and night fires, by which fools, who follow them in the dark,
are lead into dangerous pits, boggs, ditches, and downfalls.

Thirdly, they have represented unto you Presbyterian Government as a Bugbear,
and cruel monster, worse then Popery and Prelacy, unto which if you submit,
you and your children are made slaves for ever, to the lust of proud, peevish,
tyrannical Priests; And allthough many credulous fools, and unstable souls,
are hereby terrified and skared out of their wits, and run wild after several
dangerous sects, and know not where to rest: Yet you are no such strangers to
the Gospel, nor so little acquainted with the Scriptures of the New Testament,
as to be moved with such skarecrowes; but rather by such rabid railing against
Government of the Church by Classical Presbyteries, you have been moved and
stirred up (after serious consideration, and consultation had with your godly
Pastors, and Teachers, diligent searching of the Scriptures, and good
assurance of understanding of divine truth gained to your selves) to be more
earnest and importunate in promoting that Presbyterian Government, besides
which there is no mention of any other in all the writing of the Apostles; nor
any other acknowledged or received, in any well reformed Churches in all the
Christian world.

The Apostolical Church at Jerusalem, consisting of many thousands and ten
thousands of believers, and so many particular Congregations, was altogether
governed by the Apostles and Presbyters, Assemblies, Synods and Presbyteries,
as appears, Act. 11. 30. and 15. 6. and 21. 18. The Christian Church of the
Gentiles gathered unto Christ in several Nations, Countries and Cities by Paul
and Barnabas, had every one their Presbyters, ordained to have rule over them
in the Lord, Acts 14. 23.

The Church of Ephesus, that great City of Asia, had also diverse Presbyters,
whom the Holy Ghost had made overseers to watch in common over it, Acts 20. 17,
28. And of them S. Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 5. 17. saying, Let the Elders that rule
well, be counted worthy of double honor. Also S. Paul left Titus in Creet, and
appointed him to ordain Presbyters in every City, and such overseers as were
fit to rule the Church, Tit. 1. 5. Peter and John were Presbyters, and called
themselves so, as they with others governed several Churches, 1. Pet. 5. 1.
John 2. 1. and John 3. 1. Wherefore, o London, thou that have chosen the best
part, rejoice in the Lord thy God, who has made his glory to rise upon thee,
and his light to shine upon thy grave Senators, thy religious Common Council,
and all thy true hearted Citizens; and has led them into those ways which be
in Christ, which Saint Paul taught every where, and in every Church, 1 Cor. 4.
17. For the encouraging of you, worthy Citizens, in your constancy, and for the
confirming of them that are weak and wavering, I have framed out of the
Scriptures this brief discourse, concerning that one uniform Church Government,
which Christ by his Apostles ordained, and appointed to be set up in the whole
universal Church, and to be observed in all other Churches, members of the
universal. Here you have the Heavenly pattern shadowed out in a small compass,
of that Government, for the establishment whereof in this City and Kingdom, you
have stood up and appeared openly at several times. If the Lord be pleased to
bless you with courage for his truth, and with constancy and perseverance till
you obtain your desire, which is the desire also of all Orthodox faithful
Ministers in the Land, then shall London be called, The City of the Lord, the
Zion of the holy one of Israel; And they who despise her and stand up against
her, to hinder the work of God in her hands, shall bow down at the soles of her
feet, and her enemies shall lick the dust, even lick up the dust of her feet,
for they shall not be ashamed who wait for the Lord, Isa. 49. 23.

This is the prayer of your servant in the work of the Lord, and humble
suppliant for your prosperity at the throne of grace. G. W.

A Model of the Government of the Church under the Gospel, by Presbyters
proved out of the holy Scriptures, to be that one, only uniform Government of
the universal visible Church, and of all National, Provincial, Classical
and Congregationall Churches: which is according to the will and appointment of
Jesus Christ.
THe holy Scriptures of the New Testament do speak most plainly of a Church
Government, and of ruling and rulers, which the Lord Jesus Christ has
appointed to be in his Church visible on earth in the times under the Gospel:
the pattern and platform of this Government, together with a commission to
govern the universal Church in all Nations according to it, he gave to his
Apostles by word of mouth in the time of his life (as the Gospel in diverse
passages does testify) and after his passion, when he showed himself alive
unto them, and was seen of them forty days, speaking the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God, Act. 1. 3. And that the Apostles by word and writing, and
by their example and practice, might infallibly instruct all Churches by them,
gathered unto him in all Nations, and might deliver unto them, so as they had
received from the mouth of him the supreme Lord, that one uniform Government:
He filled them with extraordinary gifts, and sent unto them the holy Ghost, the
Comforter, to lead them into all truth, Joh. 16. 13. to teach them all things,
and to bring all things to their remembrance, whatsoever he had said unto them,
Joh. 14. 26. And that Government, which they partly by word and writing, and
partly by their example and practice, did prescribe uniformly in all Churches,
is of divine instution: and to it all Orthodox reformed Churches in all the
Christian world at this day, have submitted themselves, acknowledging it to be
the only Government Ecclesiastical which is Jure divino, and by the will and
appointment of Jesus Christ. And yet in this unstable and wavering age and
generation, and in this unsettled state, and land full of confusion; as the
giddy-headed multitude, which are like clouds without water, carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, and dream of new lights beginning to appear, do call
into question the saving doctrines of aeternall truth, and the chief Articles
of the Christian faith, firmly believed, constantly professed, and never
doubted of by any true Christians: So also many of the wisest Statesmen, who
are esteemed the pillars of the Kingdom, and the stay of the State, do doubt
and make question, whether there be any Church Government Jure Divino, and by
the will and appointment of Jesus Christ? What that Government is? Who are the
Governors? And by what rules and laws they ought to govern? And how far, and
in what things, matters and causes, power is given to them by Christ to rule
and govern in the Church? For the answering of all such questions, and removing
of all such doubts and scruples, I will endeavor, out of love to the truth,
and zeal to the honor of Christ, and the advancement of his Kingly power in
his Church, to lay down some sure grounds of Doctrine, gathered out of holy
Scripture, and proved by clear testimonies of Gods spirit, speaking in the
infallible written word.

And first, I take this as an undeniable principle, That whatsoever Christ has
with his own mouth commanded, or by his spirit moved his Apostles to teach by
writing and word, or by example and practice, concerning the well ordering and
Government of his Church in any place, which is as useful in all places, and
the reason of it stands firm in all ages, and it may be practiced profitably by
ordinary Pastors: Also whatsoever is necessarily presupposed, or included in
any thing, which Christ in the Gospel commands, or of necessity must follow
thereupon, is Jure divino, and by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, because the main question which comes to be answered, upon which all
the rest do depend, is, Whether there be any proper and particular
Church Government distinct from Civil Government: The answer is easy, and such
as may fully satisfy any reasonable Christian. For first, in every Nation,
Kingdom, and state wherein Christian Religion is publicly and generally
professed, all the people are to be considered two ways. First, as men and
members of a civil society or Common Wealth. Secondly, as Christian men and
members of the Church, the mystical body of Christ. As they are members of the
Commonwealth, they are to be ruled by the laws of men which are there in
force, and do bind them to obedience in temporal things to their Kings and
Civil Magistrates, and to good order and behavior among themselves, for the
peace and safety of humane society, and of the civil State. And this
Government may be among them who are Turks, Heathens and nor Christians, for it
is common to all men of all Nations, States and Kingdoms. But as they are
Christians and members of the Church, Christ's mystical body, so they are to be
governed by the law of Christ, which binds them to the obedience of him in all
things, which concern their spiritual estate, heavenly life, and blessedness,
and to holy communion among themselves in spiritual things. These two States
and Governments are so distinct and different, that either of them may stand
alone without the other. There are and have been diverse earthly Kingdoms well
ordered, and wisely governed in all outward temporal things, in which Christ
has had no Church, neither was Christianity known or professed. And again,
Christ has had a Church well governed, and flourishing in Religion, grace, and
godliness, when there was no civil Government, King, or Civil Magistrate to
help or uphold it, but all set against it, to perfecute, vex, and make havoc
of it; as it was in the days of Christ and of his Apostles, and in diverse ages
after: And yet Christ was the King, and the Church was his Kingdom in which he
ruled, and is called the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 12. 28. and that Kingdom of
heaven, Matthew. 3. 2. and 4. 14. Now a Kingdom is not an Anarchy, that is, a
confused multitude without Government; but a Monarchy, in which there is one
King who is supreme Governor. And in the Church, which is Gods holy hill, and
spiritual Zion, Christ alone is the King, Psalm. 2. 6. and Zech. 9. 9. Joh. 12.
15. and the head, and sole ruler, Mat. 2. 6. Ephesians. 1. 22. and the Government
is on his shoulder, Isa. 9. 6. He also alone is the Lord, and Lawgiver, Isa.
33. 22. Iam. 4. 12. and his Word is the law and rule of Government, Isa. 2. 3.
yea the law, and rule by which the spirit rules, Romans 8. 2. and to which he is
limited in moving and working, Ioh. 16. 13.

3. But that Church Government may be more clearly and distinctly understood:
we are further to distinguish between the supreme power of Government, which is
only in the hand of Christ; and the delegated power, which he has given to
his Ministers, to exercise under him a subordinate and minesteriall Government.

The supreme Government which is in the hand of Christ is Monarchical: For to
him alone all power is given in heaven and in earth, Math. 28. 18. and he is
set at Gods right hand, far above all principality, and power, and might and
dominion, and every name that is named both in this world, and in that which is
to come. And God has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head
over all things to the Church which is his body, Ephesians. 1. 21. 22. And this
power of Government is proper to him, and he reserves it to himself. But the
subordinate and Ministerial power of Government, he gave to his Apostles and
to their Successors, Mark. 16. 15. Joh. 20. 21. where he said, As my father
has sent me, so send I you. Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every Creature. And promised to be with them always to the end of the world,
Math. 28. 20. And lest any should think that this rule and Government of the
Church, was limited to the Apostles, and was to dye, and and to expire with
them: The Scriptures do fully prove, and plainly demonstrate, that it was also
by Gods appointment imparted to others in the Apostles days, as 1 Cor. 12. 28.
where the Apostle writes, that God has set in his Church, not only Apostles,
Prophets and others of extraordinary gifts; but also teachers, helps, and
Governments. And Romans 12. 8. The Church is compared to a natural body, and the
several members thereof, having gifts differing according to the grace that is
given them, are commanded to exercise their gifts, and to wait on their
several offices, as Prophets on prophesying; Ministers on ministering;
Teachers on teaching, and he that rules on ruling with diligence. And 1 Thessalonians.
5. 12. the brethren are entreated to know them that labor among them and are
over them in the Lord, and admonish them, and to esteem them very highly in
love for their works sake: and 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well
(says the Apostle) be counted worthy of double honor, especially they that
labor in the word and doctrine: and Heb. 13. 7. He inioynes the brethren to
remember them that have the rule over them: and verse. 17. to obey them and
submit themselves, because they watch for their souls, as they that must give
account: and verse. 24. he says, Salute them that have the rule over you. All
which Scriptures, and many others, wherein several acts of Government are
commanded to be done by Pastors and overseers of the Church, other acts of
discipline commended, when they were done, and the neglect of them blamed, do
prove a Ministerial Government in the hand of Church rulers Jure divino, and
by the appointment of Christ.

4. The subordinate and Ministerial Government which Christ has set up in his
Church, is not Monarchical, as that supreme Government is which he reserves to
himself; Neither is it Civil, left to Civil Magistrates, who judge and rule
over men in Civil states, and societies, and about temporal and worldly
affairs of this life, such judging and dividing our Savior disclaymed, Luke.
12. 14. saying, Who made me a judge or a divider over you? when a man requested
him to speak to his brother to divide the inheritance with him. And he told
Pilat, that his kingdom was not of this world. John. 18. 36. They who rule
under him in his Church must meddle only with spiritual things which concern
men's spiritual estates, and eternal life and the salvation of their souls. And
they are all equal in title, honor and office, even Elders, stewards and
dispensers of holy things. There is no one chief Lord above the rest in the
whole Church on earth, or in any part thereof, whether National, Provincial or
Classical Church. But of the Apostles who were the chief Pastors and rulers in
his Church, he said, Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
minister. Math. 20. 26. and Luke 22. 26, And as Peter received this lesson from
his Lord, so he gave charge to all Presbyters of the Church, fellows in the
Presbytery with himself, that they must take the oversight of the flock, and
not be as Lords over Gods inheritance, but as ensamples to the flock, 1 Pet. 5.
3. The authority and title of Lords our Savior will have left to the Kings and
Rulers of states and Kingdoms on earth, Luke 22. 25.

5. The Government of the Church which is Ecclesiastical, our Savior gave in
common to all his Apostles, who were the Pastors of the Church universal, and
the first teachers of all Nations, who had a charge and Commission from Christ
to gather and build up Churches in all the world, and to teach and instruct all
people to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them, as we see in the
Scriptures before named, Math. 28. 19. 20. Mark. 16. 15. John. 20. 23. and in
other places, where the exercise of the power of the Keys of the kingdom of
heaven, which was given to Peter as the mouth of the rest, Math. 16. 19. is
also given in common to them all, as they were the Church representative, and
stood in the place of all Pastors and Teachers to the end of the world. In so
much as if any two or three of them were gathered together in his Name, he
promised to be in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 17. 18. 20. and Joh. 20. 23. And
as the Lord Christ gave this power to the Apostles; so they exercised it
sometimes in common all together in the general Assembly of the Disciples,
Brethren and Elders, as Act. 1. 15. in the election of an Apostle in the place
of Judas, and Act. 6. 2. about the election, and Ordination of the seven
Deacons, and Act. 15 6. about the deciding of a great controversy concerning
Circumcision and other legal rites not to be imposed on the believing
Gentiles. And sometimes two or three of them, as Peter and John when they were
sent to Samaria to confirm the Church there, Act. 8 14. And Barnabas and
others who were sent to confirm the first Church called Christian at Antioch,
Act. 11. 22. 23. And Paul, and Barnabas and Silas in ordaining Elders in every
Church by them converted to Christ, Act. 14. 23. But yet they altogether, and
every one or two by themselves exercised, and commended to the Evangelists and
Presbyters by them ordained, the same uniforme government, and the same way in
Christ both for Doctrine and Discipline. So the great Apostle of the Gentiles
plainly testifies, 1 Cor. 4 17. writing thus, for this cause have I sent to
you Timotheus, who is my beloved son and faithful in the Lord, who shall
bring you into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every
where in every Church, and 1 Cor. 7. 17. So ordain I in all Churches. And he
who had the care of all the Churches (as he says,) 2 Cor. 11. 28. keeps them
to the same custom, as is implied, 2 Cor. 11. 16. where speaking of new
fashions for which some are ready to contend, he says, If any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God.

6. Now this ministerial uniforme government settled by Christ and his Apostles
in all Churches, National, and Provincial, and Classical in every Circuit,
as it was in the hands of the Pastors, Presbyters and overseers, so it was
Aristocraticall. But as the whole Church and multitude of believers had liberty
in elections to nominate such as they found most fit to be overseers and
officers, and orderly to give their approbation of the Acts of the Elderships,
so it is in some part Democraticall. As we see in the election of the seven
Deacons, Act. 6. The twelve Apostles appointed that seven men of honest report,
and full of the holy Ghost should be ordained. The multitude chose them; and
set them before the Apostles, who ordained them with prayer and imposition of
hands. So also Act. 15. The Apostles and Elders came together, to consider of a
matter, and to decide a Controversy brought unto them from the Church of
Antioch, verse. 6. Peter and James debated the business and gave the sentence,
together with the Elders, and all the brethren, even the whole Church approved
the sentence given by James, and thereupon a decree was framed in the name of
them all, verse. 23. And in the ordaining of Presbyters in every Church, Act,
14. 23. As the Apostles Paul, and Barnabas with Silas prayed and laid on their
hands, so the people holding up their hands, approved the election and
ordination. These examples and these practices of Church government in Synods
and greater Presbyteries performed by men who had received instructions from
Christ's own mouth, and were inspired and moved there unto by the holy Ghost,
and the reason of them still standing in force; they do show that such Synods
and acts of Church Government are according to the will and appointment of
Christ and are useful and necessary to the end of the world. And all Churches
ought to conform unto this special Government.

Ob. But some do object, that the Apostles were men of extraordinary gifts and
calling, and had an infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, which did lead
them into all truth, and could do in their Synods and Assemblies things, which
ordinary Pastors and teachers cannot do, they could say, It seemed good to
the holy Ghost and to us, and could take upon them the care and oversight of
all Churches. But now it is well if one or two of the wisest Ministers can
teach or rule one particular Congregation; It is too much for them to meddle
with the common Government of many particular Churches. And therefore the
examples of the Apostolical Churches do not bind the Churches of these times.

Ans. To this I answer, First, that it was necessary, that the Apostles and
Evangelists should be extraordinarily called, inspired and assisted by the holy
Ghost, that he might lead them into all truth, and call to their remembrance
all things whatsoever Christ had taught them, and commanded them to be observed
in all Churches to the end of the world; otherwise they could not have been the
infallible penmen of the Scriptures, which are the certain rule both of
Doctrine, and Discipline, Neither could their example and practice have been an
heavenly pattern of Divine Authority, to all succeding ages. But after the
publishing of the Gospel by them to all the world, and their writing of the
holy Scriptures, and leaving them recorded for a sure rule of teaching and
ruling to all Christian Churches, there is no more need of any such
extraordinary calling and gifts in their Successors, but ordinary Pastors,
and Teachers, by the ordinary light and direction of the holy Ghost, who has
made them Overseers over the Church, may be as able to exercise Discipline and
censures, as to preach and propound sound and saving Doctrine in the Church,
out of the holy Scriptures of the Apostles, which are as plain a rule, and as
certain a direction for ruling as they are for preaching. And to confirm us in
this assurance, we have the promise of Christ, that he will be with his
Ministers in all ages to the end of the world, as he was with his Apostles, not
only in teaching and Baptizing people, but also making them observers of all
things whatsoever he had commanded, Matthew. 28. 20.

Secondly, This objection is of no more force against the imitation of the
Apostles in their practice, and acts of Church Government in Synods, and
greater-Presbyteries: then it is against preaching their doctrine contained in
their writings. For they were men of extraordinary calling and gifts, in
teaching as well as in ruling. And if that be a good reason against ruling
after their example: It is so also against preaching of the same word and
doctrine which they wrote and preached.

Thirdly, Although the Pastors and Teachers which succeed the Apostles, are
unable to work miracles, and to write infallible Scriptures, and give
unchangeable rules to all Churches, as the Apostles did, because they have not
such extraordinary gifts and calling: Yet in things which are in the power of
ordinary Presbyters and Pastors, as meeting many together in Synods and
Presbyteriall Assemblies, to decide and determine controversies, according to
the Scriptures, it is a thing as easy and ordinary for them wherein to imitate
them: as for many Lords and Commons to meet in a Parliament, to remove
grievances in the Commonwealth. And certainly so far as God makes us able,
we are bound to follow their practice and examples.

Fourthly, The more extraordinary gifts that the Apostles had, the less need
they had to meet in Synods and Assemblies, either all, or diverse of them
together. Paul and Barnabas had an infallible spirit, and did dispute against
the error at Antioch, and condemned it by as infallible a sentence, as the
Apostles did at Jerusalem, And yet for a pattern to all succeeding Churches,
and to make the judgment and determination of more authority in all Churches
of believing Jews and Gentiles, and to show the unity of spirit and uniformity
of doctrine and discipline among them all, an appeal was made to a general
Synod, of all the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem. And therefore (the
necessary use and reason of such Synods and Classical Presbyteries, being
still the same in all ages; And ordinary Ministers of Christ having more need
of common help and assistance, because many eyes see more then one, and many
heads consulting together, will better search out the truth and true sense of
Scripture in doubtful matters, and of great concernment) The objection does
make more for the confirmation of the doctrine, to wit, that the practice and
examples of the Apostles in the manner of governing the Church, is of divine
authority, and ought to be esteemed the will and appointment of Christ.

7. Now out of these points plainly proved by clear texts of holy Scripture; We
may easily raise a perfect definition or description of that Government partly
Ecclesiastical, which Christ as King of his Church, has set up therein,
namely this, That it is the exercise of power and authority in matters
spiritual, which concern the salvation of souls; given by Christ to the
Pastors and Elders of his Church, for the gathering, building up, and well
ordering of it, and for the perfecting of the Saints, the members thereof. For
the confirmation of this definition in every part and member of it, we have
express words of holy Scripture.

First, the Commission which Christ the supreme Lord gave to his Apostles, and
to their successors in all ages to the end of the world, was not only by
preaching the Gospel to make men Disciples, but also to open the kingdom of
Heaven, and by Baptism to admit believers and Disciples into it, and to teach
them to observe all things, whatsoever he had commanded them, Matthew. 28. 19,
20. But to shut out unbeleevers as being under damnation, and in the kingdom of
Satan, Mark. 16. 16. And that by this Commission not only power and authority
was given them to propound the word by way of doctrine; but also to use the rod
of discipline, and to correct and censure all such as were offenders,
untractable and puffed up: the Apostle Paul shows, 1 Cor. 4. 20, 21. Where he
says, that when he comes to Corinth he will know, not the speech of them that
are puffed up, but the power, For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in
power, even to use the rod of correction, and sharp censure, as the next words
show, viz. What will you? Shall I come to you with a rod? or in love, and in
the spirit of meeknes? And what this rod is, the next chapter immediately
declares; in which he gives them a charge, In the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to excommunicate in their solemn Assembly the incestuous person. And 2
Cor. 10. 8. and Chap. 13. 10. He does plainly affirm, that to him and his
fellow-Ministers, the Lord has given power and authority even to use
sharpness.

Secondly, That this power is not carnal, nor exercised about worldly matters:
but is spiritual and mighty through God, exercised in pulling down the strong
holds of sin and Satan, casting down imaginations, and every high thing which
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought, to the obedience of Christ; The Apostle affirms, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

Thirdly, This power and authority is given to be exercised for edification,
not for destruction, as the Apostle teaches, 2 Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10. even
for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 12.

Fourthly, The exercise of this power and authority is uniform, and the ways
of it the same in all Churches: No supreme Magistrate has power to alter it,
it is not to be usurped, nor contended for by any to whom God has not given
abilities, nor called thereunto. It belongs to the Pastors and Teachers who
have a calling to expound publicly the Word and law of Christ, and to their
assisting Elders who are fit to judge accordingly. For such the Apostles
appointed to be their successors; and not civil Magistrates which were not
known in the Church, till many years after the days of the Apostles. And to the
Apostles and their successors the Lord Christ gave this power to rule his
Church, and it continued in their hands in all the Apostolical Churches: The
same ways which the great Apostle of the Gentiles observed himself, he taught
in every Church, every where, 1 Cor. 4 17. and so he ordained in all Churches,
1 Cor. 7. 17. And when any swerved from the institution of Christ in the use of
the ordinances, and contended for forms and fashions, differing from the common
rule and custom; The Apostle reproved and blamed them, as appears, 1 Cor. 11.
16, 17. The Pastors, Elders, and Teachers who labor in the Word and Doctrine,
and watch for the souls of the people, and by the holy Ghost are made overseers
over the flock, are the Governors, and rule over them in the Lord, and they
ought to submit themselves to be ruled and guided by them, as being the
stewards of Gods house, his Church, and dispensers of the mysteries of Christ,
as these places following do show; Act. 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and
to all the flock over the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed
the Church of God. And 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the
Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. And 1 These. 5. 12.
We beseech you, brethren, to know them that labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, and admonish you: And to esteem them very highly in love for their
works sake. And 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy
of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. And Heb.
13. 7. Remember them who have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the
Word of God: and verse. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account.
These and diverse other Scriptures do clearly show what that Government is,
which Christ has appointed in his Church.

8. The next part to be considered is, to whom Christ Jesus first committed
this Government, and where he first settled it, and in what Church, from whence
it is derived, propagated and communicated to all other Churches which shall be
in all ages. And in this the Gospel is very clear. For it tells us, that he
first and immediately committed it to his Apostles as they were to teach all
Nations, and to be the Pastors of the universal visible Church. In their
hands and in that Church he first settled it, for the use of all the members
thereof, even all National, Provincial, Classical and particular Churches,
gathered by the Gospel preached in every Nation, Country, State, City, and
Circuit. That the Lord Christ, having all power in Heaven, and earth given unto
him, did give Authority to the Apostles to preach the Gospel to all Nations,
to baptize them, and to teach them to observe all things, whatsoever he had
commanded them, I have before showed out of the Gospel, Math. 28. 19. 20. That
he gave to them the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and power to open and shut,
to bind and lose, to remit and retain sins, it is manifest, Math. 16. 19.
Where he said to Peter, (when he answered in the name, and as the mouth of all
the rest, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God.) I will give to thee the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest one earth, shall
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall lose on earth shall be losed in
heaven: and Math. 18. 18. where he gave the same power to them all again: and
John. 20. 23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them, and
whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. And that they ordained
Presbyters, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers in the name of Christ, and by the
Authority which he gave them, it appears, Act. 14. 23. where it is written
that Paul and Barnabas ordained Presbyters in every Church of the converted
Gentiles: and Act. 20. 28. where Paul admonishes the Presbyters whom he had
ordained in the Church of Ephesus, to take heed to the flock over which the
holy Ghost had made them Bishops, that is overseers. And they appointed the
same order and form of Government in all National and Provincial Churches,
and in every Classis and particular Congregation, as in Judea and Jerusalem, so
in Corinth, Ephesus, Asia, Galatia, Macedonia, Creet and the rest, as diverse
Scriptures, (besides those before named, 1 Cor. 4. 17. and 2 Cor. 10. 8. and
13. 10.) do abundantly testify, as Ephesians. 4. 12. where Pastors and Teachers,
as well as Apostles, are said to be given by Christ, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of
Christ: and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. where he mentions some who labored among them,
and were over them in the Lord, and Act. 15. 6. where we read of a general
assembly of Apostles and Presbyters gathered to consider a great matter and to
decide a controversy, and send out their decree to all Churches, and 1 Timothy 3.
1. 2. etc. where the office of a Bishop, that is a Pastor or overseer, is
commended for a good work, and the qualification and ordination of such after
trial and examination is described, as also of Deacons. and 1 Timothy 5. 17.
where mention is made of ruling by Elders, and by them who labor in the Word
and Doctrine: and verse. 22. of ordaining by laying on of hands: and also Chap.
4. 14. And Tit. 1. 5. and 1 Pet. 5. 1. 2. and James. 5. 14. where Elders of the
Church and their work and behavior is prescribed. In all these places we have
Church Government set forth in Presbyteries, and in the hands of Presbyters,
and Presbyteriall Bishops, Pastors and Teachers lawfully called, and upon due
trial ordained by imposition of hands, as being that Government appointed by
Christ, and observed in all Churches. But of no other form of Government do we
read in any writings of the Apostles and Evangelists in the New Testament. For
as there is but one God and Father of all, and one Lord Jesus Christ, and one
faith, one Baptism and one whole universal Church, which is but one body,
moved and informed by one Spirit, 1 Cor. 8. 5. and Ephesians. 4. 4. 5. So every
member of this one body in every Nation, City and Country, and every
Congregation of Christians, whether Jews or Gentiles, is informed, moved and
guided by that one spirit, as the Apostle testifies, Romans 12. 5. and 1 Cor.
12. 12. 13. as Pastors and Teachers: so also governments are set in the Church
by God, and the spirit distributeth gifts to them as he himself will, 1 Cor.
12. 11. and 28. And there is but one law to all, which is the word of God,
which is called the law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. and the law of the spirit of
life, Romans 8. 2. because the spirit speaks to none, neither does move or guide
any Christian but by this word and law of Christ, John. 16. 13. 14. (as was
before showed) What Church soever does swerve or decline in any material or
substantial point of Doctrine or Discipline from that one law, and rule of
Christ, which is the heavenly pattern showed to us in the Scriptures, as the
Pattern of the Tabernacle was showed to Moses in the mount, Exodus 25. 40. That
Church comes so much short of Apostolical perfection, and has in it too much
mixture of humane policy and infirmity. Whatsoever new light, proud, vain,
foolish and fanaticall persons may pretend: all sound and stable Christians
both ought, and will look to the law, and to the testimony of Christ; and if
any speak not according to this word it is because there is no light in them,
Isa. 8. 20. In respect of this our uniforme Government by one law the word of
Christ, and one spirit, the soul and life of the whole visible Church, it is a
body uniforme, homogeneall and similar. And as in all natural uniforme bodies,
every part has the same name with the whole, as every particular part of air
is called air, and every river, fountain and drop of water is, water and is
so called, as well as the whole element: Even so every National, Provincial,
Classical and particular congregation in every Nation, City, and circuit, is a
Church and is so called, as the Church of Judea, Act. 11. 22. 26. the Church of
Antioch, Act. 13. 1. the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 2. and of Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. and the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 1. 2. yea and the particular
Congregation in the house of Aquila, and Priscilla, Romans 16, 15. and 1 Cor. 16.
19. and in the house of Nymphas, Coloss. 4. 15. and of Philemon, verse. 2. are
every one called the Church, as well as the universal body is called the
Church, Math. 16. 18. Ephesians. 1. 22. Coloss. 1. 24. and 1 Timothy 3. 15.

9. The principal parts of this Government of Christ which always ought to
go together, and are inseparable in every well ordered and constituted Church,
are two. First, Doctrine, which the Apostle calls (...). Secondly, Discipline,
which he calls (...). 2 Timothy 3. 16. which our Savior in allusion to other
Scriptures, calls the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, Math. 16. 19. For as
keys do open and shut the door of an house: so do both Doctrine, and
Discipline open and shut the Kingdom of heaven, Christ his true Church. They
open it to believers, and to humble and paenitent persons; and shut it against
unbelievers, and scandalous obstinat sinners, who continue in their impenitency
after conviction. And for this cause our Savior calls Doctrine and Teaching by
expounding that word and law aright, the key of knowledge, Math. 23. 13. and
Discipline he calls the key of David, Revel. 3. 7. alluding to the words of the
prophet Isa. 22. 22. where the Lord says, that he will lay the key of the
house of David upon the shoulder of Eliakim, so he shall open, and none shall
shut, and he shall shut, and none shall open, that is, I will commit the
Government into his hands (as the words before show) to rule the house of Juda
as a Father. The preachers of the word by convincing Doctrine do wound the
wicked, and are said to, root out, to pull, and throw down, and to destroy,
Jer. 1. 10. Yea and to torment the world, to smite the earth with plagues, and
to shut heaven, Revel. 11. 6, 10. And by the converting word of the Gospel, and
the ministry of reconciliation, to heal the broken in heart, to open the
prisons, and to set captives at liberty, Isa. 61. 1. And to build and to plant,
Jer. 1. 10. And to open the right way into the sheepfold, Joh. 10. 16. The key
of discipline also does by censures, which are according to the infallible Word
of God, shut out ignorant and scandalous persons from Communion with the
children of the Kingdom, purges out the old leaven, and so binds the
obstinate, that they are bound in heaven, Matthew. 18. 18 and 1 Cor. 5. 7, 13.
But by declaring in the name and word of Christ absolution and remission of
sins to persons penitent, it opens the door of the Kingdom, and receives into
Christ's sheepfold such as are brought back from going astray, and loses such
as are bound, 2 Cor. 2. 10. The exercise of the power of these two keys,
consists in diverse public acts done with authority, by commission from Christ.
First, the main act of doctrine is preaching the Word, as the mouth of God to
the people, and applying it fitly to all sorts of persons, instructing the
ignorant, discovering to them the corruption of their nature by which they are
Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. and so humbling them in their own eyes,
driving them out of themselves, drawing them to Christ by the promises of the
Gospel, wooing them, and as Ambassadors for Christ, praying them in Christ's
stead to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and espousing them to Christ, 2
Cor. 11. 2. And on the other side, reproving, rebuking, and admonishing with
authority, as messengers of God, all inners and transgressors, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
and Tit. 1. 13. Threatening and denouncing judgments, hell, and damnation
against all that are hard hearted and impenitent, as the Apostles did, Act. 8.
23. and 13. 10. Romans 2. 1, 2, 5. 1 Cor. 6 9. Heb. 20. 26, 29. Iam. 5. 1. 2 Pet.
2. 13. Jude verse. 4. 11, 14 15.

These acts of doctrine private Christians may perform mutually among
themselves, and according to the measure of grace, which God has distributed
to every one, they are in brotherly duty, and in Christian zeal and charity,
bound to perform them privately. But public Ministers only, called of God, and
sent to preach, can do them with power and authority, as Gods mouth, and
Christ's Ambassadors: and their word is to be received as the Word of God, 1
These. 2. 13. and as a message from heaven, with fear, reverence, and trembling,
Isa. 66. 5.

The acts of discipline which are to be performed by Gods Ministers also, not
as preachers in the pulpit before all the Congregation, but as Presbyters in
the Consistory, are diverse.

First, receiving accusations before witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. 19.

Secondly, public admonition, and personal reproof, and rebuke of such as are
convicted of offense and scandal, by two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. 20.
Tit. 3. 10.

Thirdly, after admonition condemned and scorned, and the authority of the
Eldership despised and slighted, these scorners are to be refused and
rejected, Tit. 3. 10. which cannot be, if they be admitted to the holy
Communion. The Apostle injoins every faithful Minister to withdraw himself
from perverse persons of corrupt minds, 1 Timothy 6. 5. And he commands the
brethren in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that they withdraw themselves,
from every brother that walks disorderly, 2 These. 3. 6. Certainly he is
blind, and has the eye of his reason put out, who does not in these forenamed
places see and understand, that all scandalous, perverse and stubborn persons
are by the Commandment of Christ, which is Jus divinum, to be refused, and not
admitted into holy Communion, which is Excommunicatio minor, that is, lesser
excommunication.

The fourth act of discipline is, the censure of the greater Excommunication,
which is the utmost censure of a Church member, even casting him out of Church
communion for his obstinacy in his scandalous sins, and refusing to hear, and
obey the Church. After this sentence given against any person, he is in our
Saviors phrase to be esteemed as an heathen man, who is no member of the
Church for the present, but shut out of Gods Kingdom, and in the Apostles
phrase he is delivered to Satan, and taken captive by the Devil, and held in
his snare, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

This censure is according to the will, and by the appointment of Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 18. 17. Where he says of him who will not hear nor obey the Church. Let
him be to thee as an heathen and as a Publican. The Apostle in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, commanded the Elders of the Church of Corinth by this
censure, and with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ to proceed against the
incestuous person, to put him away from among them, and to diliver him unto
Satan 1 Cor. 5, 5, 13. And he himself delivered unto Satan Hymenaeus and
Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20. And these acts of discipline are not punishments of
revenge, not execution of justice in a rigid sense; but Medicinal corrections
of mercy, and fatherly chastisements laid on the person censured, not in hatred
to hurt him, nor in rigor to satisfy the law: But in love, hope, desire, and
godly zeal for a threefold end and use.

First, For the mortification, humiliation, and repentance of the obstinate
sinner, that he may be made sensible of his danger, and ashamed of his sin, and
heartily sorrowful for it, and full of contrition: this is intimated by the
Apostle, where he says, that delivering unto Satan, is for the destruction of
the flesh, (that is fleshly corruption by mortification) that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5. 5. and 1 Timothy 1. 20. he says
that he delivered unto Satan Hymeneus and Alexander, that they might learn not
to blaspheme, and 2 These. 3. 14.

Secondly, For the preserving of the body and the rest of the members from
infection, for obstinate scandalous sinners will infect others: this the
Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7. Saying, Know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump? purge out therefore the old leaven.

Thirdly, For vindicating the Church and Christian Religion from reproach and
scandal, and all show and appearance of countenancing and cherishing vile sin
and wickedness, which will raise an ill report commonly, that Christian Religion
is worse then Gentilisme, and tolerats sins, the names of which are loathed
among civil heathen. This the Apostle implies, 1 Cor. 5. 1. saying, It is
commonly reported, that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as
is not so much as named among the Gentiles. And certainly the Jews who were,
according to to their law, so strict in keeping from the Passover, all such as
had any uncleannes on them, might justly reproach Christians, if they should
admit scandalous sinners spiritually leprous and unclean to the Lords Supper,
and into holy communion with them, and not cast them out.

There is besides those censures before named, another most dreadful censure
mentioned in Scripture, and called by the name of Anathema Maranatha, that is,
the cursed until the Lord comes. 1 Cor. 16. 22. This is a curse which the
Church denounces against desperate back-sliders, and Apostates, who after
illumination, profession of love to Christ, and a taste of the good Word of
God, and of the power of the world do come, do sin against the holy Ghost, and
fall away into hatred and despite against the truth, of which the spirit has
convinced their consciences, into malignant persecution of all true godliness,
and into an impossibility of being renewed by repentance, Heb 6. 4. This
censure (to speak no more of it) is a sentence and judgment of the Church,
declaring and pronouncing, that such persons are reprobates and desperate
enemies of God, finally accursed, past hope of recovery, given up to the
judgment of the last day, when the Lord shall come to render vengeance in
flaming fire, to all them that hate him, and that they are to be shunned and
abhorred as fire brands of hell. Of this curse we have diverse examples in
Scripture, as that which God laid upon Cain, Genesis 4. That which Enoch denounced
against the old world, of which Jude in his Epistle makes mention, verse. 14.
That of David against Doeg and other enemies, and against the traitor Judas,
Psalm. 109. and that wherewith the Lord cursed the reprobate Jews, when he
forbad the Prophet Jeremy, to pray for them Jer. 7. 16. and 11. 14. and 14. 11.
For there is a sin unto death, namely the sin of Apostasy, and rebellion
against the light, not to be prayed for, as S. John says, 1 Ioh. 5. 16.

Besides these acts of Government before named, we read of three others.

The first is, Ordination of Ministers, which properly belongs to the preaching
Presbyters, who are to examine them, try their gifts, and inquire into their
lives first, and after proof made of their abilities, and godly conversation,
to ordain them with prayer and imposition of hands: of this we read, Act. 13.
2, 3. 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, etc. and 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 5. 22. Tit. 1. 5.

The second is, Choosing and appointing of Church Officers, this is the common
act of the whole Eldership, together with the people, as appears, Act. 6. 3, 5.
and Act. 14. 23.

The third is, Setting of things in good order, and appointing that all things
be done decently and in order in the Church: this Paul injoined the Elders of
Corinth to do, 1 Cor. 14 40. and he promised to assist them therein, 1 Cor. 11.
34. and laid this charge on Titus, Tit. 1. 5.

From this discourse framed out of the infallible Word of God, and express
testimonies of holy Scriptures, diverse Corollaries and necessary conclusions do
issue, which remove the doubts, and answer the questions, which doubting
scrupulous persons shall propound concerning Church Government, whether it be
in whole, or part Jure divino, and by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ.

1. Conclus. That there is one uniform Government in the whole universal
Church, and in every part thereof Jure divino, and by the will and appointment
of Jesus Christ, which ought to be observed in all National, Provincial,
Classical and Congregationall Churches, as they are parts and members of the
Church universal, which is the mystical body of Christ. Proved, Section 3.
and 5. and 6. and 8.

2. As there is but one law to all Christians, even the Word of God, which is
the perfect rule of Government in all Orthodox, and well constituted Churches:
So ought the Government to be one, and the same in them all among themselves,
and in every particular Congregation. Proved Sect. 8.

3. The supreme Magistracy in every Nation, Country, and State, being
Christians, is in duty bound to be as a nursing father to the Church of Christ,
to set up and maintain Preachers, who may by preaching the Gospel, gather their
people and subjects into Congregations, and set up Elders in every one
according to the Word of God; And parochial, or particular Congregations so
gathered, and Elderships set up in them by the dictate and direction of Christ
are Iure divino: The appointment of the Civil Magistrate is only a civil
sanction, it does not make them to be Iure divino. Proved Sect. 3. and 4.

4. Though all National Churches rightly constituted, and formed according to
the Scriptures, are of equal authority, not any one superior to another; and
likewise all Provincial, Classical and Parochial Churches alike well formed,
are equal: No Provincial superior to another Provincial: Nor any Classical
Eldership to another Classical; Yet the deciding of a controversy in point of
Doctrine, or any sentence, or censure issuing out, and published from a greater
Assembly or Eldership, as from a National, Provincial, or Classical, is
generally of more authority, and more to be respected in all Churches, then the
same sentence and determination proceeding from the Eldership of a lesser or
particular Congregation, as we see, Act. 15. Where the decree of the Apostles
and Elders in a National, or rather Oecumenicall Synod at Jerusalem, was of
more authority in all Christian Churches, then if it had proceeded from the
Eldership of Antioch, in which were Paul and Barnabas, the two great Apostles
of the Gentiles, who were able to decree infallibly the same things, and
appealed to Jerusalem, not to learn, but to make their doctrine of more
authority, as appears, Gal. 2. 2. 6. Proved Sect. 5. 6.

5. All Elderships consisting of preaching Presbyters and other Elders who do
rule well, and all the members of such Elderships are Jure Divino, and by the
will and appointment of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 5. 17. and the acts of Government
done by assisting Elders, together with preaching Presbyters, who by their
office and calling have authority and ability to expound the word and law, the
infallible rule of Government, are certainly according to the will and
appointment of Christ, and being conformed to the rule, are ratified in heaven.
Math. 18. 18.

6. All superior Elderships and greater Assemblies, whether National,
Provincial or Classical, consisting of preaching Presbyters, successors of
the Apostles and Evangelists, and of other assisting Church Elders, who are
chosen members of the universal Church, unto the common Pastors, whereof the
Apostles, Christ immediately committed the Government of the whole Church, and
by them to the Presbyters, who do succeed them in several Nations, Provinces,
Cities and circuits, are by the superior Assemblies and Synods held by the
Apostles and Elders gathered together at Jerusalem about matter of greater
concernment Act. 6. 2. and 15. 6. and 21. 18. warranted, and declared to be
Jure Divino, and by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. Proved Sect. 8.

7. The Appeals from Congregationall Elderships to Classical, and from
Classical to Provincial and National, are by the Appeal of the Church
Presbyters, and the two great Apostles Paul and Barnabas at Antioch to the high
Synod at Jerusalem, warranted and demonstrated to be Iure Divino, and by the
will and appointment of Jesus Christ; and their powers also.

8. Occumenicall or universal Assemblies, consisting of Pastors and Elders
chosen out of all true Orthodox Christian Churches, and sent as delegates from
every National Church, are warranted by that Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15. In
which the Apostles there residing together with the two great Pastors of all
the Churches of the Gentiles, Paul and Barnabas, and the Elders in Jerusalem,
and delegates from Antiochia, Syria, and Cilicia, were assembled to decide a
Controversy, which concerned the universal Church of Christ; And cannot with
any good reason be denied to be Iure Divino, and by the will and appointment of
Jesus Christ.

9. Though notorious scandalous offenses, for which persons thereof guilty, are
to be kept from the Sacrament of the Lords supper, until they profess
repentance, and promise amendment, are easy to be discerned, and noted by the
general multitude, who may privately judge them to be such: Yet the Lord Christ
in his word, gives power and authority to none, by virtue of their office and
calling, to judge, and declare by public sentence, what scandalous offenses
are worthy of such a censure, and to keep persons guilty of them from the holy
Communion; But only Elderships Congregationall, Classical or others merely
Ecclesiastical, in which there are preaching Presbyters, who are able, and
have a public calling from Christ, to expound the word of God, which is the
law and rule by which scandalous sins must be judged, and censures given and
executed. For on their persons, and consciences, the scandal, and guilt will
lie heavy, if they profane the holy Sacrament by giving it wittingly to such as
will eat and drink unworthily, and be guilty of the body and blood of Christ.
1 Cor. 11. 17. Proved sect. 3. and 5.

10. There are certain particular rules (as the Scriptures cited in this
foregoing discourse, and diverse others do show) some openly expressed in the
word of God; others by necessary consequence from thence diducted, which
sufficiently direct all Elderships, and all persons, who are Elders in them, in
the exercise of the power Ecclesiastical before mentioned, and in performing
all necessary acts of Church Government, as receiving accusations, public
admonition, reproof, rebuke, refusing to communicate with, or to admit to the
holy Communion sinners convicted of scandalous sins, and persisting therein
without repentance, Excommunication, and casting out of the Church them who
refuse to be ashamed and reclaimed by the former means used; and continue in
contumacie, disobedience, scorn and contempt of the Churches judgment, and
proceeding with them in the Name, and by the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Proved Sect. 9.

11. Although the Scriptures give great power to Christian Kings, and Supreme
Magistrates over the Church of God in their dominions, and the civil
Government thereof is in their hands. And all Christians, and Ecclesiastical
persons of all orders, and degrees are bound in Civil matters to be subject to
them, and to obey and honor them. Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3. 1. and Pet. 2. 13. And
as nursing fathers to the Church, Isai. 49. 23. they have the power which
David, Solomon, Asa, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah exercised in purging and
reforming the Church, in commanding Ministers of the word, and Church officers
to execute their offices faithfully; in punishing with Civil censures, and
deposing such as are scandalous and incorrigible; in providing maintenance and
setting up able Ministers to teach, and instruct their subjects, and allotting
Gods portion to maintain his worship, and service in his Church; in granting
liberty to all to profess true Christian religion, and to make laws for the
punishing and restraining of wicked profane persons from disturbing their
people in the holy service of God: Yet seeing the exercise of Government merely
Ecclesiastical, and the administration of holy ordinances is by Christ
committed to the Apostles, and their successors, Pastors, Teachers, and
Church officers, with promise to be with them to the end of the world: And the
office and authority of expounding the word, which is the law and rule of
Ecclesiastical Government, is left in their hands, without mention of Civil
magistracy, which neither then was Christian, nor for many ages after, and yet
the Church was well Governed, increased mightily and flourished in all piety,
religion and godliness. Therefore the supreme Magistracy is not allowed, nor
warranted by Scripture, but excluded from intruding into the administration of
holy Church ordinances, and must leave the power of judging and determining of
all things which concern the public worship and service of God to the
infallible word of Christ, the holy Scriptures, and to those who are by God set
apart, and furnished with gifts, and abilities, and ordained according to
Christ's institution unto the office of expounding the word and ministering in
all holy things in the Church the house of God, of which they are stewards,
officers and Ministers, Proved Sect. 3. and 5.

12. Church Discipline without sound Doctrine is a body without a soul. The
key of Doctrine is the soul, life, guide, and direction of Discipline, and those
two keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are inseparably tied together, and committed
by Christ to the same hands. Discipline has no power, nor authority over the
conscience, but from the word rightly applied. They who are bound and loosed on
earth, according to the infallible word, are also bound and loosed in heaven:
And Censures erring from the word are void in heaven. Sect. 9.

13. Civil Magistrates, and other grave, godly, wise and discreet men, are not
excluded, but may be chosen assisting Church Elders, and together with
preaching Presbyters may rule and Govern in those Elderships, whereof they are
Elders, and have power and authority by the word of God to judge and determine
in the Presbytery together with the Pastors (and not otherwise) who are
scandalous offenders, unworthy for the present to be admitted to the Lords
table. For the word expounded by Ministers thereunto lawfully called, is the
law and perfect rule of all acts of Church Government and Censures.

14. Provision of Commissioners who are no Church Elders, and who are
authorized only by the Civil Magistracy to judge who are scandalous
offenders, not fit to receive the holy Sacrament, is in the judgment of the
best Divines of the reformed Churches, and appears by Scriptures before
alleged, to be a mere invention of humane policy, which has no example or
warrant in Gods word, and a manifest usurpation, and giving of that power to
others, which Christ has appropriated to the Apostles and Presbyters of his
Church, and so is contrary to the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. Godly
ministers generally are of this judgment, that their approving and yielding to
the practice thereof, is a breach of the National league and Covenant. King
Vzziah was plagued by God with an incurable leprosy, for meddling in the
administration of holy ordinances, and in so doing his heart was lifted up to
his destruction, and he transgressed against the Lord his God 2 Chronicles. 26. 16.
In many men, who highly applaud, extol and vehemently urge this new device and
practice, it favors too much of scorn, contempt, envy and a most uncharitable
opinion conceived against the godly, learned, faithful Ministers of Christ,
and watchful Pastors of his Church, and brands both them and all those who
are to be set up hereafter in all places of the land, (if the godly reformation
desired, be really intended, and sincerely prosecuted) with insufficiency, and
want of grace to do the work unto which God has called them. It seems to
call in question the faithfulness of Christ, who has promised to be with
them always even unto the end of the world, Math. 28. 20. Many wise and godly
people hold it a perverse imagination, and a thing unreasonable to think, that
wise, discreet and godly men, being chosen Elders of the Church, and joined in
Elderships with learned and faithful Ministers, who can expound the word, and
give them the true sense of the law of Christ, shall or will not be more able
to judge of scandalls, and what persons are fit or unfit to be admitted to the
Lords Supper, then the same persons being commissioners by themselves. As if
Christ were not able, ready, and willing to give grace and assistance to them
which are his chosen servants, and ministers of his Church in things spiritual
all, as the supreme magistracy is to give to his new formed Creatures, who are
never owned by Christ in all the new Testament. Surely no rational man will so
much as dream, That Ministers of Christ, who are able to teach the supreme
Magistrate his duty, how to be just, and to rule over men in the fear of God,
are not able to rule their own flock, over which the holy Ghost made them
overseers; or that Church Government in their hands to whom Christ has
committed it, will prove more arbitrary, irregular, unlimited, and tyrannical
then the Government both of Commonwealth and Church in the hands of Civil
Magistrates, seeing Ministers and Church Elders have a certain and infallible
rule, the word of God, to which alone they are limited, and by which the spirit
of God is promised to direct them in all Censures, and Church Government. But
civil Magistrates have no such special promise of assistance from Christ, and
they rule by the uncertain laws of men, and have an arbitrary power to make
laws which are sometimes found contrary to the word of God, and therefore
unjust and tyrannical over the Consciences of Christians, till they be
repealed and declared to be void.

And there can be no just suspicion or fear of tyranny in the Government of
the Church left in the hands of Church Elders, where Christ has placed it;
seeing the supreme Magistracy, (as keeper of both tables, in all Christian
Kingdoms and states) has as much Civil power to curb, and punish them for
maladministration of Church Government, abuse of their power, and manifest
corruption of Christ's ordinances, and to depose and cast them out of their
office, when they are scandallous and incorrigible; as they have to reprove him
by Gods word, for any notorious scandallous sins, to admonish him of his
duty, to threaten him from God, and to lay his judgments close to him, when he
goes on in his sins of injustice, profanenes, licentiousnes and the like.

And now I will conclude all with some brief answers to the grievous
accusations; and loud clamours raised against the Ministry in general, as if
the stain, and guilt of all those errors, and scandallous vices of pride,
covetousnes, ambition and ignorance, envy and cruelty, which were found
heretofore in the corrupt Popish and Prelaticall Clergy, did still cleave to
all Presbyters and Pastors of Christ's Church, and were hereditary to them.

We meet with this accusation and calumny now adays almost in every company,
and at every rich man's table, and in every libellous Printed pamphlet, set
forth weekly by News Mongers: That Presbyterians are as proud as Prelates; and
if Ministes get into their hands Church Discipline, they will tyrannize, and
Lord is over their flocks, and the same spirit of pride, envy, covetousnes,
error and cruelty, will work in them, which ruled in the Prelates, and in
popish Bishops formerly.

To these I answer, first, That if we search all histories of the Church in all
ages, we shall never find in any Church or Kingdom; so many godly, learned,
faithful, and sincere Ministers, holding so fast their integrity of life, and
purity of doctrine under so great corruption of Government, both in Church and
State, and after so great tyranny raging in both; together with so many
temptations, hatred, and persecution of godly and zealous Preachers, and so
open countenancing of prophanenes, error, and heresy, as we have had of late
years, and have at this day; whom neither persecution, loss of goods and
estates, nor bonds, nor imprisonment; no nor hopes and offers of preferment,
honor or riches could move from their stedfastnes. And yet all this cannot
stop the mouths of the sons of Belial, whose hearts are hardened, and their
tongues set on fire of hell, to revile the Ministers of Jesus Christ, whose
blameless lives convince them of malicious slander, lying and impudency.

Secondly, It is manifest to all equal and judicious men, that the supreme
Magistracy has been the chief cause of such an ungodly and scandallous
Ministry, pestring this Kingdom of late years. For who, like Jeroboam, did
prefer the basest of the people to be Priests of the high places, namely
Court flatterrers, ambitious bribers, importunate beggars, Simoniacks, and
slaves to great men's lusts, but the suprem Magistracy, licentious Nobility,
profane gentry, and covetous patrons of benefices? Who, but the supreme
Magistracy hindered the lawful ordination of Ministers by Presbyteries, after
strict examination, and trial had of their learning and gifts, and upon
testimony and experience of their honest life and conversation; and gave the
sole power thereof into the hands of those who commonly hated true godliness,
and either carelessely, or corruptly, and of purpose admitted vile unworthy
persons into the holy calling of the Ministry, who were either unlearned and
not gifted; or if learned, and men of parts, were vicious, men of corrupt
mind, prone and strong to do mischief?

Thirdly, the supreme Magistracy by robbing the greatest part of parish
Churches, and selling away all impropriat Benefices to the Nobility and
Gentry, and they covetously retaining them in their possession, have made the
Churches and Ministry base, contemptible, and beggarly. And

Lastly it seems to reflect upon the supreme Magistracy in these days, That
there is such a scarcity of profitable pr^^^chers, and that many Congregations
are wholly unprovided, and others are out of necessity forced to content
themselves with soule-starving shepherds, and many young men, of learning, and
of hopeful gifts, finding no lawful way of entering into the Ministry, and
terrified with the intolerable taxes, and other great grievances, and
discouragments under which many Ministers of great worth do lie groaning, are
moved to withdraw their minds from the study of Divinity, and betake
themselves to other callings. This certainly is not the fault of the learned
Presbyters of this time, who earnestly desire, and have petitioned for liberty
by the civil sanction, to join together in Classical Presbyteries, and to
ordain Ministers, according to the advice of the Reverend Assembly, and the
rules by them gathered out of Gods holy word. It remains therefore, that they
and all the godly in the land, do cry mightily unto God in daily prayer, that
he would pour out his spirit upon the high Court of Parliament, and incline the
heart of the supreme Magistracy to yield to the petitions and importunity of
the City, of the Assembly, and of the Ministers of the Country; and to be
entreated in so necessary, pious, profitable and religious a request, so easily
granted, to satisfy the longing desires, and hungring, and thirsting souls of
all godly people, that they and we may rejoice together in the Lord, and may
bless his holy name, for the abundance of peace extended to us like a river,
and the Lord Christ may be our King, and his Name one in all the three
Kingdoms.

FINIS.

