A WORD to Purpose: Or, A Parthian Dart, Shot back to 1642, and from thence
shot back again to 1659. swiftly glancing upon some remarkable Occurrences of
the Times; and now sticks fast in two Substantial QUERIES,

I. Concerning The Legality of the Second Meeting of some of the Long
-Parliament-Members.

ALSO, A Fools Bolt shot into Wallingford House, by as good a Friend to
England, as any is there, concerning A Free State.

Printed 1659.

A Word to purpose, OR A Parthian Dart, shot back to 1642. and from thence shot
back again to 165^ etc.
I. Whether the men met together in the House at Westminster, where usually the
Commons sat; be at this day a lawful Parliament, according to the Fundamental
laws of this Nation: to bind the people to obey their Commands.
The Grounds of my Scruple are these:
Query I.

I. ADmitting the Power to be a derivative from the People originally, either
by Request and Election precedent, or Agreement and Consent subsequent, which
is all one; and thereby a Supremacy of Power is lodged and fixed somewhere in
one or more Persons, who has in him or them the Appointment of a season for
the Commons to Elect their Representatives, and send them up to Consult
according to our long continued Laws (though the Commons Representatives were
not in former time known, but by the Notion of Petitioners) with the other two
Estates; their Authority and Warrant which they receive from the People, is not
expressed but employed, with this difference; their general Authority is
expressed indeed, which answers the Writ of Summons, to Consult, etc. I say
expressed, because by their actions in Electing, according to the Writ, they
express themselves: But the Authority in law or employed, is this; First, To
make Laws for the good of the People. Secondly, According to the ancient
custom.


1. Of this Realm, that is, not to make laws to undo the People, not to make
laws to destroy the people, not to make laws to perpetuate heavy burdens upon
the People.

2. According to the Ancient customs of this Realm, that is, to join with their
Fellows, not to grow peremptory and saucy, and Rebellious against their
Superiors in Honor and Dignity, though at that time equal only with
themselves in Power, not to violate the known and anciently renewed
Privileges, which any of the other Estates has been long endowed with; and
that by the ^onsent of their Masters that sent them thither, not to enforce
their Fellows to consent to an Act against Reason, against their own Trusts,
against the Obedience that they have bound themselves to by Oath, and that all,
so that Elected them, are also bound by Oath to with many others; which if they
do, they forfeit their Trusts. Now to prove their employed Commission runs in
this channel, I say, First, all Parliaments ever went according to these rules,
which is Argument enough: Our Laws and Liberties (which people prate of and
mistake) have no other Authority than the common and constant custom of the men
of this Nation.

Secondly, Is it not against sense and reason, that men should give others a
Power to Undo, Destroy, or Oppress themselves? And can it be imagined that
when the King sends his Writs out for summoning of a Parliament, consisting of
Lords and Commons, according to the Ancient Usage of this Realm, and the People
sending their Representatives accordingly to advise with the other Estates; but
that the People intended they should proceed according to the ancient Rules and
Prescripts of Government, to acknowledge the Supremacy of the single Person,
invested absolutely without any Power of Revocation, with several Prerogatives
and Immunities befitting, necessary and of absolute Import for the Grandeur,
Honor and Serenity of his Person, with Power in a moderate measure for
discharging his Place, in putting in execution of Laws in intervals; also to
acknowledge the decent precedence of the other Estate, differenced only from
them i^ the point of Honor, and lovingly, religiously and faithfully to join
with them in establishing Laws, for the mutual good one of another, and all
the rest whose Trusts they execute. Can it be imagined that the People
intended, when they sent their Representatives up to London, at the beginning
of the Long Parliament; that they or one of them did or durst think of turning
out the House of Lords; equal to themselves in lawful Power? Of turning out
one half of themselves, equal to themselves? Of Deposing the King, to whom all
had sworn Allegiance? Besides of a multitude of more inferior hideous actions:
I am confident, no such thing was thought (yet as to the Bishops, I do not
affirm so much, nor do I count that act, being done by the three Estates any
more than the excluding Abbots and Priors) then if these things were not
thought of; certainly Authority to do such things were never given by the
People; then it follows, that if the Representatives do exceed their
Commissions, and proceed contrary to the rules before mentioned, it is not
obligatory; now I intend they exceed their Commissions; when they act any thing
contrary to Reason, Religion, the Peace of the Nation, the Fundamentals of
settled government, or impossible; some of all which, though enacted by the
three Estates, the learned in the Law knows bind not; And indeed I am of
opinion, and many more, therefore shall not go about to prove it, That the
House of Commons at first lawfully Assembled, did after 642. obtrude all these
incongruities, Absurdities, Cheates and Villainies upon the People of this
Nation, and so forfeited their Authorities. But admitting that my Bailiffe whom
I employed to manage my estate for me, will fall out with some that I have
dealing with, and without my warrant sue, bring to trial and recover (per fas
vel nefas) something for me, under color all this while of my Authority, and
in my name, and further takes out execution, and possesses himself of the other
man's goods, and pretends for my use, yet keeps them to his own; and says all
this is by my Warrant, when in truth I was against it: And admitting all this
to be lawful, and that my Warrant iustifies all he has done; yet if I die, my
Books tell me the Warrant is determined as to the executory part of it. Now I
conceive, the death of the King determined, what pretense the Long Parliament
could possibly have to act as a Parliament? for his death determines all
Commissions, all Writs derived from him to hold at Will; so that the very Writ
whereby they were summoned is by his death determined and of no force; then the
superstructure must fall; besides (which is a great argument) with many) who
every knew a Parliament, a Committee, or other like inferior Commissionated
Court, to hold after the the death or determination of him or them under whom
they derive their Power? and if the Act of perpetuating themselves be thrown
in my Dish, I Will throw that into the house of office, using it as other waste
paper:

For first, I hold that Act void in its Creation, and yet shall not hint that
secret force that made it an Act; but as I said before: Acts against Reason and
the Fundamentals of that Government, which Impowers them to act, are void; and
therefore if the three Estates had Enacted that there is no King or House of
Lords in these three Nations, this had been void, and a contradiction, that
that Act should take away the Power that made it an Act; when it is most certain,
that if that be an Act, the King is a King, and so they are relata. So of Acts
against Reason, that should enact that there should be no King in England, etc.
after such a day; this though signed by the three Estates is void; for
alteration of Government was never in their Commission, unless expressed,
which had it been, it would have been Treason. Impossible Act, your own feeble
sense will tell you are void, and you need not to see the Comment by Cock upon
35. E. 1. which Act would have had the common Seal of the Orders of
Cistercians, etc. to be in the custody of the Prior, and of the four of the
discreetest of the Covent, sealed up with the Privy Seal of the Abbot; and if
any Writing should be se led with any other seal than with the said common
Seal; so (as is aforesaid) kept in custody, it should be void: Now observe, if
it be kept in custody under the Seal of the Abbot, then no Writing can be
sealed by the Abbot, and if the Abbot takes it out and seal, etc. then, etc.
not kept in custody under his Privy Seal, this you may see in the printed Book,
and is called de Asportatu religiosorum, I pray mind it, theress good matter to
be learned from thence: Now to Apply these things, I conceive, an Act of
Parliament to perpetuate themselves a Parliament, is as absurd, as to enact
that there never should be a Parliament again: I know the last will be noted
void by the Keepers of the Liberties, and doubtless its void as against their
Commissions. And therefore if I leave lands to I. S. so long as I. N. shall
think fit; and I. N. says he thinks fit, he shall have it to him and his
heirs, this is void in law, as to the perpetuity of it, and never was intended
between the parties.

But admitting that also the act good, yet Acts must be construed according to
the intent of the Maker, a certain rule: Now we well know, and so do you, and
those unruly Members know too, that the intent of the Makers on no sides was
that the Parliament should continue for ever; nor that it should not cease by a
legal determination, such as is the Kings death, but only that the King
should not break them up till they had eased the grievances of the people, and
that they might sit a convenient time for doing the service of the Country,
this is the true meaning of it, you know well enough, and this agrees with the
right interpretation of other Acts of Parliament.

But admitting that also, yet me thinks the Exclusion of half of themselves,
should hugely abate the legality of their power, and infringe the privileges
and native Rights of the People, who should sit in Parliament by their
Representatives, but that's a small one, I pass it over.

But further, I have heard that a Parliamen discontinued is dissolved; which
was the opinion of Chief Justice Roll and Justice Ask, two men as indulgent to
the designs of the Keepers of our Liberties from us, as they can find out
again: and this they declared in Captain Streaters Case, one of your own
disciples: Then your Assembly being not adjourned is discontinued and so
dissolved.

Just now, I fancy some may object, a Force in that case, do so and I Will
Answer it; but in the mean time, if it were a force, and that Assembly a
Parliament, it was Treason; and I will never believe it to be a Force, till I
see some of the Offenders hanged; and if that should come to pass, it would go
hard with most of those that called them together again.

But admitting all this, yet there is one thing more that makes me Querie; And
that is this: Generally and regularly, the King has Power to Dissolve; and
when the King is taken away, that Power devolves upon the People, this I
suppose must be granted; else let the Commons cut off their King, and they have
ipso facto, at the same instant made themselves an everlasting Parliament,
without the help of a specious Act; then admitting that the King was bound by
that Act, as sub moda, I agree he was: Now the King is taken away, who is now
Found by it? the Keepers of the Liberties, etc. That's no sense, that the
Keepers should be bound not to dissolve the Keepers, without the consent of the
Keepers, and they are de facto, now the only Succession of the King; then it
falls out now that Act is void, then has nobody power to Dissolve; Yes the
Soldiers, probatum est: But I mean lawful Power? Yes, the People: And
therefore I liken it to this Case.

I. enfe off I. S. in Fee of certain Lands, upon condition that he shall pay a
certain sum of money yearly to I. N. And he does not pay, who shall take
advantage of the Condition? I. N. cannot, the law disables him, for none can
take advantage of a Condition but he from whom the estate moves: then it
follows that I. S. must if any: and so be may by law, though there be no clause
of reentry by him for condition broken. This is our case, the people chose
their representatives, and gave them a Commission before remembered, but with a
condition annexed thereto, that the King should take advantage of it upon
occasion, Now know that the King is not a stranger as I. N. is in the former
case, but he joining by his Writ with the people, is become as party to the
deed, and so may have a condition reserved to him; besides the cases will thus
differ, that ancient Common Law of England (older than Commons sitting in
Parliament) has endowed the King therewith. But our Keepers made that
impossible to be done by no Law, which the Law made Impossible to be done in
case of I. N. So that they that gave the Authority must countermand and resume
it again, if they can, they may certainly, for no Authority whatsoever, but is
countermandeable. Now what if the people have countermanded this Authority, and
that by the consent of themselves or most of them? One would think this would
make it clear: Then lets consider, There is a Countermand express, and a
Countermand in law or implied: Now by both these, the people have Countermanded
their Autho-

First, Expressly, then know an express countermand, is either per alium or
per se, either in person, or by others; and a countermand by others is either
by command precedent, or agreement subsequent; and all these as firm in law one
as the other; and that which makes for our purpose is no more, but this case: I
reenter for condition broken by another; or another reenters in his own name,
and I agree to it; this may be done by law.

Now then Oliver Cromwell pulled those whipsters out by the ears, (and did them
no wrong, say some, for he might as well turn them out, as they turn him out,
that had better right; and he might as well Govern as they, having as good
Authority and better, coming nearer the old model) but let this Act be lawful
or not lawful (and some say no public Act this sixteen years has been
lawful) Yet if he has the agreement subsequent of the People to it, that
makes it doubtless lawful: And that agreement is very obvious.

First, The Saints agreed to it, that is to say, the Army, ask Lambert else,
next the godly party in the Country agreed to it, as appears by their speedy
scudding up to Westminster into the same place and confirmed it over and over:
next, all the people of the three Nations agreed to it, in chosing a new
Representative to Congratulate Oliver, for the good service; and to give him
some handsome gratuity for his pains, which accordingly was done, and that more
than once, and with great solemnity; and not only to him, but to his Son, and
that with as great solemnity and as unanimously as ever any Prince could be
enthroned: And if I may speak the sense of all that ever I came near since that
time, I never heard one man speak concerning it, but heartily rejoiced, that
the yoke was taken off their necks. But again, let the Designs of Oliver be
what they would; yet the Peoples choosing new Representatives, as often as
occasion was offered; is clearly an employed countermand of the Commission of
the former; For two sort of men cannot be commissionated severally to do the
same thing, but the first are countermanded by the last, if they be
countermandable; and the last are void, if the other be not countermandable:
Now all these several choises of Representatives were to do the same thing,
that is, to transact the great, Affairs of the Nation, which Authority is
countermandable, draw hence the Conclusion, etc.

And further, Its evident the Army agreed to all this, and so did a great many
of those few that meet now in the Parliament house, who sat more than once in
the same place they now fit in, by virtue of the Peoples new choice; which
some, if not all, made, contrived and contended for; and after made Laws to
confirm the then Protector, which doubtless shows plainly, that they took the
former long Assembly to be determined; and by their actings, are by Law
estopped and concluded: To say otherwise, like to this case in Law; Lessee for
many years by a good Lease accepts from his Lessor a void Lease; that is, a
surrender and determination of his former good Lease; for by his acceptance, he
has admitted the Lessor to have a power to make another Contract, which must
work a surrender of his former, otherwise there could be no new contract: So it
is here; which Note.

So now the grounds of my scruple being these, That its conceived generally,
that the long Parliament forfeited their Trusts and Authorities, by going
beyond their Commissions, notwithstanding the Act of not Dissolving, etc. made
by the three Estates: Or else that they determined by the death of the King?
However their Power determined as to make Acts? Or else they determined by
their discontinuance? or else by the Peoples reseising their Authority, and
granting it to others, which they would not have done, had they intended the
same should have continued: And had the Act of Oliver in Dissolving them not
been acceptable to the People, he had not sat so sure as he did. I must
ingenuously say, I cannot see (unless I be further enlightened, which I wish
some would endeavor) how this present meeting in the Parliament House, should
amount to a Parliament?

But mistake me not, I offer not this to public view to breed contentions,
stirs and debates in the Land, we are like to have enough of them besides: but
my main end is to have some satisfaction; and that a thing of so great moment
to the people may be settled and resolved, and the consciences of many quieted:
For how can it be imagined, that the people should be obedient, when they doubt
the grounds of the supreme Authority? And what compliance other than a passive
submission can be expected, when an Usurped, confused, unlimited, rude and
groundless power shall obtrude themselves upon the Rights, Liberties and Native
privileges of the people? When a disorderly, unaccountable and unwarrantable
procedure is set on foot by a company unauthorized inferior spirits? To whom
sad experience has dictated, that no trust or heed is to be given; because
their whole proceedings have been violent, their own judgments unsettled,
their pretenses but pretenses; their thoughts conceits, and their whole
practice contradictions. But now on the other side, can they assure us of hopes
of a settled Government, and some advantage to the public by their changes?
They shall have my Vote to be once more entrusted: But give me leave to offer
one Query more.

Whether as things now stand, it is likely we should compass the design of
setting up a Free State? The grounds and inducements to this query are these:
First, in respect of those that are to do it by greatest pretense: Secondly,
In respect of those that would do it without any pretense. Thirdly, In respect
of the thing it self to be done.

First, They that are to do it, if any, must be the men met at the Parliament
House: Now as to them consider how their Power stands; for if it fall out, that
they go on in an unauthoritative way, what they do will not long stand?
witness all the unwarrantable Attempts and Acts, that have been attempted or
acted from the first Rebellion; if all or most have not been opposed,
contradicted, and many nulled by after contrary actions? Then again consider
their spirits and tempers, are they not dissatisfied, distasted and distempered
spirits, are they not fiery tongues only, that is, are they not zealous
without knowledge? When they that sit at the Helm of Government should have
cloven tongues also? that is, knowledge to discern truth from error; and know
that knowledge without zeal is like a Ship without a ^ayle, and zeal without
knowledge, is like a ship under sail without a Pilot: Also are they not men
too much biassed to private Interests? do they not call the long
Parliament-time a blessed time, because some of them could make shift to bless
themselves with above twenty thousand pounds per ann. and the other with fair
estates? And is not this the design of them to return willingly till the
residue of the Land unsold be viis and modis brought into their own clutches,
at least good gratuities? see the history of Independency.

Are they men acquainted with a Free State, or understood the meaning thereof?
Or where could they learn it, unless by some Jesuits Insinuation? I Am
confident they never found a jot concerning it in the House they sit in, and
where they are desirous to spend their days.

Secondly, In respect of the men that would do it without any pretense
whatsoever, that is the Army. Now consider, was ever a long lasting Government
established by an Army? Was there ever any Religion in an Army? Can we think an
Army, which has for many years burdened, oppressed, impoverished and almost
ruined the people, should set up a Government. Especially whilst they
themselves acknowledge a Power above them, or can a Parliament do it, when they
know there is in truth a power above them? Can they both do it, when they
cannot agree? Do the men in the Parliament House signify any more than the man
that stands upon the Clock in Westminster Abbey with the Hammer in his hand,
and when the Iron wheels bid him strike, he strikes: Has it not been so (at
least since 1648.) between the Army and Parliament (as it its called) durst
they ever do any thing contrary to the mind of the Army? Yea, they did, and
were always chidden, sometimes beaten for their pains. Do the Soldiers know
what they would have? Yes, Money, Great estates, and nothing else? Yes Honor,
and would every one be rulers in chief, and would play Level-coyle with the
Government, and so play the Fool or Knave with the people? How is it possible
to imagine that so many hotspurs that stand in equali Gradu one to the other,
should ever agree in a supremacy? Oliver we know was as hot as these, with as
fair pretenses, but nothing would serve but aut Caesar, aut Nullus, and that
would have done too; had he been as good as his promise to him that was the
next him in Power, and had he came in his room, a Free State had not been
dreampt on, but we saw the dignity and honor was going in another Channel,
and no hope of coming to us, which is intolerable: lets bring all even
again, and then may I come in and be chief, if this were the thoughts of but
one, it were pretty well, but is not this the thoughts of many? great hopes of
a Free State: And certainly the chief grounds of our confusions are, that all
would be Governors, and the hearts of most, I mean of the men in Power, are
stuffed with excessive pride, and can never subject themselves to any
subordination, or live as subject, and if all be Governors, there are no
Governors, like a bastard that is filius populi, is nullius filius, he that
has every one for his Father, has no Father at all.

Thirdly in respect of the thing it self, which we must call a Commonwealth or
Free State.

A Free State? how Free? What! within the meaning of Magna Carta, cap 1. Libera
pro liberata? That is, that our possessions and goods shall be freed from all
un^ust Taxations and Oppressions, and a restitution made to us of our ancient
Rights and Liberties, and a freeing us from such Impositions and Services as
have been usurped and encroached upon us by illegal Power: which is but
declaratory of the common Laws of England? Or within Magna Charta cap. 9. Where
Freedom and Liberties signify particular interest and Liberties, which they
have or ought to have either by lawful grant or prescription? I pray lets have
such a Free State, and I Will say no more, but thanks. But is it not meant a Free
State, that every one shall be free to do that which is good in his own eyes,
or that every one shall be free to do what he has power enough to do, or that
every one shall be free in Hobson's choice, to take, enjoy, or have what the
Army will suffer us to take, enjoy, or have, or nothing? or Free in paying the
Soldiers, or Free to do what the Army would have us. Let the People think of
this.

But if they mean a Government by the Peoples Representatives only, which is a
Democracy, let them tell us so: why do not the People choose them? What have
the Army to do to choose men to make laws to bind me or my estate? What tell
they me that the People chose those men? It Is true, but not to play such tricks
as they have done: I told you before, they had abused their Authority, and it
was taken away from them.

But think of a Democracy rightly ordered, That the Keepers, etc. would have?
but let them take heed, for if these Mounsiers once leave the House, they are
like never to come there again: And as for the Soldiers, let the people have
their choice, and they would choose to have them hanged. Besides a Democracy
squares not with the genius of this People; and while Harrinton (speaking well
of a Commonwealth in general) would fit and calculate it for our Horizon,
because it suits with other Nations, he talks like an ass; for the laws of
every Nation are suited to the constitution of the People: were it possible now
to alter the Fundamental positive ancient Common Law of this Nation concerning
men and times? Its impossible; however eager Wolves may bark at the Moon: And
its as impossible to subdue the hearts of the People to another frame of
Government, to have it continue long. Alas! after the Kings death, the people,
poor, beaten, tired, Parliament-ridden wretches, were content to have any thing
to be quiet; but as soon as Oliver stepped up into the chair; see how willingly
they conspired with him? How cheerfully they embraced him? Which was only
because of the Government, and the reduction of the ancient known Laws, and
Supremacy into the ancient Channel, for as for his person, they deemed him a
Traitor.

As for Oligarchy, a government by a few, a Senate, by the Officers of the
Army; its so senseless, I Will not think of it.

But this I Will say, let them that wish for Charles Stuarts coming in again,
make all they can for an Oligarchy; however a Democracy will do it: and let the
Soldiers alone and be quiet: For let them have a common Enemy, or any power to
oppose, theyl'e join and be unanimous in such a business. But let them rest,
and have nothing to do, and they will make something to do: Let them be idle and
they will be busy; and if they can find no business, they will make some; Give
them no occasion of fighting with others, and my life for it, they will fight
with themselves; And when Thieves fall out, honest men will come by their own.

FINIS.

