EIGHT Occasional Speeches, made in the house of Commons this Parliament,
1641.

1 Concerning Religion. 2 Upon the same subject. -- 3 Upon dismounting of the
Cannons. 4 Upon the Scotch Treaty. 5 Upon the impeachment of the Lord
Strafford, and Canterbury, etc. 6 Upon the Straffordian knot. 7 Upon the same
subject. 8 A seasonable motion for a loyal Covenant.
By Sir John Wray Knight and Barronet.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Constable, 1641.

EIGHT Occasional Speeches, made in the House of Commons, this Parliament.
1641.
The first, concerning Religion.
November. 12. 1640. Mr. Speaker,
IT was well observed by my Lord Keeper, that a multiplying Glass may deceive;
but the right English Glass of the Commonwealth, never. In which I discern,
so comely and active a Motion, that out of all question, some great work is
here to be done, some thing extraordinary is here to be decreed; or else God
and the King beyond all our expectations, at the last breath, would never so
soon have cemented us again, to meet in this great Council.

Mr. Speaker, What an happy sight will it be to see the King and his people
accord? A threefold cord is not easily broken; and I hope King Charles his
threefold Kingdoms shall never be so divided, as to break in pieces.

Mr. Speaker, God knows, the divisions of Great Britain, have half untwisted
our long union; and I fear that God is angry with our National lukewarm
temper: The zeal of his house has not kindled that flame in our hearts; which
our seeming good actions, have blown abroad; much like the walking of a Ghost,
or livelesse body which affrights many, but pleases no beholder. Omnia honesta
opera, voluntas inchoat; It is the heart or will which gives the beginning to
every good action; and I hope our constant resolutions will be to settell
religion in his splendour and purity, by pulling Dagon from the Altar; and
whipping the Buyers and sellers out of the Temple; Pars prima bonitatis est
velle fieri bonum. The first part of goodness is to have the will of being
good.

God knows all our hearts, and takes notice of our inward resolutions, and for
what ends we come hither, if to propagate and advance his glory and Gospel,
blessed shall this Parliament and Nation be, and then most happy we, whose God
is the Lord, all things shall work together for our good. For Mr. Speaker, he
that turns the hearts of Kings like the rivers of waters, will make the King
and his Kingdoms all of one mind: Long live King Charles the Great, and his
numerous Royal Issue, to defend the true Faith, which will protect and keep
him and his, safe in his fathers Throne. Never King gave more full content to
his people, than his Majesty now has done, and I hope never subjects came with
better hearts and affections to their King and Country then we do: let it then
appear Mr. Speaker, by our outward actions and practice, that our inward
obedience both of heart and hand, is true, loyal, and current coin, not false
nor counterfeit; for, Nemo veraciter dicit, velo, qui non facit illud quod
potest; no man truly says, I am in will and heart resolved, unlessen according
to his ability, he endeavor to perform his resolution, which, to speak the
hearts of us all in this renowned Senate, I am confident, is fully fixed upon
the true reformation of all disorders and innovations in Church or Religion,
and upon the well uniting, and close rejoynting of the now dis-located great
Britain: For let me tell you Mr. Speaker, that, God be thanked, it is but out
of joint, and may be yet well set, by the skillful Chyrurgions of this
Honorable House, to whose loving and Christian care, and to whose tender and
upright hands I leave it, only with this Aviso, let brotherly love continue,
and be constant and of good courage; for the keeper of Israel who neither
slumbers nor sleeps, who delivered us from Romes November powder-blast, will no
doubt still preserve his Anointed our gracious King, and us his loyal
Subjects from all dangers of fire, or sword; For, Si Deus nobiscum quis contra
nos?

The second, upon the same subject.
November. 20. 1640. Mr. Speaker,
BY the report made from the Committee of Religion, you may see to what an
exorbitant height Popery is grown; and yet how slowly we go on to suppress
it; I fear God is displeased with us, or else no disaster should have
prevented the sealing of our Covenant, when intended: And I hope it shall be
performed the next Sabbath. Had our Fast been accepted, and our outward
humiliation cordial, no blow should have distracted our preparations. Mr.
Speaker, If we had taken the good Counsel of our Teachers at the Fast, and
believed their report we had done well, and by this time no doubt we might
have found out Achan, with his Wedge of Gold, and Babylonish Garments: but we
have spent our time only in pilling off the Bark, and snatching the boughs
and the branches of Popery, and that will do no good, for they will grow
thicker and harder; what must we do then, Mr. Speaker, to preserve our
Religion safe and sound, to us and our posterity, that our golden Candel-stick
be not removed? Why, the only way is to fall to our work in earnest, and lay
the Axe to the root, to unloose the long and deep Fangs of Superstition and
Popery: which being once done; the Bark will soon fall down. Let us then Mr.
Speaker, endeavor a thorough Reformation, for if it be imperfect, it will
prove the seed of dissolution, if not desolation; (which God forbid) And to
prevent that, I shall humbly move that the groves and high places of Idolaty,
may be removed, and pulled down, and then Gods wrath against England will be
appeased; until then, never.

The third, upon dismounting the Cannons, December. 15. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
A Man may easily see to what tend all these Innovations and alterations in
Doctrine, and Discipline; and (without a perspective) discover a far off the
active toylesomnesse of these Spiritual Engineeres, to undermine the old and
true foundations of Religion, and to establish their tottering Hierarchy in
room thereof; which least it should not hold, being built with untempered
mortar, you see how careful they are by a vast Oath to force men's consciences,
not to alter their government Archiepiscopall etc.

Mr. Speaker, the thoughts of the righteous are right, but the Counsels of the
wicked are deceit, and nothing else is in their hearts but destruction and
devastation; but to the Counselors of peace is joy; So long as they kept
themselves within the circle of spiritual commerce; and studied to keep men's
hearts upright to God and his truth; there was no such complaining in our
streets of them, nor had we ever seen so many thousand hands against them, as
now there are come in; and no marvel though God withdraw so many hearts and
hands from them, who have turned so many out of the way of truth: via Tuta,
they have stopped up; but via Devia, they have enlarged and laid open, as
appears by their crooked Cannons:

Mr. Speaker, I shall not go about to overthrow their government in the
plural, but to limit and qualify it in some particulars; for as Sir Francis
Bacon long since well observed, there were two things in the government of
Bishops; of which he could never be satisfied: no more am I. The first was the
sale exercises of their Authority: And secondly, the deputation of that
authority. But Mr. Speaker, I shall not now dispute of either; for my own part
I love some of them so well, and am so charitable to the rest, that I wish
rather their reformation, than their ruin; but let me tell you withal, that
if we shall find among them any proud Becket, or Wolsey Prelates, who stick
not to write, Ego and Rex meus: or if there shall be found any cruel Bonners
etc. such, I profess, I would not spare; for they will spare none: But if in
the counter-ballance there may be found but one good Cranmer, or one good
Latimer, or Ridley, I would esteem and prise them (as rich jewels) fit to be
set in the Kings own Cabinet; for such I am sure will pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, and for the peace of King Charles, and his three Kingdoms; which
God long preserve in concord and unity. But Mr. Speaker, we must also be
actors in the preservation of religious concordance, which will never be safe,
nor well at quiet, until these heavy drossy Cannons with all their base
mettle, be melted, and dissolved: let us then dismount them, and destroy them,
which is my humble motion.

The fourth, upon the Scotch Treaty.
January 21. 1640. Mr. Speaker,
THere is no malady more destructive to the natural, or politic body, than
the mal Caduque, or falling sickness, nor is there any Physician or compound
more to be esteemed than that which can cure it in either. Mr. Speaker, this
unknown remedy, if we be wise to apply it, and take the receipt withal the
ingredients, without any scruple of distaste; I am confident the recovery will
be perfect, and the whole body of Great Britain safe and sound. Mr. Speaker,
the happy union of Scotland and England, has thus long ever since flourished
in interchangeable blessings of plenty, and mutual love and friendship. But of
late by what fatal disasters, and dark underminings we are divided, and
severed into Scottish and English Armies; let their well composed preambles
speak for me, which I wish were printed as an excellent emblem of brotherly
love, that discovers who has wounded us both, and how each should strive to
help the other in distress, seeing their and our Religion and Laws lie both
at stake together. Think of it what you will, (Noble Senate) their subsistence
is ours, we live or die, rise or fall together. Let us then find out the
Boutefaux of this Prelaticall war, and make them to pay the shot for their
labor, who no doubt, long for nothing more than that we should break with
them, who worship but one God, and serve but one Master with us: Nor need we
fear that they intend to dispossess the English of their inheritance or
freehold, being ready to withdraw their forces upon reasonable terms,
referring their demands of reparation for losses, to the justice and courtesy
of this house, which I assure my self will give both a bountiful, cheerful,
and speedy supply in this case of necessity; for, Bis dat, qui Cito dat, is the
best motto, or motion at this time.

The fifth, upon the impeachment of the Lord Strafford, and Canterbury, etc.
February 26. 1640. Mr. Speaker,
I Take it we have now sat in this great Council fifteen or sixteen weeks, a
longer time than any Parliament has done these many years; God has given us
a fair and blessed opportunity, if we lay hold of it; and call to mind the
best Motto for a Parliament, which is, Non quam diu, sed quam been.

Mr. Speaker, We have had thus long under our Feathers many Estriges Eggs,
which as some observe are longest in hatching, but once hatched, can digest
Iron; and we have many Irons in the fire, and have hammered some upon the
anvill of justice into nails; but we have not struck one stroke with the
right hammer, nor riveted one nail to the head.

Mr. Speaker, God forbid we should be cruel or vindicative to any; but let us
take heed we be not so to our selves, and them that sent us; if we do not
mend our pace, and so run as we may obtain.

Mr. Speaker, I hope we shall make good the work we have undertaken, and
win that prize and goal we aim at; else if we fail in this our pursuit of
justice, it is time to look about us: for then I fear that we our selves
shall hardly escape scot-free. It will not be our six Subsidies, that will help
us, unless we be good husbands, and cut of all superfluous charges, disband
all needless Armies, and dis-arme all Papists, and banish all Priests, and
Jusuits; and then we shall thrive and prosper.

Provided always that we deny our selves, and trust not too much in the arm
of flesh, but be careful to preserve brotherly love and concord, least
discord and faction break, devide, and ruin us: but I hope God will make us
all of one mind and one public spirit, that as we are descended from that
ancient and noble English quiver, we may prove our selves a right sheafe of
English Arrows well united, well feathered, and sharply piled for public use,
stoutly to defend and preserve the public good and safety of this famous Island
of Great Britain, and that is my humble prayer and motion.

The sixth, upon the Straffordian Knot.
March 10. 1640. Mr. Speaker,
IN this great and weighty cause, we ought seriously to consider, First,

What we our selves have done already in the accusation and impeachment of this
great Earl, of high Treason.

Secondly, let us remember what we now are, not only Parliament men, but
public men, and English men.

As Parliament men, let us follow the steps of our Ancestors, and be constant
to that rule of Law which was their guide, and should be ours.

As public men, forget not whom we here represent, and by how many chosen and
trusted.

As English men let us call to mind the undanted spirits, and stout hearts of
those ancient Heroes, from whom we are descended, how free they were from
Pusillanimity, and how they scorned all Flattery, and Slavery; let us then now
or never, Mr. Speaker, show the same blood runs in our veins.

Thirdly, let us be well advised what to do, if in case we shall be denied
justice in this particular, upon which depends not only the happiness, but the
safety of this Parliament, of this Kingdom, of our selves, and of our
Posterities: and this is my Aviso.

The seventh, upon the same subject.
April 9. 1641. Mr. Speaker,
TRuth is the daughter of time, and experience the best Schoolmaster, who has
long since taught many men and estates the sad and woeful effects of an
halfe-done work; those convulsions and renting pains, which the body of great
Britain now feels, shows us that the ill humors and obstructions are not yet
fully purged, nor dissolved.

Mr. Speaker, God will have a through work done; if in stead of redressing
evils, we think to transact all, by removing of persons, and not things, well
may we hust our troubles for a season, but they will return with a greater
violence.

For believe it, Mr. Speaker (let us flatter our selves as we please) a
dim-sighted eye may see, that although we think we have now passed the
equinoctial of the Straffordian line, and seem to have gone beyond
Canterbury; yet their faction and undermining Agents (of all Religions) grow
daily more and more powerful; and no doubt do labor an extirpation of all
Parliaments, and men that will not think, say, and swear to their opinions and
practice.

Have we not then, Mr. Speaker, a wolf by the ears? is there any way to go
scot-free, or wolfe-free, but one? then let us take, and nor forsake, that old
English Parliamentary Road, which is Via tuta, and will bring us safely to our
journeys end: that is my humble motion.

The eighth, a seasonable motion for a loyal Covenant.
May 3. 1641. Mr. Speaker,
IF ever we intend to perfect and finish the great works we have begun, and
come to our journeys end, let us take and follow the right way, which is Via
tuta; and that is in a word to become holy Pilgrims, not Popish, and to
endeavor to be loyal Covenanters with God and the King; first binding our
selves by a Parliamentary and National Oath, (not a Straffordian, nor a
Prelaticall one) to preserve our Religion entire and pure, without the least
compound of Superstition, or Idolatry: next, to defend the defender of the
Faith, his Royal person, Crown, and dignity, and maintain our Sovereign in
his glory and splendour, which can never be ecclipsed, if the balance of
justice go right, and his laws be duly executed.

Thus doing, Mr. Speaker, and making Jerusalem our chiefest joy, we shall be a
blessed Nation, and a happy People. But if we shall let go our Christian hold,
and loose our Parliament proof, and old English well-tempered mettle* Let us
take heed that our Buckler break not, our Parliaments melt not, and our golden
Candlestick be not removed; which let me never live to see, nor England to
feel the want of: that is my prayer to conclude my former motion.

FINIS.

