A word of Council to the Disaffected.
Will ye not fear? has not the Almighty shown
His works of wonder? will ye not them own?
Think who has still withstood ye when ye hatched
Infernal Plots? what eye, his overwatc'ht?
Think how by sea and land your forces joynd,
Who still made frustrate what ye had designd?
Think when ye thought come was the Critic hour
That none could help, how God still showed his power.
Think thus, and let your stubborn wills submit
To him that changed the world, still orders it:
But if thou see not, thou art a Bird of night,
Whose eyes are dazzled with the dawning light.
To the same, upon the Scots recantation.
Will ye not turn your angry stomach, since
The Scottish Conscience does it self convince?
Will ye not hear the Brethren that defy
Their fained Compact, give themselves the lie?
Have you a Scottish Faith? do like them then;
Far wandered from your friends, return again.
To the same about Engaging.
ARe you so tied to the Covenant that ye dare
Not promise against what formerly ye swear?
Is not that Covenant that ye should resist
All Hostile bands that against Religion list?
The Kirk confesses that her powers are such,
That she is deceived; do but ye as much;
But ye are tied to Fathers, and their Heirs.
What say ye then if God new powers prepares,
To present Rule his Word commands, ye bow;
Shall Gods Command be crossed by your Vow?
His Word obliging bonds from Conscience takes;
His word forbidding, oaths unlawful makes.
You Will say to such as have a legal call:
But God himself does bid submit to all.
You Will say to good and just, not bad ye dare:
But God bids yield unto the powers that are;
And in so doing, promises to bless
Men with a quiet life in Godliness;
For they that Titles do so far extend.
Will kindle fires that burn unto the end:
Who swears to future powers, does strife increase;
Who swears to present, is a friend of peace.
Thus heavenly wisdom does direct to be
Submiss 'neath present; from past powers free,
Marking the streams in which his actings run,
Praying, thy will, O Lord, on earth be done.
London, Printed for Francis Tyton. 1651.


