THE REMONSTRANCE OF THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, TO THE House of Commons assembled
in Parliament. Preferred to them by the hands of the SPEAKER.
Mr. SPEAKER,
PRejudge us not, we pray you, because the title of this paper is a
Remonstrance, not a Petition; the cause is, for that Petitions have had ill
success of late, yet the matter will be the same, though the form differ.

We send this (whatsoever ye will call it) to the Honorable House of Commons,
who are the representative body of the whole Commons of England, and we desire
to present it by you, who are the Speaker of that House.

The end of our desire is Peace, and we hope we shall not err in the way, when
we entreat you to be Mediator. Master Speaker, all that we desire of you, is
to deliver this to the House, to procure it to be read, and to obtain us as
good an answer unto it as you may.

And now we address our selves to the honorable House it self.

WHen this Parliament was called (after several unhappy breaches of some
former) we comforted our selves with an hope of a redress of all our
grievances, and we made choice of you for our Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
to serve for us, and we did put our confidence in you, and believed that you
according to our trust without any by-respects, would have studied only the
peace and good of the Kingdom, and we cannot be yet out of hope, but that ye
will perform it in the end.

But you must not take it amiss, if as persons grieved, we tell you where our
griefs lie. And to prepare our Cure the better, we must desire you to call to
your remembrances.

1 That we are still the true body of the Commons of England* you but the
representative.

2 That we have not so delegated the power to you, as to (...) the governors
of us and our estates, you are in truth but our p^s to speak for us in that
great Council.

3. That in right we ought to have access to those whom we have thus chosen,
and to the whole House, as there shall be eause, to impart our desires unto
you, and you ought not to refuse us.

4. That by involving our votes in yours, we had no purpose to make you
perpetual Dictators.

5. That we never intended, that you should have that latitude of power as to
imbarke us all in a Civil War, to the destruction of us and our posterities.

6. Much less had we a thought, that by any your votes ye would or could draw
us in to any Acts of disloyalty or disobedience against our natural Liege
Lord, to whom by the laws of God and man, we do owe and will pay all
allegiance and fidelity.

Wherefore we must claim this freedom which belongs unto us, as freeborn
Subjects, and as persons interessed in the good and safety of this Kingdom, as
well as your selves, that ye will speedily take those things into your wise and
religious considerations, which belong to our peace, and which we out of the
deep sense of our present miseries, and of the apparent ruin of us all (if not
timely prevented) do now offer unto you.

None of which shall be any new fancies, or dreams of distempered brains, but
shall be such as have their grounds on apparent truth, and a clear evidence.

For first, we do profess to all the world, that we are resolved with our
lives and fortunes to maintain the true Protestant Religion established by the
Laws in this Church of England. To maintain our well settled Government under a
Monarchy, according to the known laws of this land. To maintain the just
liberty of our persons and property of our Estates, according to the Rule of
those Laws. To maintain the just privileges of Parliament, without which our
Laws can hardly be continued.

And in the asserting of these, we believe we have the concurrence of both the
Houses of Parliament, for such have been their daily Protestation.

And for the Kings Majesty's Opinion herein; he has by many Declarations,
solemn protestations, and religious vows, before God and man, declared himself
so fully and freely, that it is his unchangeable Resolution to live and die in
the maintenance of all these; that we hold our selves bounden in reverence to
his person, and in Christianity, to believe that he will faithfully perform his
word with his people.

And we have this further assurance thereof, in that he has descended so low
from his throne, as to acknowledge some errors which have slipped him in his
bypast government, and to undertake not to give way to the like hereafter.

We wish with all our hearts, that you would with the same ingenuity acknowledge
your errors also and amend them; so we might soon (by Gods blessing) have our
peace restored, and by your industries be made a happy Nation.

Let us then clearly and freely express in what things we find our selves
grieved, which have been voted, ordered, and acted by you during this
Parliament, whereby the cure intended is become worse, then the diseases under
which we formerly languished; and we must with as much cleanness and freedom
protest against them, if they be not speedily reformed and remedied.

The particulars are these.

1. That under the color of advancing the true Protestant Religion,
encouragement is given to Anabaptists, Brownists and all manner of Sectaries,
which multiply in every Corner; which must be reformed, or our true Religion is
lost.

2. Under the pretense of hatred of Popery (which we also detest, as far as
their superstitious and idolatrous tenets are inconsistent with the true
reformed Protestant Religion) the Book of Comm-prayer (which is established by
Law) is cried down by many, and all decent orders in Gods outward worship; and
every man left to the dictate of his own private spirit: But let the Laws
against Papists and Sectaries (the two extremes) be put in due execution, we
shall thank you for it.

3. Under the color of regulating the Ecclesiastical Courts, and taking away
the High Commission Court, all spiritual Jurisdiction (for the coe^rcive part
thereof, which is the life of the Law) is taken away, so that now no heinous
crimes, inquirable by those Courts, as Adultery, Incest, etc. can be punished:
No Heresy or Schism reformed: No Chruch can be enforced to be repaired: No
Church Officers, as Churchwardens, etc. are compellable to take upon them
their offices, or perform their duties, no not to provide Bread and Wine for
the Communion: No Parsons or Vicars can be enforced to attend their Cures, or
to give satisfaction for the pains of them who do: No tithes can be recovered
by their Law, nor other Church-duties. We beseech you think what will be the
end of these things at the last.

4. Under the name of reforming the Church Government, ye endeavor to take
away the function, and being of Church Governors, as Bishops and their
Assistants the Deans and Chapters, so to take away at once the preferments of
learned men, and the encouragements of learning: In the name of God let the
abuses be taken away, but not the uses also.

5. For the rectifying of matters amiss in Church Discipline, and some things
in Doctrine also (as is pretended) an Assembly of Divines is propounded to be
convocated and consulted with: The matter is right, but the manner is surely
amiss, and so we are likely to lose the benefit of the substance for the
errors in the circumstance; which is, That in this intended Convocation, the
Divines are not nominated by Divines, who can best judge of their abilities
(which is the legal way) the greatest part of those who are named, are known
or justly suspected to be persons ill disposed to the Peace of the Church, and
addicted too much to Innovation; you your selves (being all Laymen) are to be
the only Judges of what shall be propounded, and what determined; the Divines
but your assistants, and the King is totally to be excluded from having any
voice or hand in it: And (as it is propounded) this is to be a perpetual
Convocation, if the Houses of Parliament so please.

6. Under the color of freedom of Preaching, seditious Sermons are preached
daily, even in the hearing of many of your selves, who traduce the Kings Sacred
on, slander His Government, and in express terms, encourage the maintaining
and continuing of this unnatural and unchristian civil War, and yet none
are punished for it, which makes us fear that this is, and long has been
made by some, to be the principal engine to kindle this fire of Hell, to the
just scandal of all good men, and slander of our Religion, this doctrine
coming so close to that of the Jesuits

7 And diverse worthy, learned, and painful Preachers have been committed to
prison by you for delivering their consciences freely and religiously, and
preaching of obedience to their Sovereign: these things we observe unto you,
as tending namely against the maintaining and propagation of the true
Protestant Religion.

Touching that part which concerns the maintaining of the Laws, we shall
observe also some things unto you, wherein your own practice differs much from
your professions: a preposterous way to persuade us, or any other bystanders.

1 Ye assume that power to your selves, that ye by a bare vote without an act
of Parliament, may expound or alter a known Law; whereas the Commons house
formerly assumed to themselves no such power, but in order toward the making
of a new Law: nor did the House of Peers challenge any such thing: But they
having the power Judicature, as Judges they proceeded according to the Rules
of the known Laws, and upon their honors are answerable for the justness of
their Judgment, as other Courts are upon their oaths.

2 Ye make your own orders and ordinances to be as Laws, and compel them to
be observed, and with a stricter hand: which may bind the Members of your house
in their privileges, but have not nor ever had the force of Laws, until by
both houses and the Kings Consent they were confirmed.

3 And for your own observation of the Laws of the Land, ye make your selves
to be so far above the reach of them, that by your orders and ordinances ye
enjoyne the Judges and Ministers of Justice to forbear (contrary to their
oaths) to proceed in their ordinary course, where ye please.

4 Ye make an Ordinance to put the Militia of the Kingdom in such hands as ye
please, and shall confide in; and this without the King, and expressly against
his Command. 5 Ye Possess your selves of the Navy Royal, and appoint
Admiralls and other Officers by Sea without the King, and use those ships
against the King himself.

6 Ye take the Kings Castles, Forts and Ports, the places of great strength in
the Kingdom, and keep them against the King himself, Hull, and Portsmouth,
and Windsor Castle; and these three last actions appear to us to have been
done by Design, for

7 The pretense at first was for the preservation of the Kingdom, against some
foreign Enemy; but when none appeared in many months (and we now believe none
such in truth ever were) a war for the Parliament, against the King himself
was raised for the preservation of the King.

8 And those which refuse to join in this war with you, or to contribute
unto it, which giving or lending of money, horse, arms, etc. ye proscribe as
Malignants, and persons ill-affected to the Commonwealth; although we see not
how it can be less then Treason against the K. to join with you therein.

9. But to all those who are your Commanders or Officers of your Army, ye give
large and even profuse entertainments and rewards; but out of our purses, who
give you little thanks for it. Thus much may suffice to give a taste how the
laws are, and how they are likely to be maintained, in the course we are now
in. And for the Liberty of our persons, and propriety of our Estates, we shall
say a little in the next place, and by a few particulars judge what we may hope
for therein.

1. Ye take the Kings treasure, ye intercept his revenue, possess his houses
of access, and all these for his own service, and if any attend him or assist
him, they are condemned as Malignants, Popish, evil Counselors and Enemies to
the State.

2. Ye have by messages endeavored to persuade our Brethren of Scotland to
join in your Rebellion against your Sovereign, and this was not done by some
private men alone, but ordered by the Votes of your House.

3. Ye condemn the Rebels in Ireland (and that very justly) for their horrid
rebellion there, and yet your selves do greater and more horrid acts of of
barbarous hostility against the King, even in his own person, in England: and
when ye have been charged with it ye would excuse it by saying, that it was not
your fault, but the fault of the King himself, and of the Counselors and
Cavaliers about him, that he went himself in person into the battle, which he
did with that magnanimity and Kingly courage, as will add to his honor and
your shame, whilst the world endures. Thus your action is become odious to God
and man, and your excuse for it ridiculous.

4. And as if ye had shaken off all subjection, and your selves become a State
independent, ye have treated by your Agents with foreign States: Such
usurpation upon Soveraigntie, was never attempted in this Kingdom.

5. Ye command your own orders, ordinances, and Declarations to be printed and
published cum privilegio: But if any thing come from the King, which may truly
inform and disabuse the people, ye forbid those to be published, and commit
them to prison who do it.

6. The moneys advanced by gift, or adventure, or act of Parliament, and
soldiers prepared for Ireland to reduce the Rebels there, ye have from time to
time diverted to maintain this unnatural war in England; so ye do visibly
lose the Kingdom of Ireland, that ye may be the better enabled to lose the
Kingdom of England also.

7. Ye have showed your se ves so averse from peace, that ye have voted there
shall be no cessarion of Arms, lest by a free treaty a peace might ensue; This
is your carriage toward the King himself.

And lest ye might be accused to be juster to the subject then ye are toward
your Sovereign, these things ye have done to the subject also.

1. Ye have made an Ordinance that the twentieth part of men's estates, must be
paid toward the maintenance of this Rebellion, and ye appoint those who
shall value that twentieth part; and why by the same reason ye take not the
tenth part, or the one half, we see not: and for the levying of it, ye ordain
your Collectors shall distrein for the sum assessed, and sell the distress,
and if no distress can be found, the persons of these notable offenders are to
be imprisoned, and they and their families banished from their habitations.

2, But lest this should not have the color of Law sufficient to blind the
world, ye have lately made an ordinance for the Inhabitants of the Counties of
Northampton, Rutland, Derby. etc. to pay and be assessed (by Assessors named in
your Act) in imitation of the Statute lately made for the 40000l. and this, as
is probable, shall in convenient time be extended to the whole Kingdom: so ye
first cast your selves into a necessity to get money, by making an impious war
upon your Sovereign, and then out of that necessity ye compel your
Fellow Subjects (who abominate the war) to maintain it.

3. And ye have yet a shorter and a surer way: where ye understand there is any
money, plate, or goods to be had, ye send a party of Horse or Dragooners, to
fetch it out of an enemies Country, because the owners are good Subjects to the
King, or you suspect them to be so; and that alone is crime sufficient to
apprehend them, to judge them, and to take execution upon them, and all this
without the Ceremony of Law, by your absolute and omnipotent power, which
cannot err.

4. You discharge Apprentices and Servants from their Masters services, without
consent of their Masters and Dames, and either persuade them or compel them to
serve in your Army against the King: This is indeed the Liberty of the Subject.

5. Ye have imprisoned many for petitioning unto you (as if that alone were a
crime) if the matter of the perition do not flatter you in your present courses.

6. And others ye have imprisoned, some for petitioning, and some for intending
to petition to the King (as those Gentlemen of Hertfordshire and Westminster:)
And yet God be praised, the way is open to petition to him in Heaven, and he
will hear us in his good time.

Lastly, for your privileges of Parliaments.

1. Ye forbid us to dispute them, ye alone are (as ye say) the Judges of them;
but in former ages those also might be and have been judged by the laws of the
Kingdom: only of offenses committed by your own Members against your House, of
these you are the proper Judges: and of the elections of your Members.

2. Yet these we conceive under your good favors, are to be thus confined,
that every member of your House has and ought to have as free liberty as any
of them, to deliver his opinion upon every emergent occasion, and not to be
committed, as some have been: -- or put out of the House, as others have been,
for speaking freely against the sense of the House, or rather of some members
thereof.

3 The Privileges of your House were never challenged til now, to extend to
any Member which shall commit Treason, or Felony: bur ye have now declared that
no Member of the House, nor any others employed by you in this horrid
Rebellion, should be questioned for Treason, but in Parl. or at the least by
leave of the House.

4. Ye have made a close Committee (as you call it) wherein a very few Members
of your House only are privy to your Councels, and what those few consult
upon, is summarily reported to the House and that taken upon trust by an
implicit faith of all the rest.

5 Many of the present Members of your House have had their elections
questioned, but if they incline to those propositions which ye lay down to
your selves to uphold your Tyrannical and usurped Government: you are so busied
in the great affairs of State, that in two years space (for so long and
longer ye have continued this Parl. already) ye have no leisure to determine
those questions, lest you should loose such a one from your party.

6. Sometimes when a matter of importance has been in debate, they have put
it to the question, and upon the question it has been determined, and the
same question again resumed at another time, better prepared for the purpose,
and determined quite contrary; this we are well assured was not the Privilege
of former Parliaments, when many of us were Members thereof.

We do believe ye have many just privileges for the freedom of your persons,
for freedom of speech; but we never did believe that ye had a Privilege to
take the Scepter into your hands, to levy a War against your King, and to
compel others to join with you in so execrable an act. We wish from our
hearts that all these Observations were but fables and fictions, (as we have
met with many from you to amuse us) but they are all undeniably true; our
conditions therefore are most miserable, when thus instead of of maintaining
the true protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the just Liberty and
propriety of the Subject, and just privileges of Parliament, they are all of
them radically and fundamentally destroyed, and that by you, whose duties and
professions are daily to the contrary. And if any thing can be added to our
misery, it is this, that we cannot see through the time, when this intolerable
yoke of slavery which ye put upon your fellow subjects, shall have an end,
seeing by the art of a few ye have contrived an Act, whereby ye have
perfidiously overreached both the King and people, to make this Parliament to
be perpetual at your pleasurses, that so your arbitrary power and tyranny over
the Kingdom, might be perpetuated.

Yet one thing more may be added to our unhappiness:

Fuisse foelices, We were lately a happy people, and are now on a sudden
reduced to such a depth of unhappiness, that we are made a spectacle to the
whole world, and the very object of their scorn: For,

We are (before we were aware of it) cast in a War, a Civil War, an
irreligious and barbarous War, against our Sovereign, our natural Liege
Lord.

We are put into an inevitable way of poverty.

By being wasted in all quarters and corners of the Kingdom one by another:

By loosing our commerce at home, it being intercepted by the Armies, and
almost no debts paid, occasioned specially by the privileges of your Members,
and such as ye privilege.

By loosing our trade abroad, it being cast into the hands of strangers.

We loose our season for tillage and husbandry, which must of necessity
introduce a Famine; and Famine does but usher in a Pestilence: And War,
Famine, and Pestilence, are the three great and fearful Judgments of God
upon a Nation.

Nothing can redeem us out of these calamities, but a speedy Peace; and to
prepare it, a Cessation of Arms: And then by good Laws, as ye have already
happily begun, to amend what is or has been amiss, without plucking up the
foundations of Government.

We beseech you therefore at the last, to lay aside your affections, and in
your judgments to provide for us, and for your selves, and for the honor of
our Religion, the peace of our consciences, the preservation of our lives and
estates, and for the salvation of our poor souls, to have pity upon us, bind
up our bleeding wounds, cure the distractions of the the time, and make up the
breaches between the King aad people, occasioned only by a misunderstanding.

And if these our Petitions, or Complaints, or Remonstrances (call them what
you will) may prevail with you, we doubt not, but that the King of His grace
and goodness will be entreated to bury all your by-past-actions in an act of
oblivion, that neither the presentage, nor the ages to come, may to the shame
of this Nation, have cause to remember what have happened here in this last and
worst age of the world.

But if all this, and all which in your great judgments ye can add unto it,
shall not move you; We do and shall protest to all the world, that wirh the
hazard of our lives and fortunes, and all we can call our own, we shall
endeavor to vindicate our selves from these inhumane courses. Sed meliora
speramus. We hope for better things.

And we shall incessantly pray to God to perfect our hopes by blessing your
Counsels.

FINIS.

