THE WOVNDS of an ENEMY IN THE House of a FRIEND. BEING A RELATION Of the hard
Measure sustained by Miles Halhead, and Thomas Salthouse, for the Testimony of
JESUS: particularly in a long, and sore, and close Imprisonment, first at
Plymouth, and then at Exeter in the County of Devon, though they have neither
offended the Law of God, or of the NATION. Published for the clearing of their
Innocence from the cloud of Transgression, of which they are supposed highly
guilty, and by reason of their silent abiding such sharp, and long, and cruel
sufferings.

Even the Sea Monsters draw out the breast, they give suck is their young ones;
the daughter of my People is become Cruel, like the Ostriches in the
wilderness.

Lam. 4.3. Have the workers of Iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my People, as
they eat Bread, they have not called upon God. There were they in great fear
where no fear was, for God has scattered the bones of him that encampeth
against thee, thou have put them to shame, because God has despised them,

Psalm. 53.4. The dark places of the Earth, are full of the Habitation of
Cruelty,

Psalm. 74.20. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now
will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that puffs at
him,

Psalm. 12.5. If he turn not he will whet his sword, he has beat his Bow and
made it ready, He also has prepared for him the Instruments of Death, he
ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors.

Psalm. 7.12, 13. LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread-Eagle,
near the West end of Paul's 1656.

THE WOUNDS OF AN ENEMY, In the House of a FRIEND.
MILES Halhead and Thomas Salthouse being pressed in spirit, to visit the Seed
of God in captivity in Plymouth in the County of Devon, left their outward
Beings, and relations in the North, and passed thitherward as far as Hunniton
near the City of Exeter, where a guard being placed for the apprehending of
such persons as were suspected to have had a hand in an insurrection broke
forth a little before (whilst they were on their journey) at Salisbury, and
dispersed at Southmoulton, in the County aforesaid, they were taken up by them
and brought before Colonel Cappleston, High Sheriff of the County, upon
suspicion of being Cavileeres, and having had a hand therein; who having
examined them, though he confessed he did not believe them to be Cavalieres,
not any thing appearing upon, or against them, as matter of suspicion, yet
caused he them to kept close prisoners, at Exeter for the space of about
fourteen days, and then sent them from Officer to Officer toward their homes.

But being come two miles from Taunton on the way to Bridgwater, the Officer
that conducted them from thence, fell to the ground, and lying grovelling
thereon in the sight of diverse people, was able to go no further, whereupon
they returned back to the Justice at Taunton, and acquainted him with what had
befallen the Officer he sent with them, and to know what further he would
enjoin them, who after some consideration, told them he would have no more to
do with them, and having set them at liberty desired the Lord to be with them.

Hereupon they passed to Bristoll, where, and in the Country thereabouts,
having stayed some time they departed, being moved of the Lord toward Plymouth
again; having with them a friend of Bristoll, born at Exeter, and Certificates
from the Captain of the Fort at Bristoll, and of a Justice, concerning them,
and their good affections to the Common wealth; which before they had not,
being ignorant, when they came out of the North, of any such occasion as had
fallen out, whilst they were on their way, that might require any such thing.

And so, through the hand of the Lord, they came to Plymouth the sixteenth day
of the month called May, 1655. and there had several peaceable meetings, in
the houses of friends, to whom they ministered what they had heard, and seen,
and handled of the word of life, and were made manifest with mighty power to
that of God in the Consciences of many to whom they were sent, who being
thereby turned from darkness to light, and the eye being opened in them, which
the God of this world has blinded, the captives came to witness deliverance,
even the acceptable time, the day of salvation.

The Standard of the Lord being thus set up, many people flock thereunto,
insomuch that the house of John Harris, a friend near the Town, where a meeting
was appointed to be on the first day of the week following, being not able to
receive them, they went into his garden, and to them both in the fore and
afternoon did they declare the truth of the experience of what they had found
of the free grace of God which brings salvation manifested in them, provoking
them unto love, and to good works, according to the Scriptures of the Prophets,
and Apostles, as the Spirit gave them utterance, exhorting them in the words of
soberness and truth full of plainness and simplicity, and tending only to
the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ amongst men, without using any
inveighings against men, or opinions, and were approved of by those that heard
them, though several came only to hear some new thing.

Having both of them spoken, and finished what they had to say, George Brooks
then Priest of the Nightingale Friggot, a man whom they knew not, spoke to the
people a pretty space of time, wholly in the praise and commendation of what
they had said, affirming it to be the eternal truth, and exhorting them to
perseverance, from that Scripture, Take heed that ye receive not the grace of
God in vain, telling them that they must expect to suffer persecution; but the
principle from whence he spoke being seen in the light of Jesus Christ, which
changes not, with which he was comprehended, Thomas Salthouse said that he had
spoken many good words, and fair speeches, but asked him whether he lived the
life of what he spoke, for that it was he that had the witness in himself
that sets to his seal that God is true; and their friend who came with them
from Bristoll as aforesaid, told him, he had spoken of a Trinity in Unity, and
a Unity in Trinity, when as no such language was to be found in the Scriptures;
which being ended, Thomas Salthouse spoke a few words more to the people,
exhorting them in the words of the Apostle, Let him that stole, steal no more;
and made use of the words of Christ, He that enters not in by the door into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief, and a
Robber; which he directed not to George Brooks, or any one in particular:
Miles Halhead having not spoken one word, nor Thomas Salthouse otherwise then
as before rehearsed, and so the meeting ended.

But the persecution raised against them, then began; in which the Priest
aforesaid, to fulfill the words himself had said, (to wit) that they must
expect to suffer persecution, was isntrumental; and on what was then said to
him, being in truth no otherwise then what have been said, as ten honest men of
Plymouth, then present, have attested under their hands, which is hereunto
annexed, is laid the pretended ground of the long and cruel sufferings, which
they have, and do still undergo, hereafter mentioned.

For on the third day of the week following, being the 21 of the month called
May, the day before they intended to depart the Town, Miles and Thomas being at
a meeting of friends in Robert Caryes house in the Town; the Counstables came
thither with a Warrant from John Page Mayor, out of which they took them, and
their friend of Bristoll, and them having apprehended, they brought before the
Mayor at his house, who after a few words spoken to them, sent them to Prison
at the Gild-hall, without signifying any crime they had committed, that might
deserve a restraint.

The next day they were brought from Prison before the Mayor, Magistrates, and
Counsel, and the Priest of the Town, and severally examined, G: Hughes.
the doors being shut and all who were their friends turned out by the
Constables, not one being suffered to be present at their Examination, who any
ways favored them, to testify in their behalf; and having examined them
after this manner for the space of about three hours, they released their
friend of Bristoll, and returned the other two to Prison.

In which having continued them some days, a friend applied himself to the
Mayor, and desired of him to know for what they was committed, who positively
answered, that they were detained for denying the Trinity, and that there had
been Oath taken before them, for that purpose; to which accusation though they
had fully answered at their examination, yet that their innocence might more
clearly appear, they wrote a Letter to the Mayor, declaring what they held
therein, according to the Scriptures, against which they excepted not.

After the perusal of which, the friend aforesaid went to the Mayor again, to
know whether that had given him any satisfaction, and if so, to know what
further he had to say against them; to which the Mayor (finding nothing of
exception in their Letter, concerning the Trinity, which would bear any
weight) answered, that they were detained for refusing to take the Oath of
Abjuration, and upon suspicion that they were Jesuits (though many who are any
ways ingenious, freely declared they had no such thoughts of them, as indeed
they afforded no matter for any such suspicion, being plain husbandmen, and
such as had never been out of this Island) whereupon they sent the Mayor a
second Letter, wherein they set down more plainly the grounds wherefore they
could not swear, then they were admitted to manifest at their examination,
though for refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration the Proclamation that
inforceth it gives no power of imprisonment, nor injoyns any such thing.

Notwithstanding all which, having kept them then Prisoners for the space of a
week; the Mayor sent them in custody the 28 of the same month to the common
Goal in the Castle at Exeter, with a Warrent under his hand; wherein he
charge them, not with the denial of the Trinity or refusing to take the Oath
of Abjuration of Popery, the causes as he before said of their Imprisonment:
but as Being apprehended as disturbers of the public peace, and for diverse
other high misdemeanors against a late Proclamation prohibiting the disturbing
of Ministers, and other Christians in their assemblies and meetings, and
against an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Counsel,
lately made against Duels, and Challenges, and all provocations thereunto: And
for refusing to give sufficient Suretyes for their personal appearance at the
next general Sessions of the peace, to be held for the County of Devon, and in
the mean time to be of the good behavior against his Highness the Lord
Protector, and all his liege people, as by the copy of the Warrant at large
appears: when as they disturbed not the Peace in the least, nor them whom
they call Ministers, nor other Christians in their Assemblies and Meetings, for
they were with none of them, nor were any other whilst they had been in the
Town; but disturbed they were in their Meetings by the Mayor, who by his
Constables and Warrant took them out from their Meetings, and imprisoned them
without a cause, and contrary to the said Ordinance, and to the Government,
which Article 37 says in these words.

That all that profess faith in God by Jesus Christ, Government. Art. 37.
though differing in judgment from the doctrine, worship, and discipline
publicly held forth, shall not be restrained from, but be protected in the
profession of the faith, and exercise of their Religion, so as they abuse not
this liberty to the Civil injury of others, and to the actual disturbance of
the Peace, on their parts. Provided that this liberty be not extended to
Popery, Prelacy, and to such as under the profession of Christ hold forth and
practice licentiousness.

Nor Challenged they any to Duells, or gave any provocation thereunto: The
Principle by which they are guided, leading out of strifes, debates, and
quarrellings; and the root from whence they proceed (to wit) the Spirit that is
in men, that lusts unto envy; and with all men have they peace as far as is
possible. And for that clause, For refusing to give Sureties for their good
behavior, etc. It would be a matter of admiration that the Mayor did not blush
to give such a notorious untruth under his hand, when as he knows two
sufficient able men, as to the outward (to wit) Robert Carry, and Arthur Cotton
of that Town, were bound before him in such a Recognizance for their
appearance, as he required, though the next day he made it void, were it not
that his illegal and oppressive proceedings, and the manifest other lies with
which the Warrant is filled, renders him as one that will know no shame. All
which more at large appears in their Answer to this Warrant, and the
Testimony of eleven honest men of that Town, who were eye and ear Witnesses of
these passages, delivered under their hands to Major General Disbrow, before
the Sessions hereafter mentioned, to the truth of their said Answer.

And for the diverse other high misdemeanors, they are yet to mention, and
therefore there needs nothing in Reply; for all men who understands the Law,
know, That a general Charge requires no particular Reply, and is as much as
nothing.

Only this may be observed, That he who had so contrary unto Law imprisoned
them, and kept them for the space of a week, and during that time had shifted
from one thing to another as the cause thereof, as has been said, and then
sent them to Exeter Prison, with this Warrant full of other abominable
falsehoods, there being not one true Assertion therein, would no doubt have
formed something or other in relation thereunto, had it come within the reach
of his invention, which had created and expressed so many therein, known to
himself to be so contrary to truth; and also in his, and his brethrens filthy
flattering Letter to General Disbrow, in excuse of their unjust proceedings
against these innocent servants of the Lord, made up with other abominable
untruths, by which they endeavored to beget in him a good Opinion of them, for
so doing, and to continue his favor to their Town, as by a copy of their
Letter, and Miles and Thomas Answer thereunto, added to this Relation, at large
appears.

But being brought to Exeter upon the Warrant aforesaid, there they continued
in the common Goal, lying on the ground, until the General Sessions of the
Peace of the County held there the Tenth of the Month called July following, on
the 12 day of which Month, they were brought before the Sessions, to whom the
Clerk read a Bill of Indictment exhibited against them upon the Ordinance for
preventing of Duells, wherein was expressed:

That they the said Thomas and Miles not fearing or regarding the same
Ordinance, and the penalties therein contained, did the 20 of May, 1655. at
Plymouth in the presence and hearing of diverse honest persons then and there
being, use diverse disgraceful provoking words and gestures to George Brooks
Clerk in the Nightingale Friggot, he being then opening and declaring to the
same persons a certain place of Scripture, wherein he spoke something of the
Holy Trinity (viz.) Thou (the said George Brooks meaning) lie in saying there
were three persons in the Trinity, we deny it, there is no such thing; but thou
art a deluding spirit come to draw away the hearts of the people from God.

And further, they did farther speak to the people then present, that they
should not hearken to the said George Brooks, for that he was a Thief, and was
come with a lie in his mouth, and had stolen what he had from others, and had it
in his hand, pointing to the Bible which was then in the said George Brooks his
hand open. And further did say it was a lie which the said George Brooks had
brought, and other harms to the said George Brooks then and there did contrary
to the form of the said Ordinance, and against the public peace.

How utterly untrue in every particular this Indictment is, both as to the
matter and manner of the accusation charged therein, is clearly manifested in
the Relation aforesaid, of the passages at the meeting, the truth of which is
testified under the hands of diverse honest men at Plymouth which were present
as aforesaid, and the Testimony of many more could be had, were not those
enough, and in the Answer of Miles and Thomas thereunto, added to this
Relation; but having wronged the innocent in that high manner as is expressed,
it concerned them, at least, to have something, how false soever, to pretend as
a color in Law, as the cause of their so doing.

Miles Halhead spoke not a word at the Discourse, upon which occasion is taken,
and the ground of this Indictment laid, and he that says nothing cannot be
made an offender for a word, though there be that make a man an offender for a
word that is none indeed: Nor does that Ordinance require, or any Law, that if
one man transgress it (were it so that Thomas Salthouse had so done (which is
denied) two should suffer, that were to destroy the righteous with the wicked,
unto which the Law is a terror; and yet has Miles Halhead been Imprisoned and
Indicted, and suffered has he though he was altogether silent, and without so
much as any thing that might be a pretense of offending in the least that
Ordinance, or any other Law of God, or the Nation.

Nor did Thomas Salthouse speak one word to George Brooks in particular, as to
what the Indictment charge; true it is, after George Brooks had spoken so
largely in the praise of what they had declared from the Lord, saying, it was
the eternal truth, and Exhorted the people to take heed that they received not
the grace of God in vain; Thomas Salthouse comprehending the Principle from
whence he spoke, in the light of Jesus Christ which changes not, said unto him
to this effect, Thou have spoken many good words, and fair speeches, but do
thou live the life of what thou speak? for it is he that has the witness
in himself, that sets to his seal that God is true: which were savory
words, and feasonable for the directing of his mind, and the hearers also, to
see that they witnessed indeed what they spoke and professed, and to speak and
profess no more then they witnessed, that so he and they might not be deceived
with the subtilty of the Serpent, in thinking they had that which was eternal
life, when in the day of Trial it would appear to be no such matter. This was
love to his soul, though in requital he has made it matter of persecution.

Had they come in ways of craftiness to deceive, they would have cherished
his Testimony to the truth of what they had spoken, and not have questioned it
with such expressions. Allow the Dragon but a place in Heaven, and he shall cry
out, These are the Servants of the most High, which show us the way to
salvation; but cast him out into the Earth, Acts 16.17.
his proper seat, and then he makes war with the Lamb, and those who have the
Testimony of Jesus.

He also Exhorted the people, in the close of all, after the end of the
discourse aforesaid, in the words of Paul, Let him that stole steal, no more,
Ephesians. 4.8. John 10.1.
and made use of the words of Christ, He that enters not in by the door, into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief, and a
Robber; but directed them not to George Brooks, as the Indictment has falsely
charged it, nor to any one in particular; but had they been directed unto him,
or to any other in particular, are those words of Paul, and of Christ, and the
language of Scripture, disgraceful words, provocations to Duells, let that of
God in every man's conscience speak, and judge? Jer. 23.10.
Therefore behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my
words every one from his neighbor, that use their tongues, and say, he says.
Had Jeremiah lived in these days, and spoken these words now, the false
Prophets now who smite with the fist of wickedness, would certainly have
Indicted him upon the Ordinance for preventing of Duells, and were Christ Jesus
and Paul who spoke as aforesaid, and all the Prophets and holy men of God, now
alive in this Nation, testifying as they did to the Generations in which they
lived, of which the Scripture bears Record, the same would they receive from
the Priests, and men of this Generation; and yet we find not that the false
Prophets of old, did Indict them for so speaking, as Provocation to fightings,
nor did they pretend to any Law as a cover for so doing; so far do the Priests
and men of this Generation, who in works pretend to the Prophets, and Christ
Jesus, and the Apostles, and the holy men of God, and the Scriptures, outstript
their forefathers in a sottish and malicious persecuting of the truth; for
till this example, the like has not been heard of since the foundation of the
world, and is void of understanding, and ridiculous amongst all rational men.
On this foot, he that tells an envious person that he is a murderer, and he
that looks on a woman to lust after her is an adulterer, and the covetous
person, that he is an Idolater, and he that speaks a Divination of his own
heart for the word of the Lord, uses witchcraft, and he that knows not, nor
speaks from the mouth of the Lord, is a dumb Dog that cannot bark; and he that
says when the Lord says not, is a devourer, the murderer of souls; and he
that biteth with his teeth, and prepares war when men put not into his mouth,
is a greedy Dog, and those who are in the nature and Generation of the
Pharisees, who profess what they are not, and persecute and murder the life of
what they profess where it is manifested, are Serpents, Generation of Vipers,
with such like: would be Indicted as Offenders against the Ordinance for
preventing of Duells.

He that takes what is none of his as to the things without, the things of
this world, is a Thief, and truly is so judged and accounted of. He that takes
the words of the Prophets, and Christ Jesus, and the Apostles, which they spoke
from the life, and uses his tongue, and says, the Lord says, when the Lord
spoke not to him, having not the life that spoke them forth, takes that which
is none of his, and is a Thief, as to the things which are within, the things
that are spiritual, and truly is so judged and accounted of.

He that steals without has an outward Law to pass upon him as a
Transgressour; he that steals within has the Law of Christ Jesus by which he
shall also be judged; for further then the outward, the Law of man has no
power, and this is agreeable to that of God in every man's conscience; also to
the Ordinance against Duells, which they, and all the Children of light own in
its place, as a bearing of the sword against fightings, quarrellings, evil
speakings, and such like, as evil doing, which the Principle of light which is
Jesus Christ discovers, and witnesses against, and the root from whence they
proceed (to wit) from men's lusts that are within them.

And he that said, Let him that stole steal no more, was the Minister of God,
who adds the Law upon the transgressour; and he that said. He that enters
not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the
same is a Thief and a Robber, is the Lawgiver, the Prophet whom whosoever does
not hear in all things, shall be cut off from his people; and he that said, I
am against the Prophets that steals my word every one from his neighbor, is
the Lord of glory who shall judge the quick and the dead by the man Christ
Jesus, the Lawgiver, and Minister of God, at his appearing and coming. But the
Priests have gotten a new weapon against the Lamb (to wit) the Ordinance
against Duells, and with it they will fight against his battle Axes and Weapons
of War, (to wit) his Witnesses, and none shall testify against their deceit
with a spiritual weapon; but they will have it to be a carnal one, and will
take an Ordinance of man to fight against it, and judge it by, which never
intended it. But their Weapon formed shall not prosper, the overflowing scourge
shall sweep away their refuge of lies, and their coverings are ripping off, nor
can the Rocks and Mountains hide them from the wrath of him who sits on the
Throne, and judges righteously.

And whereas something is mentioned in the Indictment, of the Trinity, one of
them said, I know no such Scripture that speaks of three persons in the
Trinity, but the three the Scriptures speak of, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, these three are one, and that Baptism, by one Spirit, into one
body, and the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, the Scriptures declare to be
one, and he that has the Son, has the Father also, and this we own; he that
can receive it, let him. And this was spoken as to what G. Brooks said of a
Trinity in Unity, and a Unity in Trinity, which as he was told the Scriptures
no where spoke.

Court. To this Indictment they were demanded to answer guilty, or not guilty?


Answer. We are not guilty in what is there charged upon us.


Court. By whom will you be tried?


Answer. By you whom the Lord God of power has set in Authority, to judge
righteously between man and man, and to put a difference between the precious
and the vile, and set the oppressed free, from whom we do expect justice and
equity.


Court. Will ye be tried by God and the Country?


Answer. We are willing to be tried by this Bench, and desire that our accusers
may be brought in, and that we may have liberty to speak for our selves, and
make our defense against the false accusations laid to our charge.


Court. Will ye be judges of your own case?

Jailer, take them away, which was done immediately.


When they were first apprehended, and brought before the Mayor and Magistrates
of Plymouth, many honest people, who were present at the meeting aforesaid, and
were ready in the Hall to testify the truth of things, were all turned out,
and not a man or woman that favored them permitted to stay, notwithstanding
which, and the keeping fast of the doors of the common Hall, that so none of
them might return in, did they in the presence of near one hundred of other
people, desire openly, that if either man or woman, had any thing to lay to
their charge, they would speak: but no man or woman appeared to speak, nor ever
were their accusers brought face to face, that they might see them, or hear
them speak.

And now after seven weeks imprisonment, being brought before the Sessions, and
such an abominable pack of falsehood, and lies, in an Indictment exhibited
against them, unto which they pleaded not guilty; and declared again and
again in answer to what they required of them, (to wit) by whom will ye be
tried? That they were willing to be tried by the Bench, whom the Lord God of
power had set in Authority, to judge righteously between man and man, etc. as
aforesaid, and desired their accusers might be brought in, and that they might
have liberty to speak for themselves, and make their defense against the false
accusations laid to their charge; because they spoke it not in the form of
words which they would have, though they both pleaded, and submitted to a
trial, as aforesaid, and a Jury might they have called, and tried them by, or
otherwise as they pleased; they asked them whether they would be Judges in
their own case? when as they desired no such thing, but to be tried by them who
were in Authority, and turned them aside for a thing of naught, and called to
the Jailer to take them away, which command of theirs was presently executed.

And here let all that are sober, and who calmnly weigh things in the balance
of equity, judge, whether innocent men in a case of this nature, wherein
without a cause, and contrary to the Law of the Land they were Imprisoned, and
so hardly dealt withal, and wickedly Indicted, and stood before enemies,
having largely experienced that neither Law nor justice had took place in their
behalf; but oppression and cruelty as has been mentioned, should, for their
parts, being demanded by whom they would be tried, make in reason, equity, and
justice, any other answer, then by those whom the Lord God of power has set in
Authority to judge righteously between man and man, and to put a difference
between the precious and the vile, and to set the oppressed free, from whom
they expected equity and justice; or to put themselves on any other issues
without being guilty of a manifest wilful throwing away of their innocence,
and of a continuation of sufferings by their own consent: If those in Authority
will have a trial by other manner of men, that they cannot help, and of their
sufferings that might follow thereupon, they are not accessory, nor will it by
such men be judged a contempt of Authority in that they submit to a trial. A
man will in reason choose to have right taken away from him by force, rather
then to put himself upon an issue, from which he can expect no other, and so
as it were by his own consent to give it away. And to that of God in the
consciences of those then present, and of all others, who seriously observe,
with what rage, and malice, these innocent people are prosecuted, and how
contrary to Law, and justice, proceedings are every where had against them; as
if they were fit only to be destroyed, yea, even to that of God in the
consciences of their enemies themselves, do I appeal, whether righteous
judgment can be by them expected from those, whom the Lord God of power has
not set in Authority to judge righteously between man and man, and to put a
difference between the precious and the vile, in things relating to the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, which can only be seen and judged in his light, to
whom all judgment is given both in Heaven and in Earth; And the children of
light can give consent to no other judgment, and trial; nor, from any other
can they expect right, and judgment, but where that is. But to put this matter
out of doubt, and to manifest how instead of seeking judgment, and relieving
the oppressed, which the Lord requires who is a God of judgment, the needy are
turned aside from judgment, and the righteousness of the righteous taken from
him. Those who understand the Law, know, that as to all Indictments of
trespass (of which nature this is pretended to be) of misdemeanor, and breach
of the peace, to answer not guilty, or to put in a Traverse is a sufficient
legal plea; and the Clerk of the peace is to record it, and join issue, and
is punishable, if he does it not: and that only in cases of life, the Law or
custom of England requires the person Indicted to join this issue of saying,
by the country, when after he has pleaded not guilty, it is demanded of him,
by whom he will be tried? And here all People may take notice what measure of
injustice these innocent Servants of the Lord receive, who are sent to Prison
instead of being heard in their just defense, and their accusers brought forth,
when after they had legally pleaded these things were by them lawfully
demanded: and how contrary to Law, and justice, and to the libertyes of
Englishmen lately vindicated with so much blood, is this proceeding? how
plainly does it speak as if no other thing were intended in bringing them to
the Bar, then to asperse, and destroy their innocence, as their libertyes had
been before injured by above seven weeks Imprisonment; and by arraigning them
as abominable offenders in the face of the country, to endeavor to render them
odious to the people who had heard so much of their oppressions, and thereby
amongst them to seek to beget a belief that their sufferings were just, from
which least they should clear themselves, and in so doing their long sufferings
come to an end, (which to lengthen and make grievous to the purpose resolutions
were had) to Prison they are sent, and the benefit of the Law denied them in a
trial. What greater injustice can there be then this, and oppression? what
higher violation of Law, and liberty? of these things the Roman heathen were
not guilty, and to be so dealt withal the worst of their adversaryes would cry
out against; were it his own case, as justly he might. Yet this is the measure
which the witnesses of the great and living God receive from this adulterous
generation, and who is there that regards, or lays it to heart? though it
is every man's concernment, and may become the condition of others, how soon
they know not. To close this particular, let the wise in heart judge, whether
amongst those a man is found whom the Lord God of power has set in Authority
to judge righteously between man and man, and to put a difference between the
precious and the vile; who, thus, turn aside the needy from judgment, and
take the righteousness of the righteous from him? And whether they had not
cause to say, being asked by whom they would be tried, that they desired to be
tried by such whom the Lord God in power had set in Authority to judge
righteously, as aforesaid.

About the space of an hour after they were called in again.

Court. It is thought fit that you take the Oath of Abjuration because of your
contempt of Authority, which accordingly was to them tendered, and a Bible
holden to them, that they might swear.


Answer. In the presence of the eternal God, and before all this people, we
do deny with as much detestation, as any of you does, the Pope, and his
Supremacy, and the Purgatory, and all therein mentioned, and declare freely
against it; and we do not deny to swear because of any guilt that is upon us,
but in obedience to the command of Christ, who says, Swear not at all; and we
will not come under the condemnation of an Oath for the liberty of the outward
man: after which they were returned to Prison.


The Mayor of Plymouth when he first apprehended them, tendered them this Oath,
which when they had refused, and given the reasons of their so doing, he sent
them back to Prison, and afterward signifying that as the cause of their
detainment to a friend, they sent him in writing more fully their answer there
unto, then they had liberty to express, when they were examined; but there
still continued them Prisoners: And now after seven weeks further durance, it
was tendered them again, and they refusing are returned again to Prison.

Christ Jesus the only John 3.16.
beggoten Son of God, by whom the Joh. 1.3, 10.
world was made, the John 8 12.
light of the world, who John 1.9.
lights every one that comes into the world, who is greater then Luke 11.31.
Solomon, who is Psalm. 110.1. Mat. 22.43, 45
David's Rev. 27.16.
Root, and Lord, whose day John 8.56.
Abraham saw, and rejoiced; whom Heb. 1.6.
the Angels of God are commanded to worship; who is the Romans 10.4.
end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes: Heb. 7.23.
the surety of a better Testament; the Heb. 8.6.
Mediator of a better, of the Heb. 13.20.12.24.
everlasting, new Covenant: the Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 3.22, 23.7.37.
Prophet whom Moses said the Lord their God should raise up like unto him, whom
they should hear in all things whatsoever he should say unto them, and it shall
come to pass, that every soul that will not hear that Prophet shall be
destroyed from amongst the people: he who Mat. 24.35.
said Heaven, and earth, shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away:
who Mat. 5.17.
came not to destroy the law, of the Prophets, but to fulfill: who is Luke 1.73.
the Oath of God, the Romans 2.8, 9, 10.
end of contention and strife where he is witnessed, the Amen, the faithful
and true witness, Rev. 3.14.
the Judge of all, whose Acts 10.42.17.32. 2 Timothy 4.1. Romans 2.16.
sheep hear his voice, says, You John 10.17. Mat. 5 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
have heard it has been said by them of old time, thou shall not forswear thy
self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; but I say unto you, swear
not at all, but let your communications be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for
whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. Then which there is no command
in Scripture more plain, and positive, either for obedience to Magistrates, or
forbidding to do that which is evil. And the Apostle James says, But James
5.12,
above all things my brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
earth, neither by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay,
least ye fall into condemnation. And yet how are his sheep the children whom
the Father has given him, and who in obedience to this his command, dare not
to swear at all, but are come to the yea and nay in their communications,
imprisoned and cruelly dealt withal throughout this Nation, for refusing in
conscience to swear at the will of man; who calls himself a Magistrate of God,
and requires obedience as to the Minister of God to this his command, which is
contrary to the command of the higher powers, Jesus Christ by whom Prove. 8.15.
Kings reign, and Princes execute justice, to whom Psalm. 62.11.
all power belongs, unto whom the Father has committed all judgment, and at
whose Phil 2.10, 11.
name every knee shall bow, of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth, and every tongue shall confess, and who will render
Romans 2.9.
tribulation, and anguish upon every soul that does evil, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile, for there is no respect of persons with God. And yet
those who swears, where they forbid, them they punish, and thus do they exalt
themselves above all that is called God.

The bloody Persecutors in the times of Popery, thought not their other
persecutions of the poor Protestants to secure the Papacy against them; but the
Sacrament of the Altar they had by a Law, whereupon to examine them, by which
they sought to destroy their consciences, or their bodies in the fire; and many
of their lives they had in witness of the truth against it: upon whose
examinations the next question usually was, what say you to the Sacrament of
the Altar? and where they suspected a man to be a heretic (as they called then
the witness of the Lord) and had malice against him, presently was tendered the
Sacrament of the Altar.

The Bishops of late who in words denied the Sacrament of the Altar, and cried
out against the Papists, for shedding of the blood of the Martyrs, who
testified against it, were not satisfied with what dispersions they had made of
the tender conscientous Puritans the witnesses then, against them, in, and out
of these Dominions; but that their Kingdom might be established, and remain
unmovable, an Oath, et caetera, they had, for every one to take, who should be
admitted Priest, to uphold the Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc.

Whereby to catch, and work out of the Priesthood, and their beings, and lively
hoods, the residue of those non conformable factious men, (as they called them)
whom by no other device they could reach, or attach; and at length the sword
they drew, and joined with the Papists in a war against them.

These carrying the war against the Bishops, and Papists, a part of them
climbing up into the Chair of Presbytery to affect, and establish the
Authority they intended over the State, and the consciences of their brethren
in the three Nations, had a Covenant, and neither in Church (as they called it)
nor State (and how universal as to others time had manifested, as it was by
some timely foreseen, and understood, and prevented) was any to be entrusted:
but such as should subscribe to that, and as many of those as they could
(though never so deserving in the wars for the Nations interest, of liberty,
and justice, and faithful) turned they out of employment, who in conscience
scrupled it, as Heretics, and Schismatics, though above any of them they
affectually answered the just and righteous ends thereof: but what use these
men of the Presbitery made of it against the libertyes of England, and what a
snare it proved as to that, is not yet forgotten; and when they saw they could
not submit the Army thereto, who were made the Sword of the Lord; for the
ending of the Wars against the Papists, and the Bishops, they drew the sword
against them, and their poor wasted Country, and not prevailing in a first
War, many of them joined with the Papists, and the Bishops, and the then
neighbor Nation of Scotland, and the Rebels in Ireland, and the common enemy
yet to accomplish.

And now an Oath of Abjuration of Popery is found out, and tendered to them to
swear, as suspected Papists, upon the penalty of the sequestration of their
estates, if they refuse, who have been known throughout their time, to be
constant Witnesses for the Truth, and most faithful to the Common wealth, and
its Army, and have born the brunt and heat of the day in the late Wars, with
the peril of their lives in the field, and the loss of their Estates, against
the Popish, Prelaticall, and Presbyterian party, and have been known all their
time to be most contrary to Popery, and now in life above any, witness against
all Popish and formal Religion, who dare not in conscience to the Command of
Christ, swear at all.

And these are the men in several parts, who are summoned by Prelaticall,
Malignant, and Presbyterian Justices so called to abjure Popery, or their Names
and Habitations to be taken, and returned into the Exchequer, for the
Sequestration of their Estates; and these are the men who are taken up in the
Country as they are upon their lawful occasions, against whom there being no
accusation in Law, this Oath is put to them, which because they refuse to take
out of conscience to an Oath, not daring to swear at all, because of the
Command of Christ Jesus the great Lawgiver, are imprisoned, where many of them
have a long time layn, and do yet lie, though contrary to Law, not unknown to
the Chief in Authority, some of whom have personally pressed it. And not only
is this exercised upon men, but on women also, who till this day since the
times of Popery, were never known to be so used, but have been forborne, as that
which has been accounted below the dignity and spirit of a man to exact.

And the next word now to any one who is reproached with the name of Quaker,
who are known out of Conscience, not to dare to Swear at all, is usually, give
him or her the Oath of Abjuration of Popery, though he be their Neighbor, whom
they know to be, and their Consciences tells them, is far from any such thing;
and there they are sure to catch him, and to have their revenge on him for
Witnessing the Truth as it is in Jesus: when otherwise they cannot get him into
the compass or pretense of any Law, and having fast here, there he may lie for
the Eternal Truth for which he suffers, seeks not to man for deliverance, and
those who should regard care little for the matter, and the cry of their
oppressions seldom enters into their ears.

Thus in all Ages has Error sought to support it self against the Truth, and
to ensnare the Consciences of those of her Children with Oaths, when other
manner of Persecutions have not reached, that so she might be secure, and never
know sorrow: Which Oaths, as they are out of the Doctrine of Christ, so a Curse
have they proved, instead of a Defense, and the beginner and certain
Forerunner of the Destruction and Final Overthrow of that Kingdom, as these
and former Generations have witnessed, though before in never so promising and
flourishing condition, and seeming in its own eye to want nothing, but Oaths to
establish it.

And now the Witness of God is drawn forth against this, and all manner of
Swearing, and it is Witnessing in sufferings, at the hands of those on whom was
pressed the Oath, etc. And the Covenant, and who in their time Suffered by, and
Testified and Fought against those who imposed and sought to establish both;
and also against the Bishops Oath Ex Officio, which required a man to Swear
against himself; and Whether the imposing of an Oath upon a man to abjure what
is supposed to be his conscience wherewithal to worship God, upon the penalty
of loosing his Estate, if he refuse, be less, let the Wise in heart, judge?
And Whether upon the same ground, and by the same Rule, the like Oath may not
be imposed as to any other thing, and exacted upon the same penalty? The
Witness of God has its time of Reigning as well as Suffering, and will as
certainly Reign, as it does Suffer; it was ever so in all Ages, these later,
above any, have known it so, and so it will be in this, and in the Ages to
come: Let those whom it concerns, who have had a time of Suffering and
Reigning, and now cause others to Suffer, consider before it be too late, The
Judge stands at the door, and according to the Greatness and Majesty of the
Truth that is witnessed, and the Sufferings that attend its Testimony, and the
condition of those who cause it to Suffer, as having been Witnesses and
Sufferers themselves, and the Sword of the Lord upon that which has caused to
Suffer, and have known his Presence and Mighty Power therein wonderfully, and
his strange Overturnings, whereby to cause to Reign what has been so
testified unto by Sufferings, will be the Judgment, Except they repent. You
only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you
for your iniquities, says the Lord. Whilst they are the sufferings of Sion,
who is there that considers or lays them to heart; but the Rod of the
wicked shall not always lie on the back of the Righteous; there is a time when
the Testimony of the Truth in sufferings will be finished, and other men will
have their Day, who have cried Aha, and nagged the head, and stamped with the
feet, and helped on their sufferings, and caused them to suffer, and looked on
their brethren in the day of their distress, wherein the Lord will mock at
their calamity and their sorrows which shall come upon them, as on a woman in
travel, and they shall not escape, whilst the righteous who have mourned in
Sion, joy in the Lord, and rejoice in the God of their salvation, having beauty
for ashes, the Oil of joy for mourning, and the Garments of praise for the
spirit of heaviness; for God is Judge.

The next day they were brought before the Bench again.

Court. Will ye confess that you wronged G. Brooks, in calling of him Thief,
and be sorry for it, and make him satisfaction?


Answ. One of us did not speak one word to him, and therefore I deny to make
him satisfaction, or to be sorry for it, and what was spoken was no such thing;
therefore we will not lie for our liberty, nor confess that we are sorry for
that which we never spoke.


Court. You are fined five pound a piece, and must go to the House of
Correction till payment, and to find Sureties for your good behavior; and for
refusing to take the Oath, we shall take course to send to the North to seize
on your Estates, according to the Proclamation.


And so to Prison were they returned, and what follows entered as the Record of
their proceedings.

A Calender of the Prisoners Tried and Delivered at the General Sessions of
the Peace public holden at the Castle of Exon. July 10. 1655.
THomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead, for provoking words against George Brooks,
Clerk, who refused to be Tried by the Country, fined 5 l. a piece, committed
to Bridewell, till payment, and finding Sureties for their good behavior.

And thus as the day before they were returned to Prison, instead of being
admitted to a Trial according to Law, after the Indictment against them was
read, and they had made a sufficient Legal Plea thereunto, and Desired their
Accusers might be brought in, and they liberty to speak in their own Defense;
as aforesaid, so now Judgment is given against them without a Trial, or
Hearing, or bringing in so much as one Accuser, and yet the Record says, A
Calender of the Prisoners Tried.

Have such things as these before these days been heard of in this Nation? Is
it not hereby manifest, that nothing but to cause the Innocent to suffer is
sought after by them, who to help those to right, that suffer wrong, and to
relieve the oppressed, are entrusted by the Law? And is not the Justice and
Relief of the Law hereby made void, and of none effect, and trampled under foot
by those who are in Commission to execute Justice? What is become of Liberty,
of liberty for tender consciences? If things must be so, talk no more of Law,
let not liberty come forth of your lips.

When they were first imprisoned at Plymouth, the Mayor said they were detained
for denying the Trinity, then for refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration, then
he sent them to the common Goal at Exeter, and charged them with disturbing of
the Peace, and Other high misdemeanors against the Act prohibiting the
disturbing of Ministers and other Christians in their peaceable Assemblies, and
against the Ordinance for preventing of Duells, and for not finding Sureties
for their good behavior. At this Sessions they are Indicted for disgraceful
provoking words spoken to G. Brooks, calling him Thief, etc. That being read,
They are had a way, and being brought again the Oath of Abjuration of Popery
was tendered Them, after which they are returned to Prison, and the next day are
demanded To confess that they had wronged G. Brooks, in calling him Thief, and
to be sorry for it, and to make him satisfaction. (What turnings are here, and
falsehoods traversed to destroy the Innocent?)

When as One of them spoke not a word to him, and the Other no such word, nor
to any such purpose, as is contained in the Indictment, as is already
manifested, and as in their Answer to the Warrant by which they were committed,
and the Attestation of ten honest men at Plymouth, delivered to General
Disbrow, and in another Declaration of theirs all hereunto annexed, at large
appears; and notwithstanding no accuser was ever brought to their faces, and
thy heard in their own Defense, or to speak for themselves, though both at
Plymouth, and this Sessions they demanded it; and because they denied to make
him satisfaction for what they never did, and to be sorry for words which they
never spoke, and so to lie for their liberty. A Legal Trial is denied them,
and without a Trial, or Hearing, Judgment given against Them, wherein they
are Fined 5 l. a piece, and committed to Bridewell till payment, and finding
Sureties for their good behavior, after their having been kept Prisoners for
above seven weeks before, and in that manner as aforesaid, by those who had
broke the Law upon them in taking them from their peaceable Meeting waiting on
the Lord, when as they had transgressed no Law.

And to make sure work have they cast them into a place which is no Prison in
Law, and therefore a remove cannot be had out of it by a Habeas Corpus to the
Upper Bench, nor falls it under the consideration of the Judges in their
Circuits. Does our Law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he does?

And indeed well might they avoid it, and be ashamed of their Cause and Proof,
for besides a Cloud of Witnesses which could have been brought, and diverse that
were then present ready to give Testimony to the contrary, as has been
mentioned, and of the Innocence and Harmlesnesse of that Meeting, and what was
said therein, upon which is grounded as is pretended the cause of all their
sufferings.

Peter Pepham one of the Witnesses which were ready to Swear against them, was
heard to say the day before his going to Exeter to this effect, I am going to
Swear against the Quaker, and if Swearing will do it, I will make them to
suffer soundly: He being a known Cavaliere, and sometime a Servant to Duke
Hamilton. And besides G. Brooks and his two Witnesses, there is not one to be
found of these many who made up the Meeting, of whom diverse came out of novelty
to Testify what they affirm; but the contrary for what they spoke was
generally well approved of.

And to mention only one particular, One who had been a Captain in the Kings
Army, very well known in Plymouth, did freely declare to a friend, That having
a scorn and contempt of the men and their way, his end in coming to hear them,
was to see what he could catch from them, to render them odious; but having
heard them, he confessed that he thought them to be harmless, innocent, honest
men, and he would not lift up a finger against them, if he might gain thereby
ten thousand pounds. And he freely declared to both the Witn^sses with whom he
was very well acquainted, That if they Swore any evil against them, they would
be perjured men. Also that he never was so much convinced of the evil of his
ways, and the power of God, by any Minister that he had heard for many years
before.

And for G. Brooks himself, he is one whole conversation stinks in the
Nostrills of those who savor of Civility and honesty, who know him and his
Conversation.

There needs to this no further instance then of his beastly and wicked
behavior in the Nightingale Friggot, of which he was then Priest, which was
such, that even some of the Seamen of that Ship, justified one who reproved him
to his face, of the Vanity and Madness, of his Conversation, about three weeks
before the Meeting aforesaid, and told the said George Brooks, that They should
not be so wicked in their ways, were it not for his example.

And the Steward of the Ship aforesaid, in the presence of two or three
Witnesses affirmed, That he was had and wicked enough before the said George
Brooks came into the ship, but since, he was ten times worse; and that he, and
some other in the ship, could not endure to hear him Preaching or bauling (as
he called it) yea a friend of the said Priests, who manifesting some dislike in
the Garden at the Meeting aforesaid, that his friend G. Brooks should be
questioned by what Spirit he spoke, at length confessed, That his life was not
conformable to his Doctrine.

And so abominable was his filthiness, that in the same Frigot was he made a
public Example for his Drunkenness, having a Quarter Can hanged about his
Neck, and is since for that and his other wickedness set on shore, or turned
out or the said Ship, as appears by the Certificates of the Captain of that
Friggot, and two other Captains of Friggots hereunto annexed.

And yet in the Cause and behalf of this Son of Belial, so full of lies and
falsehoods in every particular, are the Innocent servants of Christ Oppressed
and Afflicted, as if they were not fit to live, and after almost two months
imprisonment lying on the ground, because they refused to confess and be sorry
for calling him Thief, which they never did, nor was there any one that made
proof thereof to their faces, after their long and hard bonds, as aforesaid;
for provoking words to him the said G. Brooks (as it is falsely alleged)
without a Trial, are they fined 5 l. a piece, and committed to the House of
Correction, till payment, and finding Sureties for their good behavior. And
not only so, but for refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration out of conscience
to the Command of Christ Jesus (none appearing to testify to their faces that
they suspected them to be Papists, or Popishly affected) as an addition to the
former, as if what has been already expressed had not been enough suffering,
they are told by the Bench that therefore to the North would they send to have
their estates sequestered, according to the Proclamation; and so in Prison they
are judged to lie, till they pay five pound a piece, where they owe nothing,
and their Estates to be sequestered, out of which they can only have money where
withal to discharge it; and whether this intended any other then a perpetual
imprisonment, let the reasonable judge.

And that the abominablenesse of these illegal and oppressive proceedings may
seem to have some cover in the Record of the Judgment given against them,
without a hearing as aforesaid; it is inserted, who refused to be tried by the
Country, when as they pleaded to the Indictment not guilty; and although his
Answer was enough in Law, yet being demanded further, by whom they would be
tried? they answered again and again, By you, the Bench, whom the Lord God of
power has set in Authority to judge righteously between man and man, and to
put a difference between the precious and the vile, and to set the oppressed
free, from whom we do expect Justice, and Equity, and desire that our Accusers
may be brought in, that we may have liberty to speak for our selves, and make
our defense against the false accusations laid to our charge. And upon what
issue they pleased might the Court have put them; for though they being asked
by whom they would be tried, gave no other Answer then has been expressed: And
for the Reasons aforesaid, could they be in Law, or equity, expected any
otherwise to do; yet plead they did, and to Trial they submitted, by the
bench, whom they owned to be set in Authority by the Lord God of power to Judge
righteously between man and man, etc. And desired that their accusers might be
brought in, and their liberty to speak in their own defense, and had Witnesses
in their own behalf ready, and from them expected an issue, according to
equity, and Justice, and refused not to be tried by the Country, but submitted
to be tried by those whom God had set in Authority to Judge righteously, and
such Judgment is the Lords, for God is Judge, and no other Judgment can the
Children of light put themselves upon, but his upon which as it rules man they
put themselves, but not on the wills and lusts of men, as added or equal unto
God, or joined with him; for man not guided by the ligh^ of Jesus Christ, is
blind, and dark, and erres in Judgment, and is as the Beast that perishes,
though even the wills and lusts of men in imposing sufferings upon them in
their bodies, they do not resist, as all parts of the Nation sadly testify,
and particulary the Town of Plymouth, and City of Exeter, and County of Devon,
the black Habitations of cruelty, and persecuting of the Just.

Nor is this the end, but rather the beginning of their sufferings, for the 16
of the said fifth Month called July, being removed from the common Goal in the
Castle of Exeter, to Bridewell in Thomas Parish near Exeter, over and above the
Order of Sessions, a Guard of Soldiers under the Command of Col. Coppleston
High Sheriff of the County, who was formerly a Commander for the late King in
the Wars against the Parliament, was placed upon them, with strict Warrant in
writing, signed by one Joyce a Captain, to detain all such Prisoners who came
to visit them, whom in the Warrant he in scorn calls Quakers (giving the
Prisoners aforesaid no other Name therein) especially such as they should
suspect to be such; who having shut them up in a close dark room, where they
lay on the ground many days, kept them close Prisoners, and with much violence
entreated, and detained Prisoners, those who came to visit them, whether of the
Town, or Country, and to relieve them with necessaries, though they were
strangers in that place, and above two hundred miles from their outward
Habitations; yea such as looked in but at a hole where they lay, did they so
use. And whereas there was a friend in the Town who came to see them, him they
imprisoned, though he knew not of any Order for their close restraint; and
notwithstanding that he was then a Constable of the Parish, and a man known
always to be faithful and active for the Commonwealth, and its Army, and of
a godly and sober conversation; whom also they sometime afterward imprisoned
again, for coming in to them, though he was there upon the persuasion of the
Officer, who when he asked for them, being unwilling to go in, told him he
might see them freely without danger, and went in with him, and stood between
the Soldiers and him; but being there, private notice presently was sent to an
Attendant of the Sheriffs, who Ordered his detainment, and being kept in Prison
that night, the next morning he prevailed with the Soldiers to bring him
before the Sheriff, who at first Ordered him to Prison again, but having heard
him, released him with Threatenings, what he would do unto him, if he came
there once more.

And a woman of Totnes in the same County, they kept two days and two nights
on the Guard, for coming to see them.

And though upon the cry of these their sore oppressions, several friends, to
the truth from diverse parts of the Nation came to see them, and to search
whether, after all the blood that has been shed, such sufferings could
possibly dare to be exercised, amongst whom was some, who had been Members of
the Army, and in places not of the least trust, and eminency in the Nation, men
of activity, and service, and of unspotted integrity, and of considerable
estates, as to the outward in the world, yet have they received the same
uncivil, and barbarous usage, some of them have been threatened to be taken
into Prison; for being in the outward court, and speaking to them, others
detained on the Guard, and to their Inns has the Mayor of the Town sent his
Officers to know their Names, as if they were some dangerous persons, and when
they have asked, to see his Warrant, when his Officers have required them to
come before him, a company of Butchers was got to bring them thither by force,
in case they had refused, though when they came before him, he had nothing to
say unto them, wherefore they were thus dealt with; and some have been had up
to the Castle, and kept in custody there, and searched, and others detained in
their Inns, as they have lodged there passing into the country, and searched,
and their papers taken from them, though only of private concernment; and when
any friends have obtained liberty to see them, the Soldiers stand by to hear
what they say. And lately seized them on all the papers of those two Prisoners,
and took them away.

And to this day are they continued Prisoners, and the Guard of Soldiers upon
them, who Imprison friends as aforesaid, according to their pleasure, though
diverse of them confess that what they do is against their conscience, and
that they know no law for what they do, and that it is contrary to the liberty
they have fought for, but they must obey the orders of their superior
Officers, or they shall be turned out of their places, and livelihood: and
even, when those cruelties have been exercised upon them, the Cavaliers in the
same Prison, in custody upon the late Insurrections, have had no Guard upon
them, nor their friends hindered from visiting them, and bringing them
necessaries, and out of the Prison have they leave to walk to friends houses
without any one to attend them, only those two innocent servants of the Lord,
who have been constant faithful friends to the Common wealth, are thus
guarded, kept close Prisoners, and dealt withal as is aforesaid, beyond the
example of the highest offenders, whether of Thieves, Robbers, or Murderers, in
that County, of which particulars could be instanced were it not too large for
this short Relation.

Nor during the time of their long Imprisonment (to wit) for near seven Months
under this close restraint, and above seven weeks before at Plymouth, and the
Castle of Exon, have their persecutors administered unto them, or caused any to
take care that they had those accomodations that were necessary for men: but as
if nothing else were intended, but the starving of them, and causing them to
wear, and wast, and to dye in a miserable languishment, far from friends, and
relief in the heat of summer, and sharp cold of winter, such has been the
cruel dealing with them, as has been rehearsed without natural affection, or
common humanity, and contrary to all Law, and justice, and liberty, and the
righteous ends for which the late blood has been shed, and the many and solemn
Engagements made before, and to God, and this Nation. And had not some broke
through their violence, and other difficulties, and resolvedly watched all
opportunities to relieve them, nothing had been expected as to men, but that
they had long since perished with famine, and necessity.

If a man has broken the Law it is something to him that the Law is to be
known and the punishment that it inflicteth for the breach thereof, by which he
understanding the extent of the Law, and having satisfied what it requires, may
come to the end of his trouble. Or if a man suffer being innocent upon a
pretense of a Law which he has not offended, it is something to know what that
Law is, and what it requires of those who offend it: But neither to have
offended the Law of God, or the Nation; but to have both broken on him even by
those who are in Commission, as Ministers of the Law, for the protecting of the
innocent, and punishing of the guilty, who thereby become themselves
transgressors of the law, and liable to the penalties thereof; and yet
nevertheless being innocent to be by such punished as guilty beyond the
direction of any law and contrary thereunto in long and cruel Imprisonments;
and when brought before the Bench to be denied hearing and trial according to
law, and yet judgment to be given, wherein are exactions of such fines of
other performances, for such causes expressed, as are utterly untrue, and the
Imprisonment to continue till there be a satisfying thereof; and such an
Imprisonment as from it Appeals cannot be had to the Higher Courts for Justice,
as House of Correction are, which are no Prisons in law, and therefore without
the Cognizance of the Judges in the Circuits, or the Upper Bench by Habeas
Corpus, and which to satisfy a man cannot without an acknowledgement of guilt,
and giving away the righteousness of his cause, which is to be prized above all
things, will be accounted very hard, and grievous, even by every man, who
seriously makes it his own condition, as indeed it is every man's; for what is
done to the injury of one man's liberty, is done unto all: But to have hereunto
added guards of Soldiers, who have fought for liberty with whom, and in the
same cause of liberty and justice a man has engaged his life, and what is dear
to him, in the time of peace, after that cause has prevailed, by such as have
drawn the sword, and been in command against it, A close Imprisonment is
directly contrary to the 23: H: 8. Cap: 2. which provideth that Prisons shall
be in the most eminent and populous Towns where is most resort of people, that
the Prisoner may be the oftener visited, and relieved. And though the Statute of
Westminster 2. provides for a safe Imprisonment, yet for a close Imprisonment
there is neither that nor any other Law: and above all things does the Law
value the liberty of a man.
and by Soldiers who formerly were the relief of the oppressed, to be
oppressed, and kept close Prisoners from friends and accomodations (contrary to
the Law; for in no case whatsoever does it require a close Imprisonment, but
provides against it) in a strange place some hundreds of miles from his outward
being for many Months together, in heat, and cold, of which he can understand
no end, as he can know no reason for their so doing, and during all this time,
having not so much as an accuser brought to his face, nor he heard in his own
defense, against the manifold false accusations, and shiftings from one lie to
another, as the pretense of his sufferings, and such friends as come to visit
him, whether from far, or near at hand, citizen, or stranger, violently to be
entreated, and detained in Prison, yea for but looking in at a hole where he
lies: and if any obtain leave to see him, not to be permitted to speak with him
without a Soldier by to hear what is said, and to have his Friends searched,
and his, and their Papers, and Letters of private concernment only taken away,
as if there were some dangerous treason by him designing, though he stands
only a Prisoner of innocence, and never had any such thing laid to his
charge, when as at the same time, and at the same Prison those in custody, who
have been Cavaliers, and clapped up, as having had to do in the general
Insurrection, have had no Guard upon them, but liberty of Friends, and
accomodations, and of going forth to their Friends houses, without so much as a
Keeper; and during this long and close Imprisonment to have none appointed by
those who cause him so to be kept to take care of him, and to administer the
relief that is fitting to a man, nor to have any relief to be administered to
him, by such, or in such a way, would be esteemed highly oppressive, and
unsupportable, even by the chiefest of their Persecutors, were it, or did he
make it his own condition, and the soul of every English man, would it greatly
afflict who retains the sense of another man's condition, as of his own, and is
not blinded with prejudice, and hurried with rage, and madness by the Prince
of the Air, who rules mightily in the children of Disobedience, beyond bowels
and natural affection.

And this is the case, and this is the condition of these two innocent servants
of the Lord, who having all their days been seeking after the Lord, and
walking in that which is called good conscience, and Godliness, and having at
length through the riches of that free love of God in Jesus Christ, come to
find what they had so diligently sought for, even Eternal life, which is in
the Son, and to witness it in their measures, and in the light of Jesus
Christ, by whom the world was made to comprehend and see where all professions
and people are, who know not nor believe in the light, (to wit) Jesus Christ
the light of the world, who lights every one that comes into the world, nor
do winesse the life of Jesus made manifest in them, as by the light they have
been brought to see it in their own particulars; and knowing the terrors of
the Lord, out of bowels of love to the precious souls of people, which are
eternal, and at the command of the Lord have left their Country, and Relations
as to the outward in the North, and traveled for their sakes to show unto them
what they had found, and tasted, and seen, and handled of the word of life,
that so their souls might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; and being
come thither, did no other thing, then to meet in the fear of the Lord, with
friends to wait upon him, and to declare the truth of the experience of what
they had found of the free grace of God, which brings salvation, manifested in
them, provoking them unto love, and to good works according to the Scriptures
of the Prophets, and Apostles, and exhorting to holiness, and the things that
are eternal, as the day approaches from the measure of the life of God, which
they had received, as the Spirit gave them utterance; out of which meetings
they were taken contrary to the practice of the Church of Christ, and the
example of the Saints in the Scriptures, and the instrument of Government; and
dealt withal as has been mentioned: And which indeed is hardly to be
believed; but has been said, is true, for no other thing, but as aforesaid,
have they done, or that is not according to the righteous Law of the holy God,
which shall be answered with that in every man's conscience. And to make appear
truly to the contrary, are all men here openly charged, who can, even their
greatest adversaries, because of whose cruelty, and oppression, and to manifest
what it is, this Relation is undertaken. Nevertheless through the power of the
Lord, in whom is everlasting strength, whom they witness, and for whom they
suffer, they glory in tribulation, and stands over the heads of their greatest
enemies, who puff at them, knowing, that he who shall come, will come, and
will not tarry, when their Testimony in sufferings is finished, for the Seeds
sake, and the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus, for whom they suffer in bonds,
and are ready even unto the death, from the hands of those, who profess him as
dying at Jerusalem, and yet crucify him in his truth, and members, and have
the generation of their forefathers from the beginning: And then neither Guards
nor Gates shall be able to keep them; For our God is King over the whole Earth,
and his Kingdom is begun to be set up, and to him whom man despises, to him
whom the Nation abhors, to a servant of Rulers Kings shall see and arise,
Princes also shall worship, because of the Lord who is faithful, and the holy
one of Israel which has chosen him, says the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel,
and his holy one, who commands deliverance for Jacob* and Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing mothers, they shall bow down to
thee with their faces toward the earth and lick up the dust of feet, and thou
shall know that I am the Lord, for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.
The sons also of those that afflict thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all
those that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet,
and they shall call thee, the City of the Lord, the Syon of the holy one of
Israel. Whereas thou have been forsaken, and hated, so that no man went through
thee, I will make thee an eternal excelency, a joy of many generations. Thou
shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of Kings,
and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer, the
mighty one of Jacob; For thus says the Lord, even the captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I
will contend with them that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children,
and I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh, and they shall be
drunken, with their own blood, as with sweet wine, and all flesh shall know
that I the Lord am thy Savior, and Redeemer the mighty one of Jacob. And the
Nation, and the Kingdom, that will not serve thee shall perish, yea, those
Nations shall be utterly wasted. Therefore hear now this thou afflicted and
drunken but not with wine, Thus says thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God that
pleads the cause of his people, behold I have taken out of thy hand, the cup
of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my sury, thou shall no more drink it
again; But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee, which have
said to thy soul, bow down that we may go over, and thou have laid thy body
as the ground, and as the street to them that went over.

A Testimonial of several honest men of Plymouth, concerning the meeting
aforesaid, and the passages thereat, upon which is laid the pretended ground,
and cause of the sufferings of Miles Halhead, and Thomas Salthouse, at which
they were present.
FOrasmuch as we are concerned in the sufferings of our dear Friends Thomas
Salthouse, and Miles Halhead, who have been kept close Prisoners in and near
the City of Exeter almost six Months contrary to equity, and justice, they
having not broken the least clause of any Law, we think it necessary to give a
brief Relation of the state of their Sufferings.

After some trouble, and difficulty, which the said Thomas Salthouse, and Miles
Halhead endured in coming to Plymouth, May 16. 1655. they came safe to
Plymouth, where then had several Meetings with most of us, and the first day
of the week following, we had a Meeting which was appointed by us at John
Harris his house, a little out of the Town, where both our Friends spoke in the
forenoon, and afternoon, and were approved of by those that heard them, there
being no less then thirty persons of the company in the afternoon, that came
out of novelty to hear them, amongst whom was one George Brooks a Priest
belonging to the Nightingale Friggot, who is since turned out of the said
Friggot, for his deboyst conversation, who (after Miles Halhead and Thomas
Salthouse had left speaking) took upon him to speak to the people, highly
approving of what our Friends had spoken and exhorted the people to
perseverance, telling them they must expect to suffer persecution; he began
with this text (as they call it) Take heed that ye receive not the grace of God
in vain, but he being comprehended and seen in the Light, after he had spoken,
and ended without any interruption Thomas Salthouse entered into some discourse
with him, telling him, that he had spoken many good words, and fair speeches;
but asked him, whether he lived the life of what he spoke; and one standing by
told him that he had spoken of a Trinity, and there was no such Scripture; but
he obstinately persisted, affirming that it was the Scripture phrase: And after
their dispute was ended, Thomas spoke again to the people some few words, in
which he used this Scripture, Let him that stole, steal no more; and this also,
He that enters not by the door, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a
Thief and a Robber: but the other of our Friends namely Miles Halhead spoke not
one word to the Priest, either about the Trinity, or any thing else, who yet
lies in Prison under color of disgraceful provoking words he should speak to
the same Priest George Brooks at the same meeting.

Now we testify to all to whom these may come, that we have here truly
declared, and manifested the very utmost that was spoken, or acted by our said
Friends, while they were in Plymouth that might occasion to say, that either
they denied the Trinity, that they gave provoking language to G. Brooks, or any
other, or that they disturbed any Ministers or Christians in their Assemblies:
but we rather judged our selves disturbed in our Meeting by such a deboyst
person, as the Priest was known to some of us to be.

The third day of the week following, May 21. we had another Meeting appointed
by us at Robert Caryes house in the Town, where the Constables came, and by a
Warrant from the Mayor of the Town took our said friends Miles Halhead, and
Thomas Salthouse, and a friend of Bristoll, and carried them to the Mayors
house, who after a little talk with them, sent them to the Prison at the
Guildhall, where they were kept till the next day, and then were brought forth
before the Mayor, Magistrates, and Counsel, and severally examined, and all
that were their friends were drawn out from the rest of the multitude, and by
the Constables turned out of the Hall, and not one suffered to be present, at
their examination; after they had examined them about three hours, the Friend
who spoke not to the people was set free, with charge to be gone home, and the
other two were again committed to Prison, where they kept them near a week, and
sent them to Exeter Goal, where they remained until the Sessions and were
afterward removed to Bridewell in Thomas parish, without the City, where they
now remain close Prisoners.

Now whether their Actions above truly related, have deserved such hard
measure, let all who have understanding judge, to whom we shall leave it: Lo
hear what a filthy worker of iniquity this Priest is, for denying of whose
spirit before the people these long and cruel sufferings are inflicted on the
innocent? What a defiler of the flesh is this in whose behalf these men make
war against the Lamb? Is not this Priest who not only prophecies of, but fills
himself with wine and strong drink, a fit Prophet for these people? What think
you? had they a Spirit of discerning who comprehended this Priest, and his root
and principle and denying his spirit before the people, though he spoke so high
in the praise of what they had said? Would not these men, plead Barabas his
part against Jesus, were he on the earth?
But as for our parts, we are fully satisfied that these their sufferings have
turned, and yet more abundantly shall turn to the furtherance of the Gospel,
it being known to most of the Inhabitants of Plymouth that this here related is
the utmost for which they are imprisoned, and how many are ashamed of the
injustice of it, we shall not now further mention; but subscribe our names.

Nicholas Cole. Richard Smith. Ralph Fogg. John Harris. Anthony Todde. Edward
Dyer. Arthur Cotton. Robert Carry. John Martindale. Richard Lepincote.

Plymouth, 12. of the 9 Month, or Nov. 1655.
The Testimonies of the Captains of the Nightingale Friggot, and of the
Nantwich, and of the Constant Warwick, concerning the deboyst, filthy, and
drunken conversation of George Brooks Priest, or Clerk, with the reasons
wherefore he was put on shore, or turned out of the said Friggot.
I Having been formerly desired to relate upon what account that Mr. George
Brooks Chaplin of the Friggot, and under my command was put on shore; because
he was a busiy body, and disturbed the whole Ships company. Secondly, being on
shore, it was his common practice to abuse the creature in such sort, that he
was drunken, void of good reason, that he would abuse any one that came in his
company by ill language, besides the abuse of himself and the good creature,
daily complaints coming unto me both aboard, and on shore. Therefore knowing
him to be a deboyst fellow, and not fit for that employment, therefore I put
him on shore, and I dare own it, who shall ever call me to question, witness
my hand.

Robert Vessay.

MR. Brooks being formerly with me in the Nightingale I found him to be very
idle, and continually drunk, which once made me to put a quarter Can about his
neck, whereunto I suscribe.

John Jeffery, Captain of the Nantwich.

THe person above mentioned I have seen drunk at shore, in testimony whereof I
have set my hand.

Richard Potter, Captain of the Constant Warwick Frigot.

A true Copy of the Warrant by which they were sent to the common Goal in
Exeter, from the Prison at Plymouth.
Devon.
JOhn Page, Merchant, Mayor of the Borough of Plymouth in the County
aforesaid, and one of his Highnesses Justices of the Peace within the said
Borough. To the Keeper of his Highnesses Goal at Exon Castle, or to his
lawful Deputy in that behalf, greeting. I send you herewithall by the bearer
hereof, the bodies of Thomas Salthouse late of Drugglibeck in the County of
Lancaster husbandman, and Miles Halhead late of Kendal in the County of
Westmorland, lately apprehended here, as disturbers of the public peace, and
for diverse other high misdemeanors against a late Proclamation prohibiting the
disturbing of Ministers, and other Christians in their assemblies, and
meetings, and against an Ordinance of his said Highness the Lord Protector and
his Counsel lately made against Duells, Challenges, and all provocations
thereunto, who have refused to give sufficient security for their personal
appearance at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be held for the County
of Devon, and in the mean time to be of good behavior against his Highness
the Lord Protector, and all his liege people. These are therefore in his said
Highness his name to will, and command you that when the bodies of the said
Thomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead, shall be unto you brought, you them safely
detain, and keep them until by due course of law they shall be thence
delivered, hereof fail not at your peril.

Given under my hand and seal of Plymouth aforesaid, the 28 day of May, in the
year of our Lord God 1655. John Page, Mayor.

The Answer of Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Halhead, to the above written
Warrant.
A True Copy of a Miltimus, by which we Thomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead are
committed to the Goal at Exon. by John Page Mayor of Plymouth, with Answers in
defense of the truth, to the false accusations cast upon us, to make truth
odious; but for Sions sake we cannot hold our peace, and suffer lies to go for
truth.

First Accusation. Disturbers of the public Peace.
ANswer. The Accusation is false, for we have not disturbed the public peace,
nor have we fellowship with any such as break the peace, but have freely
declared the way that leads to peace, and do desire that Grace and Peace may
be multiplied publicly to the ends of the earth, and that all the occasion of
strife and envy may be taken away, and that the feet of them that are running
on in the broad way that leads to destruction, may be turned into the way of
peace.

The second Accusation. For diverse other high misdemeanors against the late
Proclamation, by his Highness the Lord Protector, prohibiting the disturbing
of Ministers, and other Christians in their Assemblies and Meetings.
ANswer. The breach of this Proclamation we charge upon thee, who when we were
assembled, and met together in a friends house to wait upon the Lord, as has
been the practice of all Christians in former Ages, and which the Law of this
Nation does allow. Thou sents the Constables with a Warrant from thee, and
fetchest us out of the house from among our friends, and broughts us two before
thee, and thou said thou had not time then to examine us, but sents us to
Prison. Here let all people that love the light, whose eyes are open, judge,
whether we or our accusers have broken and transgressed this Proclamation,
which we, and our friends claim our privilege in, we being free born men, and
friends to the Commonwealth, and have disturbed none in their Assemblies, nor
were we at any public meeting that thou can charge upon us, but amongst our
own friends, as many can witness for us if they may be heard. And here we
charge upon thee that which thou call misdemeanors, for we are clear in the
thing, and what is charged upon us here, is false, as many can witness that
our demeanor has not been disorderly, nor contrary to the Laws of God, nor
the Laws of this Nation. And although the word diverse be mentioned, yet none
in truth can be laid to our charge, nor proved against us.

The third Accusation. Against an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord
Protector, and his Counsel, lately made against Duells, Challenges, and all
provocations thereunto.
ANswer. This Accusation against us, is falsely charged upon us; the Act we own,
and the Magistrates sword of Justice we own, which is for the punishment of
evil doers, and the encouragement of them that do well. Our weapons are not
carnal, but sprituall, nor have we challenged any man, nor done violence to
any, nor provoked any, nor used any other language then Scripture holds
forth, as Thee and Thou to a particular person, whether he be King, Priest, or
Prophet, Judge, or Justice; and if any be offended by this, or provoked by it,
let him speak, or write the unlawfullnesse of it; for against fightings,
quarrellings, challenging, and provoking one another to wrath by corrupt
communications, do we declare freely, knowing the ground of it; for where
envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work.

The fourth Accusation. Whereas Thou say, We have refused to give Sureties
for our personal appearance at the time and place mentioned.
ANswer. Let the light of Christ in thy own conscience judge Thee, and witness
against Thee, for us, and for our friends that can bear us witness that
sufficient Security was proffered to Thee for our Appearance; but to make thy
self manifest, and thy Counselors, how have thou written these lies in the
name of the Lord Protector, and strengthened thy self to accuse the Innocent, by
using his name; but to the Children of light is thy deceit discovered and laid
open.

The fifth Accusation. And whereas thou say, In the mean time to be of the
good behavior.
ANswer. We do affirm before Thee, and all the word, that we are of the good
behavior, and seek to be at Peace with all men; and we know that in the truth
you cannot charge us with any evil behavior, or that we walked disorderly
amongst you, wherefore be witness against thy self, for out of thine own mouth
Thou shall be judged, for that thou have charged upon us, we are not guilty of,
as many can witness for us.

And under these lies, and false Accusations do we lie in Prison at Exon in
Devon. whose names are

Thomas Salthouse. Miles Halhead.
Whom the world scornfully calls Quakers.

The Copy of a Warrant aforesaid, with the Answer above written to it was given
in to the hands of General Disbrow, at Plymouth, with this following Testimony
to the truth thereof.
WE whose names are hereunto subscribed do testify, That the several
particulars in this Answer made by our friends, are true (to wit) That they did
not at all disturb the public peace. Nor were they at any other Meeting (but
that which was appointed by us) to disturb any Ministers, or other Christians,
in their Assemblies and Meetings; Nor are they guilty of any Challenges,
Duells, and Provocations thereunto in the least measure, whilst they were
amongst us. And as for their refusal to give security, two of us, whose names
are Robert Carry, and Arthur Cotton, had given security to the Mayor, by entering
into Recognisance for their appearance at the next Sessions, the day before
their sending to prison, but that the Town Clerk made it void the next day,
pretending it could not be according to Law.

Ralph Fogg. Arthur Cotton. Robert Carry. Richard Smith. Anthony Todde. John
Harris, the younger. Thomas Faulkner. Nicholas Cole. John Martindale. Richard
Lepincote. John Harris, the Elder.


The Copy of a Letter from the Mayor of Plymouth, to General Disbrow,
concerning Miles and Thomas.
Plymouth, 1 June, 1655. Right Honorable;
CAptain Hatsell has communicated to me what you rote him in reference to
those two men Thomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead, of whom and of their
imprisonment your Honor had heard something from some persons of this place,
and received a copy of a Letter which they sent me. By the enclosed copies of
their Examinations your Honor will see some part of the cause of their
confinement, which was on their refusal to give Bail for their appearance the
next General Sessions to be held for the County of Devon, they being as I
conceive, offenders within the late Ordinance of his Highness the Lord
Protector and Counsel, made against Duells, Challenges, and all provocations
thereunto, and also his Highness his late Proclamation against Quakers, and
they still refusing to give Bail for their appearance as aforesaid, went from
hence to the Goal at Exon. on Tuesday last. Indeed Sir, their carriage here was
not becoming men, much less Christians, and besides their contempt of
Authority, and all the while they were in Prison, they never sought God by
prayer at any time, nor desired a blessing on any Creature they received, or
gave thanks for them; and these very men were about two months past, taken up
by Colonel Coppleston High Sheriff of our County, and after 14 days restraint
were sent away by him for Taunton, from Tithing to Tithing, as by their own
Examination, and they show no occasion they have to come to these parts. They
are by profession Quakers, but Husbandmen by their calling; one of them is a
Lancashire man, the other of Westmorland, and they left their Families,
Relations, and Callings about three Months since, as they say, and do net
work, nor employ themselves in their Callings, to procure themselves a
livelihood: but wander up and down in all parts, to vent their wicked Opinions,
and discover their irregular practices in the breach of Peace, and disturbance
of good People. Indeed Sir they hold many sad Opinions, destructive to the true
Religion, and Power of godliness. I have hereby according to my Duty given
your Honor an account of what passed here in reference to these men; I could
say much more in reference to their Examination, and discourse with them, but I
fear I have already trespassed upon your Honors patience, in the perusal of
these lines, and humbly desiring your excuse for giving you this trouble, and
do most thankefully acknowledge your Honors continued favors to this place,
and for which we stand very much obliged, desiring your Honor still te retain
such an Opinion of us, as those that desire to do nothing unbecoming
Christians, and persons that desire the welfare and peace of this
Commonwealth, and Government, and shall ever labor to appear

Your Honors very humble Servant. JOHN PAGE, Mayor, for my Self, and Brethren.

THis is the second time this Mayor has affirmed this abominable lie under his
Hand and Seal, notwithstanding that two sufficient men of the Town of Plymouth
had entered into a Recognizance before him for their Appearance, which the next
morning he denied to give under his hand as he had promised, and voided the
Recognizance, the Town Clerk saying it would not stand in Law, and sent them to
Prison. And here as he twice charge them for refusing to do that which they
had done before him, and which he had refused to deliver them under his hand
according to his promise, and made void as the cause of their imprisonment, so
he committed them to Prison for refusing to do that which the Town Clerk said
would not stand in Law, and so according to what he affirmed, was contrary
thereunto. Can thou who do such things as these blush? Is it not hereby
apparent that cause is sought for, and made where there is none to destroy the
innocent?

What the measure wants of filling, with false Accusations, that the
Indictments meaning, and this Mayors conceiving shall make up to cause the
righteous to suffer.

Where is that late Proclamation entitled against Quakers? There is one
against disturbing of Christians in their peaceable Assemblies, and there is
the 37 Article of the Government, which says, That all that profess faith in
God by Jesus Christ, shall not be restrained from, but be protected in the
profession of the faith, and exercise of their Religion, etc. Both which thou
have broken, in sending thy Officers, and taking them from their peaceable
meetings of Christians waiting on the Lord, by thy Warrants.

The Law forbids the reproaching of any, and all evil speaking, as evil
doing, yet this Mayor who calls himself a Minister of the Law, reproacheth the
Servants of the most high God, who fear before his presence, and tremble at his
word, as the holy men of God have done from the beginning on Record in the
Scriptures, with the name of Quakers, and intitles the Generation of those who
seek the face of the Lord, with the name of Quakers (which he so reproacheth)
by profession.

What difference is there between a calling and profession?

Is coming to Plymouth in obedience to the movings of the Lord, to visit
friends, and to speak to them the words of eternal life, to Preach the
everlasting Gospel, and to exhort them to love, and good works, according to
the Scriptures of truth, no occasion? showed they not this as the occasion of
their coming thither? and is it not a lawful one? And have they not there many
seals of their Ministry, who by it are turned from darkness to light, and from
the Kingdom of Satan unto God?

How can they employ themselves in their callings of husbandry, when kept in
Prison? how can they return to their Families, Relations, and Callings, when
thus detained, as they were at first hindered in their Journey on their lawful
occasions, and are still by Thee? Do thou complain of them for not doing
that which by imprisoning of them thou have made impossible? Did they want a
livelihood before they were laid hands on, or do they now, though it is near
nine months since the time of their commitment by thee? Did they ask any thing
of thee, or of any one else? wast thou or Plymouth burdened, or made chargeable
by? or had not the Town the advantage of their expense for themselves and
Horses, and the friend that was with them? how know Thou that they want a
livelihood? or have Thou or thy Generation administered to them, or to their
Families, and Relations during near nine months of restraint, and six of them
in a close imprisonment without a cause, in a strange place 200 miles from
their outward Habitations, whereby they are kept from employing themselves to
procure a livelihood for themselves, Families, and Relations?

Is riding the strait Road from Bristoll to Plymouth, lying at the best Inns,
and paying for what they have for themselves and Horses, a wandering? Think
thou what the Law calls wandering, is not known, and how much thou have broken
the Law upon them, and what penalties thou art under for so doing, and art thou
sure thou shall never be called to an account, deceive not thy self? May not a
man travel where he will in times of peace, paying for what he has, and
behaving himself peaceable? what if they had come only to see the Town of
Plymouth? Make it thy own case, would thou not judge it hard measure for them
to do to thee, as thou have done to them?

Art thou not ashamed of lying, to say they wandered in all parts, when they
traveled the direct Road? Or call thou the going about to Preach the
Gospel, a wandering? Did not the Apostles and holy men of God do so, and yet
were they not as hardly thought of, and reviled by those of thy Generation
then, as these are now by thee, and those of the same Generation, and as
wickedly persecuted, by reason of whose cruelty they wandered in Desert, in
Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the earth, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented, of whom the world was not worthy, as these do by thine, suffer
imprisonment and as is before mentioned.

What are their wicked and sad opinions, destructive to the true Religion and
power of godliness, that (as thou say indeed Sir) they hold and have vented
in all parts? What are their irregular practices in the breach of peace and
disturbance of good people, that they have discovered? they are yet to name
that are indeed so. But thou have in this Letter, and thy Warrant, and thy
whole carriage toward these innocent servants of the Lord vented, and
manifested thy sad opinions, conceivings, and actings, and discovered thy
irregular practices (though thou art in Commission to do Justice, and would
be esteemed as a Magistrate) in the breach of the peace, and disturbance of
good people, to give an account hereof to General Disbrow, thou do not
blush to say to him, it is thy duty, on whose patience and Justice, as bearing
the sword of God against evil doing, thou may well fear thou have
trespassed, and beg excuse for thy trouble, and for thy self and Brethren
desire by thankfully acknowledging his former favors, to retain such an
opinion of you, as those that desire to do nothing unbecoming Christians, and
persons that desire the welfare and peace of this Commonwealth, and
Government, when under thy hand, and as aforesaid, against the innocent thou
have so plainly manifested the contrary, and yet for thy self and Brethren art
not ashamed of him to desire it, who is in Justice, you have obliged to visit
the more your transgressions upon your heads by reason of the ill use you have
made of his former favors, in acting contrary to the welfares and peace of
this Commonwealth, and Government, and so unbecoming Christians, in disturbing
good people, and oppressing the innocent, and in belying and slandering them
when you have so done; and in considerations of his favors; and nevertheless
to his face, when you have so offended, to wipe your mouth, as if you had none
iniquity, and in confidence to entreat him to understand you as aforesaid.

Now to that of God in thy conscience, and in the consciences of thy Brethren,
and of all who shall read this Relation, whose carriage was not becoming men,
much less Christians, theirs, or thine, and thy Brethren, and who contemn
Authority, and despise Dominion, and discover their irregular practices in the
breach of the peace, etc. Thou, and thy Brethren, who being entrusted as
Ministers of the Law, thus break the Law, or those who being innocent have the
Law thus broken upon them by thy self and brethren. The Magistrate of God is a
praise to him that does well, and a terror to the evil doer, Romans 12. And he
that breaks the righteous Law, on him the Law is added, as a contemner of
Authority, and a Transgressor, and Transgression, especially such as this is,
tends to the destruction of the Nation, and is a reproach to any people. And
who hold many sad and wicked opinions destructive to the true Religion and
power of godliness; they are thee, who do thus act and write, and art not
come so much as to the bridling of thy tongue, and so all thy Religion is vain.

And if thou will not yet take shame, behold these lies and false Accusations
in this one Letter of thine, to murder the innocent, set in Order before thee.
On their refusal to give Bail for their appearance the next General Sessions
to be held for the County of Devon. One -- And they still refusing to give
Bail for their appearance as aforesaid, Two -- Indeed Sir, their carriage here
was not becoming men, much less Christians, Three -- And besides their
contempt of Authority, Four -- All the while they were in Prison, they never
sought God by prayer at any time, Five -- Nor desired a blessing on any
Creature they received, Six -- Nor gave thanks for them, Seven -- And they
show no occasion to come to these parts, Eight -- But wander up and down in all
parts, Nine -- To vent their wicked Opinions, Ten -- And discover their
irregular practices in the breach of the Peace, and disturbance of good people,
Eleven -- Indeed Sir they hold and vent many sad Opinions destructive to the
true Religion, and power of Godliness, Twelve --

And let these convince thee, and give judgment against thee, that thy tongue
is bent like a Bow for lies, and art not valiant for the truth upon earth, but
proceedest from evil to evil, and know not the Lord: And all liars shall
have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death, Rev. 21. And the Devil is the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev.
12.10. And false Accusers are they who make the days perilous, 2 Timothy 3.3.
And the Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, Psalm. 12.3. And he that
respects persons commits sin, and is convinced of the Law as a
Transgressour, James 2.9. And the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.53. And woe
unto them that call good evil, and evil good, and put darkness for light,
and light for darkness, Isa. 5 20. And blaspheme that worthy name by which the
children of light are called, James 2.7. And of these things are thy Letter
made up, and these things are found on thee, and the judgment cannot be
avoided, for the Lord is righteous, and not one jot or tittle of his word shall
pass away, and thy soul is precious. Therefore turn within, and consider thy
condition, and repent whilst thou have time, before thou go into the Pit,
and it be sealed on Thee, out of which there can be no redemption.

The Answer of Miles Halhead, and Thomas Salthouse, to the Accusations in the
aforesaid letter.
John Page Mayor of Plymouth.
WE have seen a copy of a Letter, which we hear you sent to Major General
Disbrow, in reference to us, Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Halhead, wherein thou
have manifested thy self to the children of light to be of the same generation,
by thy flattering of him in feigned humility, and thy railing accusations
against us, we say, to be of the spirit of Tertullus, Acts 24. who accused and
informed the Governor against the Apopostle Paul, to be a pestilent fellow,
etc. And so thou have laid open thy Ignorance, in imprisoning; us, because thou
conceivest we are offenders, which indeed is nothing but thy conceiving; and
thou say, The cause of our confinement is because we refused to give Bail
to answer at the Sessions. Here be witness against thy self, and for us, that
we refused not to give Bail, but had sufficient men, Robert Carry, and Arthur
Cotton, which thou wast content to take, and we were willing to appear upon
thine own conditions, that if we were any way disabled to come, either by
sickness, or any other restraint, we being to go out of the County, thou
promised us, that a Certificate from the next Justice of the Peace, where we
were so disabled, should set our Recognizance void, and clear us, and our
friends were willing to engage for us. And the next morning when we came to
receive it under thy hand, according to thy promise, thou there refusedst to
give it, and the Town Clerk said it would not stand in Law, which is like to
thy Letter thou sentest us to Exon Prison, and so because thou conceivest we
are offenders, do we suffer; but thou make thy conceiving a Law, to imprison
us by. And further thou have manifested thy enmity, and persecuting spirit in
what thou witnessest falsely against us, that all the while we were in Prison,
we neither sought God by prayer, as thou say, nor desired a blessing of God
on any Creature that we received, nor gave thanks for them. Here let thy mouth
be stopped, and for shame proceed no further in thy false Accusations, to
render us, and the truth odious; for besides the witness of God which is true,
and greater then the witness of man, many in Plymouth can witness against
thee in this thing, that joined with us in spirit, being moved several times
in prison, and out of prison, to go to prayers, and to give thanks for the
blessing of God that we received. And further thou say, We wander up and
down in all parts, to vent our wicked Opinions, to the disturbance of good
people. Here thou have vented forth thy malice, out of the spirit of
bitterness against us, to make us appear odious to good people, if they will
lend an ear to thee, for wicked Opinions we do deny. And we have not disturbed
any good people, neither have we wandered in all parts, as thou say, but came
the straight Road from Bristoll to Plymouth, and were chargeable to none in our
Journey, but lay at the best Inns where we came, and paid for what we had need
of, for both our Horse, and our selves. And again thou say, Indeed Sir they
hold many sad Opinions, destructive to true Religion, and power of godliness.
We say indeed, if thou had the true Religion, thou would have power over thy
tongue, but thou have manifested thy Religion to be in vain, and thy ignorance
both of the true power, and also of the form of godliness, for godliness is a
mystery, and he that has the form, and not the power, from such we turn away;
and with such as have the power and life of what they profess, have we
fellowship in the light, which has no fellowship with darkness, neither with
such as walk disorderly, and contrary to the light of Christ, who brings
peace on Earth, and good will toward man. And we never contemned thy Authority
as a Magistrate, neither do we slight the General Disbrow, whom thou desire
to have a good opinion of thee, who have made thy conceivings, and thy will a
Law, to imprison us by, though we have transgressed no Law, but to the Children
of light thou art discovered, and thy deceit laid open. He that has
understanding let him read. And this we have written to thee, in reference to
that thou writest to General Disbrow, for thy self, and thy Brethren, not
rendering to thee, nor thy Brethren, railing for railing, but in the spirit of
love, and meeknes, we exhort you all to repent, and fear to offend the Lord,
and the least of them who believe in his name, lest he come in a day when you
are not aware, and cut you off in a day when you are not aware, and cut you
off, and you be numbered amongst the transgressors, and have your portion
amongst them which make war with the Lamb, and the Saints and Servants of the
most high God. This is the day of your visitation, while you have time prize
it.

From us who are friends to your souls. Thomas Salthouse, Miles Halhead,
prisoners in Exon Goal.

A Copy of an Indictment Exhibited against, and read to them at the Sessions.
Devon.
THe Jurors for his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, upon their Oaths
do present, That whereas by an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord Protector,
and his Counsel, bearing date the 29 day of June, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred fifty four, for preventing of Duells, and all occasions
of Challenges and Quarrels, and using any disgraceful provoking words, or
gestures tending to that effect, it was Ordered, That no persons whatsoever
should from and after the publishing of the said Ordinance, use any provoking
words, or gestures, whereby Quarrels or Challenges may arise, as by the said
Ordinance may more at large appear. Nevertheless Thomas Salthouse late of
Druggly beck in the County of Lancaster, Husbandman, and Miles Halhead of
Kendall in the County of Westmorland, Husbandman, not fearing nor regarding the
said Ordinance, and the penalty therein contained, after the publishing of the
said Ordinance, to wit, the twentieth day of May, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred fifty and five, at Plymouth in the County aforesaid, in
the presence and hearing of diverse honest persons of the Commonwealth of
England there then being, did use diverse disgraceful provoking words, and
gestures, to George Brooks, Clerk in the Nightingale Friggot, he being then
opening and declaring unto the said persons, a certain place of Scripture
wherein the said George spoke something of the Holy Trinity, to wit, Thou, the
said George Brooks meaning, lie in saying there were three persons in the
Trinity, we do deny, there is no such thing, but thou art a deluding spirit
come to draw away the hearts of the people from God. And farther they the said
Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Halhead did further speak to the people then
present, that they should not hearken to the said George Brooks, for that he
was a Thief, and was come with a lie in his mouth, and had stolen what he had
from others, and had it in his hand, poynting to the Bible which was then in
the said George Brooks his hand open. And further did say it was a lie which
the said George Brooks had brought, and other harms to the said George Brooks
then, and there did, contrary to the form of the said Ordinance, against the
peace public.

Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Halheads Answer to this Indictment.
BEing that we were not permitted to speak for our selves, when this Indictment
or Bill was read to us in the open Court at the General Sessions, holden at
the Castle of Exon. upon the 12 day of the fifth Month 1655, but by the
Justices there in Commission, the Jailer was commanded to to take us away. So
to make our defense for the truths sake, we are constrained to write something
in Answer to the substance of it: The sum of it is, To make us Offenders in an
Act made against Duells and Challenges, and the like, by the Lord Protector and
his Council; and you say, We not fearing or regarding the said Act, and the
penalty therein contained, did use diverse disgraceful and provoking words to
George Brooks Clerk of the Nightingale Frigot.

To which we Answer.

THe fear of the Lord which is the beginning of wisdom, has taught us to
regard and honor all men in the Lord, and that Act we own, which is made
against quarrelling, and fighting, and cursed speaking, which is the fruit of
the flesh, and that the Magistrates bear not the sword in vain, but adds the
penalty to the transgression of it, and not to add the Law where there is no
transgression proved. And we do declare, and many can witness, that unless
you call the Scripture disgraceful words, there was none spoken to him by us.
And we do affirm, that one of us did not speak one word to him, and yet we are
both accused and imprisoned, and if this be the penalty of the Act, that if one
man offend, two must suffer, let all that know the Law of England, with
moderation, judge? And whether discoursing of the Scripture be a transgression
of that, yea or nay? For what was spoken, many of our friends of Plymouth,
which you confess to be honest people* that are friends to the Commonwealth
of England, did hear us, you say. Yet might they not be permitted to hear us
examined before the Mayor and Magistrates of Plymouth, upon the 23 day of the
third month, in the Common Hall in the presence of near one hundred people; and
all our friends that heard the discourse, and know the truth of it, were put
forth of the Hall, and the door kept fast. And we desired, that if either man
or woman had any thing to lay to our charge, they might then speak. But we
never had our Accusars brought before us, that we might see them, or hear them
speak. And for that George Brooks spoke concerning the three persons of the
Trinity, these words was spoken by one of us, I know no such Scripture that
speaks of the three persons in the Trinity; but the three that the Scripture
speaks of, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.
And the Baptism by one Spirit, into one body, and the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, the Scripture declares to be one; and he that has the Son, has the
father also. And this we do own, he that can receive it, let him. And no such
word was spoken by us, as calling him a deluding spirit, and therefore the
Accusation is false: Neither did we say that he came to draw away the hearts of
the people from God, as you say; for he stood up, and vindicated what we had
declared, to be truth, and that of God in his conscience will witness against
you in this thing. And in that you say, We spoke to the people not to hearken
to him, and that he was a THIEF, and pointed to the Bible which was then in his
hand, and other harms to the said George Brooks, against the peace public.
Here under a cloak of maliciousness have you made Lies your refuge, but with
the light you are comprehended, and your works of darkness brought to it, and
reproved, for we did neither call him Thief, nor say he had stolen the Bible
that was in his hand, which you say, we pointed at. And you speak of other
harms against George Brooks, and say, We meaned that he lied. And here you make
use of meanings, as if here were not false Accusations sufficient to drive on
your design of Persecution; you might have mentioned those other harms you
speak of, if you knew of any; but it is like you have mentioned the worst you
heard of, which we declare to be false, as many can witness that heard the
discourse, that are inhabitors of Plymouth, and friends to the peace of
Englands Commonwealth. So all ye that take your Oaths, and give informations,
consider what you do, for because of Oaths the land mourns, and the Lord God
will come near to judgment, and will be a swift witness against the liar, and
the false Swearer, that are out of the doctrine of Christ who says, Swear not
at all, but in all your communications, let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay,
for whatsoever is more, is evil. And every one of you in particular, take heed
to the light of Christ in your consciences, and there is your Teacher, loving
it, that will keep you from accusing any man falsely, and lead you out of all
controversy and strife, up to Jesus Christ who is the end of the Law for
righteousness, to every one that believes on him, who brings peace on earth,
and good will toward men, who is the Prince of Peace, of whose Government
there shall be no end, who is God over all blessed for evermore.

This we have written in Answer to the Bill of Indictment against us Thomas
Salthouse and Miles Halhead, Prisoners for the truths sake in Bridewell in
Thomas Parish near Exeter, in Devonshire.
Record of the Sentence given against them at Sessions.
Devon.
A Calender of the Prisoners Tried and Delivered at the General Sessions of
the Peace public holden at the Castle of Exon. July 10. 1655.
THomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead, for provoking words against George Brooks,
Clerk, who refused to be Tried by the Country, fined 5 l. a piece, and
committed to Bridewell, till payment, and finding Sureties for the good
behavior.

The Answer of Miles and Thomas thereunto.
TO you Justices by whom we are committed, we Answer as we did when we were
before you, and do affirm that one of us spoke not a word unto him George
Brooks, and to satisfy all such as may hear this thing, under which we suffer
as if we were Thieves, or Murderers; we shall lay open to the view of all
people, the ground of the Discourse.

We being met together at a friends house near Plymouth, to wait upon the Lord,
there being more people then the house would contein, we went into a Garden,
and after we had spoken some words of Exhortation to the people and had
declared the truth of the experience we had found manifested in us, of the free
grace of God that brings salvation, provoking them to love, and to good works,
according to the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, as the Spirit gave us
utterance at that time. Then George Brooks unknown unto us, stood up and spoke
to the people, with the words of Paul to the Corinthians, and said, Take heed
that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, with many words in Vindication
of what we had spoken, witnessing that it was the eternal truth which we had
spoken. So after all was ended, some began to enter into some discourse with
him, and one of us asked him whether he could witness what he had spoken to be
from the life and power of it saying, Thou have uttered many Scriptures and
good words, but it is he that has the witness in himself, that sets to his
seal; that God is true. Then directing my speech to all that were there, by way
of Exhortation. I spoke the words of Paul to the Ephesians, Let him that stole
steal no more, with many other words of truth and soberness, which was not to
any one in particular. If these be provoking words, and worthy of such bonds as
we suffer, let all men that have moderation bear witness.

And in that you say, We refuse to be tried by the Country. Oh! how dare you
give such things under your hands, when you your selves, and all people that
were in the Court, can bear us witness, that we did not refuse to be tried, but
did appeal to the highest power that was there, unto whom many in the Country
came for Justice, and from whom we expected righteous judgment; for you know
we said, We were willing to be tried by the Bench, to whom all the Court was in
subjection, to whose power we were and are subject to, for conscience sake, and
did not resist your power; but for the* ve pounds that is demanded of us, we
answer, we owe nothing to any man but to love one another, therefore we deny to
pay so much money for naught; but if any man will come to us and say that we
have wronged him, we will make him satisfaction, and pay him the utmost
farthing.

And as for Sureties for the good behavior, they that walk in the light of
Christ, who is the Surety of a better Covenant then man's Covenant, whom we
witness, teaching us to deny the customs, and fashions of the world, and all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to do to all men as we would they should
do unt^ us. And we are tied to the good behavior by the Righteous Law of God,
and dare not lie, nor swear, nor be drunk, nor use any deceit, policy, shifts,
or double dealing, nor respect men's persons for the liberty of the outward man,
or any other advantage, to that in all your consciences do we appeal, whether
we be woe thy of such bonds as these, where none of our friends nor acquaintance
must come at us, or speak with us, but they must be imprisoned: Is the Law of
England so exact against us, such as have been always faithful in that which
has been manifested, and in the States service, and desires nothing else but
to worship God in Spirit and truth, according to what is manifested and
witnessed in the light of Jesus Christ, who is the way to the father, that when
we were locked up in close Prison, the Soldiers kept John Gannyclife who is a
Constable, in their custody, for coming to speak with us, and another person
who did spy in at a hole of the door where we were; this they did by an Order
from Captain Joyce, who has given it under his hand to take into their custody
all such as they suspected to be of us whom they called Quakers. But this they
do that the Scripture may be fulfilled, which Jesus Christ spoke to his
Disciples, They shall hale you before Magistrates, and Rulers, who shall cast
some of you into prison, and the time shall come if they kill you, they shall
think they do God good service. But here is our confidence in his Promise,
that he that endures to the end shall be saved; and if we suffer with him, we
shall also reign with him; for whose sake we are made willing by his eternal
power to suffer the loss of all things, that we may receive an inheritance
with them that are Sanctified, and witness against all deceit, and
abomination, to the laying down of our lives, if it be required, who are
Prisoners for the Testimony of Jesus in Thomas Parish near Exon, in Bridewell.

Thomas Salthouse. Miles Halhead.


A copy of their Letter sent the Mayor of Plymouth, after their first
Apprehension.
FRIEND,
Seeing the Lord God of power, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, has entrusted
thee with the power of a Magistrate, to bear the Sword of Justice, which is for
the punishment of evil doers and the encouragement of those that do well, and
to rule for him who brings peace on earth, and has good will toward men, even
Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant; who is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes; who was supposed to be the Son of
Joseph, but was the Son of God; and he that has the Son, has life; and he
that has not the Son, has not life; and we know that the Son of God is come,
and has given us an understanding, to know him who is true; and he that has
the Son, has the Father also; and he that has the witness in himself, has
set to his seal that God is true; he that has understanding, let him read; he
that loves not, knows not God, for God is love; and if any man say, I love
God, and hate his Brother, he is a liar, for his Commandment is love; and he
that rules in love, rules with Authority, and not as the Scribes and Pharisees.
The Law of God is perfect, and endures for ever; he is our Judge, and
Lawgiver, before whom all must appear, to give an account for all the deeds
done in the body, when every man shall receive according to his works.

Now Friend, to thee for Justice do we call, that the truth may be freed from
scandalls, and false reports, and the oppressed set free, which is pure
Religion; that we may have that favor at thy hands, which the Law does afford,
to bring our Accusers to us, that have any thing to lay to our charge worthy of
Bonds, that things may be tried by the light, and actions weighed in the
balance of equity; that truth may spring up out of the Earth, and
righteousness may run down as a mighty stream, and peace and Justice may kiss
each other; for know assuredly, although we are counted deceivers, yet are we
true; and nothing do we desire from thee, as thou art a Magistrate, but to
have the truth cleared by the light, and truth set at liberty; and if there be
any that knows the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and
has eternal life abiding in him; we desire to be tried by him, even him that
is guided by the Spirit of God, and as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
are the Sons of God. And whereas some ignorant men say, that we deny the
Trinity, and the Godhead, which is false; for God is a Spirit, and as many as
are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God, and the Father Son and Spirit are
one; and this we witness according to the Scriptures, and this God is but one,
in whom all things live, move, and have their being, who is above all, and in
all, and through all, God blessed for ever.

And for the word Trinity, there is no such Scripture as speaks of a Trinity;
so in tenderness of conscience, and love to the Spirit of Truth, which gave
forth the Scriptures, we dare not wrest them nor speak any other language, nor
add nor diminish from them. So Friend, to the light of Jesus Christ in thine
own conscience, and the measure of the Spirit of Truth, do we exhort thee to
take heed that the spiritual man judge all things in righteteousnesse and
truth. So we remain Prisoners of the Lord, not as evil doers, our conscience
bearing us witness in the presence of the Lord in whom is everlasting
strength, who are friends of the Truth, and of the Commonwealth of England.

Known to the World by the Names of Thomas Salthouse. Miles Halhead.

For the hands of John Page Mayor of Plymouth.
The copy of another Letter to the Mayor of Plymouth, concerning Swearing.
John Page Mayor of Plymouth;
FOrasmuch as it has pleased thee to cast us into Prison, and have Examined
us, and have found no breach of any Law, by which thou can lawfully punish
us; but under a pretense has tendered us an Oath to swear against the Supremacy
and Purgatory. We do in the presence of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, deny
the Pope, and all things therein mentioned, with as much detestation as thou
thy self, or any in the world can, or does; our consciences also bearing us
witness, in the presence of our God, who is able to deliver us, although we
are cast into a Prison; nay, if we be cast into a Den of Lions, and a fiery
Furnace, with the three Children, as you may read in Daniel, that would not
fall down to worship the Image, neither will we disobey the Command of Jesus
Christ, who says, Swear not at all; and the Apostle James says, Above all
things, my brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any
other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, lest you fall into
condemnation. And all that does the will of God, shall know of the doctrine of
Christ; and whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ,
has not God. He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, has both the Father,
and the Son. If any come unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house, nor bid him God speed; and this we do affirm, that swearing
is out of the doctrine of Christ, although you may allege many Scriptures for
Swearing, as in the first Covenant; and that an Oath among men for
confirmation, is to them an end of all strife; but he that is made the Surety
of a better Covenant, who has put an end to all strife, where it is witnessed,
says, Swear not at all; although that you may allege that the Angels swore,
yet know this, that when he brings his first begotten into the world, he
says, Let the Angels of God worship him: So we lay it upon thee to witness
for us, or against us, whether Yea or nay is not to be preferred before
swearing, by all those who profess Religion, seeing that Jesus Christ has
commanded not to swear at all; and he says, If ye love me, keep my
Commandments; and if we suffer imprisonment for keeping the Commandments of
Christ, it is not grievous to us; for we refuse not to swear, for any
guiltiness that is in us, or that can be charged upon us, for we are against
all false ways, false worships, false Laws, but we deny swearing, because
Jesus Christ has commanded us, not to swear at all. So if we be kept in
Prison, let it never be said by you, That it is for any thing, but because we
dare not swear, knowing, that to disobey the Commandments of Christ, is the
way of Cain, who was driven out from the presence of God, and became a
Fugitive, and a Vagabond; and this some of you would charge upon us, to be
Vagabonds, who in tenderness of conscience, and in the obedience to the light
of Jesus Christ, and in love to him, our lives are not dear to us, to lay down,
if it be required, for the confession of him before men, and the keeping of his
Commandments; for to this end are we called; and our rejoicing is in this,
that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, our conversations has been, and is
honest, as many can witness for us against those, who in their wisdom go
about to entrap and ensnare the innocent: And this we write, not to justify
our selves but for the sake of the simple ones, who have heard many lies and
false reports of us; of this do we put thee in mind, not that thou art
ignorant that all the glory and honor belongs to the Lord God, who has
said, He will not give his glory unto another; and Vengeance is mine, and I
will repay it, says the Lord, who will ease himself of all his Adversaries,
and recompense tribulation to them that trouble, afflict, or offend one of the
least that believe in his Name. So in love to thee, and all people, for the
eternal good of all, do we heartily wish, that grace and peace may be
multiplied; so we rest in the will of our father, to do or to suffer, that he
may be glorified by us, to whom all glory belongs for evermore; and pray,
that the sin of Persecution may not be committed by thee, nor any that profess
to be the friends of Englands,

Whose Names are known to be Thomas Salthouse. Miles Halhead.
For the hands of John Page, Mayor of Plymouth.

HEar ye this O Priests, and hearken ye house of Israel; and give ye ear O
house of the King, for judgment is toward you, because you have been as a
snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor: And ye revolters are profound to
make slaughter; though I have been a rebuker of them all.

Hear I pray you O Heads of Jacob; and ye Princes of the house of Israel; Is
it not for you to know Judgment? Shall thou reign, because thou closest thy
self in Cedar? Did not their Father, eat, and drink, and do Judgment, and
Justice, and then it was well with him? he Judged the Cause of the poor and
needy; then it a as well with him, was not this; know me says the Lord.

And hear ye Rulers, who hate the good, and love the evil, who pluck the skin
from off the people of the Lord, and their flesh from off their bones; yea who
abhor Judgment, and pervert all equity; who turn Judgment into worm wood,
and leave off righteousness in the Earth; who decree unrighteous decrees, and
write grievousnesse which ye have prescribed: Woe unto you; for Judgment is
turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off, for truth is fallen in the
street, and equity cannot enter; yea truth fails, and he that departs from
evil, makes himself a prey: a man is made an Offender for a word; a snare is
laid for him that reproves in the gate; the just is afflicted, and turned
aside, for a thing of naught, and the poor in the gate from their right: The
righteousness of the righteous, is taken from him; he that rebukes in the
gate, is hated; he that speaks uprightly is abhorred; iniquities are
conceived, are traveled withal; are searched out; A diligent search is
accomplished, the inward thought, and the heart is deep, they dig as low as
hell, the pit is made into which to cast and destroy the innocent, the workers
of iniquity make insurrections, they whet their tongue like a sword, they bend
their bows, and make their Arrows keen, and ready on string, and shoot at
the perfect, at the upright and fear not; there are who encourage themselves in
an evil matter, that commune of laying snares privily, that lie in wait in
the lurking places of the Villages, in the secret places, as he that sets
snares to murder the innocent, that set a trap that catch men; as a cage is
full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit: therefore, are they become
great, and wax in rich, they are waxen fat, and shine; yea, the deeds of the
wicked are over passed: The rod has blossomed, pride has budded, violence is
risen up into a rod of wickedness, Sion is built up with blood, and Jerusalem
with iniquity; the stranger is vexed, and oppressed (which the Lord has
commanded shall not be, but be beloved as a man's self, for the Lord loves the
stranger) and turned aside from his right, and dealt wrongfully withal, his
Judgment is perverted, and upon him is violence, and cruelty, exercised: The
people of the Lord are sold for naught, and there are none that inquire after
their blood, they are eaten up as one would eat breath; they whom the Lord
has smitten are persecuted, and the spoiled is not delivered out of the hand
of the Oppressor: the Lord is not feared; this people are broken in pieces,
and his heritage afflicted: yet they that do these things, say in their
hearts, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it; God
has for gotten, he hides his face; he will never see it; God is contemned;
they say, he will not require it; yea every one in the dark, in the chambers
of his Imagery, says the Lord sees us not; the Lord has forsaken the earth;
how does God know, is there knowledge in the most High? Thou have seen it O
Lord, for thou beholdest mischief, and spite, to requite it with thy own
hand; the poor commits himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the
fatherless.)

Understand ye brutish among the people; And ye fools, when will ye be wise?
He that planteth the ear, shall not he hear? he that formed the eye, shall he
not see? he that chastises the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teaches
man knowledge, shall not he know? Surely, the Lord sees it, and it displeases
him that there is no Judgment, and he sees that there is no man, and wonders
that there is no Intercessor; therefore his arm is bringing salvation unto
him, and his righteousness it sustaineth him; for he is putting on
righteousness as a breast plate, and a helmet of salvation upon his head, and
he is putting on the garment of vengeance for a clothing, and is clading with
zeal as with a cloak; he will awake as one out of sleep, and go forth as a
mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine; he will stir up jealousy like a
man of war; he will cry, yea roar; he shall prevail against his enemies; he
has a long time holden his peace, and he has been still, and refrained
himself; he will cry like a traveling woman; he will devour and destroy all
at once; he he will make wast mountains, and hills, and dry up all their herbs;
he will make the rivers Islands; and he will dry up the pools, and according to
their deeds, accordingly, will he repay, fury, to his adversaries, recompense
to his enemies.

For these things, shall I not visit says the Lord, shall not my soul be
avenged on such a generation as this? Shall not God avenge the sufferings, the
blood of his Elect, who cry Night and Day unto him, how long O Lord holy and
true do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth?
Though he bear long with them: I tell you, he will avenge them speedily. And
has he said it, and shall he not do it? has he spoken it, and shall it not
come to pass? he has avenged their blood, from the days of righteous Abel,
to the Times of this generation, and shall he not avenge it on this generation?
has this generation witnessed this word of the Lord to be true above many
generations before whose Eyes; and by whose hands the righteous God has
executed his dreadful Judgments on the Enemies of his Elect; and shall this
Generation who have exceeded what has been done by their Fathers go unpunished?

Has he despised the Image of the King, and Princes, and Nobles, and the great
ones, and many of the people of these Nations, and their pomp and glory, and
powered forth their blood as water on the Earth, and made them a fearful
desolation, in the cause of his people, and of Justice, and Equity, and shall
those whom he has made the rod of his Anger, and the staff of his
Indignation, upon these; doing the same things, for which he judged, and cast
them out, escape? Has all this blood been shed, that unrighteousness may
reign, and oppresssion? has not God spared the glory, and beauty, and
excellency of these Nations, and the goodlinesse of them, but in the Iniquities
that they have committed, and in the sins wherewithal they have sinned, has
cut them off, and made them the dreadful examples of his vengeance, to make
way for others to rise up, and to commit greater abominations? Was persecution
of tender consciences unjust in the Bishops, and is it righteous now in them,
who suffered by the Bishops, for the tenderness of their consciences, and shed
so much blood for a secure provision therein, and put it to this Issue, by the
sword either they and theirs not to be or not to be without it; to outstrip the
Bishops; yea the latter Ages, in a cruel and barbarous persecution of their
Brethren, because of the tenderness of their consciences? Was the Infringement
of Liberty, the endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Nation;
and the violation of right; unrighteous in the King, and Strafford, and
Canterbury, and that generation; and Judged Tyrannical, and Traiterous, and
Justice executed upon them, for so doing, and the Kings Family rooted up, and
thousands of Families destroyed, and the three Nations made fields of blood,
and hazarded in many years fierce and cruel Wars to bring it to pass, and is
it just now in inferior Ministers, who are in Commission, and sworn to execute
the Law, to preserve liberty, and to defend right, as says also the Instrument
of Government; to exceed them all in the violation of Law, and the destruction
of right, and liberty, as if so be the Cause and the Justice of the Wars were
to destroy one Generation, for another to exercise the same, and far greater
violences and oppressions, upon those who were isntrumental in the destruction
of the other, when lost their liberties, or by what Law, Contract, or Conquest?
have they lost them in suffering and fighting for them, and having had to do
in obtaining the Victory, or in fearing the Lord, and being peaceable in the
land, and living in the principle that leads out of transgression, and not
resisting evil with evil, but bearing all things, and suffering all things,
both from those who have been friends and enemies, though contrary to Law and
liberty, and common humanity, and the righteous ends of the Wars are their
sufferings; leaving vengeance to the Lord, whose it is, and who will repay it;
and laying their bodies as the ground, and as the street to them that say bow
down thy body, that we may go over? And wherein consists the virtue, merit, or
prerogative of the other by which they may in equity or right claim such a
privilege? Is Law, and Justice, and Liberty, and Right changed in the ending
of the Wars, for them into peace, that those must be denied either, and the
contrary inflicted on them, in such a manner of cruelty, that the presidents of
former times, have not paralleled, whose lives in the field, and whose All has
been so often engaged, for the effecting thereof? Is this Generation delivered
to commit greater abominations and Cruelties, then those who for these things
sake, and by their hand have been so lately Destroyed? Is the Weight of the
Blood of these Nations a small Matter? and all the Garments rolled in blood,
the mangled and dead Carcasses of so many Thousands, the Plundering, burnings,
Devastations, Ruins of Multitudes, the Barbarous and the unheard of Cruelties
and Murders executed especially in Ireland, the Cries of the Great Companies
of Fatherless and Widows, for Liberties and Justice, a pleasant sight? that
Men so Lightly Gird it to their loins, and go over their Graves, in acting
higher Wickednesses then what were the Causes of those Miserable Destructions?
God is not unrighteous, so severely to punish Offenses in some, and to let
others go free, who transgress in the same, and act more wickedly. Shall not
the Judge of the whole earth do right? God is true, and every man a liar; and
at his hands every man shall receive according to their deeds. If he spared not
the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into
chains of darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment: Nor the old world,
bringing in the flood upon the World of the ungodly; nor Sodom and Gomorah,
but turned their Cities into ashes, and condemned them with an overthrow,
making them Ensamples to them that afterward should live ungodly; nor the
Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, in whom the iniquities and mighty sins
aforementioned were found, but suffered for those things sake; Sion to be
plowed as a field, and Jerusalem to become heaps, and the mountain of the house
as the higher places of the forest, and removed them both out of his sight;
and upon whom the wrath is come to the uttermost. And if he spared not those in
these three Nations, upon whom some of these things were found, but has spread
them before this Generation, as the remarkable and sad Examples of his
Vengeance and Justice, who renders to every one according to his works; then
what can they expect, who having all these examples before their eyes, and
having bin the Instruments of his indignation, upon those of their Age, do not
only the same things, but over-passe their deeds in afflicting the just, and
persecuting the witnesses of the living God, the God of their mercies, who has
wrought all their wonderful deliverances, whom of their brethren he has
raised up and sent amongst them to turn their feet out of the ways of
destruction, into the path of peace, and to direct them to that, which if
hearkened unto, will guide them out of all deceipts and subtilties, and power of
darkness, up to the Kingdom of his Son, whose Throne is for ever and ever, and
the Scepter of whose Kingdom is a righteous Scepter, which is the substance of
what the late wars were a figure, and the principle from whence alone Justice
shall spring up from the earth, and righteousness shall slow down from heaven;
who shall rule the Nations with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces as a
potters vessel, whose kingdom is begun to be set up, which shall never have an
end. I say, what remains for such, but a fearful expectation of the
revelation of the righteous judgments of God, which shall destroy the
adversary, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, beyond the measure of
those that have gone before them, except they repent. For, God is not mocked,
as men sow, so shall they reap, and those that follow their pernicious ways,
their judgment lingreth not nor does their damnation slumber; the testimony of
his Elect in sufferings is finishing, and the measure of the iniquity of their
persecutors is filling up apace, and the Judge stands at the door, and
Judgment hastneth, and vengeance is preparing her self, and destruction is
making ready, and woe unto you, ye potsheards of the earth, who strive with
your Maker. What will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation
that comes from far? To whom will ye flee for help, and where will you leave
your glory? Can your hearts endure, and your hands be strong, in the days when
the Lord shall deal with you.

Be wise therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the Earth; serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Touch not his Anointed, and do
his Prophets no harm. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye parish from the
mid way; when his wrath is kindled but a little (and it is kindling) blessed
are all they that trust in him.

But sing O Heavens, and be joyful O Earth, and break forth into singing O
Mountains, for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy on his
afflicted.

FINIS.

