Parnassus Biceps. OR Several Choice Pieces OF POETRY, Composed by the best
WITS that were in both the Universities BEFORE THEIR DISSOLUTION.

With an Epistle in the behalf of those now doubly secluded and
sequestredMembers, by One who himself is gone.

LONDON: Printed for George Eversden at the Sign of the Maidenhead in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

To the Ingenuous READER.
SIR.
THese leaves present you with some sow drops of that Ocean of Wit, which
flowed from those two breasts of this Nation, the two Universities; and does now
(the sluices being pulled up) overflow the whole Lands: or rather like those
Springs of Paradise, does water and enrich the whole worlds whilst the
Fountains themselvss are dried up, and that Twin-Paradise become desert. For
then were these Verses Composed, when Oxford and Camebridge were Universities,
and a College more learned then a Town Hall; when the Buttery and Kitchen
could speak Latin, though not Preach; and the very irrational Turnspits had so
much knowing modesty, as not to dare to come into a Chapel, or to mountany
Pulpits but their own. Then were these Poems writ, when peace and plenty were
the best Patriots and Maecenasses to great Wits; when we could sit and make
Verses under our own Figtrees, and be inspired from the juice of our own Vines:
then, when it was held no sin for the same man to be both a Poet, and a
Prophet; and to draw predictions no less from his Verse, then his Text. Thus
you shall meet here St. Paul's Rapture in a Poem, and the fancy as high and as
clear as the third Heaven, into which that Apostle was caught up: and this not
only in the ravishing expressions and ecstasies of amorous Composures and Love
Songs; but in the more grave Dorick strains of sollid Divinity: Anthems that
might have become David's Harp, and Asaphs Quire, to be sung, as they were
made, with the Spirit of that chief Musician. Again, In this small Glass you
may behold your own face, fit your own humors, however wound up and tuned;
whether to the sad note, and melancholy look of a disconsolate Elegy, or those
more sprightly jovial Aires of an Epithalamium, or Epinichion. Further, would
you see a Mistress of any age, or face, in her created, or uncreated
complexion: this mirror presents you with more shapes then a Conjurers Glass,
or a Limnors Pencil. It will also teach you how to court that Mistress, when
her very washings and pargettings cannot flatter her; how to raise a beauty out
of wrinkles fourscore years old, and to fall in love even with deformity and
ugliness. From your Mistress it brings you to your God; and (as it were some
new Master of the Ceremonies) instructs you how to woe, and court him likewise;
but with approaches and distances, with gestures and expressions suitable to a
Diety; addresses clothed with such a sacred filial horror and reverence, as may
invite and embolden the most despairing condition of the saddest gloomy Sinner;
and withal dash out of countenance the greatest confidence of the most
glorious Saint: and not with that blasphemous familiarity of our new-enlightned
and inspired men, who are as bold with the Majesty and glory of that Light that
is unaprochable, as with their own ignes fatui; and account of the third Person
in the blessed Trinity for no more then their Fellow-Ghost; thinking him as
much bound to them for their vertiginous blasts and while-winds, as they to him
for his own most holy Spirit. Your Authors then of these few sheets are
Priests, as well as Poets; who canteach you to pray inverse, and (if there were
not already too much phantasticknes in that Trade) to Preach likewise: while
they turn Scripture-chapters into Odes, and both the Testaments into one book
of Psalms: making Parnassns as sacred as Mount Olivet, and the nine Muses no
less religious then a Cloister of Nuns. But yet for all this I would not have
thee, Courteous Reader, pass thy censure upon those two Fountains of Religion
and Learning, the Uviversities, from these few small drops of wit, as hardly as
some have done upon the late Assemblies three-half-penny Catechism: as if all
their public and private Libraries, all their morning and evening watchings,
all those pangs and throws of their Studies, were now at length delivered but
of a Verse, and brought to bed only of five feet, and a Conceit. For although
the judicious modesty of these Men dares not look the world in the face with
any of Theorau John's Revelations, or those glaring New-lights that have muffled
the Times and Nation with a greater confusion and darkness, then ever benighted
the world since the first Chaos: yet would they please bnt to instruct this
ignorant Age with those exact elaborate Pieces, which might reform Philosophy
without a Civil War, and new model even Divinity its self without the tuine
of either Chuch, or State; probably that most prudent and learned Order of the
Church of Rome, the Jesuit, should not boast more sollid, though more numerous
Volums in this kind. And of this truth that Order was very sensible, when it
felt the rational Divinity of one single Chillingworth to be an unanswerable
twelve-years-task for all their English Colleges in Chrisendome. And therefore
that Society did like its self, when it sent us over a War instead of an
Answer, and proved us Heretics by the sword: which in the first place was to
Rout the Universities, and to teach our two Fountains of Learning better
manners, then for ever heareafter to bubble and swell against the Apostolic
Sea. And yet I know not whether the depth of their Politics might not have
advised to have kept those Fountains within their own banks, and there to have
dammd them and choakd them up with the mud of the Times, rather then to have
let those Protestant Streams run; which perchance may effect that now by the
spreading Riverets, which they could never have done through the enclosed
Spring: as it had been a deeper State-piece and Reach in that Sanedrim, the
great Council of the Jewish Nation, to have confined the Apostles to
Jerusalem, and there to have muzzeld them with Oaths, and Orders; rather then
by a fruitful Persecution to scatter a few Gospel Seeds, that would spring up
the Religion of the whole world: which had it been Coopd within the walls of
that City, might (for all they knew) in few years have expired and given up the
ghost upon the same Golgotha with its Master. And as then every Pair of
Fishermen made a Church and caught the sixth part of the world in their Nets; so
now every Pair of Celledge-fellows make as many several Vniversityes; which are
truly so called, in that they are Catholic, and spread over the face of the
whole earth; which stands amazed, to see not only Religion, but Learning also
to come from beyond the Alps; and that a poor despised Canton and nook of the
world should contain as much of each as all the other Parts besides. But then,
as when our single Jesus was made an universal Savior, and his particular
Gospel the Catholic Religion; though that Jesus and this Gospel did both take
their rise from the holy City; yet now no City is more unholy and infidel then
that; insomuch that there is at this day scarce any thing to be heard of a
Christ at Jerusalem, more then that such a one was sometimes there, nor any
thing to be seen of his Gospel, more then a Sepulcher: just so it is here with
us; where though both Religion and Learning do owe their growth, as well as
birth, to those Nurseryes of both, the Vniversityes; yet, since the Siens of
those Nurseryes have been transplanted, there is little remains in them now (if
they are not belyed) either of the old Religion and Divinity, more then its
empty Chair and Pulpit, or of the ancient Learning and Arts, except bare
Schools, and their gilded Superscriptions: so far have we beggard our selves to
enrich the whole world. And thus, Ingenuous Sir, have I given you the State and
Condition of this Poetic Miscellany, as also of the Authors; it being no more
then some few Slips of the best Florists made up into a slender Garland, to
crown them in their Pilgrimage, and refresh thee in thine: if yet their very
Pilgrimage be not its self a Crown equal to that of Confessors, and their
Academicall Dissolution a Resurrection to the greatest temporal glory: when
they shall be approved of by men and Angels for a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, a peculiar People. In the interim let this comfort be held out to
you, our secluded University-members, by him that is none; (and therefore what
has been here spoken must not be interpreted as out of passion to my self, but
nicer zeal to my Mother) that according to the generally received Principles
and Axioms of Policy, and the soundest Judgment of the most prudential
Statesmen upon those Principles, the day of your sad Ostracisme is expiring,
and at an end; but yet such an end, as some of you will not embrace when it
shall be offered; but will choose rather to continue Peripateticks through the
whole world, then to return, and be so in your own Colleges. For as that great
Council of Trent had a Form and Conclusion altogether contrary to the
expectation and desires of them that procured it; so our great Councels of
England (our late Parliaments) will have such a result, and Catastrophe, as
shall no ways answer the Fasts and Prayers, the Humiliations, and Thanks
givings of their Plotters and Contrivers: such a result I say, that will strike
a palsy through Mr. Pims ashes, make his cold Marble sweat; and put all those
several Parties, and Actors, that have as yet appeard upon our tragical bloody
Stage, to an amazed stand and gaze: when they shall confess themselves (but too
late) to be those improvident axes and hammers in the hand of a subtle Workman;
whereby he was enabled to beat down, and square out our Church and State into a
Conformity with his own. And then it will appear that the great Work, and the
holy Cause, and the naked Arm, so much talked of for these fifteen years, were
but the work, and the cause, and the arm of that Hand, which has all this
while reached us over the Alps; dividing, and composing, winding us up, and
letting us down, until our very discords have set and tuned us to such notes,
both in our Ecclesiastical, and Civil Government; as may soonest conduce to
that most necessary Catholic Unison and Harmony, which is an essential part of
Christ's Church here upon Earth, and the very Church its self in Heaven. And
thus far, Ingenuous Reader, suffer him to be a Poet in his Prediction, though
not in his Verse; who desires to be known so far to thee, as that he is a
friend to persecuted Truth, and Peace; and thy most affectionate Christian
Servant,

Ab: Wright.

Vniversity-Poems.
The Temper. UPON Dr. JUXON Bishop of LONDON.
Great Sir,
ANd now more great then when you were
Oth' Cabinet to your King, and Treasurer.
For then your acts were locked from common view
Your life as Counsel being all Closet too;
But now that Cabinet's opened, you do pass
To the world for the chief Jewel of the case:
Each virtue shines a several glorious spark,
Which then were but one Diamond in the dark.
The Exchequer speaks your faith, this you to be
As true to the Counsell-board as Treasury;
Which care oth' civil good when they shall view
The houses will repeal their act for you;
And in their graver policy debate
The cloak less fit for the Church, then the gown for the State.
Next, to your place your low mind did accord
So well, you seemed a Bishop and no Lord.
A Bishop such, as even the Scots to make
You theirs would arm, and a new Covenant take;
Disband the Presbitery, and henceforth
Install you their sole Patriarch of the North.
Such power has your soft Rhetoric, such awe
Your nod, and even your silence is a law;
While others are not heard through their own noise
And by their speaking much have lost their voice:
Thus those oth' starry Senate of the night
Which slowest tread their Orbs shine till most bright,
And dart the strongest influx; so conceal
The flints cold veins a fire; such is the zeal
Of recluse Votaries, piercing the air
And yet not heard, and such the Anchorites prayer.
Not like our modern Zelots, whose bare name
In Greek and Welsh joins language for a flame.
Gunpowder souls, whose Pulpit thoughts create
A calenture and fever in the State;
Whose plots and discipline are all fire, and shine
As hot, as if contrived under the line.
Your tempers cool and Northern, calculate
For the Miridian of this clime and State;
And may be fitly styled the Courts pole star,
Or honors best moral Philosopher:
So just your Sovereigne's, it is a hard thing
To say, which was the Bishop, which the King.
This Temper took our State, by whom we see
The order questioned yet the Bishop free:
So that of all their Acts this ones most rare,
A Churchman escape and a Lord Treasurer.
A Poem, I ndefence of the decent Ornaments of Christ-Church Oxon, occasioned
by a Banbury brother, who called them Idolatries.
YOu that profane our windows with a tongue
Set like some clock on purpose to go wrong;
Who when you were at Service sighed, because
You heard the Organs music not the Dawes:
Pitying our solemn state, shaking the head
To see no ruins from the flore to the lead:
To whose pure nose our Cedar gave offense,
Crying it smelt of Papists frankincense:
Who walking on our Marbles scoffing said
Whose bodies are under these Tombstones laid:
Counting our Tapers works of darkness; and
Choosing to see Priests in blew-aprons stand
Rather then in rich Coapes which show the art
Of Sisera's prey Imbrodred in each part:
Then when you saw the Altars Basin said
Why's not the Ewer on the Cubboards head,
Thinking our very Bibles too profane,
Cause you nere bought such Covers in Ducklane.
Loathing all decency, as if yould have
Altars as foul and homely as a Grave.
Had you one spark of reason, you would find
Your selves like Idols to have eyes yet blind.
It Is only some base niggard Heresy
To think Religion loves deformity.
Glory did never yet make God the less,
Neither can beauty defile holiness.
What Is more magnificent then Heaven? yet where
Is there more love and piety then there.
My heart does wish (were possible) to see
Paul's built with precious stones and porphery:
To have our Halls and Galleries outshine
Altars in beauty, is to deck our swine
With Orient Pearl, whilst the deserving Quire
Of God and Angels wallow in the mire:
Our decent Copes only distinction keep
That you may know the Shepherd from the sheep,
As gaudy letters in the Rubric show
How you may holi-dayes from lay-dayes know:
Remember Aarons Robes and you will say
Ladies at Masks are not so rich as they.
Then are th'Priests words like thunderclaps when he
Is lightning like rayed round with Majesty.
May every Temple shine like those of Nile,
And still be free from Rat or Crocodile.
But you will urge both Priest and Church should be
The solemn patterns of humility.
Do not some boast of rags? Cynicks deride
The pomp of Kings but with a greater pride.
Meekness consists not in the clothes but heart,
Nature may be vainglorious well as art;
We way as lowly before God appear
Dressed with a glorious pearl as with a tear;
In his high presence where the Stars and Sun
Do but Eclipse there is no ambition.
You dare admit gay paint upon a wall,
Why then in glass that held Apocriphall?
Our bodies Temples are: look in the eye
The window, and you needs must pictures spy;
Moses and Aaron and the Kings arms are
Daubed in the Church when you the Warden were.
Yet you nere find for Papist: shall we say
Banbury is turned Rome, because we may
See the holy Lamb and Christopher? nay more
The Altar stone set at the Tavern door?
Why cannot the Ox then in the nativity
Be Imagd forth, but Papists Bulls are nigh?
Our pictures to no other end are made
Then is your Time and since your death and spade;
To us they are but mementoes, which present*
Christ best, except his Word and Sacrament.
If 'twere a sin to set up Imagry,
To get a Child were flat Idolary.
The modells of our buildings would be thus
Directions to our houses, ruins to us.
Has not each creature which has daily birth
Something which resembles Heaven or Earth?
Suppose some ignorant Heathen once did bow
To Images, may we not see them now?
Should we love darkness and abhor the Sun
Cause Persians gave it adoration?
And plant no Orchards, because apples first
Made Adam and his lineall race accursed?
Though wine for Bacchus, bread for Ceres went,
Yet both are now used in the Sacrament.
What then if these were Popish relics? few
Windows are elsewhere old but these are new,
And so exceed the former, that the face
Of those come short of the outside of our glass;
Colors are here mixed so, that Rainbows be
(Compared) but clouds without variety.
Art here is Natures envy: this is he,
Not Paracelsus, that by Chemistry
Can make a man from ashes, if not dust,
Producing offsprings of his mind not lust.
See how he makes his maker, and does draw
All that is meant in the Gospel, or in the Law:
Looking upon the Resurrection
Me thoughts I saw the blessed vision,
Where not his face is merely drawn but mind,
Which not with paint but oil of gladness shind:
But when I viewed the next pane, where we have
The God of life transported to his grave,
Light then is dark, all things so dull and dead;
As if that part of the window had been lead.
Jonas his whale did so men's eyes befool
That they would have begd him for the Anatomy School.
That he saw Ships at Oxford one did swear,
Though Isis yet will Barges hardly bear.
Another soon as he the trees espied
Thought them in the Garden on the other side.
See in what state (though on an Ass) Christ went,
This shows more glorious then the Parliament.
Then in what awe Moses his rod does keep
The Seas, as if a frost had glazed the deep;
The raging waves are to themselves a bound;
Some cry help help or horse and man are drowned.
Shadows do every where for substance pass,
You Would think the sands were in a houre-glasse.
You that do live with Surgeons, have you seen
A spring of blood forced from a swelling vein?
So from a touch of Moses rod does jump
A Chataract, the rock is made a pump:
At sight of whose oreflowings many get
Themselves away for fear of being wet.
Have you beheld a sprightfull Lady stand
To have her frame drawn by a painters hand?
Such lively look and presence, such a dress
King Pharoahs Daughters Image does express;
Look well upon her Gown and you will swear
The needle not the pencill has been there:
At sight of her some gallants do dispute
Whether in the Church it is lawful to salute.
Next Jacob kneeling, where his Kids-skins such
As it may well cosen old Isaacs touch:
A Shepherd seeing how thorns went round about
Abraham's ram, would needs have helped it out.
Behold the Dove descending to inspire
The Apostles heads with cloven tongues of fire,
And in a superficies there you will see
The gross dimentions of profundity:
It Is hard to judge which is best built and higher
The arch-roofe in the window or the Quire.
All beasts as in the Ark are lively done,
Nay you may see the shadow of the Sun.
Upon a landscape if you look a while
You Will think the prospect at least forty mile.
There Is none needs now go travel, we may see
At home Jerusalem and Ninevy;
And Sodom now in flames: one glance will dart
Farther then Lynce with Galilaeus art.
Seeing Eliahs Chariot, we fear
There is some fiery prodigy in the air.
When Christ to purge his Temple holds his whip
How nimbly hucksters with their baskets skip.
St. Peter's fishes are so lively wrought,
Some cheapen them and ask when they were caught.
Here Is motion painted too: Chariots so fast
Run, that they are never gone though always past.
The Angels with their Lutes are done so true,
We do not only look but hearken too,
As if their sounds were painted: thus the wit
Of the pencil has drawn more then there can sit.
Thus as (in Archimedes sphere) you may
In a small glass the universe survey:
Such various shapes are too in the Imagry
As age and sex may their own features see.
But if the window cannot show your face
Look under feet the Marble is your glass,
Which too for more then Ornament is there
The stones may learn your eyes to shed a tear:
Yet though their lively shadows delude sense
They never work upon the conscience;
They cannot make us kneel; we are not such
As think there is balsome in their kiss or touch,
That were gross superstition we know;
There is no more power in them then the Popes toe.
The Saints themselves for us can do no good,
Muchless their pictures drawn in glass and wood,
They cannot seal, but since they signify
They may be worthy of a cast oth' eye,
Although no worship: that is due alone
Not to the Carpenters but Gods own Son:
Obedience to blocks deserves the rod;
The Lord may well be then a jealous God.
Why should not Statues now be due to Paul,
As to the Caesar's of the Capital.
How many Images of great heirs, which
Had nothing but the sin of being rich,
Shine in our Temples? kneeling always there
Where when they were alive theyd scarce appear.
Yet shall Christ's Sepulcher have nere a Tomb?
Shall every Saint suffer John Baptists doom?
No limb of Mary stand? must we forget
Christ's cross as soon as past the Alphabet?
Shall not their heads have room in the window who
Founded our Church and our Religion too?
We know that Gods a Spirit, we confess
Thoughts cannot comprehend his name, muchless
Can a small glass his nature: but since he
Vouchsafed to suffer his humanity,
Why may not we (only to puts in mind
Of his Godhead) have his manhood thus enshrind?
Is our Kings person less esteemd because
We read him in our Coins as well as Laws?
Do what we can, whether we think or paint,
All Gods expressions are but weak and faint.
Yet spots in Globes must not be blotted thence
That cannot show the worlds magnificence.
Nor is it fit we should the skill control
Because the Artist cannot draw the soul.
Cease then your railings and your dull complaints;
To pull down Galleries and set up Saints
Is no impiety: now we may well
Say that our Church is truly visible:
Those that before our glass scaffolds prefer,
Would turn our Temple to a theater.
Windows are Pulpits now; though unlearnd, one
May read this Bibles new Edition.
Instead of here and there a verse adornd
Round with a lace of paint, fit to be scornd
Even by vulgar eyes, each pane presents
Whole chapters with both comment and contents,
The cloudy mysteries of the Gospel here
Transparent as the Crystal do appear.
It Is not to see things darkly through a glass,
Here you may see our Savior face to face.
And whereas Feasts come seldom, here is descride
A constant Chrismas, Easter, Whitsontide.
Let the deaf hither come; no matter though
Faiths sense be lost, we a new way can show:
Here we can teach them to believe by the eye;
These silenced Ministers do edify:
The Scriptures rays contracted in a Glass
Like Emblems do with greater virtue pass.
Look in the book of Martyrs and you will see
More by the Pictures then the History.
That price for things in colors often we give
Which we would not take to have them while they live.
Such is the power of painting that it makes
A loving sympathy twixt men and snakes.
Hence then Paul's doctrine may seem more divine*
As Amber through a Glass does clearer shine.
Words pass away, as soon as heard are gone;
We read in books what here we dwell upon,
Thus then there is no more fault in Imagry
Then there is in the Practice of piety,
Both edify: what is in letters there
Is writ in plainer Hierogliphicks here.
It Is not a new Religion we have chose;
It Is the same body but in better clothes.
You Will say they make us gaze when we should pray
And that our thoughts do on the figures stray:
If so, you may conclude us beasts, what they
Have for their object is to us the way.
Did any ere use prospectives to see
No farther then the Glass: or can there be
Such lazy travelers, so given to sin,
As that they will take their dwelling at the Inn.
A Christians sight rests in Divinity,
Signs are but spectacles to help faiths ey^,
God is the Center: dwelling one these words,
My muse a Sabbath to my brain affords.
If their nice wits more solemn proof exact,
Know this was meant a Poem not a Tract.
An ELEGY, Upon the death of Sir John Burrowes, Slain at the Isle of Ree.
OH wound us not with this sad tale, forbear
To press our grief too much, we cannot hear
This all at once, such heavy news as these
Must be sunk gently into us by degrees:
Say Burrowes is but hurt, let us digest
This first, then try our patience for the rest.
Practice us first in lighter griefs, that we
May grow at last strong for this Tragedy.
Do not speak yet he is slain, or if he be
Speak't in a whisper or uncertainty,
As some new unauthoriz'd buzze without
Reason or warrant to confirm our doubt.
Come it is not so, it is but some flying talk
News lately vented in the audacious walk,
Some lie that's drapt in Paul's to stur our fears,
And gatherd by the busy credulous ears.
Will you believe ought comes from thence? why there
The Forts surrendered, and the Rochellere
Sworn English, Tillyes slain, the hostile Kings
Closed in our siege, with such prodigious things,
Which your persuaded vulgar takes and sends
Abroad as tokens to their country friends.
Are all these wonders false? and only this
True among so many impossibilities?
Where truth is worse then any forgery
There we may curse his mouth that does not lie,
When fame goes off with such a black report
Worse then the murdering Canon from the fort,
Worse then the shot that killd him, for but one
Was killd with that, this kills a Nation.
I Will not believe it yet, do we not know
An envious murder famed him dead ere now;
Received went into Ballads and almost
Clapped in Caranto's upon every post:
Why should he not now dye in jest as then,
And we as happily be mocked again?
But it is too certain, here his Coarse we have
Come ore to prove his death and ask a Grave,
A Grave for his good service: only thus
Must we reward thee that wast slain for us,
To mourn and bury thee? and would our fears
As soon were closed too as thy dust and tears.
I would thou might dye wholly here, and be
Forgotten, rather then our misery
Should urge thy fresh remembrance, and recall
Our sorrows often to lament thy fall,
When we shall say hereafter, it is well seen
Burrowes is dead else this had never been.
Why did we thus expose thee, what is now all
That Island to requite thy Funeral;
Though thousand troops of murdered French do lie
It may revenge, it cannot satifie:
They are before hand still, and when we have done
Our worst we are loosers though the Fort be won:
Our conquerers now will weep, when they shall see
This price too dear to buy a victory:
He whose brave fire gave heat to all the rest
That dealt his spirits in each English breast;
From whose divided virtues you might take
So many Captains out and fully make
Them each accomplished with those parts the which
Did jointly his rare furnished soul enrich:
He whose command was ore himself more high
And strictly sour then ore his company:
Not rashly valiant nor yet fearful wise,
His flame had counsel in it, his fury eyes,
Not struck with courage at the drums proud beat
Or made fierce only by the Trumpets heat:
When even pale hearts above their pitch do fly
And for a while do mad it furiously:
His rage was tempered well, no fear could dant
His reason his cold blood was valiant.
Alas those vulgar praises injure thee,
Which now a Poet would as plenteously
Give some boy soldier, one that nere knew more
Then the fine Scabbard and the Scarf he wore.
And we can pitch no higher; thou have outdone
So much our fancy and invention,
It cannot give thee ought. He that of thee
Shall write but half seems to write Poetry:
It is a strong line here to speak yet true,
Hyperboles in others is thy due.
Suffice it that thou were our Armies all;
Whose well tried name did more the French appall
Then all their wants could do, whose inward dread
Famished them more in courage then in bread:
And we may make it a Question, whether most
Besiegd their Castle, Burrowes, or our Host.
Now let me blame thy virtue, it was this
Took thee from us and not our enemies.
Whilst thy unwearied toil no respite takes
And thinks rest sloth, and with parpetual wakes
Continuest night with day and day with night;
Thou wast more ventrous when thou did not fight.
This did expose thee to their fraud and mark;
They durst not seize upon thee but in the dark:
The coward bullet that so often before
Waved thy bold face and did fear thee more
Then thou feardst it, now by its error is
Aimed too too sure: There was no light to miss.
Thus fell our Captain, and the sound be's dead
Has fallen as deep; and like that fatal lead
Lies cold on us. Yet this thy honor be,
Thy hurts our wound, thy death our misery.
Not as the mourning of a private fate
But as some ruin had befallen the State:
The Fleet had been miscarried, Denmark taken
Or the Palatinate been lost again.
So we with down-cast looks astonishd quite
Received this not as news but as a fright:
So we relate thy death, whilst each man here
Contributes to this public loss a tear:
Whilst Fathers tell their children this was he;
And they hereafter to posterity
Range with those Forces that scourged France of old
Burrowes and Talbots name together told.
Whilst we ad this to our quarrel, and now more
Fight to revenge thee then our Land before.
On a white blemish in his Mistress eye.
IF there be hap^y any man that dares
Think that the blemish in the Moon impaires
Her modest beauty: He may be so far
From right, as he that thinks a Swan may mar
A Crystal stream, or Ivory make a smutch
Fairly enameld in a piece of touch.
He that thinks so may as well entertain
A thought, that this fair snowie Crystal stain,
Which (beauteous Mistress) late usurped your eye,
Has done your Heavenly face some injury
He that thinks so nere let him have the bliss
To steal from your sweet lips a Nectar kiss.
Believe me (fair) and so you may, my duty
Is to observe lest on your spotless beauty
The least wrong makes assault, it gives like grace
Being white with the black moal on Venus face;
Yea Venus happily envied your sight
Which wont to dazzle her inferior light,
So put out the one eye cause it proudly strove
With her which most should kindle men in love,
Yet the other to extinguish she forbore
Least then like Cupid you had wounded more.
If you will have me nature search, and tell you
What was the cause that this fair blot befell you:
It may be this, your dainty living torch
Which wont the greedy amorous eye to scorch
With a sweet murdering flame, when it could not wail
For grief of so much slaughter it grew pale:
It may be these two dainty stars in lieu
Oth' grace which they from one another drew,
(Kind twins) would needs like Castor and his brother
Die in their turns so to enrich each other:
Or whether 'twere that Cupid in his flight
Being drawn by such a most imperious light:
Refusing all beds else does sleeping lie
White naked boy in your white spotted eye.
Or thus: Heaven seeing a sun in each your eye
Put out the one to escape a Prodigy;
Yet double grace from hence your beauty won
Now you have a pale Moon and glistering Sun.
Nor think your beauty now disgraced because
You have but one eye, believe me natures Laws
(Being her self but one) admit no store
In perfect things: there is one Sun and no more,
Unlesse't be your left eye; nor Moons more be,
Unless that eye make a plurality:
Which Moon-like spotted is: the worlds but one:
The perfect gem is called an union:
One Earth there is, one Ocean, and the Gods
Joy not in equal numbers, but in odds.
To perfect all this, you my muse assures
There Is still one beauty in the world, that's yours.
To Mr. Hammon Parson of Beudly For pulling down the May Pole.
THe mighty zeal which thou have late put on;
Neither by Prophet nor by Prophets son
As yet prevented, does transport me so
Beyond my self, that though I nere could go
Far in a Verse, and have all rimes defied
Since Hopkins and good Thomas Sternhold died,
Except it were the little pains I took
To please good people in a Prayer Book
That I set forth, or so: yet must I raise
My spirits for thee, who shall in thy praise
Gird up her loins and furiously run
All kind of feet but Satan's cloven one.
Such is thy zeal, so well thou do express it*
That were not like a charm I Would say God bless it.
I needs must say it is a spiritual thing
To rail against the Bishop and the King:
But these are private quarrels, this does fall
Within the compass of the General.
Whether it be a Pole painted or wrought,
Far otherwise then from the wood 'twas brought:
Whose head the Idol-makers hand does crop;
Where a profane bird towering on the top
Looks like the Calfe in Horeb, at whose root
The unyoakt youth does exercise his foot:
Or whether it preserves its boughs befriended
By neighboring bushes and by them attended,
How can thou choose but seeing it complain
That Baals worshipped in the Groves again:
Tell me how cursed an egging with a sting
Of lust do these unwily dances bring,
The simple wretches say they mean no harm
They don't indeed, but yet those actions warm
Our purer blood the more: For Satan thus
Tempts us the more that are more righteous.
Often has a Brother most sincerely gone
Stifled with zeal and contemplation,
When lighting on the place where such repair
He views the Nymph and is clean out in his prayer:
Often has a Sister grounded in a truth,
Seeing the jolly carriage of the youth,
Been tempted to the way that's broad and bad;
And were not for our private pleasures, had
Renounced her little ruff and goggle eye
And quit her self of the fraternity.
What is the mirth? what is the mellody
That sets them in this Gentiles vanity?
When in our Synagogues we rail at sin,
And tell men of the faults that they are in,
With hand and voice so following our theams
That we put out the sides men in their dreams:
Sounds not the Pulpit then which we belabor
Better and holier then does a Tabor;
Yet such is unregenerate man's folly,
He loves the wicked noise, and hates the holy.
If the sins sweet enticing, and the blood
Which now begins to boil, have thought it good
To challenge liberty and recreation
Let it be done in holy contemplation;
Brother and Sister in the field may walk,
Beginning of the holy word to talk,
Of David and Vriahs lovely wife
Of Thamar and her lustful Brothers strife,
Then underneath the hedge that is the next
They may sit down and so act out the Text.
Nor do we want, how ere we live austere,
In winter Sabbath nights some lusty cheer;
And though the Pastors grace which often does hold
Half an hour long make the provision cold,
We can be merry thinking nere the worse
To mend the matter at the second course;
Chapters are read and Hymns are sweetly sung
Jointly commanded by the nose and tongue:
Then on the word we diversely dilate
Wrangling indeed for heat of zeal, not hate,
When at the length an unappeased doubt
Fiercely comes in, and then the lights go out.
Darkness thus makes our peace, and we contain
Our fiery spi^its till we meet again:
Till then no voice is heard, no tongue does go
Unless a tender Sister shreek or so.
Such should be our delights grave and demure,
Not so abominable, and impure
As those thou seekst to hinder: but I fear
Satan will be too strong, his kingdoms there.
Few are the righteous, nor do I know
How we this Idol here shall overthrow,
Since our sincerest Patron is deceased
The number of the righteous is decreased:
But we do hope these times will on and breed
A faction mighty for us. For indeed
We labor all, and every Sister joins
To have regenerate babes spring from our loins:
Besides what many carefully have done
To get the unrighteous man a righteous son.
Then stoutly on, let not thy flocks range lewdly
In their old vanities, thou lamp of Beudly.
One thing I pray thee; do not so much thirst
After Idolatries last fall, but first
Follow thy suite more close, let it not go
Till it be thine as thou woulst have't: for so
Thy successors upon the same entaile
Hereafter may take up the Whitsun-ale.
On Mr. Sambourne, sometime Sheriff of Oxfordshire.
FIe, Scholars, fie, have you such thirsty souls
To swill, quaffe, and carouse in Samborns bouls.
Tell me, mad youngsters, what do you believe
It cost good Sambourne nothing to be Sheriff?
To spend so many beeves, so many weathers,
Maintain so many Caps, so many Feathers.
Again is malt so cheap, this pinching year,
That you should make such havoc of his bear:
I hear you are so many, that you make
Most of his men turn Tapsters for your sake.
And that when he even at the Bench does sit,
You snatch the meat from off the hungry spit:
You keep such hurly burly, that it passes,
Ingurgitating sometimes whole half glasses.
And some of you, forsooth, are grown so fine,
Or else so saucy, as to call for wine;
As if the Sheriff had put such men in trust,
As durst draw out more wine then needs they must.
In faith, in faith, it is not well my Masters,
Nor fit that you should be the Shrieffs tasters.
It were enough, you being such gormondizers,
To make the Shrieffs hence forth turn arrant misers
Remove the Size, to Oxfords foul disgrace,
To Henly on the Thames, or some such place.
He never had complained had it been
A petty Ferkin, or a Kilderkin:
But when a Barrel daily is drunk out,
My Masters, then it is time to look about.
Is this a lie? trow ye, I tell you no,
My Lord High-Chancelor was informed so.
And oh, what would not all the bread in Town
Suffice to drive the Sheriffs liquor down:
But he in hampers must it from hence bring;
Oh most prodigious, and most monstrous thing!
Upon so many loaves of home-made bread,
How long might he and his two men have fed?
He would no doubt the poor they should be fed
With the sweet morsells of his broken bread:
But when that they poor souls for bread did call,
Answer was made, the Scholars eat up all:
And when for broken bear, they crav^d a cup,
Answer was made, the Scholars drunk it up.
And thus I know not how they change the name,
Cut did the deed, and long-tale bore the blame.
Upon the Sheriffs Beer.
OUr Oxford Sheriff of late is grown so wise,
As to reprieve his Beer till next Assize:
A less it was not so strong, it was not so heady,
The Jury sat and found it dead already.
A journey into France.
I Went from England into France,
Not for to learn to sing or dance,
Nor yet to ride nor fence.
Nor yet did go like one of those,
That thence return with half the nose
They carried from hence.
But I to Paris rode along,
Much like John Dory in the song,
Upon a holy tide.
I on an ambling Nagge did get,
I trust he is not paid for yet.
And spurred him on each side.
And to St. Dennis first we came,
To see the sights of Nostredam,
The man that shows them snuffles.
Where who is apt for to believe,
May see our Ladies right arm sleeve,
And eke her old pantafles.
Her breast, her milk, her very gown,
That she did wear in Bethlem Town,
When in the Inn she lay.
No Carpenter could by his trade
Gain so much coin as to have made
A Gown of so rich stuff.
Yet they poor fools think it worth their credit,
They must believe old Joseph did it,
Cause he deserved enough.
There is one of the Crosses Nails,
Whcih who so sees his Bonnet vailes,
And if he will may kneel.
Some say it is false it was never so;
Yet feeling it thus much I know,
It is as true as steel.
There is the Ianthorn which the Jews,
When Judas led them forth did use,
It weighs my weight downright.
But to believe it you must think,
The Jews did put a candle in it,
And then it was wondrous light.
There Is one Saint there has lost his nose,
Another his head, but not his toes,
His elbow and a thumb.
But when we had seen these holy rags,
We went to the Inn and took our Nags,
And so away did come.
We came to Paris on the Seen,
It Is wondrous fair, but nothing clean,
It Is Europes greatest Town.
How strong it is I need not tell it,
For all the world may easily smell it,
That walk it up and down.
There many strange things are to see,
The Palace, the great Gallery
The Palace does excel.
The New-bridge, and Statues there:
At Nostredam St. Christopher,
The Steeple bears the bell.
For learning the University;
And for old cloths the Frippery,
The house the Queen did build.
St. Innocents whose earth devours
Dead corpse in four and twenty hours,
And there the King was killed.
The Basteel, and St. Dennis street,
The Shatteet just like London Fleet,
The Arsenall no toy.
But if you will see the prettiest thing,
Go to the Court and see the King,
Oh it is a hopeful boy.
He is of all his Dukes and Peers,
Reverencd for his wit and years:
Nor must you think it much.
For he with little switch can play,
And can make fine dirt Pies of clay,
Oh never King made such.
A Bird that can but kill a fly,
Or prate, does please his Magesty,
It Is known to every one.
The Duke of Guise gave him a Parrot,
And he had twenty Cannons for it,
For his great Gallioone.
Oh that I ere might have the hap
To get that Bird which in the Map
Is called the Indian Duck;
I Would give it him, and hope to be
As great as Guise or Liciny,
Or else I had bad luck.
Birds about his Chamber stand,
And he them feeds with his own hand;
It Is his humility:
And if they do want any thing,
They need but whistle for their King,
And he comes presently.
But now for these good parts he must
Needs be instil'd Lewis the just,
Great Henryes lawful heir.
When to his style to add more words,
They had better call him King of Birds,
Then of the lost Navarre.
He has besides a pretty firke,
Taught him by nature how to work
In Iron with much ease:
Sometimes into the Forge he goes,
And there he knocks, and there he blows,
And makes both locks and keys.
Which puts a doubt in every one,
Where he be Mars or Vulcans son;
Some few believe his mother,
Yet let them all say what they will,
I am resolved and do think still,
As much the one or the other.
The people don't dislike the youth,
Alleging reasons. For in truth
Mothers should honored be.
Yet others say he loves her rather,
As well as ere she loved his Father,
And that's notoriously.
His Queen a little pretty wench,
Was born in Spain, speaks little French,
Nere like to be a Mother:
For her incestuous house could not
Have children unless they were begot
By Uncle or by Brother.
Now why should Lewis being so just,
Content himself to take his lust,
With his Licina's mate:
And suffer his little pretty Queen,
From all her race that ere has been
So to degenerate.
Twere charity for to be known
To love strange chlldren as his own;
And why it is no shame:
Unless he yet would greater be,
Then was his Father Henry,
Who some thought did the same
BEN: JOHNSON To Burlace.
WHy though I be of a prodigious wast,
I am not so voluminous and vast
But there are lines wherewith I may be embraced*
It Is true, as my womb swells, so my backstoops,
And the whole lump grows round, deformed and droops;
But yet the run of Heidleb: has hoops.
You are not tied by any Painters Law,
To square my circle, I confess, but draw
My superficies, that was all you saw:
Which if in compass of no art it came
To be describ^d, but by a Monagram,
With one great blot you have drawn me as I am.
But whilst you curious were to have it be
An Archetype for all the world to see,
You have made it a brave piece, but not like me.
Oh had I now the manner, mastery, might,
Your power of handling shadow, air, and sprite,
How I could draw, behold, and take delight;
But you are he can paint, I can but write,
A Poet has no more then black and white,
Nor has he flattering colors, or false light.
Yet when of friendship I would draw the face,
A letterd mind, and a large heart would place
To all posterity, I would write Burlace.
Upon the death of Prince HENRY.
KEep station nature, and rest Heaven sure
On thy supporters shoulders, lest past cure
Thou dashed by ruin fall with a great weight;
Twill make thy Basis shrink, and lay thy height
Low as the Center. Death and horror wed
To vent their teeming mischief: Henryes dead.
Compendious eloquence of death, two words
Breath stronger terror then plague, fire, or swords
Ere conquered. Why, it is Epitaph and Verse
Enough to be prefixed on natures Hearse
At Earths last dissolution. Whose fall
Will be less griveous, though more General.
For all the woe ruin ere buried,
Lies in this narrow compass: Henry's dead.
On the BIBLE.
BEhold this little Volume here enrold,
It Is the Almighties Present to the world.
Hearken Earth, Earth: Each senseless thing can hear
His makers thunder, though it want an ear.
Gods word is senior to his work; nay rather
If rightly weighd, the world may call it Father.
God spoke, it was done: this great foundation
Was but the makers exhalation,
Breathd out in speaking. The least work of man
Is better then his word; but if we scan
Gods word aright, his works far short do fall:
The word is God, the works are creatures all.
The sundry pieces of this general frame
Are dimmer letters, all which spell the same
Eternal word. But these cannot express
His greatness with such easy readiness,
And therefore yield. For heaven shall pass away,
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, shall all obey
To light one general boon-fire; but his word
His builder up, his all destroying sword
Yet still survives, no jot of that can dye,
Each tittle measures immortality.
Once more this mighty word his people greets,
Thus lapp^d and thus swathed up in Paper sheets.
Read here Gods Image with a zealous eye,
The legible and written Deity.
Upon some pieces of work in York House.
VIew this large Gallery faced with mats and say,
Is it not purer then Joves milky way?
Which should he know, mortals might justly fear
He would forsake his Heaven and sojourne here.
Here on a River rides a silver swan,
Vailing her swelling sails, and has began
Her merry will, and left Meander dry,
Rather intending in this place to dye.
So curious is the work, the art so sweet,
That men stand back lest they should wet their feet.
Here Is Joseph and his Brethren, he in state
Enthroned in a Chair, his dream his fate.
His brethren they stand bare, and though the board
Be dumb, each posture of them call him Lord.
Joseph conceals his tears with hard restraint,
Which would gush out should they not spoil the paint.
Under a tree whose arms were wide displayed
And broidered with blossoms, Venus laid
Her naked body, which when men espy,
Modesty 'gins to check the saucy eye,
They steal a look; but why? lest she, they say;
Seeing them look should rise and run away.
Well does the Sun refuse his face to show,
Blushing to see so fair a face below:
Which had Pigmalion seen so truly fair,
He would have married straight and saved his prayer.
For life, which was the others only bliss
He begged of Venus, art has given this.
Divert your eye from this seducing sight,
And see the Dear and Heardgrooms harmeles fight,
One gasping lies, where with consenting strife,
The Painter and the poorman tug for life.
Well may you say that see his hanging head,
The Pictures lively, though the man be dead.
Open the door and let my eyes come in,
A place that would entice a Saint to sin;
Almost too dear for man to tread upon,
A floor all diaperd with Marble stone,
Feet touch our feet. This mystery beguiles
Philosophy of many thousand wiles.
Nay to increase the miracle; with ease
We here become our own Antipodes.
What ruder age did think the best of all,
(...) hangs on every wall,
Quite hung with it, where every eye may see
Not more what we do seem then what we be.
The glass so steals us from us that you would swear
That we the shadow that the substance were,
Which does not take impression but does give.
Here might Narcissus see himself and live;
Nor for the pleasure of one fading hour,
Eternally be damned into a flower.
Sir Henry Wotton on Q: ELIZABETH.
YE glorious trifles of the East,
Whose estimation fancies raise,
Pearls, Rubies, Saphirs, and the rest
Of precious Gems, what is your praise
When as the Diamond shows his raise?
Ye Violets that first appear,
By your blew Purple Matles known,
Like the proud virgins of the year,
As if the spring were all your own,
What are you when the Rose is blown?
Ye lesser beauties of the night,
That weakly satisfies our eyes
More by your number then your light,
Like common people of the skies,
What are ye when the Moon does rise?
Ye warbling chanters of the wood,
That still our ears with natures lays,
Thinking your passions understood
By accents weak. What is your praise
When Philomel her notes does raise?
So when my Princess shall be seen
In sweetness of her looks and mind,
By virtue first then choice a Queen;
Tell whether she were not assing'd
To eclipse the glory of her kind.
The Rose, the Violet, and the whole spring
May to her breath for sweetness run,
The Diamonds darkened in the ring;
When she appears the Moons undone,
As at the brightness of the Sun.
On the Princes birth.
WEll fare the Muses which in well chimb'd verse
Our Princes noble birth do sing,
I have a heart as full of joy as theirs,
As full of duty to my King:
And thus I tell
How every bell
Did sound forth Englands merry glee;
The boon-fires too
With much ado,
It were great pity to belie her,
Made London seem as all one fire;
A joyful sight to see.
The wisest Citizens were drunk that day,
With Bear and wine most soundly paid:
The Constables in duty reeld away,
And charged others them to aid.
To see how soon
Both Sun and Moon
And seven Stars forgotten be:
But all the night
Their heads were light
With much exalting of their horn,
Because the Prince of Wales was borne;
A joyful sight to see.
The Dutchmen they were drunk six days before
And prayed us to excuse their joy.
The Frenchmen vowed nere to be sober more,
But drink healths to the royal boy
In their own wine
Both brisk and fine.
The valient Irish cram a cree,
It pledged has
In Usquebath:
And being in a joviall vain
They made a bog even of their brain:
A joyful sight to see.
The Scots in bonny Ale their joy did sing,
And wished this royal babe a man,
That they might beg him for to be their King,
And let him rule them when he can*
The Spaniards made
A shrug and said,
After my pipe come follow me;
Canary Sack
Did go to rack,
Our Gentlemen with them took part,
The Papists drunk it with an heart:
A joyful sight to see.
A Welsh for joy her cozen Prince was born,
Do mean to change St. David's day,
Swearing no leeks hereafter shall be worn
But on the twenty ninth of May.
None so merry
Drinking Perry
And Metheglin on her knee,
Every man
His crock and can:
Thus armed the Devil they defied,
And durst tell Beelzebub she lied:
A joyful sight to see.
But whilst the bells about us made a din,
And boon-fires for our Prince we make;
The Puritans do only burn within
Spiritual fagots for his sake,
Should they maintain
A fire profane
They Would rather martyrs wish to be,
But this remit
Till Judges sit,
Next Sessions some or other may
Find wholesome Tyburne in their way:
A joyful sight to see.
A Letter to his Mistress.
GO happy Paper, by command
Take liberty to kiss an hand
More white then any part of thee,
Although with spots thou graced be.
The glory of the chiefest day,
The morning air perfumed in May:
The firstborn Rose of all the spring,
The down beneath the Turtles wing;
A Lute just reaching to the ear,
What ere is soft is sweet is fair,
Are but her shreds, who fills the place
And sum of every single grace.
As in a child the nurse discries,
The mothers lips, the fathers eyes,
The uncles nose, and does apply
Honors to every part; so I
In her could analize the store
Of all the choice ere nature wore;
Each private piece to mind may call
Some Earth, but none can match it all;
Poor Emblems they can but express
One Element of comeliness;
None are so rich to show in one
All simples of perfection:
Nor can the Pencil represent
More then the outward lineament;
Then who can limb the Portraiture
Of beauties live behavior:
Or what can figure every kind
Of jewels that adorn the mind?
Thought cannot draw her Picture full,
Each thought to her is gross, is dull.
On the Earl of Pembroke's Death.
DId not my sorrows sighd into a verse
Deck the sad pomp and mourning of thy hearse;
I Would swear thy death the birth of hasty fame,
Begot to try our sorrows with thy name.
I Will not believe it yet; it cannot sort
With earnest thou should dye of mere report:
News cannot kill, nor is the common breath,
Fate, or infection. Shall I think that death
Struck with so rude a hand, so without art
To kill, and use no Preface to his dart.
Come Pembrocke lives. Oh do not fright our ears
With such destroying truth, first raise our fears
And say he is not well; that will suffice
To force a river from the public eyes.
Or if he must be dead, Oh let the news
Speak't in a stonish'd whisper, let it use
Some phrase without a voice, 'twould too much cloud
Our apprehension should it speak aloud.
Let Us hear it in a Riddle, or so told
As if the laboring sense grieved to unfold
Its doubtful woe. Had thou endured the gout,
Or lingering of thy Doctor (which no doubt
Had bin the worse disease) the public zeal
Had conquered fate and saved thee; but to steal
A close departure from us, and to dye
Of no disease, but of a Prophecy,
Is mystery not fate: nor were thou killed
Like other men, but like a type fulfilld.
So suddenly to dye is to deceive;
Nor was it death, but a not taking leave:
It Is true the shortness does forbid to weep,
For so our Fathers dying fell asleep:
So Enoch whilst his God he did adore,
Instead of suffering death was seen no more.
But oh this is too much, and we should wrong
Thy ashes, thought we not this speed to long.
Methinks a dream had served, or silent breath,
Or a still pulse, or something like to death.
Now twere detraction to suppose a tear,
Or the sad weeds which the glad mourners wear
Could value such a loss. He that mourns thee
Must bring an eye can weep an Elegy:
A look that would save blacks, whose heavy grace
Chides mirth, and wears a funeral in the face:
Whose sighs are with such feeling sorrow blown
That all the air he draws returns a groan.
That grief does nearest fit that is begun
When the year ends and when the blacks are done.
Thou needst no gilded Tomb, superfluous cost
Is best bestowed on them whose names are lost.
Had thou no Statue, thy great memory
Were Marble to it self, the bravery
Of Jet or rich Enammel were misspent
Where the brave Course is its own ornament.
In thee shine all high parts, which falsely wit
Or flattering raptures for their Lord beget,
When they would faigne an Epitaph, and write
As if their grief made legs when they indite;
Such dutiful untruths, that ere he grieve,
The Readers first toil is how to believe.
Thy greatness was no Idol, state in thee
Received its luster from humility.
He that will blaze thy Coat, and only looks
How thou were Noble by the Heralds books,
Mistakes thy lineage; and admiring blood,
Forgets thy best descent, virtue and good.
These are too great for Scutcheons, and made thee
Without forefathers thine own Pedigree.
Upon his chaste Mistress.
LOve, give me leave to serve thee, and be wise;
To keep thy torch in, and restore blind eyes:
I Will such a flame into my bosom take,
As Martyrs court when they embrace the stake;
No dull and smoaky fire, but heat divine,
That burns not to consume but to refine.
I have a Mistress for perfections rare
In every eye, but in my thoughts most fair.
Like tapers on the Altar shine her eyes,
Her breath is the perfume of sacrifice:
And wheresoever my fancy would begin,
Still her perfection lets Religion in.
I touch her as my beads without devout care,
And come unto my courtship as my prayer.
We sit and talk and kiss away the hours
As chastely, as the mornings dew kiss flowers.
We were no flesh, but one another greet
As blessed souls in separation meet.
I might have lustful thoughts to her of all
Earths heavenly quire the most Angelical;
But looking in my breast her form I find
That like my Guardian Angel keeps my mind
From rude attempts, and when affections stir
I calm all passions with one thought of her.
Thus they whose reason loves, and not their sense,
The spirit love. Thus on intelligence
Reflects upon his like, and by chaste loves
In the same sphere this and that Angel moves:
Nor is this barren love: each noble thought
Begets another, and that still is brought
To bed of more, virtues and grace increase;
And such a numerous issue nere can cease:
Where children (though great blessings) only be
Pleasures reprieved to some postery.
Beasts love like men, if men in lust delight,
And call that love which is but appetite.
When Essence meets with Essence, and souls join
In mutual knots, that's the true nuptial twine.
Such Lady is my love, and such is true;
All other love is to your sex, not you.
On a Painters handsome Daughter.
SUch are your Fathers Pictures, that we do
Believe they are not counterfeit but true:
So lively and so fresh that we may swear
Instead of draughts he has placed creatures there,
People not shadows; which in time will be
Not a dead number but a colony.
Nay more; yet some think they have skill and arts,
That they are well bred, pictures of good parts;
And you your self fair Julia do disclose
Such beauties that you may seem one of those,
That having motion gaind at least and sense,
Began to know it self and stole from thence;
Whilst thus his aemulous art with nature strives,
Some think h'hath none, others he has two wives.
If you love none (fair maid) but look on all,
You then among his set of Pictures fall;
If that you look on all and love all men,
The Pictures too will be your Sisters then.
Your choice must show you are of another fleece,
And tell you are his daughter not his piece.
All other proofs are vain, go not about;
We two will embrace, and love, and clear the doubt.
When you have brought forth your like the world will know
You are his Child; what Picture can do so?
To Dr. Price writing Anniversaries on Prince HENRY.
Even so dead Hector thrice was triumphd on
The walls of Troy, thrice slain when fate had don:
So did the barbarous Greeks before their host
Turmoile his ashes and profane his Ghost:
As Henryes vault, his pure and sacred hearse
Is torn and battered by thy Anniverse.
Wast not enough nature and strength were foes,
Unless thou yearly murder him in prose.
Or did rhou hope thy ravening verse could make
A louder echo then the Almanac.
Trust me November does more ghastly look
In Dades and Hopsons penniworth then thy book;
And sadder record their sixth figure bears,
Then thy false Printed and ambitious tears.
And were not for Chrismas which is nigh,
When fruits, when eaten and digested Pie
Call for more paper, no man could make shift
How to employ thy writing to his thrift.
Wherefore forbear for pity or for shame,
And let some richer pen redeem his name
From rottenness; then leave him captive, since
So vile a price nere ransomed such a Prince.
A Reply upon an Answer to the former Copy.
NOr is it grieved, grave you the memory
Of such a story, such a book as he,
That such a Copy might through the world be read:
Yet Henry lives though he be buried.
It could be wishd that every day would bear
Him one good witness that he still were here.
That sorrow ruled the year, and by this Sun
Each man could tell thee how the day had run*
O 'twere an honest cause for him could say,
I have bin busy and wept out the day
Remembering him. His name would ever last,
Were such a trophy, such a banner placed
Upon his grave as this; Here a man lies
Was killed by Henryes dart not destinies.
But for a Cobbler to throw up his cap
And cry the Prince the Prince; O dire mishap!
Or a Geneva bridegroom after Grace
To throw his spouse in the fire, or scratch her face
To the tune of the lamentation, and delay
His friday capon to the Sabbath day;
Or an old Popish Lady half vowed dead
To fast away the day in gingerbread;
For him to write such Annals: all these things
Do open laughter and shut up griefs springs.
Wherefore Vertumnus if you will Print the next,
Bring better notes, or choose a fitter text.
On a Lady that dyed of the small pox.
O Thou deformed unwomanlike desease!
That plowest up flesh and blood and sowest there pease;
And leave such prints on beauty if thou come,
As clouted shoon do in a floare of loame:
Thou that of faces honicombs do make,
And of two breasts two cullinders; forsake
Thy deadly trade, thou now art rich, give ore
And let our curses call thee forth no more,
Or if thou needs wilt magnify thy power
Go where thou art invoked every hour
Amongst the gamesters, where they name thee thick
At the last man or the last pocky nick.
Thou who have such superfluous store of gain,
Why strikst thou one whose ruin is thy shame?
O thou have murdered where thou should have kissed,
And where thy shaft was needful, there thou mist.
Thou should have chosen out some homely face
Where thy ill-favourd kindness might add grace,
That men might say, how beauteous once was she,
And what a curious piece was mard by thee:
Thou should have wrought on some such Lady-mould
That never loved her Lord nor ever could
Until she were deformed; thy tyranny
Were then within the rules of charity.
But upon one whose beauty was above
All sorts of art, whose love was more then love.
On her to fix thy ugly counterfeit,
Was to erect a Piramid of jet,
And put out fire; to dig a turfe from Hell,
And place it where a gentle soul should dwell*
A soul which in the body would not stay,
When it was no more a body, nor pure clay,
But a huge ulcer; o thou heavenly race,
Thou soul that shunst the infection of thy case,
Thy house, thy prison, pure soul, spotless fair,
Rest where no heat, no cold, no compounds are*
Rest in that country, and enjoy that ease,
Which thy frail flesh denied, and thy disease.
Upon the Kings Return to the City of London when he came last thither from
Scotland and was entertained there by the Lord Mayor.
SIng and be merry King Charles is come back,
Lets drink round his health with Claret and Sack:
The Scots are all quiet, each man with his pack
May cry now securely, come see what you lack.
Sing and be merry boys, sing and be merry,
London's a fine Town so is Londonderry.
Great preparation in London is made
To bid the King welcome each man gives his aid,
With thanksgiving cloths themselves they arrayd
(I should have said holy day) but I was afraid.
Sing etc.
They stood in a row for a congratulation
Like a company of wild-geese in the old fashion:
Railes in the Church are abomination,
But Railes in the street are no innovation.
Sing etc.
My Lord Mayor himself on cock-horse did ride
Not like a young Gallant with a sword by his side
It Was carried before him, but there was espied
The crosse-bar in the hilt by a Puritan eyed.
Sing etc.
Two dozen of Aldermen ride two by two,
Their Gowns were all scarlet, but their noses were blew*
The Recorder made a speech, if report it be true,
He promised more for them then ere they will do.
Sing etc.
They should be good subjects to the King and the State,
The Church they would love, no Prelates would hate;
But methinks it was an ominous fate
They brought not the King through Bishops-gate.
Sing etc.
The Citizens rod in their Golden Chains
Fetched from St. Martyns, no region of Spaines:
It seems they were trobl'd with Gundamors pains,
Some held by their pummels and some by their manes.
Sing etc.
In Jackets of Velvet, without Gown or Cloak,
Their faces were wainscot, their hearts were of oak:
No Trainbands were seen, no drums beat a stroke,
Because City Captains of late have been broke.
Sing etc.
The King Queen and Prince, the Palsgrave of Rhine
With two branches more of the royal vine
Rod to the Guild Hall where they were to dine,
There could be no lack where the Conduits run wine.
Sing etc.
Nine hundred dishes in the bill of fare
For the King and Nobles prepared there were;
There could be no less a man might well swear
By the widgeons and woodcocks and geese that were there.
Sing etc.
Though the dinner were long yet the grace was but short,
It was said in the fashion of the English Court.
But one passage more I have to report,
Small thanks for my pains I look to have fort.
Sing etc.
Down went my Lord Mayor as low as his knee,
Then up went the white of an Aldermans eye:
We thought the Bishops grace enlarged should be
(Not the Archbishops) no such meanign had he.
Sing etc.
When Is Lordship kneeld down we lookd he should pray,
(So he did heartily but in his own way)
The cup was his book, the collect for the day
Was a health to King Charles, all out he did say.
Sing etc.
The form of prayer my Lord did begin
The rest of the Aldermen quickly were in:
One Warner they had of the greatness of the sin
Without dispensation from Burton or Prin.
Sing etc.
Before they had done it grew toward night,
(I forget my Lord Mayor was made a Knight:
The Recorder too with another wight,
Whom I cannot relate, for the torches are light.
Sing etc.
Up and away by St. Paul's they pass;
When a prickear'd brayd like a Puritan ass
Some thought he had been scared with the painted glass
He swore not but cried high Popery by the mass.
Sing etc.
The Quire with Music on a Scaffold they see
In Surplices all their Tapers burnt by,
An Anthem they sung most melodiously;
If this were Popery I confess it was high.
Sing etc.
From thence to White Hall there was made no stay
Where the King gave them thanks for their love that day,
Nothing was wanting if I could but say
The House of Commons had met him half way.
Sing etc.
Upon the Kings-Book bound up in a Cover colored with His Blood.
LEt abler pens commend these leaves; whose fame
Spreads through all languages, through time whose name;
Nor can those Tongues add glory to this book
So great, as they from the translation took.
Shine then rare piece in thine own Charles his ray;
Yet suffer me thy covering to display,
And tell the world that this plain sanguine vail
A beauty far more glorious does conceal
Then masks of Ladies: and although thou be
A Book, where every leafe's a Library
Filled with choice Gems of the Arts, Law, Gospel;
The chiefest Jewel is the Cabinet.
A shrine much holier then the Saint; you may yet
To this as harmless adoration pay,
As those that kneel to Martyrs tombs, for know,
This sacred blood does Rome a Relic show
Richer then all her shrines, and then all those
More hallowed far, far more miraculous.
Thus clothed go forth, blessed Book, and yield to none
But to the Gospel, and Christ's blood alone.
Thy Garments now like his; so just the same,
As he from Bozra, and the wine press came;
Both purpled with like gore: where you may see
This on the Scaffold, that upon the Tree
Poured out to save whole Nations. O may't lie
Speechless like that, and never never cry
Vengence, but pray father forgive these too,
(Poor ignorant men!) they know not what they do.
Upon the Nuptials of John Talbot Esquire, and Mistress Elizabeth Kite.
COme grand Apollo tune my Lyre
To harmonize in the Muses Quire,
Give me a draught of Helicon,
Let Pindus and Parnassus prove
Propitious in the slights of love,
Though distanc'd now at Eberton.
A consecrated quill I know,
Plucked from the silvered Swan of Po,
Love-tales is only fit to write,
But since it is voted by the Stoic,
Not place nor pen does make the Poet,
I Will venture with a plume of the Kite.
Not for to blazen the great name
Of the Talbots never dying fame
Eternized in all Histories,
I Will only say the Trojan wit,
Which Helen stole, must now submit
To Talbot in loves mysteries.
For neither Egypt, Troy, nor Greece,
Nor Colchis with her Golden-Fleece
Has ever ought produced so rare
In virtue, beauty, every Grace
That dignifies the mind or face,
Which with this Couple may compare.
The holy Priest has firmly tied
The Gordian knot, that twill abide
The touch of what is Canonical;
And the Pigmie Justice has fast chained
The Bugbeare Act, though it be proclaimed
As simple, as Apocryphal*
Let Us hasten therefore them to bring
To the pleasant fountain whence does spring
The joys of Cupids Monarchy;
There tumbling on their Nuptial bed
To batter for a Maidenhead,
Twind like the Zodiac Geminie.
Hence dull eyed Somnus think not now
T'inthrone upon this Ladies brow,
Far choycer joys do her invite:
For she is now anchored in a Haven
Where sacred Hymen her has given
An other Sovereign of the night.
Come draw the curtains, lets depart,
And leave two bodies in one heart
Devoted to a restless rest.
And when their virgin Lamps expire,
May there arise from the same fire
An other Phoenix in the Nest.
Upon Aglaura Printed in Folio.
BY this large margent did the Poet mean
To have a Comment wrote upon the Scene?
Or else that Ladies, who do never look
But in a Poem or in a Play-book,
May in each page have space to scrible down
When such a Lord or fashion came to Town;
As Swains in Almanacks their counts do keep their sheep.
When their cow calv'd and when they bought
Ink is the life of Paper, it is meet then
That this which escaped the Press should feel the pen.
A room with one side furnished, or a face
Painted half way, is but a foul disgrace.
This great voluminous Pamphlet may be said
To be like one who has more hair then head:
More excrement then body, trees which sprout
With broadest leaves have still the smallest fruit.
When I saw so much white I did begin
To think Aglaura either did lie in,
Or else did penance: never did I see
Unless in Bills dashed in the Chancery
So little in so much, as if the feet
Of Poetry were sold like Law by the sheet.
Should this new fashion last but one half year,
Poets as Clarks would make our Paper dear.
Does not that Artist err and blast his fame
That sets out Pictures lesser then the frame:
Was ever Chamberlain so mad to dare
To lodge a Child in the great Bed of Ware.
Aglaura would please better did she lie
In The narrow bounds of an Epitome.
Those pieces that are wove of the finest twist,
As Velvet, Plush, have still the smallest list.
She that in Persian habits made such brags
Degenerates in the excess of rags:
Who by her Giant bulk this only gains
Perchance in Libraries to hang in chains.
It Is not in books as choth, we never say
Make London measure when we buy a Play,
But rather have them pared; those leaves are fair
To the judicious which most spotted are.
Give me the sociable pocket books,
These empty Folio's only please the Cooks.
Venus lachrimans.
WAke my Adonis do not dye,
One life's enough for thee and I;
Where are thy words, thy wiles,
Thy love, thy frowns, thy smiles;
Alas in vain I call,
One death has snatched them all:
Yet death's not deadly in thy face,
Death in those looks it self has grace.
It Was this, it was this I feared
When thy pale ghost appeard:
This I presaged when thundering Jove
Tore the best myrtle in my Grove;
When my sick rosebuds lost their smell,
And from my Temples untouched fell;
And it was for some such thing
My Dove did hang her wing.
Whether art thou my Diety gone,
Venus in Venus there is none:
In vain a Goddess now am I
Only to grieve and not to dye.
But I will love my grief,
Make tears my tears relief:
And sorrows shall to me
A new Adonis be;
And this no fates can rob me of, whiles I
A goddess am to weep but not to dye.
An Ode in the praise of Sack.
1.
HEar me as if thy ears had palate Jack,
I sing the praise of Sack:
Hence with Apollo and the muses nine,
Give me a cup of wine.
Sack will the soul of Poetry infuse,
Be that my theme and muse.
But Bacchus I adore no Diety,
Nor Bacchus neither unless Sack he be.
2.
Let us by reverend degrees draw nere,
I feel the Goddess here.
Lo I, dread Sack, an humble Priest of thine
First kiss this cup thy shrine,
That with more hallowed lips and enlarged soul
I may receive the whole:
Till Sibill-like full with my God I lie,
And every word I speak be Propehsie.
3.
Come to this Altar you that are oppressed,
Or otherwise distressed,
Here Is that will further grivances prevent,
Without a Parliament:
With fire from hence if once your blood be warm feel
Nothing can do you harm;
When thou art armed with Sack, thou can not
Though thunder strike thee; that has made thee steel.
4.
Art sick man? do not bid for thy escape
A cock to Aesculape;
If thou would prosper, to this Altar bring
Thy grateful offering,
Touch but the shrine, that does the God enclose,
And straight thy fever goes
Whilst thou immaginst this, he is given thee
Not only heath but immortality.
5.
Though thou were dumb as is the scaly fry
In Neptunes royalty:
Drink but as they do, and new ways shall find
To utter thy whole mind;
When Sack more several language has infused
Then Babels builders used:
And whenever thou thy voice shall raise,
No man shall understand but all shall praise.
6.
Has cruel nature so thy senses bound
Thou can not judge of sounds?
Lo where yon narrow fountain scatters forth
Streams of an unknown worth:
The heavenly music of that murmr there
Would make thee turn all ear;
And keeping time with the harmonious flood,
Twixt every bubble thou shall cry good good.
7.
Has fortune made thee poor, do thou desire
To heap up glorious mire?
Come to this stream where every drop's a Pearl
Might buy an Earl:
Drench thy self soundly here and thou shall rise
Richer then both the Indies.
So may thou still enjoy with full content
Midas his wish without his punishment.
8.
All this can Sack, and more then this Sack can,
Give me a fickle man
That would be somewhat feign but knows not what,
There is a cure for that:
Let him quaffe freely of this powerful flood,
He shall be what he would.
To all our wishes Sack content does bring,
And but our selves can make us every thing.
An Epitaph on some bottles of Sack and Claret laid in sand.
ENter and see this tomb (Sirs) do not fear
No spirits but of Sack will fright you here:
Weep ore this tomb, your waters here may have
Wine for their sweet companion in this grave.
A dozen Shakespears here interred do lie;
Two dozen Johnsons full of Poetry.
Unhappy Grapes could not one pressing do,
But now at last you must be buried too:
Twere commendable sacrilege no doubt
Could I come at your graves to steal you out.
Sleep on but scorn to dye, immortal liquor,
The burying of thee thus shall make thee quicker.
Mean while thy friends pray loud that thou may have
A speedy resurrection from thy grave.
How to choose a Mistress.
HEr for a Mistress would I feign enjoy
That hangs out lip and pouts at every toy;
Speaks like a wag, is bold; dares stoutly stand
And bids love welcome with a wanton hand:
If she be modest wise and chaste of life,
Hang her she is good for nothing but a wife.
Upon a Picture.
BEhold those fair eyes, in whose sight
Sparkles a luster no less bright
Then that of rising Stars when they
Would make the night outshine the day.
To those pure lips the humming be,
May as to blooming Roses flee:
The wanton wind about does hurl,
Courting in vain that lovely curle;
And makes a murmr in despair,
To dally the unmooved hair.
View but the cheeks where the red Rose
And Lilly white a beauty grows,
So orient as might adorn
The flowing of the brightest morn.
Sure it is no Picture, nere was made
So much perfection in a shade:
Her shape is soul enough to give
A senseless Marble power to live.
If this an Idol be, no eye
Can ever escape Idolatry.
On Ladies Attire.
YOu Ladies that wear Cypress vailes,
Turned lately to white linen rayles;
And to your girdles wear your bands,
And show your arms instead of hands.
What could you do in Lent so meet
As, fittest dress, to wear a sheet?
It Was once a band, it is now a cloak;
A acorne one day proves a oak.
Wear but your linnens to your feet
And then the band will be a sheet.
By which device and wise excess
You do your penance in a dress:
And none shall know by what they see
Which Ladies censured, and which free.
The Answer.
BLack Cypress vailes are shrowds of night,
White linen railes are rays of light,
Which to our girdles though we wear
We have arms to keep your hands off there.
Who makes our bands to be our cloak,
Makes John a styles of John a noak.
We wear our linen to our feet,
Yet need not make our band our sheet*
Your Clergy wear as long as we,
Yet that implies conformity.
Be wise, recant what you have writ,
Least you do penance for your wit;
And least loves charms do weave a string
To tie you as you did your ring.
On a Gentlewoman that had the Smallpox.
A Beauty smoother then the Ivory plain,
Late by the Pox injuriously was slain.
It Was not the Pox, love shot a thousand darts
And made those pits for graves to bury hearts:
But since that beauty has regaind its light,
Those hearts are doubly slain it shines so bright.
On a fair Gentlewomans blistered lip.
HIde not your sprouting lip, nor kill
The juicie bloom with bashful skill*
Know it is an amorous dew
That swells to court your coral hew.
And what a blemish you esteem
To other eyes a Pearl may seem;
Whose watery growth is not above
The thrifty seize which Pearls do love:
And does so well become that part
That chance may seem a secret art:
Does any judge the face less fair
Whose tender silk a moral does bear?
Are apples thought less sound and sweet
When honey specks and red do meet?
Or will a Diamond shine less clear
If in the midst a soil appear?
Then is your lip made fairer by
Such sweetness of deformity.
The Nectar which men strive to sip
Springs like a well upon your lip.
Nor does it show immodesty,
But overflowing chastity.
O who will blame the fruitful trees
When too much gum or sap he sees?
Here nature from her store does send
Only what other parts can lend.
If lovely buds ascend so high,
The root below cannot be dry.
To his Mistress.
Keep on your mask and hide your eye,
For in beholding you I dye.
Your fatal beauty Gorgon-like
Dead with astonishment does strike.
Your piercing eyes that now I see
Are worse then Basilisks to me.
Shut from mine eyes those hills of snow,
Their melting valley do not show:
Those azure paths lead to despair,
Oh vex me not, forbear, forbear;
For while I thus in torments dwell,
The sight of Heaven is worse then Hell.
In those fair cheeks two pits do lie
To bury those slain by your eye:
So this at length does comfort me,
That fairly buried I shall be:
My grave with Roses, Lillies, spread,
Methinks it is life for to be dead:
Come then and kill me with your ^ye,
For if you let me live, I dye.
When I perceive your lips again
Recover those your eyes have slain,
With kisses that (like balsome pure)
Deep wounds as soon as made do cure;
Methinks it is sickness to be sound,
And there is no health to such a wound.
When in your bosom I behold
Two hills of snow yet never cold:
Which lovers, whom your beauty kills,
Revive by climing those your hills.
Methinks there is life in such a death
That gives a hope of sweeter breath.
Then since one death prevails not where
So many Antidotes are nere:
And your bright eyes do but in vain
Kill those who live as fast as slain;
That I no more such death survive,
Your way's to bury me alive
In place unknown, and so that I
Being dead may live and living dye.
A lover to one dispraising his Mistress.
WHy slight you her whom I approve*
Thou art no peer to try my love;
Nor can discern where her form lies,
Unless thou saw her with my eyes
Say she were foul, or blacker then
The night, or Sun burnt African;
If liked by me, it is I alone
Can make a beauty where there is none:
For rated in my fancy she
Is so as she appears to me.
It Is not the feature or a face
That does my fair Election grace.
Nor is my fancy only led
By a well tempered white and red;
Could I enamored grow on those,
The Lilly and the blushing Rose
United in one stalk might be
As dear unto my thoughts as she,
But I look farther and do find
A richer beauty in her mind:
Where something is so lasting fair,
As time and age cannot impair.
Had thou a prospective so clear
That thou could view my object there;
When thou her virtues did espy,
Thoudst wonder and confess that I
Had cause to like; and learn from hence
To love by judgment, not by sense.
On the death of a fair Gentlewomans Robin-redbrest.
WHatsoere birds in groves are bred
Provide your anthems, Robins dead.
Poor Robin that was wont to nest
In fair Siloras lovely breast,
And thence would peep into her eye,
To see what feather stood awry.
This pretty bird might freely sip
The sugered Nectar from her lip.
When many love-burnt souls have pined
To see their rival so retained.
But what caused Robins death was this,
Robin sure surfeited with bliss;
Or else cause her fair cheek-possest
A purer red then Robins breast,
Wherein consisted all his pride,
The little bird for envy dyed.
On the death of Sir Tho: Pelham.
Merely for death to grieve and mourn
Were to repine that man was borne.
When weak old age does fall asleep
'Twere foul ingratitude to weep.
Those threads alone should force out tears
Whose sudden crack breaks off some years.
Here it is not so, full distance here
Sunders the cradle from the beer.
A fellow-traveller he has bin
So long with time, so worn to the skin,
That were it not just now bereft
His body first the soul had left.
Threescore and ten is natures date,
Our journey when we come in late:
Beyond that time the overplus
Was granted not to him, but us.
For his own sake the Sun never stood,
But only for the peoples good:
Even so he was held out by air
Which poor men uttered in their prayer:
And as his goods were lent to give,
So were his days that they might live.
So ten years more to him were told
Enough to make another old:
Oh that death would still do so,
Or else on goodmen would bestow
That wast of years which unthrifts fling
Away by their distempering.
That some might thrive by this decay
As well as that of land and clay.
It Was now well done: no cause to mourn
On such a seasonable stone;
Where death is but a guest, we sin
Not bidding welcome to his Inn.
Sleep, sleep, goodman, thy rest embrace,
Sleep, sleep, thou have trod a weary race.
Of Music.
WHen whispering strains with creeping wind
Distill soft passion through the heart,
And whilst at every touch we find
Our pulses beat and bear a part.
When threads can make
Our heart strings shake;
Philosophy can scarce deny
Our souls consists in harmony.
When unto heavenly joys we feign
What ere the soul affects most,
Which only thus we can explain
By Music of the winged host:
Whose rays we think
Make stars to wink;
Philosophy can scarce deny
Our souls consist of harmony.
O lul me, lul me, charming air,
My senses each with wonder sweet;
Like snow on wool thy fallings are,
Soft like spirits are thy feet.
Grief who needs fear
That has an ear?
Down let him lie
And slumbring dye,
And change his soul for harmony.
To his Mistress.
I Will tell you how the Rose did first grow red,
And whence the Lillies whiteness borrowed.
You blushed and straight the Rose with red was dight,
The Lillies kissed your hands and so grew white.
You have the native color, these the die,
And only flourish in your livery:
Before that time each Rose was but one stain,
The lilly naught but palenesse did contain.
On a black Gentlewoman.
IF shadows be a Pictures excellence
And make it seem more glorious to the sense:
If stars in brightest day are lost for sight
And seem more glorious in the mask of night.
Why should you think fair creature that you lack
Perfection cause your eyes and hair are black.
Or that your beauty, which so far exceeds
The new-sprung Lillies in their maidenheads,
The rosy color of your cheeks and lips
Should by that darkness suffer an eclipse.
Rich Diamonds are fairer being set
And compassed within a foileof jet.
Nor can it be dame nature should have made
So bright a Sun to shine without a shade.
It seems that nature when she first did fancy
Your rare composure studied Negromancy:
And when to you these gifts she did impart
She used altogether the Black Art.
She framed the Magic circle of your eyes,
And made those hairs the chains wherein she ties
Rebellious hearts, those veins, which do appear
Twined in Meanders about every sphere,
Mysterious figures are, and when you list
Your voice commands like an exorcist.
Now if in Magic you have skill so far
Vouchsafe to make me your familiar.
Nor has kind nature her black art reveald
By outward parts alone, some are conceald.
As by the spring head men may easily know
The nature of the streams that run below.
So your black eyes and hair do give direction,
That all the rest are of the like complexion.
The rest where all rest lies that blesses man,
That Indian mine, that straight of Magellan.
The worlds dividing gulf, through which who venters
With hoised sails and ravishd senses enters
To a new world of bliss. Pardon I pray
If my rude muse presumes for to display
Secrets forbid, or has her bounds surpast
In praising sweetness which she nere did taste:
Starved men may talk of meat, and blind men may
(Though hid from light) yet know there is a day.
A rover in the mark his arrow sticks
Sometimes as well as he that shoots at pricks.
And if I might direct my shaft aright,
The black mark would I hit, and not the white.
On a Gentlewoman walking in the Snow.
I Saw fair Cloris walk alone,
When feathered rain came softly down,
And Jove descended from his Tower
To court her in a silver shower:
The wanton snow flew to her breast
Like little birds into their nest,
And overcome with whiteness there
For grief dissolved into a tear,
Which trickling down her garments hemme
To deck her freezd into a gemme.
Upon one dead in the snow.
WIthin a fleece of silent waters drowned.
Before I met with death a grave I found.
That which e^iled my life from her sweet home
For grief straight froze it self into a Tomb.
Only one Element my fate thought meet
To be my death, grave, tomb, and winding sheet.
Phoebus himself my Epitaph had writ;
But blotting many ere he thought one fit,
He wrote until my tomb and grave were gone;
And 'twas an Epitaph that I had none;
For every man that passed along that way
Without a sculpture read that there I lay.
Here now the second time enclosed I lie
And thus much have the best of destiny.
Corruption (from which only one was free)
Devoured my grave, but did not seize on me.
My first grave took me from the race of men,
My last shall give me back to life again.
On a woman dying in travel the child unborne.
WIthin this grave there is a grave intombd,
Here lies a mother and a child inwombd.
It Was strange that nature so much vigor gave
To one that nere was born, to make a grave.
Yet an injunction stranger nature willd her,
Poor mother, to be tomb to that which killed her:
And not with so much cruelty content,
Buries the child, the grave, and monument.
Where shall we write the Epitaph? whereon?
The child, the grave, the monument is gone:
Or if upon the child we write a staff,
Where shall we write the tombs own Epitaph?
Only this way is left, and now we must
As on a table carpeted with dust
Make chisells of our fingers, and engrave
An Epitaph both on the tomb and grave
Within the dust: but when some hours are gone
Will not the Epitaph have need of one?
I know it well: yet grave it therefore deep
That those which know the loss may truly weep
And shed their tears so justly in that place
Which we before did with a finger trace,
That filling up the letters they may lie
As inlaid Crystal to posterity.
Where (as in glass) if any write another
Let him say thus, here lies a hapless mother
Whom cruel sat has made to be a tomb,
And kept in travel till the day of doom.
On Man.
ILl busied man why should thou take such care
To lenghthen out thy lives short callendar;
Each dropping season, and each flower does cry
Fool as I fade and wither thou must die.
The beating of thy pulse when thou art well
Is but the towling of thy passing bell:
Night is thy hearse, whose sable Canopy
Covers alike deceased day and thee.
And all those weeping dewes which nightly fall
Are but as tears shed for thy funeral.
On Faireford windows.
TEll me you anti-Saints why glass
With you is longer lived then brass:
And why the Saints have escaped their falls
Better from windows then from walls.
Is it because the brethrens fires
Maintain a glasse-house in Blackfriars?
Next which the Church stands North and South,
And East and West the Preachers mouth.
Or is it because such painted ware
Resembles something what you are,
So pied, so seeming, so unsound
In doctrine and in manners found,
That ont of emblemattick wit
You spare your selves in sparing it?
If it be so then Faireford boast,
Thy Church has kept what all have lost;
And is preserved from the bane
Of either war or Puritan.
Whose life is colored in the paint,
The inside dross, the outside Saint.
On a Gentlewoman playing on the Lute.
BE silent you still music of the spears,
And every sense make have to be all ears;
And give devout attention to her aires,
To which the Gods do listen as to prayers
Of pious votaries: the which to hear
Tumult would be attentive, and would swear
To keep less noise at Nile if there she sing,
Or with a sacred touch grace but one string.
Amongst so many auditors, so many throngs
Of Gods and men, that press to hear her songs,
Oh let me have an unespied room,
And die with such an anthem ore my tomb.
On Love.
WHen I do love I would notwish to speed,
To plead fruition rather then desire,
But on sweet lingering expectation feed,
And gently would protract not feed my fire.
What though my love a martyrdom you name,
No Salamander ever feels the flame.
That which is obvious I as much esteem
As Courtiors do old cloths: for novelty
Does relish pleasures, and in them we deem
The hope is sweeter then the memory.
Enjoying breeds a glut, men better taste
Comforts to come, then pleasures that are past.
The Catholic.
I Hold as faith
What Romes Ch: says
Where the King is head
The flocks misled
Where the Altars dressed
The peoples blessed
He Is but an ass
Who shuns the Mass
What Englands Church allow
My conscience disallowes
That Church can have no shame
That holds the Pope supreme
There Is service scarce divine
With table bread and wine
Who the Communion flies
Is Catholic and wise.


On Faireford windows.
I Know no paint of Poetry
Can mend such colors Imagery
In sullen ink; Yet Faireford I
May relish thy fair memory.
Such is the echoes fainter found;
Such is the light when Sun is drowned.
So did the fancy look upon
The work before it was begun.
Yet when those shows are out of sight
My weaker colors may delight.
Those Images so faithfully
Report the feature to the eye,
As you would think each picture was
Some visage in a looking-glass;
Not a glasse-window face, unless
Such as Cheap Side has, when a press
Of painted Gallants looking out
Bedeck the casement round about.
Bnt these have holy phisnomy;
Each pane instructs the laity
With silent eloquence, for here
Devotion leads the eye not ear
To note the cetechising paint;
Whose easy phrase did so acquaint
Our sense with Gospel that the Creed
In such a hand the weak may read.
Such types can yet of virtue be,
And Christ as in a glass we see.
Behold two Turtles in one Cage
With such a lovely equipage,
As they who mark them well may doubt
Some young ones have been there stolen out.
When with a fishing rod the Clark
St. Peter's draught of fish does mark:
Such is the scale, the eye, the fin,
You Would think they strove and leaped within:
But if the net which holds them brake
He with his angle some would take.
But would you walk a turn in Paul's,
Look up, one little pane inroules
A fairer Temple, fling a stone
The Church is out of the window flown.
Consider but not ask your eyes,
And ghosts at midday seem to rise.
The Saints their striving to descend
Are past the glass and downward bend.
Look there the Devils all would cry,
Did they not see that Christ was by.
See where he suffers for thee, see
His body taken from the tree:
Had ever death such life before?
The limber corpse besullied ore
With meager palenesse does display
A middle state 'twixt flesh and clay:
His arms, his head, his legs, his crown
Like a true Lambskin dangling down:
Who can forbear the grave being nigh
To bring fresh ointment in his eye?
The Puritans were sure deceived
Who thought those shadows moved and heaved.
So held from stoning Christ; the wind
And boisterous tempests were so kind
As on his Image not to pray,
Whom both the winds and Sea obey.
At Momus wish be not dismayed;
For if each Christians heart were glazed
With such a window, then each breast
Might be his own Evangelist.
On the praise of an ill-favourd Gentlewoman.
MArry and love thy Flavia, for she
Has all things whereby others beauteous be:
For though her eyes be small, her mouth is great,
Though her lips Ivory be, her teeth be jet:
Though they be dark, yet she is light enough,
And though her harsh hair fail, her skin is rough,
And what if it be yellow, her hairs red,
Give her but thine she has a maidenhead.
These things are beauties elements, where these
Compounded are in one she needs must please:
If red and white and each good quality
Be in the wench, nere ask where it does lie:
In buying things perfumed we ask if there
Be musk and amber in it, but not where.
Though all her parts be not in the usual place,
She has the anagram of a good face.
When by the gam-ut some Musicians make
A perfect song, others will undertake
By the same gam-ut changed to equal it:
Things simply good can never be unfit.
For one nights revells silk and gold we use,
But in long journies cloth and leather choose.
Beauty is barren often; and husbands say
There Is the best land where is the foulest way.
And what a sovereign medicine will she be
If thy past sins have taught thee jealousy.
Here needs no spies nor Eunuchs: her commit
Safe to thy foes yea to thy Marmoset.
When Belgias Cities the ruind country drown
That durty foulness arms and guards the Town.
So does her face guard her, and so for thee,
Which by occasion absent often may be.
She whose face like the clouds turns day to night,
And mightier then the Sea makes Moors seem white.
Who though seven years she in the street has laid
A Nunnery durst receive and think a maid.
And though in child-bed-labour she did lie
Midwives would swear 'twere but a tympany.
If she accuse her self, i will credit less
Then witches which impossibles confess.
Upon Heavens best Image, his fair and virtuous Mistress M. S.
THe most insulting tyrants can but be
Lords of our bodies, still our minds are free.
My Mistress thralls my soul, those chains of Gold
Her locks my very thoughts infetterd hold.
Then sure she is a Goddess, and if I
Should worship her, it is no Idolary.
Within her cheeks a fragrant garden lies
Where Roses mixed with Lillies feast mine eyes:
Here Is always spring, no winter to annoy
Those heavenly flowers, only some tears of joy
Do water them, and sure if I be wise
This garden is another Paradise.
Her eyes two heavenly lamps, whose orderd motion
Swayes all my reason, my sense, my devotion;
And yet those beams did then most glorious shine
When passions dark had maskd this soul of mine:
Now if the night her glory best declare,
What can I deem them but a sta^ry pair.
Her brow is virtues court, where she alone
Triumphant sits in faultlesse beauties throne:
Did you but mark its pureness, you would swear
Diana's come from Heaven to sojourne there.
Only this Cynthia dims not even at noon,
There wants a man (methinks) in such a Moon.
Her breath is great Joves incense, sweeter far
Then all Arabian winds and spices are:
Her voice the spears best Music, and those twins*
Her arms a precious pair of Cherubs wings.
In brief she is a map of Heaven, and there
O would that I a constellation were.
The black maid to the fair boy.
Fair boy (alas) why fliest thou me
That languish in such flames for thee.
I Am black, it is true; why so is night,
And lovers in dark shades delight.
The whole world do but close your eye
Will be to you as black as I:
Or ope't and view how dark a shade
Is by your own fair body made,
Which follows thee where ere thou go,
O who allowed would not do so:
Then let me ever live so nigh,
And thou shall need no shade but I.
His Answer.
BLack girl complain not that I fly,
Since fate commands antipathy.
Prodigious must that union prove
Where black and white together move:
And a conjunction of our lips
Not kisses makes but an eclipse,
In which the mixed black and white
Pretends more terror then delight.
Yet if my shadow thou will be,
Enjoy thy dearest wish; but see
Thou keep my shadows property,
And flee away when I come nigh;
Else stay till death has blinded me,
And I Will bequeath my self to thee.
Verses sent to a Lady, which she sending back unread, were returned with this
inscription.
REead (fair maid) and know the heat
That warmes these lines is like the beat.
Thy chaste pulse keeps; thy mornings thought
Has not more temper.: were there ought
On this virgin paper shed
That might to crimson turn thy red
I should blush for thee, but I vow
It Is all as spotless as thy brow.
Read then, and know what art thou have,
That thus can make a Poet chaste.
The Verses.
ON a day ('it is in thy power
To make me bless or curse that hour)
I saw thy face, they face then maskd
Like Ivory in Ebon cask'd.
But that dark cloud once drawn away,
Just like the dawning of the day
So brake thy beauty forth, and I
Grew sad, glad, neither, instantly:
Yet through thy mercy, or my chance,
Me thought I saw a pleasing glance
Thou threwst on me: a sugar smile
Dimpled thy cheeks, and all the while
Mirth dancd upon thy brow, to prove
It came from kindness if not love.
Oh make it good; in this let me
Not Poet but a Prophet be.
And think not (fairest) that thy fame
Is wronged by a Poets Mistress name;
Queens have been proud on it, for their Kiugs
Are but our subjects; nay all things
Shall unto all posterity
Appear as we will have them, we
Give men valor, maids chastity
And beauty too: if Homer would
Hellen had been an hag, and- Troy had stood.
And though far humbler be my verse,
Yet some there will be will rehearse
And like it too perhaps; and then
The life that now thou lendst my pen
The world shall pay thee back again.
The Nightingale.
MY limbs were weary, and my head oppressed
With drowsinesse and yet I could not rest.
My bed was such no down nor feathers can
Make one more soft, though Jove again turn Swan.
No fear distracted thoughts my slumber broke,
I heard no screech-owle squeak, nor raven croak;
Nay even the flea (that proud insulting else)
Had taken truce, and was asleep it self:
But 'twas nights darling, and the woods chief jewel
The Nightingale that was so sweetly crewel.
And wooed my ears to rob my eyes of sleep.
That whilst she sung of Tereus, they might weep,
And yet rejoice the tyrant did her wrong,
Her cause of woe was burden of her song;
Which whilst I listened too, and greiv'd to hear,
It Was such I could have wished my self all ear.
It Is false the Poets feign of Orpheus, he
Could neither move a stone, a beast, nor tree
To follow him; but wheresoere she flies
She makes a grove, where Satyrs and Fairies
About her perch to dance her roundelayes,
For she sings ditties to them whilst Pan plays.
Yet she sung better now, as if in me
She meant with sleep to try the mastery.
But whilst she chanted thus, the Cock for spite
(Days hoarser herald) chid away the night.
Thus robbed of sleep, mine eyelids nightly guest,
Methought I lay content, though not at rest.
Barclay his Epitaph.
HE that's imprisoned in this narrow room
Were not for custom needs nor verse nor tomb;
Nor can there from these memory be lent
To him, who must be his tombs monument;
And by the virtue of his lasting name
Must make his tomb live long, not it his fame.
For when this gaudy pageantry is gone,
Children of the unborn world shall spy the stone
That covers him, and to their fellows cry
Just here, just here abouts Barclay does lie.
Let them with feigned titles fortify
Their tombs, whose sickly virtues fear to die.
And let their tombs belie them, call them blessed,
And charitable marble faigne the rest.
He needs not, when life's true story is done,
The lying proscript of a perjured stone.
Then spare his tomb, that's needless and unsafe,
Whose virtue must outlive his Epitaph.
A welcome to Sack.
SO soft streams meet, so streams with gladder smiles
Meet after long divorcement by the Isles
When love the child of likeness leads on
Their crystal natures to an union.
So meet stolen kisses when the moonshine nights
Call forth fierce lovers to their wished delights.
So Kings and Queens meet when desire convinces
All thoughts but those that aim at getting Princes;
As I meet thee soul of my life and fame*
Eternal lamp of love, whose radiant flame
Out-stares the Heavens Osiris, and thy gleams
Darkens the splendor of his midday beams.
Welcome o welcome my illustrious spouse,
Welcome as is the end unto my vows.
Nay far more welcome then the happy soil
The Sea-scourg'd Merchant after all his toil
Salutes with tears of joy, when fires display
The smoking chimnies of his Ithaca.
Where have thou been so long from my embraces
Poor pitied exile, tell me did thy graces
Fly discontented hence, and for a time
Did rather choose to bless some other clime:
And was it to this end thou wentst to move me
More by thy absence to desire and love thee.
Why frowns my sweet? why does my Saint defer
Her bosom smiles from me her worshipper.
Why are those happy looks (the which have bin
Time past so fragant) sickly now drawn in
Like a dull twilight? tell me has my soul
Profaned in speech, or done an act more foul
Against thy purer nature, for that fault
I Will expiate with fire, with hair, and salt,
And with the crystal humor of the spring
Purge hence the guilt, and air, the quarrelling.
Will thou not smile, or tell me what amiss,
Have I bin cold to hug thee, too remiss
And temperate in embracings? has desire
To thee-ward died in the embers, and no fire
Left in this raked up ash-heap as a mark
To testify the glowing of a spark?
Have I divorced thee only to combine*
And quench my lust upon some other wine?
True I confess I left thee, and appeal
It Was done by me more to confirm my zeal
And double my affection, as do those
Whose love grows more inflamed by being foes.
But to forsake thee ever, could there be
A thought of such impossibility?
When thou thy self do say thy Isles shall lack
Grapes, ere that Herrick leaves Canary Sack.
Thou art my life, my Heaven, salt to all
My dearest dainties, thou the principal
Fire to all my functions, giv'st me blood,
Chine, spirit, and marrow and what else is good,
Thou make me airy, active, to be borne
Like Iphictus upon the tops of corn,
And make me winged like the nimble Hours
To dance and caper on the heads of flowers,
And ride the Sunbeams. Can there be a thing
Under the heavenly Isis that can bring
More love unto my life, or can present
My Genius with a fuller blandishment?
A Parodox on the praise of a painted face.
NOt kiss? by Jove I must and make impression
As long as Cupid dares to hold his Session
Upon thy flesh and blood, our kisses shall
Out minute time, and without number fall.
Do not I know these balls of blushing red
That on thy cheeks thus amorously are spread;
Thy snowy neck, those veins upon thy brow
Which with their azure crinkling sweetly bow,
Are from art borrowed, and no more thine own
Then chains that on St. Georges day are shown
Are proper to the wearer? yet for this
I Idol thee, and beg a courteous kiss.
The Fucus and Cerusse which on thy face
The cunning hand does lay to add more grace,
Deceive me with such pleasing fraud, that I
Find in thy art wh^t can in nature lie:
Much like a Painter which upon some wall
On which the cadent Sunbeams use to fall,
Paints with such art a gilded butterfly,
That silly maids with slow-made fingers try
To catch it, and then blush at their mistake,
Yet of this painted fly much reckoning make.
Such is our state, since what we look upon
Is naught but color and proportion:
Give me a face that is as full of lies
As Gypsies or your cunning Lotteries;
That is more false and more sophisticate
Then are your relics, or a man of state:
Yet such being glazed by the slight of art
Gain admiration, and win many a heart.
Put case there be a difference in the mould,
Yet may thy Venus be more brisk and bold.
-- for oftentimes we see
Rich Candy wines in wooden bowls to be.
The odoriferous Civet does not lie
Within the Muscats nose, or ear, or eye,
But in a baser place: for prudent nature
In drawing up the various forms and stature,
Gives from the curious shop of her large treasure
To fair parts comeliness, to baser pleasure.
The fairest flower that in the spring does grow
Is not so much for use, as for a show.
As Lillies, Hyacinths, the gorgeous birth
Of all pied flowers which diaper the earth,
Please more with their discolourd purple train
Then wholesome potherbs which for use remain.
Should I a golden speckled Serpent kiss
Because the color which he wears is his?
A perphum'd cordovant who would not wear,
Because its sent is borrowed other where?
The cloths and vestiments which grace us all
Are not our own but adventitiall.
Time rifles natures beauty, but sly art
Repaires by cunning each decayed part,
Fills here a wrinkle, and there purles a vein;
And with a cunning hand runs ore again
The breaches dented by the pen of time,
And makes deformity to be no crime*
So when great men are gripped by sickness: hand,
Illustrious physic pregnantly does stand
To patch up foul diseases, and does strive
To keep their tottering carkases alive.
Beauty a candle is, with every puff
Blown out, leaves nothing but a stinking snuff
To fill our nostrils with: thus boldly think
The purest candle yields the foulest stink:
As the pure food, and daintiest nutriment,
Yields the most strong and hottest excrement.
Why hang we then on things so apt to vary,
So fleeting, brittle, and so temporary,
That agues, coughs, the toothach, or cathar,
Slight touches of diseases spoil and mar.
But when that age their beauty does displace,
And plows up furrows in their once smooth face;
Then they become forsaken and do show
Like stately Abbeys destroyed long ago.
Love grant me then a reparable face,
That whilst there colors are can want no grace:
Pygmalions painted statue I could love,
If it were warm, and soft, or could but move.
A Song.
WHen Orpheus swetly did complain
Upon his Lute with heavy strain
How his Euridice was slain;
The trees to hear
Obtained an ear
And after left it off again.
At every stroke and every stay
The boughs kept time and nodding lay,
And listened bending every way;
The ashen tree
As well as well as he
Began to shake and learnt to play.
If wood could speak, a tree might hear,
If wood can sound our grief so near,
A tree might drop an amber tear:
If wood so well
Could sound a knell,
The Cypress might condoal the bear.
The standing nobles of the grove,
Hearing dead wood to speak and move,
The fatal axe began to love;
They envied death
That gave such breath,
As men alive do Saints above.
Upon Mr. Hoptons death.
GRiefs prodigals where are you? unthrifts where?
Whose tears and sighs extemporary are;
Poured out, not spent, who never ask a day
Your debt of sorrow on the grave to pay;
But as if one hours mourning could suffice,
Dare think it now no sin to have dry eyes:
Away, profane not Hoptons death, nor shame
His grave with grief not worthy of that name:
Sorrow conceived and vented both together;
Like prayers of Puritans, or in foul weather
The sailers forced devotion, when in fear
They pray this minute, and the next they swear.
No I must meet with men, men that do know
How to compute their tears and weigh their woe;
That can set down in an exact account
To what the loss of Hopton does amount:
Tell you particulars, how much of truth
Of unmatched virtue and untainted youth
Is gone with him, and having sum'd all look
Like bankrupt Merchants on their table book,
With eyes confounded and amazed to find
The poor and blanck remainder left behind.
On his Mistress eye.
AM I once more blessed with a grace so high
As to be looked on with that other eye?
Or shall I think it once more sent again
To iterate my souls sweet lasting pain?
Your other eye, dear soul, had fire before
And darts enough, you need not have sought more
From this revived; scarce could I endure
The luster of this eye when 'twas obscure:
How shall I now when like a fresh-born Sun
It strikes forth such a new reflection?
Yet welcome, dearest torment, spare not me
Dart forth more flames, they please if sent from thee
I hope your eyes as they in luster do,
Will imitate the Sun in virtue too.
If plagues and sicknesses from him be sent
Yet gives he warmth, life, growth and nourishment.
This is my comfort now, if one eye strike,
The other may give remedy alike.
Welcome again clear lamp of beauty; shine,
Shine bright on Earth as do the soul divine,
To which my thoughts with like devotion run
As Indians adore the rising Sun.
Now shall I mine own Image view alive
In this extenuating perspective,
This living looking glass, when thou shall grace
Me, sweet, so much as to admit my face
Neighbor to thine, o how I then shall love
To see my shape in that black stream to move:
Against all reason I then more admire
My shadow there, then my whole self entire.
How often (though loath from that sweet seat to part)
Strive I to travel that way to thy heart;
Where if one wink do thy quick look recall,
I loose, poor wretch, my shadow, self, and all.
Thus all the life which I so glorious thought
By thy sole wink is quenched and turned to naught.
Oh how I wont to curse that cobweb lawn
Which like a curtain ore thy eye was drawn,
As if that death upon that eye did sit,
And this had bin the winding sheet for it,
The which, as it from off that eye was thrown,
Seemd to look pale for grief that it was gone.
Yet when both this and the other dainty robe
Did close like cases that most heavenly globe,
Think not they could disparage your fair eyes;
No more then painters do their chiefest prize;
Who use to hang some veil or silken sheet,
That men may more desire and long to se'it.
To Dr. Griffith heald of a strange cure by Bernard Wright of Oxford.
WElcome abroad, o welcome from your bed
I joy to see you thus delivered.
After four years in travel issues forth
A birth of lasting wonder, whereat truth
Might well suspect her self, a new disease
Borne to advance the Surgeons of our days
Above all others: a perfidious bone
Eaten and undermind by humors grown:
Lodged in the captive thigh, which first of any
Halted, yet furnished with a bone to many;
No Golgotha, nor charnell house, nor field,
If all were searched could such another yield,
A bone so locked and hugd, as is a bar
That back and forward may be wrested far
But not pulled out at either hole, nor could
The cunning workman come to 't as he would:
Cross veins did guard the sore, a hollow cave
Must wade into the flesh, the Surgeons grave
Thus being digd, the file without delay
Must grate the bone, and carve those chips away.
Blessed be the midmen whose dexterity
Pulled out a birth like Bacchus from the thigh.
Tutors of nature, whose well guided art
Can rectify her wants in every part:
Who by preserving others pay the debt
They owe to nature, and do rebeget
Her strength grown ruinate: I could be glad
Such lived the days which they to others add:
Nor can I rightly tell the happier man
The patient or the Surgeon; do but scan
His praise thy ease, 'twas sure an ecstasy
That killed Van-otto not a lethargy;
Striving to crown his work he bravely tried
His last and greatest cure then gladly dyed.
Bernard must tarry longer; should he fly
After his brother all the world must dye*
Or live a cripple; Griffiths happy fate
Requires the same hand still to iterate
No less a miracle: the joyners skill
Could never mend his carved pate so well
As he has heald a natural: the stout
And boasting Paracelsus who gives out
His rule can give man's life eternity,
Would faintly doubt of his recovery;
He that has wrought these cures I think he can
As well of scraps make up a perfect man.
Oh had you seen his marrow drop away,
Or the others brains drop out, then would you say
Nothing could cure this fracture or that bone
Save Bernard or the Resurrection.
Now smile upon thy torment, pretty thing
How will you use it? bury it in a ring
Like a deaths head, or send it to the grave
In earnest of the body it must have:
Or if you will you may the same translate
Into a die because 'twas fortunate;
The ring were blessed, it is like a Diamond born
Out of a Rock, so was it hewn and torn
Out of your thigh: the gem worth nothing is
Until it be cut forth, no more is this.
Happy are you that know what treasure it is
To find lost health, they only feel the bliss:
Thou that have felt these pains, may well maintain
Man's chiefest pleasure is but want of pain.
Enjoy thy self; for nothing worse can come
To one so schoold and versed in martyrdom.
The Liberty and Requiem of an imprisoned Royalist.
BEat on proud billows, Boreas blow
Swelled curled Waves high as Joves roof,
Your incivility shall know,
That innocence is tempest proof.
Though surly Nereus frown, my thoughts are calm,
Then strike (afflictions) for your wounds are balm.
That which the world miscalls a jaile,
A private closet is to me,
Whilst a good conscience is my bail,
And innocence my liberty.
Locks, bars, walls, lonenesse, tho together met,
Make me no prisoner, but an Anchoret.
I, whilst I wished to be retired,
Into this private room was turned
As if their wisdoms had conspired
A Salamander should be burned:
And like those Sophies who would drown a fish,
I am condemned to suffer what I wish.
The Cynick hug his poverty,
The Pelicane her wilderness,
And it is the Indians pride to lie
Naked on frozen Caucasus.
And like to these, Stoics severe we see
Make torments easy by their apathy.
These manicles upon my arm
I as my sweethearts favors wear,
And then to keep my ancles warm
I have some Iron shackles there:
These walls are but my garrison, this Cell
Which men call Jaile, does prove my Citadell
So he that struck at Jasons life,
Thinking h' had made his purpose sure,
By a malicious friendly knife,
Did only wound him to a cure.
Malice I see wants wit, for what is meant
Mischief, often times proves favor by the event.
I Am in this Cabinet locked up
Like some high prized Margarite;
Or like some great Mogul, or Pope,
Am cloistered up from public sight:
Retir'dnesse is a part of majesty,
And thus, proud Sultan, I Am as great as thee.
Here sin for want of food does starve,
Where tempting objects are not seen,
And these walls do only serve
To keep vice out, not keep me in*
Malice of late's grown charitable sure,
I Am not committed, but am kept secure.
When once my Prince affliction has,
Prosperity does treason seem,
And then to smooth so rough a path
I can learn patience too from him.
Now not to suffer shows no loyal heart,
When Kings want ^ase subjects must love to smart.
What tho I cannot see my King
Either in's person or his coin,
Yet contemplation is a thing
Which renders what I have not mine*
My King from me no Adamant can part,
Whom I do wear engraven in my heart.
My soul's free, as the ambient air,
Although my baser part's immured,
Whilst loyal thoughts do still repair
TO accompany my solitude.
And though rebellion do my body bind,
My King can only captivate my mind.
Have you not seen the Nightingale
When turned a Pilgrim to a cage,
How she does sing her wonted tale
In that her narrow hermitage;
Even there her chanting melody does prove
That all her bars are trees, her cage a grove.
I am that bird, which they combine
Thus to deprive of liberty,
Who though they do my corpse confine,
Yet maugre hate my soul is free:
And tho immured, yet can I chirp and sing
Disgrace to rebels, glory to my King.
To his imperious Mistress.
WEll, well it is true,
I am now fallen in love,
And it is with you;
And now I plainly see,
While you are enthroned by me above
You all your art and power improve
To tyranize ore me,
And make my flames the objects of your scorn,
While you rejoice, and feast your eyes, to see me quite forlorn.
But yet be wise,
And don't believe that I
Do think your eyes
More bright than Stars can be,
Or that you Angels far out-vy
In their Celestial livery
It Was all but Poetry.
I could have said as much by any she,
You are no beauty of your self, but are made so by me.
Though we like fools
Fathom the Earth and sky,
And drain the Schools
For names to express you by,
Out-rend all loud hyperbolyes
To dub our fancies Deityes
By Cupids heraldry;
We know you are flesh and blood as well as men,
And when we please can mortalize, and make you so again.
Yet since my fate
Has drawn me to the thing
Which I did hate,
I Will not my labor loose;
But will love, and as I begin
To the purpose, now my hand is in,
Spite of the art you use:
And have you know the world is not so bare;
There Is things enough to love besides such toys as Ladies are.
I Will love good wine,
I Will love my book and muse,
Nay all the nine;
I Will love my real friend:
I Will love my horse; and could I choose
One that my love would not abuse,
To her my love should bend.
I will love those that laugh, and those that sing,
I Will never pine my self away for any female thing.
On Dr. Ravis Bishop of London.
WHen I passed Paul's and traveld on the walk
Where all our Britain sinners swear and talk:
Old Harry Ruffians, Bankrupts, and South-sayers,
And youths whose cousenage is as old as theirs:
And there beheld the body of my Lord
Trod under foot of vice which he abhord;
It grieved me that the Landlord of all times
Should set long lives and leases to their crimes,
And to his springing honors should afford
Scarce so much Sun as to the prophets gourd:
But since swift flights of virtue have good ends,
Like breath of Angels which a blessing sends
And vanishes withal, whilst fouler deeds
Expect a tedious harvest for bad seeds.
I blame not fame and nature, if they gave
Where they could give no more, their last a grave;
And justly do thy grieved friends forbear
Marble and Alabaster boys to rear
Ore thy Religious dust, because they know
Thy worth, which such allusions cannot show,
For thou have trod amongst those happy ones,
Who trust not in their superscriptions,
Their hired Epitaphs and perjured stone,
Which so belies the soul when she is gone:
Thou do commit thy body as it lies
To tongues of living men, not unborn eyes;
What profits then a sheet of lead? what good
If on thy coarse a Marble quarry stood?
Let those that fear their rising purchase vaults,
And rear them statues to excuse their faults;
As if like birds that peck at Painters grapes*
The judge knew not their persons from their shapes.
Nor needs the Chancellor boast, whose Pyramid
Above the House and Altar reared is;
For though thy body fill a viler room,
Thou shall not change deeds with him for his tomb
On Dr. Langton.
BEcause of fleshy mould we be
Subject unto mortality;
Let no man wonder at his death,
More flesh he had, and then less breath:
But if you question how he dyed
It Was not the fall of swelling pride,
It Was no ambition to ascend
Heaven in humility: his end*
Assured us his God did make
This piece for our example sake.
Had you but seen him in his way
To Church his last best Sabbath day,
His struggling soul did make such have
As if each breath should be his last;
Each stone he trod on sinking strove
To make his grave, and showed his love*
O how his sweating body wept,
Knowing how soon it should be swept
In The mould; but while he steals to pray,
His weighty members long to stay,
Each word did bring a breathless tear,
As if he would leave his spirit there:
He gone looks back as twere to see
The place where he would buried be,
Bowing as if did desire
At the same time for to expire:
Which being done he long shall dwell
Within the place he loved so well;
Where night and morning hundreds come
A Pilgrimage unto his tomb.
To the Bell-Founder of great Tom of Christ-Church in Oxford.
THou that by ruin do repair,
And by destruction art a Founder:
Whose art does tell us what men are,
Who by corruption shall rise sounder:
In this fierce fires intensive heat,
Remember this is Tom the great.
And, Cyclops, think at every stroke
With which thy sledge his side shall wound,
That then some Statute thou have broak
Which long depended on his sound;
And that our Colledge-Gates do cry
They were not shut since Tom did die.
Think what a scourge it is to the City
To drink and swear by Carfax Bell,
Which bellowing without tune or pity
The night and day devides not well;
But the poor tradesmen must give ore
His ale at eight or sit till four.
We all in have drink off our wine,
As if we never should drink more;
So that the reckoning after nine
Is larger now then that before.
Release this tongue which erst could say
Home Scollers; drawer what is to pay?
So thou of order shall be Founder,
Making a Ruler for the people,
One that shall ring thy praises rounder
Then the other six bells in the steeple:
Wherefore think when Tom is running
Our manners wait upon thy cunning.
Then let him raised be from ground
The same in number, weight, and sound;
For may thy conscience rule thy gain,
Or would thy theft might be thy baine.
On a Gentleman, that kissing his Mistress left blood upon her.
WHat mystery is this that I should find
My blood in kissing you to stay behind?
It Was not for want of color that required
My blood for paint: no die could be desired
On that fair cheeck, where scarlet were a spot,
And where the juice of Lillies but a blot:
If at the presence of the murderer
The wound will bleed, and tell the cause is there,
A touch will do much more: even so my heart
When secretly it felt your killing dart
Showed it in blood; which yet does more complain
Because it cannot be so touched again.
This wounded heart to show its love most true
Sent forth a drop and wrote its mind on you;
Was ever paper half so white as this,
Or wax so yielding to the printed kiss?
Or seal so strong? no letter ere was writ
That could the Authors mind so truly fit:
For though my self to foreign countries fly
My blood desires to keep you company;
Here I could spill it all, thus I can free
My enemy from blood though slain I be:
But slain I cannot be, nor meet with ill,
Since but to you I have no blood to spill.
On an aged Gentlewoman.
NO spring nor summers beauty has such grace
As I have seen in one autumnall face.
Young beauties force their loves, and that's a rape,
Yours does but counsel, yet they cannot escape:
If 'twere a shame to love, here twere no shame,
Affection takes here reverences name*
Were her first years the golden age? that's true;
But now she is gold often tried and ever new:
That was her torrid and inflaming time,
This is her tolerable tropic clime.
Fair eyes, who asks more heat then comes from thence,
He in a fever wishes pestilence.
Call not those wrinkles graves, if graves they were
They were loves graves, for else they are no where;
Yet lies not love dead here, but here does sit
Vowed to this trench like to an Anchoret:
And here till her (which must be his) death's
He does not dig a grave, but build a tomb:
Here dwells he, though he sojourne every where doom
In progress, yet his standing house is here.
She always evening is, nor noon nor night,
Where Is no voluptuousnsse, though a delight.
Xerxes strange love, the broad-leav'd plantane tree,
Was loved for age, none being so large as she
Or else because being young, nature did bless
Her youth with ages glory barrenness.
If we love things long sought, age is a thing
Which we are sixty years a compassing:
If transitory things which soon decay,
Age must be loveliest at the latest day.
But name not winter-faces, whose skin's slack,
Lank like an unthrifts purse, or empty sack;
Whose eyes seek light within, for all here is shade,
Whose mouth's a hole rather worn out then made,
Whose several tooth to a several place is gone
To vex their souls at the Resurrection:
Name not these living deaths-heads unto me,
For such not ancient, but antiques be.
I hate extremes; yet I had rather stay
With tombs then cradles to wear out the day:
Since that loves natural motion is* may still
My love descend and journey down the hill;
Not panting after growing beauties, so
I shall ebb on with them that homewards go.
On his Mistress going to Sea.
FArewell fair Saint, may not the Seas and wind
Swel like the heart and eyes you leave behind,
But calm and gentle (like the looks they bear)
Smile on your face and whisper in your ear:
Let no foul billow offer to arise
That it may nearer look upon your eyes,
Least wind and waves enamourd with such form
Should throng and crowd themselves into a storm;
But if it be your fate (vast Seas) to love,
Of my becalmed heart learn how to move:
Move then, but in a gentle lovers pace,
No wrinkles nor no furrows in your face;
And ye fierce winds see that you tell your tale
In such a breath as may but fill her sail:
So whilst you court her each his several way
You will her safely to her port convay;
And loose her in a noble way of woing,
Whilst both contribute to your own undoing.
A Copy of Verses spoke to King CHARLES by way of entertainment when he was
pleased to grace S. John's College with his visit. 1636.
WEre they not Angels sang, did not mine ears
Drink in a sacred Anthem from you spears?
Was I not blessed with Charles and Mary's name,
Names wherein dwells all Music? it is the same.
Hark, I my self now but speak Charles and Mary,
And it is a Poem, nay it is a library*
All hail to your dread Majesty's, whose power
Adds luster to our feast, and to our bower:
And what place fitter for so Royal guests
Then this, where every book presents a feast.
Here Is Virgils well-drest Venison, here is the wine
Made Horace sing so sweetly; here you dine
With the rich Cleopatra's warelike love;
Nay you may feast and frolic here with Jove.
Next view that bower, which is as yet all green,
But when you are there, the red and white are seen.
A bower, which had (it is true) been beautified
With catechizing Arras on each side;
But we the Baptists sons did much desire
To have it like the dwelling of our sire
A grove or desert. See (dread Liege) you will guess
Even our whole College in a wilderness.
Your eyes and ears being fed, taste of that feast,
Which has its pomp and glory from its guest.
Upon the new Quadrangle of St. John's College in Oxford, built by the most
Reverend Father in God the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
It Is done; and now where is he that cried it down
For the long tedious business of the Town;
Let him but see it thus, and heel contend
How we could such a Quadrat so soon end,
Nay think 'twas time little enough to frame
The exact model only of the same.
It Is finished then; and so, there is not the eye
Can blame it, that's best skilld in Symmetry:
You Would think each stone were raised by Orpheus art,
There Is such sweet harmony in every part.
Thus they are one: yet if you please to pry
But farther in the quaint variety
Of the choice workmen, there will seem to be
A disagreeing uniformity.
Here Angels, stars, there virtues arts are seen,
And in whom all these meet the King and Queen.
Next view the smoothfaced columns, and each one
Looks like a pile of well joynd Punice-stone:
Nor wonder, for as smooth, as clear they are
As is your Mistress glass, or what shines there.
So that you would think at first sight at a blush
The massy sollid earth Diaphanous.
But these are common, would you see that thing
In which our King delights, which in our King?
Look up, and then with reverence cast your eye
Upon our Maryes comely Majesty:
It Is she, and yet had you her self ere seen,
Youd swear but for the crown 'twere not the Queen.
Nor is it the workmans fault; for what can be
I would feign know like to a Deity?
Unless her Charles; yet has his statue proved
So like himself you would think it spoke and moved,
But that you plainly see it is brass; nay were
The Guard but near, they would cry the King, be bare.
Rare form, and as rare matter; that can give
O^r Charles after his reign ages to live.
Not like your graver Citizens wise cost,
Who think they have King enough on a sign-post:
Where he may stand (for all I see) unknown,
But for the loving superscription.
No; here he reigns in state, to every eye
So like himself in complete Majesty,
That men shall cry, viewing his limbs and face
All fresh three ages hence, long live his Grace.
Blessed be that subject then, which did foresee
The Kings (though he is as God) mortality:
And through a Princely care has found the way
To reinthrone his dust and crown his clay;
That so what strange events soere may fall
Through peace or war antimonarchical:
Though these three Kingdoms should become one flame
And that consume us with our King and his name;
Yet here our gracious Charles whenever lent
To his much honored Marble, and there spent
To a dust's atome, being then scarce a thing,
May still reign on, and long survive a King.
Fortunes Legacy.
BLind fortune if thou wants a guide;
I Will show thee how thou shall divide,
Distribute unto each his due:
Justice is blind and so are you.
Toth' Userer this doom impart,
May Scriveners break and then his heart;
His debtors all to beggary call,
Or what is as bad turn Courtiers all.
Unto the tradesmen that sell dear
A long Vacation all the year,
Revenge us too for their deceits
By sending wives light as their weights.
But fortune how wilt recompense
The Frenchmens daily insolence?
That they may know no greater pain
May they return to France again.
To lovers, that will not believe
Their sweet mistakes, thy blindness give.
And least the Players should grow poor
Give them Aglaura's more and more.
To Physicians if thou please
Give them another new disease.
To Scholars give (if thou can do it)
A Benefice without a suit.
To court Lords grant monopolies,
And to their wives communities:
So fortune thou shall please them all,
When Lords do rise and Ladies fall.
Give to the Lawers I beseech
As much for silence as for speech.
Give Ladies Ushers strength of back,
And unto me a cup of Sack.
Upon a Gentlewomans entertainment of him.
WHether, sweet Mistress, I should most
Commend your Music or your cost:
Your well spread table, or the choice
Banquet of your hand and voice,
There Is none will doubt. For can there be
Twixt earth and Heaven analogy?
Or shall a trencher or dish stand
In competition with your hand?
Your hand, that turns men all to ear:
Your hand, whose every joints a sphere.
For certainly he that shall see
The swiftness of your harmony,
Will streightwayes in amazement prove
The spheres to you but slowly move;
And in that thought confess that thus
The Heavens are come down to us.
As he may well; when he shall hear
Such Aires as may be sung even there;
Your sacred Anthems, strains that may
Grace the eternal Quire to play:
And certainly they were prepared
By Angels only to be heard
Then happy I that was so blessed
To be yours and your Musicks quest;
For which I Would change all other cheer,
Thinking the best though given to dear.
For yours are delicates that fill,
And filling leave us empty still:
Sweetmeats that surfeit to delight,
Whose fulness is mere appetite.
Then farewell all our heavenly fare,
Those singing dainties of the air;
For you to me do seem as good
As all the consorts of the wood;
And might I but enjoy my choice,
My Quire should be your only voice.
To a black Gentlewoman Mistress A. H.
GRieve not (fair maid) cause you are black; so's she
That's spouse to him who died upon the tree:
And so is every thing. For to your thought,
If you but wink, the worlds as dark as naught.
Or do but look abroad and you shall meet
In every hallowed Church, in every street,
The fairest still in this; who think they lack
Of their perfections if not all in black:
Their gowns, their veiles are so, nay more their necks,
Their very beauties are foild off with specks
Of the dark color. Whilst thus to her mate
Each seems more fair. Now they but personate
What you are really. Your fairest hair
Shadows the Picture of your face more fair:
Your two black spears are like two Globes beset
With Ebony, or ring'd about with Jet.
O how I now desire ene to depart
From all the rest, and study the Black art:
But since that's not allowed me, I will see
How I may truly, fairest, study thee.
To the Memory of BEN: JOHNSON.
AS when the vestall hearth went out, no fire
Less holy then the flame that did expire
Could kindle it again: so at thy fall
Our wit great Ben, is too Apocriphall
To celebrate the loss; since it is too much
To write thy Epitaph, and not be such.
What thou were, like the hard Oracles of old
Without an ecstasy cannot be told.
We must be ravished first, thou must infuse
Thy self into us both the theme and muse.
Else, though we all conspired to make thy hearse
Our work, so that it had been but one great verse:
Though the Priest had translated for that time
The Liturgy, and buried thee in rhyme;
So that in meeter we had heard it said
Poetique dust is to Poetique laid:
And though that dust being Shakespears, thou mighst have
Not his room but the Poet for thy grave;
So that as thou did Prince of numbers dye
And live, so now thou mighst in numbers lie;
Twere frail solemnity. Verses on thee
And not like thine, would but kind libels be;
And we, not speaking thy whole worth, should raise
Worse blots then they that envied thy praise*
Indeed thou needst not us, since above all
Invention, thou were thine own funeral.
Hereafter when time has fed on thy Tomb,
The inscription worn out, and the marble dumb;
So that 'twould pose a Crittick to restore
Half words, and words expired so long before.
When thy maimed statue has a sentencd face,
And looks that are the horror of the place;
That twill be learning and antiquity
To ask a Seldom to say this was thee;
Thou Wilt have a whole name still: nor needst thou fear
That will be ruind, or loose nose or hair.
Let others write so thin, that they cannot be
Authors till rotten, no posterity
Can add to thy works, the had their whole growth then
When first borne, and came aged from the pen.
Whilst living thou enjoyest the fame and sense,
And all that time gives but the reverence.
When tha'rt of Homers years, no man will say
Thy Poems are less worthy, but more gray.
It Is bastard Poetry, and of the false blood
Which cannot withot succession be good.
Things that will always last, do thus agree
With things Eternal, they at once perfect be.
Scorn then their censure, who gave out thy wit
As long about a Comedy did sit,
As Elephants bring forth; and that thy blots
And mendings took moretime then Fortune plots:
That such thy drought was, and so great thy thirst,
That all thy Plays were drawn at the Mermaid first.
That the Kings yearly Butt wrote, and his wine
Had more right then thou to thy Cateline.
Let such men keep a diet, let their wit
Be rackt, and while they write, suffer a fit
When they have felt tortures which outpaine the gouut,
Such as with less the State draws Treason out;
Though they should the length of consumption lie,
Sick of their Verse, and of their Poem die,
Twould not be thy worst Scene, but would at last
Confirm their boastings, and shew't made in have.
He that writes well, writes quick, since the rules true,
Nothing is slowly done, that's always new.
So when thy Fox had ten times Acted been,
Each day was first, but that it was cheaper seen.
And so thy Alchymist Played ore and ore,
Was new oth' stage, when it was not at the door.
We, like the Actors, did repeat, the pit
The first time saw, the next conceived thy wit:
Which was cast in those forms, such rules, such arts,
That but to some not half thy Acts were parts:
Since of some silken judgments we may say
They filled a box two hours, but saw no Play.
So that the unlearned lost their money, and
Scholars saved only, that could understand.
Thy Scene was free from monsters, no hard plot
Called down a God to untie the unlikely knot.
The stage was still a stage, two entrances
Were not two parts of the world disjoynd by Seas.
Thine were land Tragedies, no Prince was found
To swim a whole Scene out, then oth'stage drowned,
Pitched fields* and Red-Bul wars, still felt thy doom,
Thou laidst no sieges to the Music Room;
Nor would allow to thy best Comedies
Humors that should above the people rise:
Yet was thy language and thy style so high
Thy Sock to the ancle, Buskin reachd toth' thigh:
And both so chaste, so 'bove dramatick clean,
That we both safely saw and lived thy Scene.
No foul loose line did prostitute thy wit,
Thou wrotst thy Comedies; did not commit.
We did the vice arraignd not tempting hear,
And were made judges not bad parts by the ear.
For thou even sin did in such words array,
That some who came bad parts, went out good Play.
Which ended not with the Epilogue, the age
Still Acted* and grew innocent from the stage.
It Is true thou had some sharpness, but thy salt
Served but with pleasure to reform the fault:
Men were laughed into virtue, and none more
Hated Face acted then were such before.
So did thy sting not blood but humors draw;
So much does Satyr more correct then Law;
Which was not nature in thee, as some call
Thy teeth, who say thy wit lay in thy gall.
That thou did quarrel first, and then in spite
Did against a person of such vices write:
And it was revenge not truth, that on the stage
Carlo was not presented, but thy rage:
And that when thou in company were met,
Thy meat took notes, and thy discourse was net.
We know thy free vain had this innocence,
To spare the party, and to brand the offense.
And the just indignation thou were in
Did not expose Shift but his tricks and gin.
Thou mighst have used the old comic freedom, these
Might have seen themselves played like Socrates.
Like Cleon Mammon might the Knight have been;
If as Greek Authors thou had turned Greek spleen;
And had not chosen rather to translate
Their learning into English, not their hate.
Indeed this last, if thou had been bereft
Of thy humanity, might be called theft.
The other was not, whatsoere was strange
Or borrowed in thee did grow thine by the change.
Who without Latin helps, had been as rare
As Beaument, Fletcher, or as Shakespeare were:
And like them from thy native stock could say
Poets and Kings are not born every day.
An Answer to the Letter of the Cloak.
Mr. Roberts,
I Wonder that you should send for the Cloak,
I thought you scornd it should be spoke
That once your promise should be broke,
If from your word you do revoke
I have wit enough to keep the Cloak.
You say you will make me smart for the Cloak,
I do not care a fart for the Cloak,
Yet I will study the black art in the Cloak
Rather then I will part with the Cloak.
You say you mean to try for the Cloak,
I scorn to tell a lie for the Cloak,
My word I Will never deny for the Cloak
Although I thought youd cry for the Cloak.
I do protest most deep in the Cloak
I did both mourn and weep in the Cloak,
And if I should not keep the Cloak
I were a very sheep in the Cloak.
I took your Cloak to mourn in your Cloak,
My corpse I did adorn in your Cloak,
And many a time have I sworn in your Cloak
That I will never return in your Cloak.
Your father we did bury in the Cloak,
And after we were merry in the Cloak,
And then I told Mr. Perry of the Cloak,
And yet I am not weary of the Cloak.
Yet still I stand in fear of the Cloak
That I shall be never the near for the Cloak:
I pray you, good Sir, forbear the Cloak
I know that you can spare the Cloak.
It cost me many a tear in your Cloak,
And many a beaker of bear in your Cloak;
And yet I stand in fear of your Cloak
That I shall be nere the near for your Cloak.
Therefore, good Sir, forbear the Cloak,
For though I have worn bare the Cloak,
I had rather for to tear the Cloak
Then see another wear the Cloak.
Your friend in truth till death me choke
If you will let me have the Cloak.
Loves Courtship.
HArk my Flora, Love does call us
To the strife that must befall us:
He has robbed his mothers Myrtles,
And has pulled her downy Turtles.
See our geniall posts are crowned,
And our beds like billows rise:
Softer lists are no where found,
And the strife its selfe's the prize.
Let not shades and dark affright thee,
Thy eyes have luster that will light thee:
Think not any can surprise us,
Love himself does now disguise us:
From thy wast that girdle throw
Night and silence both wait here,
Words or actions who can know
Where there is neither eye nor ear.
Show thy bosom and then hide it,
License touching and then chide it;
Profer something and forbear it,
Give a grant and then forswear it:
Ask where all my shame is gone,
Call us wanton wicked men;
Do as Turtles kiss and groan,
Say thou nere shall joy again.
I can hear thee curse, yet chase thee;
Drink thy tears and still embrace thee:
Easy riches are no treasure,
She that's willing spoils the pleasure:
Love bids learn the wrestlers slight,
Pull and struggle when we twine;
Let me use my force to night,
The next conquest shall be thine.
Upon the death of the Lord Stafford, the last of his name.
MUst then our loves be short still? must we choose
Not to enjoy? only admire and loose?
Must axioms hence grow sadly understood,
And we thus see it is dangerous to be good?
So books begun are broken off, and we
Receive a fragment for an History;
And as 'twere present wealth, what was but debt,
Lose that of which we are not owners yet;
But as in books that want the closing line,
We only can conjecture, and repine*
So must we here too only grieve, and guess,
And by our fancy make, what is wanting, less.
Thus when rich webs are left unfinished,
The spider does supply them with her thread.
For tell me what addition can be wrought
To him, whose youth was even the bound of thought.
Whose buddings did deserve the robe, whiles we
In smoothness did the deeds of wrinkles see:
When his State-nonage might have been thought fit.
To break the custom and allowed to sit.
His actions veiled his age, and could not stay
For that we call ripeness, and just day.
Others may wait the staff and the gray hair,
And call that wisdom which is only fear.
Christen a coldness temperance, and then boast
Full and ripe virtue, when all actions lost:
This is not to be noble, but be slack;
A Stafford never was good by the Almanac.
He, who thus stays the season, and expects,
Does not gain habits, but disguise defects.
Here nature outslips culture: he came tried,
Straight of himself at first, not rectified:
Manners so pleasing and so handsome cast,
That still that overcame which was shown last.
All minds were captived thence, as if it had been
The same to him to have been loved and seen.
Had he not been snatched thus, what drive hearts now
Into his nets, would have driven Cities too:
For these his essays which began to win
Were but bright sparks which showed the mine within.
Rude draughts unto the Picture; things we may
Style the first beams of the increasing day;
Which did but only great discoveries bring,
As outward coolness shows the inward spring.
Nor were his actions to content the sight,
Like Artists pieces placed in a good light,
That they might take at distance, and obtrude
Something unto the eye that might delude:
His deeds did all most perfect then appear
When you observed, viewed close, and did stand near
For could there ought else spring from him whose line
From which he sprung was rule and discipline.
Whose virtues were as books before him set,
So that they did instruct, who did beget:
Taught thence not to be powerful, but know,
Showing he was their blood by living so.
For whereas some are by their big-lip known,
Others by imprinted burning swords were shown;
So they by great deeds are, from which bright fame
Engraves free reputation on their name:
These are their native marks, and it has been
The Staffords lot to have their signs within.
And though this firm hereditatry good
Might boasted be as flowing with the blood,
Yet he never graspt this stay: but as those, who
Carry perfumes about them still, scarce do
Themselves perceive them, though another sense
Suck in the exhaling odor: so he thence
Never did perceive he carried this good smell,
But made new still by doing himself well.
To imbalme him then is vain, where spreading fame
Supplies the want of spices; where the name,
It self preserving, may for ointment pass,
And he still seen lie coffind as in glass.
Whiles thus his bud dims full flowers, and his sole
Beginning does reproach another whole.
Coming so perfect up, that there must needs
Have been found out new titles for new deeds.
Though youth and laws forbid, which will not let
Statues be raised, or him stand brazen: yet
Our minds retains this royalty of Kings,
Not to be bound to time, but judge of things
And worship as they merit: there we do
Place him at height, and he stands golden too.
A comfort, but not equal to the cross,
A fair remainder, but not like the loss.
For he (that last pledge) being gone, we do
Not only loose the heir but the honor too.
Set we up then this boast against our wrong,
He left no other sign that he was young:
And spite of fate his living virtues will,
Though he be dead, keep up the Barony still.
Upon the same.
Unequal nature, that do load, not pair
Bodies with souls, to great for them to bear!
As some put extracts (that for souls may pass,
Still quickening where they are) in frailer glass;
Whose active generous spirits scorn to live
By such weak means, and slight preservative:
So high borne minds; whose dawnings like the day
In torrid climes cast forth a full-noon ray;
Whose vigorous breasts inherit (throngd in one)
A race of souls by long succession;
And rise in their descents; in whom we see
Entirely summed a new born ancestry:
These souls of fire (whose eager thoughts alone
Create a fever or consumption)
Orecharge their bodies: labring in the strife
To serve so quick and more then mortal life.
Where every contemplation does oppress
Like fits of the Calenture, and kills no less.
Goodness has its extremes as well as sin,
And brings, as vice, death and diseases in.
This was thy fate, great Stafford; thy fierce speed
T'out-live thy years, to throng in every deed
A mass of virtues; hence thy minutes swell
Not to a long life, but long Chronicle.
Great name (for that alone is left to be
Called great; and it is no small nobility
To leave a name) when we deplore the fall
Of thy brave Stem, and in thee of them all;
Who do this glory to thy race dispense,
Not known to honor, t'end with innocence;
Me thinks I see a spark from thy dead eye
Cast beams on thy deceased Nobility.
Witness those Marble heads, whom Westminster
Adores (perhaps without a nose or ear)
Are now twice raised from the dust, and seem
New sculpt again, when thou art placed by them;
When thou, the last of that brave house deceast,
Had none to cry (our brother) but the Priest:
And this true riddle is to ages sent
Stafford is his Forefathers monument.
A Song of the Precise Cut.
WIth face and fashion to be known
For one of sure election,
With eyes all white and many a groan,
With neck aside to draw in tone,
With harp in's nose or he is none.
See a new teacher of the town,
O the town, O the towns new teacher.
With pate cut shorter then the brow,
With little ruff starcht you know how,
With cloak like Paul, no cape I trow,
With Surplesse none, but lately now;
With hands to thump, no knees to bow.
See a new teacher, etc.
With couzning cough and hallow cheek
To get new gatherings every week,
With paltry change of and to eke,
With some small Hebrew, and no Greek,
To find out words when stuff's to seek.
See a new teacher, etc.
With shopboard breeding and intrusion,
With some outlandish Institution,
With Vrsines Catechism to muse on,
With Systems method for confusion,
With grounds strong laid of mere illusion.
See a new teacher* etc.
With rites indifferent all damned,
And made unlawful if commanded,
Good works of Popery down banded,
And moral Laws from him estranged,
Except the Sabbath still unchanged.
See a new teacher, etc.
With speech unthought, quick revelation,
With boldness in predestination,
With threats of absolute damnation,
Yet yea and nay has some salvation
For his own Tribe, not every Nation.
See a new teacher, etc.
With after license cost a Crown
When Bishop new had put him down,
With tricks called repetition,
And doctrine newly brought to town
Of teaching men to hang and drown.
See a new teacher, etc.
With flesh-provision to keep lent,
With shelves of sweetness often spent,
Which new maid brought, old Lady sent,
Though to be saved a poor present;
Yet Legacies assure the event.
See a new teacher, etc.
With troops expecting him at door
That would hear Sermons and no more,
With Noting-tools and sighs great store,
With Bibles great to turn them ore
While he wrests places by the score.
See a new teacher, etc.
With running text, the named forsaken,
With for and but both by sense shaken,
Cheap doctrines forced, wild uses raken,
Both sometimes one by mark mistaken,
With any thing to any shapen.
See a new teacher, etc.
With new wrought caps against the Cannon
For taking cold, though sure he have none,
A Sermons end when he began one,
A new hour long when his glass had run one,
New use, new points, new notes to stand on.
See a new teacher, etc.
Upon the Lady Paulets Gift to the University of Oxford: Being an exact piece
of Needle Work presenting the whole story of the Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior.
COuld we judge here most virtuous Madam: then
Your needle might receive praise from our pen.
But this our want bereaves it of that part,
Whilst to admire and thank is all our Art*
The work deserves a Shrine: I should rehearse
Its glory in a story, not a verse.
Colors are mixed so subtily, that thereby
The strength of art does take and cheat the eye:
At once a thousand we can gaze upon,
But are deceived by their transition.
What touches is the same; beam takes from beam
The next still like, yet differing in the extreme.
Here runs this tract, thither we see that tends,
But cannot say here this or there that ends*
Thus while they creep insensibly we doubt
Whether the one pours not the other out.
Faces so quick and lively, that we may
Fear if we turn our backs theyl steal away.
Postures of grief so true, that we may swear
Your artfull fingers have wrought passion there.
View we the manger, and the Babe, we thence
Believe the very threads have innocence.
Then on the Cross, such love, such grief we find
As twere a transcript of our Saviors mind:
Each parcel so expressive, each so fit,
That the whole seems not so much wrought as writ.
It Is sacred text, all we may coat, and thence
Extract what may be pressed in our defense.
Blessed Mother of the Church, be in the list
Reckond with the four a she Evangelist;
Nor can the style be profanation, when
The needle may convert more then the pen.
When faith may come by seeing; and each leaf
Rightly perused, prove Gospel to the deaf.
Had not that Hellen happily found the cross
By this your work, you had repaired that loss.
Tell me not of Penelope, we do
See a web here more chaste and sacred too.
Where are ye now O women, ye that sow
Temptations laboring to express the bow
Of the blind Archer: ye that rarely set
To please your loves a Venus in a net?
Turn your skill hither, then we shall no doubt
See the Kings daughter glorious too without.
Women sewed only figleaves hitherto,
Eves nakedness is only clothed by you.
On the same.
MAdam, your work's all miracle, and you
The first Evangelist, whose skillfull clue
Has made a road to Bethlem; now we may
Without a stars direction find the way
To the cratch our Saviors cradle, there him see
Mantled in hay, had not your piety
Swathed him in silk; they that have skill may see
(For sure it is pricked) the Virgins lullaby.
The Ox would feign be bellowing did he not fear
That at his noise the Babe would wake and hear.
And as each passage of his birth's at strife
To excel, so even the death's drawn to the life.
See how the greedy soldiers tug to share
His seamelesse coat, as if your work they would tear:
Look on his read, that's natural, on his gown
That's a pure scarlet; so acutes his crown,
That he who thinks not they are thorns indeed,
Would he were pricked until his fingers bleed.
His Cross a skillful joyner cannot know,
(So neat it is framed) where it be wood or no:
So closely by the curious needle pointed,
Had Joseph seen't he knew not where were joynted.
His side seems yet to bleed and leave a stain,
As if the blood now trickled from the vein:
Methinks I hear the Thief for mercy call,
He might have stole't, 'twas nere locked up at all.
See how he faints; the crimson silk turns pale
Changing its grain. Could I but see the veil
Rent, all were finished, but that's well forborne;
Twere pity such a work as this we^e torn.
Turn but your eye aside and you may see
His pensive handmaids take him from the tree,
Embalming him with tears, none could express,
Madam, but you death in so fit a dress;
No hand but yours could teach the needles eye
To drop true tears, unfeignedly to cry.
Follow him to his virgin tomb, and view
His corpse environed with a miscreate crew
Of drowsy watch, who look as though they were
Nere bid to watch and pray, but sleep and swear:
The third day being come, and their Charge gone,
Only some Relics left upon the stone;
One quakes, another yawnes, a third in have
To run had not your needle made him fast:
And to excuse themselves all they can say
Is that they dreamed some one stole him away:
You, Madam, by the Angels guidance have
Found him again since he rose from the grave.
So zealous of his company, no force
Could part you had not heaven made the divorse;
Where he remains till the last day, and then
I wish with joy you there may meet again.
On the same.
Lady,
YOu have drawn, and are all graces; none so true
As those lodge in your needle work and you:
Hither will throng we know these draughts to see
Whole bevies of Court Maddams; such as be
Fair spectacles themselves, yet shall these glasses
Ravish by showing not theirs but your faces:
Eyes that will shame the Christalls, and out steal
The patterns quaintest luster those conceal:
Fingers of Ivory that will pointing stand
As Indexes to show where moved the hand,
And in what method; till a dawning light
Spread on the Pictures from their neighboring white;
Yet so they shall not weave new beauties in
Those webs, your silk is whiter then their skin:
It Is said that some will chang their own for bought
Locks, so they be not painted but thus wrought:
And scanning well these tresses well died threads
Curle into locks about the female heads,
So neatly periwig'd, will choose to wear
Rather what you so make then what grows hair.
This Lady learns a smile from hence, she there
A devout grief takes forth from Maryes tear,
So lively dropped; as if in the woman 'twas
Water, what is silk in the needle, pearl in the glass.
A third will imitate your self, and try
Each pieces counterfeit: which being set by
As types unto your Gospel, all will guess
You are the Evangelist, she the Prophetess.
Here lies my Savior; and though he it is
Lends life to all, yet borrows he from this:
And does to the world by two Nativities come
Both from your fancy and from Maryes womb*
For who observes the Art will move a strife
Whether the threads be more of silk then life.
All things are in such proper colors shown;
The natural seem feigned, these their own:
And all so well composed, their juncture such,
It were some separation but to touch:
As in the varied bow which Heaven* bends
The red appears and yet the blew nere ends;
Here green, and yellow there, yet none can see
Where green or yellow do begin to be,
Each into others transient, and so fit
Still, what you choose nothing would serve but it.
What punctual thorns here crown the Crucifix;
I thought your needle, but your silk more pricks.
The sides wound had appeared by a cleft
In The wound; had you but so much unwrought left
And open; as through which the spear once stole,
Now you have filled it it is a truer hole.
Did you pin down the hands and feet twould fail
Much of the truth, the stich is verier nail:
Well drops the blood in shadow; were there need
Of true, but squeeze the Picture and 'twould bleed:
For life that only floats in vainer breath
Other arts give: that which returns from death:
Yours fresh and fully ideates; and is one
That holds out to a Resurrection.
Here it is that it to Christ jointly procures
A rising from both bottomes, hell and yours:
His countenance refined seems not more new
Issuing out from the grave then from your clew;
Almost so much of the Diety is shown
In your works as is visible in its own:
In these materials we may more God see
Then heathens in a flower, or a true tree.
But could we reach your fancy and find in it
The spirituality of every Print;
We darkly might conceive pure Godheads, one
Nature, our Christ both of his flesh and bone.
Blessed Soul, who thus internally have eyed
Thy Savior; how have thou been sanctified?
I dare to say so long as he stayed in
Your minds, pure mirror, that you scarce did sin:
Had but one idle thought disturbed the glass,
That same reflected blemish would forth pass
Into the stained table, and no doubt
The blur within had been a blot without.
Look ore the Passion; now you only view
Old wonnds; had you then sinned you had made new.
But all is acurate: we cannot find
One fault in the copy, cause not one in the mind:
And yet it is drawn in such brief Imagry
The smallest error cannot unseen lie.
Each Picture's couched in so little space,
Had you but missed a thread you had lost a face.
Not as in gouty Arras, where a list
Of any color if left out's not mist,
And where the shuttle twenty times mishot
Makes not so rude a sphalm, as here a knot
Or stich let fallen: it is easy to excel
Wbere's such a latitude of doing well.
But, Madam, you that in two Tables draw
The Gospel whole, as God wrought all the Law,
Are both compendious and true: the story
Does something loose in bulk, nothing in glory.
The Magi are made less, but not less wise,
Their gifts diminish, but their values rise:
For since they are come hither, that's thought best
Which they do bring from you, not from the East.
We cannot pen forth all your Art, much less
Our Obligations and our thanks express:
More will be said when we can better prize
Your Present: mean while (Lady) let this suffice.
With such delight we your Imbrodry view,
No other object can please more but you;
Whose gift has swollen us to such thankful pride
We Have now no matter for a wish beside
The giver; you alone outvy it, and
We Will wave the work only to kiss your hand.
Against BEN: JOHNSON.
1.
COme leave that saucy way
Of baiting those that pay
Dear for the sight of thy declining wit:
I know it is not fit
That a sale-Poet (just contempt once thrown)
Should cry up thus his own.
I wonder by what dower,
Or patent you had power
From all to rape a judgment? let it sussice
Had you bin modest, you had bin counted wise.
2.
It Is known you can do well,
And that you can excel
As a translator; but when things require
A genius and a fire
Not kindled heretofore by others pains,
As often you have wanted brains
And art to strike the white,
As you have leveld right:
But if men vouch not things Apocriphall,
You bellow, rave, and spatter round your gall.
3.
Jugge, Peg, Pierce, Fly, and all
Your jests so nominall,
Are things so far below an able brain,
As they do throw a stain
Through all the unlucky plot, and do displease
As deep as Pericles:
Where yet there is not laid
Before a chambermaid
Discourse so weak, as might have served of old
For Schoolboys when they of love or valor told.
4.
Why rage then when the show
Should judgment be; and know
That there are those in Plush that scorn to drudg
For Stages, yet can judge
Not only Poets looser laws but wits,
With all their perquisits:
A gift as rich and high
As noble Poesy,
Which though in sport it be for Kings a play,
It Is next Mechanic when it works for pay.
6.
Alcaeus Lute had none,
Nor loose Anacreon,
That taught so bold assuming of the baies
When they deserved no praise.
To rail men into approbation
It Is new; it is yours alone;
And prospers not. For know
Fame is as coy, as you;
Can be disdainful; and who dares to prove
A rape on her shall gain her scorn not love.
6.
Leave then this humerous vain,
And this more humerous strain,
Where self conceit and choler of the blood
Eclips what else is good:
Then if you please those raptures high to touch
Whereof you boast so much,
And but forbear the crown
Till the world put it on:
No doubt from all you may amazement draw,
Since braver theme no Phoebus ever saw.
Upon a Gentlewoman who broke her vow.
WHen first the Magic of thine eye
Usurped upon my liberty,
Triumphing in my hearts spoil, thou
Did lock up thine in such a vow:
When I prove false may the bright day
Be governd by the Moons pale ray:
And I too well remember, this
Thou said and sealdst it with a kiss.
O heavens! and could so soon that tie
Relent in slack Apostasy?
Could all thy oaths and morgag'd trust
Vanish like letters form^d in dust,
Which the next wind scatters? take heed,
Take heed, Revolter, know this deed
Has wronged the world; which will fare worse
By thy example then thy curse.
Hide that false brow in mists thy shame;
Nere see light more, but the dim flame
Of funeral lamps: thus sit and moan
And learn to keep thy guilt at home;
Give it no vent. For if again
Thy love or vows betray more men;
At length I fear thy perjured breath
Will blow out day and waken death.
A Song upon a Winepot.
ALl Poets Hippocrene admire,
And pray to water to inspire
Their wit and muse with heavenly fire.
Had they this heavenly fountain seen,
Sack both their muse and wit had been,
And this Pintepot their Hipocrene.
Had they truly discovered it,
They had like me, thought it unfit
To pray to water for their wit:
And had adored Sack as divine,
And made a Poet God of Wine,
And this Pintepot had bin the Shrine.
Sack unto them had bin instead
Of Nectar and the heavenly bread,
And every a boy a Gannemed:
But had they made a God of it,
Or styled it Patron of their wit,
This Pintepot had bin a Temple fit.
Well then companions is it not fit,
Since to this gem we owe our wit,
That we should praise the Cabinet;
And drink a health to this divine
And bounteous palace of our Wine?
Die he with thirst that does repine.
To one married to an old man.
SEeing thou would (bewitched by some ill
Be buried in those monnmental arms (charms)
All we can wish is may that earth be light
Upon thy tender limbs, and so good night.
A Song.
I Mean to sing of Englands fate,
(God bless in the mean time the King and his (Mate)
That's ruled by the Antipodian state,
Which no body can deny.
Had these seditious times been when
We had the life of our wise Poet Ben,
Apprentices had not been Parliament men,
Which no body can deny.
But Puritans bear all the sway;
And they will have no Bishops as most of them say,
But God may have the better another day,
Which no body can deny.
Prin and Burton say women that are lewd and loose
Shall wear Italian locks for their abuse,
They Will only have private keys for their own use,
Which no body can deny.
Zealous Prin has threatened a shrewd downfall
To cut off long locks both bushy and small,
But I hope he will not take ears and all,
Which no body can deny.
They Will not allow of what pride in brings,
No favors in hats nor any such things,
They Will convert all ribbands into Bible strings,
Which no body can deny.
God bless the King, and Queen also,
And all true Subjects from high to low,
The Roundheads can pray for themselves we know,
Which no body can deny.
Upon the Times.
THe Parliament cries arm, the King says no;
The new Lievtenants cry on, lets go;
The People all amazed, ask where is the foe?
The bugbear Scots behind the door cry boh.
Patience a while, and time will plainly show
The King stands still faster then they can go.
A double Chronogram (the one in Latin the other in the English of that
Latin) upon the year 1642.
TV DeVs IaM propItIVs sIs regI regnoqVe hVIC VnIVerso.
OgoD Now Show Favor to the kIng anD thIs Whole LanD.
On the Noble-mans Sons Cloak that refused to wear a Gown in Oxford.
SAw you the Cloak at Church to day
The long-worne short Cloak lined with Say?
What had the Man no Gown to wear,
Or was this sent him from the Mayor?
Or is it the Cloak which Nixon brought
To trim the Tub where Golledge taught?
Or can this best conceal his lips,
And show Communion sitting hips?
Or was the Cloak St. Paul's? if so
With it he found the Parchments too.
Yes verily; for he has been
With mine Host Gajus at the New-Inn.
A Gown (God bless us) trailes oth' floor
Like the petticoat of the Scarlet Whore;
Whose large stiff pleats he dares confide
Are ribs from Antichrists own side.
A mourning Cope, if it looks to the East,
Is the black Surplisse of the Beast.
Stay, read the Cards; the Queens and Kings
The best in the Pack are Gouned things;
But shortcut Spade with the other three
Are dubbed ith Cloak of knavery.
Beside his Lordship cloak'd did stand
When his Watch went false by slight of hand:
Then look for more such Cloaks as these
From the Court of Wards and Liveries.
On Alma's voice.
WHat Magic art
Compells my soul to fly away,
And leave desert
My poor composed trunck of clay?
Strange violence! thus pleasingly to tear
The soul forth of the body by the ear.
When Alma sings,
The pretty Chanters of the sky
Do droop their wings,
As in disgrace they meant to die;
Because their tunes which were before so rare,
Compared to hers, do but distract the air.
Each sensitive
In emulation proudly stands,
Striving to thrive
Under the bliss of her commands,
Whose charming voice does Bears and Tigers tame,
And teach the Spears new melodies to frame*
The Angels all
(Astonished at her heavenly air)
Would sudden fall
From cold amazement to despair;
But that by nimble theft they all conspire
To steal her hence for to enrich their quire.
FINIS.

