A SPEECH Spoken in the HOUSE of COMMONS, BY The Reverend Father in God,
ROBERT, L. Bishop of COVENTRY and LICHFIELD.

Being brought to the Bar to answer for himself.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Richard Lownds, and are to be sold at his Shop
without Ludgate. 1641.

Master SPEAKER,
AS it has been ever my fashion (and in truth, it is my disposition) to
endeavor, at the least, to give satisfaction to every man, even to the
me^nest, that has had any sinister conceptions of me, be it scandalum datum,
or acceptum, so has it been my ambition, and I have sought it with affection,
(as to all men) so much more to this honorable Assembly, especially concerning
the late Petition and Protestation exhibited unto his sacred Majesty, and the
Lords and Peers in Parliament, But in the first place Master Speaker, I am, as
it becomes me, to give most hearty and condign thanks to the noble Knights,
Citizens, and Burgeses, of this honorable House of Commons, for that they have
been pleased by a general vote, and I hope, unanimous, to give me leave to
speak for my self, and to lay open the truth of my cause, concerning the said
Petition and Protest^tion before them.

And now M. Speaker, to address my self to the business, whereof I shall not
speak as a Lawyer, for I have no head for Law, neither shall I need to touch
upon any point thereof, nor as a flourishing Orator, as desirous to hear
himself speak, I have long since laid aside my books of Rhethorick: my
desire is, Master Speaker, to tread in the steps of an old Divine, of whom
Sozomen writes in his Ecclesiastical History, who groaning under the like
heavy burden and accusation as I do, chose rather to vent his own sense,
and express the truth of his cause in plain language, than to color or cloak
falsehood, and to extenuate his offense, by forced, trapped, and new varnished
eloquence: And to that purpose my conceptions and narration shall stand only
upon two feet, Negation, and Affirmation. There are some things that I must
deny, and yet justly, somewhat I must affirm, and that I shall do ingenuously
and fully. First for the Negative, I never framed, made, nor contrived,
compiled, or preferred any such Petition or Protestation, I never was at any
meeting, consultation, or conference, about any such business; nay, I never
heard of any intention, much less execution of any such thing, until it was
the Wednesday in Christmas, being the 29. of December, at which time it was
brought unto my house in Covengarden, being betwixt 6. or 7. at night
(subscribed by eleven of my Brethren) with a request, that I would subscribe
suddenly also. And for the affirmation, presuming that so many learned, grave,
and wise men, well verst in matters of that nature, would not have attempted
any such thing, without good counsel to the endangering of themselves, and
their Brethren, and to the distaste of the Lords, and that all the rest of the
Bishops in or about the City of London, Westminster, should subscribe
thereunto, and that it should not be preferred, without the approbation, and
mature deliberation of good counsel, and of us all: I made the twelfth and set
to my hand, which I do now acknowledge* and never denied; nay, the first time
that I came to the Bar in the Lords House, I acknowledged that my hand was to
it, and diverse of this honorable Presence heard it so read unto them, out of
the jornall of the Lords house:

Now Master Speaker, if these my deceived and deceiving thoughts (to use S.
Bernards phrase) have led me into an error, the error is either Ex
ignorantia juris, an unskilfulnesse in the Law, or Debilitate judicii, a
weakness of my apprehension, or else, Ex nimia credulitate, out of the to much
confidence in others, not of any prepensed malice, or out of a spirit of
contradiction, as the Lord knows. The Schoolmen tell me, that Duo sunt in
omni peccato, there is actio, and malitia actionis, I own the action, the
subscription is mine; but, that there was any malice in the action (to cross
any Vote, at which I was not present, nor never heard of) I utterly disavow.

And therefore, Master Speaker, I shall become an humble Suitor, that I may
recommend three most humble Requests, or motions to this Honorable House.

The first Motion is, That you would be pleased to tread in the steps of
Constantine the Christian Emperor, who had ever this resolution, that if he
should see Sacerdotem peccantem, an offending Divine, he would rather cast his
purple garment upon him, than to reveal the offense, for the Gospels sake of
Christ.

My second Motion is, That if my subscription shall make me a delinquent, and
worthy of any censure, that then the censure may not exceed (but at the
highest) be proportionable to the offense.

The third and last motion is, That, that of Plautus (after my fifty eight
years painful, constant, and successful preaching of the Gospel of
Christ, in the kingdom of England, and in foreign parts, may not be
verrified of me, Si quid been feceris levior pluma gratia est; si quid mali
feceris plumbeas iras gerunt. And now (Master Speaker) I might here tender
diverse motions to the consideration of this honorable House, for favorable
construction of my rash subscription, I may say commiseration, but all without
ostentation, that is far from me, but rather for the consolation of my
perplexed soul, for the great affliction, restraint and disgrace, which I have
long sustained (which is far greater than ever I endured before, and
transcends the dangers and jeopardies of the seas,, and the miseries of the
wars, whereof I have had my share) and partly for the vindication of my
former reputation, calling, and profession, which is now so clouded, eclipsed,
and blackt in the eyes of the world, and scandalized in the mouths of the
vulgar multitude, that without reparation, and restoration to my former
esteem, I shall never have heart to show my face in Pulpit any more, wherein I
have wished to end my days. But I wave them all, because I will not detain
you from other occasions of greater importance, and desire my ways may be made
known unto you, rather by inquisition, than my own Relation, only I shall
appeal to the Noble Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Diocese where I
now live, and of the other wherein formerly I did live, as namely the
honorable City of Bristow, which I can never name without that title, not only
in respect of their piety, unity, and conformity, but also in respect of
their love, kindness, and extraordinary bounty unto me, I appeal to them
for their testimonies, and knowledge of my courses amongst them, nay I appeal
to the records of the honorable house, where I am confident after sixteen
months sitting, there is nothing found that can trench upon me, neither I hope
will, or may be.

And therefore my humble suite is for expedition (if you intend accusation, or
rather for your meditation, that I may speedily return to my own home and
Cure, to redeem the time because the days are evil, as the Apostle speaks,
and to regaine the esteem and reputation which I was long in getting, and long
enjoyed, but lost in a moment, for if I should outlive (I say not my
Bishopric,) but my credit, my gray hairs, and many years, would soon be
brought with sorrow to the grave.

I have done Master Speaker, and there remains nothing now but that I become a
petitioner unto almighty God, that he will be pleased to bestow upon you all
the Patriarchs blessing, even the dew of Heaven, and fatness of the earth: and
I end with that of S. Jude, Mercy, peace, and love be multiplied unto you; I
say again with a religious and affectionate heart, Mercy, peace, and love, be
multi-plyed unto you.

*

FINIS.

